THE History of Pennsylvania, IN NORTH AMERICA, FROM THE Original Institution
and Settlement of that Province under the first Proprietor and Governor WILLIAM
PENN, in 1681, till after the Year 1742; WITH AN INTRODUCTION, RESPECTING, The
Life of W. PENN, prior to the grant of the Province, and the religious Society
of the People called Quakers; -- with the first rise of the neighboring
Colonies, more particularly of West-New-Jersey, and the Settlement of the Dutch
and Swedes on Delaware. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A brief Description of the said
Province, AND OF THE General State, in which it flourished, principally between
the Years 1760 and 1770. The whole including a Variety of Things, Useful and
interesting to be known, respecting that Country in early Time, etc. With an
APPENDIX.

Written principally between the Years 1776 and 1780, BY ROBERT PROUD.

"PULCHRUM EST BENEFACERE REIPUBLICAE, ETIAM BENEDICERE HAUD ABSURDUM EST, VEL
PACE VEL BELLO CLARUM FIERI LICET."

Sal. Catalin. "SED CUM PLERIQUE ARBITRENTUR RES BELLICAS MAJORES ESSE QUAM
URBANAS, MINUENDA EST HAEC OPINIO."

Cic. Off. VOLUME I.

Philadelphia: PRINTED AND SOLD BY ZACHARIAH POULSON, JUNIOR, NUMBER EIGHTY,
CHESNUT-STREET. 1797.

"William Penn, the great legislator of the Quakers," (in Pennsylvania) "had
the success of a conqueror, in establishing and defending his colony, among
savage tribes, without ever drawing the sword; the goodness of the most
benevolent rulers, in treating his subjects as his own children; and the
tenderness of an universal father, who opened his arms to all mankind without
distinction of sect or party. In his republic it was not the religious creed,
but personal merit, that entitled every member of society to the protection and
emoluments of the state."

Essay on toleration, by Arthur O'Leary. (The copy-right secured as the law
directs.)

TO THE Descendants and proper Successors OF THE First COLONISTS and early
SETTLERS OF PENNSYLVANIA, UNDER THE First Proprietor and Governor WILLIAM PENN,
AND To the rest of its Inhabitants, This HISTORY of that PROVINCE IS DEDICATED,
BY THE AUTHOR.
THE following history was written many years ago, as mentioned in the title
page; The design.
but the great change in this country, which ensued, and was then forming,
prevented the publication. It was not only intended more particularly for the
use of the descendants of the first and early settlers of the province, but
also for a general information to all others, respecting its former state, etc.
that by beholding the means, by which small things become great, and what
formerly made the country happy, it might excite a similar conduct in
posterity, etc.

"Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri."
That which renders people happy, is necessary to keep them so.
The means, or materials.
Though the materials of this performance, and the regular accounts of the early
progressive advances of this country, left by those who were most capable of
giving them, appear, in some things, and more so at particular times, very
defective, yet the compilation is made from the best that could be had, as
transmitted from the most early settlers, and their successors, of the first
reputation and character, in the province; as well as from the public records,
and such other accounts as may be depended on.

C. Pusey and first collectors of the memorials, etc.
Among the first collectors of these materials appears to have been Caleb Pusey,
one of the early settlers of Pennsylvania from about London, in 1682; who, at
different times, was both of the provincial and proprietary's, or governor's,
council, and frequently in the assembly. He lived many years; was well
acquainted with the public affairs, and saw great improvements in the province.
His papers after his decease, in 1725, were delivered to David Lloyd and Isaac
Norris; and afterward to James Logan, about the year 1732. From these persons,
who made such additions, as came within their observation, they afterward
passed to John Kinsey; who, in conjunction with several others, his friends,
revised them; and they remained in his possession till his death, in the year
1750.

The character of these persons, above mentioned, who, at different periods of
time, filled some of the most eminent public stations in the province, will
further appear in the ensuing history; as being men who had not only the best
opportunity of knowing the variety of incidents, and the true state of its
internal affairs, from the beginning, but also were themselves actively
concerned in a large share of the public transactions; and some of them, in the
different interests both of the proprietary and of his opposers.

But the person who took the most pains to adjust and reduce these materials
into such order, S. Smith, and his M.S. etc.
as might be proper for the public view, before that of the present
publication, was Samuel Smith of Burlington, in New Jersey, author of the
history of that province; whose manuscript (which contained only the space of
about forty years) after his decease, in 1776, being thought by diverse sensible
and judicious persons, among his friends, to be capable of further improvement,
and useful alterations, or additions, the present history, therefore, is
published, not only in a form, different from that of S. Smith's manuscript,
but also diverse particulars therein, are here much abbreviated, especially
respecting the long and tedious disputes between some of the governors and
assemblies; and considerable additions are made, from other accounts, of such
things as were either not at all touched upon, or but slightly mentioned, by
him; besides most of the notes, with the introduction, and the description of
the province and its present state, between the years 1760 and 1770; both which
last, not being attempted by him, are, for the most part, entirely new: -- So
that the whole comprizes, besides what may be found of veracity, in other
publications, respecting the province, a true and genuine narrative of the
different public transactions, the great and various improvements, memorable
incidents, entertaining anecdotes, and things worthy to be known, for above
sixty years, besides the said present state, etc.

The restoration and enjoyment of those natural and civil rights and
privileges, Subject of the history.
of which men originally, by their folly and wickedness, are often deprived,
was the great end, for which the predecessors of the present inhabitants of
Pennsylvania, at first, peaceably withdrew into this retirement, from those,
who, at that time, appeared either to have lost, or too partially distributed
them; and the preservation thereof was the original design of the civil
government and constitution of the province; an account of which, etc. is the
principal subject of the following history.

Remarkable example, etc.
Hence, in the first rise, and early progress, of this province, there
manifestly appears a remarkable and extraordinary example of that excellent
wisdom, industry and moderation, whose effects are replete with useful
instruction to posterity, for having, in reality, rendered a people so very
happy and flourishing; -- not proved by the boasting of mere theory and
anticipation, but by a happy experience for many years.

Possible benefit of history, etc.
It is likewise by means of the same kind of evidence, or proof, so far as
history favors us with the experience of former times, in all ages and
countries, that men may be taught, not only that the happy state of any country
cannot reasonably be expected long to continue, in the same degree of
increasing prosperity, as before, without the continued prevalence of
principles and means, among the people, in general, similar to those by which
it was first obtained; but also how liable such a happy and prosperous
condition is again to be lost, by that folly or depravity, which has ever been
fatal, where it got the ascendency, though generally under the most plausible
appearances.

"Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and umbra."
Evil deceives under the pretense, or appearance of good.
Human nature still the same, etc.
For the history of all nations abounds with instances of the same nature,
operating in all the descendants of Adam and Eve, which we are told, prevailed
in these first parents, or representatives, of mankind; and through this medium
of history, it may be clearly seen, as in a glass, that too much, or very
great, prosperity has been, and consequently may still be, as fatal to the
human race, (which is capable of bearing only a certain proportion of it) as
the extreme of adversity; and that the effects of plenty, pride and ambition,
in the one, have been, and thence may still be, no less pernicious, than those
of want, oppression and distress, in the other: -- But how little have
posterity profited from such former examples! -- human nature is still the
same; -- the interdicted tree, with its forbidden fruit, is still as tempting
as ever it was.

"Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum."
Happy is he whom the harms of others make wary.
How often, Men love change, etc.
under some plausible pretense or other, are peace and improvement wantonly
exchanged for war and destruction; whose natural consequence are violence and
oppression! -- Have we not seen the commencement of this already, even, within
our borders, in this young country? Motives for settling Pennsylvania.
which the former had rendered so flourishing and happy. -- The first and early
colonists, or settlers and makers of the province, left the finely cultivated
plains of Europe, with their nearest and dearest connections there, to enjoy
and promote the former, in this wilderness, in such degree of perfection, as
seemed impossible for them there, and to avoid the latter, with its
consequences; -- from which, in an eminent degree, it is most manifest, their
wisdom, virtue, moderation, and good policy, through much labor, danger and
expense, many ways, and in a very signal, pacific and extraordinary manner,
effected the deliverance and preservation of the inhabitants, while they
directed the affairs of the colony, and for so many years prolonged the golden
days of Pennsylvania.

For, as there appears to be a constant decay, Happy consequences, etc.
in human affairs, and all things have their beginning and end, so is it not
manifest, in the course of nature, or of all things within the circle of human
observation, that a constant recurring to first principles, or, that a
renovation, or melioration, to balance this decay, is always necessary, both in
an individual and collective capacity? -- But then do all the boasted
improvement of men, or melioration of the human race, etc. in reality, and in
the general, amount to any more, than what is intimated by this similitude? viz.

"Like leaves on trees the race of man is found;
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground;
Another race the following spring supplies;
They fall successive, and successive rise:
So generations, in their course, decay;
So flourish these, when those are past away."
POPE'S HOMER. W. Penn a wise promoter of improvement, etc.
The worthy founder and father of the province appears to have been well
acquainted with the true means of this melioration, in the state of mankind, by
insisting, so much as he did, on the early cultivation of piety and virtue, and
on a good education of youth, in its different branches; with a just and
vigorous magistracy, or government, and good order; of which he was ever the
firm friend and supporter, not to say, the reformer, or improver, of it, for
the benefit, and further happiness of civil society; as sufficiently appears by
his writings, and in his excellent example of that of Pennsylvania; -- in
which, as he exhibited himself a strenuous advocate, and a remarkable extender
of justice, mercy, and all rational liberty, so was he also a severe enemy to
all licentiousness, injustice, and criminal indulgence of vice and wickedness.

Extracts form W. Penn's writings.
"There can be no pretense (says he) of conscience, to be drunk, to whore, to be
voluptuous, to game, to swear, curse, blaspheme and profane; no such matter.
These are sins against nature; and against the government, as well as against
the written laws of God. They lay the ax to the root of human society; and are
the common enemies of mankind. It was to prevent these enormities, that
government was instituted; Duty of the magistracy, etc.
and shall government indulge that, which it is instituted to correct? This
were to render the magistracy useless, and the bearing of the sword vain; there
would be then no such thing, in government, as a terror to evildoers; but every
one would do that, which he thought right in his own eyes; God almighty deliver
us from this sort of tyranny!"

"Nothing (continues he) weakens kingdoms like vice; it does not only displease
Heaven, Great importance of virtue, etc.
but disable them;" -- "It is our interest to be good; and it is none of the
least arguments for religion, that the piety and practice of it is the peace
and prosperity of government; and consequently that vice, the enemy of
religion, is, at the same time, the enemy of human society. What, then, should
be more concerned for the preservation of virtue, than government? that, in its
abstract, and true sense, is not only founded upon virtue, but without the
preservation of virtue, it is impossible to maintain the best constitution,
that can be made. And, however some particular men may prosper that are wicked,
and some private good men miscarry, in the things of this world, in which
sense, things may be said to happen alike to all, to the righteous as to the
wicked, yet I dare boldly affirm, and challenge any man to the truth thereof;
that, in the many volumes of the history of all ages and kingdoms of the world,
there is not one instance to be found, where the hand of God was against a
righteous nation, or when the hand of God was not against an unrighteous
nation, first or last; nor where a just government perished, nor an unjust
government long prospered. Kingdoms are rarely so short lived as men; yet they
also have a time to die; but as temperance gives health to men, so virtue
gives time to kingdoms; and as vice brings men betimes to their graves, so
nations to their ruin."

Modes of government.
Respecting modes of government, the memorable founder of that of Pennsylvania
declares, -- "There is hardly one frame of government, in the world, so ill
designed by its first founder, that, in good hands would not do well enough;
and history tells us, the best, in ill ones, can do nothing, that is great or
good; witness, the Jewish and the Roman states. Governments, like clocks, go
from the motion, which men give them; and as governments are made and moved by
men, so by them are they ruined too: wherefore governments rather depend upon
men, than men upon governments. Let men be good and the government cannot be
bad; if it be ill they will cure it: but if men be bad, let the government be
never so good, they will endeavor to warp and spoil it to their turn." --
"That, therefore, which makes a good constitution, must keep it, viz. men of
wisdom and virtue; qualities, that, because they descend not with worldly
inheritances, must be carefully propagated by a virtuous education of youth;
for which after ages will owe more to the care and prudence of founders, and
the successive magistracy, than to their parents, for their private
patrimonies."

Great importance of good education.
"I would think (says he in another place) that there are but few people so
vicious, as to care to see their children so; and yet to me it seems a plain
case, that, as we leave the government, they will find it: if some effectual
course be not taken, what with neglect, and what with example, impiety and the
miseries that follow it, will be entailed upon our children. Certainly it were
better the world ended with us, than that we should transmit our vices, or sow
those evil seeds, in our day, that will ripen to their ruin, and fill our
country with miseries, after we are gone; thereby exposing it to the curse of
God, and violence of our neighbors. But it is an infelicity we ought to
bewail, that men are apt to prefer the base pleasures of their present
extravagances to all endeavors after a future benefit; for, besides the guilt,
they draw down upon themselves, our poor posterity must be greatly injured
thereby; who will find those debts and encumbrances harder to pay than all the
rest, we can leave them under."

"Upon the whole matter (continues he) I take the freedom to say, that, Good
education conducive to good government.
if we would preserve our government, we must endear it to the people. To do
this, besides the necessity of present, just and wise things, we must secure
the youth: this is not to be done, but by the amendment of the way of their
education; and that with all convenient speed and diligence. I say, the
government is highly obliged: it is a sort of trustee for the youth of the
kingdom; who, though now minors, yet will have the government, when we are
gone. Therefore depress vice, and cherish virtue; that through good education,
they may become good; which will truly render them happy in this world, and a
good way fitted for that which is to come. If this be done, they will owe more
to your memories for their education, than for their estates."

Such maxims and advice are of universal concernment, and interesting to all
governments; Men's opinions vary much, etc.
but the opinions of different men frequently vary much on the same subjects;
and that, even, on important as well as trifling affairs; and their conduct is
no less contradictory, and sometimes seemingly irrational; they are so liable
to embrace opposite extremes, that they often deviate from the middle way of
rectitude: Hence, while the forward, selfish and less qualified, frequently
from sinister, or mean views, solicit and succeed into the public offices and
magistracy, Some causes of defect in government and magistracy, etc.
as well as into diverse other important departments of life, for which they are
unfit and improper, it is to be regretted, that sometimes the more worthy, and
better qualified, who are actuated, in what they do, by more generous
principles, too often from diffidence of their own abilities, and an abhorrence
of a connection with others, in their improper conduct, entirely decline being
concerned in such stations, and thereby refuse that benefit, which they might
otherwise, most probably, administer to themselves and their country.

Some pious men inconsistent in their conduct, etc.
But ought the misuse of a right and necessary thing to be a sufficient reason
for rejecting that thing altogether? -- shall the abuse and perversion of
government, and the ill administration of the magistracy, by wicked men, give
just occasion for any sober, thinking and rational person, qualified and
suitable to be serviceable to his country, in that very important department,
to condemn the right use of them? and entirely to refuse his assistance in a
thing so necessary as the magistracy? -- whether it be from political
considerations, or a persuasion, that the execution of it is, in some respects,
contrary to the nature of Christianity? -- like the Anabaptists, in Germany
formerly, in the time of Charles the fifth, and as indicated by the conduct of
some in later years? -- Certainly, if such reasoning, or conduct, as this,
ought to prevail, and be imitated, in the extreme, then, to be consistent with
themselves, it is most manifest, such persons as reason and act thus, ought to
possess no private property; -- religion itself, under pretense of which this
notion, or conduct, seems to have been founded, should no longer be professed
by them; -- nay, they absolutely ought to desist from propagating their own
species! -- Because these things are most of all abused, or perverted; from
which have flowed the greatest evils in the world; and in consequence of the
last arise all the wickedness and unhappiness of mankind, etc. for the
restraint and correction or remedy, of which, it has pleased divine Providence
mercifully to ordain government and magistracy, etc. and to communicate
knowledge and ability to the industry of men, for that happy purpose: -- But
who is not able to see the inconsistency of such reasoning? -- How strangely
liable are mankind to err! -- how variously do they go astray, even, under well
intended views! -- Men may go north till they come south.

But Pennsylvania was settled upon very different principles; Pennsylvania an
example to other countries, etc.
-- for it was impossible for the government of it to be founded on such
notions; William Penn was far from being actuated by the extravagance of this
kind of enthusiasm, in giving such an excellent example to mankind, and showing
them how happy it is possible for men to live in the world, if they please:
for, while he distinguished between the too general abuse of power, and the
exertion of a just authority, he laid a foundation for happy consequences; as
manifested in the late glorious example and prosperity of the province, to such
a degree of both private and public felicity, as has exceeded that of most
other countries, that we know of, in the world, considering its age, situation,
extent, and other circumstances: -- This, though defectively exhibited, will,
at least, in part, appear in the following history, and in the sketch of the
general state of the country between the years 1760 and 1770, at the
conclusion. During all which golden age of the province, the effects of William
Penn's government and conduct appear to have excelled those of the wise Solon,
so far as the effects of peace, and prevention of military evils and
destruction are preferable to those of war: -- For by reason of the natural
injustice, and the violent operation of the latter, the happy consequences of
the former are generally impaired, or destroyed, and never can be long
preserved by it; so that the emphatical expressions of the great legislator of
Athens, as recorded by Plutarch in his life of Solon, appear more applicable to
the lawgiver of Pennsylvania, viz.

"What power was fit I did on all bestow;
Nor raised the poor too high, nor pressed too low;
The rich that ruled, and every office bore,
Confined by laws, could not oppress the poor;
Both parties I secured from lawless might;
So none prevailed upon another's right."
Various ways of ambition, etc.
But ambition is rooted in human nature, and demands restraint; it assumes all
manner of appearances whatsoever, and is now working wonders, in the world,
under the name of equality and the rights of man; -- Hence to mistake
innovation for renovation, and a love of change for melioration, connected with
such an idea of self-independency, as is inconsistent with the enlargement of
civilization, or of the social happiness of mankind, in any great or extensive
degree, have ever produced those pernicious consequences, which have flowed
from the revolutionary governments of nations and countries; whose felicity
consists in the unity, harmony, or a just dependency of their parts; and the
more extensive those parts are, in such a state, the greater and more durable
is most likely to be the happiness of those very constituent and particular
parts, as well as of the whole; and vice versa.

Comparison of the effects of unity, etc.
For as an assemblage of similar rays of light adds to the luster of each
individual ray, of which it is composed; and the larger the assemblage, so much
greater is that luster, in proportion to the number of rays; so the happy, or
unhappy state of mankind individually may be considered, as augmented, or
diminished, beyond the possibility of a solitary enjoyment only, according to
the general prevalency and extensiveness of these two different states, in a
national or collective capacity: -- The just and proper consideration of which
might have no small tendency to incite men more effectually to cultivate and
extend such a state of harmony and unity in the world, Incitement to unity and
harmony, etc.
as necessarily must, above all other means, ever constitute, preserve and
increase, or advance, their felicity, so far as human nature is capable of it,
both in a particular and general relation; rather than the contrary, or
discord, rebellion and revolt, so often advocated, pursued, and in the end,
unhappily experienced, under the plausible name and false appearance, of
melioration.

But how muchsoever the recommendation and extension of unity, concord and
amity, Original causes of happiness and misery still the same.
with a due submission, in civil society, may be contrary to the ambition, and
selfish views, of an independent and rebellious spirit, in any age, or country,
yet it is most certain that as the former constituted the state of original,
and most complete, felicity, so the latter occasioned the contrary; and cannot,
in the nature of things, do otherwise; -- and that human happiness may be much
further increased, or augmented, both in an individual and collective capacity,
than either idleness or wickedness will permit many to believe, or think
possible, Example of Pennsylvania.
the province of Pennsylvania has afforded a very signal example, and
incontestible proof, to the admiration of strangers; and doubtless far beyond
the credibility of many, who are not sufficiently acquainted with the early, as
well as the later state of the country.

To conclude, How good things may be reversed and restored.
as the world is said to have been formed out of a chaos, and that order sprung
from disorder, by the effect of Omnipotence; so, in the rise of this province,
appears a remarkable instance of happy consequences, from apparent unhappy
causes; -- rational liberty, with an equal participation of natural and civil
rights, and religious privileges, with the glorious effects, have risen out of
oppression, persecution and bigotry: -- But, as the abuse of the former has
always introduced the latter, sooner or later; and as human nature ever remains
to be the same, so the reversing of those enjoyments continues to be no less
incident to the human race, than it was in former ages of the world; and their
preservation depends as-much upon the wisdom and conduct of the possessors of
them, as their restoration will do, on means similar to those, which raised,
and so long preserved, the happy state of the province of Pennsylvania.

Philadelphia, 1797.
CONTENTS OF THE INTRODUCTION.
PART THE FIRST.
The parentage, birth and education of William Penn, with the time and manner
of his embracing the religion of the people called Quakers, etc. In the account
of the religious system and manners of the Quakers, are comprehended: 1. The
time, motive and manner of their first rise, and becoming a religious society.
2. Their first and chief principle, etc. 3. Their worship and ministry, with
some of their chief and particular doctrines.
Their other tenets, doctrines, practices and customs, more peculiar to them
than to other people, are ranged under the following heads, viz. 1. Their
justice, veracity and true Christian fortitude. 2. Their temperance and
moderation. 3. Their charity and loving one another.
4. Under the first of these heads are comprised: Their disuse of flattering
titles, and their not respecting persons, etc. Their using the plain and true
speech of thou and thee, to a single person, etc. Their disuse of the common
salutations, etc. Their non-observance of holy days, fast-days, etc. Their
manner of naming the months, and days of the week, etc. Their refusing to pay
tithes, priests' wages, etc. Their strictly paying the government taxes, dues,
etc. Their not suffering the Negro or slave trade among them. Their refusing to
swear on any occasion. Their fortitude, in valiantly suffering for their
testimony.
5. Under the second head are, Their disuse of gaming, sports, plays, etc.
Their avoiding superfluity, viz. In their diet and discourse. In their
furniture and apparel. At their births, marriages and funerals.

6. Under the third head are represented: Their loving one another, and
refraining from lawsuits, among themselves. Their loving enemies, and not
fighting, but suffering, etc. Their charity to the poor: -- With some
conclusions on diverse of these things, from R. Barclay.
7. Their marriages, births, burials and discipline, from W. Penn; concluded
with some further hints of the temper, and general disposition of mind, and of
the practice of this people, in early time, from W. Penn, and W. Edmundson.
Further account of the life of William Penn, continued till about the time of
the grant and settlement of Pennsylvania.
PART THE SECOND.
1. First European discoveries of the different parts of America, by Spain,
Portugal and England, from the year 1492 to 1497. 2. Summary of the ancient
Virginia; and of the Dutch and Swede's pretensions to what was called New
Netherland by the former, and New Swedeland by the latter: -- With a sketch of
the first settlement, government and revolutions of these people on the
Delaware bay and river; -- Including some account of the Maryland grant to the
Lord Baltimore, in 1632; and of the reduction of the Dutch and Swedes under the
British government in 1664. 3. First rise of New Jersey, in 1664; and some
account of the English administration by the governors of N. York, over the
country on Delaware, till it was retaken by the Dutch, in 1673; -- and of the
government there, after it was surrendered to England. 4. Division of
New Jersey into East and West New Jersey, in 1676; whereby W. Penn first became
concerned in the latter; -- With a summary of the first settlement and public
transactions of West New Jersey, by the Quakers, etc. continued from the
division of the province, in 1676, till about the time of W. Penn's obtaining
the grant of Pennsylvania, in 1681, etc. 5. A sketch of the religious state of
West N. Jersey, about that time, with some further hints of its general
situation, or state, till the surrender of the respective proprietary
governments to the crown, in 1702. Note, When the months are mentioned in their
numerical order, in the following history, Marchis understood to be the first
month of the year, before the change of the style, in ^752; after which the
year commenced on the first of January.
INTRODUCTION. PART THE FIRST. CONTAINING, MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF WILLIAM PENN,
Prior to his founding the Province of Pennsylvania; AND INCLUDING, A general
and comprehensive view of the rise, principles, religious system and practice,
or manners, of the people called QUAKERS, who first settled the province, under
his government.
THE wisdom of former ages, when transmitted, Office and use of history, etc.
in writing, to posterity, is an inestimable treasure; but the actions of
illustrious and virtuous persons, in the same manner exhibited, is still more
beneficial: by the former our judgments are rightly informed, and our minds
brought into a proper way of thinking; by the latter we are animated to an
imitation; and while the excellency of noble examples is displayed before our
understandings, our minds are inspired with a love of virtue. This appears to
be the office of history; by which every succeeding age may avail itself of the
wisdom, and, even, of the folly, of the preceding, and become wiser and happier
by a proper application. Through this medium when we view the conduct of those
great men of antiquity, who have benefited mankind, in their most essential
interests, they appear frequently to have been actuated by motives, the most
disinterested, and attended with a satisfaction more than human! -- Adversity,
which refines men, and renders them more fit to benefit the human race, is a
frequent concomitant of worthy minds; and apparent success does not always
immediately attend noble and just designs: -- When a Socrates is put to death,
wisdom and truth seem to suffer; and when an Aristides is exiled, justice
appears to be in disgrace. But virtue is its own reward, and depends not on the
fluctuating opinions of mortals, nor on the breath of popular applause; which
is often on the side of error, and entirely opposite to the real interests of
its votaries.

W. Penn an example of wisdom and fortitude.
An example of true wisdom and fortitude, is no less conspicuous in the
venerable founder of the province of Pennsylvania, the truly great and worthy
William Penn, than in many of the celebrated sages and legislators of former
ages; who, in opposition to the vulgar notions of the times in which they
lived, have seemingly suffered in their own particulars, in order to benefit
mankind: this will appear in the following sketch of his life, both with
respect to his religion in joining with the people called Quakers, and likewise
in settling the province itself. In both of which his engagement for the
happiness of men was not unattended with a large share of that difficulty and
opposition, to which the most excellent undertakings are generally exposed: but
minds of such exalted virtue are actuated by motives above mortality, and
indisputably are influenced by something divine; without which, as Cicero says,
"there never was a really good and great man. "Credendum est neminem virorum
honorum talem fuisse, nes^ adjuvante Deo; and nemo unquam fuit vir magnus sine
afflatu aliquo divino."

Cic. de natura Deorum


His father, Sir William Penn, Of his father admiral Penn.
was of eminent character; and served both under the parliament, and king
Charles the second, in several of the highest maritime offices. W. Penn, in his
printed works, says further respecting his father, Admiral Penn; -- "He was
engaged both under the parliament and king; but not as an actor in the domestic
troubles; his compass always steering him to eye a national concern, and not
intestine wars. His service, therefore, being wholly foreign, he may be truly
said to serve his country, rather than either of these interest, so far as they
were distinct front each other." -- Again, "In the attack on Hispaniola, his
employ was only as general of the fleet; from which the miscarriage did not
arise; it was owing to the land forces, over which he had no command.

PENN'S Works
He was born in Bristol, anno 1621; and married Margaret, daughter of John
Jasper, of Rotterdam in Holland, merchant; Biographia Britannica.
by whom he had his son William Penn. He was himself the son of captain Giles
Penn, Hisdescent
several years consul for the English, in the Mediterranean; and of the Penns
of Penns-lodge, in the county of Wilts; and those Penns of Penn, in the county
of Bucks; and by his mother, from the Gilberts, in the county of Somerset,
originally from Yorkshire.

He was addicted from his youth to maritime affairs, and made captain at
twenty-one years of age; His offices.
rear admiral of Ireland, at twenty-three; vice admiral of Ireland, at
twenty-five; admiral to the Straits, at twenty-nine; vice admiral of England,
at thirty-one; and general in the first Dutch war, at thirty-two. Whence
returning, anno 1655, he was a parliament man for the town of Weymouth; in
1660, he was made commissioner of the admiralty and navy, governor of the town
and fort of Kingsail; vice admiral of Munster, and a member of that provincial
council; and anno 1664, he was chosen great captain commander under the Duke of
York, in that signal, and most evidently succesful sight with the Dutch Fleet.

Thus he took leave of the sea, but continued still in his other employments,
till 1669; His death.
at which time, through bodily infirmities, contracted by the care and fatigue
of public affairs, he withdrew, prepared and made for his end. He died at
Wanstead, in the county of Essex, on the 16th. day of September 1670, in the
49th. year of his age; leaving a plentiful estate, in England and Ireland, with
his paternal blessing to his son William; to whom he was perfectly reconciled,
after the great displeasure, he had before conceived at his joining in
religious society with the Quakers; -- "Thus (says his son) from a lieutenant
he passed through all the eminent offices of sea employment, and arrived to
that of general, about the 30th. year of his age; in a time full of the biggest
sea action, that any history mentions; and when neither bribes nor alliance,
favor nor affection, but ability only, could promote." -- Having acquitted
himself with honor and fidelity, in all his public offices, after the
restoration he was knighted by king Charles the second, and became a peculiar
favorite of James, duke of York; See W. Penn's letter to W. Popple afterward.
whose friendship, favor and benevolence were, after his death, continued to
his son; which, in a particular manner he requested of the duke, on his death
bed.

Birth and education of W. Penn born, 1644.
The memorable William Penn, son and heir of the above mentioned Sir William, or
admiral Penn, and the first proprietor and governor of Pennsylvania, was born
in London, on the fourteenth day of October, 1644. He was endowed with a good
genius; and his father, from the promising prospect, which he had, of his
advancement was induced to give him a liberal education: He accordingly made
such early improvements in literature, that, about the fifteenth year of his
age, he was entered a student at Christ's church college in Oxford.

His behavior at Oxford.
At this time more particularly (says the writer of his life) began to appear in
him a disposition of mind after true spiritual religion; of which before he had
received some sense and taste, through the ministry of Thomas Lo, a preacher
under the denomination of a Quaker. In this place, he, and certain students of
that university, withdrawing themselves from the national way of worship, held
private meetings, for the exercise of religion; where they both preached and
prayed among themselves; which gave great offense to the heads of the college.
He, being then but sixteen years of age, was fined for nonconformity; and, at
last, for his persevering in the like religious practices, was expelled the
college.

From thence, after he returned home, His father's conduct toward him.
he still retained the same turn of mind, and continued to prefer the society
of sober and religious persons. His father, judging this to be a great obstacle
in the way of his sons preferment, endeavored, by diverse means to deter and
divert him from it. For which purpose, after having used both the force of
persuasion upon his mind, and the severity of stripes upon his body, without
success, he at length was so far incensed against him, that, in great
resentment of rage, he turned him out of his house!

His patience surmounted this difficulty, He sends him to France.
till his father's affection had subdued his anger. He then sent him to France
in company with some persons of quality, who were making a tour thither. He
continued there a considerable time, till a quite different, conversation had
diverted his mind from the serious thoughts of religion. There he acquired the
knowledge of the French language, and a perfectly accomplished, polite and
courtly behavior. His father, on his return, thinking the intention of his
travels was fully answered, received him with great satisfaction. His conduct
and behavior, for some time after this, being represented to be such as justly
entitled him to the character of a complete young gentleman.

About the year 1664 his spiritual conflict, 1664.
or religious exercise of mind, is said to have been very great: his natural
inclination, his lively and active disposition, His great conflict of mind and
resolution.
his acquired accomplishments, his father's favor, the respect of his friends
and acquaintances, did strongly press him to embrace the glory and pleasures of
this world, then, as it were, courting and caressing him, in the bloom of
youth, to accept them; but, his earnest supplication being to the Almighty for
preservation, he was, in due time, providentially favored with resolution and
ability to overcome all opposition and to pursue his religious prospect, and
what he believed was his best interest, through all the reproaches, and
persecutions which attended him.

He is fully convinced of the Quakers principles in Ireland.
In the year 1666, and the 22d. of his age, his father committed to his care and
management a considerable estate, in Ireland; which occasioned his residence in
that country; there, being at Cork, at a religious meeting of the people called
Quakers, he was thoroughly and effectually convinced of their principles, by
means of the preaching of Thomas Loc, before mentioned; whose ministry ten
years before had made some impressions; upon his understanding; so that he
afterward constantly attended the religious meetings of that people, even
through the heat of persecution.

1667.
Being again at a meeting in Cork, in the year 1667, W. Penn committed to prison
with the Quakers.
he, with many others, was apprehended, and carried before the mayor, who,
observing that his dress discovered not the Quaker, would have set him at
liberty, upon bond for his good behavior; which, refusing to give, he was,
with about eighteen others, committed to prison; he had during his residence in
Ireland, contracted an intimate acquaintance with many of the nobility and
gentry; and, being now a prisoner, he wrote a letter, on the occasion, to the
Earl of Orrery, lord president of Munster; wherein he briefly informed him of
his situation, pleaded his innocence, and boldly exhibited the inconsistency
with true christianity, as well as the ill policy, of such kind of persecution,
especially in Ireland. The earl immediately ordered his discharge. But his
imprisonment was so far from terrifying him, that it strengthened him in his
resolution of a closer union with that people, whose religious innocence
appeared to be the only crime, for which they suffered.

His more openly joining with the Quakers now brought him under that
reproachful name; 1667.
He openly joins the Quakers.
and the compliments and caresses of his companions were changed into scoffs
and derision; and he became a byword, and the subject of scorn and contempt
both to the professor of religion, and to the profane.

His father by a letter from a nobleman of his acquaintance, Great contest
between his father and him.
being informed of the situation of his son, sent for him home. Upon his
return, though there was no great alteration in his dress, yet the manner of
his deportment, and the solid concern of mind, which he appeared to be under,
were manifest indications of the truth of the information which his father had
received; who thereupon attacked him afresh. "And here my pen (says the writer
of his life) is diffident of her abilities to describe that most pathetic and
moving contest, between his father and him. His father, by natural love,
principally aiming at his son's temporal honor; he, guided by a divine
impulse, having chiefly in view his own eternal welfare; his father grieved to
see the well accomplished son of his hopes, now ripe for worldly promotion,
voluntarily turn his back on it; he, no less afflicted, to think that a
compliance with his earthly father's pleasure, was inconsistent with an
obedience to his heavenly one; his father pressing his conformity to the
customs and fashions of the times; he modestly craving leave to refrain from
what would hurt his conscience; his father earnestly entreating him, and,
almost on his knees, beseeching him to yield to his desire he, of a loving and
tender disposition in extreme agony of spirit, to behold his father's concern
and trouble; his father threatening to disinherit him; he humbly submitting to
his father's will therein; his father turning his back on him in anger; he
lifting up his heart to God, for strength, to support him in that time of
trial!"

A remarkable instance of his sincerity.
During this contest, the writer of his life mentions one very remarkable
instance, among others, of his sincerity: -- "His father, finding him too
fixed, to be brought to a general compliance with the customary compliments of
the times, seemed inclinable to have born with him, in other respects, provided
he would be uncovered, in the presence of the king, the duke and himself; this
being proposed, he desired time to consider of it; which his father supposing
to be with an intention of consulting his friends, the Quakers, about it, he
assured him that he would see the face of none of them, but retire to his
chamber, till he should return him an answer. Accordingly he withdrew, and,
having humbled himself before God, with fasting and supplication, to know his
heavenly mind and will, he became so strengthened in his resolution, that,
returning to his father, he humbly signified, that he could not comply with his
desire therein."

His father turns him out of doors a second time.
"When all endeavors proved ineffectual to shake his constancy, and his father
saw himself utterly disappointed of his hopes, he could no longer endure him in
his sight, but turned him out of doors the second time. Thus exposed to the
charity of his friends, having no other subsistence, (except what his mother
privately sent him) he endured the cross with a christian patience and
magnanimity, comforting himself with the promise of Christ; -- "Verily I say
unto you, there is no man, that has left house, or parents, or brethren, or
wise, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive many
fold more, in this present time, and in the world to come, life everlasting."

"After a considerable time, His father's wrath some what abated.
his steady perseverance evincing his integrity, his father's wrath became
somewhat mollified, so that he winked at his return to, and continuance in his
family; and though he did not publicly seem to countenance him, yet, when
imprisoned for being at meetings, he privately used his interest to get him
released."

"About the year 1668, 1668.
being the 24th. of his age, (continues the writer of his life) he first
appeared in the work of the ministry, rightly called to, and qualified for,
that office; being sent of God to teach others what himself had learned of him;
commissioned from on high, to preach to others that holy self-denial, which
himself had practiced; to recommend to all that serenity and peace of
conscience, which himself had felt; walking in the light, to call others out of
darkness; having drank of the water of life, to direct others to the same
fountain; having tasted of the heavenly bread, to incite all men to partake of
the same banquet; being redeemed by the power of Christ, he was sent to call
others from under the dominion of Satan, into the glorious liberty of the sons
of God, that they might receive remission of sins, and an inheritance among
them that are sanctified through faith in Jesus Christ."

Of the rise, religious principles and practice, etc. of the people called
Quakers.
Before I proceed to be more particular respecting William Penn, Account of the
Quakers, etc.
I shall here intermit the further account of his life; and, that the reader
might have some just idea of the people, with whom he joined in religious
society, and who first settled the province of Pennsylvania, under him, I shall
next exhibit a short summary of the rise, religious principles, general system
and practice or manners, of the people called Quakers, sufficient for the
purpose, principally extracted from their own accounts, and in their own words,
referring the more inquisitive enquirer to their particular writings, for
further information. Among other writings of this people, the reader is
referred to the following:

Their history, by W. Sewel, in folio, and by J. Rutty, in 4to. Their
sufferings, in two vols. folio, by Jos. Besse, also to the works, or writings,
of R. Barclay, W. Penn, G. Fox, Is. Penington, Samuel Fisher, Ed. Buroughs,
Fr. Howgill, Thomas Story, with many others.




Evidences of God's providence, in the rise of the Quakers.
Nothing can be a more signal evidence of an overruling Providence,
superintending the works of the creation, and directing the end of things, than
the rise of good out of evil; and the conversion of the wicked machinations of
perverse mankind to good purposes: that out of persecution and hatred should
spring charity, and mutual benevolence; that from tyranny and ignorance should
flow rational liberty, and true knowledge, is as manifest a demonstration of an
all preserving cause, as the creation itself is evident of its own existence:
this appears, in part, from the rise of the religious people called Quakers,
and the settling of the flourishing province of Pennsylvania.

Time of the rise of the Quakers.
Near the middle of the 17th. century, during the civil war, in England, when
men were tearing each other in pieces, and when confusion and bloodshed had
overspread the nation, many sober and thinking persons of the different
religious societies, weighing the uncertainty of human affairs, and beholding
the various vicissitudes in the political system, after having examined the
many vain and futile opinions, and absurd customs, in religion, which were
either imposed, practiced or insisted on, by the various professors of
Christianity, under all denominations, in that country, withdrew themselves
from their assemblies for divine worship; and, having their minds turned to
what appeared to them more rational, and consistent with a rightly informed
understanding, and a life more congruous, or agreeable, to the mind of that
Deity which is spiritual, and communicates his goodness and knowledge more
nearly through a medium of his own nature; and places the human mind above the
reach of terrestrial influence; they thence fell into that practical belief,
and christian conduct, which gave rise to this religious society. It may be
here noted, that the same unhappy and distracted times likewise originally gave
rise to the institution of the Royal Society, in London: When men were tired
out with wars, contentions, and the changes consequent thereon, diverse persons
of genius and fortune began to turn their minds from the broils of state
affairs, to a philosophic life; and by degrees formed that venerable body, for
the promotion of science and natural knowledge; a society, which has done no
small honor to the British nation, and has been of great benefit to mankind.

Vide spectator, No. 262, on the rise of the R. Society.


It was not till the year 1650, When first called Quakers.
that the name of Quakers was imposed on them; who before had generally gone
under the denomination of professors, 1650.
or children, of the light; but the most common appellation, by which they
distinguished themselves from others, and even to this day, is by the name of
Friends.

"Now these people (says Robert Barclay, Cause and manner of their first rise
and uniting in society.
one of their early and principal writers) who hold forth the principles and
doctrines hereafter to be mentioned, were not gathered together by an unity of
opinion, or by a tedious and particular disquisition of notions and opinions,
requiring an assent to them, and binding themselves by leagues and covenants
thereto; but the manner of their gathering was by a secret want; which many
truly tender and serious souls in diverse and sundry sects, found in themselves,
which put each sect in search of something beyond all opinion; which might
satisfy their weary souls, even, the revelation of God's righteous judgment in
their hearts, to burn up the unrighteous root and fruits thereof; that, the
same being destroyed, and done away, the inward peace and joy of the holy
spirit, in the soul, might be felt to abound, and thence power and life to
follow him, in all his commandments. And so many came to be joined and united
together in heart and spirit, in this one life of righteousness, who had been
long wandering in the several sects; and by the inward unity, came to be
gathered in one body; from whence, by degrees, they came to find themselves
agreed in the plain and simple doctrines of Christ. And as this inward power,
Whence the name of Quakers imposed --

It may be observed, "that through the deep and inward operation of this power
in them, a dread took hold on them, not only to the begetting of God's fear in
their hearts, but even to the reaching and instructing of their outward man,
hence the name of Quakers, or Tremblers, has been in reproach, by their
enemies cast upon them, which serves to distinguish them from others, though
not assumed by them; yet as the Christians of old, albeit the name of Christian
was cast upon them by way of reproach, gloried in it, as desiring, above all
things, to he accounted the followers of Christ; so they also are glad the
world reproacheth them as such, who tremble before the Lord, and who work out
their salvation in fear and trembling."

R. Barclay.
they longed for, and felt, to give them victory over sin, and bring the peace,
that follows thereon, was that, whereby they were brought into that unity and
community together; so they came first thence to accord in the universal
preaching of this power to all, and directing all unto it; which is the first
and chiefest principle held by them, viz.

First and chief principle of the Quakers.
"That there is somewhat of God, some light, some grace, some power, some
measure of the spirit, some divine, spiritual, heavenly, substantial life and
virtue, in all men; which is a faithful witness against all unrighteousness,
and ungodliness in the heart of man, and leads, draws, moves and inclines the
mind of man to righteousness, and seeks to leaven him, as he gives way
thereunto, into the nature of itself; whereby (...) inward, thorough and real
redemption may be wrought in the hearts of all men, of whatsoever nation,
country or kindred they be, notwithstanding whatsoever outward knowledge, or
benefit, they may be, by the providence of God, deprived of: because whatsoever
they want of that, yet such a measure of this light, seed, life and word, is
communicated to all, as is sufficient truly to convert them from the evil of
their ways, purify and cleanse them, and consequently bring them to salvation.
And in the affirming of this, they do not at all exalt self, or nature; (as do
the Socinians) in that they freely acknowledge that man's nature is defiled and
corrupted, and unable to help him one step, in order to salvation; judging
nothing more needful than the full and perfect denial and mortification of
self, in order thereunto. Nor do they believe this seed, light and grace to be
any part of man's nature; or, any thing that properly, or essentially, is of
man; but that it is a free grace and gift of God, freely given to all men, in
order to bring them out of the fail, and lead them to life eternal. Neither do
they suppose this seed, word and grace, which is sufficient to lead to
salvation, to be given to men without Christ; for they believe it to be the
purchase of Christ's death, who tasted death for every man: so that they
confess all to be derived to them in and by Christ, the mediator; to whom they
ascribe all. Yea, they believe this light, grace and seed to be no other, but a
measure of that life and spirit, that was in Christ Jesus; which, being in him,
who is the head, in the fullness of it, is from him, (in whom it resideth) as he
is ascended up unto, and glorified in, the heavens, extended to all men, in
order to redeem them from sin, and convert them to God."

"Thus, according to this principle, without attributing any thing to self or
to the nature of man, or, claiming any thing without Christ, the universal love
of God to all men is exhibited; whereby the means of salvation by Christ, and
reconciliation unto God, is so asserted, that no man is altogether excluded
from it, but each so reached, as puts him into a capacity to be saved."

Hence, as it naturally arises from this universal principle, the church
Catholic, or universal, Definition of the church Catholic, or universal, etc.
without which there can be no salvation, is by them understood to comprehend
all persons, or so many, of every nation and kind of people, without exception,
whether they have the knowledge and benefit of the scriptures and christianity
outwardly by word or not, Barclay's apology.
as are obedient to the principle of the holy light and testimony of God, in
their hearts, so as thereby to become cleansed and sanctified; of which
Catholic church there may be members both among Heathens, Turks, Jews, and all
the several sorts of Christians.

Particular outward and visible church Ibid.
And this they think may not be derogatory from the propriety and necessity of a
particular outward visible church of Christ; which is absolutely requisite,
where God affords the opportunity of the knowledge of christianity; as it
consists of a society, or number of persons, who, through the belief of the
true principles and doctrines of the christian faith; their hearts being united
by the same love of God, and their understandings informed in the same truths,
associate and assemble together, for divine worship; to bear a joint testimony
for the truth, against error; and for the mutual edification and strengthening
of one another: -- So that a person may be a member of the true Catholic
church, who, at the same time, may not be a member of any particular church of
Christ: but, that no man can properly be a real member of a particular church
of Christ, who is not one of the Catholic church; and that the outward
testimony and profession of christianity can only be requisite to be believed
and held forth, where it is known, or revealed, and not otherwise.

Of their worship.
Consistent with the nature of this universal principle, and the definition of
the church arising therefrom, appears to be their worship; which, according to
the account of it, given by themselves, was more divested of those numerous
external and bodily exercises and performances, which either the ignorance or
ingenuity of men, had introduced, under the specious pretense of thereby
rendering themselves more acceptable to a spiritual Being, than that of any
other religious societies, known to them, at that time, under the name of
Christians: -- A worship, which they professed to be spiritual, and performed
in the mind; not being confined to particular persons, times, places, nor
ceremonies; but more congruous to, or consistent with the nature of a spiritual
divinity, the object of all true worship, according to the New Testament; which
expressly declares, "that the worship of God ought to be performed in spirit
and in truth, and not to be confined to any external mode, place or particular
person; and for this reason, because God is a spirit; and consequently a
spiritual worship is the sole rational, and most agreeable to his nature:" --
This is the only precept, or declaration, concerning divine worship; and the
manner of it, which is left us by the author of Christianity.

Hence says R. Barclay, "Albeit, Barclay's apology.
I say that this worship is neither limited to times, places nor persons; yet I
would not be understood, as if I intended the putting away all set times and
places to worship: God forbid I should be of such an opinion. Nay, we are none
of those that forsake the assembling of themselves together; but have even,
certain times and places, in which we carefully meet together to wait upon God,
and worship him. To meet together we think necessary for the people of God;
because, so long as we are clothed with this outward tabernacle, there is a
necessity to the entertaining of a joint and visible fellowship, and bearing of
an outward testimony for God, and seeing of the faces of one another; that we
may concur with our persons, as well as spirits;" -- which meeting together is
no part of worship in itself, but only a preparatory accommodation, in order to
a public visible worship; which consists, Worship of the Quakers.
when met, in a silent watching and waiting upon God in themselves, (or in
their minds) and a being gathered from all visibles thereinto. And as every one
is thus stated, they come to find the good over the evil, and the pure over the
impure; in which God reveals himself, and draws near to every individual; and
so he is in the midst, in the general; whereby each not only partakes of the
particular refreshment and strength, which comes from the good in himself, but
is a sharer of the whole body, as being a living member of the body, having a
just fellowship and communion with all. And, as this worship is steadfastly
preached, and kept to, it becomes easy; though it be very hard, at first, to
the natural man; whose roving imaginations, and running worldly desires, are
not easily brought to silence." -- "And, as every one is thus gathered, and so
met together inwardly, in their spirits, as well as outwardly, in their
persons, there the secret power and virtue of life is known to refresh the
soul, and the pure motions and breathings of God's spirit are felt to arise;
from which, as words of declaration, prayers or praises, arise, the acceptable
worship is known, which edifies the church, and is well pleasing to God. And no
man here limits the spirit of God, nor brings forth his own conned and
gathered stuff; but every one puts that forth, which the Lord puts into their
hearts; and it is utterred forth, not in man's will and wisdom, but in the
evidence and demonstration of the spirit and of power. Yea, though there be not
a word spoken, yet is the true spiritual worship performed, and the body of
Christ edified; yea, it may and has often fallen out among us, that diverse
meetings have passed without one word; and yet our souls have been greatly
edified, and our hearts wonderfully overcome, with the secret sense of God's
power and spirit; which, without words, have been ministered from one vessel to
another." -- "Many are the blessed experiences, which I could relate of this
silence, and manner of worship; yet I do not commend, and speak of silence, as
if we had a law in it, to shut out praying or preaching, or tied ourselves
thereunto; not at all: For, as our worship consists not in the words, so
neither in silence, as silence; but in an holy dependence of the mind upon God:
from which dependence silence necessarily follows, in the first place, until
words can be brought forth, which are from God's spirit. And God is not wanting
to move, in his children, to bring forth words of exhortation, or prayer, when
it is needful; so that of the many gatherings and meetings of such as are
convinced of the truth, there is scarce any, in which God raises not up some
or other, to minister to his brethren; that there are few meetings, that are
altogether silent." -- "And when any are, through the breaking forth of this
power, constrained to utter a sentence of exhortation or praise, or to breathe
to the Lord, in prayer, then all are sensible of it; for the same life in them
answers to it, as in water, face answers to face." -- "And there being many
joined together in the same work, there is an inward travail and wrestling; and
also, as the measure of grace is abode in, an overcoming of the power and
spirit of darkness (in the mind:) and thus we are often greatly strengthened
and renewed in the spirits of our minds, without a word, and we enjoy and
possess the holy fellowship and communion of the body and blood of Christ; by
which our inward man is nourished and fed; which makes us not to dote upon
outward water, and bread and wine, in our spiritual things." -- "This is that
divine and spiritual worship, which the world neither knows nor
understands, which the vulture's eye sees not into." -- "And its excellency
is such, that it can neither be stopped, intercepted nor counterfeited by the
malice, or power of men or devils, as all others can."

As that, which is necessary to make a man a Christian, so as without it he
cannot be truly one, Of their ministry.
must consequently be much more necessary to make a man a minister of
Christianity, (seeing the one is a degree above the other, and has it included
in it) so this people accordingly maintained that, as the inward call, power
and virtue of the spirit of God is indispensably necessary to make a man a true
Christian, so it must of consequence be much more so, for the qualification of
the ministry; without which they believe none can possibly be a true minister
of the new testament; Barclay's apology.
insomuch that they assert, "that not only in a general apostasy it is needful
men be extraordinarily called, and raised up by the spirit of God; but that,
even when several assemblies, or churches, are gathered by the power of God,
(not only into the belief of the principles of truth, so as to deny errors and
heresies, but also into the life, spirit and power of Christianity, so as to be
the body and house of Christ indeed, and a fit spouse for him) that he, who
gathers them, does also, for the preserving them in a lively, fresh and
powerful condition, raise up, and move, among them, by the inward immediate
operation of his own spirit, ministers and teachers, to instruct, teach and
watch over them: The qualification, call, and title of their ministers.
who being thus called, are manifest in the hearts of their brethren; and their
call is thus verified in them; who, by the feeling of that life and power, that
passes through them, being inwardly builded up, by them daily, in the most
holy faith, become the seals of their apostleship. And this is answerable to
the saying of the apostle Paul: "since ye seek a proof of Christ's speaking in
me, which to you-wards is not weak, but is mighty in you." -- "So this is that,
which gives a true, substantial call and title to a minister; and not of the
bare name: And to such ministers we think the outward ceremony of ordination,
or laying on of hands, not necessary:" -- neither are the outward
qualifications of letter-learning, and school divinity absolutely requisite:"
Though they held, as above, a spiritual teaching and instruction, in the mind,
most suitable, reasonable, adequate and necessary to a spiritual intelligence
in religion, See R. B's. writings, etc.
yet they never meant thereby that natural science and the knowledge of
languages and literature, etc. were not useful, as the proper means, or medium,
of communicating external knowledge and information among mankind, even, in
religious affairs; (which is plainly manifested in the labors and literary
works of this very author, R. Barclay, and diverse others of that society) as
well as in the common outward concerns of life, and those things, for which
they are adequate and suitable: and therefore, they had schools and seminaries
of learning among them, for the acquisition thereof, and other useful sciences,
as other people have. But their excluding literature, or school-learning, from
being absolutely necessary in divinity, according to the Christian system; and
the great harm, which they believed and declared the general perversion, or
misuse thereof, had produced in Christendom, occasioned diverse of them to be so
severe on the subject, that many, from thence, have mistakenly supposed, they
entirely disapproved of human learning in every respect.
"But, in a true church of Christ gathered together by God, not only into the
belief of the principles of truth, but also into the power, life and spirit of
Christ, the spirit of God is the orderer, ruler and governor; as in each
particular, so in the general. And when they assemble together, to wait upon
God, and to worship and adore him; then such as the spirit sets apart for the
ministry, by its divine power and influence, opening their mouths and giving
them to exhort, reprove and instruct with virtue and power; these are thus of
God ordained and admitted into the ministry; and their brethren cannot but hear
them, and receive them, and also honor them for their works sake. And so this
is not monopolised to a certain kind of men, as the Clergy (who are to that
purpose educated and brought up, as other carnal artists) and the rest to be
despised as Laics; but it is left to the free gift of God to choose any whom
he sees meet thereunto, whether rich or poor, servant or master, young or old,
yea, male or female. And such as have this call verify the gospel, by preaching
not in speech only, but also in power, and in the holy ghost, and in much
fullness; and cannot but be received and heard by the sheep of Christ."

William Penn, in his account of the rise and progress of this people, See W.
Penn's rise and progress of the Quakers. 1694.
printed among his literary works, further observes: -- " And as God had
delivered their souls of the wearisome burden of sin and vanity, and enriched
their poverty of spirit, and satisfied their great hunger and thirst after
eternal righteousness, and filled them with the good things of his own house,
and made them stewards of his many-fold gifts; so they went forth to all
quarters of these nations, to declare to the inhabitants thereof what God had
done for them; what they had found, and where and how they had found it, viz.
the way to peace with God; inviting all to come and see and taste, for
themselves, the truth of what they declared unto them."

The manner and purport of their preaching.
"And as their testimony was to the principle of God in man, the precious pearl
and leaven of the kingdom, as the only blessed means, appointed of God, to
quicken, convince and sanctify men; so they opened to them what it was in
itself, and what it was given to them for: how they might know it from their
own spirit and that of the subtle appearance of the evil one: and what it would
do for those, whose minds should be turned off from the vanity of the world,
and its lifeless ways and teachers, and adhere to this blessed light in
themselves, which discovers and condemns sin, in all its appearances, and shows
how to overcome it, if minded and obeyed in its holy manifestations and
convictions; giving power to such, to avoid and resist those things, that do
not please God, and to grow strong in love, faith and good works: that so man,
whom sin has made a wilderness, overrun with briars and thorns, might become
as the garden of God, cultivated by his divine power, and replenished with the
most virtuous and beautiful plants of God's own right hand planting, to his
eternal praise."

They could not pray and preach when they pleased, etc.
"But these experimental preachers of glad tidings, of God's truth and kingdom,
could not run when they list, nor pray or preach when they pleased, but, as
Christ, their redeemer, prepared and moved them, by his own blessed spirit; for
which they waited in their services and meetings, and spoke as that gave them
utterance; and which was, as those having authority, and not like the dreaming,
dry and formal Pharisees. And so it plainly appeared to the serious minded,
whose spiritual eye the Lord Jesus had, in any measure, opened: so that to one
was given the word of reproof, to another the word of exhortation, to another
the word of consolation, and all by the same spirit, and in the good order
thereof, to the convincing and edifying of many."

"And truly (says W. Penn) they waxed strong and bold, through faithfulness;
and by the power and spirit of the Lord Jesus became very fruitful; thousands,
in a short time, being turned to the truth, in the inward parts, through their
testimony, in ministry and sufferings; insomuch as, in most countries, and many
of the considerable towns of England, meetings were settled, and daily were
added such as should be saved, for they were diligent to plant and to water;
and the Lord blessed their labors with an exceeding great increase;
notwithstanding all the opposition, made to their blessed progress by the false
rumors, calumnies and bitter persecutions; not only from the powers of the
earth, but from every one that listed to injure and abuse them: so that they
seemed, indeed, to be as poor sheep appointed to the slaughter and as a people,
killed all the day long." See their sufferings in 2 vols. fol. by Jos. Besse,
etc.
-- "So many and cruel were the sufferings of this people on a religious
account, and, in part, recorded in their writings, which they endured from
professors, as well as from profane, and from magistrates, as well as the
rabble, that it may be truly said of this abused and despised people, they went
forth weeping, and sowed in tears, bearing testimony to the precious seed,
even, the seed of the kingdom, which stands not in words, the finest, the
highest, that man's wit can use, but in power; the power of Christ Jesus, to
whom God the Father, has given all power, in heaven and in earth; that he
might rule angels above, and men below; who empowered them, as their work
witnesses, by the many, that were turned, through their ministry, from
darkness to light, and out of the broad into the narrow way of life and peace;
bringing people to a weighty, serious and God-like conversation, the practice
of that doctrine, which they taught."

Of their ministers and ministry, W. Penn speaks as follows:
W. Pennen their ministers and ministry, etc.
1. "They were changed men themselves before they went abroad to change others.
Their hearts were rent, as well as their garments; and they knew the power and
work of God upon them. And this was seen by the great alteration it made; and
their stricter course of life, and more godly conversation, that immediately
followed upon it."

2. "They went not forth to preach in their own time, or will, but in the will
of God; and spoke not their own studied matter, but as they were opened and
moved of his spirit; with which they were well acquainted, in their own
conversion; which cannot be expressed to carnal men, so as to give them any
intelligible account; for to such it is as Christ said, like the blowing of the
wind, which no man knows whence it comes, or whither it goes. -- Yet this
proof and zeal went along with their ministry, that many were turned from their
lifeless professions, and the evil of their ways, to an inward and experimental
knowledge of God, and an holy life as thousands can witness. And as they freely
received, what they had to say, from the Lord, so they freely administered it
to others." -- (And, Barclay's apology, etc.
as R. Barclay further observes on the subject) "they coveted no man's silver,
gold nor apparel; sought no man's goods; but sought them, and the salvation of
their souls: whose hands supplied their own necessities, working honestly for
bread, for themselves and families. And if, at any time, they were called of
God, so as the work of the Lord hindered them from the work of their trades,
they took what was freely given them by such, to whom they had communicated
spirituals, and having food and raiment, were therewith content.

3. "The bent and stress of their ministry (continues W. Penn) was conversion
to God, regeneration and holiness. Not schemes of doctrines, and verbal creeds,
or new forms of worship; but a leaving off, in religion, the superfluous, and
reducing the ceremonies, and formal part, and pressing earnestly, the
substantial, the necessary and profitable part, to the soul.

4 "They directed people to a principle in themselves, though not of
themselves, by which all, that they asserted, preached and exhorted others to,
might be wrought in them, and known to them, through experience, to be true:
which is an high and distinguishing mark of the truth of their ministry, both
that they knew what they said, and were not afraid of coming to the test: for,
as they were bold from certainty, so they required conformity upon no human
authority, but upon conviction of this principle; which they asserted was in
them, that they preached unto; and unto that they directed them, that they
might examine and prove the reality of these things, which they had affirmed of
it, as to its manifestation, and work in man. And this is more than the many
ministers in the world pretend to." -- "Thus this people did not only in words,
more than equally with others, press repentance, conversion and holiness, but
over and above did it knowingly and experimentally; and directed those, to whom
they preached, to a sufficient principle; and told them where it was, and by
what tokens they might know it, and which way they might experience the power
and efficacy of it, to their souls' happiness; which is more than theory and
speculation; upon which most other ministers depend: for here is certainty; a
bottom upon which man may boldly appear before God, in the great day of account.

5. "They reached to the inward state and condition of people, which is
evidence of the virtue of their principle, and of their ministering from it,
and not from their own imaginations, glosses or comments, upon scripture. For
nothing reaches the heart, but what is from the heart, or pierces the
conscience, but what comes from a living conscience. Insomuch, as it has often
happened, where people have, under secrecy, revealed their state, or condition,
to some choice friends, for advice, or ease; they have been so particularly
directed, in the ministry of this people, that they have challenged their
friends, with discovering their secrets, and telling their preachers their
cases, to whom a word had not been spoken. Yea, the very thoughts and purposes
of the hearts of many have been so plainly detected, that they have, like
Nathaniel, cried out of this inward appearance of Christ, "Thou art the son of
God, thou art the king of Israel." And those, that have embraced this divine
principle, have found this mark of its truth and divinity, that the woman of
Samaria did of Christ, when in the flesh, to be the Messiah, viz. It had told
them all that ever they had done; shown them their insides, the most inward
secrets of their hearts, and laid judgment to the line, and righteousness to
the plummet; of which thousands can, at this day, give in their witness. So
that nothing has been affirmed by this people, of the power and virtue of this
heavenly principle, that such as have turned to it, have not found true, and
more; and that half had not been told them, of what they have seen of the
power, purity, wisdom and goodness of God therein.

6. "The accomplishments, with which this principle fitted, even some of the
meanest of this people, for their work and service; furnishing some of them
with an extraordinary understanding, in divine things, and an admirable fluency
and taking way of expression, gave occasion to some to wonder, saying of them,
as of their master, "Is not this such a mechanic's son? How came he by this
learning? As from thence others took occasion to suspect and insinuate, they
were Jesuits in disguise, who had the reputation of learned men for an age
past, though there was not the least ground of truth for any such reflection,
in that their ministers are known, the places of their abode, their kindred and
education.

7. "That they came forth low, despised and hated, as the primitive Christians
did; and not by the help of worldly wisdom or power, as former reformations, in
part, have done: But, in all things, it may be said, this people were brought
forth in the cross; in a contradiction to the ways, worships, fashions and
customs of this world; yea, against wind and tide; that no flesh might glory
before God.

8. "They could have no design to themselves, in this work, thus to expose
themselves to scorn and abuse; to spend and be spent: leaving wife and
children, house and land, and all that can be accounted dear to men, with their
lives in their hands; being daily in jeopardy, to declare this primitive
message, revived in their spirits, John i. chapter 4. and 19. iii. chapter 20, 21. I.
John i. chapter 5, 6, 7.
by the good spirit and power of God, viz. That God is light and in him is no
darkness at all; and that he has sent his son, a light into the world, to
enlighten all men, in order to salvation; and that they, that say they have
fellowship with God, and are his children and people, and yet walk in darkness,
viz. in disobedience to the light in their consciences, and after the vanity of
this world, they lie, and do not the truth. But, that all such as love the
light, and bring their deeds to it, and walk in the light, as God is light, the
blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, should cleanse them from all sin.

9. "Their known great constancy and patience, in suffering for their
testimony, in all the branches of it, and that sometimes unto death, by
beatings, bruisings, long and crowded imprisonments, and noisome dungeons. Four
of them, in New England, dying by the hands of the executioner, purely for
preaching among that people; besides banishments, and excessive plunders and
sequestrations of their goods and estates, almost in all parts, not easy to be
expressed, and less to have been endured, but by those that have the support of
a good and glorious cause; refusing deliverance by any indirect ways, or means,
as often as it was offered to them.

10. "That they did not only not show any disposition to revenge, when it was
at any time in their power, but forgave their cruel enemies; showing mercy to
those, who had none for them.

11. "Their plainness with those in authority, like the ancient prophets, not
fearing to tell them, to their faces, of their private and public sins: and
their prophecies to them of their afflictions and downfall, when in the top of
their glory: -- Also of some national judgments; as, of the plague and fire of
London, in express terms; and likewise particular ones, on diverse persecutors,
which accordingly overtook them; and were very remarkable in the places, where
they dwelt, which in time, may be made public for the glory of God."

Of their doctrines.
"As to the doctrine, which they taught, (says the same author) having already
given some account of their fundamental principle, their characteristic; or
main distinguishing principle, viz. the light of Christ within; which is, as
the root of the goodly tree of doctrines, that grew, and branched out from it,
I shall, therefore, now speak of them, in their natural and experimental order.

Repentan^e.
"First, repentance from dead works, to serve the living God; which comprehends
three operations; first, a sight of sin; secondly, a sense and godly sorrow for
sin; thirdly, an amendment for the time to come. This was the repentance, they
preached and pressed, and a natural result from the principle, they turned all
people to. For of light came sight; and of sight came sense and sorrow; and of
sense and sorrow came amendment of life. Which doctrine of repentance leads to
justification; that is, forgiveness of sins, that are past, through Christ, the
alone propitiation and the sanctification or purgation of the soul, from the
defiling nature and habits of sin present, by the spirit of Christ in the soul;
which is justification, in the complete sense of the word, comprehending both
justification from the guilt of the sins that are past, as if they never had
been committed, through the love and mercy of God in Christ Jesus; and the
creatures being made inwardly just, through the cleansing and sanctifying power
and spirit of Christ revealed in the soul, which is commonly called
sanctification: But that none can come to know Christ to be their sacrifice,
that reject him as their sanctifier; the end of his coming being to save his
people from the nature and defilement, as well as guilt, of sin; and that,
therefore, those that resist his light and spirit, make his coming and offering
of none effect to them.

"From hence sprang a second doctrine, they were led to declare, as the mark of
the prize of the high calling, to all true Christians, Perfection from sin.
viz. perfection from sin, according to the scriptures of truth; which testify
it to be the end of Christ's coming, and the nature of his kingdom; and for
which his spirit was, and is given, viz. to be perfect as our heavenly Father
is perfect; and holy, because God is holy." And this the apostles labored for;
that the Christians should be sanctified throughout, in body, soul and spirit."
But they never held a perfection in wisdom and glory in this life, or from
natural infirmities, or death; as some have, with a weak, or ill mind,
imagined, or insinuated against them.

"This they called a redeemed state, regeneration, or the new birth: teaching
every where, according to their foundation, that without this work were known,
there was no inheriting the kingdom of God.

Eternal rewards and punishments.
"Thirdly, This leads to an acknowledgment of eternal rewards and punishments,
as they have good reason; for else, of all people, certainly they must be the
most miserable; who, for above forty years, W. P. writ this about the year 1694.
have been exceeding great sufferers, for their profession, and in some cases,
treated worse than the worst of men; yea, as the refuse and offscouring of all
things.

"This was the purport of their doctrine and ministry; which, for the most
part, is what other professors of Christianity pretend to hold, in words and
forms, but not in the power of godliness; which, generally speaking has been
long lost, by men's departing from that principle and seed of life, that is in
man; and which man has not regarded, but lost the sense of; and in, and by
which only, he can be quickened in his mind, to serve the living God, in
newness of life, For as the life of religion was lost, and the generality lived
and worshipped God, after their own wills, and not after the will of God, nor
the mind of Christ, which stood in the works, and fruits of the holy spirit; so
that which they pressed was not notion, but experience; not formality, but
Godliness; as being sensible in themselves, through the work of God's righteous
judgments, that, without holiness, no man shall see the Lord with comfort."

Having thus far mentioned the manner of the first rise of this people, with
their prime, or fundamental principle, and some of their chief doctrines,
arising from it, in the next place, Of their other doctrines, customs and
discipline.
follows an account of that order, and discipline, with diverse customs, more
peculiar to themselves, than to others, into which as a reformed society, by
the same principle they professed themselves to be led and brought; and of that
innocent, exemplary and uniform life and conduct, for which, consistent
therewith, they are said to have been very remarkable among all sorts of
people, to whom they were known, in early time.

Of these customs, doctrines and practices, or manners, for which they were,
and still are, more particularly distinguishable, I shall first observe, that
though some of them may probably appear singular, or trivial to strangers, and
to those who are not sufficiently acquainted with the moderation and sincerity
of this people, yet, as they profess them to arise from this fundamental and
universal principle, held by them, as before mentioned; from which all the
virtues spring, and every practice is more or less important, and not from any
whimsical, or selfish humor, or desire to appear singular, so, in this light,
if it be granted as reasonable, a contrariety of conduct will rather appear,
and ought to be accounted, singular, strange or out of the way; -- seeing, it
is very plain, their adversaries themselves, in placing so much stress, as they
have done, on the practice of the contrary, in the view of this people,
indefensible, have rendered some of these apparently insignificant things of
much greater importance than they would otherwise have been; I shall therefore,
in this abstract, arrange them under certain following heads, referring to
their own writings, for their reasons and probations of their use and practice,
viz.

1. Their justice, veracity and true christian fortitude. 2. Their temperance
and moderation. 3. Their charity, and loving one another.
1. Under the first of these heads it is not my intention to specify every
particular, which may properly come under it, in respect to the just and due
appropriation of the true and proper attributes and rights, of God and man
respectively; but as their sense of justice and propriety, in these respects,
went considerably higher, and led them further, in their practice, than that of
other people, I shall, therefore, only mention those things, for which they
were particularly distinguished from them, viz.

Their disuse of compliments, etc.
First, Their disuse of vain compliments, and flattering titles, bowing,
kneeling, and uncovering the head to mankind; and their using the singular
language, thou and thee, to a single person, in discourse, according to the
true form of speech; though so contrary to the general practice of people in
common; believing all tokens of adoration and worship belong to God only; and
that plain, but civil language, and true speeches are most becoming the
professors and followers of truth. Respecting these and other things of that
nature, R. Barclay observes; -- "I would not have any judge, that hereby we
intend to destroy the mutual relation that either is betwixt prince and people,
master and servant, parents and children; nay, not at all; we shall evidence
that our principle in these things, has no such tendency, and that these
natural relations are rather better established, than any ways hurt by it."
They do not respect persons.
-- "Thus (says W. Penn) not to respect persons, was, and is another of their
doctrines and practices; for which they were often buffeted and abused. They
affirmed it to be sinful, to give flattering titles, or to use vain gestures
and compliments of respect; though to virtue and authority they ever made a
difference; but after their plain and homely manner, yet sincere and
substantial way; well remembering the good examples of Mordecai and Elihu, but
more especially the command of their lord and master, Jesus Christ; who forbade
his followers to call men, Rabbi; which implies Lord or Master; also the
fashionable greetings and salutations of those times; that so self love and
honor, to which the proud mind of man is incident in his fallen state, might
not be indulged, but rebuked. And though this rendered their conversation
disagreeable; yet they that will remember what Christ said to the Jews, "How
can you believe me, who receive honor one from another," will abate of their
resentment, if his doctrine has any credit with them."

"They also used the plain language of thou and thee to a single person, They
speak the plain language thou and thee, to a single person.
whatsoever was his degree among men. And, indeed, the wisdom of God, was much
seen, in bringing forth this people, in so plain an appearance: for it was a
close and distinguishing test upon the spirits of those, they came among;
showing their insides, and what predominated, notwithstanding their high and
great profession of religion. This among the rest, sounded so harsh to many of
them, that they took very great offense at it; forgetting the language they use
to God, in their prayers, and the common style of the scriptures; and that it
is an absolute and essential propriety of speech."

"Nor could they humor the custom of good night, good morrow, God speed; Some
salutations not used by them.
for they knew the night was good, and the day was good, without wishing of
either; and that, in the other expression, the holy name of God was too
lightly, and unthoughtfully used; and therefore, taken in vain. Besides, they
were words and wishes of course, and are usually as little meant, as are love
and service in the custom of cap and knee; and superfluity in these, as well as
in other things, was burdensome to them and therefore they did not only decline
the use of them, but found themselves often pressed to reprove the practice."

They do not observe holy days fast days, etc.
To this place may be referred, their non-observance of those called holy days,
and days appointed for fastings, prayings and rejoicings; as being religious
ceremonies prescribed by men, whom they did not allow to have a just right to
impose any religious practice on, or against, the conscience which is God's
peculiar prerogative.

Their manner of naming days of the week, etc.
They were likewise in the custom of using the numerical names of the months,
and days of the week, especially the latter; as, first, second, third day of
the week, etc. instead of the vulgar names of the heathen gods, commonly used,
and given to those days, by other people; and so inconsistent with a thorough
christian practice, in that respect. As our common names of the months were
first imposed by the Pagan Romans; some of them in honor of their gods; as
January, February and March; others, in complaisance to common strumpets; as,
April and May; while others were denominated in honor of their deified
emperors; as, July and August; most of the rest being numerical; so the vulgar
names of the days of the week, now used, are handed to us from our heathen
ancestors, the Saxons; which they are said to have introduced, in reference to
their idols, which they, under particular representations, or figures,
worshipped, as gods, on the respective days, appropriated for each of them;
hence, to the first day of the week, on which they worshipped the Sun, they
gave the name of Sun's day, or Sunday; and so of the rest; adoring the Moon, on
Monday; and their idols Tuisco, on Tuesday; Woden on Wednesday; Thor, on
Thursday; Friga, on Friday; and Seater on Saturday, calling it Seater's day,
etc. -- The Quakers thought the common names as expressed in the New Testament,
more suitable and proper for the use of Christians, than the vulgar pagan
appellation; and, even, preferable, setting aside Christianity, in the case:
neither did they like the imitation thereof, in the names of popish saints,
given to times and places, and other similar ceremonies and observations.


They refuse to pay tithes, church rates, etc.
Secondly, Their refusing to pay tithes and wages toward the support of a
ministry, from which they received no advantage, but entirely disowned, so
unreasonably exacted of them by its advocates and votaries; of which says W.
Penn, "Another part of the character of this people was and is, that they
refuse to pay tithes, or maintenance to a national ministry; and that for two
reasons; the one is, they believe all compelled maintenance, even to gospel
ministers, to be unlawful; because expressly contrary to Christ's command, who
said, "Freely you have received, freely give:" -- at least, that the
maintenance of gospel ministers should be free, and not forced. The other
reason of their refusal is, because those ministers are not gospel ones; in
that the Holy Ghost is not their foundation, but human arts and parts, so that
it is not matter of humor, or sullenness, but pure conscience toward God,
that they cannot help to support national ministries, where they dwell; which
but too much, and too visibly become ways of worldly advantage and preferment."

Thirdly, Their great care and strictness, They strictly pay their taxes to the
government.
in rendering to Caesar, according to their manner of expression, that is, to
the government, its dues; in the punctual payment of taxes, customs, and
discouraging all illicit and clandestine trade; and in being at a word in their
dealings: -- Insomuch, that, in their particular printed advices to their
brethren, they say, -- "As the blessed truth, we profess, teaches us to do
justly to all men, in all things; even so more especially, See Y. meeting
epistle for 1715, 1719, 1732, etc.
in a faithful subjection to the government, in all godliness and honesty;
continuing to render unto the king what is his due, in taxes and customs,
payable to him according to law." -- "For our ancient testimony has ever been,
and still is, against defrauding the king of any of the above mentioned
particulars, and against buying goods reasonably suspected to be run," -- "or
doing any other thing whatsoever to the injury of the king's revenue, or of the
common good, or to the hurt of the fair trader; so, if any person or persons,
under our name or profession, shall be known to be guilty of these, or any
other such crimes and offenses, we do earnestly advise the respective monthly
meetings, (hereafter explained) to which such offenders belong, that they
severely repremand, and testify against such offenders, and their
unwarrantable, clandestine, and unlawful actions; -- we being under great
obligations of gratitude, as well as duty, to manifest, that we are as truly
conscientious to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as to support
any other branch of our Christian testimony." -- And so great was the
importance of this affair with them, that an annual enquiry was regularly made
through all parts of the British dominions, where they had members of society,
whether the purport of these advices were duly put in practice, or not, and to
enforce the same.

They were at a word in their dealings. J. Rutty.
"It has moreover been a well known, distinguishing characteristic of this
people, that anciently they did, from a religous principle, keep to a word, in
buying and selling, and forbear that multiplicity of words, in making bargains;
in which, how common soever among dealers, there wants not sin, as the wise
man observes, nor very often deceit." -- "For they were, (says W. Penn) at a
word in their dealing; nor could their customers, with many words, tempt them
from it, having more regard for truth, than custom; to example than gain."

Fourthly, As their justice was very remarkable in their strict and constant
adherence to the laws not only respecting the government's dues, They refrained
from certain things accounted lawful, as the slave trade, etc.
but in every other case, where their consciences, in reference to things of a
religious nature, were not affected thereby; in which situation nevertheless
they were always passive; so were they very particularly distinguishable for
refraining from certain things, under the articles of trade, even, accounted
lawful, or permitted by the laws of the land, where they lived, which they
thought unchristian, or unjust; among which I find the trading in slaves; See
Y. meeting minutes, in M. S. for 1727, etc. J. Rutty.
or the importation of negroes from their native country into other parts or
the world, for slaves, was a practice ever highly censured, and a traffic never
allowed among them, in Great Britain, though permitted and protected by the
Legislature. It may be noted, that, though some of this society, in America, in
early time, when servants were very scarce, or assistance difficult to be got,
in that country, inadvertently fell into the practice of purchasing these
negro-slaves, after they were imported, and others receiving them by
inheritance, etc. whereby formerly, in this part of the world, diverse of them
became possessed of these people: -- Yet this unnatural traffic there has been
since, and is now, justly and entirely disapproved and forbidden among them, in
all its branches: -- A trade so monstrous and abominable, so unparallelled,
both in ancient and modern history, all its circumstances, cruelty, and the
whole manner of carrying it on, being impartially and duly considered, that it
seems unaccountable and astonishing, that any nation, at least, pretending to
justice and christianity, should countenance or tolerate such a practice, such
an unnatural, and most detestable traffic! -- Nay in its consequences, most
manifestly impolitic, as well as a most pernicious, diabolical and inhuman
business! both in its present operation and consequential effects, etc.


Fifthly, Their truth speaking, They refuse to swear on any occasion.
and refusing to swear, on any occasion; using the plain and simple affirmation
and negative, instead of an oath. "Another doctrine of theirs (says W. Penn)
was the sufficiency of truth-speaking, according to Christ's own form of sound
words, of yea, year nay, nay, among Christians, without swearing, both from
Christ's prohibition, to swear not at all, Matt. v. and for, that they being
under the tie and bond of truth in themselves, there was no necessity for an
oath; and it would be a reproach to their Christian veracity to assure their
truth by such an extraordinary way of speaking; simple and uncompounded
answers, as, yea and nay, (without asseverations, attestations, or supernatural
vouchers) being most suitable to evangelical righteousness. But offering, at
the same time, to be punished to the full, for false speaking, as others for
perjury, if ever guilty of it; and hereby they exclude with all true, all false
and profane swearing, for which the land did, and does mourn; and the great God
was, and is, not a little offended with it."

Sixthly, Their cheerfully and valiantly suffering, Their valiantly suffering
for their testimony.
both in person and estate, from all ranks of people, for their conscientious
noncompliance with the vulgar and unreasonable customs of the times, in which
they lived, without endeavoring any retaliation, when in their power; their
steady perseverance, in patiently and passively enduring, for a long series of
years, the rigor of such laws, as either designedly, or otherwise, affected
their consciences, and were used to force, or compel, conformity, in religious
matters; which they always distinguished from civil affairs, so abundantly
demonstrate the Christian patience and fortitude of this people, that it would
fill a large volume to specify only the principal, or at least, the common
incidents of this nature, which have been conspicuous among them: therefore,
referring to their own writings, for an account of them, I shall only here
insert what R. Barclay mentions, in short, on this point, in addressing his
apology for the true Christian Divinity, as held by this people, to king
Charles the second; who, after having hinted their hard and cruel sufferings,
both under Cromwell and the parliament, and also after the king's restoration,
R. Barclay's apology, etc.
says, -- "For indeed their sufferings are singular and obviously
distinguishable from all the rest of such as live under thee, in these two
respect."

R. Barclay.
"First, In that, among all the plots contrived by others against thee, since
thy return into Britain, there never was any, owned by that people, found or
known to be guilty (though many of them have been taken and imprisoned on such
kind of jealousies) but were always found innocent and harmless, us became the
followers of Christ; not coveting after, nor contending for, the kingdoms of
this world, but subject to every ordinance of man, for conscience sake."

"Secondly, In that, in the hottest times of persecution, and the most violent
prosecutions of those laws, made against meetings, being clothed with
innocence, they have boldly stood to their testimony for God, without creeping
into holes, or corners, or once hiding themselves, as all other dissenters have
done; but daily met according to their custom, in the public places appointed
for that end; so that none of thy officers can say of them, that they have
surprised them in a corner, overtaken them in a private conventicle, or catched
them lurking in their secret chambers; nor needed they to send out spies to get
them, whom they were sure daily to find in their open assemblies, testifying
for God and his truth."

2. Under the second head of temperance and moderation, Second head.
which were conspicuous through their whole conduct, it is not my design to
enumerate every thing, practiced by them, which properly belongs to these
virtues; but only, as before, principally to exhibit wherein they were
distinguishable from other people, in these respects.

First, Their disuse of all gaming, and vain sports; Their disuse of gaming,
sports, plays, etc.
as the frequenting of plays, horse-races, etc. was a custom strictly and
constantly adhered to by them; as being most consistent with a truly christian
life; the use of these, and similar things, having, in their estimation, a
manifest and infallible tendency to draw away, and alienate the human mind from
the most important object of true happiness, as thus expressed by R. Barclay,
viz.

"It will not be denied but that men ought to be more in love of God, than of
any other thing; R. Barclay.
for we ought to love God above all things. Now it is plain, that men, who are
taken up with love, whether it be of women, or of any other thing, if it has
taken a deep place in the heart, and possess the mind, it will be hard for the
man so in love, to drive out of his mind the person, or thing so beloved; yea,
in his eating, drinking and sleeping, his mind will always have a tendency that
way; and in business, or recreations, however intent he be in it, there will be
but a very short space of time permitted to pass, but his mind will let some
ejaculation forth toward its beloved. And albeit such an one must be
conversant in those things, that the care of this body, and such like things
call for; yet will he avoid, as death itself, to do those things that may
offend the party so beloved, or cross his design in obtaining the thing so
earnestly desired: though there may be some small use in them, the great
design, which is chiefly in his eye, will so balance him, that he will easily
look over, and dispense with such petty necessities, rather than endanger the
loss of the greater by them. Now, that men ought to be thus in love with God,
and the life to come, none will deny; and the thing is apparent from these
scriptures, Matt. vi. 20. but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven. Col.
iii. 2. set your affections on things above, etc. and that this has been the
experience and attainment of some the scripture also declares, Psalm lxiii. 1,
8. 2 Cor. v. 2."

"And again, that these games, sports, plays, dancings, comedies, etc. do
naturally tend to draw men from God's fear; to make them forget heaven, death
and judgment; to foster lust, vanity and wantonness; and therefore are most
beloved, as well as used by such kind of persons, experience abundantly shows,
and the most serious and conscientious, among all, will scarcely deny; which if
it be so, the application is easy."

They avoided superfluity etc.
Secondly, They avoided superfluity in the general course of their living;
observing such a temperate medium in the use of things, as they were sensible
conduced most to a good state both of body and mind; which distinguished them
from others, not only in their eating and drinking, in their conversation and
discourse, being generally of few words, but pertinent; but also in the
furniture of their houses, their apparel, or dress; and in their births,
marriages and funerals; and not only so but they even sometimes, condemned and
disused what only had a tendency to excess; -- "Thus (says W. Penn, They did
not drink healths, etc.
on the custom of drinking healths) they forbore drinking to people, or
pledging of them, as the manner of the world is: a practice, that is not only
unnecessary but they thought, evil, in the tendencies of it, being a
provocation to drink more than did people good, as well as that it was in
itself vain and heathenish."

But, in regard to several of such things, They are not for levelling, etc.
and the proper use of temporal enjoyments, R. Barclay further observes: --
"Let not any one judge, that from our opinion in these things, any necessity of
levelling will follow; or, that all men must have things in common; our
principle leaves every man to enjoy that peaceably, which either his own
industry, or his parents, have purchased for him; only he is thereby instructed
to use it aright, both for his own good and that of his brethren; and all to
the glory of God: in which also his acts are to be voluntary, and in no ways
constrained. And further, we say not hereby, that no man may use the creation
more or less than another: for we know, that as it has pleased God to dispense
it diversely, giving to some more, and to some less, so they may use it
accordingly." -- "The safe place then is, for such as have fullness, to watch
over themselves, that they use it moderately, and rescind all superfluities,
being willing, as far as they can, to help the need of those, to whom
Providence has allotted a smaller allowance. Let the brother of high degree
rejoice, in that he is abased; and such as God calls, in a low degree, be
content with their condition, not envying those brethren, who have a greater
abundance; knowing they have received abundance, as to the inward man; which is
chiefly to be regarded. And therefore, beware of such a temptation, as to use
their calling as an engine to be richer, knowing they have this advantage
beyond the rich and noble, that are called, that the truth does not any ways
abase them, nay, not in the esteem of the world, as it does, in the others; but
that they are rather exalted thereby, in that, as to the inward and spiritual
fellowship of the saints, they become the brethren and companions of the
greatest and richest; and, in this respect, let him of low degree rejoice that
he is exalted."

Of their christian charity.
As to the third head, in what manner they held and practiced christian charity,
in its highest and sublimest sense, appears, in part, from what has been
already said of their first and chief principle; respecting some particular
branches I shall further mention from W. Penn:

Their loving one another.
First, "Communion, and loving one another. This is a noted mark, (says W. P.)
in the mouth of all sorts of people, concerning them; they will meet, they will
help and stick to one another, whence it is common to hear some say, look how
the Quakers love and take care of one another. Others less moderate, will say,
the Quakers love none but themselves. And if loving one another, and having an
intimate communion, in religion, and constant care to meet to worship God, and
help one another, be any mark of primitive christianity, they had it, blessed
be the Lord, in an ample manner."

They did not go to law one with another.
Their entire disuse of going to law one with another was a singular instance of
their high sense, and steady and uniform practice of christian love and
charity: -- "To go to law one with another, (says one of their writers) as it
was among the primitive Christians, is deemed an utter fault, and breach of
fellowship with them; and commencing, or defending suits at law, in any case,
without urgent necessity, is forbidden:" -- Their differences, and disputes,
one with another, about their temporal affairs, when they happened, which was
but seldom, being generally composed and settled by arbitrators, or persons
chosen, for that purpose, by the parties, among themselves, without going to
law." See R. Barclay's anarchy of the Ranters, etc. on this head.


Their loving enemies
Secondly, "To love enemies, (continues W. Penn) this they both taught and
practiced. For they did not only refuse to be revenged for injuries done them,
and condemned it, as of an unchristian spirit, but they did freely forgive,
yea, help and relieve those, that had been cruel to them, when it was in their
power to have been even with them: of which many and singular instances might
be given: endeavoring through faith and patience, to overcome all injustice
and opposition; and preaching this doctrine, as Christians, for others to
follow."

Thirdly, Not fighting, but suffering, They did not fight but suffer, etc.
is another testimony, peculiar to this people, in the words of W. Penn, viz.
"They affirm, That Christianity teaches people to beat their swords into
plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, and to learn war no more; that
so the wolf may lie down with the lamb, and the lion with the calf, and nothing
that destroys be entertained in the hearts of the people: exhorting them to
employ their zeal against sin, and turn their anger against Satan, and no
longer war one against another; because all wars and fightings come of men's
own hearts lusts, according to the apostle James, and not of the meek spirit of
Christ Jesus; who is captain of another warfare; and which is carried on with
other weapons. Thus, as truth speaking succeeded swearing, so faith and
patience succeeded fighting, in the doctrine and practice of this people. Nor
ought they, for this, to be obnoxious to civil government; since if they cannot
fight for it, neither can they fight against it; which is no mean security to
any state: nor is it reasonable that people should be blamed for not doing more
for others, than they can do for themselves. And, Christianity set aside, if
the costs and fruits of war were well considered, peace, with all its
inconveniences, is generally preferable. And though they were not for
fighting, they were for submitting to government; and that not only for fear,
but for conscience sake, where government does not interfere with conscience;
believing it to be an ordinance of God, and where it is justly administered, a
great benefit to mankind. It is observable, that though they absolutely
declined all military service, not only in their persons, but also in their
refusing to procure substitutes, or others, in their room, by hiring, or in
anywise paying, or contributing for the personal service of such for them, in
that capacity, or for any particular military purpose solely; yet in all other
respects, they punctually and willingly paid their taxes, though of a mixed
nature, that is both military and civil, for the support of government, as
before observed. Vide page 51.
Though it has been their lot, through blind zeal in some, and interest in
others, to have felt the strokes of it with a greater weight and rigor, than
any other persuasion, in this age; while they, of all others, religion set
aside, have given the civil magistrate the least occasion of trouble, in the
discharge of his office."

Concerning this point it may be further observed from R. Barclay, viz. -- "For
it is as easy to obscure the sun, at midday, as to deny that the primitive
Christians renounced all revenge and fighting, and although this thing be so
much known, yet it is as well knows, that almost all the modern sects live in
the neglect and contempt of this law of Christ, and likewise oppress others,
who in this agree not with them, for conscience sake toward God: even, as we
have suffered much in this our own country, because we could neither ourselves
bear arms, nor send others in our places, nor give our money for the buying of
drums, standards, and other military attire. And lastly, because we could not
hold our doors, windows and shops close, for conscience sake, upon such days as
fasts and prayers were appointed, to desire a blessing upon, and success for,
the arms of the kingdom, or commonwealth, under which we live; neither give
thanks for the victories acquired by the effusion of much blood. By which
forcing of the conscience they would have constrained our brethren, living in
diverse kingdoms at war together, to have implored our God for contrary and
contradictory things, and consequently impossible; for it is impossible that
two parties fighting should both obtain the victory. And because we cannot
concur with them, in this confusion, therefore, we are subject to persecution."

Fourthly, The last thing I shall mention under this head, is their maintaining
all their own poor, Their charity to the poor, etc.
at their own expense; or, without being chargeable to others, besides
contributing toward the support of the poor of other societies, equally with
themselves, in all common poor rates or taxes: insomuch that no such thing as a
common beggar was permitted, or known, to be among them, of that society. For,
as they suffered none of their society to be in so necessitous a condition, as
others, so they were so careful in the education of their children and youth,
that there were none among them, brought up without a competency of useful and
plain learning; these things being annually and methodically enquired into, and
strictly practiced through the whole society, in every place. Thus, while, in
these important matters, they were no ways burdensome to others, and while
they contributed to other societies equally with themselves, in paying all poor
rates and taxes of every kind, they were moreover and besides no less noted for
most other acts of beneficence according to their stations in civil society;
being ever among the first, in works and institutions of charity, where they
lived, according to their abilities: so that in contributions of this nature,
they were observed mostly either to be among the introducers or promoters of
them, or otherwise distinguished for their liberal donations; and if any were
in distress, they were generally known to be among the first to relieve them.

As the practice of diverse of these particulars, mentioned under the preceding
heads, made them appear, at first, very singular to many in all ranks and
societies of people; from whom they suffered much redicule, These things made
the Quakers appear singular, etc.
unmerited abuse, and cruel persecution, chiefly on account of diverse of these
things; and as they still appear to be subject to something of the same nature,
though in less degree, in some places, where they are but little known, and
labor under false representations; and where ignorance and a blind zeal dispose
people to reject and despise moderate enquiry; or where a strong attachment to
old customs, however absurd, too frequently slights and refuses sober
reasoning, on religious subjects, for unprofitable and acrimonious disputes, I
shall, therefore, close this part with the following short conclusions,
respecting them, from R. Barclay, viz.

Conclusions from R. Barclay.
"But lastly, to conclude, if to give and receive flattering titles, which are
not used because of the virtues inherent in the persons, but are, for most
part, bestowed by wicked men upon such as themselves; if to bow, scrape and
cringe to one another; if, at any time, to call one another humble servant, and
that most frequently without any design of real service; if this be the honor
that comes from God, and not the honor, that is from below, then indeed our
adversaries may be said to be believers, and we condemned, as proud and
stubborn, in denying all these things.

"But if, with Mordecai, to refuse to bow to proud Hamon, and with Elihu, not
to give flattering titles to men, lest we should be reproved by our Maker; and
if, according to Peter's example, and the angel's advice, to bow only to God,
and not to our fellow servants; and if, to call no man lord nor master, except
under particular relations, according to Christ's command; I say, if these
things are not to be reproved, then are we not blame worthy in so doing.

"If to be vain and gaudy in apparel; if to paint the face and plait the hair;
if to be clothed with gold and silver, and precious stones; and, if to be
filled with ribbands and lace, be to be clothed in modest apparel; and, if
these be the ornaments of Christians; and, if that be to be humble, meek and
mortified, then are our adversaries good Christians indeed, and we, proud,
singular and conceited, in contenting ourselves with what need and convenience
calls for, and condemning what is more, as superfluous; but not otherwise.

"If to use games, sports, plays; if to card, dice and dance; if to sing,
fiddle and pipe; if to use stage plays and comedies, and to lie, counterfeit
and dissemble, be to fear always; and if that be to do all things to the glory
of God; and if that be to pass our sojourning here in fear; and if that be to
use the world, as if we did not use it; and if that be, not to fashion
ourselves acording to our former lusts; to be not conformable to the spirit and
vain conversation of this world; then are our adversaries, notwithstanding they
use these things, and plead for them, very good, sober and self-denying
Christians, and we justly to be blamed, for judging them, but not otherwise.

"If the profanation of the holy name of God; if to exact oaths one from
another, upon every slight occasion; if to call God to witness, in things of
such a nature, in which no earthly king would think himself lawfully and
honorably to be a witness, be the duties of a Christian man, I shall confess
that our adversaries are excellent good Christians, and we wanting in our duty:
but if the contrary be true, of necessity our obedience to God, in this thing,
must be acceptable.

"If to revenge ourselves, or to render injury, evil for evil, wound for wound,
to take eye for eye, tooth for tooth; if to fight for outward and perishing
things; to go a warring one against another, with whom we never saw, and with
whom we never had any contest, nor any thing to do; being moreover altogether
ignorant of the cause of the war, but only that the magistrates of the nations
foment quarrels against one another; the causes whereof are, for the most part,
unknown to the soldiers, that fight, as well as upon whose side the right and
wrong are; and yet to be so furious, and rage one against another, to destroy
all, that this, or the other worship may be received, or be abolished; if to do
this, and much more of this kind, be to fulfill the law of Christ, then are our
adversaries, indeed, true Christians, and we miserable heretics, that suffer
ourselves to be spoiled, taken, imprisoned, beaten and evilly treated, without
any resistance, placing our trust only in God, that he may defend us, and lead
us, by the way of the cross, into his kingdom: but if it be otherwise, we shall
certainly receive the reward, which the Lord has promised to those, that
cleave to him, and, in denying themselves, confide in him.

"And, to sum up all, if to use all these things, and many more, that might be
instanced, be to walk in the strait way, that leads to life; be to take up the
cross of Christ; be to die with him to the lusts, and perishing vanities of
this world, and to arise with him in newness of life, and to sit down with him
in the heavenly places, then our adversaries may be accounted such, and they
need not fear, they are in the broad way which leads to destruction; and we are
greatly mistaken, that have laid aside all these things for Christ's sake, to
the crucifying of our own lusts, and to the procuring to ourselves shame,
reproach, hatred and ill will, from the men of this world: not as if, by so
doing, we judged to merit heaven, but, as knowing they are contrary to the will
of him, who redeems his children from the love of this world, and its lusts,
and leads them in the ways of truth and holiness, in which they take delight to
walk."

Of their marriages, births and burials, from W. Penn.
"Their way of marriage is peculiar to them; Of their marriages, etc.
and shows a distinguishing care, above other societies, professing
christianity. They say that marriage is an ordinance of God; and that God only
can rightly join man and woman in marriage. Therefore, they use neither priest
nor magistrate; but the man and woman concerned take each other as husband and
wife, in the presence of diverse credible witnesses, promising to each other,
with God's assistance, to be loving and faithful in that relation, till death
shall separate them. But antecedent to this they first present themselves to
the monthly meeting, for the affairs of the church, where they reside; there
declaring their intentions to take one another, as husband and wife, if the
said meeting have nothing material to object against it -- they are constantly
asked the necessary questions, as, in case of parents or guardians, if they
have acquainted them with their intention, and have their consent, etc. -- The
method of the meeting is, to take a minute thereof, and to appoint proper
persons, to enquire of their conversation and clearness from all others, and
whether they have discharged their duty to their parents, or guardians; and to
make report thereof to the next monthly meeting, where the same parties are
desired to give their attendance. In case it appears they have proceeded
orderly, the meeting passes their proposal, and so records it in the meeting
book. And in case the woman be a widow, and has children, due care is there
taken, that provision also be made by her for the orphans, before the meeting
pass the proposals of marriage; advising the parties concerned, to appoint a
convenient time and place, and to give fitting notice to their relations, and
such friends and neighbors as they desire should be witnesses of the marriage;
where they take one another by the hand, and, by name, promise reciprocally,
love and fidelity, after the manner before expressed. Of all which proceedings,
a narrative, in way of certificate, is made; to which the said parties set
their hands, thereby confirming it as their act and deed; and then diverse
relations, spectators and auditors, set their names, as witnesses of what they
said and signed. And this certificate is afterward registered in the record
belonging to the meeting, where the marriage is solemnized, which regular
method has been, as it deserves, adjudged in courts of law a good marriage,
where it has been, by cross and ill people, disputed and contested, for want of
the accustomed formalites of priest and ring, etc. ceremonies they have
refused; not out of humor, but conscience reasonably grounded, in as much as
no scripture example tells us, that the priest had any other part, of old time,
than that of a witness, among the rest, before whom the Jews used to take one
another: and therefore this people look upon it, as an imposition, to advance
the power and profits of the clergy: and for the use of the ring, it is enough
to say, that it was an heathenish and vain custom, and never in practice among
the people of God -- Jews, or primitive Christians; -- the words of the usual
form, as, with my body I thee worship, etc. are hardly defensible. In short,
they are more careful, exact and regular, than any form now used; their care
and checks being so many, and such as no clandestine marriages can be performed
among them."

Their births.
"It may not be unfit here to say something of their births and burials, which
make up so much of the pomp of too many called Christians. For births, the
parents name their own children; which is usually some days after they are
born, in the presence of the midwife, if she can be there, and those that were
at the birth; who afterward sign a certificate for that purpose prepared, of
the birth and name of the child, or children; which is recorded in a proper
book, in the monthly meeting, to which the parents belong; avoiding the
accustomed ceremonies and festivals."

"Their burials are performed with the same simplicity. Their burials.
If the body of the deceased be near any public meeting place, it is usually
carried thither, for the more convenient reception of those, that accompany it
to the burying-ground. And it so falls out sometimes, that while the meeting is
gathering, for the burial, some or other has a word of exhortation, for the
sake of the people there met together. After which the body is borne away by
young men, or else by those, that are of the neighborhood, or those that were
most of the intimacy of the deceased party; the corpse being in a plain coffin,
without any covering or furniture upon it. At the ground they pause some time
before they put the body into the grave; that, if any there should have any
thing upon them, to exhort the people, they may not be disappointed; and that
the relations may the more retiredly and solemnly take their last leave of the
body of their departed kindred, and the spectators have a sense of mortality,
by the occasion then given them, to reflect upon their own latter end:
otherwise they have no set rites, or ceremonies, on those occasions. Neither do
the kindred of the deceased ever wear mourning; they looking upon it, as a
worldly ceremony and piece of pomp; and that what mourning is fit for a
Christian to have, at the departure of a beloved relation, or friend, should be
worn in the mind, which is only sensible of the loss: and the love they had to
them, and the remembrance of them, to be outwardly expressed by a respect to
their advice, and care of those they have left behind them, and their love of
that they loved, which conduct of theirs, though unmodish or unfashionable
leaves nothing of the substance of things neglected, or undone: and as they aim
at no more, so that simplicity of life is what they observe with great
satisfaction, though it sometimes happens not to be without the mockeries of
the vain world they live in."

These things not from affectation of singularity, etc. but a sense of duty,
etc.
"These things, to be sure (continues W. Penn) gave them a rough and
disagreeable appearance with the generality: who thought them turners of the
world upside down; as, indeed, in some sense they were; but in no other than
that, wherein Paul was so charged, viz. to bring things back into their
primitive and right order again. For these, and such like practices of theirs,
were not the result of humor, or for civil distinctions, as some have fancied,
but a fruit of inward sense, which God, through his holy fear, had begotten in
them. They did not consider how to contradict the world, or distinguish
themselves, as a party from others; it being none of their business, as it was
not their interest: no, it was not the result of consultation, or a framed
design, by which to declare, or recommend schism or novelty. But, God having
given them a sight of themselves, they saw the whole world in the same glass of
truth; and sensibly discerned the affections and passions of men, and the rise
and tendency of things: what it was that gratified the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and the pride of life; which are not of the father, but of the
world. And from thence sprung, in the night of darkness, and the apostasy,
which has been over people, through their degeneration from the light and
spirit of God, these, and many other vain customs, which are seen by the
heavenly day of Christ, that dawns in the soul, to be either wrong in their
original, or by time and abuse, hurtful in their practice: and though these
things seemed trivial to some, and rendered these people stingy and conceited,
in such persons opinions, there was, and is, more in them, than they were, or
are, aware of."

"It was not very easy, to our primitive friends, to make themselves sights and
spectacles, and the scorn and derision of the world; which they easily foresaw
must be the consequence of so unfashionable a conversation in it. But here was
the wisdom of God seen, in the foolishness of these things; first, that they
discovered the satisfaction and concern, that people had in, and for, the
fashions of this world, notwithstanding their high pretenses to another; the
greatest honesty, virtue, wisdom and ability were unwelcome without them.
Secondly, It seasonably and profitably divided conversation; for this, making
their society uneasy to their relations and acquaintance, gave them the
opportunity of more retirement and solitude; wherein they met with better
company, even, the Lord God, their Redeemer; and grew strong in his love, power
and wisdom; and were thereby better qualified for his service. And the success
abundantly showed it: Blessed be the name of the Lord."

"And though they were not great and learned in the esteem of the world, (for
then they had not wanted followers, upon their own credit and authority) yet
they were generally of the most sober of the several persuasions, they were in,
and of the most repute, for religion; and many of them of good capacity,
substance and account among men."

"And also some among them wanted not for parts, learning or estate; though
then, as of old, not many wise or noble, etc. were called; or, at least,
received the heavenly call; because of the cross, that attended the profession
of it, in sincerity. But neither do parts or learning make men the better
Christians, though the better orators and disputants and it is the ignorance of
people about the divine gift, that causes that vulgar and mischievous mistake.
Theory and practice, speculation and enjoyment, words and life, are two things."

Of their church discipline, from the same author, W. Penn.
Of their discipline, etc.
In the next place, in order to form some idea of the religious care,
discipline, and practice, which they used as a Christian and reformed society,
also in a collective capacity, that they might live orderly and consistent with
their principles and profession, the following extract, from W. Penn, exhibits
the church power, which they owned and exercised, and that which they rejected
and condemned, with the method of their proceedings against erring and
disorderly persons, of their community, viz.

"This people increasing daily both in town and country, an holy care fell upon
some of the elders among them, for the benefit and service of the church. And
the first business, in their view, after the example of the primitive saints,
was the exercise of charity; to supply the necessities of the poor, and answer
the like occasions. Wherefore collections were early and liberally made for
that, and diverse other services, in the church, and entrusted with faithful
men, fearing God, and of good report, who where not weary in well doing; adding
often of their own, in large proportions, which they never brought to account,
or desired should be known, much less restored to them, that none might want,
nor any service be retarded, or disappointed."

"They were also very careful, that every one, who belonged to them, answered
their profession, in their behavior among men, upon all occasions; that they
lived peaceably, and were, in all things, good examples. They found themselves
engaged to record their sufferings and services; and in the case or marriage,
which they could not perform in the usual methods of the nation, but among
themselves; they took care that all things were clear between the parties, and
all others, and it was then rare, that any one entertained an inclination to a
person, on that account, till he, or she, had communicated it secretly to some
very weighty and eminent friends among them, that they might have a sense of
the matter; looking to the counsel and unity of their brethren, as of great
moment to them. But because the charge of the poor, the number of orphans,
marriages, sufferings and other matters, multiplied; and that it was good, that
the churches were in some way and method of proceeding in such affairs, among
them, to the end they might the better correspond, upon occasion, where a
member of one meeting might have to do with one of another; it pleased the
Lord, in his wisdom and goodness, G. Fox, the first instrument, etc.
to open the understanding of the first instrument of this dispensation of
life, George Fox, about a good and orderly way of proceeding; who felt a holy
concern to visit the churches, in person, throughout this nation, to begin and
establish it among them: and by his epistles, the like was done in other
nations and provinces abroad; which he also afterward visited and helped in
that service."

"Now the care, conduct and discipline I have been speaking of, and which are
now Written in 1694.
practiced among this people, are as follow:

"This godly elder, in every county where he traveled, exhorted them, that
some out of every meeting of worship, should meet together, once in the month,
to confer about the wants and occasions of the church. And as the case
required, so those monthly meetings were fewer, or more in number, in every
respective county; four or six meetings of worship usually making one monthly
meeting of business. And accordingly the brethren met him from place to place,
and began the said meetings, viz. for the poor, orphans, orderly walking,
integrity to their profession, births, marriages, burials, sufferings, etc. And
these monthly meetings should, in each county make up one quarterly meeting
(held once every quarter of a year) where the most zealous and eminent friends
of the county should assemble, to communicate advice, and help one another,
especially when any business seemed difficult, or a monthly meeting was tender
of determining a matter."

"Also that these several quarterly meetings should digest the reports of their
monthly meetings, and prepare one for each respective county, once a year,
against the yearly meeting, in which all quarterly meetings resolve; which is
held in London: where the churches, in this nation, and other nations and
provinces, meet, by chosen members of their respective counties, both mutually
to communicate their church affairs, and to advise and be advised, in any
depending case, to edification. Also to provide a requisite stock, for the
discharge of general expenses, for general services, in the church not needful
here to be particularized."

"At these meetings any of the members of the churches may come, if they
please, and speak their minds freely, in the fear of God, to the matter; but
the mind of each quarterly meeting therein represented, is chiefly understood,
as to particular cases, in the sense delivered by the persons deputed or
chosen, for that service by the said meeting."

Of their discipline, etc.
"During their yearly meeting, to which their other meetings refer, in their
order, and naturally resolve themselves, care is taken by a select number for
that service, chosen by the general assembly, to draw up the minutes of the
said meeting, upon the several matters, that have been under consideration
therein, to the end that the respective quarterly and monthly meetings may be
informed of all proceedings; together with a general exhortation to holiness,
unity and charity. Of all which proceedings, in yearly, monthly and quarterly
meetings, due record is kept by some one appointed pointed for that service,
or, that has voluntarily undertaken it. These meetings are opened, and usually
concluded, in their solemn waiting upon God; who is sometimes graciously
pleased to answer them with as signal evidences of his love and presence, as in
any of their meetings of worship."

"It is further to be noted, that, in these solemn assemblies, for the churches
service, there is no one presides among them, after the manner of the
assemblies of other people; Christ only being their president, as he is pleased
to appear in life and wisdom, in any one, or more of them, to whom, whatever be
their capacity, or degree, the rest adhere with a firm unity, not of authority,
but conviction; which is the divine authority and way of Christ's power and
spirit in his people; making good his blessed promise, that he would be in the
midst of his, where and whenever they were met together, in his name, even, to
the end of the world. So be it."

"Now, it may be expected, Of their church power and authority.
I should here set down what sort of authority is exercised by this people,
upon such members of their society as correspond not, in their lives, with
their profession, and that are refractory to this good and wholesome order,
settled among them; and the rather, because they have not wanted their reproach
and sufferings from some tongues and pens, upon this occasion, in a plentiful
manner.

"The power, they exercise, is such as Christ has given to his own people, to
the end of the world, in the persons of his disciples, viz. to oversee, exhort,
reprove, and, after long suffering and waiting upon the disobedient and
refractory, to disown them, as any more of their communion, or, that they will
any longer stand charged, in the sight and judgment of God or men, with their
conversation, or behavior, as any of them, until they repent. The subject
matter about which this authority, in any of the foregoing branches of it, is
exercised, is first, in relation to common or general practice. And, secondly,
about those things, that more strictly refer to their own character and
profession, and which distinguishes them from all other professors of
Christianity; avoiding two extremes, upon which many split, viz. persecution
and libertinism; that is a coercive power, to whip people into the temple; that
such as will not conform, though against faith and conscience, shall be
punished, in their persons and estates: or, leaving all loose, and at large, as
to practice; and so unaccountable to all but God and the magistrate. To which
hurtful extreme, nothing has more contributed, than the abuse of church power,
by such as suffer their passion, and private interest to prevail with them, to
carry it to outward force, and corporal punishment. A practice, they have been
taught to dislike, by their extreme sufferings, as well as their known
principle for an universal liberty of conscience."

"On the other hand, they equally dislike an independency, in society, an
unaccountableness in practice and conversation, to the rules and terms of their
own communion, and to those, that are the members of it. They distinguish
between imposing any practice, that immediately regards faith or worship (which
is never to be done, or suffered, or submitted to) and requiring Christian
compliance with those methods, that only respect church business, in its more
civil part and concern; and that regard the discreet and orderly maintenance of
the character of the society, as a sober and religious community. In short,
what is for the promotion of holiness and charity, that men may practice what
they profess, live up to their own principles, and not be at liberty to give
the lie to their own profession, without rebuke, is their use and limit of
church power. They compel none to them; but oblige those that are of them, to
walk suitably, or they are denied by them: that is all the mark, they set upon
them, and the power they exercise, or judge a Christian society can exercise
upon those that are members of it."

"The way of their proceeding against such as have lapsed or transgressed, is
this: He is visited by some of them, and the matter of fact laid home to him,
be it any evil practice against known and general virtue, or any branch of
their particular testimony, which he, in common, professes with them. They
labor with him in much love and zeal, for the good of his soul, the honor of
God, and reputation of their profession, to own his fault, and condemn it, in
as ample a manner, as the evil, or scandal was given by him; which, for the
most part, is performed by some written testimony, under the party's hand; and
if it so happen, that the party prove refractory and is not willing to clear
the truth, they profess, from the reproach of his, or her, evil doing, or
unfaithfulness, they, after repeated entreaties, and due waiting for a token of
repentance, give forth a paper to disown such a fact, and the party offending:
recording the same, as a testimony of their care for the honor of the truth,
they profess."

"And if he, or she, shall clear the profession, and themselves, by sincere
acknowledgment of their fault, and godly sorrow for so doing, they are
received, and looked upon again as members of their communion. For, as God, so
his true people upbraid no man after repentance."

That the general conduct and practice of this people have been, in a
remarkable manner, Their consistency in conduct with their profession, etc.
consistent with their profession, we are well assured, not only by the
accounts given by themselves, but also by those of others, who appear to have
been best acquainted with their manner of life, in early time; and whose
certain knowledge enabled them to speak with that moderation, which is divested
of passion and prejudice; besides, it is manifest from the many acrimonious and
abusive writings of their enemies themselves against them, yet extant, that
their conformity to the principles and customs before mentioned, was the chief
cause of the severe persecution and suffering; which they so long endured: --
for which, if any instances of intemperate zeal, in early time, appeared in any
individuals among them, (from which, probably, the first rise of no religious
society has been entirely free) it seems to have been too much the delight of
their adversaries to exaggerate and misrepresent them. -- For, as they
professed no theory, but what they chiefly derived from practice or conviction;
nor speculation, but what they principally had from experiment, so it has been
long observed, particularly in Great Britain, that, as any of the members of
this society failed in the practical part, they consequently, for the most
part, discontinued the profession, in proportion; and either went over to such
other religious societies, as place less stress on the practice of
Christianity, or of true religion; or else they made no formal profession of it
at all, with any particular set of people: some apparently from an irreligious,
mean and indolent, or depraved turn of mind; and others, probably, from looking
upon all forms of religion, as vain; and that the knowledge of truth, and the
interior of religion, or the intercourse between the creature and the Creator,
depends not upon, nor is necessarily connected with, any fixed form; but is
rather obscured, or impeded, by that attention, which such forms, in general
require; or which ultimately have so much tendency to engross the minds of many
people with that slavish formality, which is observable to terminate in mere,
religious superstition.

Nevertheless it is well known, that in later times, diverse among them have
been observed, under the covering of a plain garb, and a formal compliance to
sundry of these external customs, before mentioned, to make this profession an
engine to accumulate wealth, and from an apparent zeal for their profession, in
diverse of those very things, without the possession of the real life, or
substance, of it, have notwithstanding continued among them, and used that
credit and reputation, which the society, in general, had acquired by a better
principle, so as to obtain low, terrestrial enjoyments, and worldly advantages,
even, beyond others of the same degree, or rank of people. For it cannot be
reasonably supposed that every person who is born and educated, or brought up,
merely in the form, is therefore consequently experienced in every practical
truth of the profession, so much as those, who have embraced the same from real
conviction and experience, in their own minds, unless they possess the same
experience and enjoyment; which may, or may not be the case; for profession, or
implicit belief, alone, cannot give a lively experience, nor a bare assent,
convince the judgment.

But the Christian care of this society, as appears by their discipline,
already mentioned, as well as by the many additions, since made by them, to
this part of their religious economy, has not been small, to prevent and
redress this evil, as well as to remedy all other deviations from the truth of
their profession, and the primitive practice among them; which, in some or
other of their members, cannot but sometimes happen, while in this frail and
mortal state of existence: -- Yet the result of this very care, so far, at
least, as it respects the external obligations, upon the members of this
society, and the many rules increased from time to time, among them, for that
purpose, it is thought by some, has had this certain and inevitable tendency,
to render it, in fact, more formal, and to distinguish it more, in reality, See
R. Barclay on universal love, etc.
as a sect, than some of its first, or early principal founders, by their
writings, appear to have intended; who would not admit of that name, nor the
natural contractedness of such a distinction, particularly R. Barclay, and
others among them.

I shall, therefore, after having, in a few words, further expressed respecting
them, in early time, from two persons of eminence in their religious society,
W. Penn and W. Edmundson, conclude this account. The former, addressing himself
to them, speaks thus, viz.

W. Penn's account of the religious lives of the primitive Quakers.
"The glory of this day, and foundation of the hope, that has not made us
ashamed since we were a people," -- "is that blessed principle of light and
life of Christ, which we profess, and direct all people to, as the great and
divine instrument and agent of man's conversion to God. It was by this, that we
were first touched, and effectually enlightened, as to our inward state; which
put us upon the consideration of our latter end, causing us to set the Lord
before our eyes, and to number our days, that we might apply our hearts to
wisdom. In that day we judged not after the sight of the eye, or after the
hearing of the car, but according to the light and sense this blessed principle
gave us, so we judged and acted, in reference to things and persons, ourselves
and others; yea toward God, our Maker: for, being quickened by it in our
inward man, we could easily discern the difference of things, and feel what was
right, and what was wrong, and what was fit, and what was not, both in
reference to religion and civil concerns. That being the ground of the
fellowship of all saints; it was in that our fellowship stood. In this we
desired to have a sense of one another, acted toward one another, and all men,
in love, faithfulness and fear."

"In feeling of the stirrings and motions of this principle in our hearts, we
drew near to the Lord, and waited to be prepared by it; that we might feel
drawings and movings, before we approached the Lord in prayer, or opened our
mouths in ministry. And in our beginning and ending with this, stood our
comfort, service and edification. And, as we ran faster, or fell short, in our
services, we made burdens for ourselves to bear; finding in ourselves a rebuke,
instead of an acceptance; and in lieu of well done, "Who has required this at
your hands?" In that day we were an exercised people; our very countenances and
deportment declared it."

"Care for others was then much upon us, as well as for ourselves; especially
of the young convinced. Often had we the burden of the word of the Lord to our
neighbors, relations and acquaintance; and sometimes strangers also. We were
in travail likewise for one another's preservation; not seeking, but shunning
occasions of any coldness, or misunderstanding; treating one another as those
that believed and felt God present. which kept our conversation innocent,
serious and weighty; guarding ourselves against the cares and friendships of
this world. We held the truth in the spirit of it, and not in our own spirits,
or after our own wills and affections, they were bowed and brought into
subjection, insomuch that it was visible to them, that knew us. We did not
think ourselves at our own disposal, to go where we list, or say, or do, what
we list, or when we list. Our liberty stood in the liberty of truth; and no
pleasure, no profit, no fear, no favor, could draw us from this retired,
strict and watchful frame. We were as far from seeking occasions of company,
that we avoided them what we could, pursuing our own business with moderation,
instead of meddling with other people's unnecessarily."

"Our words were few and savory, our looks composed and weighty, and our whole
deportment very observable. True it is, that this retired and strict sort of
life from the liberty of the conversation of the world, exposed us to the
censures of many, as humorists, conceited, and selfrighteous persons, etc. but
it was our preservation from many snares, to which others were continually
exposed, by the prevalency of the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and
the pride of life, that wanted no occasions, o^ temptations to excite them
abroad, in the co^^^rse of the world."

W. Edmundson's account of the religious lives of the primitive Quakers.
The words of W. Edmundson, on this head, are these, -- "At the first, when the
Lord called and gathered us to be a people, and opened the eyes of our
understandings, then we saw the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the wickedness
that was in the world; and a perfect abhorrence was fixed, in our hearts,
against all the wicked, unjust, vain, ungodly, unlawful part of the world, in
all respects; and we saw the goodly, and most glorious lawful things of this
world to be abused; and that many snares and temptations lay in them; and many
troubles and dangers of diverse kinds; and we felt the load of them, and that we
could not carry them, and run the race, the Lord had set before us, so
cheerfully as to win the prize of salvation; so that our care was to cast off
this great load and burden of our great and gainful way of getting riches, and
to lessen our concerns therein, to the compass that we might not be chargeable
to any, in our stations and services required of us, and be ready to answer
Christ Jesus, our Captain, that called us to follow him, in a spiritual
warfare, under the discipline of his daily cross and self-denial; and then the
things of this world were of small value with us, so that we might win Christ;
and the goodliest things of the world were not near us, so that we might be
near the Lord; and the Lord's truth outbalanced all the world, even the most
glorious, part of it. Then great trading was a burden, and great concerns a
great trouble; all needless things, fine houses, rich furniture, gaudy apparel,
were an eyesore; our eye being single to the Lord, and the inshining of his
light, in our hearts; which gave us the sight of the knowledge of the glory of
God; which so affected our minds, that it stained the glory of all earthly
things; and they bore no mastry with us, either in dwelling, eating, drinking,
buying, selling, marrying, or giving in marriage. The Lord was the object of
our eye; and we all humble and low before him, and self of small repute;
ministers and elders, in all such cases, walking as good examples, that the
flock might follow their footsteps, as they followed Christ; in the dairy
cross of self-denial, in their dwellings, callings, eating, drinking, buying,
selling, marrying, and giving in marriage; and this answered the Lord's witness
in all consciences, and gave us great credit among men."

Such appear to have been the people called Quakers, as to their first rise,
principles, doctrines, religious system, and general practice, or manners, in
early time; with whom W. Penn joined in socity; such they appear to have been,
who principally first settled West Jersey and Pennsylvania: -- By a conduct
influenced chiefly by the principles above mentioned has this country
providentially advanced to that justly admired and happy state, and importance,
for which, it has now long been growing more and more conspicuous: -- Of this
people as a religious society, I shall, at present take my leave, till I again
revisit them, as transplanted from Europe, into these provinces, and observe
their proceedings, in their new and political situation; in the mean time, I
return to, and resume, my intermitted account of the life of W. Penn.

About this time (1668, and the twenty-fourth year of his age) William Penn
published several of his first pieces, now extant in his printed works; one of
which, 1668. W. Penn's first writings, etc.
entitled, "The sandy foundation shaken," was written in consequence of a
dispute, which he had in London with one Vincent, a Presbyter. In this he
exposed the vulgar notion of the Trinity, and some other religious tenets;
which gave so much offense to those then at the helm of the church, that they
immediately took the old method of reforming what they called error, by their
strongest argument, viz. "An order for imprisoning him in the tower of London;"
-- there he was under close confinement, and even denied the visits of his
friends: His imprisonment in the tower of London.
but yet his enemies attained not their purpose; for when, after some time, his
servant brought him word, that the bishop of London was resolved he should
either publicly recant, or die a prisoner, he made this reply: "All is well: I
wish they had told me so before; since the expecting a release put a stop to
some business: thou may tell my father, His resolution.
who, I know, will ask thee these words; that my prison shall be my grave,
before I will budge a jot; for I owe my conscience to no mortal man. I have no
need to fear; God will make amends for all. They are mistaken in me; I value
not their threats and resolutions: for they shall know I can weary out their
malice and peevishness; and in me shall they all behold a resolution above
fear; conscience above cruelty; and a baffle put upon all their designs, by the
spirit of patience, the companion of all the tribulated flock of the blessed
Jesus, who is the author and finisher of the faith, that overcomes the world,
yea, death and hell too. Neither great nor good things were ever attained
without loss and hardships. He that would reap and not labor must faint with
the wind, and perish in disappointments: but an hair of my head shall not fall
without the providence of my Father, that is over all."

"A spirit warmed with the love of God" (says the writer of his life) "and
devoted to his service, ever pursues its main purpose: he, He writes several
treatises in the tower.
being now restrained from preaching, applied himself to writing; several
treatises were the fruits of his solitude, particularly, that excellent one,
entitled, No cross, no crown; a book, which, tending to promote the general
design of religion, was well accepted, and soon past several impressions."

He also, in the year 1669, writ, from the tower, a letter to the lord
Arlington, then principal secretary of state, by whose warrant he was
committed, 1669. He writes to the Lord Arlington, etc.
in vindication of his innocence, and to remove some aspersions cast upon him;
in this letter, with christian boldness, and elegance of style, he pleads the
reasonableness of toleration in religion, shows the singular injustice of his
imprisonment, and declares his firm resolution to suffer, rather than give up
his cause; he likewise requests the secretary to lay his case before the king,
and desires he may be ordered a release; but, if that should be denied, he
entreats the favor of access to the royal presence, or at least, that the
secretary himself would please to give him a full hearing, etc. And in order to
clear himself from the aspersions, cast on him, in relation to the doctrines of
the Trinity, the incarnation, and satisfaction of Christ, he published a little
book called, "Innocence with her open face," by way of apology for the
aforesaid, Sandy foundation shaken: in this apology he so successfully
vindicated himself, that soon after the publication thereof, He is discharged.
he was discharged from his imprisonment; which had been of about seven months
continuance.

In the latter part of the summer this year, he went again to Ireland. Being
arrived at Cork, he there visited his friends the Quakers, He goes to Ireland.
who were in prison, for their religion, attended the meetings of his society,
and afterward went from thence to Dublin; where an account of his friends
sufferings being drawn up, by way of address, it was by him presented to the
lord lieutenant.

During his stay in Ireland, though his business, in the care of his father's
estate, His business there.
took up a considerable part of his time, yet he frequently attended, and
preached in the meetings of his friends, especially at Dublin and Cork; in one
of which places he usually resided. He also wrote, during his residence there,
several treatises, and took every opportunity in his power, to solicit those
in authority, in behalf of his friends in prison: and, in the beginning of the
fourth month, 1670, through his repeated applications to the chancellor, the
lord Arran, 1670.
and the lord lieutenant, an order of council was obtained for their release.
Having settled his father's concerns to satisfaction, and done his friends, the
Quakers, many signal services, he shortly after returned to England.

In the year 1670 was passed the conventicle act, which prohibited the meetings
of the dissenters, 1670.
under severe penalties. The rigor of this law was immediately executed upon
the Quakers; who not being used to give way, in the cause of religion, stood
most exposed. They being kept out of their meeting house, in Grace-church
street in London, by force, met in the street itself, as near it as they could:
W. Penn, preaching here, was apprehended, and by warrant, dated August
fourteenth, He is committed to Newgate.
1670, from Sir Samuel Starling, the lord mayor, committed to Newgate; and, at
the next sessions, at the Old Bailey, was, together with William Mead, indicted
for being present at, and preaching to, an unlawful, seditious and riotous
assembly. At his trial be made such an excellent defense, as discovered at once
both the free spirit of an Englishman, Famous trial of Penn and Mead.
and the undaunted magnanimity of a Christian; insomuch that notwithstanding
the most partial frowns and menaces of the bench, the jury acquitted him. The
trial itself was soon after printed; it exhibits a signal instance of the
attempts of the ignorance and tyranny of that time; and may be seen in his
printed works.

Not long after this famous trial, His father's reconciliation and death.
and his discharge from Newgate, his father died, entirely reconciled to his
son; to whom, as before observed, he left both his paternal blessing, and a
plentiful estate. His deathbed expressions, and last advice are very
remarkable, instructive, and may be seen in W. Penn's treatise, entitled, No
cross, no crown, among the sayings of other eminent persons.

He was about this time employed in defense of his religious principles, 1670.
He disputes with J. Ives and visits Oxford, etc.
in a public dispute with one Jeremy Ives, a celebrated Baptist. Afterward in
the ninth month this year, being at Oxford, and observing the cruel usage and
persecution, which his innocent friends suffered there from the junior
scholars, too much by the connivance of their superiors, he wrote a letter to
the vice chancellor, on the subject.

In the winter, this year, He publishes a book against Popery, etc.
having his residence at Penn, in Buckinghamshire, he published a book,
entitled, "A reasonable caveat against Popery;" wherein he both exposes and
confutes many erroneous doctrines of the church of Rome, and establishes the
opposite truths, by sound arguments; a work alone sufficient, on the one hand,
to wipe off the calumny, cast upon him, 1670.
of being a favourer of the Romish religion; and, on the other, to show, that
his principle being for an universal liberty of conscience, he would have had
it extended, even to the Papists themselves, under a security of their not
persecuting others.

In the last month of this year, He is taken and carried to the tower, etc.
while he was preaching in a religious meeting of his friends, in
Wheeler-street, London, he was forceably seized by a party of soldiers, sent
thither for that purpose, and brought to the tower, by an order from the
lieutenant. In his examination, on the occasion, before the lieutenant of the
tower, Sir John Robinson, Starling, the lord mayor, and others, his behavior
was very remarkable, spirited and extraordinarily adapted to the nature of the
occasion. It may be seen in the printed account of his life, prefixed to his
literary works; in which, as the lieutenant's words and conduct appear high,
imperious, and toward him manifestly inimical, so his replies were smart,
sensible and bold: and, on the lieutenant's charging him with his having been
as bad as other people, and that both at home and abroad, A remarkable answer.
he received this remarkable answer from W. Penn, viz. "I make this bold
challenge to all men, women and children upon earth, justly to accuse me, with
ever having seen me drunk, heard me swear, utter a curse, or speak one obscene
word, (much less that I ever made it my practice) I speak this to God's glory,
that has preserved me from the power of those pollutions, and that, from a
child, begot an hatred in me toward them. But there is nothing more common,
than when men are of a more severe life than ordinary, for loose persons to
comfort themselves with the conceit, that they were once as they are, as if
there were no collateral, or oblique line of the compass, or globe, men may be
said to come from to the Arctic pole, but directly and immediately from the
Antarctic. Thy words shall be thy burden, and I trample thy slander, as dirt,
under my feet."

Sent a prisoner to Newgate, and writes to the parliament.
He was sent prisoner to Newgate for six months; where, during his confinement,
he wrote several treatises, and occasional pieces of controversy, extant in his
works; and the parliament being about to take measures for enforcing with
greater severity the aforesaid conventicle act, he whose freedom of spirit a
prison could not confine from advocating the cause of liberty, wrote from the
same place, the following paper, directed,

To the high court of Parliament.
Forasmuch as it has pleased you to make an act, entitled, 1671. Application
to parliament in behalf of his suffering friends.
"An act for suppressing seditious conventicles, the dangerous practices of
seditious sectaries, etc." and that, under pretense of authority from it, many
have taken the ungodly liberty of plundering, pillaging and breaking into
houses, to the ruin and detriment of whole families, not regarding the poor,
the widow and the fatherless, beyond all precedent, or excuse; and, that we are
informed it is your purpose, instead of relaxing your hand, to supply the
defects of that act, by such explanatory clauses as will inevitably expose us
to the fury and interest of our several adversaries; that under pretense of
answering the intents of the said act, will only gratify their private humors,
and doubtless extend it beyond its original purpose, to the utter destruction
of us, and our suffering friends.

We, therefore, esteem ourselves obliged, in Christian duty, once more to
remonstrate:

First, That we own civil government, or magistracy, as God's ordinance, for
the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them, that do well; and though
we cannot comply with those laws that prohibit us to worship God, according to
our consciences, as believing it to be his alone prerogative, to preside in
matters of faith and worship, yet we both own and are ready to yield obedience
to every ordinance of man, relating to human affairs, and that for conscience
sake.

Secondly, That we deny and renounce, as an horrible impiety, all plots and
conspiracies, or to promote our interest, or religion, by the blood and
destruction of such us dissent from us, or yet those, that persecute us.

Thirdly, That in all revolutions we have demeaned ourselves with much peace
and patience (disowning all contrary actings) notwithstanding the numerous
prosecutions of cruel and ungodly men; which is a demonstration of our harmless
behavior, that ought not to be of little moment with you.

Fourthly, That as we have ever lived most peaceably under all the various
governments, that have been since our first appearance, (notwithstanding we
have been as their anvil, to smite upon) so we do hereby signify, that it is
our fixed resolution to continue the same; that where we cannot actually obey,
we patiently shall suffer, (leaving our innocent cause without daring to love
ourselves unto the death, for our blessed testimony's sake) thereby manifesting
to the whole world, that we love God above all, and our neighbors as ourselves.

If this prevails not with you to suspend your thoughts of reinforcing your
former act, we do desire that we, or some of our friends, may receive a fre^
hearing from you, (as several of us had upon the first act for uniformity)
having many great and weighty reasons to offer against all such severe
proceedings, to the end all wrong measures of us, and of our principles, may be
rectified; and, that you, being better informed of both, may remove our heavy
burdens, and let the oppressed go free; for such moderation will be well
pleasing both to God and good men.

From us who are prisoners, at Newgate (for conscience sake) on behalf of
ourselves, and all our suffering friends in England, etc.

WILLIAM PENN and several others.
Newgate, Second month, 1671.

He travels into Holland and Germany.
His six months imprisonment, in Newgate, being expired, he was set at liberty,
and shortly after went into Holland and Germany. Of his business, or services,
at this time, in these countries, I find no particular account, besides some
small mention made thereof, by himself, in his journal of his subsequent
travels afterward into those countries.

In the beginning of the year 1672, 1672. He marries and lives in Hertfordshire.
and the twenty-eighth of his age, he married Gulielma Maria Springett,
daughter of Sir William Springett, formerly of Darling in Sussex; who was
killed in the time of the civil wars, at the siege of Bamber; his widow was
afterward married to Isaac Penington, of Peter's Chalfont, in Buckinghamshire;
in whose family her said daughter was brought up; a young woman, whom a
virtuous disposition, joined to a comely personage, rendered well accomplished.
Afterward, pitching upon a convenient habitation at Rickmersworth, in
Hertfordshire, he resided there with his family, often visiting the meetings of
his friends.

In the Seventh month this year, He visits his friends in Kent, Sussex and
Surry.
(1672) he visited his friends in Kent, Sussex and Surry; of which his
memorandums furnish us with an observation of that singular industry, which the
free ministers of the gospel exercise, in the discharge of their office; for,
in the space of twenty-one days, he with his companion, under the like concern,
were present at, and preached to, as many assemblies of people, at distant
places, viz. Rochester, Canterbury, Dover, Deal, Folkstone, Ashford, and other
places in Kent; at Jews, Horsham, Stenning, etc. in Sussex; and at Charlewood
and Rygate in Surry. "Great was their service, in these counties; 1672.
(says the writer of his life) their testimonies, effectual to the
strengthening of their friends, silencing of gainsayers, and to a general
edification, were received by the people with joy, and openness of heart; and
themselves in the performance of their duty, filled with spiritual
consolation." W. Penn gives this account of their last meeting, in that
journey, being at Rygate: "The Lord sealed up our labors and travels according
to the desire of my soul and spirit, with his heavenly refreshments, and sweet
living power and word of life, unto the reaching of all, and consolating our
own hearts abundantly." -- He concludes his narrative with these words: -- "And
thus has the Lord been with us, in all our travels for his truth; and with his
blessings of peace are we returned; which is a reward beyond all worldly
treasure."

About this time many opposers of the Quakers, some of whom being dissenters
themselves, who had enough to do in time of persecution, by a cautious privacy,
which they called christian prudence, to secure their heads from the storm,
began, under the sunshine of the king's indulgence, to peep out, and (in the
words of the writer of W. Penn's life) by gainsaying the truth, to make its
defense necessary; He writes on diverse subjects, etc.
so that he had plenty of controversial exercise for his pen, the remainder of
this year, and the two next ensuing; which produced several valuable treatises,
extant in his works, together with diverse remarkable and excellent letters and
epistles, written both to single persons, collective bodies of men, and others,
in a more general capacity, in England, Holland, Germany and elsewhere; which,
as they are principally of a religious, and some of them of a political nature,
may likewise be seen in his printed writings. Among these appears the following
letter to a Roman catholic, viz.

My Friend,
A letter to a Roman catholic. 1675.
Christ Jesus did redeem a people with his most precious blood, and the ancient
church of Rome, among other churches, was one; but as the sea loses and gets,
and as prosperity changes its station, so the chastity of the church of Rome is
lost; she having taken in principles and discipline, that are not of Christ,
neither can be found in the holy scriptures.

1675.
If thou were to die, would not thou leave a plain will to thy children? so
have Christ and his apostles, in the scriptures. Read and thou may behold
the simplicity, purity, meekness, patience and self-denial of those Christians
and churches. They are Christ's, that take up his cross to the glory and spirit
of this world; which the church of Rome lives in. Behold the pride, luxury,
cruelty, that have, for ages, been in that church, even the heads and
chieftains thereof! It is a mistake to think that Christ's church, which has
lost its heavenly qualifications, because it once was. What is become of
Antioch, Jerusalem, etc. both churches of Christ, and before Rome? Nor is it
number, (the Devil has that;) nor antiquity, (for he has that;) but
Christ-likeness, and conformity to Jesus; who has divorced those, that have
adulterated; and though be had left but two or three (though there were
thousands) yet he would be in the midst of them: and they have been in the
wilderness, people crying in sackcloth. The generality declined from Christ's
spirit; and it was lost, and the teachings of it: And then came up form,
without power, and a wrathful spirit, to propagate it; and this made up the
great whore, that looked like the Lamb's bride, Christ's church, but was not;
which God will judge. Remember that God was not without a church, though the
natural church and priesthood of the Jews apostatised: so, in the case of the
church of Rome.

Now is the Lord raising up his old power, and giving his spirit, and moving
upon the waters, (the people) that out of that state all may come, and know God
in spirit, and Christ, his Son; whom he has sent into the people's hearts, a
true light. And, my friend, build not upon fancies, nor the traditions of men,
but Christ the sure foundation, as he appears to thee, in thy conscience; that
thou may feel his power to redeem thee, up to himself, out of the earthly,
sensual spirit, to know thy right eye plucked out, the true mortification; and
this brings thee to the church of the first born, that is more divine and
noble, than an outward glittering church, that is inwardly polluted: For, know,
as thou sowest, thou reapest, in the great day of account. So to God's spirit,
in thy own conscience, do I recommend thee, that leads out of all evil, and
quickens thee to God, as thou obeyest it, and makes thee a child of God, and an
heir of Glory. I am in much haste, and as much love,

Thy true friend WILLIAM PENN.
London, ninth October, 1675.

1670. He becomes a proprietor of West Jersey, etc.
In the year 1676, he became one of the principal persons, concerned in settling
West New Jersey, in America; as hereafter will appear, in the second part of
this introduction, in the account of the first settling and government of that
colony. About this time also he writ to some persons of great quality, in
Germany, as appears in his works; encouraging them to a perseverance in the
paths of virtue and true religion; with the love of which he had understood
their minds were happily and divinely inspired.

In the year 1677, he traveled into Holland and Germany, 1677.
in company with several of his friends, the Quakers, on a religious visit, to
these countries; of which there is extant, in his works, an account, or
journal, written by himself; in a plain, familiar style, and particularly
suited to persons of a religious turn of mind. It does not appear to have been
originally intended to be published; for, in the preface, to its first
publication, the author himself says, -- "It was written for my own, and some
relations, and particular friends satisfaction, as the long time it has lain
silent does show, but a copy, that was found among the late countess of
Conway's papers, falling into the hands of a person, that much frequented that
family, he was earnest with me both by himself and others, to have leave to
publish it, for a common good," etc. In this account are included diverse
letters, epistles and religious pieces, written during his travels there, to
persons of eminence and others, whom he either visited in person, or writing,
or both: -- it is continued from the twenty-second of the Fifth month, 1677,
when he left home, to the first of the Ninth month the same year, when he
arrived well at Worminghurst, his habitation, in Sussex.

In this journal mention is made of his having religious meetings, or paying
personal visits, Names of some places which he visited, etc.
at Rotterdam, Leyden, Haerlam and Amsterdam; in which last place he made some
stay, being employed there in assisting to regulate and settle the affairs of
his religious society in that city, etc. from thence he writ to the king of
Poland, in favor of his persecuted and suffering friends, the Quakers, at
Dantzick. He was also at Naerden, Osnaburgh and Herwerden; in the last of which
places he had religious meetings and agreeable conversation with the princess
Elizabeth Palatine and others. 1677.
He visited Paderborn, Cassel and Frankfort; here he made some stay, and writ
an epistle, "To the churches of Jesus throughout the world," etc. From hence he
went by the way of Worms to Crishcim; where he found a meeting of his friends,
the Quakers; and writ to the princess, before mentioned, and the countess of
Horns, two Protestant ladies of great virtue and quality, at Herwerden. Thence
by Frankenthall to Manheim; from which place he wrote to the prince elector
Palatine of Heydelburgh. He was likewise at Mentz, and diverse other places, on
the Rhine; as Cullen, Duysburgh, etc. But, on account of his being a Quaker, he
was prohibited to enter into Mulheim, by the Graef, or earl of Bruch and
Falkensteyn, lord of that country; on which occasion he wrote to him from
Duysburgh, a sharp letter of reproof and advice; and to his daughter, the
countess, a virtuous and religious lady, at Mulheim, on whose account his visit
there was principally intended, he sent a consolatory epistle.

He then visited Wesel, Rees, Emrick, Cleve, Nimmeguen, Lippenhusen, Groningen,
Embden, Bemen and the Hague; and diverse of these places, several times,
frequently writing letters of advice and religious comfort to diverse virtuous
and religious persons of great quality, and others; with several of whom he
corresponded; and at the last mentioned place he corrected and finished several
long epistles of a religious nature; which were written and intended for the
press, both in his first and second journey, in Germany; which are now extant
in his works. From the Hague he went to Delft, Wonderwick, and so to the Briel;
and from thence by the packet, to Harwich, and home, within the limits of the
time above mentioned.

He solicits the parliament, etc.
After his return from Germany, the people called Quakers being harrassed with
severe prosecutions, in the exchequer, on penalties of twenty pounds per month,
or two-thirds of their estates, by laws made against Papists, but unjustly
turned upon them; W. Penn, soliciting the parliament for redress of those
grievances, presented petitions, on the occasion, both to the lords and
commons; where, 1678.
upon being admitted to a hearing before a committee, on the twenty-second of
the month, called March, 1678, he made the following speeches, viz.

His first speech to the committee.
"If we ought to believe that it is our duty, according to the doctrine of the
apostle, to be always ready to give an account of the hope, that is in us,
1678. W. P's. first speech to committee of parliament.
and that to every sober and private enquirer; certainly much more ought we to
hold ourselves obliged to declare, with all readiness, when called to it by so
great authority, what is not our hope, especially when our very safety is
eminently concerned in so doing, and that we cannot decline this discrimination
of ourselves from Papists, without being conscious to ourselves of the guilt of
our own sufferings; for that must every man needs be, that suffers mutely,
under another character than that, which truly and properly belongs to him,
and his belief. That which gives me a more than ordinary right to speak, at
this time, and in this place, is the great abuse, that I have received, above
any other of my profession; for, of a long time, I have not only been supposed
a Papist, but a seminary, a Jesuit, an emissary of Rome, and in pay from the
Pope, a man dedicating my endeavors to the interest and advancement of that
party. Nor has this been the report of the rabble, but the jealousy and
insinuation of persons otherwise sober and discreet: Nay, some zealous for the
Protestant religion, have been so far gone in this mistake, as not only to
think ill of us, and to decline our conversation, but to take courage to
themselves, to prosecute us for a sort of concealed Papists; and the truth is,
what with one thing, and what with another, we have been as the wool-sacks, and
common whipping-stock of the kingdom; all laws have been let loose upon us, as
if the design were not to reform, but to destroy us, and that not for what we
are, but for what we are not: It is hard, that we must thus bear the stripes of
another interest, and be their proxy, in punishment; but it is worse, that some
men can please themselves in such a sort of administration."

"I would not be mistaken, I am far from thinking it fit that Papists should be
whipped for their consciences, because I exclaim against the injustice of
whipping Quakers for Papists: No, for though the hand, pretended to be lifted
up against them, has (I know not by what direction) lit heavy upon us, and we
complain; yet we do not mean, that any should take a fresh aim at them, or that
they must come in our room; for we must give the liberty we ask, and cannot be
false to our principles, though it were to relieve ourselves; for we have good
will to all men, and would have none suffer for a truly sober and conscientious
dissent, on any hand: and I humbly take leave to add, that those methods,
against persons so qualified, do not seem to me to be convincing, or indeed
adequate to the reason of mankind; but this I submit to your consideration."

"To conclude, I hope we shall be held excused of the men of that profession,
in giving this distinguishing declaration, since it is not with design to
expose them; but, first, to pay that regard, we owe to the enquiry of this
committee; and, in the next place, to relieve ourselves from the daily spoil
and ruin, which now attend and threaten many hundreds of families, by the
execution of laws, that we humbly conceive were never made against us."

His second speech to the committee.
W. P's. second speech to the committee of parliament.
"The candid hearing, our sufferings have received from the committee, and the
fair and easy entertainment, that you have given us, oblige me to add what ever
can increase your satisfaction about us. I hope you do not believe, I would
tell you a lie; I am sure I should choose an ill time and place to tell it in;
but, I thank God it is too late in the day for that. There are some here that
have known me formerly; I believe they will say, I never was that man; and it
would be hard, if after a voluntary neglect of the advantages of this world, I
should sit down, in my retirement, short of common truth."

"Excuse the length of my introduction, it is for this I make it. I was bred a
Protestant, and that strictly too: I lost nothing by time or study; for years,
reading, travel and observations made the religion of my education the religion
of my judgment: my alteration has brought none to that belief; and though the
posture I am in may seem odd, or strange to you, yet I am conscientious; and
(till you know me better) I hope your charity will rather call it my
unhappiness, than my crime. I do tell you again, and here solemly declare, in
the presence of Almighty God, and before you all, that the profession I now
make, and the society I now adhere to, have been so far from altering that
Protestant judgment I had, that I am not conscious to myself of having receded
from an iota of any one principle, maintained by those first Protestants and
reformers of Germany, and our own martyrs, at home, against the Pope, and See
of Rome.

"On the contrary, I do, with great truth, 1678. W. P's. second speech to the
committee of parliament.
assure you, that we are of the same negative faith, with the ancient
Protestant church, and, upon occasion, shall be ready, by God's assistance, to
make it appear, that we are of the same belief, as to the most fundamental
possitive articles of her creed too. And, therefore it is, we think it hard,
that though we deny, in common with her, those doctrines of Rome, so zealously
protested against, from whence the name Protestants; yet that we should be so
unhappy as to suffer, and that with extreme severity, by those very laws on
purpose made against the maintainers of those doctrines, we do so deny. We
choose no suffering, for God knows what we have already suffered, and how many
sufficient and trading families are reduced to great poverty by it. We think
ourselves an useful people: we are sure we are a peaceable people; but, if we
still suffer, let us not suffer as Popish recusants, but as Protestestant
dissenters.

"But I would obviate another objection, and that none of the least, that has
been made against us, viz. That we are enemies to government, in general, and
particularly disaffected to this we live under: I think it not amiss, but very
seasonable, yea, my duty, now to declare to you, (and that I do with good
conscience, in the sight of the Almighty God) first, that we believe government
to be God's ordinance; and next, that this present government is established by
the providence of God, and law of the land, and that it is our christian duty
readily to obey it, in all just laws; and wherein we cannot comply, through
tenderness of conscience, in all such cases, not to revile, or conspire against
the government, but, with christian humility and patience tire out all mistakes
about us; and wait their better information; who, we believe, do as
undeservedly as severely treat us; and I know not what greater security can be
given by any people, or how any government can be easier from the subjects of
it.

"I shall conclude with this; that we are so far from esteeming it hard, or
ill, that the house has put us upon this discrimination, that, on the
contrary, we value it as we ought to do, for an high favor, (and cannot choose
but see, and humbly acknowledge God's providence therein) that you should give
us this fair occasion to discharge ourselves of a burden we have, not with more
patience than injustice, suffered but too many years under; and I hope our
conversation shall always manifest the grateful resentment of our minds, for
the justice and civility of this opportunity; and so I pray God direct you."

Parliament prorogued; and the Quakers not relieved
The committee agreed to insert in a bill, then depending, a proviso, or clause,
for relief, in the case complained of; and the same did pass the House of
Commons: But before it had gone through the House of Lords, it was quashed by a
sudden prorogation of the parliament.

1679. He writes d^vers trea^^^^ etc.
About this time, and the following year, the people's minds being hurried and
disturbed with rumors of plots, apprehensions of a French invasion, and
designs to subvert the Protestant religion, and introduce Popery, he writ and
published several pieces by way of advice to his friends, the Quakers, in
particular, and also for settling the minds of the people in general, and
turning them to their real and best interest, both in a religious and political
sense; among which was published, in the year 1679, that excellent treatise,
entitled, "An address to Protestants of all persuasions," etc. -- And in the
year 1681, there being a fresh persecution against his friends, the Quakers, in
the city of Bristol, W. Penn writ them the following epistle, (which is here
inserted as a specimen of his writing on such occasions) for their Christian
consolation and encouragement, directed,

"To the friends of God in the city of Bristol," 1681.


"This sent to be read among them, when assembled to wait upon the Lord."

My beloved in the Lord,
I do hereby send amongst you the dear and tender salutation of my unfeigned
love, To his persecuted friends in Bristol.
that is held in the fellowship of the lasting gospel of peace, that has many
years been preached and believed amongst you, beseeching the God and Father of
this glorious day of the Son of man, to increase and multiply his grace, mercy
and peace among you; that you may be faithful, and abound in every good word
and work, doing and suffering what is pleasing unto God; that you may prove
what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God; which it becomes you
to be found daily doing; that so an entrance may be administered unto you
abundantly into the kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that is an
everlasting kingdom. My beloved brethren and sisters, be not cast down at the
rage of evil men, whose anger works not the righteousness of God; and whose
cruelty the Lord will limit. Nothing strange, or unusual, is come to pass, it
makes well for them, that eye the Lord in and through these sufferings: there
is food in affliction, and though the instruments of it cannot see it, all
shall work together for good to them that fear the Lord: keep your ground in
the truth, that was, and is the saints victory. They that shrink, go out of it;
it is a shield to the righteous: feel it, and see, I charge you by the presence
of the Lord, that you turn not aside the Lord's end toward you, in this
suffering, by consulting with flesh and blood, in easing your adversaries; for
that will load you. Keep out of base bargainings, 1681. W. Penn, to his
persecuted friends in Bristol.
or conniving at fleshly evasions of the cross. Our Captain would not leave us
such an example: let them shrink that know not why they should stand; we know,
in whom we have believed: he is mightier in the faithful, to suffer and endure
to the end, than the world, to persecute: call to mind those blessed ancients,
"That by faith overcame of old, that endured cruel mockings and scourgings, yea
moreover, bonds and imprisonments, that accepted not deliverance, (to deny
their testimony) that they might obtain a better resurrection:" -- They were
stoned; they were tempted; they were sawn asunder; they were slain with the
sword; but ye have not so resisted unto blood; and it suffices, I hope, to
you, that the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment, to he punished; when it may be
truly said, "It shall go well with the righteous, but very ill with the
wicked." The Lord God, by his power, keep your hearts living to him; that it
may be your delight to wait upon him, and receive the bounty of his love; that,
being fed with his daily bread and drinking of his cup of blessing, you may be
raised above the fear and trouble of earthly things and grow strong in him, who
is your crown of rejoicing; that, having answered his requirings, and walked
faithfully before him, you may receive, in the end of your days, the welcome
sentence of gladness. Eternal riches are before you, an inheritance
incorruptible: press after that glorious mark: let your minds be set on things
that are above, and when Christ, that is the glory of his poor people, shall
appear, they shall appear with him in glory; when all tears shall be wiped
away, and there shall be no more sorrow, or sighing, but they, that overcome,
shall stand as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed.

So, my dear friends and brethren, endure, that you may be saved, and you shall
reap, if you faint not. What should we be troubled for? our kingdom is not of
this world, nor can be shaken by the overturning here below. Let all give glory
to God on high, live peaceably on earth, and show good will to all men; and our
enemies will at last, see they do they know not what, and repent, and glorify
God, our heavenly Father. O! great is God's work on earth. Be universal in your
spirits, and keep out all straitness and narrowness: look to God's great and
glorious kingdom, and its prosperity: our time is not our own, nor are we our
own: God has bought us with a price, not to serve ourselves, but to glorify
him, both in body, soul and spirit; and, by bodily sufferings for the truth, he
is glorified: look to the accomplishing of the will of God, in these things;
that the measure of Christ's sufferings may be filled up in us, who bear about
the "dying of the Lord Jesus;" else our suffering is in vain. Wherefore, as the
flock of God, and family and household of faith, walk with your loins girded,
being sober, hoping to the end, for the grace and kindness, which shall be
brought unto you, at the revelation of Jesus Christ, to whom you and yours are
committed: his precious spirit minister unto you, and his own life be shed
abroad plenteously among you, that you may be kept blameless to the end. I am
your friend and brother in the fellowship of the suffering for truth, as it is
in Jesus,

WILLIAM PENN,
Worminghurst, the 24th. of the Twelfth month, 1681.

Having thus far pursued this abstracted account of the life of W. Penn, I
shall, in the next place, after having previously given a brief preliminary
description of the first rise of the British colonies, in America, and more
especially of West New Jersey, in which he was so much concerned, attend him in
the settlement and colonization of his province of Pennsylvania.

INTRODUCTION. PART THE SECOND. CONTAINING, A short preliminary sketch of the
first colonization of continental America by the English; -- Of the Dutch and
Swedish settlements, pretensions and proceedings, on Hudson's or North river,
and on the bay and river of Delaware; -- But more particularly, of the rise,
government, and early transactions of the colony of West New Jersey, previous
to those of Pennsylvania.
THE first European discovery of some of the insular parts of America, in the
year 1492, 1492. Discovery of America by Columbus, and by Americus, etc.
by Christopher Columbus, and the success of his subsequent voyages, as well as
those of Americus Vespucius, between the years 1496 and 1499, to that
continent, both in the service of Spain, are now so well known as here to need
no repetition; and, for the same reason, it is unnecessary to specify, in this
place, how, or why, this newly discovered part of the world was called America,
from the name of the latter of these persons; whose last voyage, in the
employment of Portugal, gave that part of South America now called Brasil, to
that kingdom; as the prior discoveries of Columbus and himself had added,
besides the islands, immense tract of territory to Spain, both in the northern
and southern latitudes of continental America; according to that universally
acknowledged law of nations, which assigns all waste and uncultivated countries
to the prince, who is at the charge of the first discovery of them. See
Justinian, Grotius, etc. on this subject.

Columbus is said to be buried in the cathedral of Seville, in Spain, with this
inscription on his tomb.

"Columbus has given a new world
To the kingdoms of Castile and Leon."
Herrera, the great Spanish historian of America, expressly affirm, "That
neither on the continent, nor isles of the West Indies (the name the Spaniards
usually give to all America) were there either silk, wine, sugar, olives,
wheat, barley or pulse; all which (adds Herrera) and many other things have
been transported thither from Spain." Their own sole original productions were
tobacco, indigo, cocheneal, cotton, ginger, cocoa, piemento, sundry useful
drugs and woods for dying, furniture, physic," etc.

ANDERSON'S historical deduction of commerce, etc.


1497. British discoveries, by the Cabots, etc.
I shall only, therefore, in this place, previously mention, that, in the year
1497, John and Sebastian Cabot, father and son, in the service of king Henry
the seventh of England, by the best accounts, are generally acknowledged to
have been the first Europeans, who discovered that part of north America, where
the English colonies were afterward settled, along the Atlantic shore,
including Newfoundland, from 60, or 68 degrees north, to so far south, as the
isle of Cuba, or the latitude of Florida. "The main end of the above attempt of
the Cabols, from England, was said by the writers of, or near, these times, to
have been to discover a north-west passage to the Indies, or spice islands, or,
to Cathaia; as they then termed a country, since known to be China; whither
some traveller had gone over by land, in the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth
centuries Cabot having sailed so far north as 67 degrees, the land which he
first saw, was the country between the mouth of the river of Canada and
Hudson's strait; and which he, therefore, named Prima vista; (i. e. first
discovered) which name it soon lost; and next got the name of Corterial^s, from
a Portugueze; who, from Lisbon, fell in with that coast, an^o 1500, calling
also the north part of it Eslotiland. After the French had settled in Canada,
they freely called the country New France, Lastly, the English discoveries, on
the north parts of that country, deep into the bay of Hudson, called it New
Britain; though the Portugueze, in some of their maps, called it Terra di
Labrador: its only produce hitherto being poltry, surs and fe^ther^."

ANDERSON, etc.


All this extent of territory, or, least, The ancient Virginia.
from 34 to 45 degrees of north latitude, including all that tract of land,
which is situated between the extreme bounds of New England and Carolina, north
and south, was, in the reign of queen Elizabeth, named Virginia; which was then
deemed to comprehend all the habitable part of the British continental
territories in America. Which name is said so have been given it, either by the
queen herself, or by Sir Walter Raleigh; who, in the year 1584, 1584.
obtained a patent from the queen, for making a settlement in America. This was
accordingly attempted, at different times; though at first unsuccessfully, in
that part of the continent, which still retains the name of Virginia. "In the
year 1584, Sir Walter Raleigh formed his scheme with a number of gentlemen and
merchants, for making a settlement in America; for which purpose queen
Elizabeth, on lady day, this year, grants him, etc. a charter for the
possessing of such remote heathen lands, not then inhabited by Christians, as
they should discover in six years; of which they thereby had the property
granted to them for ever, reserving to the crown the fifth part of all the gold
and silver are found therein, with power to seize, to their proper use, all
ships, with their merchandise, that shall without leave, plant within two
hundred miles of this intended settlement; excepting however, the quton's
subjects and allies, fishing at Newfoundland," etc. "Grants free denixation to
the planters and their posterity residing there." -- "Powers are also granted
to the patentees, for making Bye-laws there, not repugnant to those of
England." -- Amidas and Barlow, with two vessels, were accordingly sent the
same year." -- They arrived at a part of what is now called Virginia; which
name, either the queen herself, or Sir Walter Ruleigh, gave that country; where
making some insignificant trade with the natives, they returned home."

"N. B. In this, and some other patents of those times, there was no distinct
place, longitude nor latitude, fixed or limited, for such plantation, although,
undoubtedly, North America was the country intended."

Anderson, etc.


In the year 1606, 1606. Virginia divided into two colonies.
the whole extent of this territory was divided into two parts, or colonies, by
a charter obtained of king James, for two companies. The first was called the
South Virginia company, comprehending the now named provinces of Maryland,
Virginia and Carolina; or all the country which is situated between 34 and 41
degrees of N. latitude, which includes part of Pennsylvania. These were called
the London adventurers. The second company were called the Plymouth
adventurers; who were empowered to plant and inhabi^ so far as to 45 degrees of
N. latitude, in which compass was included what is now called Pennsylvania, in
part, New Jersey, New York and New England.

Planting of Virginia.
The first, or London company, which most properly ought to be called the
Virginia company, d^^ in this same year, 1606, or the next following, (...)
fect a settlement near the mouth of Powhatan, no^ called James's river, within
Chesapeak bay, whi^ they named James town; which name it still ^^tains. This is
said to have been the first Engl^ colony, on the continent of America, which
to^^^ root, and has continued permanent to our days; a^ former attempts having
proved abortive.

1620. Planting of N. England etc.
From this time, till the year 1620, the planting of New England, or the
northern division, appe^^ not to have been succesfully undertaken; thou^^ there
had been several voyages made during th^^^ interval, but mostly in a trading
way, to that part of the continent. "It is evident, from the charter, that the
original design of it (...) to constitute a corporation in England, like that
of the East Indies, and other great companies, with powers to settle
plantations within the limi^^ of the territory, under (...) ^orms of government
and magistracy as should be fit and necessary."

Hutchinson's history of Massachussetts Bay.
But in the year 1620, the first permanent plantation, or, which remains such
to^ this time, appears to have been made in that country; to which king Charles
the first, then princ^ of Wales, is said to have given the name of New England:
"Captain John Smith, having surveyed the inland country, and presented a map of
it to Charles, prince of Wales, the prince gave the country the name of New
England."

Anderson, etc.
"For which purpose (says governor Hutchinson, in his history of Massachusetts
bay) a new patent was granted, bearing date, November third 1620, incorporating
the adventurers t^ the northern colony, by the name of The Council for the
affairs of New England; the bounds of the country were expressed between forty
and forty-eight degrees north."

In the year 1623, there were so many complaints made of bad management, that,
on enquiry, a Quo warranto was issued against the Virginia charters, including
both North and South Virginia; and it is said, after a trial in the King's
Bench, they were declared forfeited. "In volume seventeenth of Rymer's Faedera,
page 608, we have a more distinct view of the condition of the colony of
Virginia; in a commission from King James, to many lords and gentlemen, as
follows, viz. -- "WE, having by letters patent of the fourth year of our reign,
granted powers to diverse knights, gentlemen and others, for the more speedy
accomplishment of the plantation of Virginia, that they should divide
themselves into two colonies; the one to consist of Londoners, called the First
Colony; and the other, of those of Bristol, Exeter and Plymouth, called the
Second Colony. And we did, by several letters under our privy seal, prescribe
orders and constitutions, for directing the affairs of said colony.

"And whereas, afterward, upon the petition of diverse adventurers and planters
of the said First (or London) colony, WE, by letters patent in the seventh year
of our reign, ( anno 1610) incorporated diverse noblemen, knights, etc. by the
name of The Treasurer and Company of Adventurers and Planters of the city of
London, for the first Colony of Virginia; granting them diverse lands,
territories, etc. to be conveyed by them to the adventurers and planters; with
power to have a council there resident, for the affairs of the colony; and also
to place and displace officers.

"And afterward, in the tenth year of our reign, (1613) by letters patent, did
further mention to give that Company diverse Isles, on that coast"

"And whereas, WE, finding the courses taken, for the settling of the said
colony, have not taken the good effect, we intended, did, by a late commission
to sundry persons of quality and trust, cause the state of the said colony to
be examined into; who, after much pains taken, reported, that most of our
people sent thither, had died by sickness and famine, and by massacrees by the
natives; and that such as are still living, were in a lamentable necessity and
want; though they (the Commissioners) conceived the country to be both fruitful
and healthful; and that, if industry were used, it would produce many good
staple commodities." -- "But by neglect of the Governors and Managers here, it
had, as yet, produced few, or none" -- "That the said plantations are of great
importance; and would, as they hoped, remain a lasting monument of our most
gracious and happy government to all posterity, if the same were prosecuted to
those ends, for which they were first undertaken." -- "Whereupon, We, entering
into mature consideration of the premises, did, by advice of our Privy Council,
resolve to alter the charter of the said Company, as to points of government:
-- but the said Treasurer and Company not submitting thereto, The said charters
are now avoided by a Quo Warranto. Wherefore, We direct you to consider the
state of the said colony, and what points are fitting to be inserted in the
intended new charter, and to report to Us." -- "And in the meantime to take
care to supply the Planters there with necessaries, and to do all other acts
needful for maintaining the colony."

"Moreover the King (Ibidem page 618) appoints Sir Francis Wy^^, Governor of
the colony, with eleven Counselors, residing in the colony."

Anderson, etc. vol. 2. page 18.


1625.
"And about the year 1625," -- (says Anderson in his historical deduction of
commerce, The present form of government settled in Virginia.
etc.) -- "King Charles the first issued the following proclamation, which
first laudably established the prudent form of government, in which this, (i.
e. South Virginia; or what is now called Virginia,) and the other regal
colonies, have remained to this day (1761) viz. -- That, whereas, in his royal
father's time, the charter of the Virginia Company was by a Quo warranto
annulled; and whereas, his said father was, and he himself also is of opinion,
that the government of that colony by a company incorporated, consisting of a
multitude of persons of various dispositions, among whom affairs of the
greatest moment are ruled by a majority of votes was not so proper for carrying
on prosperously the affairs of the colony: wherefore, to reduce the government
thereof to such a course, as might best agree with that form, which was held in
his royal monarchy; and considering also that we hold the^ territories of
Virginia, and the Somer Isles, as also that of New England, (lately planted)
with the limits thereof, to be a part of our royal empire; We ordain, that the
government of the colony of Virginia shall immediately depend on ourself, and
not to be committed to any company or corporation, to whom it may be proper to
trust matters of trade and commerce, but cannot be fit to commit the ordering
of state affairs. Wherefore our commissioners for those affairs shall proceed
as directed, till we establish a council here, for that colony, to be
subordinate to our Privy Council." -- "And, that we will also establish another
council, to be resident in Virginia, who shall be subordinate to our council
here, for that colony. And, at our own charge we will maintain those public
officers and ministers, and that strength of men, munition, and fortification,
which shall be necessary for the defense of that plantation."

After the dissolution of the Virginia charters, the British continental
territories, in America, that had before gone under the name of Virginia, being
under the immediate direction of the crown, and at liberty to be granted to
whom the crown thought proper, particular patents, in consequence thereof, for
such parts as remained unplanted, were accordingly granted at various times,
and on different occasions. And in the year 1628, And in New England.
on the fourth of March, the settlers on Massachusetts bay obtained their first
royal charter, for the government of that colony; Matthew Cr^dock being
appointed the first Governor, and Thomas Goffe, Hutchimson's history of
Massachusetts bay
deputy Governor; the patent, from the council of Plymouth having given them a
right to the soil only, but no powers of government.

In the year 1609, 1609. Dutch discovery, or claim, etc. of New York, etc.
the Dutch East India company, according to their own writers, employed Henry
Hudson, an Englishman, to attempt the discovery of a north west passage to
China; in this voyage he discovered Delaware bay; "Sir Thomas West, Lord
Delaware, made Captain General of Virginia, in 1609, in his second voyage to
that colony, in the year 1618, died at sea; and I think, (says Stith, in his
history of Virginia,) I have somewhere seen, that he died about the mouth of
Delaware bay, which thence took its name from him."

Stith's history of Virginia. But I find, in an old Sweedish manuscript, it was
called Poutaxat by the Indians.


and also sailed to the place, where New York now stands, and up North river,
called by him Hudson's river, so far north, as latitude 43 degrees. "Henry
Hudson, an Englishman, according to our authors, in the year 1608, under a
commission from the king, his master, discovered Long Island, New York, and the
river that still bears his name; and afterward sold the country, or rather his
right, to the Dutch."

Smith's history of New York.
In consequence of which, the Dutch, having purchased of him, as they say, his
chart of discoveries, on the coast, obtained a patent from the states, in the
year 1614, for an exclusive trade, on the said river; and made a settlement, in
the province, now called New York; to which they gave the name of New
Netherland; claiming within the same the country on Delaware: "The extent of
New-Netherland, (says Smith, in his history of New York,) was to Delaware, then
called South river, and beyond it; For I find in the Dutch records, a copy of a
letter from William Kieft, their Governor, at New-Amsterdam, May sixth, 1638,
directed to Peter Minuit, who seems, by the tenor of it, to be the Swedish
Governor of New-sweden, "Asserting that the whole south river of
New-Netherlands had been in the Dutch possession many years, above and below,
beset with forts, and sealed with their blood." -- "Which ( Kieft adds) has
happened, even, during your administration, in New-Netherland, and so well
known to you."

"In the year 1642, Kieft fitted out two Sloops to drive the English out of
Schuylkill, of which the Marylanders had lately possessed themselves. The
instructions, dated, May twenty second, to Jan Janson Alpendam, who commanded
in that enterprise, are upon record, and strongly assert the right of the Dutch
both to the soil and trade there."

Smith's history of New York. The Dutch are reported, about the year 1623, to
have furnished the Indians with Firearms, and to have taught them the use
thereof, that by their assistance, they might expel the English, when they
began to settle around them.

Smith's history of New Jersey, and others.
-- On the island, called Manhattans, at the mouth of the said river they
erected a fort; where they afterward, in the year 1656, laid out and began
their town of New-Amsterdam, now New York.

1623.
In the year 1623, they erected several forts in different parts of the new
territory, to which they had thus made claim; among which they built one on
Delaware, (by them called South river) near Gloucester, in New Jersey. But the
commodious situation of New York, for the sea and trade, induced most of them,
who were settled on the Delaware, soon afterward to quit it, and fix their
settlements on both sides of North river, before any of the Swedes came into
America.

In the year 1626, 1627. The Swedes settlement and claim on the Delaware, etc.
under the reign of Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, a scheme was set on foot
in that kingdom, for settling a colony in America; This was chiefly promoted by
the great commendation which William Useling, an eminent merchant, gave of this
country; and the undertaking was, in the following year, 1627, principally
through his means and persuasion, put in execution.

The first landing of the Swedes and Fins, this year, was at cape Inlopen, the
interior cape of Delaware; This cape is frequently confounded with cape
Hinlopen, the exterior, or the False-cape, in Fenwick's island, being written
in the same manner, and sometimes, Henlopen; -- said to be a Swedish word,
signifying, Entering in: -- It was also formerly, sometimes called cape
Cornali^^, and afterward by William Penn, cape James. -- It is situated in
north latitude 38 degrees, 56 minutes.

In the notes to Smith's history of New Jersey, is inserted an extract from a
pamphlet, said there to have been published is 1648, entitled, "A description
of the province of New-Albien, -- in North America," etc. [which country,
extending from the west bank of North-river to the bounds of Virginia, is said
to have been granted by king James the first to sir Edward Plocyden, made earl
Palatine of the same,] giving, among other things, an account of the country,
on the bay and river of Delaware: and though part of it, at this time, appears
not very intelligible, yet, as it is somewhat curious, and exhibits what
notion, of knowledge, of this country, was then propagated, the following
extract therefrom, may probably be entertaining to some.

The author, giving an account of the discoveries of Cabot, further says,

"The said Cabot took possession in latitude 37 degrees, of that part called
Virginia and Chesapeak bay, -- and of the next great bay, in, or near 39
degrees, called now by the Dutch, cape Henlopen, the South-river, and by us
cape James, and Delaware bay, of the baron of Delaware's name, being then
governor of Virginia; who, by sir Thomas Dale, and sir Samuel Argoll, forty
years since, took possession and atternment of the Indian kings; and sixty
years since, sir Walter Raleigh seated and left thirty men, and four pieces of
ordnance; and the creek, near cape James, by the Dutch called Horchill, by us
Roymount, and by the Indians, Cui Achomeca;" -- (speaking of the Dutch, in
New-Netherland, he says,) -- "and in general they endanger all his majesty's
adjoining countries, most wickedly, feloniously, and traitorously, contrary to
the marine and admiral laws of all christians, sell, by wholesale, guns,
powder, shot and ammunition to the Indians, instructing them in the use of our
fights and arms; -- likewise, the Swedes hiring out three of their soldiers to
the Susquahannocks, have taught them the use of our arms and fights." --

"Whereas, that p^rt of America, or North-Virginia, lying about 39 degrees, on
Delawar^ bay, called The province of New-Albion, is situated in the best, and
same temper as Italy, between too cold Germany, and too hot Barbary: so this
lying just midway between New England, two hundred miles north; and Virginia,
one hundred and fifty miles south; where now are settled eight thousand
English, and one hundred and forty ships in trade, is freed from the extreme
cold and barrenness of the one, and heat and aguish marshes of the other; and
is like Lambardy; and a rich, fat soil, plain, and having thirty-four rivers,
on the main land; seventeen great isles; and partaketh of the healthiest air,
and most excellent commodities of Europe, and replenished with the goodliest
woods of oak, and all timber for ships and masts, mulberries, sweet cyprus,
cedars, pines and firs; four sorts of grapes, for wine and raisins and with the
greatest variety of choice fruits, fish and fowl; stored with all sorts of
corn, yielding five, seven and ten quarters an acre: silk grass, salt, good
mines, and dyers ware; five sorts of deer, buffs, and huge else, to plow and
work, all bringing three young at once. The uplands covered many months with
berries, roots, chestnuts, walnuts, beech and oak-mast, to feed them, hogs and
turkies, five hundred in a flock; and having, near the colony of Manteses, four
hundred thousand acres of plain mead land, and mere level, to be flowed and
flooded by that river, for corn, rice, grapes, flax and hemp. After seventeen
years trading, and discovering there, and trial made, is begun to be planted
and stored by the governor and company of New-Albion, consisting of forty-four
lords, baronets, knights and merchants; who, for the true informing of
themselves, their friends, adventurers and partners, by residents and traders
there four several years, out of their journal books, namely captain Brou^e, a
ship master, and master Stafford, his mate, and by captain Claybourn, fourteen
years there trading, and Constantine his Indian, there born and bred, and by
master Robert Evelin, four years there, yet by eight of their hands subscribed
and enrolled, do testify this to be the true state of the country of the land
and Delaware bay, or Charles's river; which is further witnessed by captain
Smith, and other books of Virginia, and by New England prospect, New-Canaan,
captain Powell's map, and other descriptions of New England and Virginia."

Master Evelin's letter.
Good Madam,
Sir Edmund, our noble governor and lord, ear! Palatine, persisting still in
his noble purpose, to go on with his plantation, on Delaware or Charles's
river, just midway between New England and Virginia, where, with my uncle
Young, I several years resided, has often informed himself, both of me and
master Stratton, as I perceive by the hands subscribed, of Edward Monmouth,
Tenis Palec, and as master Buckham, master White, and other ship masters and
sailors, whose hands I know, and it to be true, that there lived and traded
with me, and is sufficiently instructed of the state of the country and people
there. And I should very gladly, according to his desire, have waited upon you
into Hampshire, to have informed your honor, in person, had I not, next week,
been passing to Virginia. But nevertheless, to satisfy you of the truth, I
thought good to write unto you my knowledge, and first, to describe to you,
from the north side of Delaware, unto Hudson's river, in sir Edmund's patent,
called New-Albion; which lies just between New England and Maryland, and that
ocean-sea; I take it to be about one hundred and sixty miles; I find some
broken land, isles and inlets, and many small isles at Egg-bay. But, going to
Delaware-bay, by cape May; which is twenty-four miles, at most, and is, as I
understand, very well set out, and printed in captain Powell's map of
New England, done, as is told me, by a draught I gave to M. Daniel, the plot
maker; which, sir Edmund says, you have at home; -- on that north side, about
five miles within, a port, or road, for any ships, called the Nook; and within
lies the king of Kechemeches, having, as I suppose, about fifty men; and
twelve leagues higher, a little above the bay and bar, is the river of
Manteses, which has twenty miles on Charles's river, and thirty miles running
up a fair navigable, deep river, all a flat level of rich and fat black marsh
mould; which I think to be three hundred thousand acres. In this sir Edmund
intends, as he says, to settle; and there the king of Manteses has about one
hundred bowmen. Next above, about six leagues higher, is a fair deep river,
twelve miles navigable; where is Freestone, and there, over against it, is the
king of Sikonesses; and next is Asomoches river and king, with an hundred men;
and next is Eriwoneck, a king of forty men; where we sat down; and five miles
above is the king of Ramcock, with one hundred men; and four miles higher the
king of Axion, with two-hundred men; and next to him, ten leagues over land, an
inland king Calcefar, with one hundred and fifty men; and then there is, in the
middle of Charle's river, two fair woody islands, very pleasant and fit for
parks, one of one thousand acres, the other of one thousand four hundred, or
thereabouts; and six leagues higher, near a creek, called Mosilian, the king
having two hundred men; and then we come to the Falls, made by a rock of
limestone; as I suppose, it is about sixty-five leagues from the sea: -- near
to which is an isle, fit for a city; all materials there to build; and above,
the river fair and navigable, as the Indians inform me; for I went but ten
miles higher. I do account all the Indians to be about eight hundred; and are
in several factions and war against the Susquabannocks; and are all extreme
fearful of a gun, naked and unarmed against our shot, swords and pikes. I had
some bickering with some of them; and they are of so little esteem, as I durst,
with fifteen men, sit down, or trade in despite of them; and since my return
eighteen Swedes are settled there; and so sometimes sixteen Dutchmen do, in a
boat, trade without fear of them.

I saw there an infinite quantity of bustards, swans, geese and fowl, covering
the shores; as within, the like multitude of pigeons, and store of turkies; of
which I tried one to weigh forty-six pounds. There is much variety and plenty
of delicate fresh sea fish, and shell fish, and whales or grampus; elks, deer
that bring three young at a time, and the woods bestrewed many months with
chestnuts, walnuts and mast of several sorts, to seed them and hogs, that would
increase exceedingly. There the barren grounds have four kinds of grapes, and
many mulberries, with ash, elms, and the tallest and greatest pines and pitch
trees, that I have seen. There are cedars, cypress and sassafras, with wild
fruits, pears, wild-cherries, pine-apples, and the dainty Parsemenas; and there
is no question but Almonds, and other fruits of Spain, will prosper, as in
Virginia. And (which is a good comfort) in four and twenty hours, you may send,
or go by sea, to New England, or Virginia, with a fair wind; you may have
cattle, and from the Indians two thousand bushels of corn, at twelve pence a
bushel, in truck; so as victuals are there cheaper and better than to be
transported; neither do I conceive any great need of a fort, or charge, where
there is no enemy.

If my lord Palatine will bring with him three hundred men, or more, there is
no doubt, but he may do very well, and grow rich; for it is a most pure
healthful air, and such pure wholesome springs, rivers and waters, as are
delightful of a desert, as can be seen; with so many varieties of several
flowers, trees and forests, for swine; so many fair risings and prospects, all
green and verdant: and Maryland, a good friend and neighbor, in four and
twenty hours, ready to comfort and supply.

And truly (...) believe, my lord of Baltimore will be glad of my lord
Palatine's (...) ^on and assistance, against any enemy, or bad neighbor: and
if my lord Palatine employ some men to sow slax, hemp and rapes in these rich
marshes, or build ships, and make pipe staves, and load some ships with these
wares, or fish, from the northward, he may have any money, ware, or company,
brought him, by his own ships, or the ships of Virginia, or New England, all
the year.

And because your honor is of the noble house of the Pawlets, and, as I am
informed, desire to lead many of your friends and kindred thither, whom, as I
honor, I desire to serve, I shall entreat you to believe me, as a gentleman
and christian, I write to you nothing but the truth, and hope there to take
opportunity, in due season to visit you, and do all the good offices, in
Virginia, my place and friends can serve you in: And thus tendering my service,
I rest, madam, your honors most humble, faithful servant,

Robert Evelin.


"Now since master Elmes's letter, and seven years discoveries of the lord
governor in person, and by honest traders with the Indians, we find, beside the
Indian kings, by him known and printed, in this province, there are, in all
twenty-three Indian kings, or chief commanders, and besides the number of eight
hundred by him named, there are, at least, one thousand two hundred, under the
Raritan kings, on the north side, next to Hudson's river; and those come down
to the ocean, about Little-egg-bay, and Sandy Barnegate, and about the south
cape, two small kings of forty men a piece, called Tirans, or Tiascons; and a
third reduced to fourteen men, at Roymount: The Susquchannocks are not now, of
the naturals, left above one hundred and ten, though with their forced
auxiliaries, the Ihon-a-Does, and Wycomeses, they can make two hundred and
fifty; -- These together are counted valiant and terrible to other cowardly
dull Indians; which they beat with the sight of guns only."

"The eighth seat is Kildorpy, near the falls of Charles river, near two
hundred miles up from the ocean; it has clear fields to plant and sow; and
near it are sweet, large meads of Clover, or Huney-suckle, no where else in
America, to be seen, unless transported from Europe; a ship of one hundred and
forty tons may come up to these falls; which is the best seat for health, and a
trading house to be built on the rocks; and ten leagues higher are Lead-mines,
in stony hills."

"The ninth is called mount Ployden, the seat of the Raritan kings, on the
north side of this province, twenty miles from Sand-bay sea, and ninety from
the ocean, next to Amara-hill, the retired Paradise of the children of the
Ethiopian emperor, a wonder; for it is a square rock, two miles compass, one
hundred and fifty feet high, a wall-like precipice, a strait entrance, easily
made invinsible; where he keeps two hundred for his guard; and under it is a
flat valley, all plain, to plant and sow."

"The Susquehannock's new town is also a rare, healthy and rich place, with it
a crystal broad river; but some falls below hinder navigation; and the
Hook-hill, on the ocean, with its clear fields, near Hudson's river, on the
south side is much commended for health and fish, were it not so northerly."

"The bounds are one thousand miles compass, of this most temperate rich
province; for our south bound, is Marylands north bound; -- and beginning at
Aquats, or the southermost, or first cape of Delaware bay, in 38 degrees, 40
minutes, and so runs by, or through, or including Kent isle, through
Chesapeak bay, to Piscataway, including the falls of Petowmack river, to the
head, or northermost branch of that river, being three hundred miles due west;
and thence northward to the head of Hudson's river, fifty leagues; and so down
Hudson's river, to the ocean, sixty leagues, and thence to the ocean and isles
across Delaware bay, to the south cape, fifty leagues; in all seven hundred and
eighty miles. Then all Hudson's river, isles, Long-isle, or Pamunke, and all
isles within ten leagues of the said province being. And note, Long Island
alone is twenty miles broad, and one hundred and eighty long; so that alone is
four hundred miles compass. Now I have examined all former patents, some being
surrendered, and some adjudged void, as gotton on false suggestions; as, that
at the council table was, at master Gonges suit of Mantachusets; and, as
captain Clayborn, heretofore secretary, and now treasurer, of Virginia, in
dispute with master Leonard Calvert, alleges; that of Maryland is likewise
void, in part, as gotten on false suggestions; for, as captain Clayborn
shows, the Maryland patent, in the first part, declares the king's intention
to be, to grant a land, thereafter described, altogether dishabited and
unplanted, though possessed with Indians. Now Kent-isle was with many
households of English by captain C. Clayborn before seated; and because his
majesty, by his privy signet, shortly after declared, it was not his intention
to grant any lands before seated and habited: and for that it lies, by the
Maryland printed card, clean northward, within Albion, and not in Maryland: and
not only late seaman, but old Depositions, in Clayborn's hand, show it to be
out of Maryland: and for that, Albions privy signet is elder, and before
Maryland patent; Clayborn, by force, entered and thrust out master Calvert out
of Kent; next Maryland patent, coming to the ocean, says, along by the ocean,
upon Delaware bay; that is, the first cape of the two, most plain in view, and
expressed in all the late English and Dutch cards; and unto Delaware bay is not
into the bay, nor farther than the cape, heading the bay, being in 38 degrees,
40 minutes, or, at most, by seven observations I have seen, 38 degrees 50
minutes; so as undoubtedly, that is the true intended, and ground bound and
line, and further; for the words following are not words of grant, but words of
declaration, that is, Which Delaware-bay lies in 40 degrees, where New England
ends; these are both untrue, and so being declarative, as a false suggestion,
is void; for no part of Delaware bay lies in 40 degrees; now if there were but
the least doubt of these true bounds, I should wish, by consent, or commission,
and perambulation and boundary; not but there is land enough for all; and I
hold Kent-isle, having lately but twenty men in it, and tbe mill and fort
pulled down, and in war with all the Indians near it, is not worth the keeping."


which, from its pleasant appearance to them, they named Paradise-point. They
are said to have purchased of some Indians, the land from cape Inlopen, to the
falls of Delaware, on both sides of the river; which they called New-Swedeland
stream; and made presents to the Indian chiefs, to obtain peaceable possession
of the land so purchased: -- with whom they appear to have lived in much amity;
but they were frequently disturbed by the Dutch; who, in the year 1630, 1630.
built a fort within the capes of Delaware, at the place now called Lewis-town,
but then, and sometime since, Hoerkill; The Swedes and Dutch unite against the
English, etc.
-- But both they and the Dutch appear to have agreed so far together, as to
unite in expelling such English, as about this time, began to settle near, or
on the east side of Delaware, and to prevent them from coming among them.

In 1631, 1631. The Swedes erect a fort at Christeen etc.
the Swedes erected a fort on the west side of Delaware, at a place near
Wilmington, upon the river, or creek, which still, from the name of the fort,
is called Christina, or Christeen, where they had laid out a town, and made
their first settlement.

1631, etc. Swedish improvements.
On the island Tenecum, in the river Delaware, sixteen miles above this town,
they built a fort, which they called New Gottemburgh; here their Governor, John
Printz, had a fine settlement, which was named Printz's Hall; and on the same
island the principal settlers had their plantations. They had also other forts,
as at Chester, Elsingburg near Salem, etc.

1632. The first rise of the colony of Maryland.
On the twentieth of June 1632, the young lord Baltimore, Caecilius Calvert,
obtained from king Charles, a grant of the unoccupied part of Virginia, from
Potowmack river northward, including lands both on the east and west side of
Chesapeak; of which his father, Sir George Calvert, Secretary of state, had
before received a promise, but died before the grant was made out; the king
himself named it Maryland, in honor of his queen, Henrietta Maria.

1632. Situation and bounds of Maryland.
This province is situated between 37 and 40 degrees of north latitude, and
according to the words of the patent, -- It Is all that part of a Peninsula,
lying between the ocean on the east, and the bay of Chesapeak, on the west, and
divided from the other part, by a right line, drawn from the cape, called
Watkins's point, situated in the aforesaid bay, near the river Wighco, on the
west, unto the main ocean, on the east; and between that bound, on the south,
unto that part of Delaware bay, on the north, which lies under the fortieth
degree of north latitude, etc. and all that tract of land, from the aforesaid
bay of Delaware, in a right line, by the degree aforesaid, to the true meridian
of the first fountain of the river Potowmack, and from thence tending toward
the south, to the further bank of the aforesaid river, and following the west
and south side of it, to a certain place called Cinquack, situated near the
mouth of said river, where it falls into the bay of Chesapeak, and from thence
by a straight line, to the aforesaid cape, called Watkins's point, etc."

These are the bounds of Maryland, as expressed in the patent; -- concerning
which afterward there was so long a dispute between the Proprietaries of that
province, and of Pennsylvania; arising principally from the different
construction of the words, expressing the boundary between them, made by each
party, and of the intention of the said grant: for, first, the extent of land,
contained in the fortieth degree of latitude which was to be the north boundary
of Maryland, by charter, was afterward claimed by both provinces, as lying
entirely within each of their respective grants; which made a very material
difference.

Secondly, 1632. On the bounds between Maryland and Pennsylvania, etc.
That part of the western shore of Delaware, which appears to come within the
bounds of Lord Baltimore's grant, had, long before this time, been possessed
and inhabited by both Dutch and Swedes successively; and was claimed by the
former as a part of New Netherlands, and was then actually in possession of the
latter; whereas it appears manifest, both from the Maryland patent, and the
best documents, than only such lands were intended to be granted to the Lord
Baltimore, as were uncultivated, and uninhabited by any people except Indians.
-- But as this affair will be further mentioned in the following history of
Pennsylvania, I shall only observe, in this place, that, in consequence of this
grant, the following year, the said Lord Baltimore (being a Roman Catholic)
carried several hundred persons to his new colony, mostly Papists, that there
they might enjoy quietly the exercise of their religion. "The year 1632 (says
Anderson, before quoted) gave rise to the colony of Maryland, being a part of
what was then reckoned Virginia. Sir George Calvert, secretary of state, (he,
or his son, being afterward created lord Baltimore) having, in the years 1621
and 1622, obtained of king James, a grant of part of Newfoundland, he, some
time after, removed thither, with his family; but he soon found it to be one of
the worst countries, in the habitable world. Whereupon he returned back to
England, and, he being a conscientious Roman catholic, (says sir William Keith,
in his history of Virginia) was inclined to retire, with his family, to some
part of Virginia, there quietly to enjoy the free exercise of his religion; for
which purpose he went thither himself;" (in, or about the year 1631) "but being
discouraged by the universal dislike, which he perceiving the people of
Virginia had to the very name of a Papist, he left Virginia, and went further
up the bay of Cheaspeak; and finding there a very large tract of land,
commodiously watered with many fine rivers, and not yet planted by any
Christians, he returned for England, and represented to the king, that the
colony of Virginia had not, as yet, occupied any lands beyond the south bound
of Potowmack river; whereupon he obtained a promise of the king's grant, but
dying before it was made out, his son Caecilius took it out in his own name, on
the twentieth of June, 1632; the king himself naming it Maryland, in honor of
his queen, Henrietta Maria. It is held by the lords Baltimore of the crown, in
free and common sociage, as of the kings honor of wirdsor, yielding and paying
yearly for ever (if demanded) two Indian arrows; -- by which charter this lord
proprietary has as plenary, or sovereign, a power, as any in America; having
the sole right to all the quit rents of land therein, which he shall grant out
to his Land-holders; who, however, are empowered by the crown, to lay on all
proper taxes, etc. in their general courts, composed of their representatives
duly elected, and of the council: and the governor is always to be appointed by
the said lord proprietary, with the king's approbation, etc."


1654, etc. Of the Swedes on Delaware, Smith's history of New Jersey.
John Printz, continued Governor of the Swedes, on Delaware, from his arrival
till about the year 1654, when he returned to Sweden, having first deputed his
son-in-law, John Papegoia, Governor in his stead; who also, sometime after,
returned to his native country, and left the government to John Risingh.

It was during the administration of Printz, in in 1651, that the Dutch built
fort Casimir, now called New Castle on Delaware, This place, after it came into
the hands of the English, was sometimes called Delaware town.
against which he solemnly protested; and afterward Risingh took it from them
by stratagem. Smith's history of New York.
He likewise renewed the league of friendship with both the English and Dutch
in the neighborhood; and also with the Indians, at a meeting held with their
chiefs, for that purpose, at Printz's hall, on Tenecum Island.

The Indians had before complained, that the Swedes had introduced much evil
among them; in consequence of which they alleged, that many of the Indians,
since their coming were dead. But the Swedes, at this treaty, by making them
presents, and treating them kindly, Treaty between the Swedes and Indians.
removed their murmurings, renewed and fixed a more strict and permanent
friendship between them. Their chief, Noamen, expressed, -- "That as formerly
they had been but one body and one heart, they should be henceforward as one
head; -- It was concluded with mutual engagements to assist, and stand by each
other, in all future attempts, that should be made against either party. This
league, or agreement, is said to have been faithfully kept by the Indians.

But the Dutch, who, in the neighboring settlement, had before been
troublesome, to the Swedes, The Dutch reduce the Swedes on Delaware, etc.
in the year 1655, fitted out six or seven vessels, from New Amsterdam, with
six or seven hundred men; and, in the summer of this year, under the command of
their Governor, Peter Stuyvesant came up Delaware, and compelled the Swedes,
who were in an unprepared condition to oppose them, to deliver up their forts,
on terms. They destroyed New Gottemburg, with such houses as were without the
fort; plundering the inhabitants, and killing their cattle. The officers and
principal inhabitants among the Swedes, were carried prisoners to New
Amsterdam; and thence to Holland; but the common people, submitting to the
Dutch, remained in the country. Thus the Dutch became possessed again of that
part of the west side of Delaware bay, etc. sice called the Three lower
counties on Delaware.

Smith's history of New York.
This country was afterward under the command of Lieutenant Governors, subject
to the control of, and commissioned by, the Director General of New Amsterdam,
(now New York) John Paul Jacquet was the first Vice Director, or Lieutenant
Governor, of South River (now Delaware) his successors were Alricks, Hinojessa
and William Beekman.

1657, etc.
Ibid.
These Lieutenants had power to grant lands, and their patents made a part of
the ancient titles of the present possessors. Alricks's commission of the
twelfth of April, 1657, shows the extent of the Dutch claim, on the west side
of Delaware, at that time. He was appointed Director General of the Colony of
South river of New Netherlands, and the fortress of Casimir, Extent of the
Dutch claim on Delaware, etc.
now called Niewer Amstel, (New Castle) with all the lands depending thereon,
according to the first purchase and deed of release of the natives, dated July
nineteenth, 1651, beginning at the west side of the Minquaas, or Christina
Kill, in the Indian language, Suspecough, to the mouth of the bay, or river,
called Bompt-hook, in the Indian language, Canarasse; and so far inland as the
bounds and limits of the Minquaas land, with all the streams, etc.
appurtenances and dependencies."

Ibid.
"Of the country northward of the Kill no mention is made. In 1658, orders were
given to William Beekman, to purchase Cape Hinlopen from the natives; and to
settle and fortify it; which, for want of goods, was not done till the
succeeding year."

Lord Baltimore's claim on Delaware, etc.
"In the year, 1659, fresh troubles arose from the Maryland claim to the lands
on South river; and in September, Colonel Nathaniel Utie, as commissioner from
Fendal, Lord Baltimore's Governor, arrived at Niewer Amstel, from Maryland. The
country was ordered to be evacuated; Lord Baltimore claiming all the land
between 38 and 40 degrees of latitude, from sea to sea."

This claim of Lord Baltimore appears to have laid long undetermined, and, in
August, 1663, a ship arrived from Holland, at South river, with new planters,
ammunition and implements of husbandry. Lord Baltimore's son landed a little
after, and was entertained by Beckman, at Niewer Amstel. This was Charles, the
son of Caecilius, who, in 1661, had procured a grant and confirmation of the
patent passed in favor of his father in 1632. Impediments to the advancement of
Maryland, etc. Ibid.
The papistical principles of the Baltimore family, the charge of colonizing,
the parliamentary war with Charles the first, and Oliver's usurpation, all
conspired to impede the settlement of Maryland, till the year 1661, and these
considerations account for the extention of the Dutch limits on the west side
of Delaware."

Thus till the year 1664, New Sweden and New Netherland continued in
possession, and under the government, of the Dutch; who, about one hundred and
fifty miles up Hudson's or North river, at their fort Orange (now Albany) are
said, then to have carried on a very profitable trade with the Indians, even,
as far as Quebec.

King Charles the second, Grant of K. Charles the second to the Duke of York,
etc.
having no great regard for the Dutch, and being determined to prevent the
consequences, that might arise from a settlement of that nation, in the midst
of the British colonies, granted a patent to his brother James, Duke of York
and Albany, dated March twentieth, 1664, for sundry tracts of land, in America,
including what the Dutch claimed under the name of New Netherland, thus
described and bounded, Bounds of the grant.
viz. -- "All that part of the main land of New England, beginning at a certain
place, called, or known, by the name of St. Croix, next adjoining to New
Scotland, in America; and from thence extending along the sea coast unto a
certain place, Pemaquie, or Pemaquid, and so up the river thereof, to the
furthermost head of the same, as it tends northward; and extending from
thence to the river of Kimbequin, and so upwards, and by the shortest course to
the river Canada, northward: and also all that island, or islands, commonly
called by the several name or names, of Meitowacks, or Long Island, situate and
being toward the west of Cape Cod, and the narrow Higansetts, abutting upon
the main land, between the two rivers, there called or known by the several
names of Connecticut and Hudson rivers; and all the land from the west side of
Connecticut river to the east side of Delaware Bay; and also all those several
Islands called or known by the name of Martin's Vineyard or Nantucks, otherwise
Nantucket," etc.

Upon this Sir Robert Carr, joined in commission with Colonel Richard Nicolls,
George Cartwright and Samuel Maverick, were immediately sent with a small fleet
and some land forces, to put the Duke in possession of the country, which they
accordingly effected; for coming upon the Dutch at unawares, Reduced under the
British government.
and unprepared, they were obliged to surrender up the country, and their town
of New Amsterdam, Smith's history of New York, etc.
on North river; which was thence forward called New York, in honor of the Duke
of York.

"Cartwright was commissioned to subdue the Dutch, at fort Orange; the garrison
capitulated on the twenty-fourth of September, and he called it Albany, from
the Duke's Scotch title. While Cartwright was here, First league of friendship
with the Indians, etc.
he had an interview with the Indians of the Five nations, and entered into a
league of friendship with them, which remarkably continues to this day."

Inhabitants on Delaware reduced, etc.
The commissioners likewise sent Sir Robert Carr, with the ships under his
command, to reduce the inhabitants on Delaware bay and river; which he effected
without much difficulty; for, on his arrival at New Amstel (New Castle) the
Dutch and Swedes, on the first of October, 1664, capitulated and surrendered
their fort; six of the principal persons among them signing articles of
agreement and submission to the British government. These articles were as
follow, viz.

"ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT between the honorable Sir Robert Carr, knight, on
behalf of his majesty of Great Britain, and the Burgo Masters, on behalf of
themselves and all the Dutch and Swedes, inhabitants on Delaware bay, and
Delaware river.

1. "That all Burgesses and Planters will submit themselves to his Majesty
without any resistance.

2. "That whoever, or what nation soever, does submit to his Majesty's
authority, shall be protected in their estates, real and personal whatsoever,
by his Majesty's laws and justice.

3. "That the present Magistrates shall be continued in their offices and
jurisdictions, to exercise their civil power as formerly.

4. "That if any Dutchman, or other person, shall desire to depart from this
river, it shall be lawful for him so to do, with his goods, within six months
after the date of these articles.

5. "That the Magistrates, and all the inhabitants (who are included in these
articles) shall take the oaths of allegiance to his Majesty.

6. "That all people shall enjoy the liberty of their consciences, in Church
discipline, as formerly.

7. "That whoever shall take the oaths, is, from that time, a free denizen, and
shall enjoy all the privileges of trading into any of his Majesty's dominions,
as freely as any Englishman, and may require a certificate for so doing.

8. "That the Schout, the Burgo Master, Sheriff and other inferior Magistrates
shall use and exercise their customary power, in administration of justice,
within their precincts, for six months, or until his Majesty's pleasure is
further known.

"Dated October 1st. 1664."




"The English being now possessed of all the country of New Netherland, 1664.
English government at New York, and on Delaware.
Colonel Richard Nicolls took the government upon him, with the style of Deputy
Governor, under the Duke of York, of all his territories in America:" -- very
few of the inhabitants chose to remove out of the country; and Governor
Stuyvesant himself held his estate and died in it.

In the latter end of October, Smith's history of New Jersey.
affairs being in a quiet situation at New York, Nicolls was commissioned by
Cartwright and Maverick, to repair to Delaware bay, for the government of that
place, by deputing such officers, civil and military, and for taking such other
measures, as he should think proper, till the King's pleasure should be further
known. In which situation, affairs in this quarter, remained till the year
1668; when Nicolls and his Council, at New York, gave further directions, for a
better settlement of the government on Delaware, which appears, at that time,
to have been principally administered by Carr; who resided on the place. These
directions were: --

"That it is necessary to hold up the name and countenance of a garrison, in
Delaware, with twenty men, and one commission officer.

"That the commission officer shall undertake to provide all sorts of
provisions for the whole garrison, at the rate of five pence per day, viz.
wholesome bread, beer, pease, or beef, that no just complaint be made of
either; that the soldiers (so far as conveniently may be) be lodged in the
fort, and keep the stockades up, in defense; that the civil government, in the
respective plantations, be continued till further orders.

"That, to prevent all abuses, or oppositions, in civil Magistrates, so often
as complaint is made, the commission officer, captain Carr, shall call the
Schout, with Hans Block, Israel Holme, Peter Rambo, Peter Cock, Peter Aldrick,
or any two of them, as counselors, to advise and determine, by the major vote,
what is just, equitable and necessary, in the case and cases, in question.

"That the same persons also, or any two or more of them, be called to advise
and direct what is best to be done in all cases of difficulty, which may arise
from the Indians, and to give their council and orders, for the arming of the
several plantations and planters, who must obey and attend their summons upon
such occasion.

"That two-thirds, at least, of the soldiers remain constantly in and about
Newcastle at all hours.

"That the fines or premunires, and light offenses be executed with moderation;
though it is also necessary that ill men be punished, in an exemplary manner.

"That the commission officer captain Carr, in the determination of civil
affairs, whereunto the temporary, before mentioned, counselors are ordered,
shall have a casting voice, where votes are equal.

"That the new appointed counselors are to take the oath to his Royal Highness.

"That the laws of the government, established by his Royal Highness be showed,
and frequently communicated to the said counselors, and all others, to the end
that, being therewith acquainted, the practice of them may also, in convenient
time, be established: which conduces to the public welfare and common justice.

"That no offensive war be made against any Indians, before you receive
directions from the government for so doing.

"That in all matters of difficulty and importance, you must have recourse, by
way of appeal, to the Governor and Council at New York.




The Duke of York, having been thus seized of all that tract of land, before
described, did, First rise, extent and bounds of New Jersey.
by his deeds of lease and release, bearing date the 23d. and 24th. days of
June 1664, in consideration of a competent sum of money, grant and convey a
part thereof, unto John, Lord Berkeley, Baron of Stratton, and Sir George
Carteret, of Saltrum, in Devon; who were then members of the King's Council,
and to their heirs and assigns forever, bounded and described as follows: --
"All that tract of land adjacent to New England, and lying and being to the
westward of Long Island, and Manhatta's-Island, and bounded, on the east, part
by the main sea, and part by Hudson's river; and has upon the West, Delaware
bay, or river; and extends southward to the main ocean, as far as cape May,
at the mouth of Delaware bay; and to the northward, as far as the northermost
branch of the said bay, or river, of Delaware, which is in 41 degrees, 40
minutes of latitude, and crosses over thence, in a straight line, to Hudson's
river, in 41 degrees, of latitude, which said tract of land is hereafter to be
called Nova Caesaria, or New Jersey," etc. "in as full and ample manner as the
same is granted unto the said Duke of York, by the before recited letters
patent."

Thus New Netherland became divided into New Jersey and New York;
New-Netherland divided into New Jersey and New York.
the former named from the isle of Jersey, in compliment to Sir George
Carteret, whose family came from thence; the latter took its name in honor of
James Duke of York.

Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret, Smith's history of New Jersey.
having agreed upon certain constitutions or concessions, to such adventurers
as should choose to settle within their grant, (which was the first constitution
of New Jersey, These concessions, or constitutions, may be seen in the appendix
to Smith's history of New Jersey, No 1.
) appointed Philip Carteret, the first Governor; who arrived in the latter part
of the summer, 1665; and these concessions or agreements with the people, were
so well liked by them, that the eastern parts of the province were soon
considerably peopled. In this situation the constitution and government
continued till the year 1676, when the province was divided into East and West
New Jersey.

After a prudent administration of three years Nicolls returned to England; and
colonel Francis Lovelace was appointed, by the Duke, to succeed Nicolls, in the
government of New York; which he began to exercise in May, 1667. 1667.
During his time affairs appear to have been in a tranquil situation, on
Delaware, till about the year 1668; when a disturbance happened from some of
the tribe of Mantas Indians, nigh the river, about the place where Burlington
now stands, who had murdered the servants of one of the settlers.

Transactions on Delaware respecting the Indians, etc.
This appears to have been the consequence of drunkenness; by reason of the
Indians themselves thereupon requesting an absolute prohibition, upon the whole
river, of selling strong liquors to the Indians generally. Such were the early
effects of strong liquor among this people; which ever since has been so
ruinous and fatal to them; and so frequently the source of pernicious evils to
the European settlers, near them. Their ignorance of the nature and effects of
drunkenness, to which at first they were absolute strangers, rendered them less
prepared to resist the temptation; and the extreme effects of madness, arising
from intoxication, in a savage state, were consequently more unrestrained and
brutish; and, when enraged, more shocking and barbarous than among civilized
people: -- nevertheless, this request of an absolute prohibition of the sale of
strong liquors among them, shows their sense of the introduction of the
temptation, their weakness to resist it, and the best means, with them, to
avoid the pernicious consequences of it; which request, afterward was, from
time to time, frequently and earnestly repeated by the different nations, in
these parts, before they were much corrupted by this, and other European vices.

Human nature, 1668.
when destitute of a good education, and those benefits, Why the Indians are so
prone to drunkenness, etc.
which arise from a wise and early institution in the best knowledge and
customs, being the more prone to imbibe and indulge low, immediate and sensual
gratifications, than when it is aided by these excellent advantages; which
teach to aspire after and pursue the more exalted and arduous paths of virtue
and self-denial; views, which, as well as the present, also respect a future
more high and lasting felicity, so far above the untutored ideas of savages, is
a consideration, that may, in part, account for the greater depravity of the
Indians, respecting this vice of drunkenness, than is to be found among other
people.

These Indians, along the Delaware, Since the Europeans came among them.
and the adjacent parts of New Jersey and Pennsylvania, so far as appears by
the best accounts of the early settlement of these provinces, when clear of the
effects of the pernicious poison of strong liquor, and before they had much
imbibed, and to their own natural depravity added, such European vices as
before they were strangers to, were naturally, and in general, an inoffensive,
faithful and hospitable people.

Governor Lovelace writ to Carr, Governor Lovelace gives directions to Carr,
etc.
respecting this affair; giving him directions how to proceed in the government
both of Christians and Indians; to consult with the Indians, and to send the
state of the affair to the council at New York. But it appears to have been
afterward neglected till the year 1671, when William Tomm and Peter Alricks
arrived at New York from Delaware, with the particulars of the affair;
declaring that if special care was not taken, and effectual means used, the
worst consequences would ensue.

Upon this the Governor and Council immediately took measures to prevent
further mischief; and from Alrick's advice, made proper dispositions to bring
the offenders to justice: -- The Governor prohibited, on pain of death, the
selling of powder, shot, and strong liquors to the Indians; and writ to Carr,
on the occasion, to use the utmost vigilance and caution.

Remarkable act of Justice among the Indians.
But the Indians themselves were determined, if possible, to bring the murderers
to justice; and and accordingly one of them Tashiowycan, the chief offender,
was shot to death, in the night by the Indians, who brought his body to
Wicocoa; which was afterward hung in chains at New Castle; the other principal
person, concerned in the murder, hearing the report of the gun, ran into the
woods, and made his escape, not being heard of afterward.

The Indians, on this affair, summoned many of their young men together, and,
in the presence of the English, told them, that all should in like manner be
treated, who should be found in the like practice: -- This, at a time, when the
Indians were numerous and strong, and the Europeans few and weak, was a
memorable act of justice, and a proof of true friendship to the English,
greatly alleviating the fear, for which they had so much reason among savages,
in this then wilderness country.

Other disturbances on Delaware, etc.
Beside this, there was another disturbance, about the same time; a Swede, at
Delaware, who gave out that he was the son of Conningsmarke, the Swedish
general, attempted to make an insurrection, in order to throw off the English
allegiance. With him was associated Henry Coleman, one of the Fins, on the same
river, a man of property, and who well understood the Indian language. But by
the timely care and vigilance of the government their intention was prevented.
The former was taken and secured; as to the latter, who kept himself among the
Indians, it does not appear what became of him. Conningsmarke, commonly called
the Long Fin, was condemned to die; but, in consideration that his death would
involve many other deluded people in deep suffering, his punishment was
mitigated to a whipping, and branding with the letter R. for Rebellion, and to
be sent abroad. He was accordingly brought fettered from Delaware, and kept
prisoner in the Stadt-house, at New York, for one year, and then transported to
Barbados, for sale. It was further ordered, that the chief of his accomplices
should forfeit to the King one half of their goods and chattels; and a smaller
mulct to be laid on the rest; to be left at the discretion of Commissioners,
appointed to examine the matter.

At this time there is likewise an account of an Indian rape, committed on a
Christian woman. The Indian was taken and condemned to death by by the
Commissioners at Delaware; but he broke jail. -- And one Douglas at Hoarkill,
after this, for making a disturbance among the new settlers, by seditious
practices, was secured in jail, and afterward sent to New York, where he had
his trial; and was sent to the eastward, and ordered not to return.

Near the beginning of the year 1669, 1669.
a commission and letters of instruction were sent from New York, to the
Hoarkill, Further proceedings on Delaware, etc.
authorizing Hermannus Frederickson to be Schout, Slander Matson, Otto Walgast,
and William Cleason, to be Commissioners: who were to keep good order there;
and to try all matters of difference, under ten pounds, among themselves: --
Which seems to have been intended to save them the trouble of going to
Newcastle, upon every trifling occasion; but for all matters above ten pounds
they were to apply themselves to New York; and so for all criminals. Governor
Lovelace also gave an order to captain Martin Prieger, to receive the customs,
for all European goods, imported at the Hoarkill, and on the furs and peltry
exported from thence, viz. ten pounds per cent. in the following words:

1669. Appointment of Collector, etc. at Hoarkill, or Lewistown.
"Whereas I am given to understand, that all European goods imported at the
Hoarkill in Delaware bay, did heretofore pay custom, at the rate of ten pounds
per cent. and all furs and peltry exported from thence, at the same rate; which
turned to some advantage toward the support of government; upon mature advice
and consideration had thereof, I have thought fit to renew the former custom,
and do, therefore, hereby order and appoint Captain Martin Prieger, who is a
person well versed in the trade of those parts, and very well known there, both
to the Christians and Indians, to be Receiver and Collector of the customs at
Hoarkill; where, by himself, or his deputy, he is to receive ten per cent. of
all European goods, imported there, whether coming from this place, Newcastle
in Delaware, or any other parts; and ten per cent. also for all furs, or
peltry, exported from thence, according to former custom and usage, on that
behalf; and all persons whatsoever, trading thither, or from thence, to any
other place, are to take notice thereof, and obey this my commission, under the
penalty of confiscation of their goods, if they shall presume to do otherwise.
^he said Captain Prieger standing obliged to (...) answerable here, for all
such customs, as shall be received by himself, or deputy, there; of which he is
to render unto me a due and exact account." Hoarkill, the settlement so called,
from a small river, or creek, near Cape-Inlopen, or Henlopen, at the mouth of
Delaware bay, was a place of considerable importance to the Swedes, about that
time, though since chiefly become a residence for pilots only, and called
Lewis-town; before which, at the entrance of the bay, is the road, for ships,
etc.

This place (from an old M. S.) is said to have been named Hoarkill by the
Dutch, from the Indians prostituting their young women to the Netherlanders: --
otherwise it is by David Piertersz de Uries, who, about the year, 1630, first
endeavored to settle there, called Swanendale.

Other accounts affirm, That the original of the name arose from the winding
and turning of the creek, much in the shape of a horn, whence the Dutch word,
Hoarnkill: -- This is the tradition of the inhabitants there, etc. But soon
after it came into the hands of the English, it took the above name of
Lewis-town: -- and the creek appears to be much diminished, etc.




In the Spring of the year 1672, 1672. New Castle incorporated.
the town of Newcastle was, by the government of New York, made a corporation;
to be governed by a Bailiff, and six Associates; after the first year four old
to go out, and four others to be chosen. Smith's history of N. Jersey.
The Bailiff was President, and had a double vote: the Constable was chosen by
the bench. They had power to try causes, as far as ten pounds, without appeal.
The English laws were established in the town, and among the inhabitants, on
both sides of Delaware. The office of Schout was converted into that of
Sheriff, for the Corporation and river, annually chosen. And they were to have
free trade, without being obliged to make entry at New York, as before.

About this time an act of violence was committed, at Hoarkill, The Marylanders
disturb the inhabitants at Hoarkill.
by a party of people from Maryland, led by one Jones; who seized on the
Magistrates and other inhabitants, plundered them and carried off the booty.
They were joined by one Daniel Brown, a planter of Hoarkill. Brown was taken,
and sent to New York; and there tried and convicted; but, on promise of
amendment, and security given for his good behavior in future, he was
dismissed.

Governor Lovelace wrote a spirited letter to the Governor of Maryland, on the
occasion, Governor Lovelace's conduct on the occasion.
complaining of the outrage and injustice, and requesting that the perpetrators
might be duly punished. He likewise writ to Captain Carr, who presided at
Delaware, on the same affair, advising him, for the present, to pass by what
was done, till he heard from England; but in the mean time, that the
inhabitants there should prepare, and put themselves in a posture of defense
against any future similar invasion. The first of these letters is dated the
twelth of August 1672, and is as follows, viz.

To Philip Calvert, Esquire, Governor of Maryland.
SIR,
I thought it had been impossible, now in these portending beisterous times,
wherein all true hearted Englishmen are buckling on their armor, to vindicate
their honors, and to assert the imperial interest of his sacred Majesty's
rights and dominions; that now, without any just grounds, either given or
pretended, such horrid outrages should be committed on his majesty's liege
subjects, under the protection of his Royal Highness's authority, as was
exercised by one Jones; who, with a party, as dissolute as himself, took the
pains to ride to the Hoarkills, where in derision and contempt of the Duke's
authority, he bound the Magistrates and inhabitants, despitefully treated them,
rifled and plundered them of their goods; and when it was demanded, by what
authority he acted, he answered in no other language, but a cocked pistol to
his brea^^ which if it had spoke, had, for ever silenced him. I do not remember
I have heard of a greater outrage and riot, committed on his Majesty's
subjects, in America, but once before in Maryland; You cannot but imagine his
Royal Highness will not be satisfied with these violent proceedings; in which
the indignity rebounds on him; neither can you but believe it as easy an
undertaking to me, to retaliate the same affront on Jones's head, and
accomplices, as he did on those indefensible inhabitants: but I rather choose to
have first a more calm redress from you; to whom I now appeal, and from whom I
may, in justice, expect that right, in the castigation of Jones cum sociis,
that your nature and the law has provided for; otherwise I must apply myself to
such other remedies, as the exigence of this indignity shall persuade me to;
thus, leaving it to your consideration, I shall remain your very humble servant,

Fr. Lovelace.


The following is his letter to Carr, on the same occasion, viz.

SIR,
The letters you sent me, by the express over laud, came safe to my hands, with
the enclosed relation and papers, concerning the Hoarkill, and the Marylanders
forceably possessing themselves of the place; as also of the goods and estates
of some of the inhabitants; of which we had some rumors before, but did not
give much credit to it; supposing what was done before to be the rash action of
some private person, not thinking the authority of Maryland would invade his
royal highness's territories; which he has been possessed of for near eight
years, without giving the least overture of it to me, who am his Royal
Highness's deputy. Their former violent action and force upon those poor
unarmed people, together with the particulars of their plunders, I had
immediate opportunity of transmitting to his Royal Highness, by a ship then
bound away for London; the which I made use of, and recommended their case; and
I hope, it has long ere this arrived at his hands, so that some directions,
about it, may be expected in a short time; till when, I think it best, for the
present, to leave matters there as they are; but, as to the cloud, which hangs
over your heads, at Delaware, which, it is said, they are making preparations
to invade, my instructions and orders to you, and the officers in general, are,
that you put yourselves in the best posture of defense possibly you can, by
fitting up the fort in the town; keeping your companies in arms, both there and
up the river; who are to provide themselves with fitting ammunition; and that
all soldiers be at an hours warning, upon any alarm, or order given; and that,
at the town especially, you make your guards as strong as you can, and keep a
strict watch; and if any enemy come to demand the place, that you first desire
to know their authority and commission, and how it comes to pass those of
Maryland should now make such an invasion, after so long quiet possession of
those parts by his Royal Highness's Deputies, under his Majesty's obedience,
and by other nations before that, several years before the date of the Lord
Baltimore's patent; whom they never disturbed by arms; and whose right is now
devolved upon the Duke. Stand well upon your guard, and do not begin with them;
but, if they first break the peace, by firing upon your guards, or any such
hostile action, then use all possible means to defend yourselves and the place;
and command all his Majesty's good subjects to be aiding and assisting to you;
who, I hope, will not be wanting to their abilities. In all matters of concern,
you are to take advice of the chief officers there.

This will come to you by your Bailiff, Mr. Peter Alricks, who is hastening
over land, to secure his affairs there, in this portending invasion, and to
give his best help for the safeguard of the place, and his Royal Highness's
interest, upon all occasions. Fail not to send an express to me, by whom I
shall give you such further directions and assistance as will be requisite;
and, if occasion should be, will come over myself in person; though the spring
would be more suitable for me, than a winter voyage; so recommending all things
to your care and vigilance, of which I expect a good account, I conclude, being
your very loving friend,

Francis Lovelace,
Fort James, in New York, this 7th. of October, 1672.




In this year the inhabitants of New Castle and Hoarkill, Dutch privateers, etc.
being likewise plundered by the Dutch privateers, were permitted by the
government at New York, in reparation of their losses, to lay an imposition to
the value of four guilders, in Wampum, upon each anchor of strong rum, imported,
or sold there; power being given to the Magistrates, to levy and receive the
same. This was to continue only one year for trial -- Wampum was the chief
currency of the country; of which, at this time, Wampum their chief currency.
etc.
the Indians had carried so much away, that it was become scarce. To increase
the value of which, the Governor and Council, at New York, in the year 1673,
issued a proclamation; which was published at Albany, Esopus, Delaware,
Long Island, and parts adjacent. "This is the Indian money, by them called
Wampum; by the Dutch S^want. It is worked out of shells, into the form of
beads, and perforated to string on leather. Six beads were formerly valued at a
Stiver; twenty Stivers made what they called a Guilder; which was about
sixpence currency, or four pence, sterling. The white Wampum was worked out of
the inside of the great Conques. The black, or purple was formed out of the
inside of the Musile, or Clam-shell. These, being strung on leather, are
sometimes formed into belts, about four inches broad, and thirty in length;
which are commonly given and received at treaties, at seals of friendship. --
Wampum has been long made by certain poor Indian families at Albany; who
support themselves by coming this cash for the traders."


The ambitious designs of Lewis the XIVth. king of France, 1673. New York etc.
taken by the Dutch.
against the Dutch, and the attachment of Charles the IId. of England, to the
French court, gave rise to the war with the States General in 1672; which, in
the summer of the next following year, Smith's history of N. York.
extended itself to America; when a few Dutch ships arrived at New York, under
the command of Commodores Cornelius Evertse and Jacob Benkes etc. The fort
surrendered without any resistance, all the magistrates and constables from
East Jersey, Long Island, Esopus and Albany were immediately summoned to
New York, and the major part of them swore allegiance to the States General and
the prince of Orange, upon which colonel Lovelace returned to England.

From the Dutch records it appears that deputies were sent by the people,
inhabiting the country, even, as far westward as Delaware river; who in the
name of their principals, made a declaration of their submission; in return for
which certain privileges were granted them, and three judicatories erected at
Niewer Amstel, (New Cast) Upland (Chester) and Hoarkill, (Lewistown) under
Anthony Colve, who was commissioned Governor. Colve's commission, translated as
follows, shows the extent of the Dutch claim, at that time in this country, viz.

"The honorable and awful council of war, for their High Mightinesses, the
States General of the United Netherlands and his Serene Highness the Prince of
Orange, over a squadron of ships, now at anchor in Hudson's river, in New
Netherlands; to all those who shall see or hear these Greeting. As it is
necessary to appoint a fit and able person to carry the chief command over the
conquest of New Netherlands, with all its appendencies, from cape Hinlopen on
the south side of the South or Delaware bay, and fifteen miles more southerly,
with the said bay and South river, included, so as they were formerly possessed
by the directors of the city of Amsterdam, and after by the English government,
in the name and right of the Duke of York, and further from the said Cape
Hinlopen along the Great Ocean to the east end of Long Island and Shelter
Island, from thence westward to the middle of the sound, to a town called
Greenwich, on the Main, and to run landward in northerly; provided that such
line shall not come within ten miles of North River, conformable to a
Provincial Treaty, made in 1650, and ratified by the States General, February
22d. 1656, and January 23d. 1664; with all Lands, Rivers, Lakes, Kills, Creeks,
Fresh and Salt Waters, Fortresses, Cities, Towns and Plantations, therein
comprehended. So it is, that we, being sufficiently assured of the capacity of
Anthony Colve, captain of a company of foot, in the service of their High
Mightinesses, the States General of the United Netherlands, and his Serene
Highness the Prince of Orange, etc. by virtue of our Commission, granted us by
their before mentioned High Mightinesses, and his Highness, have appointed and
qualified, as we do by these presents, appoint and qualify, the said captain
Anthony Colve to govern and rule the lands, with the appendencies and
dependencies thereof as Governor General; to protect them from all invasions of
enemies, as he shall judge most necessary; hereby charging all high and low
officers, justices and magistrates, and others in authority, soldiers,
burghers, and all the inhabitants of this land to acknowledge, honor, respect
and obey, the said Anthony Colve, as Governor General; for such we judge
necessary for the service of the country, waiting the approbation of our
principals. This done at fort William Hendrisk, the 12th. day of August, 1673."

Signed by CORNELUIS EVERTSE, junior. JACOB BENKES.





The Dutch Governor enjoyed his office but a short time; for, on the 9th. of
February 1674, 1674. By the peace, New York, etc. is restored to the English,
etc.
the treaty of peace between England and the States General was signed at
Westminster; the sixth article of which restored this country to the English;
the terms of it were generally, "that whatsoever countries, islands, towns,
ports, castles or forts, have or shall be taken, on both sides, since the time
that the late unhappy war broke out, either in Europe, or elsewhere, shall be
restored to the former Lord and Proprietor, in the same condition, they shall
be in, when the peace itself shall be proclaimed; after which time there shall
be no spoil nor plunder of the inhabitants, no demolition of fortifications,
nor carrying away of guns, powder or other military stores, which belonged to
any castle or fort, at the time when it was taken."

Edm. Andross, appointed Governor of New York, etc.
Upon conclusion of the peace, in 1674, the Duke of York, to remove all
controversy respecting his property, obtained a new patent from the King, dated
the 29th. of June, for the lands granted, in 1664; and two days after
commissioned Major, afterward, Sir Edmund Andross to be Governor of his
territories in America; which were resigned to him by the Dutch possessors, on
his arrival at New York, on the 31st. of October following. Upon which he
authorized captain Cantwell and William Tomm, to take possession of the fort
and stores at Newcastle, for the King's use; and gave them directions to take
proper measures to establish order and tranquillity there, and the other places
on Delaware; enjoining all to comport themselves amicably to the neighboring
colonies.

Of West-New-Jersey, etc.
W. Penn concerned in the settlement of West-New-Jersey, etc.
As West New Jersey was, at first, settled principally by the same kind of
people as Pennsylvania, was afterward, viz. by the people called Quakers, so a
short introductory account of the first and early settlement of that colony by
these people, etc. in which likewise William Penn was so much concerned may, in
this place, not be improper.

1675. Lord Berkeley fells West-Jersey, etc.
In or about the year 1675, the Lord Berkeley sold his half of the Province of
New Jersey to a person named John Fenwicke, in trust for Edward Byllinge, and
his assigns, in consequence of which the former, this year, arrived with a
number of passengers, in a ship, called the Griffith from London, on a visit to
his new purchase. Both Fenwicke and Byllinge are said to have been of the
people called Quakers; respecting whose particular characters, nothing very
material appears. -- Fenwicke brought with him two daughters, and many
servants: -- two of the latter, viz. Samuel Hodge and John Adams afterward
married his daughters. Some of the others in this ship, were Edmund Champness,
Fenwicke's son in law, Edward Wade, Samuel Wade, John Smith and wife, Samuel
Nicholson, Richard Guy, Richard Noble, Richard Hancock, John Pledger, Hipolite
Lufever, and John Matlack; these, and others with them, were masters of
families.
He landed at a place, in West Jersey, situated upon a creek, or small river,
which runs into the river Delaware; to which place he gave the name of Salem; a
name which both the place and creek still retain. This was the first English
ship, which came to West-Jersey; First English ship arrives at W. Jersey.
and it was near two years before any more followed: This long interval is
supposed to have occasioned by a disagreement between Fenwicke and Byllinge;
which was at last composed by the kind offices of William Penn.

Byllinge, having been reduced in his circumstances, had agreed to present his
interest, in New Jersey, to his creditors; by whose entreaty and importunity,
William Penn, though it is said, with reluctance, was prevailed upon to become
joint trustee with two of them, viz. Gawen Lawrie, Names of the proprietors.
of London, and Nicholas Lucas, of Hertford, for the management thereof: These
he invested with his own moiety of the province; it being all his remaining
fortune, for the satisfaction of his creditors.

Hence William Penn became one of the chief instruments in settling
West-New-Jersey; 1675.
and thereby acquired some knowledge of the adjacent country of Pennsylvania,
before it had that name, or was granted to him. And though New Jersey was still
undivided, yet, from necessity, many shares of their propriety were soon sold
to different purchasers; who consequently also became proprietors, in
proportion to their different shares.

For the better promoting the distribution of rights to lands, an orderly
settlement, 1676. Proceedings respecting W. N. Jersey.
and a regular government of the colony, in March, 1676, a constitution was
drawn up, under the name of, "Concessions and agreements of the proprietors,
freeholders and inhabitants of West-New-Jersey, in America," in 44 chapters;
this was mutually agreed to, and signed, as laws, concessions and agreements,
by 162 names; and may be seen in the appendix to S. Smith's history of
New Jersey.

William Penn and the others, having agreed on a division of the province with
Sir George Carteret, Division of New Jersey, into East and West, etc.
a Quintipartite deed, the instrument for dividing the same, between Sir George
Carteret, on the one part, and Edward Byllinge, William Penn, Gawen Lawrie and
Nicholas Lucas, on the other part, was signed by them, dated the first day of
July, 1676. After which the latter wrote to Richard Hartshorne, Richard
Hartshorne lived in Middletown, in East-Jersey; he was one of the people called
Quakers, of good reputation, public character, and of a benevolent disposition,
in those early times. He came thither from London, in the seventh month, old
style, 1669; where he lived many years. There are several of his descendants,
still inhabitants of these parts.
a resident in the province, requesting his consent to be joined in commission
with two others, James Wasse and Richard Guy; whom they authorized and
empowered to act for them, furnishing them with instructions for their conduct,
and engaged to ratify and confirm their proceedings, in prosecution of the
same. In their letter to Hartshorne, dated, London, the 26th. of the sixth
month, 1676, they say,

Extract of the proprietor's letter to R. Hartshorne.
1. "We have divided with George Carteret; and have sealed deeds of partition,
each to the other; and we have all that side on Delaware river, from one end to
the other; the line of partition is from the east side of Little Egg Harbor,
straight North, through the country, to the utmost branch of Delaware river;
with all powers, privileges and immunities whatsoever:" -- "Ours is called New
West Jersey; his is called New East Jersey. The division line between East and
West-Jersey, as it was afterward run and marked out, about the year 1687, and
agreed to, in the next following year, by Coxe and Barclay, the respective
Governors of each division, more particularly, proceeded from Little Egg
Harbor, N. by W. and 30 degrees and 5 minutes more westerly 60 miles, to the
corner of John Dobie's plantation, on the south branch of Raritan river; from
thence continuing behind that and other plantations, to that of James Dundas:
It proceeded from the most north westerly part thereof, north-eastward, to the
north branch of said river; thence by the largest branch thereof, to its north
end; from thence to the nearest part of Pasaick river; whence following its
course, and that of Paquanick river, so long as it runs northerly, or
northwesterly; those rivers still being the bounds between both provinces; and
if the latter do not run far enough to the latitude of 41 degrees, then from
said river, by a straight line northward to the latitude, the utmost north
partition point, from which point, a straight line drawn due east, to the
partition point, on Hudson's river, to be the boundary between East-Jersey and
New York."

S. Smith's history of New Jersey.


2. "We have made concessions by ourselves; being such as Friends here, and
there (we question not) will approve of, having sent a copy of them by James
Wasse: There we lay a foundation for after ages to understand their liberty, as
men and christians; that they may not be brought into bondage, but by their own
consent: for we put the power in the people; that is to say, They to meet, and
choose one honest man, for each propriety, who has subscribed to the
concessions; all these men to meet, as an Assembly there, to make and repeal
laws; to choose a Governor, or a Commissioner, and twelve Assistants, to execute
the laws during their pleasure. So every man is capable to choose, or to be
chosen; no man to be arrested, condemned, imprisoned, or molested, in his
estate, or liberty, but by twelve men of the neighborhood: no man to lie in
prison for debt; but that his estate satisfy, as far as it will go, and he be
set at liberty, to work: no man to be called in question, or molested for his
conscience; with many more things mentioned in the said concessions.

3. "We have sent over, by James Wasse, a commission, under our hands and
seals; wherein we empower thyself, James Wasse and Richard Guy, or any two of
you, to act and do according to the instructions, of which here is a copy;
having also sent you goods, to buy and purchase some lands of the natives," etc.

The rest of this letter chiefly respected John Fenwicke; who, as they
apprehended, might probably endeavor to obstrust their mode of proceeding, in
settling the colony; that the Commissioners should immediately agree with the
Indians for lands, and get them surveyed and taken up, before many more people
arrived, and the price thereby advanced. The instructions were dated the 18th.
of the Sixth month, and purported the method of treating with John Fenwicke;
the mode of taking up lands of the natives; -- Which was all to be divided into
one hundred parts, as agreed in England, and lots to be cast for the same; viz.
ninety parts, for the use of William Penn, Gawen Lawrie and Nicholas Lucas; and
ten parts for John Edridge and Edmond Warner, Fenwicke's heirs; To these two
persons the said ten parts had been conveyed by Fenwicke; being together with a
certain sum of money, the proportion, or satisfaction, agreed on between him
and Byllinge, and conveyed to him by the latter, for his service and trouble,
in the concern.
and to provide a place for the settlement of a town, etc. The former was
signed by Lawrie, Penn, Lucas, Byllinge, Edridge and Warner; the latter, by all
these, except Edridge.

East-Jersey, which was the property of Sir George Carteret, had, before this
time, been considerably peopled, under its Governor, Philip Carteret, as
already mentioned, in the year 1665; so upon the division of the province being
now settled, in the present year 1676, the proprietors of West-New-Jersey
published a description of the country; in consequence of which many people
removed thither.

Proprietors of West-Jersey were Quakers.
But the western proprietors being of the people called Quakers, their part of
the province consequently, through their influence, became settled principally
by the same kind of people; but to prevent any of their religious society from
rashly, or inadvertently, removing into this new country, or without due
consideration, and contrary to the mind of their parents and nearest relatives,
three of the principal persons among the proprietors, viz. W. Penn, G. Lawrie
and N. Lucas, wrote an epistle, of caution to their friends, the Quakers;
which, Their concern for an orderly settlement, etc.
as it further shows their right to this part of the province, the care of that
people over one another, at that time, and their concern for an orderly
settlement in it; that none might be deceived, and have occasion to repent of
such an important undertaking, is not unworthy of the perusal of the posterity
and descendants of those early adventurers, settlers and cultivators of the
country. This epistle was as follows, viz.

Dear friends and Brethren,
In the pure love and precious fellowship of our Lord Jesus Christ we very
dearly salute you; -- Forasmuch as there was a paper printed several months
ago, entitled, "The description of New-West-Jersey, in which our names were
mentioned, as Trustees for one undivided moiety of the said province, and
because it is alleged, that some, partly on this account, and others
apprehending that the paper, by the manner of its expression, came from the
body of Friends, as a religious society of people, and not from particulars,
have, through these mistakes, weakly concluded, that the said description, in
matter and form, might be writ, printed and recommended on purpose to prompt
and allure people to dis-settle and transplant themselves, as its also by some
alleged; and because we are informed that several have, on that account, taken
encouragement and resolution to transplant themselves and families to that
province; and left any of them (as is feared by some) should go out of a
curious and unsettled mind; and others to shun the testimony of the blessed
Cross of Jesus; of which several weighty friends have a godly jealousy upon
their spirits, left an unwarrantable forwardness should act or hurry, any
beside, or beyond, the wisdom and counsel of the Lord, or the freedom of his
light and spirit, in their own hearts, and not upon good and weighty grounds;
it truly laid upon us to let Friends know how the matter stands; which we shall
endeavor to do with all clearness and fidelity.

1. That there is such a place as New Jersey is certain.

2. That it is reputed of those, who have lived and traveled in that country
to be wholesome of air, and fruitful of soil, and capable of sea trade, is also
certain; and it is not right, in any, to despise it, or dissuade those, that
find freedom from the Lord, and necessity put upon them, on going.

3. That the Duke of York sold it to those called Lord Berkeley, Baron of
Stratton, and Sir George Carteret; equally to be divided between them, is also
certain.

4. One moiety, or half part, of the said province, being the right of the Lord
Berkeley, was sold by him to John Fenwicke, in trust for Edward Byllinge, and
his assigns.

5. Forasmuch as Edward Billinge (after William Penn had ended the ^^erence
between E. Byllinge and J. Fenwicke) was willing to present his interest, in
the said province, to his creditors, as all that he had left him, toward their
satisfaction, he desired W. Penn (though every way unconcerned) and Gawen
Lawrie and Nicholas Lucas, two of his creditors, to be trustees, for
performance of the same; and because several of his creditors, particularly and
very importunately pressed W. Penn to accept of the trust, for their sakes and
security, we did, all of us, comply with these, and the like requests, and
accepted of the trust.

6. Upon this we became trustees for one moiety of the said province, yet
undivided; and after do little labor, trouble and cost, a division was
obtained between the said Sir George Carteret and us, as trustees: the country
is situated and bounded, as is expressed in the printed description.

7. This now divided moiety is to be cast into one hundred parts, lots or
proprieties; ten of which, upon the agreement, made betwixt E. Billinge and J.
Fenwicke, his executors and assigns, with a considerable sum of money by way of
satisfaction, for what he became concerned in the purchase from the said Lord
Berkeley, and by him afterward conveyed to John Edridge and Edmond Warner,
their heirs and assigns.

8. The ninety parts remaining are exposed to sale; on behalf of the creditors
of the said Edward Byllinge. And forasmuch several friends are concerned as
creditors, as well as others, and the disposal of so great a part of this
country being in our hands; we did in real tenderness and regard to friends,
and especially to the poor and necessitous, make friends the first offer; that
if any of them, though particularly those, who being low in the world, and
under trials about a comfortable livelihood for themselves and families, should
be desirous of dealing for any part or parcel thereof, that they might have the
refusal.

9. This was the real and honest intent of our hearts, and not to prompt, or
allure any out of their places, either by the credit our names might have with
our people throughout the nation, or by representing the thing otherwise than
it is in itself.

As to the printed paper, some time since set forth by the creditors, as a
description of that province, we say, as to two passages in it, they are not so
clearly and safely worded as ought to have been; particularly in seeming to
hint, the Winter season to be so short a time; when, on further information, we
hear it is sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter, than therein expressed; and
the last clause, relating to liberty of conscience, we would not have any to
think, that it is promised or intended, to maintain the liberty of the exercise
of religion by force of arms; though we shall never consent to any the least
violence on conscience; yet it was never designed to encourage any to expect by
force of arms, to have liberty of conscience fenced against invaders thereof.

And be it known unto you all, in the name and fear of Almighty God, his Glory
and Honor, Power and Wisdom, Truth and Kingdom, is dearer to us, than all
visible things; and as our eye has been single, and our hearts sincere, in the
living God, in this, as in other things, so we desire all, whom it may concern,
that all groundless jealousies may be judged down, and watched against; and
that all extremes may be avoided, on all hands, by the power of the Lord; that
nothing which hurts or grieves the holy life of truth in any that goes or
stays, may be adhered to, nor any provocation given to break precious unity.

This am I, William Penn, moved of the Lord to write unto you, left any bring a
temptation upon themselves, or others; and, in offending the Lord, slay their
own Peace. Blessed are they that can see and behold him their Leader, their
Orderer, their Conductor and Preserver in staying and going; whose is the earth
and the fullness thereof, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. And, as we
formerly writ, we cannot but repeat our request unto you, that, in whomsoever a
desire is to be concerned in this intended plantation, such would weigh the
thing before the Lord, and not headily, or rashly, conclude on any such remove;
and that they do not offer violence to the tender love of their near kindred
and relations, but soberly and conscientiously endeavor to obtain their good
wills; the unity of friends, where they live; that, whether they go, or stay,
it may be of good favor before the Lord, and good people; from whom only can
all heavenly and earthly blessings come; -- This we thought good to write, for
the preventing all misunderstandings, and to declare the real truth of the
matter; and so we recommend you all to the Lord, who is the watchman of his
Israel. We are your real friends and brethren.

WILLIAM PENN. GAWEN LAWRIE. NICHOLAS LUCAS.





1667. Arrival of the Kent, etc.
On the 16th. day of the Sixth month 1677, arrived at New Castle from London,
the ship Kent, Gregory Marlow, master; with the other Commissioners; which the
proprietors had before mentioned, they intended to send. Their names were,
Thomas Olive, Daniel Wills, John Kinsey, Names of the Commissioners.
Joseph Helmsley, Robert Stacy, Benjamin Scott, Richard Guy, and Thomas Foulke.
They were empowered to purchase lands of the Indians; to inspect the rights of
such as claimed property; to give directions for the laying out the lands; and,
in general, to administer the government, according to the concessions. Of
these Commissioners, Richard Guy came in the first ship; John Kinsey died at
Shackamaxon, (the Indian name of the place, where Kensington stands, near
Philadelphia) soon after his landing.

Among the purchasers of the West-Jersey lands, were two companies, both
consisting of friends, or Quakers; the one of persons from Yorkshire, the other
from London. These contracted for large shares, and had patents for them. --
See the concessions, in Smith's appendix to the history of New Jersey, No. 2,
etc.

Those of the county of York, were, Thomas Hutchinson of Beverly, Thomas
Pearson of Bonwicke, Joseph Helmsley of Great Kelle, George Hutchinson of
Sheffield, and Mahion Stacy of Hansworth. All these were principal creditors of
Edward Byllinge; and to these, several of the other creditors made assignments
of their debts, which together amounted to 3500 pounds sterling; and they took,
in satisfaction for the sum, one-tenth part of West-Jersey; which was conveyed
to them by Willam Penn, Gawen Lawrie and Nicholas Lucas, and Edward Byllinge,
in two different deeds, dated the first of the month called March, 1676.

Smith's history of New Jersey. The Yorkshire Commissioners were Joseph
Helmsley, William Emley, and Robert Stacy; -- those of London, were John
Penford. Thomas Olive, Daniel Wills and Benjamin Scots.

ibid.


Passengers on board the Kent, etc.
The number of passengers in this ship, was two hundred and thirty, mostly of
the people called Quakers; and some of them had good estates in England. They
anded at Rackoon-creek, etc.
They landed about Rackoon creek, on Delaware; where the Swedes had some
Scattered habitations, but insufficient to receive, or accommodate them. This
was the second ship, which arrived at West-Jersey with passengers. As this ship
lay in the river Thames, with the passengers on board, ready to sail, king
Charles the second, in his pleasure barge, coming along side, and observing a
great number of people on board, and being, informed where they were bound,
asked whether they were all Quakers, and gave them his blessing.

The Commissioners treat with the Indians, etc.
After their arrival, the Commissioners proceeded further up the river, to the
place where Burlington was afterward built, then called Chygoe's-Island, from
an Indian sachem, who lived there. Here they treated with the Indians, and
entered on the regulation of their settlements; for which, beside the
commission of the proprietors, they had likewise obtained that of Governor
Andross; on whom, in their passage, they had waited, at New York, to acquaint
him with their business; who, as he had received no instructions from the duke
of York, in the case, was unwilling to surrender the government of the place to
them, without an order from the Duke. He had continued Governor of this
country, since the Dutch surrender of it to the King, in 1673; and though the
Duke soon after had a re-grant of it, as before observed, yet it was not till
the year, 1678, that he, in consequence thereof, made a new grant of
West-Jersey to the assigns of Lord Berkeley, as well as also of East-Jersey, to
Carteret, the proprietor of the same.

The Commissioners procured interpreters from the Swedes, Israel Helmes, Peter
Rambo, and Lacy Cock; and afterward Henry Jacobson Falcombre: They made
diverse purchases of lands from the Indians; but not having goods sufficient to
pay for all they bought, they agreed not to settle any part, till it was paid
for. Thomas Olive, the first mentioned of these Commissioners, by the Kent, was
afterward Governor of West-Jersey, and in other respects, a man of importance;
being both a preacher and writer among the Quakers. While he was in the
magistracy, by his skill and prudent management, he acquired an universally
good character; and in both his religious and civil capacity and deportment,
through life, he is said to have merited and obtained the general love and
esteem of all people, till his death; which was about the year 1692, at
Rankokas, where he had lived.

To form an idea of the price of lands, then purchased of the Indians, the
following instance may suffice, viz.

"The price of the lands, situated between Oldman's-creek, and Timber-creek,
extending about twenty miles on the river Delaware, purchased this year, (1677)
consisted of thirty matchcoats, twenty guns, thirty kettles, and one great one,
thirty pair of hose, twenty fathom of duffelds, thirty petticoats, thirty
narrow hoes, thirty bars of lead, fifteen small barrels of powder, seventy
knives, thirty Indian axes, seventy combs, sixty pair of (...) tongs, sixty
pair of scizzars, sixty Tinshaw looking glasses, one hundred and twenty awl
blades, one hundred and twenty fish hooks, two grasps of red paint, one hundred
and twenty needles, sixty tobacco boxes, two hundred bells, one hundred Jews
harps, sixty anchors of rum."

Smith's history of New Jersey. In the same history it is mentioned in another
place, about the year, 1703, when the price of lands was consequenly much
advanced, viz.

"The council (of proprietors) have made two purchases, amounting to, according
to our best computation, the number of one hundred and fifty thousand acres, at
least; the cost thereof to the Indians, with other incidental charges, will
amount to about the sum of seven hundred pounds."

Ibid.


The town of Burlington was laid out by mutual agreement of the proprietors;
Burlington laidout, etc.
and by the Commissioners, it was first named New-Beverly; but soon after it
got the name of Burlington. S. Smith, etc.
It was first settled by a considerable number of reputable families, from
Yorkshire, and other places in England; Some of the masters of families, who
came in the ship last mentioned, and settled in and about Burlington, were
Thomas Olive, Daniel Wills, William Peachy, William Clayton, John Crips, Thomas
Eve^, Thomas Harding, Thomas Nositer, Thomas Fairnsworth, Morgan Drewet,
William Pennton, Henry Jennings, William Hibes, (...) Lovett, John Woolston,
William Woodmancy, Christopher Saund^^ and Robert Powel; -- John Wilkinson and
William Perkins died in (...) passage. -- Perkins, early in life, joined in
society with the Quarkers (...) lived well, in Leicestershire; -- and in the
fifty-second year of his (...) with his wife, four children, and some servants,
embarked in this ship -- among his servants was one, by name, Marshall, a
Carpenter, a (...) serviceable person, in fitting up the new habitations."

Smith's history of New-J^^. Extract from John Crips's letter, dated,
Burlington, on Delaware, 26th. 8th. month, 1677, to his friend Henry Stacy, in
England.

"Here is a town (Burlington) laid out for twenty proprieties, and a straight
line, drawn from the river side (Delaware) up the land, which is to be the main
street, and a market place about the middle. The Yorkshire ten proprietors are
to build on one side, and the London ten, on the other side; and they have
ordered one street to be made along the river side; which is not divided with
the rest, but in small lots by itself, and every one that has any part in a
propriety, is to have his share in it. The town lots for every propriety will
be about ten or eleven (...) which is only for a house, orchard and gardens,
etc."

Thomas Budd, who owned a share of propriety in West Jersey, being ancestor to
a large family there; and who arrived at Burlington in 1678, in a Pamphlet,
describing the country about nine or ten years afterward, says,

"The Indians told us, in a conference at Burlington, shortly after we came
into the country, they were advised to make war on us, and cut (...) off, while
we were but few; for that we sold them the Small Pox, with the Match coat they
had bought of us: -- Which caused our people to be in fears and jealousies
concerning them: therefore we sent for the Indian Kings, to speak with them,
who with many more Indians, (...) to Burlington, where we had a conference with
them, about the ^^tter. We told them, we came amongst them by their own
consent, and had bought the land of them; for which we had honestly paid, as
well as for all the commodities which we had, at any time bought of (...); that
we had been just, kind, and respectful to them, from the time of (...) first
coming; and therefore, know no reason that they had to make (...) on us. To
which one of them in, behalf of the rest, made the following speech in answer."

"Our young men may speak such words as we do not like, nor app^^^e of; and we
cannot help it. And some of your young men may speak such words as you do not
like; and you cannot help that: -- We are your brothers, and intend to live
like brothers with you; we have no mind to have war, for when we have war, we
are only skin and bones, the meat that we eat does us no good; we always are in
fear, we have not the benefit of the sun to shine on us; we hide us in holes
and corners; we are minded to live in peace. If we intend, at any time, to make
war upon you, we will let you know of it, and the reasons why we make war with
you; and if you make us satisfaction for the injury done us, for which the war
was intended, then we will not make war on you; and if you intend at any time,
to make war on us, we would have you let us know of it, and the reason; and if
we do not make satisfaction for the injury done unto you, then you may make war
on us; otherwise you ought not to do it: you are our brothers, and we are
willing to live like brothers with you; we are willing to have a bread path,
for you and us to walk in; and if an Indian is asleep in this path, the
Englishman shall pass by and do him no harm. And if an Englishman be asleep in
this path, the Indian shall pass by him and say "he is an Englishman; he is
asleep, let him alone, he loves sleep." It shall be a plain path; ^here must
not be in this path stump, to hurt our feet. And as to the smallpox, it was
once in my grandfather's time; and it could not be the English, that could send
it to us then; there being no English, in the country; and it was once in my
father's time, they could not send it us then neither; and now it is in my
time; I do not believe they have sent it to us now; I do believe it is the Man
above that has sent it us."

"Some are apt to ask, how we can propose safely to live among such a Harthen
people, as the Indians, whose principles and practices lead them to war and
bloodshed; and ours on the contrary, to love enemies? I answer, that we settled
by the Indians consent and goodliking, and bought the land of them, that we
settle on; which they conveyed to us by deeds, under their hands and seals; and
also submitted to several articles ^ agreement with us, viz. not to do us any
injury; but if it should so happen that any of their people, any time, should
injure, or do harm to any (...) us, then they were to make us satisfaction, for
the injury done. Therefore if they break these covenants and agreements, then,
in consequently thereof, they may be proceeded against, as other offenders,
viz. to (...) in subjection to the Magistrate's power; into whose hands the
(...) justice is committed to be used by him, for the punishment of evildoers,
(...) the praise of them that do well: therefore I do believe it to be both
^^^ful and expedient to bring offenders to justice, by the power of the
^^gistrate's sword; which is not to be used in vain; -- but may be used aga^^^^
such as raise rebellions and insurrections against the government of the
c^^^try, be they Christians or Indians, (now that these have so far agreed to
(...) the laws of civil government) otherwise it is in vain for us to prov^^^
to magistracy, or government; it being that, which we own to be lawful both in
principle and practice.

-- "The Indians have been very serviceable to us, by selling (...) venison,
Indian corn, peace and beans, fish and fowl:" -- "The ^^men plant the corn and
carry burdens. There are many of them of a good understanding considering their
education; -- and in their (...) meetings of business, they have excellent
order; one speaking after another; and while one is speaking all the rest keep
silent, and do not so much as whisper one to the other.

"We had several meetings with them; one was in order to put down the sale of
rum, brandy and other strong liquors, to them; they being a people, that have
not government of themselves, so as to drink in moderation. At which time there
were eight Kings, (one of them was Okanickon, a noted friend to the English)
and many other Indians. The Kings sat on a form, and we on another, over
against them. They had prepared four belts of Wampum (so their current money is
called, being black and white beads, made of a fish shell) to give us as seals
of the covenant, they made with us. One of the Kings by the consent and
appointment of the rest stood up, and made this following speech:

-- "The strong liquor was first sold us by the Dutch; and they are blind; they
had no eyes, they did not see that it was for our hurt. The next people that
came among us, were the Swedes, who continued the sale of these strong liquors
to us; they were also blind; they had no eyes, they did not see it to be
hurtful to us to drink it; although we know it to be hurtful to us; but if
people will sell it to us, we are so in love with it, that we cannot forbear
it. When we drink it, it makes us mad; we do not know what to do: we then abuse
one another; we throw each other into the fire. Seven score of our people have
been killed by reason of the drinking it, since the time it was first sold us.
Those people that sell it are blind; they have no eyes: -- But now there is a
people come to live amongst us, that have eyes; they see it to be for our hurt,
and we know it to be for our hurt; they are willing to deny themselves the
profit of it, for our good: Those people have eyes; we are glad such a people
are come among us: we must put it down by mutual consent; the cask must be
sealed up: it must be made fast; it must not leak by day nor by night, in light
nor in the dark; and we give you these four belts of Wampum; which we would
have you lay up safe, and keep by you, to be witnesses of this agreement, that
we make with you; and we would have you tell your children, that these four
belts of Wampum are given you, to be witnesses betwixt us and you, of this
agreement."

S. Smith's history of New Jersey.
a fresh number of which arrived from Wickaco, the Swedes settlement on
Delaware, in the latter en^ of October this year; but the season being so (...)
spent, they had only time to erect a kind of W^wams, like those of the Indians,
for their acco^modation during the winter.

1677.
The Indians supplied them with corn and ve^son; The indians kind helpful to the
first and early setlers, etc.
which was their principal food. These ^^tives were then not much corrupted
with stro^^ liqours, and they were, in general, friendly, kin^ and helpful to
the English; though at that ti^^ they were very numerous, and the latter,
compan^ with them, but few and weak; and notwithstan^ing endeavors had been
used, as was suppo^^ by some persons, to render them otherwise, in ^^ing to
make them believe that the English had (...) them the Smallpox in their match
coats; yet, (...) meeting, which they had on this affair, one of th^^ chiefs
expressed himself thus: -- "In my grand^^thers time, the smallpox came; in my
fathers ti^^ the smallpox came; and now, in my time, the smallpox is come;"
-- then stretching his hand toward the skies, he said, "It came from thence:"
to which the rest assented.

In November arrived another ship from London, with about sixty or seventy
passengers, of which some settled at Salem; and others at Burlington Among the
former are mentioned James Nevill* Henry Salter, and George Deacon, with their
families. -- And, in this year also arrived the Fly-Boat, Martha, of
Burlington, in Yorkshire; which sailed from Hull, in the latter end of the
summer, with one hundred and fourteen passengers. Some masters of families, in
this ship, were, Thomas Wright, William Goforth, John Lynam, Edward Season,
William Black, Richard Dungworth, George Miles, William Wood, Thomas Schooly,
Richard Harrison, Thomas Hooton, Samuel Tailor, Marmaduke Horsman, William
Oxley, William Ley, and Nathanial Luke. The families of Robert Stacy and Samuel
Odas; and Thomas Ellis and John Batts, servants sent by George Hutchinson, came
in this ship. -- Twenty of the passengers were said to be living 45 years
afterward.

Ibid. Note, Many who came servants, and were industrious, succeeded better,
than some who brought estates, or fortunes, etc. the former, being more
generally better suited to encounter the hardships and difficulties of a new
country, often acquired considerable possessions; while the latter, being
accustomed to live, and depend, on their fortunes, and what they brought with
them, had the disadvantage; and sometimes spent all they had, and were reduced
to indigence, in a country, where servants were difficult to be had or kept:
and the lower class of people naturally became more independent, than in old
countries, etc.




In one of these vessels, or about this time, Arrival of John Kinsey, etc.
came John Kinsey, then a young man; his father, having been one of the
Commissioners, before mentioned, who died on his arrival. He was afterward a
person of distinguished services, Account of his son J. Kinsey, etc.
in diverse public stations. His son of the same name, and likewise one of the
people called Quakers, afterward Chief Justice of Pennsylvania, and eminent in
the law, was no less memorable for his useful and beneficent abilities and good
qualities, both in his public and private life and character.

In the Tenth month, O. S. (December) 1678, arrived the Shield, from Hull,
Daniel Towes, Commander, and anchored before Burlington. This was the first
ship, that came so far up the river Delaware: Opposite to Coaquanock, the
Indian name of the place, where Philadelphia now stands, which was a bold and
high shore, she went so near it, in turning, 1678.
that part of the tackling struck the trees some of the passengers expressing,
"It was a fi^e situation for a town." Arrival of Shield, etc.
The people, next morning went on shore upon the ice; so hard, and so suddenly
had it froze, in the space of one night! In this vessel came William Emley, the
second time, with his (...) and children, and both men and women servants;
Mahlon Stacy, (...) his wife and children, and several both men and women
servants; Thomas Lambert, his wife, children, men and women servants; Jo^^
Lambert and servants; Thomas Revell, hit wife, children and servants, Godfrey
Hancock, his wife, children and servants; Thomas Potts, his wife and children;
John Wood, and four children; Robert Muffin, his wife and children; Robert
Schooly, his wife and children; James Pharo, his wife and children; Susannah
Fairnsworth, her children and two servants; Richard Tattersal, his wife and
children; Godfrey Newhold, John Dewsbury, Richard Green, Peter Fretwell, John
Fretwell, John Newbold; one, by name, Barnes, a merchant, from Hull, Francis
Berwick, George Parks, George Hill, John Heir, and others.

In this year (1678) also arrived a ship from London, which brought John Denn,
Thomas Kent, John Hollingshead, with their families William Hewlings, Abraham
Hewlings, Jonathan Eldridge, John Petty, Thomas Kirby, with others: -- the
former of these settled about Salem; the rest, at Burlington.

About this time, and a few years afterward, arrived, at Burlington, the
following settlers, from England, viz. John Butcher, Henry Gr^bb, William
Butcher, William Brightwen, Thomas Gardner, John Budd, John Burten, Seth Smith,
Walter Pumphrey, Thomas Ellis, James Satterthwaite, Richard Arnold, John
Woolman, John Stacy, Thomas Eves, Benjamin Duffeld, John Pain, Samuel Cleft,
William Cooper, John Shinn, William Biles, John Skein, John Warrel, Anthony
Morris, Samuel Bunting, Charles Reed, Francis Collins, Thomas Matthew,
Christopher Wetherill, John Dewsbury, John Day, Richard Basnett, John Antrom,
William Biddle, Samuel Furnace, John Ladd, Thomas Raper, Roger Huggins and
Thomas Wood.

Smith's history of New Jersey.


1680.
The duty, which was imposed by the government of New York on all exports and
imports, a Hoarkill, The duty imposed at Hoarkill, discontinued, etc.
remained a grievance till the year 1680. This duty was exacted of settlers,
who came (...) West-Jersey. But it was, this year, redressed, through the
application of their friends, in England, to the Duke of York: he referred the
master to Council; where it rested for a considerabl^ time; but, at last, by
the management and assiduity of William Penn, George Hutchinson, and others, it
was reported in their favor; and Sir John Werden, on the Duke's behalf, wrote
to have it discontinued: William Penn and the rest having made it fully appear,
that they had purchased the government of the country with the soil; which,
therefore, of right, ought not to be subject to any imposition of duties, from
the government of New York; that the Duke of York, having granted all his right
to the said country, to the assigns of Lord Barkeley, and these to them, in as
ample a manner, as it was granted to the Duke by the King; which was expressly,
"To make, ordain and establish, all manner of orders, laws, directions,
instruments and forms of government, and Magistrates, fit and necessary for the
territory aforesaid;" -- with this limitation, "so always as the same be not
contrary to the laws and statutes of this our realm of England; but as near as
may be, agreeably thereto; -- it was thereby plain, that the colony, or any of
its inhabitants, could not possibly be, of right, subject to any laws or
impositions, but those of its own, and of Great Britain. In the present year
1680, arrived Sammuel Jenings, with his family, from Coder-Hill, in
Buckinghamshire. He was person of some note and eminence; a preacher among the
Quakers, and sometime Governor of the province; -- His letter, after his
arrival, directed to William Penn, Edward Byllinge, or G. Lawrie, further
mentions the discontinuance of this imposition, as follows:

Dear Friends,
THIS may give you an account of mine, and my family's safe arrival in
New Jersey, with all the rest that came with us. -- I might say something
concerning our passage at sea, but I wave it, for want of time; and, in fine,
may observe, all was well; for which I bless God; and the Lord keep us all
sensible of it, with the rest of his mercies, for ever.

Dear Friends, about six weeks since we arrived in Delaware river, where I
expected to have met with a combat, in the denial of Customs. In our passage,
at sea, I had communicated to all that had any considerable cargo on board, the
opinion of Council, concerning the illegal demand thereof, with what else I
thought might be for their information; which thus far prevailed, that most, if
not all, concerned, seemed resolved to deny the paying of custom here; having
paid all the King's duties in England. In good time we came to anchor, in
Delaware; where one Peter Alricks (collector of the customs) came aboard, and
brought a handsome present to our Commander, and sent for me into the
Round-house, where they both were; and Peter told me, he had nothing to say to
us, relating to customs; he had no commission for it; nor did he know of any
body that had; so we had all our goods safely landed after this unexpected easy
manner.

In pursuance of the trust committed to me after my arrival, I acquainted those
nominated in the commission with me, of it; but in a short time after I
received your letters, giving me an account of a new grant obtained, wherein
the customs are taken off; a free port confirmed, and the government settled on
Edward Byllinge; which I doubt not will be very acceptable to every honest man.
But, as yet I have not had time to let the people, in general, know it: and now
seeing the ports are made legally free, and the government settled, I would not
have any thing to remain as a discouragement to planters; here are several good
and convenient settlements already, and here is land enough, and good enough,
for many more.

SAMUEL JENINGS.
New Jersey, 17th. of October, 1680.




In the settlement of new countries, people differently interested commonly
characterize, of praise and dispraise them, as it suits their interest to
encourage or discourage such colonization; but we find most of those early
adventurers, See S. Smith's history of N. Jersey.
who soon after their arrival, wrote to their friends, in England, appear to
have been well pleased with the country, by giving a very favorable account of
it, The new Colonists well pleased with the country.
in many of their letters, and some of them, even, beyond their former
expectation; of which the following extract from one, written by an early
colonist and proprietor, in the year 1680, may serve as a specimen respecting
the native produce of provisions of the country, in those early times, viz.

-- But now a word or two of those strange reports you have of us, Extract of a
letter respecting the provisions and native produce of the country.
and our country: I affirm they are not true; and fear they were spoke from a
spirit of envy. It is a country that produces all the things for the support
and sustenance of man, in a plentiful manner; if it were not so, I should be
ashamed of what I have before written; but I can stand, having truth on my
side, against and before the face of all gainsayers and evil spies. I have
traveled through most of the places that are settled, and some that are not;
and in every place I find the country very apt to answer the expectation of the
diligent. I have seen orchards laden with fruit to admiration, their very limbs
torn to pieces with the weight, and most delicious to the taste, and lovely to
behold. I have seen an apple tree, from a pippin-kernel, yield a barrel of
curious cider; and peaches in such plenty, that some people took their carts a
peach-gathering; I could not but smile at the conceit of it; they are very
delicate fruit, and hang almost like our onions, that are tied on ropes. I have
seen and known, this summer, forty bushels of bold wheat of one bushel sown;
and many more such instances I could bring, which would be too tedious here to
mention. We have, from the time called May until Michaelmas, great store of
very good wild fruits; as, strawberries, cranberries and hurtle-berries, which
are like our bilberries in England, but far sweeter; they are very wholesome
fruits. The cranberries, much like cherries, for color and bigness; which may
be kept till fruit come again; an excellent sauce is made of them for venison,
turkeys, and other great fowl; and they are better to make tarts than either
goosberries or cherries; we have them brought to our houses by the Indians, in
great plenty. My brother Robert had as many cherries, this year, as would have
loaded several carts. It is my judgment, by what I have observed, that fruit
trees, in this country, destroy themselves by the very weight of their fruit.

As for venison and fowls, we have great plenty; we have brought home to our
houses, Plenty in New Jersey, in 1680.
by the Indians, seven or eight fat bucks in a day; and sometimes put by as
many, having no occasion for them, and fish, in their season very plenteous. my
cousin Revell and I, with some of my men, went last third month into the river
to catch herrings; for, at that time, they came in great sholes into the
shallows; we had neither rod nor net; but, after the Indian fashion, made a
round pinfold, about two yards over, and a foot high, but left a gap for the
fish to go in at, and made a bush to lay in the gap, to keep the fish in; and
when that was done, we took two long birches, and tied their tops together, and
went about a stones-cast above our said pinfold; then hawling these birch
boughs down the stream, where we drove thousands before us; but so many got
into our trap as it would hold; and then we began to hawl them on shore, as
fast as three or four of us could, by two or three at a time; and, after this
manner, in half an hour, we could have filled a three bushel sack of as good
large herrings as ever I saw. And as to beef and pork, here is great plenty of
it, and cheap; and also good sheep. The common grass of this country feeds beef
very fat. I have killed two this year; and therefore I have reason to know it:
besides, I have seen, this fall, in Burlington, killed eight or nine fat oxen
and cows on a market day, and all very fat. And though I speak of herrings
only, left any should think we have little other sorts, we have great plenty of
most sorts of fish, that ever I saw in England: besides several other sorts
that are not known there; as, rocks, cat-fish, shads, sheeps-heads, sturgeons;
and fowls plenty; as, ducks, geese, turkeys, pheasants, partridges; and many
other sorts, that I cannot remember, and would be too tedious to mention.

Indeed the country, take it as a wilderness, is a brave country, though no
place will please all. But some will be ready to say, -- He writes of
conveniences, but not of inconveniences. -- In answer to these, I honestly
declare there is some barren land, as, I suppose, there is in most places of
the world; and more wood than some would have upon their lands; neither will
the country produce corn without labor, nor cattle be got without something to
buy them, nor bread with idleness; else it would be a brave country indeed; and
I question not, but all then would give it a good word; For my part, I like it
so well, I never had the least thought of returning to England, except on
account of trade.

MALHON STACY.


West-New-Jersey being now become populous, 1681.
and Edward Byllinge chosen Governor by the proprietors, in England, S. Jenings
made Deputy Governor under E. Byllinge, etc.
he commissioned Samuel Jenings, some time after his arrival, which was in
1680, to be his deputy. Jenings accordingly called an Assembly, with which, in
November 1681, he agreed upon certain fundamentals in government, passed a
number of laws; and, with the Commissioners for settling and regulating lands,
fixed on proper rules and methods, for that purpose, all which may be seen in
S. Smith's history of that province." Note. In the year 1683, Gawen Lawrie,
arriving Deputy Governor of East-Jersey, under Robert Barclay, writes thus from
Elizabeth-town, to the proprietors, at London, viz.

-- "There is not a poor man in all the province, nor that wants; here is
abundance of provision; pork and beef at two pence per pound; fish and fowl
plenty; oysters, I think, would serve all England; wheat four shillings
sterling per bushel; Indian wheat two shillings and sixpence; it is exceeding
good for food every way; and two or three hundred fold increase: cider good and
plenty, for one penny per quart. Good drink, that is made of water and
molasses, stands in about two shillings per barrel; -- good venison plenty,
brought in to us at eighteen pence the quarter; eggs at three pence per dozen;
all things very plenty; la^d very good as ever I saw: vines, walnuts, peaches,
strawberries, and many other things plenty in the woods."


About this time a large number of settlers, chiefly friends, or Quakers, from
Dublin, and places adjacent, in Ireland, arrived at Elsingburg, near Salem;
some of whom, John and Andrew Thompson, and Robert Zane settled there: others
went up to Burlington, and several of them settled at New-Town creek; where the
Indians were shy, at first, but after becoming more acquainted, they were very
kind, friendly and helpful to them.

In the year 1682, the names of the members of Assembly, which was the second
Assembly, under Jenings, were,

"Thomas Olive, Speaker, Mahlon Stacy, Joshua Wright, John Lambert, Thomas
Lambert, William Emley, Godfrey Hancock, Daniel Leeds, Thomas Wright, Samuel
Borcen, Robert Stacy, Thomas Budd, Daniel Wills, senior, Thomas Gardener, John
Crips, John White, John Chaffin, Bernard Davenish, Isaac Marriott, William
Peachy, William Cooper, Mark Newby, Thomas Thackery, Robert Zane, James Nevill,
Richard Guy, Mark Reeves, Richard Hancock, John Smith, John Pledger, Edward
Wade, George Deacon, and Samuel Hedge.

Those of the Council were,

"Thomas Olive, Robert Stacy, Mahlon Stacy, William Biddle, Thomas Budd, John
Chaffin, James Nevill, Daniel Wills, Mark Newby, Elias Far.

Justices for Burlington.

"William Biddle, Robert Stacy, Elias Far, Mahlon Stacy, John Chaffin, Thomas
Budd, Benjamin Scott, John Crips, Thomas Thackery.

Justices for Salem,

"James Nevill, George Deacon, Richard Hancock, Edward Wade.

Commissioners for laying out lands, etc.

"Elias Far, William Biddle, Thomas Budd, Thomas Gardener, Mark Newby, James
Nevill, Thomas Olive, Robert Stacy, Benjamin Scott, William Cooper.

Sheriff for Burlington, John White.

Sheriff for Salem, Thomas Woodruffe.

Provincial Clerk and Recorder for Burlington, Thomas Revell.

Ditto for Salem, Samuel Hedge.

Surveyor, Daniel Leads.

Constables, Robert Schooly, John Pancoast, John Burten, William Brightwen,
Thomas Sharp."

Among the laws, passed in West-Jersey, under the administration of Jenings,
anno 1683, the following indicates their views and care for an orderly,
industrious and reputable settlement, etc. viz.

"And whereas, it has pleased God to commit this country and province into the
hands of such, who (for the generality of them) are fearing God, and painful
and industrious, in the promoting and improving the said province; and, for the
better preventing of such as are profane, loose and idle and scandalous, from
settling amongst us, who are, and will be, not only unserviceable, but greatly
burdensome to the province: It is therefore hereby enacted, by the authority
aforesaid, that all person and persons, who shall transport him, or themselves
into this province, shall, within eighteen months after he, or they, shall
arrive, in the said province, procure and produce a certificate, under the
hands of such of that religious society, to whom he or they did belong, or
otherwise, from two Magistrates, if procurable, or two Constables, or Overseers
of the poor, with three, or more, creditable persons of the neighborhood, who
inhabit, or belong to the place, where he, or they, did last reside, as may
give satisfaction, that is to say, that he, or they came not clandestinely, or
fraudently away; and if unmarried, that he, or she, are clear from former
engagements, in that particular; and also, that he, or she, are such as live
soberly and honestly, to the best of their knowledge; and that no Justice shall
presume to marry any such person or persons, who shall come into this province,
before such certificate be produced; or that it be laid before the Governor, or
two Justices, and give them sufficient satisfaction concerning their clearness;
and that all such person and persons, who shall settle in the said province,
and shall refuse, or neglect to produce such certificate, as aforesaid, within
the said eighteen months, shall be fined at the discretion of the Governor and
Council of the said province, not exceeding twenty pounds; the same to be
levied by distress and sale on the offender's goods, and to be paid into the
hands of the Treasurer of the said Province."




After this large numbers of fresh settlers continued coming into the province;
and, in the year 1682, a ship of 550 tons burden arrived at West-Jersey, with
three hundred and sixty passengers; who landed between Philadelphia and
Burlington, on the Jersey shore.

The representatives of West-Jersey, in general Assembly, continued to be
annually elected, till the surrender of the proprietary government to the
crown, in 1702; before which time the council, (who were Justices ex officio)
Justices of peace, and inferior officers of government, were chosen by them;
and the Governor was appointed by the proprietors.

As to the religious state of the first and early settlers of West New Jersey,
it is observable, Religious state of W. N. Jersey, in early time.
as before mentioned, they consisted principally of the people called Quakers;
whose religious principles, system, and general practice have been already
described: hence on their arrival at the place where Burlington now stands, and
other places, we find it was their first and great concern publicly to support
their religious worship; on account of which many of them had suffered much, in
their native country. The following is an extract from a manuscript, written by
one of the passengers, in the Shield, from Hull, in 1678.

"The first settlers were mostly of the people called Quakers, who were well
beloved where they came from, and had valuable estates: and though while they
lived in their native country, they had plenty of all necessaries, yet their
desire to remove to America was so strong, that they could not be content
without going thither; and chose to venture themselves, their wives, children,
and all they had, in the undertaking." --

-- "But, notwithstanding the masters of families were men of good estates,
yet, before they could get their land in order, and corn and stock about them,
they endured great hardships, and went through many diff^^^ties and straits;
nevertheless I never perceived any of them to repine, or repent of their
coming." --

"As it is said in holy writ, the preparations of the heart, in ma^^^ of the
Lord, so it may well be believed, that the hearts of these people were prepared
for this service; even, to labor for the replenishing of the land; it being a
wilderness indeed, and they unacquainted with the nature of the soil, and also
with the inhabitants; altogether pilgrims and strangers, at their first coming
among them."

"A providential hand was very visible and remarkable, in many instances, that
might be mentioned; -- and the Indians were, even, rendered our benefactors and
protectors! -- Without any carnal weapon we entered the land; and inhabited
therein, as safe as if there had been thousands of garrisons; -- For the most
High preserved us from harm both of man and beast: -- and as the English
increased more and more, there came such a sore distemper among the Indians
that they died so fast that, in some places, their bodies wasted above ground."

"Many were the instances, whose consideration might be useful to future
generations, and the steps of their forefathers and elders, instructive to
posterity."

-- "The aforesaid people were zealous in performing their religious service;
for having, at first, no meeting house to keep public meetings in, they made a
tent, or covert, of sail cloth, to meet under; and after they got some little
houses to dwell in, then they kept their meetings in one of them, till they
could build a meeting house." -- Thomas Olive and William Peachy were two of
the first settlers, who had a public Ministry.

"Samuel Jenings and his wife, Ann, were early comers to American and of worthy
memory, endued with both spiritual and temporal wisdom; -- some part of his
time he was made Governor of West-Jersey; -- he was a suppressor of vice, and
an encourager of virtue; -- sharp toward evil doers, but tender and loving to
them that did well; giving good counsel, and wholesome advice to friends and
neighbors; -- an able minister of the gospel; and labored much therein; to
the comfort and edification of many people, both in this province, and other
places," etc. M. S.

Note. Among those of this society, who arrived in this province, before the
grant of Pennsylvania to William Penn, in 1681, or soon afterward, the
following persons appear to be mentioned, as active and useful, not only in
their own religious society, but most of them also in a civil capacity, in and
about Burlington, viz.

John Butcher, Henry Grubb, William Butcher, William Brightwen, Thomas
Gardener, Thomas Foulke, John Bourten, Samuel Jenings, Seth Smith, Walter
Pomphrey, Thomas Ellis, James Satterthwaite, Richard Arnold, John Woolman, John
Stacy, Thomas Eves, John Pain, Samuel Cleft, William Cooper, John Shinn and
William Biles. -- And about this time, or soon afterward, arrived John Skein,
Anthony Morris, Samuel Bunting, Francis Collins, Thomas Matthews, Christopher
Wetherill, John Dewsbury, John Day, Richard Basnett, John Antrom, William
Biddle and Samuel Furnace.

Among the women of worthy and eminent character, in the same society, at this
time, appear to have been, Elizabeth Gardener, Sarah Biddle, Elizabeth Hooten,
Helen Skein, Ann Butcher, Susannah Brightwen, Mary Crips, Frances Antrom,
Frances Tailor, Ann Jenings, Joan Atkinson, Susannah Budd, Judith Noble, Ann
Peachy, etc.

John Woolston is said to have been a person of good esteem among his friends,
the Quakers at Burlington; and that during more than twenty years fatigue of a
new settlement, he ever proved himself a ready friend kind neighbor, and a
valuable member of society till his death, in School.

Thomas Gardener was a man of eminence among the Quakers and early settlers in
Burlington and West-Jersey. He served in several public offices, in the
government, with honor and fidelity; -- was very skilful in a variety of
business; -- a good surveyor, and a very useful member of society; -- several
years, one of the Council; Treasurer of the western division, and the first
Speaker of the Assembly, after the union of the governments of East and
West-Jersey, in 1703, He died at Burlington, in 1712.

John Skein, was a native of Scotland; a person of great service and integrity,
both in his religious and civil conduct; he was near two years Governor of
West-Jersey, and died in the year 1687. He was a preacher among the Quakers;
had suffered much for his religion, in his native country; where he had
distinguished himself in its cause.




At first they meet under a tent, etc.
Before a house was built on the place, they constantly at stated times, held
their religious meetings under a tent, covered with sail cloth, till John
Woolston had got his house ready; which was the first framed house in
Burlington; at whose house, and that of Thomas Gardener, they afterward
continued to hold their meetings both for divine worship, and the discipline or
order, or their religious society, till a suitable meeting house was built for
that purpose; which was not till several years after their first arrival there,
and a similar care and practice appear to have been among them, in other places
where they settled.

Among the first things that appear to have come under particular notice and
regulation, First objects of their care in their meetings of discipline, etc.
in their meetings of discipline, after their arrival, were, the taking proper
care and support of their poor; the ordering and passing of marriages,
(thirteen couple having been married among them at Burlington, before the year
1681,) and the discouraging of all their people from selling strong liquors to
the Indians.

In the year 1680, in an epistle from their monthly meeting at Burlington, They
write to the Y. meeting in London, etc.
to the yearly meeting in London, which was the first regular correspondence of
that nature, established between the society, in this part of the world, and
the said yearly meeting, they were particularly urgent, among other things,
that none of their friends, or members of the same society in England, or
elsewhere, should remove to them, without certificates, or well authenticated
recommendation, from the society, where they last lived, prior to their
removal; in order to prevent imposture, idle, disorderly and designing persons
from coming among them, and taking advantage of the innocent and well-meaning;
and that they might be well advised in such important undertaking. This epistle
was signed by John Woolston, Daniel Leeds, John Butcher, Henry Grubb, William
Butcher, Seth Smith, Walter Pomphrey, Thomas Ellis, James Satterthwaite, Thomas
Budd, William Peachy, William Brightwen, Thomas Gardener, Robert Stacy, John
Hollingshead, Robert Powell, John Burton, Samuel Jenings; -- and by Richard
Arnold, John Woolman, John Stacy, Abraham Hulings, Peter Fretwell, Thomas Eves,
John Pain, John Crips, Thomas Lambert, John Kinsey, Samuel Cleft, William
Cooper, John Shin, William Biles, Thomas Harding, William Hulings.


The first general yearly meeting, etc. in 1681.
The first general yearly meeting of the people called Quakers, in this country,
for regulating the affairs of their religious society, was held, or met, at
Burlington, on the 28th. day of the Sixth month, 1681. On the 31st. this yearly
meeting entered upon regulating such affairs of the society, as then appeared
first necessary, etc. particularly the appointment of times and places of the
different meetings for religious worship, and the discipline, or other business
of the society: -- among which a general meeting for worship was then agreed to
be held yearly at Salem, on the second first day of the week in the Second
month, etc.
It was constituted of such of their religious meetings as were then
established, or settled, in New Jersey, as, at Shrewsbury, Salem, Burlington,
Rankokas, etc. and on the west side of Delaware, (where diverse English
settlements of this people appear to have been, prior to those under William
Penn) as, at Shackamaxon; (or nigh the place where Kensington stands, in the
vicinity of Philadelphia) near the falls of Delaware; and at Upland, since
called Chester, etc. The first religious meetings of this people, in
New Jersey, were regularly settled, first, at Shrewsbury, in 1670; second at
Salem, in 1675. At the former place, in 1667, the settlers are said to have
been either all, or most of them, Friends, or Quakers; -- among whom Lewis
Morris, a Friend from Barbados, was one of the most considerable, etc. As to
the latter place, or Salem, the Friends, who came with John Fenwicke, in 1675,
first settled a meeting there, on their arrival.

Note. It may be further observed, that, among the records of early time, viz.
about the years 1681 and 1682, there are several papers of religious advice,
addressed, -- "To the planters, and such as are transporting them selves to the
plantations, in America," among the Quakers, by George Fox, the first and chief
preacher, in that society; tending to inculcate such a principle and motive of
acting and general practice, in life and manners, as, if duly adhered to, would
render laws and punishments less necessary, by preventing the causes of them:
-- These exhorted to a due performance of certain Christian duties, both in a
religious and civil capacity; pointing out the infallible means of executing
the same; -- In which, that the reader may see a specimen of the nature of
these advices, among other things, it is there expressed and advised, viz.

1 "That, while they were making outward plantations, in America, they should
not neglect the more important cultivation of their own minds, and that more
excellent improvement, in heavenly riches, and true mental felicity; which is
of more lasting duration, than all worldly objects; by faithfully discharging
their duty to God, as well as to each other; and their inviting and instructing
the Indians, and all people, where they came, in the knowledge and practice of
true Christianity.

2 "To keep to truth and uprightness, in all their dealings; taking no
advantage from the distress of others, or the circumstances of the times; not
to oppress any, through lucrative views, when in their power; nor to be
elevated in mind by their temporal acquisitions; which the same hand of
Providence, that gave them, could as easily take away: -- and that their lives
and conversations should be consistent with their profession, in all things,
and not administer any real occasion for report, that they were become worse,
through the increase of their worldly possessions; to the incumbering of their
minds, and drawing them into a practice, incompatible with their real felicity.

3. "That none should go beyond their abilities and capacities, in trade, and
thereby risk the property of others, to their hurt; nor strive to be great, in
the world; but to keep to moderation, in all things.

4. "That all, who were in offices of government, as Governors, Judges,
Justices, etc. should strictly adhere to justice and equity, distinguishing
themselves by the faithful discharge of their duty, especially in helping the
poor, fatherless and distressed, etc. (with many quotations out of the S.
Scriptures, on this head) and, that, such as rule over others, should, in the
first place, govern well their own families; recommending the examples of
Daniel, Joseph, etc. to those in authority; and the Apostle's advice, "To
submit to every ordinance of man, whether it be to the King, as supreme, or to
Governors, as to them that are sent by them, etc.

5. "And, that all these things, with many others, (too tedious here to
particularize,) should be observed and done, from a sense, principle, or
motive, of conscientious duty; which is a more noble and stronger obligation,
on the human mind, and far above what any slavish fear, or mere external force,
or power of laws and punishments alone, is able to induce, or effect."




This yearly meeting of the society on both sides of Delaware, was afterward,
from the year 1684, Y. M. since removed to Philadelphia, etc.
held alternately at Burlington and Philadelphia, till the year 1761 when it
was removed entirely to Philadelphia; since which time it continues to be
annually held there, and maintains a constant regular intercourse and
correspondence with that of the same society in London.

Proportion of Quakers, meetings with others, etc.
As to the proportion, which the number of these people, in later years, bears
with the rest of the inhabitants, in West-Jersey, who have since flocked into
it and increased among them, it appears by S. Smith's history of New Jersey,
published in 1765, from which the major part of what has here been said of it
is taken, that in the eight counties, of which West-Jersey consists, there then
were meeting houses, where meetings were held for divine worship, of the
Quakers thirty-two, of the Presbyterians thirty-two, of the different Baptists
thirteen, of the Episcopalians, or church of England ten, of the low Dutch,
Germans and Swedes, both Lutheran and Presbyterian congregations, ten, and one
of the Moravians.

Number of inhabitants, etc.
In the same history, the whole number of the inhabitants of both East and
West-Jersey, were then supposed to be about one hundred thousand.

E. Jersey sold to 12 proprietors, etc.
East-Jersey was, by the last Will of its proprietor, Sir George Carteret,
ordered to be sold, at his death, to pay his debts. "His Will is dated,
December 5th. 1678; he devises to Edward, Earl of Sandwich, John Earl of Bath,
Bernard Grenville, Sir Thomas Crew, Sir Robert Atkins and Edward Atkins,
Esquire, and their heirs, among other lands, all his plantation of New Jersey,
upon trust and confidence, that they, and the survivors, or survivor of them,
should make sale of all the said premises; and out of the money, that should,
upon such sale, arise, pay and discharge debts, etc. as therein mentioned."

Smith's history of New Jersey. Note. George Keith, a scotchman, sometime
Surveyor General of East-Jersey, and a noted person among the Quakers, is
thought to have arrived about this time, (1682) or soon afterward.

Ibid.
-- He died in 1679; and it was accordingly disposed of, and conveyed, to
twelve persons, or proprietors, and to their heirs and assigns, by indenture of
lease and release, bearing date the first and second of February, 1681-2: -- Of
which Philip Carteret had remained Governor ever since the quintipartite
division, in 1676, as well as before, till about this time; Elizabeth-town
being then the capital, or the place of the Governor's residence. The names of
the twelve proprietors were, William Penn, Robert West, Their names.
Thomas Rudyard, Samuel Groom, Thomas Heart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox, of
London, Goldsmith, Ambrose Rigg, John Haywood, Hugh Hartshorne, Clement
Plumsted and Thomas Cooper.

These twelve proprietors soon took in twelve others, making, in all,
twenty-four. Names of other twelve, etc.
The names of the latter twelve proprietors were, James, Earl of Perth, John
Drummond, Robert Barclay, Robert Gordon, Aarent Sonmans, Gawen Lawrie, Edward
Byllinge, James Brain, William Gibson, Thomas Barker, Robert Turner, and
Thomas Warn. They published an account of their country, a fresh project for a
town, (Perth Amboy) and a method of disposing of their lands. Their plan was
popular; and many, especially of the Scotch, resorted thither: and to these
proprietors the Duke of York made a fresh grant of East-Jersey, bearing date,
the 14th. of March, 1682.

Many, if not most, of these proprietors were Friends, or Quakers; Robert
Barclay of Urie, Robert Barclay in 1683, made Governor of East Jersey, etc.
in Scotland, a very noted person in that society, as before mentioned, being
one or them, was by the rest of the proprietors, in 1683, made Governor of
East-Jersey, for life; Thomas Rudyard, of the same society, from London,
likewise a proprietor, being his deputy; who, either at, or before, this time,
had arrived in the province; but he was soon after succeeded by Gawen Lawrie of
London, (one of the proprietors of both East and West-Jersey) under Robert
Barclay. Barclay's Commission was in the following words, viz.

The proprietors of the province of East-New-Jersey to our trusty and well
beloved fellow proprietor, Robert Barclay send Greeting:
Whereas, the powers of government of the province of East-New-Jersey is
devolved upon us, and assigned to us, by James duke of York, with power to
constitute and appoint such Governor and Commissioners, for the well governing
of the said province, as we shall see meet; and we having heretofore, out of
the confidence, we had of Robert Barclay, his skill, prudence and integrity,
constituted him Governor of the said province, to appoint a deputy, during his
absence therefrom; to be approved by sixteen of the proprietors: upon the same
reason and confidence, we do hereby confirm to him the government of the said
province, during all the days of his life; as to have the power of the
government of all the said province, and of all isles, rivers, islands and
seas, within the same, or belonging thereto; to do all, and every thing, or
things, which to the charge and office of a Governor does appertain; commanding
all inferior officers to obey him, as their Governor, according to this our
commission, and the power hereby given him, and according to the laws and
constitutions made, or confirmed, by us, or to be made; which he himself is to
observe and follow; as unto his duty and office does appertain. And whereas, we
have agreed, and are satisfied, for certain good reasons and considerations,
moving us thereunto, to commit this trust unto him, and give him this
character, without laying any necessity upon him, to repair to the said
province; so likewise we have, and do hereby give him power, from time to time,
as need shall be, during his absence, to name and constitute, and grant
commission to a Deputy Governor to serve in the said province; he being always
approved by sixteen of us the proprietors, and following the orders, he
receives from us, according to the laws and constitutions of the said province.

Given under the seal of the said province, and signed by our hands;
dated at London, the 17th. of the Fifth month, called July, in the year of our
Lord, according to the English account, 1683.

Note. "R. Barclay never came to the province. He died on the third of October
1690; having continued Governor till 1685* -- when Lord Neil Campbell, uncle to
the Duke of Argyle, was appointed Governor, and came over to the province." --
"In School, Sir Thomas Lane was Governor of East-Jersey."

Smith's history of New Jersey.


Government of E. and W. Jersey surrendered to the crown anno 1702.
East and West-Jersey thus continued, in an increasing and prosperous state,
for a number of years, or till about the year 1701; when the nature of their
governments, which were invested in such a large number of proprietors,
occasioned so much inconveniency, dispute; party and confusion, that, in the
following year, the proprietors of both divisions agreed to surrender the
government; which was accordingly done by them, to Queen Ann, by an instrument,
dated the 15th. day of April, 1702. Since which time they both have continued,
in prosperity, united in one government, immediately under the Crown.

It may be further observed from S. Smith's account of this province,

"That the whole extent of it, Extent of, and number of acres in, N. Jersey.
from North to South, or from Cape May, in latitude 39 degrees, to the north
station point, in latitude 41 degrees, 40 minutes, at 69 miles to a degree, is
about 184 miles; and its greatest breadth, about 60 miles; but supposing it, at
a medium, to be 150, in length, and 50, in breadth, the whole province, must
then contain 4,800,000 acres; of which one-fourth part (probably more) is poor,
barren, land, in respect to tillage; but, in part, abounding with pines and
cedars, and some few tracts of swamp, that will make meadow.

East Jersey is divided into five Counties, Number of counties, etc.
viz. Middlesex, Monmouth, Essex, Somerset, and Bergen. West-Jersey, into
eight, as, Burlington, Gloucester, Salem, Cumberland, Cape May, Hunterdon,
Morris and Sussex.

"It is supposed that West-Jersey, Number of acres in W. Jersey, etc.

S. Smith.


contains more acres, than the eastern division, and, in return, took more
barren land. East-Jersey, now in 1765, is supposed to have located nearly
468,000 acres, good land, and 96,000 acres of pine land. The proprietors of
West-Jersey, soon after their arrival, divided among them 500,000 acres; which
they called the first dividend: since which, at different times, they have
issued directions for each proprietor's taking his part of four other
dividends, of the like quantity, amounting in the whole, with allowance of five
per cent. for roads, to 2,625,000; conjectured by many to be full as much as
the division contains; of this the far greater part is already surveyed; what
yet remains are chiefly the rights of minors and people abroad."

The trade of N. Jersey centers in Philadelphia and N. York.
The vicinity of the cities of New York to East-Jersey, and of Philadelphia to
West-Jersey, has carried most of their foreign trade to these two places; to
which the inhabitants resort, in that respect, as to the capitals of each
respective division; so that there is no town of very considerable trade, size,
or importance, in that otherwise rich, plentiful and flourishing colony of
New Jersey.

THE HISTORY OF PENNSYLVANIA.
CHAPTER I.
William Penn's chief design in the colonization of Pennsylvania -- cause and
manner of obtaining the grant: -- King Charles the second's royal charter to
William Penn. -- Boundary between Maryland and Pennsylvania, with the real
extent and content of the latter. -- The King's declaration. -- Account of the
province, terms of sale for land, and conditions of settlement published, with
advice to the adventurers. -- Free society of traders, etc.

IT has been mentioned, in the preceding introduction, 1676.
in what manner William Penn became concerned in the province of
West-New-Jersey, W. Penn's time spent in benefiting mankind.
and a principal promoter of its colonization, in, or about, the year 1676.
After which time, as before, it appears, in the annals of his life, that he was
continually, and various ways, employed, in promoting the happiness of mankind,
both in their religious and civil capacity; insomuch that his name is revered
in a double respect, and rendered dear to posterity. The fruits of his labors
have placed his conduct above the power of envy and detraction; which would
pervert every good and laudable design to the vilest purposes, and represent
the most generous actions, as arising from sordid and sinister views: evils,
which always indicate their opposite virtues and true merit, and have their
residence in base and low minds.

His views in the colonization of Pennsylvania.
The views of William Penn, in the colonization of Pennsylvania, were most
manifest, the best and most exalted, that could occupy the human mind; Governor
Hutchinson, in his history of Massachuset's-bay, says, "Our ancestors valued
themselves upon being a colony for religion. Penn had no other motive to found
his colony, than human policy."

First, By religion here, it seems not unreasonable to suppose, the author
meant, that partial advancement of a particular sect, or of the professors of
one particular form of religion only, both in civil and ecclesiastical power
and advantages, to the exclusion of all others; which appears, by his history,
to have been the real case, in that colony: -- and that, by human policy only,
is to be understood, in this place, the conferring of no exclusive favor, nor
partial advantages, on the votaries of any one particular form of religion
alone, according to the political state or constitution of Pennsylvania,
established by William Penn; -- for as mentioned in the beginning, it is most
certain, that William Penn, both in a religious and civil respect, -- "As an
universal father, opened his arms to all mankind, without distinction of sect,
or party. In his republic, it was not the religious creed, but personal merit,
that entitled every member of society to the protection and emolument of the
state."

It is not my business here to compare this kind of religion, with what is here
called human policy alone, nor to show how far the latter excels, or
transcends, the unreasonable limitation of the former, both in a religious and
political sense, notwithstanding the names here given them; because the
perversion, or misapplication of names and words is easy and common; -- but to
call the best religion, human policy only, cannot alter the nature of it,
though it may sometimes have an effect on ignorant and inconsiderate minds, etc.

Second, Besides, I think I have known some others, so differently minded in
their conceptions of things, and so strongly swayed by the opinion, though
under pretense of religion, or from declared religious views, as to endeavor
to make men believe, "That true Christians ought not to be concerned, as
agents, in the affairs of civil government at all:" -- because, say they,
"Christ's kingdom is not of this world," etc. I shall not meddle here with such
opinions further than, in this history to oppose the invariable sentiments, and
uniform conduct of William Penn to the extravagancy of all such notions.

When preparing for his settlement and government of Pennsylvania William Penn,
in diverse of his letters and writings, on the occasion, etc. besides what is
published, of that nature, in his printed works, expressed his religious sense
and views, in a manner sufficiently clear, on this affair; of which the
following short extracts may serve, as a specimen, viz.

First, To his friends, in a more general capacity: --

"And now give me leave to say, I have served the Lord, his truth and people,
in my day, to my ability, and not sought myself, though much spent my self; so
has he firmly made me to believe, that I shall not, even, outwardly, go without
my reward; I see his blessed hand therein, that has blessed my faith and
patience, and long attendance with success. And because I have been somewhat
exercised, at times, about the nature and end of government, among men, it is
reasonable to expect, that I should endeavor to establish a just and righteous
one, in this province; that others may take example by it; -- truly this my
heart desires. For the nations want a precedent: and till vice, and corrupt
manners, be impartially rebuked and punished, and till virtue and sobriety be
cherished, the wrath of God will hang over nations. I do, therefore, desire the
Lord's wisdom to guide me, and those that may be concerned with me; that we may
do the thing, that is truly wise and just," etc. M.S.

Secondly, To a particular friend in England, who afterward removed to
Pennsylvania, taken from his own hand writing, dated, in 1681, viz. --

"For my country, I eyed the Lord, in obtaining it; and more was I drawn inward
to look to him, and to owe it to his hand and power, than to any other way; I
have so obtained it, and desire to keep it; that I may not be unworthy of his
love; but do that, which may answer his kind Providence, and serve his truth
and people: that an example may be set up to the nations: there may be room
there, though not here, for such an holy experiment." etc.


to render men as free and happy as the nature of their existence could
possibly bear, 1680.
in their civil capacity, and in their religious state, to restore to them
those lost rights and privileges, with which God and nature had originally
blessed the human race. This, in part, he effected; and, by those means, which
Providence, in the following manner, His success in this his design.
put into his hands, he so far brought to pass, as both to excite the
admiration of strangers, and to fix in posterity, that love and honor for his
memory, which the length of future time will scarcely ever be able to efface.

It has already been observed, W. Penn petitious the King in 1680.
that the eminent public services of Admiral Penn had brought him in favor at
court; to which favor his son, William Penn, succeeded, notwithstanding the
singularity of the choice of his mode of life. There was a large sum of money
due, from the government, to the Admiral, at the time of his death; much of
which he himself had advanced for the sea service; the rest was for arrearages
in his pay. In consequence of this debt, William Penn, in the summer of the
year 1680, petitioned King Charles the second, that letters patent might be
granted him, for a tract of land, in America, lying north of Maryland; on the
east, bounded by Delaware river; on the west limited as Maryland; and northward
to extend as far as plantable.

This was first laid before the Privy Council, and afterward, the Lords of the
committee of trade and plantations. After several meetings on the occasion, in
which the objections, from the Duke of York, by his agent, Sir John Werden, as
proprietor of that tract of Land, since called, the counties of New Castle,
Kent and Sussex, on Delaware; and from the Lord Baltimore, proprietor of
Maryland, were fully heard and debated; the Lord Chief Justice North, and the
Attorney General, Sir William Jones, being consulted both respecting the grant
itself, 1681.
and also the form, or manner, of making it. W. Penn obtains the grant of
Pennsylvania.
The affair was at length, resulted in William Penn's favor; and he was, by
charter, dated at Westminster, the fourth day of March, 1681, made and
constituted full and absolute proprietor of all that tract of land and
province, now called Pennsylvania, and invested with the powers of government
of the same. Anderson, in his excellent treatise, entitled, "An historical and
chronological deduction of the origin of commerce," etc. published in two
volumes folio, under the year 1680, thus mentions the rise of this colony, viz.

"The same year, 1680, gave rise to the noble English colony of Pennsylvania,
in North America;" -- "That country, till now, was mostly a part of Virginia,
and another part of it was a part of New York colony. Mr. William Penn, an
eminent Quaker, and a gentleman of great knowledge and true philosophy, had it
granted to him, at this time; -- which he designed for a retreat or asylum, for
the people of his religious persuasion, then made uneasy at home, through the
bigotry of spiritual courts, etc. Mr. Penn, therefore, carried thither with him
a large embarkation of those Quakers; afterward, from time to time, joined by
many more, from Britain and Ireland. At his first arrival there, he found many
English families in it, and considerable numbers of Dutch and Swedes who all
readily submitted to his wise and excellent regulations; which highly merit to
be known by all persons, who would apply to colonizing. The true wisdom, as
well as equity, of his unlimited toleration of all religious persuasions, as
well as his kind, just and prudent treatment of the native Indians, also his
laws, policy and government, so endeared him to the planters, and so widely
spread the fame of his whole economy, that, although so lately planted, it is
thought, at this day (about the year 1760) to have more white people in it,
than any other colony, on all the continent of English America, New England
alone excepted."




This charter consists of twenty-three sections. The preamble to which declares
the reasons for the said grant were, Reasons for the grant, etc.
"The commendable desire of Willian Penn to enlarge the British Empire, by
promoting commodities of trade; reducing the savage natives, by gentle and just
means, to the love of civil society, and the Christian religion, and by
transplanting an ample colony into that uncultivated country, together with the
memorable services of his father Admiral Penn;" The whole is expressed in the
following manner, viz.

"The Charter of Charles the second, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
King, 1681.
defender of the faith, etc. unto William Penn, proprietary and Governor of the
province of Pennsylvania,
"Charles, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc. to all, to whom these presents shall come, Greeting:
"Whereas our trusty and well-beloved subject William Penn, Esquire, Preamble.
son and heir of Sir William Penn deceased, (out of a commendable desire to
enlarge our British empire, and promote such useful commodities, as may be of
benefit to us and our dominions, as also to reduce the savage Natives, by just
and gentle manners, to the love of civil society, and christian religion has
humbly besought leave of US, to transport an ample colony unto a certain
country, herein after described, in the parts of America, not yet cultivated
and planted; and has likewise so humbly besought our royal Majesty to give,
grant and confirm all the said country, with certain privileges and
jurisdictions, requisite for the good government and safety of the said country
and colony, to him, and his heirs forever.

Section I.
Consideration of the grant.
"Know ye, therefore, that we, (favoring the petition and good purpose of the
said William Penn, and having regard to the memory and merits of his late
father, in diverse services, and particularly to his conduct, courage and
discretion, under our dearest brother James Duke of York, in that signal battle
and victory, fought and obtained, against the Dutch fleet, commanded by the
Here Van Opdam, in the year 1665: In consideration thereof, of our special
grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion) have given and granted, and, by this
our present Charter, for us, our heirs and successors, do give and grant unto
the said William Penn, his heirs and assigns, all that tract, or part, of land,
in America, with the islands therein contained, Bounds of the grant.
as the same is bounded, on the east, by Delaware river, from twelve miles
distance northwards of New Castle town, unto the three and fortieth degree of
northern latitude, if the said river does extend so far northward, but if the
said river shall not extend so far northward, then, by the said river, so far
as it does extend; and from the head of the said river, the eastern bounds are
to be determined by a meridian line, to be drawn from the head of the said
river, unto the said forty-third degree. The said land to extend westward five
degrees in longitude, to be computed from the said eastern bounds; and the said
lands to be bounded on the north by the beginning of the three and fortieth
degree of northern latitude, and, on the south, by a circle, drawn at twelve
miles distance from New Castle, northward and westward, unto the beginning of
the fortieth degree of northern latitude; and then by a straight line westward
to the limits of longitude above mentioned.

Section II.
"We do also give and grant unto the said William Penn, 1681.
his heirs and assigns, the free, and undisturbed use, and continuance in, and
passage unto, and out of all and singular ports, harbors, Free passage, etc.
granted.
bays, waters, rivers, isles and inlets, belonging unto, or leading to, and
from, the country, or islands aforesaid, and all the soils, lands, fields,
woods, underwoods, mountains, hills, fenns, isles, lakes, rivers, waters,
rivulets, bays and inlets, situated, or being within, or belonging to, the
limits, or bounds, aforesaid, together with the fishing of all sorts of fish,
whales, sturgeon, and all royal, and other fishes, in the seas, bays, inlets,
waters, or rivers, within the premises, and all the fish taken therein; and
also all veins, mines, minerals and quarries, as well discovered as not
discocovered, of gold, silver, gemms, and precious stones, and all other
whatsoever, be it stones, metals, or of any other thing or matter whatsoever,
found, or to be found, within the country, isles, or limits, aforesaid.

Section III.
"And him, the said William Penn, his heirs and assigns, we do by this our
royal charter, for us, W. Penn, etc. made absolute proprietary, etc.
our heirs and successors, make, create and constitute the true and absolute
proprietary of the country aforesaid, and of all other the premises; saving
always to us, our heirs and successors, the faith and allegiance of the said
William Penn, his heirs and assigns, and of all other proprietaries, tenants
and inhabitants, that are, or shall be, within the territories and precincts
aforesaid; and saving also unto us, our heirs and successors, the sovereignty
of the aforesaid country; to have, hold, possess and enjoy the said tract of
land, country, isles, inlets, and other the premises, unto the said William
Penn, his heirs and assigns, forever, to be holden of us, our heirs and
successors, kings of England, as of our castle of Windsor, in the county of
Berks, To be held in common soccage, etc.
in free and common soccage, by fealty only, for all services and not in
capite, or by knight service: yielding and paying therefore to us, our heirs
and successors, two Beaver skins, to be delivered at our castle of Windsor, on
the first day of January, One-fifth of gold and silver oar reserved.
in every year; and also the fifth part of of all gold, and silver oar, which
shall, from time to time, happen to be found within the limits aforesaid, clear
of all charges. And of our further grace, certain knowledge, mere motion, We
have thought fit to erect, and we do hereby erect, the aforesaid country and
islands into a province and seigniory, The name.
and do call it Pensilvania, and so from henceforth will have it called.

Section IV.
"And, for as much as, we have hereby made and ordained the aforesaid William
Penn, his heirs and assigns, the true and absolute proprietaries of all the
lands and dominions aforesaid, Know ye, therefore, Power to make laws, etc.
that we (reposing special trust and confidence in the fidelity, wisdom,
justice and provident circumspection of the said William Penn) for us, our
heirs and successors, do grant free, full and absolute power, by virtue of
these presents, to him and his heirs, to his, and their deputies and
lieutenants, for the good and happy government of the said country, to ordain,
make and enact, and, under his and their seals, to publish any laws whatsoever,
for the raising of money for public uses of the said province, or for any other
end, appertaining either unto the public state, peace, or safety of the said
country, or unto the private utility of particular persons, according unto
their best discretion, and with the advice, assent and approbation of the
freemen of the said country, or the greater part of them, or of their
delegates, or deputies, whom, for the enacting of the said laws, when, and as
often as need shall require, we will that the said William Penn, and his heirs
shall assemble, in such sort and form, With the Assembly, etc.
as to him and them shall seem best, and the same laws duly to execute, unto
and upon all people, within the said country and limits thereof.

Section V.
"And we do likewise give and grant unto the said William Penn, and to his
heirs, Power to make judges and other officers, etc.
and their deputies and lieutenants, full power and authority to appoint and
establish any Judges and Justices, Magistrates, and other officers whatsoever,
(for the probates of wills, and for the granting of administration within the
precincts aforesaid, and with what power soever, and in such form, as to the
said William Penn, or his heirs shall seem most convenient: also to remit,
release, Power of pardoning, reprieving, etc.
pardon and abolish (whether before judgment or after) all crimes and offenses
whatsoever, committed within the said country, against the laws, (treason and
wilful and malicious murder only excepted, and, in those cases, to grant
reprieves, until our pleasure may be known therein) and to do all and every
other thing and things, which unto the complete establishment of justice, unto
courts and tribunals, forms of judicature, and manner of proceedings do belong,
although, in these presents, express mention be not made thereof; and by
judges, by them delegated, to award process, hold pleas, and determine, in all
the said courts and tribunals, What may be done by the judges, etc.
all actions, suits and causes whatsoever, as well criminal as civil, personal,
real and mixed; which laws, so as aforesaid, to be published, our pleasure is,
and so we enjoin, require and command, shall be most absolute and available in
law; and that all the liege people and subjects of us, our heirs and
successors, do observe and keep the same inviolably in those part, so far as
they concern them, under the pain therein expressed, or to be expressed.
Provided nevertheless, Proviso.
That the same laws be consonant to reason, and not repugnant, or contrary,
but, (as near as conveniently may be) agreeable to the laws and statutes, and
rights of this our kingdom of England; and saving and reserving to us, our
heirs and successors, the receiving, The hearing of appeals reserved.
hearing and determining of the appeal and appeals of all, or any person, or
persons, of, in, or belonging to the territories aforesaid, or touching any
judgment to be there made, or given.

Section VI.
"And, for as much as, in the government of so great a country, sudden
accidents do often happen, whereunto it will be necessary to apply remedy,
before the freeholders of the said province, or their delegates, or deputies,
can be assembled, to the making of laws; neither will it be convenient, that
instantly upon every such occasion, so great a multitude should be called
together: Therefore (for the better government of the said country) we will and
ordain, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, do grant unto
the said William Penn and his heirs, by themselves, or by their Magistrates and
officers, in that behalf, duly to be ordained, Power to make ordinances, etc.
as aforesaid, to make and constitute fit and wholesome ordinances, from time
to time, within the said country to be kept and observed, as well for the
preservation of the peace, as for the better government of the people there
inhabiting; and publicly to notify the same to all persons, whom the same does,
or may any ways concern. Which ordinances our will and pleasure is shall be
observed inviolably within the said province, under the pains therein to be
expressed, so as the said ordinances be consonant to reason, and be not
repugnant nor contrary, but (so far as conveniently may be) agreeable with the
laws of our kingdom of England, and so as the said ordinances be not extended,
in any sort, to bind, change, 1681.
or take away the right, or interest of any person, or persons, for, or in,
their life, members, freehold, Their extent.
goods, or chattels. And our farther will and pleasure is, That the laws for
regulating and governing of property within the said province, as well as for
the descent and enjoyment of lands, Property, etc. regulated by the laws of
England, till altered, etc.
as likewise for the enjoyment and succession of goods and chattels, and
likewise as to felonies, shall be and continue the same, as they shall be for
the time being by the general course of the law in our kingdom of England,
until the said laws shall be altered by the said William Penn, his heirs or
assigns, and by the freemen of the said province, their delegates, or deputies,
or the greater part of them.

Section VII.
"And to the end that the said William Penn, or his heirs, or other the
planters, owners, or inhabitants of the said province may not, at any time
hereafter (by misconstruction of the power aforesaid) through inadvertency, or
design, depart from that faith and due allegiance, which by the laws of this
our realm of England, they and all our subjects, in our dominions and
territories, always owe to us, our heirs and successors, by color of any
extent, or largeness of powers hereby given, or pretended to be given, or by
force or color of any laws hereafter to be made, in the said province, by
virtue of any such powers; Duplicate of all laws to be transmitted to the privy
council, etc.
Our farther will and pleasure is, that a transcript or duplicate, of all laws,
which shall be so, as aforesaid, made and published within the said province,
shall within five years after the making thereof, be transmitted and delivered
to the Privy Council, for the time being, of us, our heirs and successors: And
if any of the said laws, within the space of six months after that they shall
be so transmitted and delivered, be declared by us, our heirs and successors,
in our, or their Privy Council, inconsistent with the sovereignty, or lawful
prerogative of us, our heirs and successors, or contrary to the faith and
allegiance, due to the legal government of this realm, from the said William
Penn, or his heirs, or of the planters and inhabitants of the said province,
and that thereupon any of the said laws shall be adjudged and declared to be
void by us, our heirs and successors, under our, or their privy seal, that
then, and from thenceforth such laws, concerning which such judgment and
declaration shall be made, shall become void: otherwise the said laws, so
transmitted, shall remain and stand in full force, according to the true intent
and meaning thereof.

Section VIII.
Liberty for King's subjects to transport themselves, etc.
"Furthermore, that this new colony may the more happily increase by the
multitude of people resorting thither; Therefore, we, for us, our heirs and
successors, do give and grant, by these presents, power, license, and liberty
unto all the liege people and subjects, both present and future, of us, our
heirs and successors, (excepting those, who shall be especially forbidden) to
transport themselves and families unto the said country, with such convenient
shipping, as, by the laws of this our kingdom of England, they ought to use,
and with fitting provision; paying only the customs therefore due, and there to
settle themselves, dwell and inhabit and plant, for the public, and their own
private advantage.

Section IX.
"And furthermore, that our subjects may be the rather encouraged to undertake
this expedition, with ready and cheerful minds, And their goods, merchandise,
etc.
Know ye, That we, of our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, do
give and grant, by virtue of these presents, as well unto the said William
Penn, and his heirs, as to all others, who shall, from time to time, repair
unto the said country, full license to lade and freight, in any ports
whatsoever of us, our heirs and successors, according to the laws made, or to
be made, within our kingdom of England, and unto the said country, by them,
their servants or assigns, to transport all and singular their goods, wares and
merchandises, as likewise all sorts of grain whatsoever, and all other things
whatsoever, necessary for food, or clothing, not prohibited, by the laws and
statutes of our kingdom and dominions, to be carried out of the said kingdom,
without any let, or molestation of us, our heirs and successors, or of any of
the officers of us, our heirs or successors; Paying the customs.
saving always to us, our heirs and successors, the legal impositions, customs,
or other duties and payments for the said wares and merchandises, by any law of
statute, due, or to be due, to us, our heirs and successors.

Section X.
"And we do further, for us, our heirs and successors, give and grant unto the
said William Penn, his heirs and assigns, Power to divide the country into
districts etc.
free and absolute power, to divide the said country and islands into towns,
hundreds and counties, and to erect and incorporate towns into buroughs, and
buroughs into cities, and to make and constitute fairs and markets therein,
with all other convenient privileges and immunities, according to the merits of
the inhabitants, and the fitness of the places, and to do all, and every other
thing and things, touching the premises, which to him, or them, shall seem meet
and requisite; albeit they be such, as of their own nature might otherwise
require a more special commandment and warrant, than, in these presents, is
expressed.

Section XI.
"We will also, and, by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, we do
give and grant license, by this our charter, unto the said William Penn, his
heirs and assigns, and to all the inhabitants and dwellers in the province
aforesaid, To import and export produce into and from England.
both present and to come, to import, or unlade, by themselves, or their
servants, factors, or assigns, all merchandises and goods whatsoever, that
shall arise of the fruits and commodities of the said province, either by land
or sea, into any of the ports of us, our heirs, or successors, in our kingdom
of England, and not into any other country whatsoever: and we give him full
power to dispose of the said goods, in the said ports; and, if need be, within
one year after the unlading of the same, to lade the said merchandise and goods
again, into the same, or other ships, and to transport the same into any other
countries, either of our dominions, or foreign, according to law; provided
always, Paying the customs, etc.
that they pay such customs and impositions, subsidies and duties for the same,
to us, our heirs and successors, as the rest of our subjects of our kingdom of
England, for the time being, shall be bound to pay, and do observe the acts of
navigation, and other laws, in that behalf made.

Section XII.
Power to constitute ports, etc.
"And furthermore, of our ample and special grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, we do, for us, our heirs and successors, grant unto the said William
Penn, his heirs and assigns, full and absolute power and authority, to make,
erect and constitute, within the said province, and the isles and inlets
aforesaid, such and so many sea ports, harbors, creeks, havens, keys, and
other places, for discharging and unlading of goods and merchandise, out of the
ships, boats, and other vessels, and landing them unto such, and so many
places, and with such rights, jurisdictions, liberties and privileges, unto the
said ports belonging, as to him and them shall seem most expedient; and that
all, and singular the ships, boats and other vessels, which shall come for
merchandise and trade, into the said province, or out of the same, shall be
laden, or unladen, only at such ports as shall be created and constituted by
the said William Penn, his heirs, or assigns, (any use, custom or thing to the
contrary notwithstanding.) Provided, that the said William Penn and his heirs,
Proviso for admission of the King's officers, etc.
and the Lieutenants and Governors, for the time being, shall admit and receive
in and about all such havens, ports, creeks and keys, all officers and their
deputies, who shall, from time to time, be appointed for that purpose by the
farmers, or commissioners of our customs for the time being.

Section XIII.
"And we do further appoint and ordain, and by these presents, for us, our
heirs and successors, Power to assess customs on goods, etc.
we do grant unto the said William Penn, his heirs and assigns, that he, the
said William Penn, his heirs and assigns, may, from time to time, for ever,
have and enjoy the customs and subsidies, in the ports, harbors and other
creeks, and places aforesaid, within the province aforesaid, payable, or due
for merchandise and wares there to be laded and unladed, the said customs and
subsidies to be reasonably assessed, upon any occasion, by themselves and the
people there, as aforesaid to be assembled, to whom we give power by these
presents, for us, our heirs and successors, upon just cause, and due
proportion, to assess and impose the same; saving unto us, our heirs and
successors, such impositions and customs, as, by act of Parliament, are, and
shall be, appointed.

Section XIV.
"And it is our farther will and pleasure, The Proprietor to appoint an
Attorney, to reside in London, etc.
that the said William Penn, his heirs and assigns, shall, from time to time,
constitute and appoint an Attorney, or agent, to reside in, or near our city of
London; who shall make known the place where he shall dwell, or may be found,
unto the clerks of our privy council, for the time being, or one of them, and
shall be ready to appear in any of our courts, at Westminster, to answer for
any misdemeanor, that shall be committed, or by any wilful default, or neglect,
permitted by the said William Penn, his heirs or assigns, against the laws of
trade and navigation; and after it shall be ascertained, in any of our courts,
what damages we, or our heirs, or successors, shall have sustained by such
default, or neglect, the said William Penn, his heirs, or assigns, shall pay
the same within one year, after such taxation, and demand thereof from such
attorney; or in case there shall be no such attorney by the space of one year,
or such attorney shall not make payment of such damages, within the space of a
year, and answer such other forfeitures and penalties, within the said time, as
by acts of parliament, in England, are and shall be provided according to the
true intent and meaning of these presents; then it shall be lawful for us, our
heirs and successors, to seize and resume the government of the said province
or country, and the same to retain, until payment shall be made thereof: but
notwithstanding any such seizure, or resumption of the government, nothing
concerning the propriety, or ownership, of any lands, tenements, or other
hereditaments, goods or chattels of any of the adventurers, planters or owners,
other than the respective offenders there, shall any ways be affected or
molested thereby.

Section XV.
Peace and War to be observed as in Great Britain.
"Provided always, and our will and pleasure is, that neither the said William
Penn, nor his heirs, nor any other, the inhabitants of the said province,
shall, at any time hereafter, have or maintain, any correspondence with any
other king, prince or state, or with any of their subjects, who shall then be
in war against us, our heirs and successors; nor shall the said William Penn,
or his heirs or any other inhabitants of the said province, make war, or do any
act of hostility against any other king, prince, or state, or any of their
subjects, who shall then be in league or amity with us, our heirs and
successors.

Section XVI.
"And because, in so remote a country, and situate near many barbarous nations,
the incursions as well of the savages themselves, as of other enemies, pirates
and robbers, may probably be feared; Therefore, we have given, and, for us, our
heirs and successors, do give power, by these presents, to the said William
Penn, his heirs and assigns, Power of a captain general granted, etc.
by themselves, or their captains, or other their officers, to levy, muster and
train all sorts of men, of what condition soever, or wheresoever born, in the
said province of Pennsylvania, for the time being, and to make war, and to
pursue the enemies and robbers aforesaid, as well by sea as by land, even,
without the limits of the said province, and, by God's assistance, to vanquish
and take them; and being taken, to put them to death, by the law of war, or to
save them; at their pleasure, and to do all and every other thing, which unto
the charge and office of a captain general of an army belongs, or has
accustomed to belong, as fully and freely as any captain general of an army
has ever had the same.

Section XVII.
"And furthermore, of our special grace, and of our certain knowledge and mere
motion, we have given and granted, and, by these presents, for us, our heirs
and successors, do give and grant unto the said William Penn, his heirs and
assigns, Powers to alien the premises.
full and absolute power, license and authority, that he, the said William
Penn, his heirs and assigns, from tune to time hereafter for ever, at his or
their own will and pleasure, may assign, alien, grant, demise, or enfeoff of
the premises so many, and such parts and parcels to him, or them, that shall be
willing to purchase the same, as they shall think fit; to have and to hold to
them, the said person, or persons willing to take and purchase, their heirs and
assigns, in fee simple, or fee tail, or for the term of life, lives, or years,
to be held of the said William Penn, his heirs, or assigns, as of the said
seigniory of Windsor, by such services, customs, or rents, as shall seem meet
to the said William Penn, his heirs, or assigns, and not immediately of us, our
heirs or successors.

Section XVIII.
Power to the purchasers to hold by the Proprietor's grant.
"And to the same person, or persons, and to all and every of them, we do give
and grant, by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, license,
authority and power, that such person or persons, may take the premises, or any
parcel thereof, of the aforesaid William Penn, his heirs, or assigns, and the
same to hold to themselves, their heirs and assigns, in what estate of
inheritance soever, in fee simple, or in fee tail, or otherwise, as to him the
said William Penn, his heirs or assigns, shall seem expedient: The statute
made, in the parliament of Edward, the son of King Henry late King of England,
our predecessor (commonly called the statute, "Quia Emptores Terrarum," lately
published in our kingdom of England) in in any wise notwithstanding.

Section XIX.
Leave to erect manors, etc.
"And by these presents, we give and grant license unto the said William Penn
and his heirs, and likewise to all, and every such person, or persons, to whom
the said William Penn, or his heirs, shall, at any time hereafter, grant any
estate, or inheritance, as aforesaid, to erect any parcels of land, within the
province aforesaid, into manors, by and with the license, to be first had and
obtained, for that purpose, 1681.
under the hand and seal of the said William Penn, or his heirs; and, in every
of the said manors, to have and hold a Court Baron, with all things whatsoever,
which to a Court Baron do belong, and to have and to hold View of Frank Pledge,
for the conservation of the peace, and the better government of those parts, by
themselves, or their stewards, or by the lords for the time being, of the
manors to be deputed, when they shall be erected, and, in the same, to use all
things belonging to the View of Frank Pledge, And we do further grant license
and authority, That every such person, or persons, who shall erect any such
manor, or manors, as aforesaid, shall, or may, grant all, or any part of his
said land to any person, or persons, in fee simple, or any other estate of
inheritance to be held of the said manors respectively, so as no further tenure
shall be created, but that upon all further, or other alienations thereafter to
be made, the said lands so aliened shall be held of the same lord and his
heirs, of whom the aliener did then before hold, and by the like rents and
services, which were before due and accustomed.

Section XX.
"And furthermore, our pleasure is, and by these presents, for us, our heirs
and successors, we do covenant and grant to and with the said William Penn, his
heirs and assigns, that we, our heirs and successors, shall, at no time
hereafter, No tax, etc. without the consent of the proprietor or people, or by
act of parliament.
set, or make, or cause to be set, or made, any imposition, custom, or other
taxation, rate, or contribution whatsoever, in and upon the dwellers and
inhabitants of the aforesaid province, for their lands, tenements, goods, or
chattels, within the said province, or in and upon any goods and merchandises
within the province, or to be laden, or unladen within the ports, or harbors
of the said province, unless the same be with the consent of the Proprietary,
or Chief Governor, or Assembly, or by act of parliament in England.

Section XXI.
This declaration to be deemed an acquittance.
"And our pleasure is, and, for us, our heirs and successors, we charge and
command, that this our declaration shall be from henceforth, from time to time,
be received and allowed, in all our courts, and before all the judges of us,
our heirs and successors, for a sufficient lawful discharge, payment and
acquittance; commanding all the officers and ministers of us, our heirs and
successors, No officer, etc. to counteract this charter, etc.
and enjoining them upon pain of our highest displeasure, that they do not
presume, at any time, to attempt any thing to the contrary of the premises, or
that do, in any sort, withstand the same; but, that they be, at all times,
aiding and assisting, as is fitting, to the said William Penn, and his heirs,
and unto the inhabitants and merchants of the province aforesaid, their
servants, ministers, factors and assigns, in the full use and fruition of the
benefit of this our charter.

Section XXII.
Provision for a preacher, etc. on application to the bishop of London, etc.
"And our farther pleasure is, and we do hereby, for us, our heirs and
successors, charge and require, That, if any of the inhabitants of the said
province, to the number of twenty, shall, at any time hereafter, be desirous,
and shall, by any writing, or by any person deputed by them, signify such their
desire to the bishop of London, for the time being, that any preacher, or
preachers, to be approved of by the said bishop, may be sent unto them, for
their instruction; that then such preacher, or preachers, shall and may reside
within the said province, without any denial, or molestation whatsoever.

Section XXIII.
"And, if perchance hereafter any doubt or question should arise concerning the
true sense and meaning of any word, clause, or sentence, contained in this our
present charter, we will, ordain and command, that, at all times, and in all
things, Double meaning of any part, to be in favor of William Penn, etc.
such interpretation be made thereof, and allowed, in any of our courts
whatsoever, as shall be adjudged most advantageous and favorable unto the said
William Penn, his heirs and assigns: Provided always, no interpretation be
admitted thereof, by which the allegiance due unto us, our heirs and
successors, may suffer any prejudice or diminution; although express mention be
not made, in these presents, of the true yearly value, or certainty of the
premises, or any part thereof, or of other gifts and grants, made by us, and
our progenitors, or predecessors, unto the said William Penn: Any statute, act,
ordinance, provision, proclamation, or restraint, heretofore had, made,
published, ordained, or provided, or any other thing, cause, or matter
whatsoever, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness
whereof we have caused these our letters to he made patent: Witness Ourself, at
Westminster, the fourth day of March, Date.
in the three and thirtieth year of our reign, Annoque Domini one thousand six
hundred and eighty-one.

"By writ of Privy Seal, PIGOTT.

By the first section of this charter the extent and boundary of the province
are expressed in such plain terms, Of the boundary between Maryland and
Pennsylvania.
that it might reasonably be supposed they could not well, or easily, be
misunderstood: three degrees of latitude, included and bounded, between the
beginning of the fortieth, and the beginning of the forty-third degree of north
latitude, equal to about two hundred and eight English statute miles, north and
south, with five degrees of longitude, westward from Delaware river, which, in
the parrallel of forty-one degree, are equal to nearly two hundred and
sixty-five miles, east and west, are as clearly and manifestly expressed to be
granted to the proprietary of Pennsylvania, as words can do it; and we are
otherwise sufficiently certified that the same space, or quantity of land, was
intended by the King to be included in the said grant; yet the dispute between
the proprietaries of Maryland and Pennsylvania, on this point, was afterward
remarkable, and of many years continuance; occasioned by each of the respective
proprietaries claiming to himself the whole space, or extent, of the land,
contained in the fortieth degree of latitude; which was the north boundary of
Maryland, by patent of that province; and which, though prior to that of
Pennsylvania, specifies, or assigns, no particular part of the said degree, for
the boundary, as the Pennsylvania grant does: which space, or degree,
containing near seventy English miles in breadth, north and south, and in
length westward, so far as Maryland extends, was no small matter to occasion a
dispute.

But notwithstanding the clearness of the terms, by which the boundary between
the said provinces, is expressed in their respective charters, as above
mentioned, yet this dispute was, at length, in the year 1732, finally settled
chiefly in favor of Maryland; by fixing the said boundary between the two
provinces, only fifteen miles due south of the most southerly part of
Philadelphia, or in the parallel of 39 degrees, 44 minutes nearly, instead of
39 degrees, or at the beginning of the fortieth degree, as mentioned and
intended by charter; which renders the real extent of Pennsylvania, Real extent
and content of Pennsylvania at present.
north and south, only about 155 miles, instead of 208, and makes the square
miles, in the province about 41,000, and the number of acres, 26,288,000 or
near twenty-six millions.

In consequence of this charter, on the second day of April, next ensuing, the
King issued a declaration to the inhabitants and planters of Pennsylvania,
expressive of the grant, describing the bounds of the province, The King issues
a declaration.
and enjoining them to yield all due obedience to the proprietary, etc.
according to the powers granted by the said charter." This declaration was as
follows, viz.

"Charles R.

Whereas his majesty, in consideration of the great merit and faithful services
of Sir William Penn, deceased, and for diverse other good causes, him thereunto
moving, has been graciously pleased, by letters-patent, hearing date the
fourth day of March, last past, to give and grant unto William Penn, Esquire,
son and heir of the said Sir William Penn, all that tract of land in America,
called by the name of Pennsylvania, as the same is bounded, on the east, by
Delaware river, from twelve miles distance northward of New Castle town, unto
the three and fortieth degree of northern latitude, if the said river does
extend so far northward; and, if the said river shall not extend so far
northward, then, by the said river, so far as it does extend, and from the head
of the said river, the eastern bounds to be determined by a meridian line, to
be drawn from the head of the said river, unto the said three and fortieth
degree; and the said province to extend westward five degrees in longitude, to
be computed from the said eastern bounds; and to be bounded on the north by the
beginning of the three and fortieth degree of northern latitude, and on the
south, by a circle drawn at twelve miles distance, from New Castle, northward
and westward unto the beginning of the fortieth degree of north latitude, and
then by a straight line westward to the limit of longitude, above mentioned;
together with all powers, preheminences and jurisdictions, necessary for the
government of the said province, as by the said letters patent, reference being
thereunto had, does more at large appear.

"His majesty does, therefore, hereby publish and declare his royal will and
pleasure, that all persons settled, or inhabiting within the limits of the said
province, do yield all due obedience to the said William Penn, his heirs and
assigns, as absolute proprietaries and governors thereof, as also to the
deputy, or deputies, agents or lieutenants, lawfully commissioned by him, or
them, according to the powers and authorities, granted by the said letters
patent, wherewith his Majesty expects and requires a ready compliance from all
persons whom it may concern, as they tender his Majesty's displeasure.

"Given at the Court, at White Hall, the second day of April 1681, in the three
and thirtieth year of our reign." By his Majesty's special command, CONWAY."




Willam Penn, W. Penn publishes an account of province, etc.
having obtained these proper requisites, immediately published such account of
the province, as could then be given; with the royal charter, and other papers
relative thereto, offering easy terms of sale for lands, viz. forty shillings
sterling for one hundred acres, and one shilling per annum. forever; This one
shilling for ever, is the original institution of the Quit-rea's in the
province; which is a compact as old, and to be held equally binding and
inviolable, as that for the first purchase money: -- Respecting which, in the
first, or early publications, concerning the province, I find the following
observations then made, viz.

"The province is cast at a penny an acre; but he sets apart several parcels,
which he calls shares; these he sells saving a Quit-rent, necessary to secure
the title and tenure; that is, whereas five thousand acres (which make a share)
come, at a penny an acre, to 20 pounds, 16 shillings and 8 pence, yearly. For
one hundred pound paid down, he sells that yearly rent for 18 pounds, 6
shillings and 8 pence; and reserves but fifty shillings; which any be reduced,
as the purchaser pleases; but something must he reserved, for security of the
title," etc. Again --

"The shares I sell be certain, as to the number of acres; that is to for,
every one shall contain five thousand acres; the price, one hundred pounds and
for the Quit-rent, one English shilling or the value of it, yearly, for a
hundred acres; which, such as will, may now, or hereafter, buy off, to an
inconsiderable matter; but, as I hold by a small rent, of the King, so all must
hold of me, by a small rent, for their own security," etc.

In the disputes, which afterward happened between some of the Lieutenant
Governors, and the Assemblies, these quit-rents notwithstanding appear to have
been regarded, by the latter, as a grievance; and the application of them has
been insinuated, as intended, at first, by the proprietor himself, for the
support of the government, more especially that of the Leiutenant Governors:
But as I find nothing authentic, on record, to countenance this insinuation, I
shall here insert part of a reply of one of these governors to the Assembly, in
1708, on the subject, in the following words; which I have never seen confuted,
viz.

-- "It is very reasonable to believe that the proprietary, having sold lands,
to a great value, received considerable sums for them; and we find he reserved
a quit-rent on them all; but, thou, upon enquiry, I per^eive, that, in
consideration of the money, and those quit-rents, the proprietary, by firm, but
common deeds of sale, granted the purchasers a free estate of large tracts of
land, which they, or some in their behalf, now enjoy; and, am told, that there
is not, in any of these deeds, one warranty, to defend the possessor against
hostile, or invasive, force, or the covenant, that mentions government, or the
support of it, in any of them all; but that forty shillings down, and one
shilling yearly, was the consideration paid, on the one hand, for an hundred
(...) of land granted on the other.

I am sensible, gentlemen, I have been told of these quit-rents once before, to
the great surprise of those, that heard it, and knew much more of the matter,
than I could, at that time^ but, upon a full scrutiny into the whole, by some
whom it concerned, I perceived there could not be one trace sound of any such
compact, but in the pretended memory of two or three persons, who were noted to
have stronger prejudices, than reason; and who, in these points, were not too
much to be relied on; and was informed, that, for the many years before this
government wanted supplies, this notion had never once been heard of, but was
just then started, and perceived it to be greedily said hold of by some, whose
narrowness made every pretense, to save money, very acceptable; and partly by
others, to whom any kind of handle, to obstract business, was no less
agreeable; but was entirely exploded by such as were much better judges, from
clearer reasons, and better opportunities of knowing; so that, upon the whole,
gentlemen, I find the proprietary, and those concerned for him, account, that
those quit-rents, and the government here, are to more related, than his
estate, in Europe is to that of Great Britain." --.


and good conditions of settlement, to such as chose to be adventurers in the
new country.

This offer and invitation, to the people, he mixed, or qualified, with such
Christian caution and advice, as indicated a real concern both for their
temporal and eternal felicity, which he closed in these words: --

-- "To conclude, Part of William Penn's advice to the adventurer's, etc.
I desire all my dear country-folks, who may be inclined to go into those
parts, to consider seriously the premises, as well the inconveniency as future
ease and plenty; that so none may move rashly, or from a fickle, but from a
solid, mind; having, above all things, an eye to the providence of God, in the
disposing of themselves; and I would further advise all such, at least, to have
the permission, if not the good liking, of their near relations; for that is
both natural, and a duty incumbent upon all. And by this will natural
affections be preserved, and a friendly and profitable correspondence between
them; in all which I beseech Almighty God to direct us; that his blessing may
attend our honest endeavors; and then the consequence of all our undertakings
will turn to the glory of his great name, and all true happiness to us, and our
posterity. Amen."

Oh publishing these proposals, a great number of purchasers soon appeared, in
London, Liverpool, The free society of traders, etc.
and especially about Bristol; among these were James Claypole, Nicholas Moore,
Philip Forde, and others, who formed a company, called, The free society of
Traders in Pennsylvania. These last mentioned persons, with William Sharloe,
Edward Pierce, John Simcock, Thomas Bracy and Edward Brooks, having purchased
20,000 acres of land, in trust for the said company, published articles of
trade, and entered into diverse branches thereof themselves; which were soon
improved upon by others.

CHAPTER II.
Conditions, or concessions published. -- Sailing of the first ship for
Pennsylvania. -- Joseph Kirkbride, etc. -- The Proprietor's manner of treating
the Indians. -- His letter to them. -- First frame of government and laws
published. -- Part of the preface to the same. -- Purport of the frame, and one
of the laws. -- Duke of York's deed of re-lease to William Penn. -- The
territories obtained, etc. -- Boundary between the territories and Maryland. --

The proprietary publishes conditions, or concessions, etc.
THE proprietary, having already made considerable sales of land, agreed with
the adventurers and purchasers on the first deed of settlement, which in part,
may be regarded as an essay toward a constitution of government, according to
the powers granted him by charter. It consists chiefly of certain rules of
settlement, of treating the Indians with justice and friendship; and of keeping
the peace, agreeable to the customs, usages and laws of England, to be observed
on their arrival in the country, and there to be altered, on occasion. This
compact is published, under the title of, "Certain conditions, or concessions,
agreed upon by William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the province of
Pennsylvania; and those, who are the adventurers and purchasers, in the same
province, the 11th. of July, 1681." One of the stipulations in this instrument
shows the provident care and knowledge of the proprietary, in a matter, whose
continued neglect will doubtless, in future, be found more important to the
country than has been imagined, viz.

"That, in clearing the ground, care be taken to leave one acre of trees for
every five acres cleared, especially to preserve oak and mulberries, for silk
and shipping."


Which may be seen at length, in the appendix, No. I.

Three ships sailed for Pennsylvania this year; two from London, and one from
Bristol. The John and Sarah, from London, The first three ships sail for
Pennsylvania, etc.
commanded by Henry Smith, is said to have been the first that arrived there;
the Amity, Richard Dimon, master, from the same place, with passengers, was
blown off, to the West Indies; and did not arrive at the province, till the
spring of the next year; the Bristol Factor, Roger Drew, commander, arrived at
the place, where Chester now stands, on the 11th. of December; where the
passengers, seeing some houses, went on shore, at Robert Wade's landing, near
the lower side of Chester-creek; and, the river having froze up that night, the
passengers remained there all the winter. Among the passengers, in these ships,
were John Otter, Nathaniel Allen and Edmund Lovett, with their families; and
several servants of Governor Penn. -- Joseph Kirkbride, then a boy, being one
of them, who afterward became a person of importance, in the province. He is
an instance, among many others that might be given, in the early time of this
country, of advancement from low beginning to rank of eminence and esteem,
through industry, with a virtuous and prudent conduct. -- The difficulties,
hardships and trials of many of the well disposed early settlers, however low
in the world, rather visibly tended to their promotion, and, in some respect
rendered them more useful and worthy members of society, in this new country;
while others, even possessed of handsome patrimonies, at first, but more
improvident, and less accustomed to encounter with such difficulties, etc. more
commonly went to ruin, or were reduced to indigence; besides, a dependence on
such inheritances, even with otherwise prudent economy, in the early time of
this country, where, and when servants could scarcely be had, or kept, by any
means, several worthy persons, who had not been used to labor, found, by
sorrowful experience, did not answer here, as in Europe; so that for a series
of years, those who came hither more wealthy, and had before been used to a
different manner of life, sometimes lost much of what they had possessed, and
were reduced to greater straits and trials, than the more poor and laborious
part of the settlers, who were generally more numerous, and got estates; --
Hence it became noted for being a good poor man's country, etc.

This Joseph Kirkbride, above mentioned, was afterward a preacher, among the
Quakers; and, for many years in the magistracy, and frequently in the Assembly.
He is said to have been an exemplary and zealous promoter of the religion of
his profession; and a very serviceable person in diverse respects and
capacities. He lived in Buck's county; where he died in the First month, 1737.




In one of these ships sailed William Markham, a relation of the proprietary;
whom he had appointed his Deputy Governor, Commissioners sent, etc.
and joined with him certain commissioners, to confer with the Indians, or
Aboriginies, of the country, respecting their lands; and to confirm with them a
league of peace. These Commissioners he enjoined to treat them with all
possible candor, justice and humanity.

Importance of treating the Indians well.
To cultivate a right understanding with these natives, by a kind, gentle and
just treatment and usage, was an affair of great importance to the future
happiness and prosperity of the province; which good policy alone, even, from
views of temporal interest, in such a case, would point out; yet
notwithstanding this, the unhappy effects of a contrary conduct, or a neglect
in this particular, had been frequently and long experienced, in some other
provinces, to their great detriment, and ruinous consequences.

William Penn's conduct respecting the Indians.
But William Penn appears to have acted from higher, and more disinterested
motives, in reference to these people, than from those of mere temporal
advantage only; which, it is manifest, he never received from the province, in
any respect whatever, during a life of near thirty-seven years continuance
after this time; but lost much by it. His ideas were more exalted, than to be
confined within the narrow view of a temporary interest alone, and his conduct
respecting these poor, ignorant and savage people, declared his regard for
universal justice, and the natural rights of mankind; tending to impress on
their minds, as was his concern for all others, a proper sense of eternal
justice, and the happy effects of friendship, love and peace; than which
nothing can have a stronger influence on the rational and considerate mind, to
keep it within the due bounds of justice and truth. The first specimen, that I
find, of his manner of treating these people, appears in the following letter,
which he sent them, on this occasion, by his deputy and commissioners; wherein,
without perplexing and confusing their untutored ideas, with fine-spun and
unintelligible notions, and forms of belief, so common to some ecclesiastics,
he adapts his subject to their understandings, in the following plain and
simple manner.

London, the 18th. of the Eighth month 1681. My Friends,
There is a great God and power, that has made the world, and all things
therein; to whom you and I, and all people owe their being, His letter to them.
and well-being; and to whom you and I must one day give an account, for all,
that we do in the world. --

This great God has written his law in our hearts, by which we are taught and
commanded to love and help, and do good to one another. Now this great God has
been pleased to make me concerned in your part of the world; and the King of
the country, where I live, has given me a great province therein; but I desire
to enjoy it with your love and consent; that we may always live together, as
neighbors and friends; else what would the great God do to us, who has made
us, not to devour and destroy one another, but to live soberly and kindly
together, in the world? now I would have you well observe, that I am very
sensible of the unkindness and injustice, that have been too much exercised
toward you, by the people of these parts of the world; who have sought
themselves, and to make great advantages by you, rather than to be examples of
goodness and patience unto you; which I hear has been a matter of trouble to
you, and caused great grudging and animosities, sometimes to the shedding of
blood; which has made the great God angry. But I am not such a man; as is well
known in my own country. I have great love and regard toward you; and desire
to win and gain your love and friendship, by a kind, just and peaceable life;
and the people I send, William Penn's letter to the Indians.
are of the same mind, and shall, in all things, behave themselves accordingly;
and, if in any thing, any shall offend you, or your people, you shall have a
full and speedy satisfaction for the same, by an equal number of just men, on
both sides; that, by no means you may have just occasion of being offended
against them.

I shall shortly come to you myself; at which time, we may more largely and
freely confer and discourse of these matters; in the mean time I have sent my
commissioners to treat with you about land, and a firm league of peace; let me
desire you to be kind to them, and the people, and receive these presents and
tokens, which I have sent you, as a testimony of my good will to you, and my
resolution to live justly, peaceably and friendly with you.

I am your loving friend, William Penn.


1682.
In the beginning of the year 1682, William Penn published his frame of
government, and certain laws, William Penn publishes a frame of government and
laws.
agreed on, in England, by himself and the purchasers under him, entitled, "The
frame of the government of the province of Pennsylvania, in America; together
with certain laws, agreed upon, in England, by the Governor, and diverse freemen
of the aforesaid province. To be further explained and confirmed there, by the
first Provincial Council, that shall be held, if they see meet." Which frame,
etc. may be seen in the appendix, No. II.

In the preface to this frame is exhibited a sketch of the author's sentiments
on the nature of government, in general, his reflections on the different modes
of it, and his inducement for forming his. It may serve to give some idea of
the judgment of the Quakers, in general, on this subject, respecting which they
have frequently been misrepresented; I shall, therefore, here give the
following extract from it. -- The author, after having quoted several parts of
the sacred scriptures, relative to government, proceeds, in the following words:

-- "This settles the divine right of government beyond exception, Part of the
preface to his frame of Government.
and that for two ends; first, to terrify evil doers; secondly, to cherish
those, that do well; which gives government a life beyond corruption; and makes
it as durable, in the world, as good men shall be. So that government seems to
me a part of religion itself; a thing sacred, in its institution and end. For,
if it does not directly remove the cause, it crushes the effects of evil; and
is, as such, a lower, yet an emanation of the same divine power, that is both
author and object of pure religion; the difference lying here; that the one is
more free and mental, the other more corporal and compulsive, in its operation:
but that is only to evildoers; government itself being otherwise as capable of
kindness, goodness and charity, as a more private society.

"They weakly err, that think there is no other use of government, than
correction; which is the coarsest part of it: daily experience tells us, that
the care and regulation of many other affairs, more soft, and daily necessary,
make up much the greater part of government; and which must have followed the
peopling of the world, had Adam never fallen; and will continue among men, on
earth, under the highest seize, they may arrive at, by the coming of the
blessed second Adam, the Lord from Heaven." --

As to the modes, he further observes, -- "I do not find a model in the world,
that time, place, Of modes of Government in general.
and some singular emergencies, have not necessarily altered; nor is it easy to
frame a civil government, that shall serve all places alike;". -- "Any
government is free to the people under it (whatever be the frame) where the
laws rule, and the people are a party to those laws; and more than this is
tyranny, olygarchy, or confusion." --

"There is hardly one frame of government, in the world, so ill designed by its
first founders, that, in good hands, would not do well enough; and history
tells us, the best, in ill ones, can do nothing, that is great and good;
Witness, the Jewish and Roman states. Governments, like clocks, go from the
motion, men give them; and as governments are made and moved by men, so by them
are they ruined too. Wherefore, governments rather depend upon men, than men
upon governments. Let men be good, and the government cannot be bad; if it be
ill, they will cure it. But, if men be bad, let government be never so good,
Part of the preface to William Penn's frame Government.
they will endeavor to warp and spoil it to their turn." -- "That, therefore,
which makes a good government, must keep it, viz. Men of wisdom and virtue;
qualities, that, because they descend not with worldy inheritances, must be
carefully propagated by a virtuous education of youth; for which after ages
will owe more to the care and prudence of founders, and the successive
Magistracy, than to their parents, for their private patrimonies."

"These considerations," (several of which, for brevity, are here omitted) of
the weight of government, and the nice and various opinions about it, made it
uneasy to me to think of publishing the ensuing frame, and conditional laws,
foreseeing both the censures, they will meet with, from men of differing
humors and engagements, and the occasion they may give of discourse beyond my
design."

"But, next to the power of necessity (which is a solicitor, that will take no
denial) this induced me to a compliance, that we have, (with reverence to God,
and good conscience to men) to the best of our skill, contrived and composed
the frame and laws of this government, Reason for publishing his frame and laws.
to the great end of government, viz. To support power in reverence with the
people, and to secure the people from the abuse of power; that they may be free
by their just obedience, and the Magistrates honorable, for their just
administration; for liberty without obedience is confusion; and obedience
without liberty is slavery. To carry this evenness, is partly owing to the
constitution, and partly to the Magistracy: where either of these fail,
government will be subject to convulsions; but where both are wanting, it must
be totally subverted: then, where both meet, the government is like to endure;
which I humbly pray, and hope, God will please to make the lot of this of
Pennsylvania. Amen."

The frame itself consisted of twenty-four articles; and the laws were forty.
Purport of the frame of government.
By the former the government was placed in the Governor and Freemen of the
province, in the form of a provincial council, and General Assembly. By them
conjunctively all laws were to be made, all officers appointed, and all public
affairs transacted. Seventy-two was the number of the Council, to be chosen by
the freemen; and though the Governor, or his deputy, was to be perpetual
President, he had but a treble vote. One-third part of them was, at first, to
be chosen for three years, one-third for two years, and one-third for one year;
in such manner, that there might be an annual succession of twenty-four new
members, each to continue three years, and no longer. -- The General Assembly
was, the first year, to consist of all the freemen, afterward of two hundred,
and never to exceed five hundred. And this charter, or form of government, was
not to be altered, changed, or diminished, in any part, or clause of it,
without the consent of the Governor, his heirs, or assigns, and six parts of
seven of the freemen, in Provincial Council and Assembly. And to the same power
only was the alteration of the laws made subject: these laws were of the nature
of an original compact between the proprietary and the freemen; and, as such,
were reciprocally received and executed: one of them was,

"That all persons living in this province, who confess and acknowledge the one
Almighty and Eternal God to be the Creator, One of the first laws.
Upholder and Ruler of the world, and that hold themselves obliged, in
conscience, to live peaceably and justly in civil society, shall, in no ways,
be molested, or prejudiced, for their religious persuasion, or practice, in
matters of faith and worship; nor shall they be compelled, at any time, to
frequent, or maintain, any religious worship, place, or ministry whatever."

Morover, the proprietary, to prevent all future claim, or, even, pretense of
claim, that might be made, William Penn obtains that Duke of York's release.
of the province by the Duke of York, or his heirs, obtained of the said Duke
his deed of release for the same, dated the 21st. of August, 1682. The release
of the Duke of York to William Penn was expressed, as follows --

This indenture, made the one and twentieth day of August, in the four and
thirtieth year of the reign of our sovereign lord, Charles the second, by the
grace of God, of England, Sc^tland, France, and Ireland King, defender of the
says, etc. annoque Domini 1682, between the most illustious Prince, his Royal
Highess, James, Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Ulster, etc. of the one part,
and William Penn, Esquire, son and heir of Sir William Penn. Knight, deceased,
of the other part. Whereas, his said Royal Highness, being willing and desirous
that the tract of land, called Pennsylvania, herein after mentioned, should be
granted and assured unto the said William Penn, and his heirs, and for that
purpose, having signified and declared his assent thereunto, to the right
honorable, the lords of the committee of plantations, his said Majesty, by his
letters patent, under the great seal of England, hearing date the 4th. day of
March, in the three and thirtieth year of his reign, for the consideration
therein mentioned, did grant unto the said William Penn, and his heirs, all
that tract, or part of land in America, with the islands therein contained, and
thereunto belonging, as the same is bounded and described in and by the said
letters patent, and therein called Pensilvania, together with several royalties
franchises, jurisdictions and privileges, therein contained. And, whereas, in
consideration of five shillings, and for the considerations herein after
mentioned, his said Royal Highness is willing and pleased to confirm and make
any further assurance of the said tract of land and premises unto the said
William Penn, and his heirs.

Now, therefore, this indenture witnesses, that his said Royal Highness, out
of a special regard to the memory, and many faithful and eminent services
heretofore performed, by the said Sir William Penn, to his said Majesty and
Royal Highness, and for the better encouraging him, the said William Penn, to
proceed in the cultivating and improving the said tract of ground, and islands
therein, and thereunto belonging, and reducing the savage and barbarous natives
thereof to civility, and for the good will, which his said Royal Highness has
and bears to the said William Penn, and for other good causes and
considerations, has remised, released, and for ever quit claim, and by these
presents, does, for him and his heirs, remise, release, and for ever quit
claim, unto the said William Penn, (in his peaceable possession now being) his
heirs and assigns, all the estate, right, title, interest, rents, services,
duties, payments, property, claim and demand whatsoever, of his said Royal
Highness, of, in, or to, or out of the said tract of land, and all singular
other, the lands, islands, tenements, hereditaments, and other things comprised
in the said recited letters patent, and within the bounds and limits therein
mentioned, to have and to hold the said tract of land, rents, services,
hereditaments and premises, unto the said William Penn, and his heirs, to the
only use and benefit of the said William Penn, his heirs and assigns for ever.
IN WITNESS whereof his Royal Highness has to these presents set his hand and
seal, the day and year first above written.

JAMES. (L. S.)
Sealed and delivered in the presence of JOHN WERDEN. GEORGE MAN.







Besides, as an additional territory to the province, he also, this year, 1682,
procured of the duke of York, his right, title and interest, William Penn
procures of the Duke of York the territories, etc.
in that tract of land, since called the The three lower counties on Delaware,
extending from the south boundary of the province, and situated on the western
side of the said river and bay of Delaware, to cape Hinlopen, beyond, or south
of Lewistown; which, by the Duke were made over to William Penn, his heirs and
assigns, by two deeds of Feoffment, dated, August 24th. 1682. The first deed
was for the town of New Castle, alias Delaware town, and a district of twelve
miles round it, as far as the river Delaware; in the second, of the same date,
was comprehended that tract of land, from twelve miles south of New Castle to
the Hoarkills, otherwise called Cape-Hinlopen, divided into two counties, Kent
and Sussex; which, with New Castle district, Of the three lower counties, etc.
were commonly called, the territories of Pennsylvania; or the three lower
counties upon Delaware. See the votes of the house of Representatives of
Pennsylvania, Vol. 1.

William Penn, in a letter to some of his friends, in Pennsylvania, dated,
"England, 10th. Fourth month 1691," (a time when there was some disagreement in
these counties, respecting his title) says, -- "I would also you should known,
I have a patent of the lower counties, some years since; that when there is
occasion for it, you may allege so, but not otherwise."

These territories were a part of the country, called New Netherland, when in
possession of the Dutch, and included in the Duke of York's second patent for
that country, after its surrender by treaty of peace to the English, in 1674,
which extended westward of Delaware river. See Introduction, page 121 to 136;
likewise William Penn's answer to Lord Baltimore's demand, further on in this
history, etc.

In the preamble to the act of union of the three lower counties with the
province, passed at Chester, in Pennsylvania, on the 6th. of the Tenth month
1682, it is thus expressed, viz.

-- "And it having also favorably pleased James, Duke of York, Earl of Ulster,
etc. to release his right and claim to all and every part thereof (of the
province) unto the said William Penn, his heirs and assigns; whereby the said
William Penn is become the undoubted and rightful Proprietary of the province
of Pennsylvania; and is hereby freely and fully so recognized and acknowledged.
And as a beneficial and requisite addition to the territory of the said
Proprietary and Governor, it has also pleased the said James, Duke of York and
Albany, Earl of Ulster, etc. for diverse good considerations, to grant unto the
said William Penn, and his heirs and assigns, all that tract of land, from
twelve miles northward of New Castle, on the river Delaware, down to the south
cape, commonly called Cape Hinlopen, and by the Proprietary and Governor, now
called Cape James, lying on the west side of said river and bay, and formerly
possessed by the Dutch, and bought by them of the natives, and first
surrendered upon articles of peace to the King's Lieutenant Governor, Colonel
Nicolls, and a second time, to Sir Edmund Andrews, Lieutenant Governor to the
said Duke; and has been by him quietly possessed and enjoyed; as also the said
river of Delaware and so^^ thereof, and all islands therein, lately cast into
three counties, called, New Castle, Jones's and Whorekills, alias, Deal,
together with all royalties, powers and jurisdictions thereunto belonging; as
by the two deeds of Feoffment, bearing date the 24th. of the Sixth month,
called August, 1682, does more at large appear."

Pennsylvania votes of Assembly, etc. Vol. 1.




Of the boundary between the territories and Maryland, etc.
The determining and fixing the precise boundary between this territory and
Maryland, as well as that between the respective provinces, becoming afterward
a subject of dispute between William Penn and the Lord Baltimore, will
hereafter more fully appear, in the course of this history. For though prior to
making out the grant of both the province and territory, the Lord Baltimore was
duly informed, fully heard, and all his objections answered, on the subject,
before the lords of trade and plantations; where the precise southern boundary
of Pennsylvania, as expressed in the charter, must necessarily have been
mentioned to him, as appears by the minutes of the committee of the said board;
yet he afterward claimed not only the whole territory of the lower counties,
but also one degree of north latitude included in the grant of Pennsylvania, as
coming within his patent.

The boundary and extent of the former was determined by an order of council,
the King being present, in November, 1685; but it was long before it was put in
execution, said to be occasioned principally by the delays and obstructions of
the Lord Baltimore. But the line, or boundary between the two provinces does
not appear to have been precisely and finally fixed during the life of William
Penn; or, till the year 1732; which will be mentioned in its proper place.

CHAPTER III.
William Penn sails for Pennsylvania. -- Writes a valedictory epistle to his
friends in England. -- Arrivers in the Delaware. -- His reception in the
country. -- Holds an Assembly at Upland, (Chester.) -- Passes an act of union
between the province and territory. -- Naturalizes the foreigners. -- Passes
the laws agreed on in England, in form. -- Preamble to said laws, with their
titles. -- He visits New York and Maryland; and treats with the Lord Baltimore,
respecting the boundaries. -- Extracts from two of his letters, respecting his
employment in the country, and in vindication of himself from some undue
reflections. -- The Proprietor purchases lands of the Indians. -- and treats
them with great justice and kindness. -- The happy consequences, with instances
of the affectionate remembrance of William Penn.

1682.
WILLIAM PENN had, for a considerable time past, been making preparation for his
voyage to America; William Penn takes shipping for America.
which being, at last, accomplished, in The Sixth month (August) this year,
1682, accompanied by a number of his friends, he want on board the ship,
Welcome, of 300 tons burden, Robert Greenaway, commander; and on the 30th. of
the same month, he writ, from the Downs, a valedictory epistle to England,
containing "A salutation to all faithful friends." This epistle is extant in
print, though it does not appear in the collection of William Penn's works,
published in two folio volumes. The whole title of it, at length, is, "An
epistle, containing a salutation to all faithful friends; a reproof to the
unfaithful; and a visitation to the enquiring, in a solemn farewell to them
all, in the land of my nativity." -- It consists principally of religious
advice and admonition to his friends, the Quakers, according to the different
parts of the title.

Besides this epistle, and prior to his going on board, he also writ an
affectionate letter of advice to his wife and children, dated, Worminghurst
4th. Sixth month, 1682. -- It contains most excellent and pathetic directions
to them, in their distinct capacities, for their civil, moral and religious
conduct and government through life, in case he should never see them again. --
It is published in the edition of his select works, in one folio volume.




The number of passengers, in this ship, was about one hundred, mostly Quakers;
the ma^or part of them from Sussex, the Proprietary's pla^^ of residence. In
their passage, Many of the passengers die of the small pox, etc.
many of them were taken sick of the small pox; and about thirty of their
number died. In this trying situation, the acceptable company of William Penn
is said to have been of singular advantage to them, and his kind advice and
assistance of great service, during their passage; so that, in the main, they
had a prosperous voyage; and, in little more than six weeks, came in sight of
the American coast, supposed to be about Egg-Harbour, in New Jersey.

In passing up the Delaware, the inhabitants, William Penn arrives at
New Castle October 24th. 1682.
consisting of English, Dutch and Swedes, indiscriminately met the Proprietary,
with demonstrations of joy. He landed at New Castle, on the 24th. of October;
and next day had the people summoned to the Courthouse; where, after
possession of the country was legally given him, he made a speech to the old
Magistrates, and the people, signifying to them the design of his coming, the
nature and end of government, and of that more particularly, which he came to
establish; assuring them of their spiritual and temporal rights; liberty of
conscience, and civil freedoms; and, recommending them to live in sobriety and
peace, he renewed the magistrates commissions. To form some idea of the
proportion of the different sorts of people, on the west side of Delaware,
about this time, or prior to William Penn's arrival, on the lands, granted him,
it may be noted, that the Dutch then had a meeting place, for religious
worship, at New Castle; the Swedes, three; one at Christeen, one at Tenecum,
and one at Wicocoa, (now in the suburbs of Philadelphia.) The Quakers, as
before observed, in the introduction, had three, viz. one at Upland, or
Chester, one at Shackamaxon, or about where Kensington new stands, in the
vicinity of Philadelphia, and one near the lower falls of Delaware.


After this he proceeded to Upland, now called Chester; where, on the fourth
day of the Tenth month, (about three months after his sailing from England) he
called an Assembly. He calls and meets the first Assembly, at Chester, etc.
It consisted of equal numbers of members for the province, and the three lower
counties, called the Territories; that is, for both of them, so many of the
freemen as thought proper to appear, according to the 16th. article of the
frame of government.

This Assembly chose Nicholas Moore, who was president of the Free society of
traders, for their chairman, or speaker; and received as ample satisfaction
from the Proprietary, as the inhabitants of New Castle had done; for which they
returned him their grateful acknowledgments: The Swedes for themselves, deputed
Lacy Cock to acquaint him, "That they would love, serve and obey him with all
they had;" declaring, "that it was the best day they ever saw."

Proceedings of the first Assembly.
At this Assembly an act of union was passed, annexing the three lower counties
to the province, in legislation, on the 7th. day of December, 1682; likewise an
act of settlement, in reference to the frame of government which, with some
alterations, was thereby declared to be accepted and confirmed.

The Dutch, Swedes, and other foreigners were then naturalized: all the laws,
agreed on in England, with some small alterations, were passed in form. The
preamble to these laws, with the titles, or heads, of them, here follow:

"The great law: or, the body of laws of the province of Pennsylvania and
territories thereunto belonging, passed a^ an Assembly, held at Chester, alias,
Upland, the seventh day of the Tenth month called December, 1682.

"Whereas, the glory of God Almighty, and the good of mankind, is the reason
and end of government; and, therefore government itself is a venerable
ordinance of God; and for as much as it is principally desired and intended by
the Proprietary and Governor, and freemen, of the province of Pennsylvania, and
territories thereunto belonging, to make and establish such laws, as shall best
preserve true christian and civil liberty, in opposition to all unchristian,
licentious and unjust practices, whereby God may have his due, Caesar, his due,
and the people, their due, from tyranny and oppression, on the one side, and
insolence and licentiousness, on the other; so that the best and firmest
foundation may be laid, for the present and future happiness of both the
Governor, and the people of this province and territories aforesaid, and their
posterity: Be it enacted by William Penn, Proprietary and Governor, by and with
the advice and consent of the deputies of the freemen of this province, and the
counties aforesaid, in General Assembly met, and by the authority of the same,
that these following chapters and paragraphs be the laws of Pennsylvania and
territories thereof: -- 1 Concerning liberty of conscience. 2 Concerning
qualifications of officers, etc. 3 Against swearing by God, Christ, or Jesus. 4
Against swearing by any other thing or name. 5 Against speaking profanely of
God, Christ, Spirit or Scripture. 6 Against cursing. 7 Against defiling the
marriage bed. 8 Against incest. 9 Against sodomy and bestiality. 10 Against
rape, or ravishment. 11 Against bigamy. 12 Against drunkenness. 13 Against
suffering drunkenness. 14 Against healths drinking. 15 Against selling, or
exchanging, of rum, brandy, or other strong l^quors to the Indians. 16 Against
wilful firing of houses. 17 Against breaking into, or taking any thing out of
houses* 18 Lands and goods of thieves and felons, etc. liable, etc. 19 Against
forceable entry. 20 Against unlawful assemblies and riots. 21 Against
assaulting or menacing of parents. 22 Against assaulting or menacing, of
magistrates. 23 Against assaulting or menacing, of masters. 24 Against assault
and battery. 25 Against duels. 26 Against riotous sports and practices, as
plays, etc. 27 Against playing at cards, dice, lotteries, etc. 28 Against
sedition. 29 Against speaking slightly, or abusing of magistrates or officers.
30 Against reporters, dosamers, and spreaders of false news. 31 Against
clamorous persons, scolders and railers. 32 Provision for the poor. 33 Prices
of beer and ale. 34 Measures and weights. 35 Names of days and months. 36
Witnesses lying. 37 Pleadings, processes and records, to be in English. 38
Trials in civil and criminal cases. 39 Fees and salaries, bribery and
extortion. 40 Fines to be moderate, etc. 41 Numerous suits avoidable. 42 Arrest
of a person departing the province, how. 43 Promises, bargains and agreements.
44 Charters, gifts, grants, conveyances, bills, bonds and specialties, deeds,
etc. how soon to be recorded. 45 What wills shall convey lands, as well as
chattels. See appendix to the Pennsylvania laws. 46 Wills of non compos mentis
void. 47 Registry for wills, etc. 48 Registry for servants, etc. 49 Factors,
and their employ. 50 Against defacers, corrupters and embezzlers, of charters,
conveyances and records, etc. 51 How lands and goods shall pay debts. See
appendix to the Pennsylvania laws. 52 What prisoners bailable. 53 Jails and
Jailers. 54 Prisons to be work houses. 55 Wrongful imprisonment. 56 Where the
penalty is either a sum of money or imprisonment, the magistrate shall inflict
which he will. 57 Freemen, who. 58 Elections* 59 No money or goods, by way of
tax, custom or contribution, to be raised or paid, but by law. 60 Laws shall be
printed and taught in schools. 61 All other things, not provided for herein,
are referred to the Governor and freemen from time to time.


Note, By a letter of William Penn, dated, Chester on Delaware, 29th. of the
10th month, 1682, his activity, about this time, further appears:andFrom which
the following is an extract:

"I bless the Lord, I am very well, and much satisfied with my place and
portion; yet busy enough; having much to do, to please all; and yet to have an
eye to those, that are not here to please themselves.

"I have been also at New York, Long Island, East Jersey and Maryland; in
which I have had good and eminent service for the Lord, etc.

"I am now casting the country into townships, for large lots of land. I have
held an assembly; in which many good laws are passed; we could not safely stay
till the spring for a government. I have annexed the Lower Counties (lately
obtained) to the province; and passed a general naturalization for strangers;
which has much pleased the people. -- As to outward things, we are satisfied;
the land good, the air clear and sweet, the springs plentiful, and provision
good, and easy to come at; an innumerable quantity of wild fowl and fish; in
fine, here is what an Abraham, Isaac and Jacob would be well contented with;
and service enough for God; for the fields are here white for harvest. O, how
sweet is the quiet of these parts, freed from the anxious and troublesome
solicitations, hurries and perplexities of woeful Europe; and God will thin
he^^ the day hastens upon her." etc.

"Blessed be the Lord, that of twenty-three ships none miscarried; only two or
three had the smallpox; e^se healthy and swift passages, generally such as
have not been known; some but twenty-eight days, and few longer than six weeks:
Blessed be God for it; who is good to us, and follows us with his abundant
mindness: my soul fervently breathes, that in his heavenly guiding wisdom, we
may be kept; that we may serve him in our day, and lay down our heads in
peace," etc.

"P. S. Many women, in diverse of the ships, brought to bed; they and their
children do well."




The meeting continued only three days; and notwithstanding the great variety
of dispositions, rawness and inexperience of this Assembly, in affairs of this
kind, yet a very remarkable candor and harmony prevailed among them.

1681:
The proprietary, prior to his meeting this Assembly, appears to have paid a
visit to New York; and immediately after the adjournment of it, he went to
Maryland; William Penn visits New York, Maryland, etc.
where he was kindly received by the Lord Baltimore, and the principal persons
of that colony. There the two proprietaries held a conference respecting the
fixing and settling the boundaries between the two provinces: William Penn
treats with Lord Baltimore about the boundary, etc.
but the severity of the season coming on, and there being no appearance of
speedily determining the affair, after two days spent on the occasion, they
appointed to meet again in the spring, and William Penn took his leave and
departed, the Lord Baltimore accompanying him several miles, to the house of
one William Richardson; 1682.
from whence he proceeded two miles further, to a religious meeting of his
friends, the Quakers, at the house of Thomas Hooker; and from thence to
Choptank, on the eastern side of Chesapeak-bay; where was an appointed meeting
of persons of diverse ranks and qualities.

Thus proceeded William Penn, He has various enemies, etc.
with much fatigue, difficulty and expense, to settle the province, establish
the government, and cultivate a good understanding with his neighbors; though
not without enemies and oppositions of different kinds, as will hereafter more
fully appear; and that, even, from some, who had been his friends; Extract from
his life, printed with his works.
as may be seen by the following extract from the printed account of his life,
about this time, viz. -- "Nor was the advancement of himself, or family, in
worldly wealth and grandeur, his aim, in the administration of government; but,
in the greatest honor of his public station, he still retained the meekness and
humility of a private Christian; the sincerity of his intentions, and with what
zeal and ardour he pursued a general good, are best expressed by his own woods,
in a letter written in Pennsylvania, the lat^er part of this year, (1682) to a
person, who had unduly reflected on him," viz.

Part of a letter of William Penn from Chester in Pennsylvania.
-- I could speak largely of God's dealings with me, in getting this thing;
what an inward exercise of faith and patience it cost me, in passing. The
travail was mine, as well as the debt and cost; -- through the envy of many,
both professors, false friends, and profane: my God has given it me, in the
face of the world; and and it is to hold it in true judgment, as a reward of my
sufferings: and that is seen here, whatever some despisers may say or think.
The place God has given me; and I never felt judgment for the power I kept,
but trouble for what I parted with. It is more than a worldly title, or patent,
that has clothed me in this place. --

Keep thy place; I am in mine; I have served the God of the whole earth, since
I have been in it; nor am I sitting down in a greatness, that I have denied. --
I am day and night spending my life, my time, my money, and am not six pence
enriched by this greatness: costs in getting, settling, transportation and
maintenance, now in a public manner, at my own charge, duly considered, to say
nothing of my hazard, and the distance I am from a considerable estate, and,
which is more, my dear wife and poor children,

Well, -- the Lord is God of righteous judgment: had I sought greatness, I had
stayed ^t home; where the difference between what I am here, and was offered,
and could have been there, in power and wealth, is as wide as the places are:
-- No, I came for the Lord's sake, and therefore have I stood to this day, well
and diligent, and successful, blessed be his power. -- "Nor shall I trouble
myself to tell thee what I am to the people of this place, in travails,
watchings, spendings, and my servants every way freely, not like a selfish man;
I have many witnesses. -- "To conclude, it is now in friends hands; through my
travail, faith and patience it came." -- "If friends here keep to God, in the
justice, mercy, equity, and fear of the Lord, their enemies will be their
footstool: if not their heirs and my heirs too, will lose all; and desolation
will follow. -- but blessed be the Lord, we are well, and live in the dear love
of God, and the fellowship of his tender heavenly spirit; and our faith is for
ourselves and one another, that the Lord will be with us, a King and Counselor
for ever.

Thy ancient, though grieved, friend, WILLIAM PENN.
Chester, 5th. of the Twelfth month, 1682.

The Proprietary, The Proprietary returns to Pennsylvania, and begins to
purchase lands of the Indians, etc.
being now returned from Maryland to Coaquannock, the place so called by the
Indians, where Philadelphia now stands, began to purchase lands of the Natives;
whom he treated with great justice and sincere kindness, in all his dealings
and communications with them; ever giving them full satisfaction for all their
lands etc. and the best advice for their real happiness; of which their future
conduct showed they were very sensible; and the country afterward reaped the
benefit of it. Hence one of the early settlers, Thomas Makin, of Philadelphia,
after having lived in the country more than forty years, in a copy of Latin
verses, entitled, Descriptio Pennsylvaniae, dated in 1729, and inscribed to
James Logan, has the following lines.

"Non regio haec Indos armis subigendo tenetur,
Sed certa emptori condition data est.
Vivitur hic igitur tuto sine militis usu;
Et sibi securus propria quisque tenet.
Hic locus est multis felix, ubi sedibus aptis,
Sors optata dedit non sine pace frui.
Dira sed infelix, heu! bella Nov' Anglia sensit;
Indis quae semper gens male -- sida suit."
On just and fairest terms the land is gained;
No force of arms has any right obtained.
It Is here, without the use of arms, alone,
The blessed inhabitant enjoys his own:
Here many, to their wish, in peace enjoy
Their happy lots; and nothing does annoy.
But sad New England's different conduct showed
What dire effects from injured Indians flowed.



It was at this time, (1682) when he first entered personally into that lasting
friendship with the Indians, W. Penn first personally enters into friendship
with the Indians, etc.
which ever afterward continued between them; and for the space of more than
seventy years was never interrupted; or, so long as the Quakers, to whom, even,
long after his death, they always continued to show the greatest regard,
retained power, in the government, sufficient to influence a friendly and just
conduct toward them, and to prevent, or redress, such misunderstandings and
grievances, as occasionally happened between them, and any of the inhabitants
of the province, etc. A firm peace was, therefore, now reciprocally concluded
between William Penn and the Indians; and both parties mutually promised to
live together as brethren, without doing the least injury to each other. This
was solemnly ratified by the usual token of a chain of friendship and covenant
indelible, never to be broken, so long as the sun and moon endure.

Their reat regard for W. Penn, etc.
Of this kind of conferrence he afterward had many others, and some on a
religious account, during both times of his residence in the country. His
conduct, in general, to these people, was so engaging, his justice, in
particular, so conspicuous, and the counsel and advice, which he gave them,
were so evidently for their advantage, that he became thereby very much
endeared to them; and the sense thereof made such deep impressions on their
understandings, that his name and memory will scarcely ever be effaced, while
they continue a people. At a treaty, held with the Six Nations, at
Philadelphia, in July, 1742, in Governor Thomas's administration, Canassatego,
chief of the Onondagoes, said,

-- "We are all very sensible of the kind regard, which that good man, William
Penn, had for all the Indians," etc.

At this treaty, these Indians thus expressed themselves, respecting James
Logan, which further shows the sense and gratitude of that people when they are
well treated, etc.

Canassatego then spoke to the Governor and council:"

"Brethren,

"We called at our old friend James Logan's, in our way to this city, and, to
our grief, we found him hid in the bushes, and retired through infirmities,
from public business. We pressed him to leave his retirement, and prevailed
with him to assist once more, on our account, at your councils. We hope,
notwithstanding his age, and the effects of a fit of sickness, which we
understand has hurt his constitution, that he may yet continue a long time, to
assist this province with his counsels. He is a wise man, and a fast friend to
the Indians. And we desire, when his soul goes to God, you may choose in his
room, just such another person, of the same prudence and ability, in
counselling; and of the same tender disposition and affection for the Indians."
-- "In testimony of our gratitude for all his services, and because he was so
good, as to leave his country house, and follow us to town, and be at the
trouble, in this his advanced age, to attend the council, We present him with
this bundle of Skins.

After the Governor had concluded, James Logan replied to that part of
Canassatego's speech which related to him, and said --

"That, not only upon the account of his lameness, (of which the Indians
themselves were witnesses) but on account of another indisposition, which,
about three years since, had laid him under an incapacity of expressing himself
with his former usual freedom, he had been obliged to live retired, in the
country."

"But that our first proprietor, the honorable William Penn, who had ever been
a father, and true friend to all the Indians, having above forty years since
recommended them to his particular care, he had always, from his own
inclination, as well as from that strict charge, endeavored to convince all
the Indians, that he was their true friend; and was now well pleased, that
after a tract of so many years, they were not insensible of it. He thanked them
kindly for their present and heartily joined with them in their desires, that
the government may always be furnished with persons of equally good
inclinations, and not only with such, but also with better abilities, to serve
them.

At a council, held with the Seneca and other Indians, in Philadelphia, to July
1749, in the administation of James Hamilton, etc.

Ogaushtash, in part of his speech, thus expresses himself:

"We recommend it to the Governor, to tread in the steps of those wise people,
who have held the reins of government before him, in being good and kind to the
Indians. Do, brother, make it your study to consult the interest of our
nations; as you have so large an authority, you can do us much good, or harm;
we would, therefore, engage your influence and affections for us; that the same
harmony, and mutual affections may subsist during your government, which so
happily subsisted in former times, nay, from the first settlement of this
province, by our good friend, the great William Penn," etc.

At a treaty held at Easton, in Pennsylvania, with the Indians, in 1756, in
Governor Morris's administration, Tcedyuscung, the Delaware chief, spoke as
follows:

"Brother Onas, and the people of Pennsylvania,

"We rejoice to hear from you, that you are willing to renew the old good
understanding, and that you call to mind the first treaties of friendship, made
by Onas, our great friend, deceased, with our forefathers, when himself and his
people first came over here.

"We take hold of these treaties with both our hands; and desire you will do
the same; that a good understanding and true friendship may (...)
re-established. Let us both take hold of these treaties with all our strength
we beseech you; We on our side, will certainly do it."

-- Again, on concluding a peace, in July, the same year, Teedyuscung said, --

"I wish the same good spirit, that possessed the good old man, William Penn,
who was a friend to the Indians, may inspire the people of this province, at
this time," etc.

Extract from the Indian treatie^.




That they retain these things, and hand them, by tradition, from father to
son, many instances have since more particularly shown; of which one was in
1721, Instances of the Indians long retaining great respect for W. Penn.
several years after the death of William Penn; in a conferrence between
Governor Keith and the Five Nations, held at Conestogo, in Pennsylvania. Their
Chief Speaker, with a countenance, which showed great respect, said --

"They should never forget the council, that William Penn gave them; and that
though they could not write, as the English did, yet they could keep, in the
memory, what was said in their councils.

At the treaty renewed, in the year following, at Albany, they mentioned the
name of William Penn with great affection, calling him, a good man. -- And, as
their highest compliment to Governor Keith, they used this expression, "we
esteem and love you as if you were William Penn himself: telling him, "Brother
Onas," (which in their language signifies, a Pen, and by which name they call
the Governors of Pennsylvania ever since it was first settled by William Penn)
"we are glad to hear the former treaties, which we have made with William Penn,
repeated to us again." --

Upon the Governor's replying, "That he desired this visit, and the covenant
chain, which is hereby brightened, may be recorded in everlasting remembrance,
to be sent down to your and our children, to last as long as the mountains and
rivers, and while the sun and moon endure:" -- They answered, -- "We desire
that peace and tranquillity, which is now established between us, may be as
clear as the sun, shining in its luster, without any cloud or darkness; and
that the same may continue forever." --

These instances, among many others, that may be given, together with the
consequent corresponding behavior of these people, may show what a grateful
remembrance they retained of William Penn's fair and candid conduct toward
them; and what an happy influence a just and friendly treatment has on, even,
savage minds.

CHAPTER IV.
Arrivals of colonists in the first year, and early times, with their general
character. -- Some of their settlements, and rapid improvements, with the names
and memorials of diverse of them, etc. -- Difficulties and hardships of the
first and early settlers; but they prosper. -- Part of the planter's speech to
his neighbors and countrymen. -- Richard Townsend's testimony, respecting the
prosperity of Pennsylvania from the first settlement of it, for above forty
years.

Number of arrivals in the first year, etc.
WITHIN the space of the first year, after the proper requisites for a regular
settlement were obtained, between twenty and thirty sail of ships, with
passengers, arrived in the province, including those which came before, and
about the same time with the Proprietary. The settlers amounted to such a large
number, that the parts near Delaware were peopled in a very rapid manner, even
from about the falls of Trenton, down to Chester, near fifty miles, on the
river; besides the settlements in the lower counties, which, at the same time,
were very considerable: for the first settlements, for the most part, were made
nigh the river, according to the different shares of land, which were
respectively allotted for each settler; as may be seen in an old map of the
first settled parts of the province. This is said to have been the first, or
original map of the settled part of the province and of the plan of the city;
by Thomas Holme. -- It was dedicated to William Penn, and sold by Robert Green
and John Thornton in London; -- who say, in the said map, that it was begun by
the Proprietary, anno 1681; -- It is yet extant, etc.


Of the first and early colonists of Pennsylvania.
As the first colonists, and those who followed, for a number of years
afterward, were more generally of the religious people called Quakers; and in
their native country had suffered much on account of their religion, 1682.
both in person and property, through the persecuting bigotry of those times;
so, on their arrival, their great and primary concern is said to have been the
continuance and support of their religious public worship, in every part of the
country, where they made settlements, in such manner as their situation and
circumstances then permitted; and though the generality of them were not ranked
among the rich and great, yet many had valuable estates, were of good families
and education; and mostly sober, industrious and substantial people, of low, or
moderate fortunes, but of universal good reput^tion and character. In the
records of this people, in early times, among other things, I find the
following anecdotes, respecting the original and regular establishment of some
of their first religious meetings in these parts, with the names of some of the
principal settlers among them, of that society, viz.

The first most considerable English settlement, in Pennsylvania proper, is
said to have been near the lower falls of the river Delaware, in Bucks county;
where the Quakers had a regular and established meeting, for religious worship,
before the country bore the name of Pennsylvania: some of the inhabitants there
having settled by virtue of patents, from Sir Edmund Andros, Governor of
New York.

Among the names of the inhabitants here, either at this time, or soon after,
appear to be, William Yardly, James Harrison, Phineas Pemberton, William Biles,
William Dark, Lyonell Britain, William Beaks, etc. And soon afterward there,
and near Neshaminy creek, Richard Hough, Henry Baker, Nicholas Walne, John
Otter, Robert Hall; -- And, in Wright's town, John Chapman, and James Ratcliff,
a noted preacher in the society, etc.

In the year 1683, settled near the said falls, Thomas Janny who, with his
family, and others, at that time, arrived from Cheshire, in England. He is said
to have been a very serviceable person in the country, and among his
neighbors, in diverse respects.

After twelve years residence here, he revisited his native country, on a
religious account, being a preacher among the Quakers, where he died, aged 63,
and a preacher, in that society, 41 years; being a man of good reputation,
character and example.

Near Byberry, Poetquessing, etc. settled Richard Waln, John Heart, Richard
Worrall, etc.

Note, The Quakers had meetings for religious worship, and for the economy of
their society so early as the fore part of the year 1681, at the house of
Thomas Fairlamb, at Shakamaxon, near, or about the place where Kensington now
stands, nigh Philadelphia; and in the next following year, 1682, at the place
itself, where the city is since built, in a boarded meeting house erected there
for that purpose.

Their brick meeting house, in the city, at or near the center, was built in
1684. That, on the bank, in Front-street, in 1865. Their great meeting house,
in High Street, in 1695. That, on the hill, in Pine-street, in 1753. And the
present meeting house, in High Street, in 1755.

The number of marriages of the people called Quakers, in Philadelphia alone,
during the first thirty-two years of the province, or between the years 1682
and 1714, inclusive, was about 314. M. S.

In the year 1682, they had a religious meeting regularly fixed at Darby. Among
the first and early settlers of the society, at or near this place, are
mentioned, John Blunston, Michael Blunston, George Wood, Joshua Fearn, Henry
Gibbons, Samuel Sellers, Richard Bonsall, Edmund Cartlidge, Thomas Hood, John
Bartram, Robert Naylor and Adam Rhoads; -- who all came from Darbyshire, in
England.

Thomas Worth, Samuel Bradshaw, John Hallowell, William Wood, Thomas Bradshaw,
Robert Scothorn and Richard Parker, all from Nottinghamshire.

John Hood, William Garret, Robert Cliffe, William Smith, John Smith and Thomas
Smith, from Leicestershire.

At Chester, the Quakers had meetings for divine worship regularly, from the
year 1675; in which year Robert Wade, and diverse others came over; and at whose
house the first meeting of record, in this place, was held, on the tenth of the
eleventh month, 1681.

Among the eminent persons of this society, who settled in and near this place,
in these early times, were, Thomas Vernon, John Bowater, Thomas Minshall,
Bartholomew Coppock, John Edge, etc. -- David Jones, at Goshen. -- John
Gibbons, Thomas Stanfield, John Cadwallader, James Thomas; -- William
Woodmanson, at Harold. -- John Simcocke, at Ridley; Nicholas Newlin, etc.

In the year 1682, among the Quakers, who settled on the cast side of
Brandywine creek, in New Castle county, were Valentine Hollingsworth, William
Stockdale, Thomas Conoway, Adam Sharpley, Morgan Drewitt, Valentine Morgan,
Cornelius Empson. -- And about Center township, George Harlam, Thomas
Hollingsworth, Alphonsus Kirk, William Gregg, etc.

Of those who first settled in, and about New Castle, were John Hessey, John
Richardson, Edward Blake, George Hogg, Benjamin Swett, etc.

Also William Brown, from Northamtonshire in England, who settled in early
time, about Nottingham, is noted among the Quakers, for his kind benevolence
and hospitality; and as exhibiting a pattern of a truly Christian life and
practice; -- He lived upwards of ninety years, had many descendants, and died
in 1746.




They appear, in general, Of the first and early Colonists of Pennsylvania.
to have been provident, and cautious, in their removal; so that rashness and
inconsideration, so common in new attempts of this kind, was not for the most
part, much observable among them, in this important undertaking. Many of them
brought servants, and had provided themselves with food and raiment, for such a
space of time, after their arrival, as, it might be reasonably supposed their
care and industry would afterward procure necessary subsistence in the
province: besides, sufficient quantities of household furniture, utensils,
implements and tools, for diverse of the first most useful, and necessary trades
and occupations were previously provided and brought by not a few of them.

The nature of both their religious and civil system and conduct, in general,
was so reasonable, generous and inviting that as they became known, and the
same thereof spread abroad, great numbers of people were induced to flock to
the province, from different parts of Europe; and, in such a rapid manner, to
colonize and improve it, as had scarcely ever been parallelled in any other
country, at so great a distance from the parent states, or civilized part of
the world.

In this, and the two next succeeding years, Number of arrivals, etc.
arrived ships, with passengers or settlers, from London, Bristol, Ireland,
Wales, Cheshire, Lancashire, Holland, Germany, etc. to the number of about
fifty sail. Hence Thomas Makin before mentioned, says --

"Hujus fama loci multos aliunde vocavit
"Libertas quibus est dulcis amorque lucri
"Hue alienigenae veniunt, venientque quotannis
"Omnibus usque adeo libera terra placet." -- etc.
Its same to distant countries far has spread
And some for peace, and some for profit, led,
Born in remotest climes, to settle here,
They leave their native soil, and all that is dear;
And still will flock from far, here to be free;
Such powerful charms has lovely Liberty. -- etc.



Among those from Germany, were some Friends, or Quakers, from Krisheim or
Cresheim, First settlement of Germantown by some Quakers from Germany, etc.
a town not far from Worms, in the Palatinate. They had been early convinced of
the religious principles of the Quakers, by the preaching of William Ames, an
Englishman: for which they had bore a public testimony there, till the present
time; when they all removed to Pennsylvania, and settled about six or seven
miles distant from Philadelphia, at a place which they called German-town.

"This removal," (says Sewell, in his history of the Quakers) "did not seem to
be without a singular direction of Providence: for not long after a war ensued
in Germany, where the Palatinate was altogether laid waste by the French; and
thousands of families were berest of their possessions, and reduced to
poverty." Among the first Germantown settlers from Krisheim, was Denn's Conrad.
The first religious meeting of the Quakers, in that place, was held at his
house, in 1683. He was an hospitable well disposed man, of an inoffensive life,
and good character. He died in the year 1729.


First arrival of the Welsh, etc.
Among those adventurers and settlers, who arrived about this time, were also
many from Wales, of those who are called Ancient Britons, and mostly Quakers;
diverse of whom were of the original or early stock of that society there.
Diverse of these early Welsh settlers were persons of excellent and worthy
character: and several of good education, ^amily and estate, chiefly Quakers;
and many of them either eminent preachers in that society, or otherwise well
qualified and disposed to do good, in various capacities, both in religious and
civil, in public and private life.

Of some of them there are particular and extraordinary accounts in manuscript,
both respecting their eminent religious services among the Quakers, etc. and
also of their great usefulness among their neighbors, in settling the
province, and in regulating and managing the civil affairs of the government;
as persons highly and justly esteemed and distinguished both in private and
public station. Of these, besides others, I find particularly mentioned,

John Thomas, Robert Owen and Jane, his wife, from Merconethshire; pious and
honorable persons, of good family, education and abilities; and had suffered
much persecution for their religion, being Quakers; but they died soon after
their arrival.

There was also another Robert Owen, who removed from Wales into Pennsylvania,
in 1690. He was, by account, an eminent preacher, and a very serviceable and
worthy person, among the Quakers; -- being a man endowed with many excellent
qualities; a skilful peacemaker, and of much service and utility, in various
respects while he lived in the country. He died in the year 1697.

Rowland Ellis was a man of note among the Welsh settlers; from a place called
Brin-Maur, near Dolgelly in the county of Merconeth. In 1682, he sent over
Thomas Owen and his family to make a settlement. This was the custom of diverse
others of the Welsh, at first, to send persons over to take up land for them,
and to prepare it, against their coming afterward.

But Rowland Ellis, choosing to see the country, before he removed his family,
sailed in a Bristol ship from Milford Haven, for Pennsylvania, on the sixteenth
of the eighth month, 1686; taking along with him his eldest son, Rowland, then
a boy, and they had a very long and tedious passage, in which they touched at
Barbados, not arriving at the province, till about twenty-four weeks after
their first sailing. The Welsh passengers were about one hundred, all from the
same place with him. Many of them died through want of necessary provisions;
and others afterward, from the remaining effects of their sufferings; and some
that survived, never recovered their former strength; though at Barbados,
where they stayed about six weeks, and were kindly and friendly treated, many
were much recruited from their languishing condition, and the death of diverse
others prevented, etc.

After having been about nine months in the province, and making the necessary
preparations for the reception of his family, which he intended to bring over,
he returned in the next spring, to his native land, leaving his young son with
his uncle John Humphrey. But he did not return to Pennsylvania, till the year
1697; when he sailed in a Liverpool vessel, with many other families,
consisting of about one hundred passengers, all from North Wales; and in about
six weeks they arrived at Philadelphia, in the fourth month.

Rowland Ellis was then in the forty-fifth year of his age. He left his eldest
daughter and heiress, by a former wife, in possession of his paternal
inheritance, at which (...) had lived most of his time.

After this his last arrival in Pennsylvania, he is said to have lived long to
do good. His services, both in church and state, being considerable. He was a
preacher among the Quakers; but his greatest service did not appear to be that
way. He was an acceptable man in every station. He died in the eightieth year
of his age, at his son-in-law, John Evans's house, in North Wales,
Pennsylvania; -- of whom and his pious exit, their is a more particular
account, in manuscript.

Hugh Roberts was an eminent preacher, among the Quakers; a man of note, and
good character, in Pennsylvania; to which he removed from Wales, about the year
1683; where he lived near eighteen years, to an advanced age.

He had suffered much for his religion, in his native country, prior to his
removal to America. He is said to have been of a tender and affectionate
disposition of mind, and a very valuable and worthy person. He was, for some
years a member of the provincial council, etc.

-- On his return from a religious visit to his native country, in the service
of preaching the gospel, in the year School, a number of the Inhabitants of North
Wales removed to Pennsylvania, in company with him; where he arrived on the
7th. of the Fifth month, many of the passengers having died at sea of the
Bloody Flux, during the passage.

In the latter end of this year, (School) William Jones, Thomas Evans, Robert
Evans, Owen Evans, Cadwallader Evans, Hugh Griffith, John Hugh, Edward Foulke,
John Humphrey, Robert Jones, and others, having purchased of Robert Turner, ten
thousand acres of land, began in the following year, to improve and settle the
same, and called the township Guinedd, in English North Wales. Some of the last
mentioned passengers settled here; who, in general did not, at first, profess
with the Quakers; but afterward they, with many others, as the neighborhood
increased, joined in religious society with them, and were an industrious and
worthy people --

Ellis Pugh, one of the early Welsh settlers, who arrived in the province in
the year 1687, lived much of his time, and died, here, 1718. He was convinced
of the Quakers' principles, in Wales, about the year 1674. He became a minister
among them, in 1680. In which capacity he continued till his death, being a
very serviceable person, in diverse respects, and of an excellent character.


They had early purchased of the Proprietary, in England, forty thousand acres
of land.

Those who came, at present, took up so much of it, on the west side of Sculkil
river, as made the three townships, of Merion, Haverford and Radnor; and in a
few years afterward, their number was so much augmented, as to settle the
three other townships of New-town, Goshen and Uwchland. After this they
continued still increasing, and became a numerous and flourishing people.

Notwithstanding the precaution, which many of these adventurers had used, in
bringing provisions and other necessaries with them, for a certain time,
Difficulties of the first settlers, etc.
yet it cannot be reasonably supposed that the arrival of such a large number
of people, in a wilderness, within the space of two or three years would not
necessarily be attended with inconveniences and difficulties. Though the
European inhabitants, in the country, prior to their arrival, were kind and
assisting, yet they were very few, Sometimes alarmed with the prospect of want,
etc.
mostly new or late settlers, and consequently but meanly provided, either with
provisions, or other accommodations; insomuch that sometimes, for diverse years
afterward, the scarcity, which was experienced among them, of the former,
caused very alarming apprehensions. Among other particular accounts, of this
kind, I find the following; which may give a further idea of those early times
in the province, etc.

John Scarborough, of London, coach-smith, arrived in the country, in 1682,
with his son John, then a youth, and settled in Middletown, in Bucks county,
among the first, in those parts; where he remained about two years; and then
embarked for his native country, with intention to bring over his wife and
family; -- having suffered much, by persecution, for his religion, in England,
being a Quaker.

During his residence in Pennsylvania, provisions being sometimes scarce, in
that part, where he resided, especially in the first year, he is said to have
had occasion to remark the providence of God to him, and those near him, when
they were under greater difficulty, on this account, than at other times.

The wild pigeons came in such great numbers, that the air was sometimes
darkened by their flight; and, flying low, they were frequently knocked down,
as they flew; in great quantities, by those who had no other means to take
them: whereby they supplied themselves; and having salted those, which they
could not immediately use, they preserved them, both for bread and meat.

Thus they were supplied several times, during the first two or three years,
till they had raised, by their industry, food sufficient out of the ground: --
for the tilling of which, at that time, they used Hoes, having neither horses
nor plows. -- The Indians were remarkably kind, and very assistant to them, in
diverse respects, frequently supplying them with such provisions, as they could
spare, etc.

John Scarborough, having placed his son under the care of a friend, sailed for
England; but he never returned. -- His wife, who was not a Quaker, being
unwilling to leave her native country, and persecution beginning to cease, he
afterward gave his possessions, in Pennsylvania to his son, whom he had left
in the province; with a strict charge, when it should be in his power, to be
kind to the poor Indians, for the favors he had received from them: which his
son faithfully observed, and complied with; and is said to have been a worthy
man, and of good character. M. S.

John Chapman came from England in 1684. The ship, in which he came, by reason
of bad weather, put into Maryland; where he met with Phineas Pemberton, whose
father-in-law, James Harrison, had purchased, in Bucks county, Pennsylvania,
five thousand acres of land; part of it in Wright's town; -- hence Chapman
getting intelligence of that part of the country, afterward settled there. He
went from Maryland, with his family, first to Phineas Pemberton's plantation,
near the falls of Delaware; who had now made a convenient settlement, and
entertained the new-owners with much kindness. -- From hence Chapman went to
his purchase, in Wrights-town; where, within about twelve months afterward,
his wife had two sons at one time; whence he called the place Twins-borough.

At this time Chapman's place was the furthest back, in the woods, of any
English settlement; and the India^^, being then numerous, much frequented his
house, in great companies, and were very kind to him and his family, as well as
to those who came after him; often supplying them: with corn, and other
provisions; which in those early times, more especially in that part of
country, were very scarce, and hard to be procured. --

In one of these scarce times J. Chapman's eldest daughter, Mara, supplied his
family by an incident unexpected; -- being near Neshaminy creek, which runs
into the Delaware, she heard an unusual noise like that of something in
distress; upon search, she found a large Buck, which had disengaged himself
from a wolf, that a little before had seized on him, and had fled to the creek,
for safety, under a high bank; -- the Buck stood still, till she took the
halter from the horse, on which she rode, and with a stick, put it over his
horns; whereby she secured him, till assistance came; on which the wolf
retired: -- such incidents as this, in those times, were looked upon as
providential favors: --

Abraham and Joseph Chapman, the twins before mentioned, when boys, about nine
or ten years old, going out one evening, to seek their cattle, met an Indian,
in the woods; who told them to go back; else they would be lost. Soon after
this they took his advice, and went back; but it was within night before they
got home; where they found the Indian; who, being careful lest they should lose
themselves, had repaired thither, in the night, to see, etc. And their parents,
about that time, going to the yearly meeting at Philadelphia, and leaving a
young family at home, (they being Quakers) the Indians came every day, to see
whether any thing was amiss among them. -- Such, in many instances was the kind
treatment and behavior of the natives, or aborigines, of this country, to the
English, in their first and early settlement of it.




Besides, these adventurers were not all young persons, and able to endure the
difficulties and hardships which are mostly unavoidable in subduing a
wilderness, Some of them advanced in years, etc.
or as equally regardless of convenient accommodations as young healthy and
strong men, accostomed to labor and disappointment: but there were among them
persons advanced in years, with women and children; and such as, in their
native country, had lived well, and enjoyed ease and plenty.

Their first business, after their arrival, was to land their property, and put
it under such shelter as could be found; First employment of the settlers, on
their arrival, etc.
then, while some of them got warrants of survey, for taking up so much land,
as was sufficient for immediate settling, others went diversely further into
the wood, to the different places, where their lands were laid out; often
without any path or road, to direct them; for scarce any were to be found above
two miles from the water side; not so much as any mark, or sign of any European
having been there. As to the Indians, they seldom traveled so regularly as to
be traced or followed by footsteps; except perhaps, from one of their towns to
another. Their huntings were rather like ships at sea, without any track, or
path. So that all the country, further than about two miles distant, from the
river, (excepting the Indians moveable settlements) was an entire wilderness,
The country was a wilderness.
producing nothing for the support of human life, but the wild fruits and
animals of the woods.

The lodgings of some of these settlers were, at first, in the woods; a chosen
tree was frequently all the shelter they had, First dwelling places, etc.
against the inclemency of the weather: This sometimes happened late in the
fall, and, even, in the winter season. The next coverings of many of them were,
either caves, in the earth, or such huts, erected upon it, as could be most
expeditiously procured, till better houses were built; for which they had no
want of timber.

It is impossible that these first adventurers and settlers, who had never
seen, nor been accustomed to, such a scene, could, at first, have that proper
idea, or method of improving this wilderness, Great change productive of strong
and affecting sensations, etc.
which experience afterward taught. It is likewise certain, that the great
difference, between the finely improved, cultivated and open countries, with
the near connections, which many of them had left behind, and the appearance of
a wild and woody desert, with which they had now to encounter, among savages,
must have created, in them, very sensible ideas, and made strong impressions,
at first, on their minds: -- That likewise the consideration of the long and
painful labor, and inevitable disappointments and hardships, which, more or
less, are naturally inseparable from such undertakings, Of the discouraging and
encouraging prospect of the first and early settlers, etc
and for a series of years must necessarily be endured, before a comfortable
subsistence could be procured, in the country, and a sufficient portion of land
brought into proper order, for that purpose, must undoubtedly have been very
affecting to a thoughtful people, in this new, remote and solitary situation!
-- But the soil was fertile; the air mostly clear and healthy; the streams of
water were good and plentiful; wood, for fire and building, in abundance; --
And, as they were a pious and religious people, knowing their views, in this
their undertaking, to be good, they cheerfully underwent all difficulties of
this nature, and divine Providence blessed their industry. In a short treatise,
printed and published in London, by And^^^ Soul, in Shoreditch, 1684, (but
without the author's name) the vioce and motives of some of these early
colonists seem, in a more particide manner, to be exhibited. -- The title and
introductory part of it (...) follow, as a specimen, viz.

The Planter's speech to his neighbors and countrymen of Pennsylvania East and
West-Jersey, and to all such at have transported themselves into new colonies,
for the sake of a quiet and retired life.
My dear friends and countrymen,
Though it may seem very impertinent and unnecessary to go about to repeat to
you the occasions and motives, that inclined you to ab^^don the land of your
nativity, and those comfortable outward employments and accommodations, which
most of you had there, and to adventure yourselves to the hazzards of a long
voyage at sea, to come to the remote part of the world; yet, lest you should
forget those inducemen^^, as often it happens, that men, by a slothful
negligence, or ignorance, after some tract of time, fall from their first love,
and blindly hurty themselves into the very same mischiefs, which they intended
to avoid, and build up again what they justly endeavored to destroy, not
foreseeing the future ill consequences of their present (supposed innocent^
actings; I shall take leave briefly to mention some few of those weight^ causes
which I am confident, originally swayed your spirits to this transplantation
and those good ends, for the obtaining of which, you chie^ly removed hither.

The motives of your retreating to these new habitations, I apprehend
(measuring your sentiments by my own) to have been,

1st. The desires of a peaceable life, where we might worship God, and obey his
law, with freedom, according to the dictates of the divine principle,
unincumbered with the moldy errors of fierce invasions of tradition, politic
craft, covetous, or ambitious cruelty, etc.

2d. That we might here, as on a virgin elysian shore, commence, or improve,
such an innocent course of life, as might unload us of th^se outward cares,
vexations and turmoils, which before we were always subject unto, from the
hands of self designing and unreasonable men.

3d. That, as Lot, by flying to little Zoar, from the ungodly company of a more
populous, magnificent dwelling, we might avoid both being grieved with the
sight of infectious, as well as odious examples, of horrid swearings, cursings,
drunkenness, gluttony, uncleanness, and all kinds of debauchery, continually
committed with greediness; and also esea^^ the judgments, threatened to every
land, polluted with such abomination^

4th. That, as trees are transplanted from one soil to another, to render them
more thriving, and better bearers, so we here, in peace and secure retirement,
under the bountiful protection of God, and in the (...) of the least
adulterated nature, might every one the better improve his talent, and bring
forth more plenteous fruits, to the glory of God, and public welfare of the
whole creation.

5th. And lastly, That in order hereunto, by our holy doctrine, and the
practical teachings of our exemplary, abstemious lives, transacted in all
humility, sobriety, plainness, self-denial, virtue and honesty, we might gain
upon those thousands of poor dark souls, scattered round about us, (and
commonly, in way of contempt, and reproach, called heathens) and bring them,
not only to a state of civility, but real piety; which effected, would turn to
a more satisfactory account, than if, with the proud Spaniards, we had gained
the mines of Potosi, and might make the ambitious heroes, whom the world
admires, blush, for their petty and shameful victories, which only tend to make
their follow creatures slaves to those, that are already the Devil's vassals:
whereas hereby we might release millions from the chains of Satan, and not only
teach them their rights, as Men, and their happiness, when Christians, but
being them from the power of darkness into the mavelous light, and the
glorious liberty of the sons of the Most High.

These thoughts, these designs, my friends, were those, that brought you
hither; and so far only, as you pursue and accomplish them, you obtain the end
of your journey. If these be neglected, though your ports and rivers were full
of trading ships, your land never so populous, and l^^den with most vendible
commodities, yet I would be bold to say, that your plantations were in a most
unthriving condition; that like men in a ^e^er, tumbling from one side of the
bed to the other, you have shifted your dwelling, but not recovered your
health; nor are one inch nearer your proposed happiness, in America, than in
Europe; and have traveled some thousands of miles, to as little purpose, as
the Jesuits, into Japan and China, or foolish pilgrims, in their tedious, vain,
journeys to Compostella, Loretto, or Jerusalem.

Our business, therefore, here, in this new land, is not so much to build
houses, and establish factories, and promote trade and manufactories, that may
enrich ourselves, (though all these things, in their due place, are not to be
neglected) as to erect temples of holiness and righteousness, which God may
delight in; to lay such lasting frames and foundations of temperance and
virtue, as may support the superstructures of our future happiness, both in
this, and the other world.

In order to these great and glorious ends, it will well become, nay, it is the
indispensible duty of all, that are superiors amongst us, to make laws, and
imitate customs, that may tend to innocence, and an harmless life; so as to
avoid and prevent all oppression and violence, either to men or beasts; by
which we shall strengthen the principle of well-doing, and qualify the fierce,
bitter, envious, wrathful spirit; which, (as it is said of fire and water, in
the extremes) it a good servant, but a bad master, etc.

N. B. In the remainder of this performance, diverse particulars are proposed,
as fundamentals, for future laws and customs, tending principally to establish
a higher degree of temperance, and original simplicity of manners; -- more
particularly against the use of spiritous liquors, than had been usual before.
-- Every thing of a military nature, even, the use of the instruments thereof,
is not only disapproved and the destruction of the human species thereby,
condemned in this speech, but likewise all violence, or cruelty, toward, and
the wanton killing of, the inferior living creatures, with the eating of animal
food, are also strongly advised against, in those proposed regulations,
customs, or laws, with the reasons given, etc. to the end that a higher degree
of love, perfection and happiness might more universally be introduced and
preserved, among mankind, etc.





For these first comers, after their arrival, soon cleared land enough, to make
way for a crop of Indian corn, in the succeeding spring; and in a year or two,
they began upon wheat, They soon get into a prosperous way of living, etc.
and other grain; thus they went on improving, till they got into a comfortable
way of living; so that many of them were blessed both with the necessaries and
conveniences of life beyond their expectation; and, after having lived to old
age, they are said to have frequently recollected and spoke of the favors of
divine Providence, in preserving there through the difficulties, with which
they encountered, in their first and early settling the country: Of which the
following extract from the testimony of one of them, being a Quaker, a person
of an approved character, is an instance, and exhibits a specimen of this
nature, viz.

Richard Townsends account of his removal to Pennsylvania, etc.
The testimony of Richard Townsend, showing the providential hand of God, to him
and others, from the first settlement of Pennsylvania, to this day. (About the
year 1727.)
Whereas King Charles the second, in the year 1681, was pleased to grant this
province to William Penn, and his heirs, for ever; which act seemed to be an
act of Providence to many religious, good, people; and the Proprietor, William
Penn, being one of the people called Quakers, and in good esteem, among them
and others, many were inclined to embark along with him, for the settlement of
this place.

To that end, in the year 1682 several ships being provided, I found a concern
on my mind to embark with them, with my wife and child; and about the latter
end of the Sixth-month, having settled my affairs in London, where I dwelt, I
went, on board the ship Welcome, Robert Greenaway, commander, in company with
my worthy friend, William Penn; whose good conversation was very advantageous
to all the company. His singular care was manifested, in contributing to the
necessities of many, who were sick of the Smallpox, then on board; out of
which company about thirty died. -- After a prosperous passage of about two
months, having had, in that time, many good meetings, on board, we arrived here.

At our arrival, we found it a wilderness; the chief inhabitants were Indians,
and some Swedes; Richard Townsends account, etc.
who received us in a friendly manner: and though there was a great number of
us, the good hand of Providence was seen in a particular manner; in that
provisions were found for us, by the Swedes and Indians, at very reasonable
rates, as well as brought from diverse other parts, that were inhabited before.

Our first concern was to keep up and maintain our religious worship; and, in
order thereunto, we had several meetings, in the houses of the inhabitants; and
one boarded meeting house was set up, where the city was to be, near Delaware;
and, as we had nothing but love and good will, in our hearts, one to another,
we had very comfortable meetings, from time to time; and after our meeting was
over, we assisted each other, in building little houses, for our shelter.

After some time I set up a mill, on Chester creek; which I brought ready
framed from London; which served for grinding of corn, and sawing of boards;
and was of great use to us. Besides, I with Joshua Tittery, made a net, and
caught great quantities of fish; which supplied ourselves and many others; so
that, notwithstanding it was thought near three thousand persons came in the
first year, we were so providentially provided for, that we could buy a deer
for about two shillings, and a large turkey, for about one shilling, and Indian
corn for about two shillings and six pence per bushel.

And, as our worthy Proprietor treated the Indians with extraordinary humanity,
they became very civil and loving to us, and brought in abundance of venison.
As, in other countries, the Indians were exasperated by hard treatment, which
has been the foundation of much bloodshed, so the contrary treatment here has
produced their love and affection.

About a year after our arrival, there came in about twenty families from high
and low Germany, of religious, Richard Townsends account, etc.
good people; who settled about six miles from Philadelphia, and called the
place Germantown. -- The country continually increasing, people began to spread
themselves further back. -- "Also a place called North Wales, was settled by
many of the ancient Britons, an honest inclined people, although they had not
then made a profession of the truth, as held by us, yet, in a little time, a
large convincement was among them; and diverse meeting houses were built.

About the time, in which Germantown was laid out, I settled upon my tract of
land, which I had purchased of the Proprietor, in England, about a mile from
thence; where I set up a house and a corn mill; -- which was very useful to the
country, for several miles round: -- But there not being plenty of horses,
people generally brought their corn on their backs many miles; -- I remember
one man had a bull so gentle, that he used to bring his corn on him, instead of
a horse.

Being now settled about six or seven miles from Philadelphia, where leaving
the principal body of friends, together with the chief place of provisions, as
before mentioned, flesh meat was very scarce with me, for some time; of which I
found the want. I remember I was once supplied by a particular instance of
Providence, in the following manner: --

As I was in my meadow, mowing grass, a young deer came and looked on me; I
continued mowing, and the deer in the same attention to me; upon which I laid
down my scythe, and went toward him; upon which he ran off a small distance; I
went to my work again, and the Deer continued looking on me; so that several
times I left my work, to go toward him; but he still kept himself at a
distance; at last, as I was going toward him, and he, looking on me, did not
mind his steps, but ran forceably against the trunk of a tree, and stunned
himself so much, that he fell; Richard Townsends account, etc.
upon which I ran forward, and, getting upon him, held by the legs: -- After a
great struggle, in which I had almost tired him out, and rendered him lifeless,
I threw him on my shoulders, holding him fast by the legs, and, with some
difficulty, from his fresh struggling, carried him home, about a quarter of a
mile, to my house; where, by the assistance of a neighbor, who happened to be
there, and killed him for me; he proved very serviceable to my family. I could
relate several other acts of Providence, of this kind, but omit them for
brevity.

As people began to spread, and improve their lands, the country became more
fruitful; so that those, who came after us, were plentifully supplied; and with
what we abounded we began a small trade abroad. And as Philadelphia increased,
vessels were built, and many employed. Both country and trade have been
wonderfully increasing to this day; so that, from a wilderness, the Lord, by
his good hand of providence, has made it a fruitful field: -- On which to look
back, and observe all the steps, would exceed my present purpose; yet, being
now in the eighty-fourth year of my age, and having been in this country near
forty-six years, and my memory pretty clear, concerning the rise and progress
of the province, I can do no less than return praises to the Almighty, when I
look back and consider his bountiful hand, not only in temporals, but in the
great increase of our meetings; wherein he has many times manifested his great
loving kindness, in reaching to, and convincing many persons of the principles
of truth; and those, that were already convinced and continued faithful, were
not only blessed with plenty of the fruits of the earth, but also with the dew
of Heaven: -- "I am engaged, in my spirit, to supplicate the continuance
thereof to the present rising generation; that, as God has blessed their
parents, Richard Townsends account, etc.
the same blessing may remain on their offspring, to the end of time; that it
may be so is the hearty desire and prayer of their ancient and loving friend,

RICHARD TOWNSEND.

CHAPTER V.
Beginning of the city of Philadelphia. -- John Key, the first born. --
Province and territory divided into counties. -- First General Assembly at
Philadelphia in 1683. -- Names of the members, and memorials of some of them.
-- Proceedings of the Assembly. -- Second charter, or frame of government. -- A
seal for each county; the first Sheriffs. -- First grand and petit jury, with
their business, etc. -- Further account of the situation and plan of
Philadelphia. -- William Penn's letter to the free society of traders, giving
an account of Pennsylvania at that time.

IN the latter part of this year, 1682, 1682.
the Proprietary, having finished his business with the Indians, undertook,
with the assistance of his Surveyor General, Thomas Holme, A place chosen and
laid out, for the city of Philadelphia, etc.
to lay out a place for the city. The ground, which was chosen for that
purpose, was claimed by some Swedes; to whom he gave, in exchange for it, a
larger quantity of land, at a small distance.

The situation of this place, being where Philadelphia now stands, along the
western side of the river Delaware, then exhibited, on the said river, an
agreeable prospect; it had a high and dry bank next the water, with a high
shore, ornamented with a fine view of Pine trees, growing upon it.

In this bank many of the first and early adventurers had their caves, or
holes, for their residence, First house in Philadelphia, etc.
before any houses were built, or better accommodations prepared for them. The
first house erected on this plot of ground, was built by George Guest, and not
finished at the time of the Proprietor's arrival. "This house was then building
in Budd's row, near that called Powell's dock. -- He, for many years
afterward, kept a tavern there, called the Blue anchor."

John Key, who was said to be the first born child of English parents, in
Philadelphia, and that, in compliment of which William Penn gave him a lot of
ground, died at Kennet, in Chester county, on the fifth of July, 1767, in the
eighty-fifth year of his age; where his corpse was interred, in the Quakers
burying ground, the next day, attended by a great concourse of people. -- He
was born in a cave, long afterward known by the name of Penny-pot, near
Sassafras-street. -- I have seen him myself more than once, in the city; to
which, about six years before his death, he walked on foot, from Kennet, about
thirty miles, in one day. In the latter part of his life, he generally in the
city, went under the name of first born.




Soon afterward many small houses were erected. William Penn himself had a
large mansion house, built on his Manor of Pennsbury, near the side of
Delaware, a few miles below the falls of Trenton, and about twenty-six above
the city: which appears to have been undertaken before his arrival, and
intended for his reception. Here afterward he sometimes resided, and had
meetings and conferences with the Indians, both on a religious and civil
account.

Province and territory divided into counties, etc.
About this time also the Proprietor, with the consent of the purchasers under
him, divided the province and territories, each into three counties; those of
the province were called the counties of Bucks, Philadelphia, and Chester;
those of the territories, New Castle, Kent, and Sussex. For which having
appointed Sheriffs, and other proper officers, in each county, he issued writs,
The following form of these writs is taken from the original, viz.

(L. S.) William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the province of
Pennsylvania, and the territories thereunto belonging:
I do hereby, in the King's name, empower and require thee to summon all the
freeholders, in thy bailiwick, to meet on the 20th. day of the next month, at
the falls upon Delaware river; and that they then and there, elect and choose
out of themselves, twelve persons of most note for wisdom and integrity, to
serve as their delegates, in the provincial council, to be held at
Philadelphia, the 10th. day of the first month next; and that thou there
declare to the said freemen, that they may all personally appear at an
Assembly, at the place aforesaid, according to the contents of my charter of
liberties; of which thou art to make me a true and faithful return.

Given at Philadelphia, the (...) day of the month, 1682. WILLIAM PENN.
To Richard Noble, High Sheriff of the county of Bucks; and the other five
Sheriffs likewise for their several countries.





for the election of members of Council and Assembly, 1683.
conformable to the constitution, at that time.

He met the Council on the tenth day of the First month, 1683, O. S. at
Philadelphia, The Proprietary meets the first Council and Assembly, at
Philadelphia.
and the Assembly, two days afterward. The number of the members for both the
Council and Assembly consisted of twelve, out of each county: three for the
Council, and nine for the Assembly, making in all, seventy-two. Those of the
Council were: --

William Markham, Christopher Tailor, Thomas Holme, Lacy Cock, William Haige,
John Moll, Ralf Withers, John Simcock, Edward Cantwell, Names of the Council.
William Clayton, William Biles, James Harrison, William Clark, Francis
Whitewell, John Richardson, John Hillyard.
The members of Assembly for each county were:

For Bucks.
William Yardly, Samuel Dark, Robert Lucas, Nicholas Walne, John Wood, John
Clowes, Thomas Fitzwater, Robert Hall, James Boyden.
For Philadelphia.
John Songhurst, Names of the Assembly.
John Heart, Walter King, Andros Binkson, John Moon, Thomas Win, Speaker,
Griffith Jones, William Warner, Swan Swanson.
For Chester.
John Hoskins, Robert Wade, George Wood, John Blunston, Dennis Rochford, Thomas
Bracy, John Bezer, John Harding, Joseph Phipps.
For New Castle.
John Cann, John Darby, Valentine Hollingsworth, Gasparus Herman, John Dehoaef,
James Williams, William Guest, Peter Alrick, Henrick Williams.
For Kent.
John Biggs, Simon Irons, Thomas Hassold, John Curtis, Robert Bedwell, William
Windsmore, John Brinkloe, Daniel Brown, Benony Bishop.
For Sussex.
Luke Watson, Alexander Draper, William Futcher, Henry Bowman, Alexander
Moleston, John Hill, Robert Bracy, John Kipshaven, Cornelius Verhoof. I find
very little on record respecting the particular characters of these members of
this first provincial Council and Assembly, which met at Philadelphia:

Captain William Markham from London, was a relation of the Proprietor. He was
afterward sometimes his Secretary, and sometimes his Deputy Governor. He
appears to have been an useful person, of good education, character and
ability. He had the Proprietor's confidence and esteem, till his death, in the
year --.

Christopher Tailor is said to have been a person of excellent character and
ability, he was born in Yorkshire, had a good education, wrote well in the
Latin language. -- He was an eminent preacher among the Quakers; and writ
several pieces in defense of their religious principles, in England, as well as
his brother, Thomas Tailor, etc. He was one of the first and principal settlers
in the province, under William Penn; and is said to have been of great service
in it, in different respects. He died in 1696.

Captain Thomas Holme came from Waterford, in Ireland. -- He was one of the
people called Quakers, and Surveyor-General of the province, appointed by
commission, from the Proprietor, bearing date, the 18th. of the Second month,
1682.

Lacy Cock appears to have been one of the Swede settlers, prior to William
Penn's arrival.

John Simcock came from Ridley, in Cheshire, in England, where he had suffered
much for his religion, being a Quaker, and a preacher in that society. He had a
good education, was one of the Proprietor's first commissioners of property,
and one of his most trusty friends, in the government. Sometimes he was Speaker
of the Assembly; and is said to have been a very worthy and serviceable person,
in the province, till his death, both in a religious and civil capacity. He
lived in Chester county; and died on the 27th. of January, 1702.

William Biles was a preacher among the Quakers, among the first settlers
there; where he appears to have taken up land, under Governor Andres, of
New York, prior to William Penn's grant of the province. He is said to have
been a very useful person both in the civil and religions line; being often in
the Council and Assembly, etc.

James Harrison came from Boulton, in Lancashire, one of the Proprietor's first
commissioners of property; was diverse years in great esteem with him, and his
agent, at Pennsbury, etc. being a man of good education, and a preacher among
the Quakers, etc.

William Haige, had been a merchant in London.

Ralph Withers, from Bishop's Canning in Wildshire.

Griff^^h Jones, from Surry.

Francis Whitewell was counselor for Kent county. He is said to have been a
very serviceable person, in the government, among the first and early settlers;
a preacher among the Quakers; and every way a very useful and worthy member of
society. He died in the year 1684; and William Darval was chosen Counselor in
his stead.

Thomas Win was Speaker of the Assembly, during the two first years, and was,
at other times, a member of it. He was one of the people called Quakers, a
preacher among them, and came from North Wales; a person of note and good
character: -- He died in the latter part of the year 1692. -- He was author of
some pieces written in defense of the Quakers, in his native country, etc.

John Moon was originally of Lancashire in England, afterward of Bristol: --
He writ some pieces in defense of the Quakers, in his native country, etc.

John Songhurst came from Sussex, in England, was a writer and preacher among
the Quakers. -- He died in West-Jersey, and was buried in Philadelphia, in 1688.



Though the charter of privileges, or frame of government, required a greater
number, than were now returned, Proceedings of the Assembly. etc.
to serve in Council and Assembly, yet it was left to be explained and
confirmed by the Governor, his heirs and assigns, and by the freemen of the
province and territories; therefore, finding it too inconvenient to return the
full complement, prescribed by charter, the freemen depended upon the
Proprietor's construction of their choice, in a favorable manner; and alleged
their reasons, both in the Sheriffs' returns, and also by diverse petitions and
addresses, The freemen do not strictly comply with their charter, etc.
for choosing only twelve for each county, as sufficient to compose both the
Council and Assembly; declaring that the number returned, that is, three for
the Council, and nine for the Assembly, from each county, had in them the power
of the whole freemen of the province and territories, and consequently, of
serving in these capacities.

It was accordingly requested of the Governor, that this alteration might not
deprive the people of the benefit of their charter, though it might seem to be
returned to him again, by not being accepted so largely as granted. Upon which
the Governor answered, "That they might amend, alter, or add, for the public
good; and, that he was ready to settle such foundations, as might be for their
happiness, according to the powers vested in him."

These preliminaries being settled, the different branches of the Legislature
proceeded on business, according to the method prescribed in their charter of
privileges, that the Governor and Provincial Council should propose to the
Assembly, and prepare all bills, which they, at any time, should think proper
to be passed into laws, consistent with the powers granted, in the King's
letters patent.

Proceedings of the Assembly, etc.
In such popular and unexperienced Councils, where every man may propose any
thing, which he fancies will tend to the public good, it is no wonder, if
extraordinary propositions should sometimes be made; and though many
singularities of this nature do not appear to have occurred in this province,
yet, probably, the two following, which are said to have been made, Two
singular propositions, etc.
at this time, may be ranked under this description: First, that young men
should be obliged to marry at, or before a certain age: Second, that two sorts
of clothes only shall be worn; one for winter, and the other for summer. -- Of
the propositions, which were now made, some were agreed to, and some rejected:
but the principal thing done, this session, was the alteration of the charter
of liberties, called the frame of government, which had before been in
agitation.

At a Council, held the 20th. of the First month, the speaker, and two members
of Assembly attending with some bills, which had been sent to them, The house
and freemen request a new charter, etc.
the Governor and Council desired a conference with the whole house and
freemen, about the charter. Upon their attending, the Governor asked them,
"Whether they chose to have the old charter, or a new one?" They unanimously
requested a new one, with such amendments, as had already been debated and
agreed on. To which the Governor consented, and made a speech to them, on the
occasion; in which he distinguished their duty, and his own willingness to
oblige them. Next day the house sent Griffith Jones and Thomas Fitzwater, two
of their members, with a written message to the Governor, containing their
thankful acknowledgments, for his kind speech, and gratefully embracing his
offers, respecting what they desired to be inserted in their charter.

A committee of each house was thereupon appointed to draw up the charter, with
amendments: Those of the Council were, John Moll, for New Castle; Francis
Whitewell, for Kent; William Clark, for Sussex; James Harrison, for Bucks;
William Clayton, for Chester; and Thomas Holme, for Philadelphia. The committee
of Assembly were: James Williams, for New Castle; Benony Bishop, for Kent; Luke
Watson, for Sussex; Thomas Fitzwater, for Bucks; Dennis Rochford, for Chester;
and Thomas Win, the Speaker, for Philadelphia county.

At a council held the 30th. of the First-month, A new charter obtained from
the Proprietary.
this year, the charter being prepared and read, signed, sealed and delivered
by the Governor, was received by James Harrison, Thomas Win, and another
member, on behalf of the assembly and freemen, who returned the old one to the
Governor, with the hearty thanks of the whole house; which new charter may be
seen in the appendix, No. 3.

By this charter the provincial council was to consist of eighteen persons,
three from each county; and the assembly was to be composed of thirty-six; men
of most note, Purport of this charter, etc.
for virtue, wisdom and ability; by whom, with the Governor, all laws were to
be made, officers chosen, and public affairs transacted, in the manner therein
expressed.

This charter continued in force till after the revolution, in England; and
though in some parts, it was formed upon a generous plan; yet all the laws were
thereby still to be prepared and proposed by the Governor and Council; and the
number of Assemblymen were to be increased at their pleasure. This charter,
with another, which followed, in the year 1696, seemed to be only preparatory
to the last Charter of Privileges, granted in 1701.

This was the last affair transacted at this session; which continued
twenty-two days. -- The Governor and Council, A seal for each county.
among other regulations, established a Seal, for each county, viz. for
Philadelphia, an Anchor; for Bucks, a Tree and Vine; for Chester, a Plow; for
New Castle, a Cassia; for Kent, three Ears of Indian Corn; and for Sussex, a
Wheat Sheaf.

First Sheriffs.
The first sheriffs, appointed for each county, were: for Philadelphia, John
Test; Chester, Thomas Usher; Bucks, Richard Noble; New Castle, Edmund Cantwell;
Kent, Peter Bowcomb; Sussex, John Vines.

First grand jury, etc.
The first Grand Jury, in Pennsylvania, was summoned on the second of the third
month, this year, (1683) upon some persons, accused of issuing counterfeit
silver money. The Governor and Council sat, as a Court of Justice, on the
occasion. The names of those impanelled and attested to serve on the Grand Jury
were, Names of the first grand jurymen, etc.
Thomas Lloyd, Foreman, Enoch Flower, Richard Wood, John Harding, John Hill,
Edward Louff, James Boyden, Nicholas Walne, John James, John Vanborson, Robert
Hall, Valentine Hollingsworth, Alexander Draper, John Louff, John Wale, Samuel
Dark, John Parsons, John Blunston, Thomas Fitzwater, William Guest, John
Curtis, Robert Lucas, Henry Jones and Caleb Pusey.

A bill or bills, being found by the Grand Jury, Names of the petty jury.
a Petty Jury was therefore impanelled and attested; whose names were: John
Claypoole, Foreman, Robert Turner, Robert Ewer, Andrew Binkson, John Barnes,
Joseph Fisher, Dennis Rochford, William Howell, Walter King, Benjamin
Whitehead, Thomas Rouse and David Breintnall.

They convicted a person, whose name was Pickering, and two others, his
accomplices, The sentence passed on a person for counterfeiting money.
of coining and stamping silver, in the form of Spanish pieces, with the alloy
of too much copper in it. Upon which Pickering's sentence, as principal, was,
that for this high misdemeanour, whereof his country had found him guilty, he
should make full satisfaction, in good and current pay, to every person, who
should, within the space of one month, bring in any of this false, base and
counterfeit coin, (which the next day was to be called in by proclamation,)
according to their respective proportions; and that the money brought in,
should be melted down before it was returned to him; and that he should pay a
fine of forty pounds toward the building of a Courthouse, stand committed
till the same was paid, and afterward find security for his good behavior.

This and all other affairs, before the Council, W. Penn finishes his plan and
regulation of Phiadelphia.
being finished, and the members returned to their habitations, the Proprietary
applied himself to finish his plan, and regulate the streets, of his favorite
city, Philadelphia.

This city is situated forty degrees, or more precisely 39 degrees, 56 minutes,
54 seconds, Situation of the city etc.
north from the equator, and about seventy-five degrees, or more accurately 5
hours, 0 minutes, 35 seconds, west from London, on the west side of the river
Delaware; which river, at this place, is near one mile broad, at the distance
of about forty leagues from the sea, along the course of the river and bay. The
river Sculkil, which is a branch of the Delaware, and here runs nearly parallel
to it, at the distance of two miles westward, is broad and deep enough for
large ships, at this place; but, by reason of a sand-bar, at its mouth, where
it enters the Delaware, about four miles below the city, its navigation, for
large vessels, is obstructed: And it has falls about five miles above the city,
to which the tide runs, and no further. Over which falls, or rocks, at certain
times, in floods and freshes, boats and small craft pass down to the city, with
country produce, as, iron, wheat, floor, etc. from the interior parts of the
province. The tide rises, in the Delaware, generally about six feet, at the
city, and flows near thirty miles above it, to the falls at Trenton, on the
Jersey shore, and is navigable all the way for large shipping, as far as that
place. But the extent of this river, including all its curves and windings,
above these falls, (much of which may easily be made navigable) is not yet
precisely known.

The original plan of this city, as confirmed by charter, dated October 25th.
1701, extends, in length, between the river Delaware, on the east, Description
of the plan and streets of Philadelphia, etc.
and Sculkil, on the west of it, about two miles; and is, in breadth, one mile
nearly, on each river. The streets, which run right, and exactly parallel to
each other, nearly east and west, from river to river, are nine in number, and
they are intersected, at right angles, by twenty-three others, running nearly
parallel with the rivers, north and south; none being less than fifty, nor more
than one hundred feet broad.

The Proprietor likewise assigned five squares, within this plan, for the
public use of the city, with other beneficial regulations; whose future great
importance to the city, having since not been sufficiently considered and
attended to, some of them have either been neglected, or violated.

The largest public square, at the center, it is said, was intended to contain
ten acres of land; the other four, eight acres each. In the original plan by
Thomas Holme, Surveyor General, the proportions, dimensions and situations of
all the original squares and streets, with the names of the latter, then given
them, and still generally retained, are exhibited, as well as in the following
description of it, viz.

The distances of the streets from each other, from east to west, with their
names and dimensions are: -- From Delaware Front-street to Second-street, feet
396 Second-street to Third-street, 496 Third to Fourth, 396 Fourth to fifth,
396 Dimensions of the streets, squares, etc.
Fifth to Sixth, 396 Sixth to Seventh, 396 Seventh to Eighth, 396 Eighth to
Ninth, 396 Ninth to Tenth, 396 Tenth to Eleventh, 396 Eleventh to Broad-street,
528 Ten streets, 50 feet each, 500 Distance from Delaware Front-street to
Broad-street, 5088 Distance from Sculkil Front-street to Broad-street, 5088
Broad-street, 100 Distance on High Street, between the two Front-streets of
Delaware and Sculkil, exclusive of the said two streets, and their distances
from each river, equal to two miles, wanting 304 feet. The breadth of the
Front-streets, on Delaware and Sculkil, was not then ascertained, when the plan
was first made; nor the space of ground between them and the respective rivers;
so that the whole distance from river to river, appears to be somewhat more
than two miles, as least in some part of the plan.

The following printed account is said to be an extract from Thomas Holme's
description of this plan of the city, viz.

"The city, as the model shows, consists of a large Front-street, on each
river, and a High Street, near the middle, from river to river, of one hundred
feet broad; and a Broad-street, in the middle of the city, from side to side,
of the like breadth. In the center of the city, is a square of ten acres, at
each angle to build houses for public affairs. There is also in each quarter of
the city, a square of eight acres, to be for the like uses, as Moorfields, in
London; and eight streets, besides the said High-streets, that run from river
to river, or from Front to Front; and twe^^y streets besides the Broad-street,
and two Front-streets, that run across the city, from side to side; all these
streets are fifty feet broad." --

Similar to this description of the plan, is that of Oldmixon, in his account
of the British colonies, printed in London, 1708; who affirms, he had his
information from William Penn himself; -- "The town was laid out, and a draught
taken of it, by Mr. Thomas Holme, Surveyor General of the province; which lies
now before me," etc.

-- "In the center is a square of ten acres, for the state-house, market-house,
school-house, and chief meeting house of the Quakers." -- "In each quarter of
this city is a square of eight acres, to be for the like uses, as Moorfields,
in London." etc.

OLDMIXON, etc. William Penn, in answer to a remonstrance and address to him,
from several of the adventurers, freeholders and inhabitants, in the city of
Philadelphia. respecting the front, or bank, lots, along the side of Delaware,
(who in the ninth article thereof, claimed the privilege to build vaults, or
stores, in the bank, against their respective lots, and to enjoy them, as their
right, etc.) dated the 3d. of the Sixth month, 1684, thus expresses himself, on
this part of it; (which is here taken from his own hand writing, indorsed on
the back of it) and further shows his intention, in regard to that part of this
plan of the city, viz.

"The bank is a top common, from end to end; -- The rest, next the water,
belongs to front-lot men no more than back-lot men: The way bounds them; they
may build stairs; -- and the top of the bank, a common exchange, or walk; and
against the street common wharfs may be built freely; -- but into the water,
and the shore, is no purchaser's," etc. M. S.

Dr. Douglas, of Boston, in his summary of the British settlements in America,
makes the following observations, on the variation of the compass, at
Philadelphia, viz.

"The streets of Philadelphia, (says he) anno 1682, were laid out with great
preciseness, north 18 degrees east: anno 1742, they were found to be 15 degrees
east. This is three degrees alteration, in sixty years, or about one degree
every twenty years decreasing.

"In the parallel of 39 degrees, in running the line between Pennsylvania, and
Maryland, in 1686, the variation was found to be 9 degrees westerly. In 1739,
in running the east and west line, it was found 5 degrees 30 minutes west;
difference 3 degrees, 30 minutes, in fifty-three years.

"In 1743, the division line was run between East and West-Jersey, 150 miles,
20 chairs; when the variation of the south end thereof, at Egg Harbor, was 5
degrees, 25 minutes west; and at the north end, on Delaware river, in latitude
41 degrees, 40 minutes, it was 6 degrees, 35 minutes west.

"In the survey, 1739, of the east and west divisional line (about 15 miles
southward of Philadelphia) between Pennsylvania and Maryland, the surveyor
allowed a variation of 5 degrees, 30 minutes, west; and found there was about
one degree variation thereof, for every twenty late years.

"At Cape Hinlopen, 1748, the variation of the compass was 4 degrees west,
decreasing."


10,276

The distances, names and dimensions of all the streets, from north to south,
are: --

From Vine-street to Sassafras-street, feet 612 Sassafras to Mulberry, 614
Mulberry to High, 663 High to Chestnut, 497 Chestnut to Walnut, 510 Walnut to
Spruce, 821 Spruce to Pine, 46^ Pine to Cedar, 652 Seven streets, 50 feet each,
350 High Street 100 feet, Mulberry-street, 66 feet, 165 Distance from
Cedar-street to Vine-street, inclusive, equal to one mile and 73 feet, north
and south nearly, including all the streets, 5353

William Penn, having finished what related to this excellent plan, by the
latter end of the Fifth, or the beginning of the Sixth month, The Proprietor
writes an account of the province, to the society of traders.
to the general satisfaction of those concerned, writ a letter to the committee
of the Free society of traders, in London, giving some account of it, and the
country, in general, with such observations, as the short space of time, he had
resided, and his hurry of business, in it, had permitted him to make.

It exhibits a specimen of the author's attention to a variety of objects, at
the same time: for, W. Penn attentive to a variety of things.
while he was so much employed in the important establishment of legislative
and civil government, to benefit future times, it discovers a genius not less
capable of just observation and judgment, in the inferior departments of
universal improvement, than his general conduct otherwise declared him to be
master of that true philosophy and best wisdom* which is more nearly essential
to mental felicity; of which he was ever so generous and communicative. It is
the best account, though only an imperfect sketch, of the original state of the
province, of its Aborigines, and natural history, that is to be found in those
times, as follows: --

W. Penn's letter, of the province, etc.
A letter from William Penn, Proprietor and Governor of Pennsylvania, in
America, to the committee of the Free society of traders of that province,
residing in London: containing a general description of the said province, its
soil, air, water, seasons and produce, both natural and artificial, and the
good increase thereof. With an account of the natives, or aborigines.
My kind Friends,
Introduction, etc.
The kindness of yours, by the ship Thomas and Ann, does much oblige me; for, by
it I perceive the interest, you take in my health and reputation, and the
prosperous beginning of this province; which, you are so kind as to think, may
much depend upon them. In return of which I have sent you a long letter, and
yet containing as brief an account of myself, and the affairs of this province,
as I have been able to make.

He has enemies at home, in his absence, etc.
In the first place, I take notice of the news, you sent me; whereby I find,
some persons have had so little wit, and so much malice, as to report my death;
and, to mend the matter, dead a Jesuit too. One might have reasonably hoped,
that this distance, like death, would have been a protection against spite and
envy; and, indeed, absence, being a kind of death, ought alike to secure the
name of the absent, as the dead; because they are equally unable, as such, to
defend themselves: but they, that intend mischief, do not use to follow good
rules to effect it. However to the great sorrow and shame of the inventors, I
am still alive, and no Jesuit; and I thank God, very well. And, without
injustice to the authors of this, I may venture to infer, that they that
wilfully and falsely report, would have been glad it had been so. But I
perceive many frivolous and idle stories have been invented since my departure
from England: which, perhaps, at this time, are no more alive than I am dead.

But, if I have been unkindly used, by some I left behind me, I found love and
respect enough, where I came; an universal kind welcome, every sort in their
way. For, here are some of several nations, as well as diverse judgments: He is
kindly treated in his province.
nor were the natives wanting in this; for their kings, queens, and great men,
both visited and presented me; to whom I made suitable returns, etc.

For the province, the general condition of it, take as follows: --

I. The country itself, its soil, air, water, seasons and produce, both natural
and artificial, Of the country, soil and produce, etc.
is not to be despised. The land contains diverse sorts of earth, as, sand,
yellow and black, poor and rich: also gravel, both loamy and dusty; and, in
some places, a fast fat earth; like our best vales, in England; especially by
inland brooks and rivers. God, in his wisdom, having ordered it so, that the
advantages of the country are divided; the back lands being generally three to
one richer, than those that lie by navigable rivers. We have much of another
soil; and that is a black hazel-mould, upon a stony, or rocky, bottom.

II. The air is sweet and clear, the Heavens serene, like the south parts of
France, Of the air.
rarely overcast; and, as the woods come, by numbers of people, to be more
cleared, that itself will refine.

III. The waters are generally good; Waters.
for the rivers and brooks have mostly gravel and stony bottoms; and in number,
hardly credible. We have also mineral waters, that operate in the same manner
with Barnet and North Hall, not two miles from Philadelphia.

IV. For the seasons of the year, having, by God's goodness, now lived over the
coldest and hottest, that the oldest liver in the province can remember, I can
say something to an English understanding.

Fall.
First, Of the fall; for then I came in: I found it, from the 24th. of October,
to the beginning of December, as we have it usually, in England, in September,
or rather like an English mild spring. Winter.
From December to the beginning of the month called March, we had sharp frosty
weather; not foul, thick, black weather, as our north east winds bring with
them, in England; but a sky as clear as in summer, and the air dry, cold,
piercing and hungry; yet I remember not that I wore more clothes, than in
England. The reason of this cold is given, from the great lakes, that are fed
by the fountains of Canada. The Winter before was as mild, scarce any ice at
all; while this, for a few days, froze up our great river Delaware. From that
month, to the month called June, Spring.
we enjoyed a sweet Spring; no gusts, but gentle showers, and a fine sky. Yet,
this I observe, that the winds here, as there, are more inconstant, Spring and
Fall, upon that turn of nature, than in Summer, or Winter. From thence to this
present month, Of the Summer.
(August) which ends the Summer, (commonly speaking) we have had
extraordinary heats, yet mitigated sometimes by cool breezes. The wind, that
rules the Summer season, is the south west; but spring, fall and winter, it is
rare to want the north-western seven days together. And whatever mists, fogs,
or vapors, foul the Heavens by easterly, or southerly winds, in two hours
time, are blown away; the one is followed by the other: A remedy, that seems to
have a peculiar providence in it, to the inhabitants; the multitude of trees,
yet standing, being liable to retain mists and vapors; and yet not one quarter
so thick as I expected.

V. The natural produce of the country, of vegetables, is trees, fruits,
plants, flowers. The trees of most note, are the black walnut, cedar, Natural
produce, etc.
cypress, chestnut, poplar, gum-wood, hickory, sassafras, ash, beech, and oak of
diverse sorts, as, Trees.
red, white and black; Spanish, chestnut, and swamp, the most durable of all. Of
all which there is plenty, for the use of man.

The fruits, that I find in the woods, are the white and black mulberry,
chestnut, walnut, plums, Fruits.
strawberries, cranberries, hurtleberries, and grapes of diverse sorts. The
great red grape (now ripe) called by ignorance, the fox grape, because of the
relish it has with unskilful palates, Grapes.
is in itself an extraordinary grape; and by art, doubtless, may be cultivated
to an excellent wine, if not so sweet, yet little inferior to the Frontiniac,
as it is not much unlike in taste, ruddiness set aside; which, in such things,
as well as mankind, differs the case much. There is a white kind of Muskadel,
and a little black grape, like the cluster grape of England, not yet so ripe as
the other; but they tell me, when ripe, sweeter, and that they only want
skilful Vinerons, to make good use of them. I intend to venture on it with my
Frenchman, this season, who shows some knowledge in those things. Here are also
peaches very good, and in great quantities; Peaches.
not an Indian plantation without them; but whether naturally here at first, I
know not. However one may have them, by bushels, for little: they make a
pleasant drink; and I think, not inferior to any peach you have in England,
except the true Newington. It is disputable with me, whether it be best to fall
to fining the fruits of the country, especially the grape, by the care and
skill of art, or send for foreign stems and sets, already good and approved. It
seems most reasonable to believe, that not only a thing grows best, where it
naturally grows, but will hardly be equalled by another species of the same
kind, that does not naturally grow there But, to solve the doubt, I intend, if
God give me life, to try both, and hope the consequence will be, as good wine,
as any European countries, of the same latitude, do yield.

Artificial produce, etc.
VI. The artificial produce of the country is wheat, barley, "Edward Jones,
son-in-law to Thomas Win, living on the Scuikil, had, with ordinary
cultivation; for one grain of English barley, seventy stalks and ears of
barley: and it is common in this country, from one bushel sown, to reap forty,
often fifty, and sometimes sixty. And three pecks of wheat sow an acre her."
oats, rye, peace, beans, squashes, pumkins, water-melons, musk-melons, and all
herbs and roots, that our gardens in England, usually bring forth.

Of animals, etc.
VII. Of living creatures; fish, fowl, and the beasts of the woods; here are
diverse sorts, some for food and profit, Beasts.
and some for profit only: For food, as well as profit, the elk, as big as a
small ox; deer, bigger than ours; beaver, raccoon, rabbits, squirrels; and some
eat young bear, and commend it. Birds.
Of fowl of the land, there is the turkey, (forty and fifty pounds weight)
which is very great; pheasants, heath-birds, pigeons and partridges, in
abundance. Of the water, the swan, goose, white and gray; brands, ducks, teal,
also the snipe and curloe, and that in great numbers; but the duck and teal
excel; nor so good have I ever eat in other countries. Fish, etc.
Of fish, there is the sturgeon, herring, rock, shad, cats-head, sheeps-head,
eel, smelt, perch, roach; and in inland rivers, trout, some say, salmon, above
the falls. Of shellfish, we have oysters, crabs, coccles, conchs and muscles;
some oysters six inches long; and one sort of coccles as big as the stewing
oysters; they make a rich broth. The creatures for profit only, by skin, or
fur, and that are natural to these parts, are the wildcat, panther, otter,
wolf, fox, fisher, minx, muskrat; Whale fishery, etc. in the bay.
and of the water, the whale, for oil; of which we have good store; and two
companies of whalers; whose boats are built, will soon begin their work; which
has the appearance of a considerable improvement: to say nothing of our
reasonable hopes of good cod, in the bay.

VIII. We have no want of horses; Horses, cattle, etc.
and some are very good, and shapely enough; two ships have been freighted to
Barbados with horses and pipe-staves, since my coming in. Here is also plenty
of cow-cattle, and some sheep; the people plow mostly with oxen.

IX. There are diverse plants, Medicinal plants, etc.
that not only the Indians tell us, but we have had occasion to prove, by
swellings, burnings, cuts, etc. that they are of great virtue, suddenly curing
the patient; and, for smell, I have observed several, especially one, the wild
myrtle; the other I know not what to call, but are most fragrant.

X. The woods are adorned with lovely flowers, for color, greatness, figure and
variety. Flowers of the woods, etc.
I have seen the gardens of London best stored with that sort of beauty, but
think they may be improved by our woods: I have sent a few to a person of
quality this year, for a trial.

Thus much of the country; next, of the natives, or aborigines.

XI. The natives I shall consider, in their persons, language, manners,
religion and government, Of the Indians or aborigines.
with my sense of their original. For their persons, they are generally tall,
straight, well built, and of singular proportion; they tread strong and clever;
Their persons.
and mostly walk with a lofty chin. Of complexion, black, but by design; as the
Gypsies, in England. They grease themselves with bear's fat clarified; and
using no defense against sun, or weather, their skins must needs be swarthy.
Their eye is little and black, not unlike a straight looked Jew. The thick lip,
and flat nose, so frequent with the East Indians and blacks, are no^ common to
them: For I have seen as comely European like faces among them, of both, as on
your side the (...); and truly an Italian complexion has not much more of the
white; and the noses of several of them have as much of the Roman.

Their language.
XII. Their language is lofty, yet narrow; but, like the Hebrew, in
signification, full; like shorthand, in writing, one word serves in the place
of three, and the rest are supplied by the understanding of the hearer:
imperfect in their tenses, wanting in their moods, participles, adverbs,
conjunctions, interjections. I have made it my business to understand it, that
I might not want an Interpreter, on any occasion; and I must say, that I know
not a language spoken, in Europe, that has words of more sweetness, or
greatness, in accent and emphasis, than theirs; for instance, Octocockon,
Rancocas, Oricton, Shak, Marian, Poquesien; all which are names of places; and
have grandeur in them. Of words of sweetness, Anna, is mother; Issimus, a
brother; Netcap, friend; Usqueoret, very good; Pane, bread; Metsa, eat; Matta,
no; Haita, to have; Payo, to come; Sepassen, Passijon, the names of places;
Tamane, Secane, Menanse, Secatereus, are the names of persons; if one ask them
for any thing they have not, they will answer, Matta ne hatta; which to
translate, is, not I have; instead of, I have not.

Their customs.
XIII. Of their customs and manners, there is much to be said; I will begin with
children; so soon as they are born, Of their children.
they wash them in water; and while very young, and in cold weather to choose,
they plunge them in the rivers, to harden and embolden them. Having wrapped them
in a clout, they lay them on a strait, thin board, a little more than the
length and breadth of the child, and swaddle it fast, upon the board, to make
it straight; wherefore all Indians have flat heads; and thus they carry them at
their backs. The children will go, very young, at nine months commonly; they
wear only a small clout round their waste, till they are big; if boys, they go
a fishing, till ripe for the woods; which is about fifteen; then they hunt; and
after having given some proofs of their manhood, by a good return of skins,
they may marry; else it is a shame to think of a wise. The girls stay with
their mothers, and help to hoe the ground, plant corn, and carry burdens; and
they do well to use them to that young, which they must do when they are old;
for the wives are the true servants of the husbands; otherwise the men are very
affectionate to them.

XIV. When the young women are fit for marriage, they wear something upon their
heads, Time of marrying, etc.
for an advertisement, but so, as their faces are hardly to be seen, but when
they please. The age, they marry at, if women, is about thirteen, and fourteen;
if men, seventeen and eighteen; they are rarely elder.

XV. Their houses are mats, Their houses, etc.
or barks of trees, set on poles, in the fashion of an English barn; but out of
the power of the winds; for they are hardly higher than a man; they lie on
reeds, or grass. In travel they lodge in the woods, about a great fire, with
the mantle of duffils, they wear by day, wrapped about them, and a few boughs
stuck round them.

XVI. Their diet is maize, or Indian corn, Their diet.
diverse ways prepared; sometimes roasted in the ashes; sometimes beaten and
boiled with water; which they call homine; they also make cakes, not unpleasant
to eat. They have likewise several sorts of beans and pease, that are good
nourishment; and the woods and rivers are their larder.

XVII. If an European comes to see them, Their visiting, etc.
or calls for lodging at their house, or wigwam, they give him the best place,
and first cut. If they come to visit us, they salute us with an Itah; which is
as much as to say, Good be to you, and set them down; which is mostly on the
ground, close to their heels, their legs upright; it may be they speak not a
word, but observe all passages. If you give them any thing, to eat, or drink,
well: for they will not ask; and be it little, or much, if it be with kindness,
they are well pleased, else they go away sullen, but say nothing.

They are revengeful, and conceal resentment, etc.
XVIII. They are great concealers of their own resentments; brought to it, I
believe, by the revenge, that has been practiced among them. In either of
these they are not exceeded by the Italians. A tragical instance fell out since
I came into the country: a king's daughter, thinking herself slighted by her
husband, in suffering another woman to lie down between them, rose up, went
out, plucked a root out of the ground, and ate it; upon which she immediately
died: and, for which, last week, he made an offering to her kindred, for
atonement, and liberty of marriage; as two others did to the kindred of their
wives, that died a natural death. For, till widowers have done so, they must
not marry again. Some of the young women are said to take undue liberty before
marriage, for a portion; but when married, chaste. When with child they know
their husbands no more, trill delivered; and during their month, they touch no
meat they eat but with a stick, lest they should defile it; nor do their
husbands frequent them, till that time be expired.

Their great liberality, etc.
XIX. But, in liberality they excel; nothing is too good for their friend: give
them a fine gun, coat, or other thing, it may pass twenty hands before it
sticks: light of heart, strong affections, but soon spent. The most merry
creatures that live, feast and dance perpetually; they never have much, nor
want much: wealth circulateth like the blood; all parts partake; and though
none shall want what another has, yet exact observers of property. Some kings
have sold, others presented me with several parcels of land: the pay, or
presents I made them, were not hoarded by the particular owners; but the
neighboring kings, and their clans being present, when the goods were brought
out, the parties, chiefly concerned, consulted what, and to whom, they should
give them. To every king then, by the hands of a person for that work
appointed, is a proportion sent, so sorted and folded, and with that gravity,
that is admirable. Then that king subdivideth it, in like manner, among his
dependants, they hardly leaving themselves an equal share with one of their
subjects: and be it on such occasions as festivals, or at their common meals,
the kings distribute, and to themselves last. They care for little; because
they want but little; and the reason is, a little contents them. In this they
are sufficiently revenged on us: if they are ignorant of our pleasures, Their
free manner of life, customs, etc.
they are also free from our pains. They are not disquieted with bills of
lading and exchange, nor perplexed with chancery suits, and exchequer
reckonings. We sweat and toil to live; their pleasure feeds them; I mean their
hunting, fishing and fowling; and this table is spread every where. They eat
twice a day, morning and evening; their seats and table are the ground. Since
the Europeans came into these parts, Their late love of strong liquors, etc.
they are grown great lovers of strong liquors, rum especially; and for it
exchange the richest of their skins and furs. If they are heated with liquors,
they are restless till they have enough to sleep; that is their cry, some more,
and I will go to sleep; but, when drunk, one of the most wretched spectacles in
the world!

XX. In sickness, impatient to be cured; and for it, give any thing, especially
for their children; Behavior in sickness, death, etc.
to whom they are extremely natural. They drink, at those times, a teran, or
decoction of some roots in spring water; and, if they eat any flesh, it must be
of the female of any creature. If they die, they bury them with their apparel,
be they man or woman; and the nearest of kin fling in something precious with
them, as a token of their love: Their mourning is blacking of their faces;
which they continue for a year. They are choice of the graves of their dead;
for, lest they should be lost by time, and fall to common use, they pick off
the grass, that grows upon them, and heap up the fallen earth, with great care
and exactness.

Of their religion, etc.
XXI. These poor people are under a dark night in things relating to religion,
to be sure the tradition of it: yet they believe a God and immortality, without
the help of metaphysics: for, they say, There is a Great King that made them,
who dwells in a glorious country, to the southward of them; and that the souls
of the good shall go thither, where they shall live again. Their worship
consists of two parts, sacrifice and cantico. Their sacrifice is their first
fruits; the first and fattest buck they kill, goes to the fire; where he is
all burnt, with a mournful ditty of him, that performs the ceremony; but with
such mavelous fervency, and labor of body, that he will, even, sweat to a
foam. The other part is their cantico, performed by round dances, sometimes
words, sometimes songs, then shouts; two being in the middle, that begin; and,
by singing and drumming on a board, direct the chorus. Their postures, in the
dance, are very antic and differing, but all keep measure. This is done with
equal earnestness and labor, but great appearance of joy. In the fall, when
the corn comes in, they begin to feast one another. There have been two great
festivals already; to which all come, Their feastings, etc.
that will. I was at one myself: their entertainment was a great seat by a
spring, under some shady trees, and twenty bucks, with hot cakes of new corn,
both wheat and beans; which they make up in a square form, in the leaves of the
stem, and bake them in the ashes; and after that they fall to dance. But they
that go must carry a small present, in their money; it may be sixpence; which
is made of the bone of a fish: Their money.
the black is, with them, as gold; the white, silver; they call it all wampum.

XXII. Their government is by Kings; which they call Sachama; and those by
succession, Their government.
but always of the mother's side. For instance, the children of him, who is now
king, will not succeed, but his brother by the mother, or the children of his
sister, whose sons (and after them the children of her daughters) will reign;
for no woman inherits. The reason, they render for this way of descent, is,
that their issue may not be spurious.

XXIII. Every King has his council; and that consists of all the old and wise
men of his nation; Their mode of doing business with W. Penn etc.
which, perhaps, is two hundred people. Nothing of moment is undertaken, be it
war, peace, selling of land, or traffic, without advising with them; and,
which is more, with the young men too. It is admirable to consider how powerful
the Kings are, and yet how they move by the breath of their people. I have had
occasion to be in council with them, upon treaties for land, and to adjust the
terms of trade. Their order is thus: The King sits in the middle of an half
moon, and has his council, the old and wise, on each hand; behind them, or at
a little distance, sit the younger fry, in the same figure. Having consulted
and resolved their business, the King ordered one of them to speak to me; he
stood up, came to me, and, in the name of his King, saluted me; then took me by
the hand, and told me, "He was ordered by his King to speak to me; and that now
it was not he, but the King, that spoke; because what he should say was the
King's mind." -- He first prayed me, "To excuse them, that they had not
complied with me, the last time, he feared there might be some fault in the
Interpreter, being neither Indian nor English: besides, it was the Indian
custom, to deliberate, and take up much time, in council, before they resolve;
and that, if the young people, and owners of the land had been as ready as he,
I had not met with so much delay." -- Having thus introduced his matter, he
fell to the bounds of the land, they had agreed to dispose of, and the price;
which now is little and dear; that which would have bought twenty miles, not
buying now two. During the time, that this person spoke, not a man of them was
observed to whisper or smile; the old, grave; the young, reverent, in their
deportment. They speak little, but fervently, and with elegance. I have never
seen more natural sagacity, considering them without the help (I was going to
say, the spoil) of tradition; and he will deserve the name of wise, that
outwits them, in any treaty, about a thing, they understand. When the purchase
was agreed, great promises passed between us, "of kindness and good
neighborhood, and that the Indians and English must live in love as long as
the sun gave light:" Which done, another made a speech to the Indians, in the
name of all the Sachamakers, or Kings; first, to tell them what was done; next,
to charge and command them, "To love the Christians, and particularly live in
peace with me, and the people under my government; that many Governors had been
in the river; but that no Governor had come himself to live and stay here
before; and having now such an one, that had treated them well* they should
never do him, or his, any wrong." -- At every sentence of which they shouted,
and said, Amen, in their way.

Their mode of doing justice, etc.
XXIV. The justice they have is pecuniary: In case of any wrong, or evil fact,
be it murder itself, they atone by feasts, and presents of their wampum; which
is proportioned to the quality of the offense, or person injured, or of the sex
they are of. For, in case they kill a woman, they pay double; and the reason
they render, is, "That she breeds children; which men cannot do." It is rare
that they fall out, if sober; and, if drunk, they forgive it, saying, "It was
the drink, and not the man, that abused them."

XXV. We have agreed, that, An agreement between them and William Penn, etc.
in all differences between us, six of each side shall end the matter. Do not
abuse them, but let them have justice, and you win them. The worst is, that
they are the worse for the Christians; who have propagated their vices, and
yielded them tradition for ill, and not for good things. But as low an ebb as
these people are at, and as inglorious as their own condition looks, the
Christians have not outlived their sight, with all their pretensions to an
higher manifestation. What good, then, Their susceptibility of improvement, etc.
might not a good people graft, where there is so distinct a knowledge left
between good and evil? I beseech God to incline the hearts or all that come
into these parts, to outlive the knowledge of the natives, by a fixed obedience
to their greater knowledge of the will of God; for it were miserable, indeed,
for us to fall under the just censure of the poor Indian conscience, while we
make profession of things so far transcending.

XXVI. For their original, I am ready to believe them of the Jewish race; I
mean, Of their original.
of the stock of the ten tribes; and that, for the following reasons: First,
they were to go to a "land not planted, nor known;" which, to be sure, Asia and
Africa were, if not Europe; and he, that intended that extraordinary judgment
upon them, might make the passage not uneasy to them, as it is not impossible
in itself, from the eastermost parts of of Asia, to the westermost of America.
In the next place; I find them of the like countenance, and their children of
so lively resemblance, that a man would think himself in Duke's place, or
Berry-street, in London, when he sees them. But this is not all; Their
resemblance of the Jews, etc.
they agree in rites; they reckon by moons; they offer their first fruits; they
have a kind of feast of tabernacles; they are said to lay their altar upon
twelve stones; their mourning a year; customs of women, with many other things,
that do not now occur.

So much for the natives; next, the old planters will be considered in this
relation, before I come to our colony, and the concerns of it.

First European planters, etc.
XXVII. The first planters, in these parts, were the Dutch; and soon after them,
the Swedes and Finns. The Dutch applied themselves to traffic; the Swedes and
Finns, to hushandry. There were some disputes between them, some years; the
Dutch looking upon them, as intruders upon their purchase and possession; which
was finally ended in the surrender, made by John Rizeing, the Swedish Governor,
to Peter Styresant, Governor for the states of Holland, anno 1655.

Of the Dutch and Swede settlers, etc.
XXVIII. The Dutch inhabit mostly those parts of the province, that lie upon, or
near the bay; and the Swedes, the freshes of the river Delaware. There is no
need of giving any description of them; who are better known there than here;
but they are a plain, strong, industrious people; yet have made no great
progress, in culture, or propagation, of fruit trees; as, if they desired
rather to have enough, than plenty, or traffic. But, I presume, the Indians
made them the more careless, by furnishing them with the means of profit, to
wit, skins and furs, for rum, and such strong liquors. They kindly received me,
as well as the English, who were few, before the people, concerned with me,
came among them. I must needs commend their respect to authority, and kind
behavior to the English; they do not degenerate from the old friendship,
between both kingdoms. As they are people proper and strong of body, so they
have fine children, and almost every house full; rare to find one of them
without three or four boys, and as many girls; some, six, seven and eight sons.
And I must do them that right; I see few young men more sober and laborious.

XXIX The Dutch have a meeting place, for religious worship, at New Castle; and
the Swedes, Dutch and Swedes' places of worship.
three; one at Christina, one at Tenecum; and one at Wicoco, within half a mile
of this town.

XXX. There rests that I speak of the condition we are in, and what settlement
we have made: Of the present state of the country, etc.
in which I will be as short as I can; for I fear, and not without reason, that
I have tried your patience with this long story. The country lies, bounded on
the east, by the river and bay of Delaware, and eastern sea; it has the
advantage of many creeks, or rivers rather, The rivers.
that run into the mai^ river, or bay; some navigable for great ships, some,
for small craft. Those of most eminency are, Christina, Brandywine, Skilpot,
and Sculkil; any one of which have room to lay up the royal navy of England;
there being from four to eight fathom water.

XXXI. The lesser creeks, or rivers, yet convenient for sloops and ketches of
good burden, Creeks.
are Lewis, Mespilion, Cedar, Dover, Cranbrook, Feversham and Georges, below;
and Chichester, Chester, Toacawny, Pammapecka, Portquessin, Neshimenck and
Pennberry, in the freshes; many lesser, that admit boats and shallops. Our
people are mostly settled upon the upper rivers; which are pleasant and sweet,
and generally bounded with good land: The planted part of the province and
territories is cast into six counties, Philadelphia, Number of counties, souls,
assemblies, etc.
Buckingham, Chester, New Castle, Kent and Sussex; containing about four
thousand souls. Two general assemblies have been held, and with such concord
and dispatch, that they sat but three weeks; and, at least, seventy laws were
passed without one dissent, in any material thing. But of this, more hereafter,
being yet raw and new, in our gear. However I cannot forget their singular
respect to me, Their respect to the proprietor, etc.
in this infancy of things; who, by their private expenses, so early considered
mine, for the public, as to present me with an impost, upon certain goods
imported and exported. Which after my acknowledgment of their affection, I did
as freely remit to the province, and the traders to it. Courts of justice, etc.
And for the well government of the said counties, courts of justice are
established in every county, with proper officers, as justices, sheriffs,
clerks, constables, etc. which courts are held every two months. Peacemakers
appointed, etc.
But, to prevent law suits, there are three peace makers chosen by every county
court, in the nature of common arbitrators, to hear and end differences betwixt
man and man. And spring and fall there is an orphans' court, An orphans court,
etc.
in each county to inspect and regulate the affairs of orphans and widows.

Of Philadelphia.
XXXII. Philadelphia, the expectation of those, that are concerned in this
province, is, at last, laid out, to the great content of those here, that are
any ways interested therein. The situation is a neck of land, and lies between
two navigable rivers, Delaware and Sculkil; whereby it has two fronts upon the
water, each a mile; and two from river to river. Delaware is a glorious river;
but the Sculkil, being an hundred miles boatable above the falls, and its
course north east, toward the fountain of Susquahanna (that tends to the heart
of the province, and both sides our own) it is like to be a great part of the
settlement of this age. I say little of the town itself, because a platform See
page 241, etc.
will be shown you by my agent; in which those who are purchasers of me, will
find their names and interests. But this I will say, for the good providence of
God, that, of all the many ^laces, I have seen in the world, I remember not ^ne
better seated; so that it seems to me to have ^een appointed for a town,
whether we regard ^he rivers, or the convenience of the coves, docks, ^prings,
the loftiness and soundness of the land, and the air, held by the people of
these parts to ^e very good. It is advanced, within less than a ^ear, to about
four score houses and cottages, Number of houses in Philadelphia, etc.
^uch as they are; where merchants and handicrafts ^re following their
vocations, as fast as they can; while the country men are close at their farms,
The farmers success, etc.
some of them got a little winter corn in the ground last season; and the
generality have had an handsome summer-crop, and are preparing for their winter
corn. They reaped their barley, this year, in the month called May; the wheat
in the month following; so that there is time, in these parts, for another crop
of diverse things, before the winter season. We are daily in hopes of shipping,
to add to our number; for, blessed be God, here is both room and accommodation
for them: The stories of our necessity being either the fear of our friends, or
the scare-crows of our enemies: For the greatest hardship, we have suffered,
has been salt meat; which by fowl, in winter, and fish, in summer, together
with some poultry, lamb, mutton, veal, and plenty of venison, the best part of
the year, has been made very passable. I bless God, I am fully satisfied with
the country and entertainment I got in it: W. Penn well pleased with the
country.
For I find that particular content, which has always attended me, where God,
in his providence, has made it my place and service to reside. And much
employed in settling and regulating it, etc.
You cannot imagine my station can be, at present, free of more than ordinary
business; and, as such, I may say, it is a troublesome work. But the method
things are putting in, will facilitate the charge, and give an easier motion to
the administration of affairs. However, as it is some men's duty to plow, some
to sow, some to water, and some to reap; so it is the wisdom, as well as the
duty, of a man, to yield to the mind of Providence, and cheerfully, as well as
carefully, embrace and follow the guidance of it.

Of the interest and property of the Free society of traders, etc.
XXXIII. For your particular concern, I might entirely refer you to the letters
of the President of the society; but this I will venture to say, your
provincial settlements, both within and without the town for situation and
soil, are without exception. Your city lot is a whole street, and one side of a
street, from river to river, containing near one hundred acres, not easily
valued; which is besides your four hundred acres, in the city liberties, part
of your twenty thousand acres in the country. Your tannery has such plenty of
bark, the saw mill, for timber, and the place of the glass house, are so
conveniently posted for water carriage, the city lot, for a dock, and the
whalery, for a sound and fruitful bank, and the town Lewis, by it, to help your
people, that, by God's blessing, the affairs of the society will naturally grow
in their reputation, and profit. I am sure, I have not turned my back upon any
offer, that tended to its prosperity; and though I am ill at projects, I have
sometimes put in for a share with her officers, to countenance and advance her
interest. You are already informed what is fit for you further to do;
whatsoever tends to the promotion of wine, and to the manufacture of linen, in
these parts, I cannot but wish you to promote; and the French people are most
likely, in both respects, to answer that design. To that end I would advise you
to send for some thousands of plants out of France, with some able Vinerons,
and people of the other vocation: But because, I believe, you have been
entertained with this, and some other profitable subjects by your President,
Nicholas Moore.
I shall add no more, but to assure you, that I am heartily inclined to advance
your just interest, and that you will always find me

Your kind cordial friend, WILLIAM PENN.
Philadelphia, the 16th. of the Sixth month, called August, 1683.
CHAPTER VI.
The difficulty and dispute between William Penn and Lord Baltimore, respecting
the boundaries between their territories. -- A proclamation of the latter. --
William Penn's letter to the Lords of plantations. -- Lord Baltimore's
commission to Colonel George Talbot, with a demand of the latter. -- William
Penn's answer to said demand. -- Incursion from Maryland, attempting forcible
entry. -- Difficulty to restrain the Indians from strong liquors. -- Names of
the members of Assembly in 1684.

WILLIAM PENN's endeavors, 1683.
soon after his first arrival, to cultivate a friendly and good understanding
with his neighbor, the Lord Baltimore, The two Proprietors of Maryland and
Pennsylvania disagree about the boundaries, etc.
and to get the boundaries, between their respective provinces, amicably
determined, have already been mentioned; for which purpose likewise it appears
he had appointed his relation and deputy, Captain William Markham to treat with
the said Lord Proprietary of Maryland, before he arrived himself; and
afterward repeatedly used attempts, See page 208, etc.
for the same end. But these endeavors had not all the desired success, which,
so far as appears, might have been reasonably expected. The conduct of the late
Lord Baltimore, on this occasion, may, in part, appear from the following
proclamation, dated, May 15th. 1683. viz.

C. Baltimore.
For as much as taking up of land by rights, within this our province of
Maryland, has proved not only grievous and burdensome to the inhabitants of
this our said province, as well for want of such rights, upon their occasions,
as for the paying for the same extravagant and extortious rates, when to be
procured; but also very injurious and prejudicial to ourself, by undue and
unjust probate, made of such rights, as we have seen and been informed: We do,
therefore, as well for the ease, benefit, and certainty of the inhabitants of
this our province, and other persons inhabiting, trading, or residing within
the same, as also for the preservation of our own just right and property,
hereby fully resolve, determine and ordain, that no right shall hereafter be
proved, admitted, or allowed of, for the taking up of land, within our said
province, as formerly, by the conditions of plantation of our late father
Cecilius, of noble memory, has been accustomed; but, for the encouragement of
any person, or persons, adventurer or adventurers, or others, inhabiting,
residing, or trading within this province, we do resolve, determine and ordain,
and hereby declare, publish and make known, that any person, or persons,
adventuring, trading, inhabiting, or residing within this our province, and
willing to take up any land here, shall, for every fifty acres of land, he, or
they shall design to take up, as aforesaid, pay, or cause to be paid, to us, or
our heirs, the just quantity of one hundred pounds of tobacco, in cask,
together with two shillings sterling yearly rent; unless on the sea-board side,
or the Whorekills; for every fifty acres whereof, any person, or persons,
taking up such land, shall only pay for the same, as aforesaid, the sum of
fifty pounds of tobacco, in cask, together with one shilling sterling, yearly
rent; and so proportionably for any greater, or lesser quantity; he, or they,
first applying themselves to our secretaries of this our province, or other
officer, or officers, thereunto appointed, and giving good and sufficient
caution for the same, as to him, or them, shall seem meet: hereby willing and
requiring our said secretaries, or other officer, or officers, as aforesaid,
upon such caution, or security, given, to issue out warrants under the lesser
seal of this province, for any quantity of land, to any person, or persons,
suitor, or suitors, for the same, in manner aforesaid: and, to the end that
this our will and pleasure may be made known, we do hereby strictly charge and
command all and singular the Sheriffs of this our province forthwith, upon
receipt hereof, to make public proclamation hereof, in the most public and
convenient place, within their several and respective counties.

Given at our city of St. Mary's, under the great seal of this our province,
the 15th. day of May, in the eighth year of our dominion, etc. Annoque Domini
one thousand six hundred eighty and three. Vera Copia, WILLIAM SMITHSON, Sher.
count. Dorc^^.
To the Sheriff of Dorchester county, or his Deputy -- These.






The concern of the Proprietary of Pennsylvania for a good, convenient and
independent communication, by water, between his province and the sea, Of the
dispute between Penn and Baltimore, etc.
for the benefit of its trade, appears to have been his principal reason for
fixing his southern boundary by charter, so far south, as the beginning of the
fortieth degree of north latitude, intending thereby to include, at least, so
much of the head, or upper part, of Chesapeak bay, within his province, as
would furnish, from thence, a good, open and sufficient communication to the
ocean, as well as by the Delaware. The nature and state of the controversy,
about this time, between the two Proprietaries, on this subject, more fully
appear from the following letter of William Penn to the Lords of the committee
of plantations, in London; to which board the Lord Baltimore seems to have been
beforehand with him, viz.

Philadelphia, the 14th. of the Sixth-month, 1683.
THOUGH it be a duty, I humbly own, W. Penn's letter to the Lords of
plantations, etc.
to inform the Lords of the committee of plantations, of what concerns his
majesty's interest in the success of this province, I thought myself equally
obliged to be discreet and cautious in doing it. To write, then, there was
need, and not to trouble persons, of their honor and business, with things
trivial, at least, raw and unfinished for their view. This hitherto put me by
giving any account of the state of our affairs, to say nothing of the mighty
difficulties, I have labored under, in the settlement of six-and-twenty sail
of people, to content, within the space of one year; which makes my case
singular, and excusable, above any other of the King's plantations.

But because my agent has informed me that the Proprietor of Maryland has been
early in his account of our conference about fixing our bounds, and made a
narrative of my affairs, as well before, as at that time, a little to my
disadvantage, and the rather, because my silence might be interpreted neglect,
I am necessitated to make some defense for myself; which, as it will not he
hard to make, so I hope it will be received as just.

I humbly say, then, first, that it seemed to me improper to trouble the Lords
with my transactions with this Proprietor, till we were come to some result;
which we were not: for we parted till spring; and even then were but to meet
about the methods of our proceedings.

Next, This narrative was taken by the Lord's orders, W. Penn's letter to the
Lords of plantations, etc.
without my consent, or knowledge, in a corner of a room by one of his own
attendants.

And, lastly, upon when notice was given of this usage, I complained to him, he
promised, upon his word and honor, it should go not farther; and that it was
for his own satisfaction he did it; I told him that mitigated the thing a
little; but if he should divulge it before I saw and agreed to the copy, he
must pardon me, if I looked upon it as a most unfair practice. -- What that
Lord has done, and what to call it, I leave to my betters; but the surprise and
indigestion of the whole will, I hope excuse me of neglect, or disrespect: for
though I am unceremonious, I would, by no means, act the rude, or undutiful.

This said, I humbly beg that I may give a brief narrative of the matter, as it
then passed, since has been, and now stands, without the weakness and tautology
his relation makes me guilty of.

Time of W. Penn's arrival, etc.
So soon as I arrived, which was on the 24th. of October last, I immediately
dispatched two persons to the Lord Baltimore, to ask of his health, offer kind
neighborhood, and agree a time of meeting the better to establish it: While
they were gone of this errand, I went to New York, that I might pay my duty to
the Duke, in the visit of his government and colony. At my return, which was
toward the end of November, I found the messengers, whom I had sent to
Maryland, newly arrived, and the time fixed, being the 19th. of December. I
prepared myself in a few days for that province. The 11th. of the month I came
to west river; where I met the Proprietor, attended suitable to his character;
who took the occasion, by his civilities, to show me the greatness of his
power: The next day we had conference about our business of the bounds, both at
the same table, with our respective members of council.

The first thing I did was to present the King's letter; which consisted of two
parts: -- One, that the Lord Baltimore had but two degrees; and the other, W.
Penn's letter to the Lords of plantations, etc.
that, beginning at Watkins's point, he should admeasure his said degrees, at
60 miles to a degree. This being read by him, first privately, then publicly,
he told me, the King was greatly mistaken, and that he would not leave his
patent, to follow the King's letter, nor could a letter void his patent; and by
that he would stand.

This was the substance of what he said from first to last, during the whole
conference. To this I answered, the King might be misinformed rather than
mistaken, and that I was afraid the mistake would fall on his side; for though
his patent begins at Watkins's point and goes to the fortieth degree of north
latitude, yet it presumed that to lie in the 38th. else Virginia would be
wronged, which should extend to that degree; however this I assured him, that
when I petitioned the King for five degrees north latitude and that petition
was referred to the Lords of the committee of plantations; at that time, it was
urged by some present, that the Lord Baltimore had but two degrees; upon which
the Lord President, turning his head to me, at whose chair I stood, said, Mr.
Penn, will not three degrees serve your turn? I answered, "I submit both the
what, and how, to the honorable board."

To this his uncle, and chancellor, returned, that to convince me his father's
grant was not by degrees, he had more of Virginia given him, but being planted,
and the grant intending only land not planted, or possessed, but of savage
natives, he left it out, that it might not forfeit the rest: Of which the Lord
Baltimore takes no notice, in his narrative, that I remember. -- But, by that
answer, he can pretend nothing to Delaware; which was at, and before, the
passing of that patent, bought and planted by the Dutch; and so could not be
given: -- But, if it were, it was forfeited, W. Penn's letter to the Lords of
plantations, etc.
for not reducing it, during twenty years, under the English sovereignty; of
which he held it; but was at last reduced by the King, and therefore his, to
give as he pleases.

Perceiving that my pressing the King's letter was uneasy, and that I had
determined myself to dispose him with utmost softness to a good compliance, I
waved that of the two degrees, and pressed the admeasurement only, the next
part of the letter: -- For though it were two degrees, and a half from
Watkins's point to forty degrees, yet let it be measured at sixty miles to a
degree, and I would begin at forty degrees, fall as it would: -- My design was,
that every degree being seventy miles, I should get all that was over sixty,
the proportion intended the Lord Baltimore, by the grant, and computation of a
degree, at that time of the day: -- Thus he had enjoyed the full favor
intended him, and I had gained a door of great importance to the peopling and
improving of his majesty's province.

But he this also rejected; -- I told him, it was not the love, or need, of the
land, but the water; that he abounded in what I wanted, and access and
harboring, even, to excess; that I would not be thus importunate, but for the
importance of the thing, to save a province; and because there was no
proportion in the concern; if I were an hundred times more urgent and
tenacious, the case would excuse it; because the thing insisted on was more
than ninety-nine times more valuable to me than to him; to me the head, to him,
the tail. -- I added, that, if it were his, and he gave it me, planting it
would recompense the favors, not only by laying his country between two
thriving provinces, but the ships, that come yearly to Maryland for tobacco,
would have the bringing of both our people and merchandise; because they can
afford it cheaper; whereby Maryland would, for one age or two be the mart of
trade. W. Penns's letter to the Lords of plantations, etc.
But this also had no other entertainment, but hopes that I would not insist on
these things at our next meeting; after three days time we parted; and I
returned to this province.

When the spring came I sent an express to pray the time and place, when and
where I should meet him, to effect the business, we adjourned to, at that time.
I followed close upon the messenger, that no time might be lost. But the
expectation, he twice had, of the Lord Culpepper's visit, disappointed any
meeting on our affairs, till the month called May; he then sent three gentlemen
to let me know, he would meet me at the head of the bay of Chesapeak; I was
then in treaty with the kings of the natives for land; but three days after we
met ten miles from New Castle, which is thirty from the bay. I invited him to
the town, where having entertained him, as well as the town could afford, on so
little notice, and finding him only desirous of speaking with me privately, I
pressed that we might, at our distinct lodgings, sit severally with our
councils, and treat by way of written memorials; which would prevent the
mistakes, or abuses, that may follow from ill designs, or ill memory; but he
avoided it, saying, "He was not well, and the weather sultry, and would return
with what speed he could, reserving any other treaty to another season." --
Thus we parted, at that time. I had been before told by diverse, that the said
Baltimore had issued forth a proclamation, See the note in page 265, etc.
to invite people, by lower prices, and greater quantities of land, to plant in
the lower counties; in which the Duke's goodness had interested me, as an
inseparable benefit to this whole province. I was not willing to believe it;
and the being in haste, I omitted to ask him: But I had not been long returned
before two letters came from two judges of two of the country courts, that such
a proclamation was abroad, W. Penn's letter to the Lords of plantations, etc.
that the people too hearken to it, but yet prayed my directions. I bade them
keep their ground, and not fear, for the King would be judge. Upon this I
dispatched to the Lord Baltimore three of my council, with the clerk of it: As
they went they got an authentic copy, under the hand of one of his sheriffs, to
whom an original had been directed: But, as the last civility, I would yield
him, I forbad them to seem to believe any thing, but what they had from his own
mouth. -- Thus they delivered my letter.

At first, he denied any such proclamation, turning to two gentlemen of his
council, who stood by, he asked them, if they remembered any such thing? They
also denied it. Upon which the persons, I sent, produced the attested copy;
which, refreshing their memories, they confessed there was such a proclamation.

But the Lord Baltimore told them, that it was his ancient form, and he only
did it to renew his claim, not that he would encourage any to plant there. They
then prayed him to call it in, lest any trouble should ensue: but he refused
it. -- This was during a civil treaty, without any demand made, and after the
place had been many years in the quiet possession of the Duke. -- What to call
this I still humbly refer to my superiors. For his pretensions to those parts I
have thoroughly instructed my agent; who, I hope, will be able to detect them
of weakness and inconsistency. This is a true, though brief, narrative of the
entertainment, I have had from that Lord, in the business between us.

And because I have, as in duty joined, sent an agent extraordinary, to wait
upon the King, and his ministers, in the affairs of this province (so soon as I
could make any settlement in it) I shall only humbly pray leave to hint at two
or three things, relating to the business depending between this lord and
myself, W. Penn's letter to the Lords of plantations, etc.
about finding the fortieth degree of north latitude.

I. That I have common fame on my side, grounded upon ancient and constant
judges, that the fortieth degree of north latitude lies about Boles's-isle.
This the Lord Baltimore himself, has not denied; and the country confesses;
and I shall, when required, prove by some able masters of ships.

II. If this were an error, it is grounded upon such skill and instruments, as
gave measure to the time, in which his patent was granted: -- and if he has
got upon Virginia by that error, he should not get upon me by an exacter
knowledge, considering that Carolina, which ends by degrees, would as much
advance upon Virginia, if the reputed latitude of unprejudiced times should
take no place; -- for by advancing her bounds twenty miles, by a new
instrument, beyond the place; which has been generally taken for thirty-six
and an half degrees; and Virginia not being equally able to advance upon
Maryland, because of its being at a place certain, she will be greatly narrowed
between both.

III. I, therefore, most humbly pray, that the judgment of ancient times, by
which persons at the distance of England from America, have governed
themselves, may conclude that the lord's bounds, or, that he may measure his
two degrees according to the scale and computations of those times, which was
sixty miles to a degree; or, if it be allowed, that he had not his grant by
degrees, that, at last, I might not lose the benefit of admeasurement, as
before mentioned, from Watkins's-point, in whatever degree of latitude that
shall be found, to the fortieth degree of north latitude, which I humbly take
the more courage to press, because a province lies at stake, in the success of
it.

I have only humbly to add, that the province has a prospect of an
extraordinary improvement, as well by diverse sorts of strangers, W. Penn's
letter to the Lords of plantations, etc.
as English subjects; that, in all acts of justice, we name and venerate the
King's authority; that I have followed the Bishop of London's counsel, by
buying, and not taking away the natives' land; with whom I have settled a very
kind correspondence. I return my most humble thanks for your former favors, in
the passing of my patent, and pray God reward you. I am most ready to obey all
your commands, according to the obligations of them, and beseech you to take
this province into your protection, under his Majesty, and him, whom his
goodness has made Governor of it, into your favors, for that I am, with most
sincere devotion,

Noble Lords, Your thankful faithful, friend and servant, to my power, WILLIAM
PENN.


The nature and state of this controversy, about this time, further appear, by
the following papers, viz.

Lord Baltimore's commission to col. G. Talbot, etc.
Charles Lord Baltimore, absolute Lord and Proprietary of the province of
Maryland and Avalon, etc.
To our dear cousin and counselor, Colonel George Talbot, Esquire. (L. S.)
REPOSING special confidence in your wisdom and integrity, I hereby nominate
and appoint and empower you to repair forthwith to the Skulkil at Delaware;
and, in my name, to demand of William Penn, Esquire, or of his deputy, all that
part of the land, on the west side of the said river, that lies to the
southward of the fortieth degree, northern latitude, according to an east line,
run out from two observations, the one taken the 10th. of June, 1682, and the
other, the 27th. of September, 1682, in obedience to his majesty's commands,
expressed in a letter of the 2d. of April 1681; which commands were, at that
time, rejected by the agents of the said Penn (notwithstanding that by several
letters and writings under their hands it may appear they promised a compliance
with his majesty's commands aforesaid) and for which you shall do herein, this
shall be to you a sufficient power.

-- Given under my hand and seal, the 17th. day of September, anno 1683. C.
BALTIMORE.
Vera copia attesta per me, George Talbot.
By virtue of his lordship's commission, whereof the above is a true copy, I,
George Talbot, do, Talbot's demand.'
in the name of the right honorable Charles Lord Baltimore, absolute Lord and
Proprietary of Maryland and Avalon, demand of you Nicholas Moore, deputy to
William Penn, Esquire, all the land lying on the west side of Delaware river,
and to the southward of the fortieth degree of northerly latitude, according to
a line run east, from two observations, the one taken the 10th. of June, 1682,
and the other on the 27th. of September, 1682, in obedience to his majesty's
commands, expressed in a letter, the 2d. of April, 1681; which commands were at
that time rejected by the said William Penn's agents, notwithstanding that by
several letters and other writings, under their hands, it appears that they
promised compliance to his majesty's commands aforesaid. -- The land so claimed
by me for the Lord Baltimore's use, being part of the said province of
Maryland, granted to his lordship's father by King Charles the first, of sacred
memory, and now wrongfully detained by the said William Penn, from his
lordship. And, in witness, that I make this demand, I have hereunto set my hand
and seal, the 24th. day of September, 1683."

GEORGE TALBOT. (L. S.)




William Penn, being at New York, at the time of this demand, after his return,
made the following answer, W. Penn at New York at this time.
viz.

An answer to a demand, made to Nicholas Moore, as my deputy, W. Penn's answer
to the Lord Baltimore's demand.
by Colonel George Talbot, the 24th. of September, 1683, in pursuance of a
commission, from the Lord Baltimore, Proprietary of Maryland and Avalon, dated
the 17th. of the same month.
The demand being grounded upon the commission, I will take things in their
order, and begin with the commission.

The Lord Baltimore does commissionate Colonel Talbot to go to the west side of
the Skulkil to demand of William Penn, Esquire, or his deputy, all that part of
land on the west side of that river, that lies to the south of the fortieth
degree of northerly latitude.

I. I answer, it seems very slight, abrupt and unprecedented for any person,
that is in the quality of a Proprietary of a country, to send to another in the
same circumstance, any extraordinary messenger, agent, or commissioner, without
some letter, or memorial, to state the demand, with the reasons of it; the
practice of the greatest princes, and might therefore (I conceive) be the
condescension of lesser seigniories.

II. In the next place, William Penn, Esquire, and the said Penn, (the language
of the commission) is not my American style, nor that which belongs to me, in
the matter in question; for, as such, I keep no deputies.

III. I live not on the west side of Skulkil, nor any deputy of mine; and I
conceive Colonel Talbot could not, by that commission, come to the east side,
to make his demand; which yet he did.

IV. I was absent, and at New York, when this commissioner came; and I never
did, nor never will, commission any deputy to treat and conclude away my
inheritance, without my particular direction and command; though, if I were to
go for England, I would not disown the laws, he should make in my absence, for
public good, W. Penn's answer to the Lord Baltimore's demand.
when I came back.

V. Colonel Talbot is directed, in the commission, to make the demand,
according to a line, said to be run, in obedience to his majesty's command, in
his letter of the 2d. of April, 1681; but I say, that no line is yet run, in
obedience to his majesty's command; -- for the letter expressly says, that the
Lord Baltimore, or his agent, shall, together with my agent, agree to the
latitude, and then run the line, and bound the provinces accordingly; which is
not yet done: For those observations, and the line run by them, are performed
by the Lord Baltimore, and his agents only, and therefore not according to his
majesty's command, in his letter of the 2d. of April, 1681, nor, in my opinion,
common equity; for I knew nothing of them.

VI. To say (as his commission does) that my commissioners refused to comply
with the said letter, is hard for me to do; since the chiefest of them brought
it in my favor. But the truth is, (if they say true, and circumstances favor
them) the thing is improbable; for the Lord Baltimore would have had them
agreed to have taken an observation upon the river Delaware, when as the King's
letter (stating my bounds, as they are expressed in my patent) begins twelve
miles above New Castle, upon the west side of Delaware river, and so to run to
the 43d. degree of north latitude, upon the said river; which makes it
impossible, that the Lord Baltimore could come within those limits to take an
observation, or run a line, in pursuance of his majesty's commands, in the said
letter; since taking an observation on Delaware river (which, say they, he
pressed) is a plain violation of it. They further say, that they never refused,
but pressed the taking of an observation, according to his majesty's letter;
which is grounded on the bounds of my patent; W. Penn's answer to the Lord
Baltimore's demand.
and when the Lord Baltimore and my agent had agreed to meet at New Castle, and
to proceed according to his majesty's letter, it is true that my agent came not,
and as true, says he, that the reason was the Lord Baltimore called
immediately at Chichester, alias, Marcus Hooks, as he went to New Castle, and
forbad the inhabitants to pay me Quit-rent, and named the place by a new name,
before any line was run, or any observation agreed; which being a declared
breach of the King's commands, and their treaty, in the opinion of my agent, he
refused to meet the next day about a matter, the Lord Baltimore had, in such a
manner, already determined.

VII. But what fault soever they were in, sure I am, that, before an
observation was agree, or any line was run, I came in, and suddenly after
waited upon the Lord Baltimore. I presented him with another letter from his
majesty; which he was so far from complying with, that he looked upon the King,
as mistaken, and set his patent in direct opposition; and to this day would
never hear of complying with it, in either of the two points it related to;
that is to say, his having but two degrees, and that beginning them at
Watkins's point, he should admeasure them, at sixty miles to a degree, to
terminate the north bounds of his province. Now, in my opinion, it was not
proper to ground his proceedings upon a former letter, in neglect of a later
advice and command from his majesty: Nor does it look very just to make the
caution, or neglect of an agent, in the absence of his principal, a reason to
proceed against his principal, when present with other instructions, without
due regard had to him, or his allegations. And I must say, that, at New Castle,
when I pressed the Lord Baltimore to sit in one house with his Council, and I
would sit with mine in another, that we might treat by written memorials under
our hands, to prevent mistakes, ill memory, W. Penn's answer to the Lord
Baltimore's demand.
or ill will, he refused, alleging, he was not well; I did then tell him, I
would wave what force or advantage I thought I had by the second letter, and
proceed to meet him at the place he desired, which was the head of Chesapeak
bay, and there try to find the fortieth degree of north latitude, provided he
would first please to set me a gentlemanly price; so much per mile, in case I
should have no part of the bay by latitude; that so I might have a back port to
this province. This I writ, according to his desire, and sent after him, to
sell he refused, but started an exchange of part of that bay for the lower
counties, on the bay of Delaware. This, I presume, he knew I could not do; for
his Royal Highness had the one half; and I did not prize the thing, I desired,
at such a rate. Soon after this meeting, I understood that he had issued forth
a proclamation some time before, to invite people to plant those parts in my
possession, under his Royal Highness; and that also before any demand had been
made, or our friendly treaty ended; which I took so ill, in right of his Royal
Highness, and that which his goodness had made mine, that I sent commissioners
(first to know the truth of it from his own mouth, before I would credit the
intelligence, I had received, and, if true) to complain of the breach of our
friendly treaty, and that it might be repaired; which he has taken so ill (how
deservedly let the whole world judge) that he has sent me letters of a very
coarse style; such, as indeed, could not be answered without those terms, which
unbecome men in our public stations; who, in the midst of all disagreements,
ought to manage themselves with coolness and exact civility; and, if, in this,
I have, at any time, been short, let me but know it, and I, that think it a
meanness of spirit to justify an error, when committed, am not too stiff to ask
him pardon. W. Penn's answer to the Lord Baltimore's demand.
Here I left him, expecting his news when he came to the head of the bay, in
September, as I thought he promised me; but instead of that, an observation is
taken, a line run, and trees marked, without my notice, and a demand made
thereupon, and all grounded on his majesty's letter of the 2d. of April 1681:
in which I must again say, I find no such direction, which brings me to the
demand itself.

VIII. To the demand, viz. Of all that land on Delaware river to the south of
the fortieth degree of north latitude, I have this to say, that it is very odd
the demand should be made several months after the proclamation was put forth,
to encourage people to plant most of the parts demanded; but much more strange,
that, after the Lord Baltimore had declared under his hand, that he did not by
that intend to break our amicable treaty, he should, without further
provocation given, proceed to demand those parts! Certainly, this was not
intended to continue our friendship; nor did it look with common decency, that
Colonel Talbot should not think me worth leaving a letter at my house, where he
lodged, when he went away, as well as the land worth such a demand. But,
indeed, his carriage all along shows, he came to defy me, not treat me, like
either a neighbor, or gentleman. A sudden change amusing the King's people,
under my charge, by threats, or drawing them off their obedience, by degrading
mine; and invitations to the Lord Baltimore's government. This I found at my
return, in his conduct (though not in his commission) as some of the people do
aver.

IX. But, in the next place, the Lord Baltimore has no warrant to run his line
to the river of Delaware, neither by the King's letter, nor his own patent, if
he peruseth them well, where he will find the bay, but not the river, of
Delaware.

X. The land demanded is not a part of the province of Maryland, as is
expressed in the demand; for it is in the jurisdiction of Delaware, W. Penn's
answer to the Lord Baltimore's demand.
(alias, Newcastle) which is by several acts of the Assembly of Maryland,
distinguished and disowned from being any part of that province.

XI. The Lord Baltimore has no land given him by patent, but what was
unplanted of any but savage nations; and this west side of the river Delaware,
before, and at, the passing of his patent, was actually bought and possessed by
a civil and christian people, in amity with the crown of England; and by the
treaty of peace in 1653, between the English and Dutch, it was part of one
article of the treaty, that the Dutch should enjoy those territories, in
America, of which this was a member; and we do know, foreign actions of that
time and kind continued firm after his majesty's restoration; for Jamaica still
remains to us; and Dunkirk itself was not rendered, but sold. -- To be short, I
conceive, it is more for the Lord Baltimore's honor and safety, that it should
be so, as I say, than otherwise: -- For, if he claims what was possessed of
the Dutch, on Delaware river, south of the fortieth degree of north-latitude,
as what was lawfully under the English sovereignty, how comes he to suffer
part of his province to remain under a strange and foreign sovereignty to that,
under which he held his claim?

XII. But, if the Lord Baltimore had a just pretense to this river, and former
possession too, which he never had, yet being by the Dutch taken, and by the
King taken from the Dutch, it becomes the conqueror's: -- For, it is known,
that, if any of our English merchants ships be taken, and possessed but
twenty-four hours, by an enemy, if retaken by the crown, they are prize; and
this place was more than twenty-four years in the hands of the Dutch. In the
original is the following note in the margin, viz.

-- "And not demanded of them; and the Swedes and Fi^s, that settled on
Christeen-creek; which is about four miles from New Castle, and where they have
been about years, never heard of a demand, that was ever made to them, by the
lord Baltimore's father, nor himself; as the old men among them do declare."


This made his Royal Highness take out fresh patents, upon the opinion of
Council (since the last conquest) for his territories, W. Penn's answer to the
Lord Baltimore's demand.
in America. Nor is the Lord Baltimore in the condition of an ordinary subject;
(in whose favor something might be alleged) for he has reg^li^ principality,
though subordinate to the King, as his style shows; and I conceive he is bound
to keep his own dominions, or else lose them; and if lost to a foreigner, and
taken by the sovereign, the sovereign has the right; another conqueror could
plead. This is the present jus gentium, and law of nations; which in foreign
acquests prevails; and the King, accordingly has granted it, under his great
seal of England, to his Royal Highness. And, if there were no truth in this,
but the Lord Baltimore's patent were title good enough for what was actually
another's before, and which he never enjoyed since, Connecticut colony might
put in for New York, as reasonably as the Lord Baltimore can for Delaware,
their patent having that part of the Dutch territories within its bounds, on
the same mistake. (Note in the margin.) "Which is yet out of dispute from the
lord Baltimore's own patent, that says, New England begins where he cease;
which being at 40 degrees, north latitude, it follows that New York, and part
of East and West Jersey and Pennsylvania will fall to New England."


XIII. I shall conclude with this, that the King, by articles of peace, between
him and the states of Holland, is the allowed owner of all that territory, in
America, once called New Netherland; of which this is a part. He has been
graciously pleased to grant it by two patents, and this, in controversy, by
one, under the great seal of England, to his dearest brother, James, Duke of
York and Albany, etc. And his Royal Highness, out of his princely goodness, and
singular regard, he was pleased to have, to the services and ^ones of my
deceased father, W. Penn's answer to the Lord Baltimore's demand.
has interested me in part of the same; so that he is lord, (and I am tenant)
of him I hold, and to him I pay my rent; and for him I improve, as well as
myself; and, therefore, I must take leave to refer the Lord Baltimore to his
Royal Highness; who is a prince, doubtless, of too much honor, to keep any
man's right, and of too great resolution, to deliver up his own; whose example
I am resolved to follow.

Philadelphia, 4th. of October, 1683.

Such appears to have been the state of this controversy, at this time. 1684.
Incursion from Maryland, etc.
The year 1684 commenced with an incursion of a party of people from Maryland,
making forceable entry on several plantatious in the lower counties: upon which
the Governor and Council, at Philadelphia, sent a copy of the preceding answer
to the Lord Baltimore's demand, with orders to William Welsh, to use his
influence, for reinstating the persons, who had been dispossessed; and, in case
mild measures would not do, he was directed legally to prosecute the invaders:
but the former method appears, at present, to have answered the intention; for
no more of this kind of conduct was heard of till the next month; when some of
the inhabitants were afresh threatened with the same outrages, in case of their
refusal to be under the Lord Baltimore, The government issued a declaration,
showing William Penn's title, and such other requisites as were thought most
likely to prevent such illegal proceedings in future. In this month the Council
received a letter from Samuel Sands, purporting: "That col. George Talbot, with
three musketeers, went to the houses of the widow Ogle, Jonas Erskin, and
Andreas Tittle, telling them, that if they would not forthwith yield obedience
to the Lord Baltimore, and own him to be their proprietor, and pay rent to him,
he would turn them out of their houses, and take their land from them," etc.


It is likewise observable, about this time, that the methods then used, and
the law, which had been made, The Indians still get strong liqours from (...)
of the settlers, etc.
to prevent strong liquors from being sold to the Indians, did not fully answer
the intention; for these people, notwithstanding, through some mean and
unprincipled persons among the European settlers, in a clandestine manner,
still procured them. The Governor, therefore, seeing the great difficulty, if
not the absolute impossibility, of debarring them from these liquors, called a
number of them together, and proposed, that, on condition they would be content
to be punished, as the English were, in consequence of drunkenness, they should
not be hindered from the use of them? This they readily agreed to; and would,
probably, have been willing to endure much greater punishment, on these terms;
so great is their love of strong liquors! The best methods, that prudence could
dictate, had been used, as it was thought, Great difficulty of restraining the
Indians from strong liqours.
and much advice given them to inculcate an abhorrence of the vice of
drunkenness, but too generally without that effect, which was desired; their
appetite having so much the prevalency over their reason, and their sensual
desires, above their better understanding, that, while they saw and
acknowledged the means used for their real interest, in this affair, to be
good, they lived in the continued violation of them!

CHAPTER VII.
The Proprietary obliged to return to England. -- Commissionates the Provincial
Council to act in his absence, etc. -- His commission to the Judges, etc. --
William Penn's valedictory letter, to his friends in Pennsylvania from on board
the ship, at his departure. -- Oldmixon's account. -- Thomas Langhorne. Death
of Charles the IId. and succession of James the IId. to the crown of England,
with William Penn's interest and service at court. -- Extract of a letter from
the Proprietary on the subject, etc. -- Names of the members of Assembly in
1685. -- The dispute between William Penn and Lord Baltimore, respecting the
boundary of the territories decided, etc. -- Boundary lines between the
counties of the province ascertained. -- Proceedings of the Assembly against N.
Moore, J. Bridges and P. Robinson. -- Letter of the Proprietary to the
magistrates, respecting some abuses. -- Assembly's letter to the Proprietary
respecting N. Moore, etc. William Penn in Holland and Germany. -- Extracts from
his letters. -- The province needs his presence. Means used to instruct the
Indians, and to restrain them from strong liquors, etc.

WILLIAM PENN continued in Pennsylvania and sometimes in the adjacent province
of New Jersey, and other neighboring places, 1684.
till the beginning of the summer, this year, settling and establishing the
government, and assisting his friends, the Quakers, in regulating the affairs
and economy of their religious society, in these parts; where, most probably,
he would have resided much longer, had not the dispute, between him and the
Lord Baltimore, W. Penn necessitated to return to England.
before mentioned, and other important affairs, called him home, to England;
where his enemies, taking the advantage of his absence, threw his affairs there
into a critical situation and rendered his presence absolutely necessary, in
that nation.

Upon this he signed a commission, empowering the Provincial Council, to act,
in the government in his stead; W. Penn commissionates the officers of
government, etc.
of which Thomas Lloyd was president; who also had a commission to keep the
great seal. Note. -- 3d. mo. 1684, -- the Names of the Members of Assembly,
were: For Philadelphia.
Nicholas Moore, Speaker, John Songhurst, Francis Fincher, Lacy Cock, Joseph
Growden, John Heart.
For Sussex.
John Roads, Henry Bowman, Hercules Shepherd, Samuel Gray, William Emmet, Henry
Stretcher.
For Chester.
Joshua Hastings, Robert Wade, John Blunston, George Maris, Thomas Usher, Henry
Maddock.
For New Castle.
James Williams, John Darby, William Grant, Gasparus Herman, Abraham Man, John
White.
For Bucks.
William Beakes, John Clowes, Richard Hough, John Otter, Edmond Bennot.
For Kent.
John Briggs, John Glover, John Curtis, William Sherwood, James Wells, William
Berry.

Caleb Pusey, who was long of the Council, and one of the first settlers, in
his memoirs of the first settlement of Pennsylvania, in manuscript, says, --
"It may not be amiss also to mention, that when the Governor left us, the first
time, in the year 1684, he left his power of government in the hands of five
Commissioners, of whom our worthy friend, Thomas Lloyd, was president; who
afterward was several years, Deputy Governor," etc. M. S.
Nicholas Moore, William Welsh, William Wood, Robert Turner and John Eckley
were commissioned to be Provincial Judges, for two years; their commission was
in these words, viz.

Commission to the judges.
William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, and
territories thereunto belonging,
To my trusty and loving friends, Nicholas Moore, William Welsh, William Wood,
Robert Turner and John Eckley, greeting:

Reposing special confidence in your justice, wisdom and integrity, I do, by
virtue of the King's authority, derived unto me, constitute you, Provincial
Judges, for the province and territories, and any legal number of you, a
provincial court of judicature, both fixed and circular, as is by law directed;
giving you, and every of you, full power to act therein according to the same,
strictly charging you, and every of you, to do justice to all, and of all
degrees, without delay, fear, or reward; and I do hereby require all persons
within the province and territories aforesaid, to give you due obedience and
respect, belonging to your station, in the discharge of your duties: This
commission to be in force during two years, ensuing the date hereof; you, and
every of you, behaving yourselves well therein, and acting according to the
same.

Given at Philadelphia, the 4th. of the Sixth month 1684, being the
thirty-sixth year of the King's reign, and the fourth of my government, WILLIAM
PENN.


Thomas Lloyd, James Claypoole James Claypoole had been a merchant in London.
and Robert Turner were empowered to sign patents, Other officers appointed.
and grant warrants for lands; and William Clark had a general commission, to
be justice of the peace throughout the province and territories. The
Proprietary sails for England.
Other Justices being likewise appointed, and all things settled in a promising
and prosperous condition, the Proprietary, on the 12th. of the Sixth month,
1684, sailed for England. Oldmixon, mentioned in the notes, page 244, says,

"This friendship and civility of the Pennsylvanian Indians, are imputed to Mr.
Penn, the Proprietor's extreme humanity and bounty to them; he having laid out
some thousands of pounds, to instruct, support and oblige them. There are ten
Indian nations within the limits of his province; and the number of souls of
these barbarians is computed to about 6000. -- The number of the inhabitants of
Swedish, or Dutch, extraction, may be about 3000 souls." -- "Having made a
league of amity with nineteen Indian nations, between them and all the English
in America; having established good laws, and seen his capital so well
inhabited, that there were then near 300 houses, and 2500 souls in it, besides
twenty other townships, he returned to England, leaving William Markham,
Esquire, Secretary, Mr. Thomas Holme, Surveyor-General; and the administration
in the hands of the Council, whose president was Thomas Lloyd, Esquire, who, by
virtue of his office, held the government several years," etc.

Note. In the year 1684, among other friends and settlers, from Westmoreland,
Thomas Langhorne arrived in Pennsylvania, and settled in Bucks county, about
Middletown; where then dwelt Nicholas Walne and others. He was an eminent
preacher among the Quakers; and of whom there is a very excellent and
extraordinary character, in M. S. from Friends at Kendal in Westmoreland, by
way of certificate, on his removal to this country. He died a few years after
his arrival. -- His son, Jeremiah Langhorne was afterward Chief Justice of the
province.




But prior to his entirely leaving the country, he writ from on board the ship,
He writes from on board the ship, etc.
in which he sailed, the following most affectionate farewell, to be
communicated to those, whom he left behind; which, as a memorial of the father
of this country, among many others, may, in part, show to posterity, his real
concern for the true happiness of the people, both in their temporal and
spiritual capacity, and the prosperity of the country in every respect, viz.

For Tho. Lloyd, J. Claypoole, J. Simcock, Chapter Tailor and J. Harrison, to be
communicated in meetings in Pennsylvania, etc. among friends:
Dear Friends,
His valedictory letter, etc.
MY love and my life is to you, and with you; and no water can quench it, nor
distance wear it out, or, bring it to an end: -- I have been with you, cared
over you, and served you with unfeigned love; and you are beloved of me, and
near to me, beyond utterence. I bless you, in the name and power of the Lord;
and my God bless you with his righteousness, peace and plenty, all the land
over. Oh, that you would eye him, in all, through all, and above all the works
of your hands; and let it be your first care, how you may glorify God in your
undertakings: for to a blessed end are you brought hither; and if you see and
keep but in the sense of that Providence, your coming, staying and improving
will be sanctified; but if any forget God, and call not upon his name, in
truth, he will pour out his plagues upon them; and they shall know who it is,
that judges the children of men.

Oh, now you are come to a quiet land, provoke not the Lord to trouble it: And
now liberty and authority are with you, and in your hands, let the government
be upon his shoulders, in all your spirits; that you may rule for him, W.
Penn's valedictory letter.
under whom the princes of this world will, one day, esteem it their honor to
govern and serve, in their places. I cannot but say, when these things come
mightily upon my mind, as the Apostles did, of old, "What manner of persons
ought we to be, in all godly conversation!" Truly, the name and honor of the
Lord are deeply concerned in you, as to the discharge of yourselves, in your
present stations; many eyes being upon you; and remember, that, as we have been
belied about disowning the true religion, so, of all government, to behold us
exemplary and christian, in the use of that, will not only stop our enemies,
but minister conviction to many, on that account, prejudiced. Oh, that you may
see and know that service, and do it, for the Lord, in this your day: --

And, thou, Philadelphia, the virgin settlement of this province, named before
thou were born, what love, what care, what service, and what travail has there
been, to bring thee forth, and preserve thee from such as would abuse and
defile thee!

Oh, that thou may be kept from the evil, that would overwhelm thee; that,
faithful to the God of thy mercies, in the life of righteousness, thou may be
preserved to the end: He prays for Philadelphia, etc.
-- My soul prays to God for thee, that thou may stand in the day of trial,
that thy children may be blessed of the Lord, and thy people saved by his
power; -- my love to thee has been great, and the remembrance of thee affects
mine heart and mine eye! -- the God of eternal strength keep and preserve thee,
W. Penn's valedictory letter.
to his glory and thy peace.

So, dear friends, my love again salutes you all, wishing that grace, mercy and
peace, with all temporal blessings, may abound richly among you; -- so says, so
prays, your friend and lover in the truth,

WILLIAM PENN.
From on board the Ketch Endeavor, the Sixth month, 1684.

Death of K. Charles the second, etc.
In England, on the sixth of the Twelfth month this year (1684) died King
Charles the second; and was succeeded by his brother, James, Duke of York, a
professed Papist. The Proprietary in a letter to Thomas Lloyd, President of the
Council, dated, "London the 16th. of the First month, 1684-5," writes thus on
this affair, viz.

-- "The King is dead; and the Duke succeeds peaceably. He was well on the
First Day night, being the first of February (so called;) about eight next
morning, as he sat down to shave, his head twitched both ways, or sides; and he
gave a shriek, and fell as dead; and so remained some hours; they opportunely
blooded and cupped him, and plied his head with red-hot frying-pans: -- He
returned, and continued till Sixth-day noon; but mostly in great tortures. He
seemed very penitent, asking pardon of all, even the poorest subject he had
wronged; prayed for pardon, and to be delivered out of the world; The Duke
appearing mighty humble and sorrowful; -- 'twas a loss, with his gain: -- He
was an able man for a divided and troubled kingdom. -- The present King was
proclaimed about three o'clock that day; a proclamation followed, with the
King's speech, to maintain the church and state, as established; to keep
property and use clemency. -- Tonnage and poundage, with the excise, are
revived, de been esse, till the parliament meet. -- One is now choosing; -- The
people of Westminster just gone by, to choose. -- It sits the 19th. of the third
month next. In Scotland, one next month. -- Severities continue still; but some
ease to us faintly promised. -- Be careful that no indecent speeches pass
against the government; for the King going, with his Queen, publicly to Mass,
in Whitehall, gives occasion. -- He declared he concealed himself, to obey his
brother, and that now he would be above board; which we like the better, on
many accounts. -- I was with him and told him so; -- but withal, hoped We
should come in for a share; -- He smiled, and said, he desired not that
peaceable people should be disturbed for their religion: -- And till his
coronation, the 23d. when he and his consort are together to be crowned, no
hopes of release; and till the Parliament no hopes of any sixth liberty. -- My
business, I would hope, is better, -- The late King, the papists will have,
died a Roman Catholic; for he refused (after his usual way of evading uneasy
things, with unpreparedness first, and then weakness) the church of England's
communion. Bishop Ken, of Wells, pressing him, that it would be to his comfort,
and that of his people, to see he died of that religion, he had made profession
of living; but it would not do: -- and once all but the duke, Earl of Bath, and
Lord Feversham, were turned out, and one Huddlestone, a Romish Priest, was seen
about that time, near the chamber. -- This is most of our news. -- The popish
lords and gentry go to Whitehall, to mass, daily; and the Tower, (or Royal
Chapel) is crammed (by vying) with the protestant lords and gentry: -- The late
King's children, even, by the Duchess of Portsmouth, go thither. -- Our King
stands more upon his terms, than the other, with France; and though he has not
his brother's abilities, he has great discipline and industry. -- Alas! the
world is running over to you; and great quantities together is to put the sale
of lands out of my own hands, after I have spent what I got by my own, on the
public service: for I am L.3,000 worse in my estate, than at first; I can say
it before the Lord; I have only the comfort of having approved myself a
faithful steward, to my understanding, and ability; and yet, I hope, my
children shall receive it, in the love of yours, when we are gone."

The rest of this letter consists principally of salutations to the people, in
general, both of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and also to diverse particulars,
by name; with some instructions or directions of a more private nature; -- but
as the names of such families as the Proprietary expressed this particular
respect to, may, at this time, be acceptable to some, now to see, they here
follow, as transcribed from his own hand, omitting the rest, viz.

-- "Dearly salute me to dear friends, in their meetings, and particularly to
dear John Simcock, Christopher Tailor, J. Harrison, J. Claypoole, T. Janny,
William Yardley, Thomas Brasby, William Wood, Thomas Ellis, J. Songhurst, John
Moon, J. Blunston, Joseph Growden, J. Head, G. Jones, G. Painter, H. Lewis, T.
Howell, J. B. and the rest of the Welsh Friends; -- Captain Owen, etc. --
Thomas Fitzwater, James Barnes, B. Wilcocks, J. Goodson, Thomas Bowman, Widow
Fincher, W. Salloway, J. Alloway, R. Wade, R. Turner, Samuel Carpenter, J.
Southern, William Clark, with their families; and all friends on our side, and
the other too ( viz. Jersey) particularly, J. Gosling, Anne Jennings, S. Budd,
W. Biddle, S. Cooper, R. Stacy and Mahlon, T. Lambert, and widow Welsh. -- Dr.
Moore, J. C. A. Man, P. Aldricks, W. Guest. J. White, W. Durvall. -- Salute me
to the Swedes, Captain Cock, old Peter Cock, and Rambo, and their sons, the
Swansons, Andrew Binkson, P. Yoakum and the rest of them: -- Their ambassador
here dined with me the other day." -- etc.

"Keep up the people's hearts and love," etc. -- "I hope to be with them next
fall, if the Lord prevent not; -- I long to be with you; No temptations prevail
to fix me here; -- the Lord send us a good meeting, Amen." -- etc.

Note, By a warrant to President Lloyd and the Council, dated at London, the
18th. of the First-month, 1684-5, William Penn authorized them to commission
his cousin, William Markham, to be secretary of the province and territories,
and his secretary, as proprietary.

In the Third month, 1685, Thomas Lloyd being President of the Council, the
names of the members of Assembly were: -- For Philadelphia.
Nicholas Moore, Joseph Growden, Joseph Growden came from Trevose in Cornwall.
Barnaby Wilcox, Lawrence Cock, Gunner Rambo, Thomas Paschall.
For New Castle.
John White, Speaker, Gasparus Herman, Hendrick Williams, Abraham Man, Edward
Owen, junior, John Darby.
For Bucks.
William Beaks, Gilbert Wheeler, Henry Baker, William Dark, James Dilworth,
Henry Paxon.
For Kent.
John Bridges, John Curtis, Daniel Jones, Peter Groningdyke, William Berry,
John Brinkloe,
For Chester.
John Blunston, George Maris, John Harding, Thomas Usher, Francis Stanfield,
Joshua Fern.
For Sussex.
Henry Smith, William Carter, Robert Clifton, John Hill, Samuel Gray, Richard
Law.



-- The people were thereupon filled with great apprehensions and fears, lest,
according to the usual practice of those religious devotees, who would compel
all people under their power, to their own mode of religion, as in the
persecuting days of Queen Mary, he should endeavor, by the ruin of the
Protestant, to establish the Popish, power and hierarchy, in the nation. So
that had the Proprietary of Pennsylvania, Unsettledness in England, etc.
at this time, fomented the general uneasiness, by encouraging multitudes, then
upon the wing, he, most probably might, as himself said, "Have put many more
thousands of people into his province, as well as pounds into his packet than
he did." See his letter to W. Popple, etc. hereafter.


W. Penn's disinterested conduct, in England, etc.
But the actions of William Penn appear to have had more noble and generous
motives, than those of private interest, or, of a party only; and from that
friendship and intimacy, which he had had with the King, while Duke of York, he
now employed his interest with him, not only for the relief of his suffering
friends, the Quakers (who then had long filled the jails through the nation, on
account of their religion) but also for the benefit of such other persons, as
were in distress or difficulty, without distinction of sect or party: besides
what might be proper, in his private and friendly capacity and communication,
in advising the King both for his own real interest, and the good of the nation
in general, however disregarded, or neglected, by him, through a different
conduct.

For his more convenient attendance, therefore, at court, and for the easier
performance of these acts of humanity, friendship, charity, and general service
to his country, 1685.
as well as his own private concerns, in the year 1685, he fixed his residence
near Kensington; He resides near Kensington, etc.
all which gave occasion to the ignorant, the suspicious, and his malicious
enemies, to impute to him things, in which he (...) no way concerned, as a
promoter of them, and, from that enmity, which many had ignorantly conceived
against the religious profession of the people called Quakers, and against him,
on that account, to load him with many lies and reproaches, as may be seen in
his printed life and works.

The Lord Baltimore's agent had, The dispute between W. Penn and Lord
Baltimore, respecting the lower counties decided.
in the year 1683, petitioned King Charles the second, that no fresh grant of
the land, in the territories of Pennsylvania might pass in favor of William
Penn, till the said Lord was heard, on his pretension of right thereto; which
petition was referred to the Lords of the committee of trade and plantations:
these after many attendances and diverse hearings of both parties, made their
report to King James the second; who, in November, 1685, by an order of
Council, determined the affair between them; The boundaries determined.
by ordering a division to be made of all that tract of land between Delaware
and Chesapeak bay, from the latitude of cape Hinlopen, to the south boundary of
Pennsylvania, into two equal parts; of which that share on Delaware was
assigned to the King; and that on Chesapeak, to the Lord Baltimore. The purport
of this order of Council was as follows, viz.

"At a Court at Whitehall, this 13th. day of November, 1685.
"Present, -- The King, -- etc.
"THE following report from the right honorable, the Lords of the committee for
trade and foreign plantations, being this day read at the board, etc. The
substance of the said Lords' report we find, that the said lands intended to be
granted by the Lord Baltimore's patent, were only cultivated, and inhabited by
savages; and that the part then in dispute, was inhabited and planted by
Christians at, and before, the date of the Lord Baltimore's patent, as it had
been ever since, to that time, and continued as a distinct colony from that of
Maryland; so that the Lords offered it as their opinion, that, for avoiding
further differences, the tract of land, lying between the river and bay of
Delaware and the eastern sea on one side, and Chesapeak bay, on the other, be
divided into two equal parts, by a line, from the latitude of cape Henlopen, to
the fortieth degree of north latitude; (the south boundary of Pennsylvania by
charter) and that one half thereof, lying toward the Bay of Delaware and the
Eastern sea, be adjudged to belong to his Majesty ( viz. to King James, who
granted it W. Penn, when Duke of York) and that the other half remain to the
Lord Baltimore, as comprised in his charter."




This division was, by the King, in Council, ordered immediately to be made;
but its execution being many years delayed, But delayed the execution, etc.
Queen Ann was twice petitioned for a further hearing; which being obtained,
the first order of council, of 1685, was, by the Queen, ratified and confirmed,
in all its parts, and commanded to be put in execution, without further delay.

The boundary lines, etc.
In consequence hereof this territory, which before had been divided by William
Penn, into the three counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex, became bounded on
the east, by the river and bay of Delaware, and partly by the ocean; on the
south, by an east and west line, drawn a few miles south of the Indian river,
in latitude about thirty-eight and an half; which line extends halfway between
the ocean, on the east, and Chesapeak bay, on the west, thirty-five miles; and
from thence on the west of the said counties, by a right line nearly in a north
direction to the south boundary of Pennsylvania; which is in a parallel of
about fifteen miles due south of Philadelphia; For the final settlement of the
boundary between the province of Pennsylvania, and Maryland, see afterward,
under the year 1732.
so that the said line touch the arch of a circle, drawn at twelve miles
distance from New Castle to the river Delaware; and thence from the end of the
said line, on the north eastward, to the river Delaware, by the said arch.

Hence the breadth of these counties, east and west, continues to decrease,
from their south boundary, where it is thirty-five miles, till it is only about
twelve miles, at, or near, the border of Pennsylvania. The said north and south
line, from latitude thirty-eight degrees, thirty minutes, to thirty-nine
degrees, forty-four minutes, Content of the lower counties, in square miles,
and acres.
is about eighty-five miles; but, in consideration of the space, included in
the north part of the circle's arch, the whole territory may, probably, be near
ninety miles in length; this, multiplied by twenty-three, the mean breadth,
gives 2070 square miles; which last number, multiplied by 640, the number of
acres in one square mile, produces 1,324,800, or above one million and a
quarter of acres, in this territory.

At a Council held in Philadelphia, Boundaries of the province counties
ascertained.
on the first day of the Second-month, 1685, -- Present Thomas Lloyd,
President, and nine others, -- the lines of separation between the county of
Philadelphia, and those of Bucks and Chester, were confirmed, according to the
Proprietary's mind, signified to some of his friends, before he left the
province. For a description of these boundaries, see the chorographical part of
this history, in the general view of the province near the conclusion.


Nicholas Moore from London, one of the provincial judges, being first in
commission, took place, as prior judge; or in the style of later times, as
Chief Justice of the province, and was a member of Assembly. The Assembly had
before this, on the 13th. of the Third-month, showed an instance of their own
authority, in expelling, or rather suspending, one of their members, during the
session, viz. John Bridges, of Kent county, for contemptuous language to the
house, expressed in Assembly, and refusing to make submission; but upon his
altering his mind, the next day, and making acknowledgment, etc. for his
offense, he was reinstated.

Votes of Assembly. And on the 18th, Patrick Robinson, clerk of the provincial
circular courts, being admitted into the House of Assembly, and requested to
produce the records of said courts; but he denying the same, and joining with
Moore, was, for his contempt of the authority of the House, disobedience to
their orders, and abusing the Assembly, committed to the Sheriff's custody,
during the pleasure of the house, and voted "A public enemy to the province of
Pennsylvania and territories thereof, and a violator of the privileges of the
freemen, in Assembly met."

Ibid.
Though he appears to have been a person of good and useful abilties, and
esteemed by the Proprietary, yet being accused of mal-practices, he fell under
the displeasure of the house; N. Moore impeached.
and they impeached him in form, by a declaration exhibited to the Council, on
the 15th. of the Third-month, this year, consisting of ten articles; besides
saving to themselves the liberty of adding more; and concluded with a request,
that he might be removed from his great offices and trust, and be made to
answer to the crimes and misdemeanors, which were brought against him. The
following Letter from the Proprietary to the Magistrates, concerning
ordinaries, with some others, about this time, indicate the existence of some
irregularities and abuses, in the province, and his anxiety to have them
redressed, viz.

Friends,
THERE is a cry come over into these parts against the number of
drinking-houses, and looseness, that is committed in the caves." [Note, These
caves were some of the first habitations of the new settlers, under William
Penn, till they got better erected; they were made in the bank, along the side
of Delaware, where the city now stands, which then was higher ground.] "I am
pressed in my spirit, being very apt to believe too many disorders, in that
respect, strictly to require, that speedy and effectual care be taken: --
First, To reduce the number of ordinaries, or drinking-houses; and that without
respect to persons: -- Such are continued, that are most tender of God's glory,
and the reputation of the government; and that all others, presuming to sell,
be punished according to law: -- I desire you to purge these caves, in
Philadelphia; they are mine by license and time: -- The three years are
expired; -- I would have the suspected forth with ordered to get up housing
elsewhere; and the empty caves to accommodate the poor families, that may come
over; though they must not stand long before men's doors. Whatever you do, let
virtue be cherished, and those that show to fear God, by a life according to
it, be countenanced, and the evil person rebuked; that God, who blesses those
that fear him, and call upon his name in all lands, may bless and preserve you.
-- And though this be particularly addressed to you, let the magistrates of
other towns have it to read among them. I add no more, but my desires to the
God of all our tender mercies to be with you all, in your duties and places, to
his glory, and your praise and peace, Amen.

Your very loving Friend,WM. PENN.


The following I find indorsed on the copy of the above letter, viz.

These are to certify, That notwithstanding several within this county of
Philadelphia, keep ordinaries, and sell strong liquors by retail, yet not one
of them has any license for their so doing.

WILLIAM MARKHAM.
Philadelphia, 5th. 7mo. 1688.
The following is an extract from an original letter, in the Proprietary's own
hand writing, dated Sixth-month, 1685, and directed to Thomas Lloyd, John
Simcock, Christopher Tailor, James Harrison, and Robert Turner. -- Speaking of
some persons in the government, and certain disorders, he says, --

-- "I am sorry at heart for your animosities; cannot more friendly and private
courses be taken, to set matters to right, in an infant province, whose steps
are numbered and watched? For the love of God, me, and the poor country, be not
so governmentish, so noisy, and open, in your dissatisfactions; -- some folks
love hunting in government itself." -- "It is an abominable thing to have three
warrants for one purchase; it is oppression, that my soul loathes; I do hereby
require it, that P. L. be called to account, for requests and warrants, etc.
for town-lot, liberty-lot, and the rest of the purchase: Why not one warrant
for all, at least, for liberty lot, and the remainder? This is true and right
oppression; besides, several things and sums are set down, that are not in law,
nor in my regulations," etc.




The Council, having received the Assembly's charge against Moore, ordered
several of their members to acquaint him with the accusation, Proceedings
against N. Moore.
and to request his appearance before the Council, next day; but he not
appearing, at the time appointed, the articles against him were read a second
time, and notice given to the Assembly, that they were willing to hear their
proofs. The Speaker, John White, Abraham Man, Thomas Usher, John Blunston,
William Barry and Samuel Gray were appointed managers for the house, on the
occasion; who supporting the charge, the President and Council sent a second
notice to Moore, to appear at the Council Chamger, on the 19th. but he still
neglecting, after some time of delay, notice was again sent him by a Council
convened on the 2d. of the Fourth-month following, "That he desist and cease
from further acting, in any place of authority, or judicature, till the
articles of impeachment exhibited against him, by the Assembly he tried, or,
that satisfaction be made to the board. The Assembly, in a letter to the
Proprietary, signed by John White, their Speaker, express themselves in the
following manner, respecting this affair, viz. Most excellent Governor,
WE, the Freemen of the province of Pennsylvania and Territories, do, with
unfeigned love to your person and government, with all due respect, acquaint
you, that we have this last day of our sessions, passed all such bills, as we
judged meet to pass into laws: and impeached Nicholas Moore, a member of the
Assembly, of ten articles, containing diverse high crimes and misdemeanors;
and, in the presence of the President and Provincial Council, made very clear
proof of the said articles.

We have had the person of Patrick Robinson under restraint, for diverse
insolences and affronts unto the Assembly; -- but there was a right and good
understanding betwixt the President, Council and Assembly, and a happy and
friendly farewell.

Dear and honored Sir, the honor of God, the love of your person, and the
preservation of the peace and welfare of the government were, we hope, the only
center, to which all our actions did tend. And although the wisdom of the
Assembly thought fit to humble that aspiring and corrupt minister of state,
Nicholas Moore; yet, to you, dear Sir, and to the happy success of your
affairs, our hearts are open and our hands ready, at all times to subscribe
ourselves, in the name of ourselves and all the freemen we represent,

Your obedient and faithful freemen, JOHN WHITE, Speaker.
P. S. Honored Sir, we know your wisdom and goodness will make a candid
construction of all our actions, and that it shall be out of the power of
malicious tongues to separate betwixt our Governor and his freemen, who
extremely long for your presence, and speedy arrival of your person.







I find nothing on record what these articles, or crimes and misdemeanors
particularly were; which, undoubtedly, The particulars of this impeachment do
not appear, etc.
could not be without real foundation: but, from circumstances, it seems
reasonable to apprehend there might have been some animosities and
disagreement, or misunderstanding among some of the persons in authority, at
this time, by which things might have been aggravated: this appears, in part,
from Moore's obstinacy, in refusing to appear before the Council, and also from
some letters of the Proprietary, in which he seems not to have been well
pleased with part of these proceedings against him: In one of these letters,
dated Worminghurst, the 1st. of the Twelfth month, 1686, to Thomas Lloyd, he
says,

-- "Since my return from Germany and Holland, where I had blessed service for
the Lord, I have visited the north and north-west parts of this kingdom; as
Oxfordshire, Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Cheshire, Lancashire,
Westmoreland, Bishopric and Yorkshire; and the Lord was with me, in a sweet
and melting life, to my great joy and Friends' refreshment." --

-- "I rejoice that God has preserved your health so well, and that his
blessings are upon the earth; but grieved at the bottom of my heart for the
heats and disorders among the people," etc -- "This quarrel about the society,"
(meaning the free society of traders, of which N. Moore was President) "has
made your great guns heard hither: I blame nothing, nor the society here, to be
sure; but I could wish Dr. Moore and P. R. could have been softened, and that
J. Cl. Probably J. Claypoole
had been more composed;" -- "that may be a mighty political vice, that is not
a moral ^e." --

-- "Because thy commission may expire, in the opinions of some, as to
President of the Council, with thy membership, I have considered how to supply
that defect, and that of thy absence; and that is another of deputation than
before; which comes by the bearer, Edward Blackfan. I entreat thee to consider
of the true reason of our unhappiness, of that side, among our magistrates: Is
it not their Self-value, and slighting power in one another? Oh, this
preference is, in religious and civil societies, the bane of concord, that is
the means of true happiness. Men should be meek, humble and grave; that draws
reverence and love together: This wise and good men will do: Is any out of the
way? They should not so much look at his infirmity, as take care, they are not
also overtaken, eying how many good qualities the offender has to serve the
public; and not cast a whole apple away, for one side being defective. The Lord
God of peace and power, by his blessed grace, teach and lead his people, in his
own blameless path to the end."

In another, to the same, dated, Wormingburst, 6th. of Fourth-month, 1687, he
speaks thus, --

"Though I write in general, I was willing to salute thee in particular, hoping
that this will find thee and thine well, and at your ease, in poor
Pennsylvania, where nothing, on my part, in my power, shall be wanting to make
you so: I do beseech thee to travail in the spirit of meekness, and of the
precious, gentle wisdom of God, that is easily entreated, and works its way
through the hardest rocks, to quiet, and calm and determine; and not leaving
things to my coming too much: Next, remember this, that though the politic
ancients overlooked many ill things rather than, by the severity of punishment,
to discourage planting their new colonies, or any sort from settling among
them; yet, we, that have our eye to another home, whose due we have been taught
to look for, as the reason of all true prosperity; and that it has ever been
according to our faith, are to act, as in his sight, and discharge ourselves,
as righteous men, against all unrighteousness; wherefore, pray, let the law
have its course; -- as for Dr. Moore and P. Robinson, the persons esteemed the
most unquiet and cross to Friends, try what is possible to quiet them;
endeavor, by private visits and admonitions to sweeten them; much good may
come of it: -- The Lord God of endless power bless you, and furnish you, to his
praise."


For N. Moore, after this, was instituted and continued by the Proprietary, in
1686, and 1687, N. Moore lives and dies in the Proprietors favor after this.
one of his commissioners of government, a place of the highest honor and
trust, till his death, about two years after this time; in which office there
appears no objection from any party against his conduct.

But the necessity of an able and assiduous hand, to direct and manage the
affairs of the infant colony, still further appears, about this time, from some
of the Proprietor's letters to those in power, respecting some disagreement, or
discord, among certain of the magistrates, and persons in authority, Some small
disorders in the colony, etc.
abuses in some of the offices, and the prevention and suppression of vice and
immorality; in which he expresses his concern and displeasure at these things,
with a parental affection; giving suitable directions, and earnestly pressing
their effectual endeavors to cure such disorders. In a letter to J. Harrison
about this time, or soon after, the Proprietary expresses his grief at these
things; which, he says, "Disgraced the province;" and pressingly requests, that
a number of persons, whom he there names, should exert themselves, and
conjunctively so act, for the common good, as either by persuasion, or
authority, to put an end to the same; and prevent disputes and quarrels among
them; declaring, "That their conduct herein had struck back hundreds, and was
L10,000 out of his way, and L100,000 out of the country."


Appointment of the Judges, etc.
On the 14th. of September, James Harrison, James Claypoole, and Arthur Cook
were nominated, by the Council, to be Provincial Judges; -- but Harrison and
Cook refusing to serve, and Claypoole being prevented by sickness, the
Council, in order to answer the expectation of such persons as were concerned
in appeals, agreed to receive them, and to sit for the decision of differences,
themselves, at the time appointed for the court to sit; which was on the 24th.
After this, at their triennial election, according to charter, being, in part,
new chosen, they, by fresh commissions, appointed the several officers of
government.

In this year, 1685, the Quakers, in their yearly meeting, Means used to
instruct the Indians, etc.
at Burlington, in West Jersey, took additional measures to prevent all
persons, in their society, from selling strong liquors to the Indians. About
the same time, by particular appointment, they also had a religious meeting
with them, as they frequently had before; to inform and instruct them in the
principles of Christianity, and the practice of a true christian life.

The Indians generally heard patiently what was said to them on this subject,
and seemed affected with it, for a time; but, for the most part, it appeared to
make no very durable impression, on their minds, for the proper regulation of
their passions and appetites; which, at last, too generally seemed to prevail
over convictions of this nature, and their better knowledge.

Diverse preachers of this religious society, from abroad, often had meetings,
and serious discourse with them, for this purpose; as well as those who had
settled in the country, particularly, Samuel Jennings, Thomas Olive, William
Penn and others, from time to time, labored to inculcate into them a just
sense of the benefit of a christian life and conduct.

CHAPTER VIII.
William Penn's employment in Europe, for the promotion of religion and virtue.
-- His expense and endeavors to advance the interest and happiness of the
province, and to prevent discord in it. -- Extracts from his letters, on these
subjects, etc. -- More emigrants from Holland and Germany increase the
settlement of Germantown. -- Five commissioners of state, or of the government
of Pennsylvania, created. -- The Proprietor's instructions to them. -- His
letter to the same, etc. -- His beneficent employment in England for his
suffering friends, the Quakers, etc. -- Though he is misrepresented and abused,
etc. -- He appears to have accompanied the King through some counties in
England. -- His speech to the King, on delivering the Quakers' address. -- The
address itself, with the King's answer. -- Objections against the Quakers'
conduct answered. -- William Penn continues his endeavors in favor of
toleration; but labors under unjust imputations. -- William Popple's letter to
him, on the subject, with his answer.

1686.
IN the year 1686, William Penn published a further account of the province of
Pennsylvania, wrote several pieces, The Proprietor publishes a further account
of the province.
on religious subjects, chiefly in defense of toleration, in religion, (extant
in his works) and appears to have been in Germany and Holland, as well as much
engaged in various good services, among his friends, the Quakers, and in
promoting religion and virtue, in diverse parts, personally, in his native
country; at the same time continuing his care and endeavors, for the benefit,
happiness and prosperity of his province, though absent, by means of written
directions and advice, from time to time, for the prevention of disorders, and
the redressing of such things as appeared inconsistent with the real interest
of the colony.

But his great expense and generosity, His expenses for the province bring him
into difficul^^
in the original settlement of the province, as well as afterward, were so
very considerable, when compared with his private fortune, that, even before
this time, he began to feel the effects thereof to such a degree, that in his
letters to some of his friends there, he was obliged to complain of the
slowness, or deficiency, of returns from the place, where, and concerning
which, he had sowed so much, or expended so liberally, as he had done. The
following extracts, as well as the preceding, are taken from the Proprietary's
original letters, in his own hand writing, viz.

In answer to a remonstrance and address to him, respecting the Front and Bank
lots, in Philadelphia, dated 3d. Sixth-month, 1684, he says, -- "I have made
the most purchases, and been at the greatest charge of any Proprietary and
Governor, in America," etc.

In a letter, dated, Bristol, 5th. of Ninth-month, 1695, directed to A. Cook,
J. Simcock, S. Carpenter, J. Goodson, S. Richardson, R. Turner, Ph. Pemberton,
and D. Lloyd, Pennsylvania, he declares, --

-- "I must say, that what I have spent upon the province, as Governor and
Planter, is the foundation of my present encumbrance; as P. F. (Philip Ford)
knows, and asserted to the Lords of plantations lately, to be L4,000 more than
the whole, that I ever received for lands, besides what it has cost me here,"
etc.

In a letter to Thomas Lloyd, dated, Seventh-month, 1686, he says, and
complains, that, at that time, "His quit-rents were, at least, L500 per annum
value, and then due, though he could not get one penny." -- "God is my
witness," (says he, in the same letter) "I lie not; I am above six thousand
pounds out of pocket, more than ever I saw by the province, and throw in my
pains, care, and hazard of life, and leaving of my family and friends, to serve
them," etc.

In a letter to James Harrison, dated, London, 23d. Seventh-month, 1686,
speaking of his going to his province, he says, --

-- "Besides, that the country think not on my supply, and I resolve never to
act the Governor, and keep another family and capacity upon my private estate;
if my table, cellar, and stable may be provided for, with a barge and yatch, or
sloop, for the service of governor and government, I may try to get hence; for,
in the sight of God, I can say, I am five thousand pounds, and more, behind
hand, more than ever I received, or saw, for land, in that province," etc. --
"There is nothing my soul breathes more for, in this world, next my dear
family's life, than that I may see poor Pennsylvania again;" -- "but I cannot
force my way hence, and see nothing done, on that side, inviting," etc.




In, or about this year, 1686, arrived in the province, many Friends, Arrivals
from Holland and Germany.
or Quakers, and others, from Holland and Germany; who settled among their
friends, at German-town, near Philadelphia, and increased that settlement,
which was begun in 1683. Some of those, who now came, having suffered
considerably by fire, soon after their arrival, were assisted by the Friends,
in the city and county of Philadelphia.

The Proprietary found too much inconveniency to arise from his commission of
the power of government to so many persons as the Council consisted of, and, as
before hinted, not being well pleased with part of their conduct, or
management, The Proprietor alters the executive part of government.
declaring, "that the charter was forfeited, if he would take advantage at it;"
In another letter to the same, about this time, he complains, --

That the Provincial Council neglected, or slighted, his letters to them; that
he had religiously consecrated his pains, in a prudent manner, but it was not
valued, understood, or kept to; so that the charter was over and over again
forfeited, if he would take advantage at it; -- that they entirely neglected
the supply, which they had promised him; which, in consequence of his great
expense, on account of the province, was one cause, that kept him from
Pennsylvania; declaring, "That he would not spend his private estate, to
discharge a public station."


hence, in the latter part of the year 1686, by a fresh commission, he
contracted the number of his representatives, or of the executive part of the
government, to five persons only, Five Commissioners appointed.
viz. Thomas Lloyd, Nicholas Moore, James Claypoole, Robert Turner, and John
Eckley, constituting and styling them Commissioners of State, or, of the
government of Pennsylvania.

Both the cause of their institution, and the nature of their office, in part,
appear from the following instructions, viz.

William Penn, Proprietor and Governor,
To my trusty and well beloved friends, Thomas Lloyd, Nicholas Moore, James
Claypoole, Robert Turner and John Eckley, or any three of them, at Philadelphia:
TRUSTY and well-beloved, The Proprietary's instructions to them.
I heartily salute you; lest any should scruple the termination of President
Lloyd's commission, with his place in the Provincial Council, and to the end
that there may be a more constant residence of the honorary and governing part
of the government, for the keeping all things in good order I have sent a fresh
commission of deputation to you, making any three of you a quorum, to act in
the execution of laws, enacting, disannulling, or varying of laws, as if I
myself were there present, reserving to myself the confirmation of what is
done, and my peculiar royalties and advantages.

First, You are to oblige the Provincial Council to their charter attendance;
or to take such a Council, as you think convenient, to advise and assist you,
in the business of the public: for I will no more endure their most slothful
and dishonorable attendance, but dissolve the frame, without any more ado: let
them look to it, if further occasion be given.

Secondly, That you keep to the dignity of our station, in Council, and out;
but especially, to suffer no disorder in the Council, nor the Council and
Assembly, or either of them, to entrench upon the powers and privileges
remaining yet in me.

Thirdly, That you admit not any parleys, or open conferences, between the
Provincial Council and Assembly; but one, with your approbation, propose and
let the other consent or dissent, according to charter.

Fourthly, That you curiously inspect the past proceedings of both, The
Proprietary's instructions to the Commissioners.
and let me know, in what they have broken the bounds, or obligations of their
charter.

Fifthly, That you, this very next Assembly General, declare my abrogation of
all that has been done since my absence; and so, of all the laws, but the
fundamentals; and that you immediately dismiss the Assembly, and call it again;
and pass such of them afresh, with such alterations, as you and they shall see
meet; and this, to avoid a greater inconveniency, which I foresee, and formerly
communicated to Thomas Lloyd.

Sixthly, Inspect the qualifications of members in Council and Assembly; and
see they be according to charter; and especially of those, that have the
administration of justice; and whatever you do, let the point of the laws be
turned against impiety, and your severe brow upon all the troublesome and
vexatious, more especially, trifling, appeallers.

You shall shortly have a limitation from the King; though you have power, with
the Council and Assembly, to fix the matter and manner of appeals, as much as
to do any justice, or prevent any disorder, in the province, at all.

Seventhly, That till then, I have sent you a proclamation, to that effect,
according to the powers of ordinance making, and declared in my letters patent,
which you may expose, as you please.

Eighthly, Be most just, as in the sight of the all-seeing, all-searching God;
and before you let your spirits into an affair, retire to him (who is not far
away from every one of you; by whom kings reign, and princes decree justice)
that he may give you a good understanding, and government of your selves, in
the management thereof; which is that which truly crowns public actions, and
dignifies those, that perform them. The Proprietary's instructions to the
Commissioners.
You shall hear further from me by C. King; the ship is ready to sail, so shall
only admonish you in general, that, next to the preservation of virtue, have a
tender regard to peace, and my privileges, in which enact from time to time.
Love, forgive, help and serve one another; and let the people learn by your
example, as well as by your power, the happy life of concord: So commending you
to God's grace and keeping, I bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Worminghurst, in old England, the first of the Twelfth-month, 1686.

His manner of writing to these Commissioners further appears, by the following
extract from one of his letters to them, dated, the sixth of the Fourth-month,
1687.

William Penn, Proprietor and Governor,
To Thomas Lloyd, Robert Turner, Nicholas Moore, James Olaypoole and John
Eckley,
TRUSTY and well-beloved friends, I salute you all with sincere affection,
desiring your temporal and eternal prosperity.

I have constituted you, or any three of you, Governor, and so are properly the
Commissioners of the government; to act, as if I were present: And I hope is
will conduce to your honor, and the peace and happiness of the people, under
your care. I found my former deputation clogged with a long and slow tale of
persons, rarely got together, and then with unwillingness, and sometimes
reflections, even, upon me; for their pains of hearing one letter read; -- That
time may show them they were out, in their censure, having then contracted
their deputation into your hands. -- Be diligent, faithful, loving, and
communicate with one another, in things that concern the public; and I no ways
doubt, but your breaches will heal, and your example have that effect, that
nothing will be left for me to do, but thank and love you, and take pleasure in
your comely order and those under you.

I beseech you draw not several ways, have no cabals apart, nor reserves from
one another; treat, with a mutual simplicity, an entire confidence in one
another; and if, at any time, you mistake, or misapprehend, or dissent from one
another; let not that appear to the people; show your virtues but conceal your
infirmities; this will wake you awful and reverent with the people. Justice,
mercy, temperance of spirit, are high qualities, and necessary ones in
government; I beseech God to sit you for his work more and more; by whom all
Governors and people in authority, ought to be influenced, in their
administration of temporal things, committed to their care.

Three things occur to me eminently; -- First, that you be watchful that none
abuse the King, in reference to his dues, etc -- Secondly, That you get the
custom act revived, with the first; for I think that the equallest, and least
offensive way, to support the government; for something must be done, in that
affair, etc. Thirdly, That you retrieve the dignity of courts and sessions; and
remove all persons unqualified in morals or incapacity. Oh, that I could but
have that, by your union, gravity, constant weekly meetings once or twice, as
Second-days, and Fifth-days, in the morning or afternoon, to hear, advice, or
do what is fit for the public good; that you had recovered the reputation which
becomes that province to have; -- For, what with that, which is real, and that
malice in your neighbors of some governments invent, we have much ado to keep
our heads above water here.

I shall add no more, but my love to the people, in general; and that so soon
as my affairs will let me, I shall be with them: for no poor slave in Turkey,
longs more for his freedom. I commit you to God's protection, and bid you
heartily farewell.

Given at Worminghurst, this 6th. day of the Fourth-month, 1687.

In his instructions, dated, London, the 21st. of the Eighth-month, 1687, he
further says,

-- "And, first, I recommend to you the vigorous suppression of vice, and that
without respect of persons, or persuasions. Let not foolish pity rob justice of
its due, and the people of proper examples. I know what malice and prejudice
say; but they move me not. -- I know how to allow for new colonies, though
others do not; nevertheless double your diligence," etc.


During most of the time of William Penn's absence from his province, till the
reign of King William the Third, though not many public transactions, nor
proceedings of much importance and notoriety, appear to have passed in
Pennsylvania besides those which respect the labor and advantages of an
industrious people, Advantage of an industrious people, etc.
in the colonization of the country, and laying a foundation for future
greatness, by facilitating and multiplying the reasonable enjoyments and
blessings of life; yet its eminent founder was not the less active and
beneficial to mankind, in another department; and his suffering friends, the
Quakers, in Great Britain, experienced the effect of his attendance and
solicitations, at court, In a letter to James Harrison, his agent, at
Pennsbury, about this time, he gives the following hints of his employment then
in England, viz.

-- "I am engaged in the public business of the nation and Friends; and those
in authority would have me see the establishment of the liberty, that I was a
small instrument to begin in the land: The Lord has given me great entrance and
interest with the K --, though not so much as is said; and I confess I should
rejoice to see poor old England fixed, the penal laws repealed, that are now
suspended; and if it goes well with England, it cannot go ill with
Pennsylvania." -- "but this I will say, no temporal honor, or profit, can tempt
me to decline poor Pennsylvania, as unkindly used as I am; and no poor slave in
Turkey desires more earnestly, I believe, for deliverance, than I do to be with
you; wherefore be contented a while, and God in his time will bring us
together." -- etc.

Note. -- In the Summer of the year 1687, W. Penn, by some of his letters, to
his friends in Pennsylvania, seems to have been with the King, in a progress,
through diverse of the counties in England, viz. Berkshire. Glocestershire,
Worcestershire, Shropshire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Oxfordshire
and Hampshire: -- during which journey he had several religious meetings with
the people; and in some places, where the king appears to have been present,
particularly in Chester. M. S. letters.


in their favor: where his frequent access to the King brought him into
suspicion of being a disguised Jesuit, and under unjust censures and
imputations; W. Penn suspected of being a disguised Jesuit.
as if he had been an adviser, and contributed, to those arbitrary measures,
which that impolitic King (James the second) pursued: Whereas his generous plan
of liberty, so far as his power extended, and his otherwise well known
principles of government, were as contrary to those of the King, as could
possibly be, and his religion no less opposite.

Nevertheless he was not only infamously aspersed and abused, in print, on
these accounts, and vilified in print, etc.
by diverse illiberal and slanderous performances, published against him, and
some of them, even, in his own name, but also censured by some persons of good
understanding and character; who, in diverse respects were his friends, but not
thoroughly knowing him, fell into the like suspicions: An instance of this
appears in Dr. Tillotson, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury; but, by means
of a friendly epistolary correspondence between them, on the subject, in the
year 1686, as appears in William Penn's life prefixed to his printed works, Dr.
Tillotson was fully convinced of, and as freely acknowledged, his mistake.

But he continued still to distinguish himself in the cause of an impartial
toleration, in religion, W. Penn's beneficent conduct in England.
both in writing, and also by assiduous personal solicitations, at court, as a
strenuous and unwearied advocate for that undoubted right of mankind; of which
he, and his Friends, the Quakers, had, through the persecuting and bigoted
spirit of those times, been long unjustly deprived. Hence, Its consequences in
favor of religious liberty, etc.
in the fore part of this year, in consequence of the King's proclamation for a
general pardon, "about thirteen hundred of these people, most of whom had been
imprisoned diverse years, 1687.
for their religion, were set at liberty:" And in April, the next following
year, 1687, came forth the King's declaration for liberty of conscience,
suspending the execution of all penal laws, in matters ecclesiastical.

For this temporary relief from cruel suffering, by the intolerant and unjust
laws of those times, The Quakers justifiable in being grateful for this relief,
etc.
they who had endured most oppression and persecution, undoubtedly had the
greatest reason to be thankful: and whatever were the supposed views of the
government thereby, in too much favoring a Popish party, yet, for the Quakers
to refuse, or reject the restitution of that natural right of mankind, and most
undoubted privilege of English people, and all peaceable subjects, merely
because it might be made an ill use of by others, and was not done in due form,
would certainly have been the highest absurdity: and for those, who had
suffered more deeply than all others, From their cruel sufferings, etc.
not to acknowledge and commend the redress of such a crying and intolerable
grievance and affliction, as they had endured, in respect to themselves, so
long and so laboriously solicited, by them, of the preceding King and
Parliaments, in vain, would have showed the greatest ingratitude and
insensibility; more especially, as it was scarcely possible for them to be in a
much worse condition, even, under a Popish hierarchy itself, than they had, for
many years, endured, both under Cromwell, King Charles the Second, and their
Parliaments, to this time, without being able to obtain redress any other way:
Wherefore, at their next annual Assembly, held in London in the Third-month,
this year, the Quakers drew up an address of thanks to the King, deputing
William Penn and others, to present the same; his speech on the presenting it,
The Quakers thank the King.
with the address itself, and the King's answer, were, as follow, viz.

William Penn's speech to the King, upon his delivering the Quakers' address,
viz.
May it please the King,
IT was the saying of our blessed Lord to the captious Jews, in the case of
tribute, render to Caesar the things, that are Caesar's, and to God, W. Penn's
Speech to the King.
the things, that are God's. As this distinction ought to be observed by all
men, in the conduct of their lives, so the King has given us an illustrious
example, in his own person, that excites us to it: For while he was a subject,
he gave Caesar his tribute, and now he is Caesar, gives God his due, viz. the
sovereignty over consciences. It were a great shame, then, for any Englishman
(that professes Christianity) not to give God his due. By this grace he has
relieved his distressed subjects from their cruel sufferings, and raised to
himself a new and lasting empire, by adding their affections to their duty. And
we pray God to continue the King in this noble resolution; for he is now upon a
principle, that has good nature, Christianity, and the good of civil society on
its side, a security to him beyond the little arts of government.

I would not that any should think, that we come hither with design to fill the
Gazette with our thanks; but, as our sufferings would have moved stones to
compassion, so we should be harder, if we were not moved to gratitude.

Now, since the King's mercy and goodness have reached to us throughout the
kingdom of England and principality of Wales, our General Assembly, from all
those parts, met at London, about our church affairs, has appointed us to wait
upon the King, with our humble thanks, and me to deliver them; which I do, by
this address, with all the effection and respect of a dutiful subject.

The address to King James IId. over England, etc. The humble and grateful
acknowledgement of his peaceable subjects, called Quakers, in this kingdom.
From their usual Yearly Meeting, in London, the nineteenth day of the
Third-month, vulgarly called May, 1687.
The Quakers address to the King.
WE cannot but bless and praise the name of Almighty God, who has the hearts of
princes in his hand, that he has inclined the King to hear the cries of his
suffering subjects for conscience sake; and we rejoice, that, instead of
troubling him with complaints of our sufferings, he has given us so eminent an
occasion to present him with our thanks: And since it has pleased the King,
out of his great compassion, thus to commiserate our afflicted condition, which
has so particularly appeared, by his gracious proclamation and warrants, last
year, whereby twelve hundred prisoners were released from their severe
imprisonments, and many others, from spoil and ruin, in their estates and
properties; and his princely speech in Council, and Christian declaration for
liberty of conscience, in which he does not only express his aversion to all
force upon conscience, and grant all his dissenting subjects an ample liberty
to worship God in the way they are persuaded is most agreeable to his will, but
gives them his kingly word, the same shall continue, during his reign; we do
(as our friends of this city have already done) render the King our humble,
christian and thankful acknowledgments, not only in behalf of our selves, but
with respect to our Friends, throughout England and Wales; and pray God, with
all our hearts, to bless and preserve thee, O King, and those under thee, in so
good a work: and as we can assure the King it is well accepted in the several
counties, from whence we came, so we hope the good effects thereof, for the
peace, trade and prosperity of the kingdom, will produce such a concurrence
from the parliament, as may secure it to our posterity, in aftertimes; and
while we live, it shall be our endeavor (through God's grace) to demean
ourselves, as, in conscience to God, and duty to the King, we are obliged, his
peaceable, loving and faithful subjects.

The King's answer.
"Gentlemen,
"I thank you heartily for your address: The King's answer.
Some of you know (I am sure you do, Mr. Penn) that it was always my principle,
that conscience ought not to be forced: and that all men ought to have the
liberty of their consciences. And what I have promised, in my declaration, I
will continue to perform, so long as I live. And, I hope, before I die, to
settle it so, that after ages shall have no reason to alter it."

"Some (says the writer of William Penn's life) have objected against the
Quakers, Some objections against the Quakers answered.
and other dissenters, for addressing King James, upon the aforesaid
declaration of indulgence, as though they had thereby countenanced the King's
dispensing with the laws in general; let such observe, their imputation, as to
William Penn and his Friends, the Quakers, is sufficiently guarded against, in
that part of their address, where they say, we hope the good effects thereof,
for the peace, trade and prosperity of the kingdom will produce such a
concurrence from the Parliament, as may secure it to our posterity. It Is plain,
therefore, they gratefully accepted of the suspension of the penal laws, by the
King's prerogative (as who, in their case, would not?) a thing in itself just
and reasonable, in their hopes of having the same afterward confirmed by the
legislative authority; there being, at that time, much talk of an approaching
Parliament: and that their expectation centered not in the King's dispensing
power, W. Penn continues his endeavors in favor of toleration.
is evident, by William Penn's continuing his endeavors to show the necessity
of abolishing the penal laws; for soon after this he wrote a large tract,
called, Good advice to the church of England, Roman Catholic, and Protestant
Dissenters; in which he shows the disannulling of those laws to be their
general interest; and soon after he published another book, entitled, The great
and popular objection against the repeal of the penal laws, briefly stated and
considered."

He still continues under unjust imputations, etc.
But he still continuing to labor under many jealousies and reflections, as a
countenancer of the court proceedings, in general; the following letters
between him and one of his particular friends, Sir William Popple, then
secretary to the plantation office, in 1688, 1688.
may serve further to elucidate that subject, viz.

To the Honorable William Penn, Esquire, Proprietor and Governor of
Pennsylvania.
Honored Sir,
W. Popple to W. Penn.
THOUGH the friendship, with which you are pleased to honor me, does afford me
sufficient opportunities of discoursing with you, upon any subject, yet I chose
rather, at this time, to offer unto you, in writing, some reflections, which
have occurred to my thoughts, in a matter of no common importance. The
importance of it does primarily and directly respect yourself, and your own
private concernments; but it also consequentially and effectually regards the
King, his government, and, even, the peace and settlement of this whole nation.
I entreat you, therefore, 1688.
to bear with me, if I endeavor, in this manner, to give somewhat more weight
unto my words, W. Popple to W. Penn.
than would be in a transient discourse, and leave them with you, as a subject,
that requires your retired consideration.

You are not ignorant, that the part you have been supposed to have had, of
late years, in public affairs, though without either the title, or honor, or
profit, of any public office, and that especially your avowed endeavors to
introduce amongst us a general and inviolable liberty of conscience, in matters
of mere religion, have occasioned the mistakes of some men, provoked the malice
of others, and, in the end, have raised against you a multitude of enemies; who
have unworthily defamed you with such imputations, as, I am sure, you abhor.
This I know you have been sufficiently informed of, though I doubt you have not
made sufficient reflection upon it: The consciousness of your own innocence
seems to me to have given you too great a contempt of such unjust and
ill-grounded slanders. For however glorious it is, and reasonable, for a truly
virtuous mind, whose inward peace is founded upon that rock of innocence, to
despise the empty noise of popular reproach, yet, even, that sublimity of
spirit may sometimes swell to a reprovable excess. To be steady and immovable,
in the prosecution of wise and honest resolutions, by all honest and prudent
means, is, indeed, a duty, that admits of no exception: But, nevertheless, it
ought not to hinder that, at the same time, there be also due care taken of
preserving a fair reputation. "A good name, says the wise man, is better than
precious ointment." It is a perfume, that recommends the person, whom it
accompanies, that procures him every where an easy acceptance; and that
facilitates the success of all his enterprises: And for that reason, though
there were no other, I entreat you, observe, that the care of a man's
reputation is an essential part of that very same duty, W. Popple to W. Penn.
that engages him in the pursuit of any worthy design.

But I must not entertain you with a declamation upon this general theme: my
business is to represent to you, more particularly, those very imputations,
which are cast upon yourself, together with some of their evident consequences;
that, if possible, I may thereby move you to labor after a remedy. The source
of all arises from the ordinary access, you have unto the King, the credit you
are supposed to have with him, and the deep jealousy, that some people have
conceived of his intentions, in reference to religion. Their jealousy is, that
his aim has been to settle Popery in this nation, not only in a fair and secure
liberty, but, even, in a predominating superiority over all other professions:
And from thence the inference follows, that whosoever has any part in the
councils of this reign, must needs be popishly affected: But that, to have so
great a part in them, as you are said to have had, can happen to none, but an
absolute Papist. That is the direct charge; but that is not enough; your part
is too considerable for a Papist of an ordinary form; and, therefore, you must
be a Jesuit: Nay, to confirm that suggestion, it must be accompanied with all
the circumstances, that may best give it an air of probability; as, that you
have been bred at St. Omer's, in the Jesuit's college; that you have taken
orders at Rome, and there obtained a dispensation to marry; and that you have
since then frequently officiated, as a Priest, in the celebration of the mass,
at White Hall, St. James's, and other places. And this being admitted, nothing
can be too black to be cast upon you. Whatsoever is thought amiss, either in
church or state, though never so contrary to your advice, is boldly attributed
to it; and, if other proofs fail, the Scripture itself must be brought in to
confirm, "That whosoever offends, in one point, W. Popple to W. Penn.
(in a point especially so essential as that of our too much affected
uniformity) is guilty of the breach of all our laws." Thus the charge of Popery
draws after it a tail like the et caetera oath, and by endless innuendos
prejudicates you, as guilty of whatsoever malice can invent, or folly believe:
But that charge, therefore, being removed, the inferences, that are drawn from
it, will vanish, and your reputation will easily return to its former
brightness.

Now, that I might the more effectually persuade you to apply some remedy to
this disease, I beseech you, Sir, suffer me to lay before you some of its
pernicious consequences. It is not a trifling matter, for a person, raised as
you are, above the common level, to lie under the prejudice of so general a
mistake, in so important a matter. The general, and the long prevalency of any
opinion gives it a strength, especially among the vulgar, that is not easily
shaken. And, as it happens that you have also enemies of an higher rank, who
will be ready to improve such popular mistakes, by all arts of malicious
artifices, it must be taken for granted that those errors will be thereby still
more confirmed, and the inconveniences, that may arise from thence, no less
increased. This, Sir, I assure you, is a melancholy prospect to your friends;
for we know you have such enemies. The design of so universal a liberty of
conscience, as your principles have led you to promote, has offended many of
those, whose interest is to cross it. I need not tell you how many, and how
powerful they are; nor can I tell you either how far, or by what ways and means
they may endeavor to execute their revenge. But this, however, I must needs
tell you, that, in your present circumstances, there is sufficient ground for
so much jealousy, at least, as ought to excite you to use the precaution of
some public vindication. W. Popple to W. Penn.
This the tenderness of friendship prompts your friends to desire of you; and
this the just sense of your honor, which true religion does not extinguish,
requires you to execute.

Pardon, I entreat you, Sir, the earnestness of these expressions; nay, suffer
me, without offense, to expostulate with you yet a little farther. I am fearful
lest these personal considerations should not have their due weight with you,
and therefore, I cannot omit to reflect also upon some more general
consequences of your particular reproach. I have said it already, that the
King, his honor, his government, and, even, the peace and settlement of this
whole nation, either are, or have been, concerned in this matter: Your
reputation, as you are said to have meddled in public affairs, have been of
public concernment. The promoting a general liberty of conscience having been
your particular province; the aspersion of Popery and Jesuitism, that has been
cast upon you, has reflected upon his Majesty, for having made use, in that
affair, of so disguised a personage as you are supposed to have been. It has
weakened the force of all your endeavors, obstructed their effect, and
contributed greatly to disappoint this poor nation of that inestimable
happiness, and secure establishment, which, I am persuaded, you designed, and
which all good and wise men agree, that a just and inviolable liberty of
conscience would infallibly produce. I heartily wish this consideration had
been sooner laid to heart, and that some demonstrative evidence of your
sincerity, in the profession you make, had accompanied all your endeavors for
liberty.

But, what do I say, or what do I wish for? I confess that I am now struck with
astonishment at that abundant evidence, which I know you have constantly given,
of the opposition of your principles to those of the Romish church, and at the
little regard, there has been had to it. W. Popple to W. Penn.
If an open profession of the directest opposition against Popery, that has
ever appeared in the world, since Popery was first distinguished from common
Christianity, would serve the turn, this cannot be denied to all those of that
society, with which you are joined in the duties of religious worship. If to
have maintained the principles of that society, by frequent and fervent
discourses, by many elaborate writings, by suffering ignominy, imprisonment,
and other manyfold disadvantages, in defense thereof, can be admitted as any
proof of your sincere adherence thereunto; this, it is evident to the world,
you have done already: Nay, farther, if to have enquired as far as was possible
for you, into the particular stories, that have been framed against you, and to
have sought all means of rectifying the mistakes, upon which they were
grounded, could, in any measure avail to the settling a true character of you,
in men's judgments; this also I know you have done. For I have seen, under the
hand of a reverend Dean Tillotson.
of our English church, a full acknowledgment of satisfaction, received from
you, in a suspicion he had entertained, upon one of those stories, and to which
his report had procured too great credit. And though I know you are averse to
the publishing of his letter, without his express leave, and, perhaps, may not
now think fit to ask it; yet I am so thoroughly assured of his sincerity and
candor, that I cannot doubt, but he has already vindicated you, in that
matter, and will, (according to his promise) be still ready to do it, upon all
occasions. Nay, I have seen also your justification from another calumny of
common fame, about your having kidnapped one, who had been formerly a Monk, out
of your American province, to deliver him here into the hands of his enemies; I
say I have seen your justification from that story, under that person's own
hand: and his return to Pennsylvania, where he now resides, W. Popple to W.
Penn.
may be an irrefragable confutation of it, to any that will take the pains to
enquire thereinto.

Really, it afflicts me very much, to consider that all this does not suffice.
If I had not that particular respect for you, which I sincerely profess, yet I
could not but be much affected, that any man, who had deservedly acquired so
fair a reputation, as you have formerly had, whose integrity and veracity had
always been reputed spotless, and whose charity had been continually exercised
in serving others, at the dear expense of his time, his strength and his
estate, without any other recompense than what results from the consciousness
of doing good; I say, I could not but be much affected, to see any such person
fall innocently and undeservedly under such unjust reproaches, as you have
done. It is an hard case; and I think, no man, that has any bowels of humanity,
can reflect upon it, without great relentings.

Since, therefore, it is so, and that something remains yet to be done,
something more express, and especially more public, than has yet been done, for
your vindication, I beg of you, dear Sir, by all the tender efficacy, that
friendship, either mine, or that of your friends and relations together can
have upon you, by the due regard, which humanity, and, even, Christianity,
obliges you to have to your reputation; by the duty, you owe unto the King, by
your love to the land of your nativity; and by the cause of universal religion
and eternal truth, let not the scandal of insincerity, that I have hinted at,
lie any longer upon you; but let the sense of all these obligations persuade
you to gratify your friends and relations, and to serve your King, your country
and your religion, by such a public vindication of your honor, as your own
prudence, upon these suggestions, will now show you to be most necessary, W.
Popple to W. Penn.
and most expedient. I am, with unfeigned, and most respectful affection,

Honored Sir, Your most humble, and most obedient servant.
London, October the 20th. 1688.

The following is William Penn's answer to the preceding letter, viz.

Worthy Friend,
IT is now above twenty years, I thank God, W. Penn's answer to W. Popple.
that I have not been very solicitous what the world thought of me. For since I
have had the knowledge of religion, from a principle in myself, the first and
main point with me has been, to approve myself in the sight of God, through
patience and well-doing: So that the world has not had weight enough with me,
to suffer its good opinion to raise me, or its ill opinion to deject me. And,
if that had been the only motive, or consideration, and not the desire of a
good friend, in the name of many others, I had been as silent to thy letter, as
I use to be to the idle and malicious shams of the times: But, as the laws of
friendship are sacred, with those that value that relation, so I confess this
to be a principal one with me, not to deny a friend the satisfaction he
desires, when it may be done without offense to a good conscience.

The business chiefly insisted upon is my Popery, and endeavors to promote it.
I do say, then, and that with all sincerity, that I am not only no Jesuit, but
no Papist. And, which is more, I never had any temptation upon me to be it,
either from doubts, in my own mind, about the way I profess, or from the
discourses, or writings of any of that religion. And, in the presence of
Almighty God, W. Penn's answer to W. Popple.
I do declare, that the King did never once, directly or indirectly attack me,
or tempt me, upon that subject, the many years, that I have had the advantage
of a free access to him; so unjust, as well as sordidly false, are all those
stories of the town.

The only reason, that I can apprehend, they have to repute me a Roman
Catholic, is my frequent going to White Hall, a place no more forbid to me,
than to the rest of the world, who yet, it seems, find much fairer quarter. I
have almost continually had one business or other there for our Friends, whom I
ever served with a steady solicitation, through all times, since I was of their
communion. I had also a great many personal good offices to do, upon a
principle of charity, for people of all persuasions; thinking it a duty to
improve the little interest I had, for the good of those, that needed it,
especially the poor. I might add something of my own affairs too; though I must
own (if I may without vanity) that they have ever had the least share of my
thoughts, or pains, or else they would not have still depended as they yet do.

But because some people are so unjust, as to render instances for my Popery
(or, rather hypocrisy, for so it would be in me) it is fit I contradict them as
particularly as they accuse me. I say, then, solemnly, that I am so far from
having been bred at St. Omer's, and having received orders at Rome, that I
never was at either place, nor do I know any body there; nor had I ever a
correspondency with any body, in those places; which is another story invented
against me. And, as for my officiating in the King's chapel, or any other, it
is so ridiculous, as well as untrue, that besides that no body can do it, but a
Priest, and that I have been married to a woman of some condition, above
sixteen years, which no Priest can be, W. Penn's answer to W. Popple.
by any dispensation whatever; I have not so much as looked into any chapel of
the Roman religion, and consequently not the King's, though common curiosity
warrants it daily to people of all persuasions.

And, once for all, I do say, that I am a Protestant dissenter, and to that
degree such, that I challenge the most celebrated Protestant of the English
church, or any other, on that head, be he Layman, or Clergyman, in public, or
in private. For I would have such people know, it is not impossible for a true
Protestant dissenter to be dutiful, thankful and serviceable to the King,
though he be of the Roman catholic communion. We hold not our property, or
protection, from him, by our persuasion; and, therefore, his persuasion should
not be the measure of our allegiance. I am sorry to see so many, that seem fond
of the reformed religion, by their disaffection to him, recommend it so ill.
Whatever practices of Roman catholics we might reasonably object against (and
no doubt but such there are) yet he has disclaimed and reprehended those ill
things, by his declared opinion against persecution, by the ease, in which he
actually indulges all dissenters; and by the confirmation, he offers in
Parliament, for the security of the Protestant religion, and liberty of
conscience. And, in his honor, as well as in my own defense, I am obliged, in
conscience, to say, that he has ever declared to me, it was his opinion; and on
all occasions, when Duke, he never refused me the repeated proofs of it, as
often as I had any poor sufferers for conscience sake to solicit his help for.

But some may be apt to say, "Why not any body else as well as I? Why must I
have the preferable access to other dissenters, if not a Papist?" I answer, I
know not that it is so. But this I know, that I have made it my province and
business; I have followed and pressed it; I took it for my calling and station,
W. Penn's answer to W. Popple.
and have kept it above these sixteen years; and, which is more (if I may say
it without vanity or reproach) wholly at my own charges too. To this let me add
the relation, that my father had to this King's service; his particular favor,
in getting me released out of the Tower of London, in 1669; my father's humble
request to him, upon his death bed, to protect me from the inconveniences and
troubles, my persuasion might expose me to, and his friendly promise to do it,
and exact performance of it, from the moment, I addressed myself to him: -- I
say, when all this is considered, any body, that has the least pre^en^e to good
nature, gratitude, or generosity, must needs know how to interpret my access to
the King.

Perhaps, some will be ready to say, "This is not all, nor is this yet a fault,
but, that I have been an adviser in other matters, disgustful to the kingdom,
and which tend to the overthrow of the Protestant religion, and the liberties
of the people." -- A likely thing, indeed, that a Protestant dissenter, who,
from fifteen years old, has been, at times, a sufferer, in his father's family,
in the university, and by the government, for being so, should design the
destruction of the Protestant religion! This is just as probable, as it is
true, that I died a Jesuit six years ago, in America. See page 246.
Will men still suffer such stuff to pass upon them? Is any thing more foolish,
as well as false, than that, because I am often at White Hall, therefore I must
be the author of all, that is done there, which does not please abroad? But,
supposing some such things to have been done, pray tell me, if I am bound to
oppose any thing, that I am not called to do? I never was a member of council,
cabinet, or committee, where the affairs of the kingdom are transacted. I have
had no office, or trust, and consequently nothing can be said to be done by me;
nor, for that reason, W. Penn's answer to W. Popple.
could I lie under any test, or obligation to discover my opinion of public
acts of state; and therefore neither can any such acts, nor my silence about
them, in justice, be made my crime. Volunteers are blanks and ciphers, in all
governments. And unless calling at White Hall once a day, upon many occasions,
or my not being turned out of nothing (for that no office is) be the evidence
of my compliance in disagreeable things, I know not what else can, with any
truth, be alleged against me. However, one thing I know, that I have every
where most ^e^gious^y observed, and endeavored, in conversation, with persons
of all ranks and opinions, to allay heats, and moderate extremes, even, in the
politics. It is below me to be more particular; but, I am sure, it has been my
endeavor, that, if we could not all meet upon a religious bottom, at least, we
might upon a civil one, the good of England; which is the common interest of
King and people: That he might be great by justice, and we free by obedience,
distinguishing rightly, on the one hand, between duty and slavery; and on the
other, between liberty and licentiousness.

But, alas, I am not without my apprehensions of the cause of this behavior
toward me, and in this, I perceive, we agree; I mean my constant zeal for an
impartial liberty of conscience. But, if that be it, the cause is too good to
be in pain about. I ever understood that to be the natural right of all men;
and that he that had a religion without it, his religion was none of his own.
For what is not the religion of a man's choice, is the religion of him that
imposes it: So that liberty of conscience is the first step to have a religion.
This is no new opinion with me. I have writ many apologies, within the last
twenty years, to defend it, and that impartially. Yet I have as constantly
declared, that bounds ought to be set to this freedom, W. Penn's answer to W.
Popple.
and that morality was the best; and that as often as that was violated, under
a presence of conscience, it was fit the civil power should take place. Nor did
I ever once think of promoting any sort of liberty of conscience, for any body
which did not preserve the common protestancy of the kingdom, and the ancient
rights of the government. For, to say truth, the one cannot be maintained
without the other.

Upon the whole matter, I must say, I love England; I ever did so; and that I
am not in her debt* I never valued time, money, or kindred, to serve her and do
her good. No party could ever biass me to her prejudice, nor any personal
interest oblige me in her wrong. For I always abhorred discounting private
favors at the public cost.

Would I have made my market of the fears and jealousies of the people, when
this King came to the crown, I had put twenty thousand pounds into my pocket,
and an hundred thousand into my province; for mighty numbers of people were
then upon the wing: But I waved it all; hoped for better times; expected the
effects of the King's word, for liberty of conscience, and happiness by it: And
till I saw my friends, with the kingdom, delivered from the legal bondage,
which penal laws, for religion, had subjected them to, I could, with no
satisfaction, think of leaving England; though much to my prejudice beyond sea;
and at my great expense here; having, in all this time never had either office
or pension, and always refusing the rewards, or gratuities, of those, I have
been able to oblige.

If, therefore, an universal charity, if the asserting an impartial liberty of
conscience, if doing to others as one would be done by, and an open avowing,
and steady practicing of these things, in all times, to all parties, will
justly lay a man under the reflection of being a Jesuit, or a Papist, W. Penn's
answer to W. Popple.
of any rank, I must not only submit to the character, but embrace it too; and
I care not who knows that I can wear it with more pleasure, than it is possible
for them, with any justice, to give it me. For these are corner-stones and
principles with me; and I am scandalized at all buildings, that have them not
for their foundations. For religion itself is an empty name without them, a
whited wall, a painted sepulcher, no life or virtue to the soul; no good, or
example, to one's neighbor. Let us not flatter ourselves, "We can never be the
better for our religion, if our neighbor be the worse for it." Our fault is,
we are apt to be mighty hot upon speculative errors, and break all bounds, in
our resentments; but we let practical ones pass without remark, if not without
repentance: As if a mistake about an obscure proposition of faith, were a
greater evil, than the breach of an undoubted precept. Such a religion the
devils themselves are not without; for they have both faith and knowledge; but
their faith does not work by love, nor their knowledge by obedience. And, if
this be their judgment, can it be our blessing? Let us not think religion a
litigious thing; nor that Christ came only to make us good disputants; but,
that he came also to make us good livers. Sincerity goes farther than capacity.
It is charity, that deservedly excels, in the Christian religion; and happy
would it be, if, where unity ends, charity did begin, instead of envy and
railing, that almost ever follow. It appears to me to be the way, that God has
found out and appointed, to moderate our differences, and make them, at least,
harmless to society; and, therefore, I confess, I dare not aggravate them to
wrath and blood. Our disagreement lies in our apprehension, or belief of
things; and if the common enemy of mankind had not the governing of our
affections and passions, W. Penn's answer to W. Popple.
that disagreement would not prove such a canker, as it is, to love and peace,
in civil societies.

He that suffers his difference with his neighbor, about the other world, to
carry him beyond the line of moderation, in this, is the worse for his opinion,
even, though it be true. It is too little considered by Christians, that men
may hold the truth in unrighteousness; that they may be orthodox, and not know
what spirit they are of: So were the Apostles of our Lord; they believed in
him, yet let a false zeal do violence to their judgment, and their
unwarrantable heat contradict the great end of their Savior's coming, love.

Men may be angry for God's sake, and kill people too. Christ said it, and too
many have practiced it. But what sort of Christians must they be, I pray, that
can hate in his name, who bids us love; and kill for his sake, that forbids
killing, and commands love, even, to enemies.

Let not men, or parties, think to shift it off from themselves. It is not this
principle, or that form, to which so great a defection is owing, but a
degeneracy of mind from God. Christianity is not at heart. No fear of God in
the inward parts: No awe of his divine omnipresence. Self prevails, and breaks
out, more or less, through all forms, but too plainly; (pride, wrath, lust,
avarice) so that though people say to God, Thy will be done; which shows them
to be true heathens, under a mask of Christianity, that believe without works,
and repent without forsaking; busy for forms, and the temporal benefits of
them, while true religion, which is, To visit the fatherless and the widow, and
to keep ourselves unspotted from the world, goes barefoot, and, like Lazarus,
is despised. Yet this was the definition the Holy Ghost gave of religion,
before Synods and Councils had the meddling with it, and modelling of it. In
those days, W. Penn's answer to W. Popple.
bowels were a good part of religion, and that to the fatherless and widow, at
large. We can hardly now extend them to those of our own way. It was said by
him, that could not say amiss, Because iniquity abounds, the love of many
waxes cold. Whatsoever divides man's heart from God, separates it from his
neighbor; and he, that loves self more than God, can never love his neighbor
as himself. For, as the Apostle said, "If we do not love him, whom we have
seen, how can we love God, whom we have not seen?"

O, that we could see some men as eager to turn people to God, as they are to
blow them up, and set them one against another. But, indeed, those only can
have that pure and pious zeal, who are themselves turned to God, and have
tasted the sweetness of that conversion, which is to power, not form; to
godliness, not gain. Such as those do bend their thoughts and pains to appease,
not increase, heats and animosities; to exhort people to look at home, sweep
their own houses, and weed their own gardens. And, in no age, or time, was
there more need to set men at work, in their own hearts, than this we live in,
when so busy, wandering, licentious a spirit prevails. For whatever some men
may think, "The disease of this kingdom is sin; impiety against God, and want
of charity to men." And while this guilt is at our door, judgment cannot be far
off.

Now, this being the disease, I will briefly offer two things, for the cure of
it.

The first is David's clean heart, and right spirit, which he asked and had of
God: without this we must be a chaos still. For the distemper is within; and
our Lord said, All evil comes from thence. Set the inward man right, and the
outward man cannot be wrong: That is the helm, that governs the human vessel:
And this nothing can do, W. Penn's answer to W. People.
but an inward principle, the light and grace, that came by Christ; which the
scripture tells us, enlightens every one, and has appeared to all men." It is
preposterous to think, that He, who made the world, should show least care of
the best part of it, our souls. No, he, that gave us an outward luminary, for
our bodies, has given us an inward one, for our minds, to act by. We have it;
and it is our condemnation, that we do not love it, and bring our deeds to it.
It is by this we see our sins, are made sensible of them, sorry for them, and
finally forsake them. And he, that thinks to go to Heaven a nearer way, will, I
fear, belate his soul, and be irreparably mistaken. There are but goats and
sheep, at last, whatever shapes we wear here. Let us not, therefore, dear
friend, deceive ourselves. Our souls are at stake: "God will not be mocked;
what we sow we must expect to reap. There is no repentance in the grave;" which
shows, that, if none there, then no where else. To sum up this divinity of
mine; it is the light of Jesus, in our souls, that gives us a true sight of
ourselves, and that sight that leads us to repentance; which repentance begets
humility, and humility, that true charity, that covers a multitude of faults;
which I call God's expedient against man's infirmity.

The second remedy to our present distemper, is this; since all, of all
parties, profess to believe in God, Christ, the Spirit, and Scripture; that the
soul is immortal, that there are eternal rewards and punishments; and that the
virtuous shall receive the one, and the wicked suffer the other; I say, since
this is the common faith of Christendom, let us all resolve, in the strength of
God, to live up to what we agree in, before we fall out so miserably, about the
rest, in which we differ. I am persuaded the change and comfort, which that
pious course would bring us to, W. Penn's answer to W. Popple.
would go very far to dispose our natures to compound easily for all the rest;
and we might hope yet to see happy days, in poor England; for there I would
have so good a work begun. And how it is possible for the eminent men of every
religious persuasion (especially the present ministers of the parishes of
England) to think of giving an account to God, at the last day, without using
the utmost of their endeavors to moderate the members of their respective
communions toward those, that differ from them, is a mystery to me! But this I
know, and must lay it at their doors, I charge also my own soul with it, "God
requires moderation and humility from us;" for he is at hand, who will not
spare to judge our impatience, if we have no patience for one another. The
eternal God rebuke, I beseech him, the wrath of man, and humble all under the
sense of the evil of this day; and yet, unworthy as we are, give us peace, for
his holy Name's sake!

It is now time to end this letter; and I will do it without saying any more
than this: Thou see my defense against popular calumny; thou see what my
thoughts are, of our condition, and the way to better it; and thou see my
hearty and humble prayer to Almighty God, to incline us to be wise, if it were
but for our own sakes. I shall only add, that I am extremely sensible of the
kindness and justice, intended me by my friends, on this occasion, and that I
am, for that, and many more reasons,

Thy obliged and affectionate Friend, WILLIAM PENN.
Teddington, October the 24th. 1688.

CHAPTER IX.
The Proprietary's presence much needed in the province. -- His letter to the
Commissioners. -- Thomas Lloyd. -- False alarm of an Indian insurrection. --
Names of the Members of Assembly, in 1687. -- Caleb Pusey. -- Captain John
Blackwell appointed Deputy Governor. -- The Proprietary's instructions to him.
-- He meets the Assembly, disagrees with the Council, and returns to England.
-- Names of some Members of Council, on whom the administration devolved; --
with the cause and design of Blackwell's appointment. -- Why William Penn may
justly be called the Father of his country. -- Two of his epistles to his
Friends, the settlers there; with one to the Council. -- Institution of the
first public Grammar School in Pennsylvania, with its design, etc. -- George
Keith, etc.

1688.
WHILE William Penn was thus variously and importantly employed in England, his
province, as before observed, W. Penn wanted in his province
needed his presence; and Thomas Lloyd, who ever since the Proprietary's
departure, had chiefly presided in the public affairs, and sustained the weight
and care of them, under the different appointments, excepting two short
intermissions, wherein Thomas Holme and William Clark supplied his absence, T.
Lloyd requests to be released from public affairs.
wanted to be discharged from the burden; and, before this time had solicited
to be released, by the appointment of another person in his room: But a
suitable person for such an appointment was not easy to be found; and the
Proprietary appears to have been sensible of it, by his manner of writing, at
different times, to his friends in the province, On this and some other things
the Proprietor writ to the Commissioners in the following manner, dated the
27th. of the Tenth-month, 1687, viz.

William Penn, Proprietor and Governor,
To my truly and well-beloved friends, Thomas Lloyd, Robert Turner, John Eckle,
John Simcock and Arthur Cook, commissioners of state, for the province of
Pennsylvania, or any three of them: --
I salute you all with unfeigned love, and, in Christ Jesus, wish you health
and happiness. --

My last is by the same hand, this being sent to the Downs after him, upon the
receipt of Thomas Lloyd's and William Markham's letter: But I am heartily sorry
that I had no letter from the government: indeed I have hardly had one at all:
and for private letters though from public persons, I regard them but little; I
mean as to taking my public measures by: for I find such contradictions, as
well as diversity, that I believe, I may say, I am one of the unhappiest
Proprietaries, with one of the best people. If this had not been complained of
in mine by Edward Blacksan, I should have been less moved at this visible
incomplacency and neglect. -- Had the government signed, I mean those, who are
the most eminent in authority, by consent of the rest, it had given me some
case and satisfaction; but, as it is, it is controversy rather than government,
which stands and lives and prospers in unity, at least of the governing part,
whatever be their affections; for men may agree in duty, that dislike one
another's natural tempers. -- I shall henceforth, therefore, expect letters
from the government, recounting the affairs of it, that they may be
authoritative to me; and as many private ones as you please besides; for that I
also, rejoice in, and any particular advice, that may inform me, as to the
public, or remedy what may be amiss, or meliorate what is, in itself, well,
will also be very acceptable to me.

Now I have said this, I cannot but condole the loss of some standards, in the
province, honest men, and of good understandings, in their kind. The Lord avert
his judgments, and constrain all, by his visitations, to amend, be it in
conversation, or be it in peace, concord and charity; they that live near to
God, will live far from themselves; and from the sense they have of his
nearness and majesty, have a low opinion of themselves; and out of that low and
humble frame of spirit it is, that true charity grows; the most excellent way;
-- Ah! what shall I say, there can be no union, no comfortable society without
it: Oh, that the people of my province, and parts annexed; felt this gracious
quality abounding in them, my work would be done, and their praise and my joy
unspeakably abound to us; wherefore, in the name and fear of God, let all old
sores be forgotten, as well as forgiven: shut out the remembrance of them, and
preach this doctrine to the people, in my name, yea, in the king's name, and
his that is greater above all, viz. God Almighty's name.

I am sorry that Thomas Lloyd, my esteemed friend, covets a Quietus, that is
young, active and ingenious; for from such it is, that I expect help; and such
will not low, I hope, in vain; but since it is his desire, I do hereby signify
his dismiss from the trouble he has borne, (for some time of rest and ease, at
least) and do nominate, to be commissionated in my name, under the great seal,
till further order, Samuel Carpenter, who, I hope will accept, and
industriously serve that station, else Thomas Ellis; who has an office, that
requires his attendance, having one in my eye, that may see you shortly, as a
man richly qualified for that station: Robert Turner, of course has the Chair,
for the first month after the receipt of this, and the rest alternately,
monthly, if you find that convenient, as, I believe, it will be most easy, e^se
let the senior commissioner have it always.

I have only to recommend to you, the due execution of the diverse good laws,
among you, impartially and diligently, not neglecting the order, from hence
sent, especially for peace and concord. -- Government is not to make, but to do
and dispatch business; in which few words, and a quiet, but a brisk execution
does best; wherefore consider well what is just and fit, the one in law, the
other in prudence (where you have room to use it) pursue in all cases; and no
matter what any say, or object.

I writ to you about my Quit-rents: I am forced to pay bills here, to support
my family there, while I have 4 or 500 pounds per annum in Quit-rents there;
you may remember the votes of Council, to pay my charges in this expedition: I
could draw a large bill upon the provincial council, in that respect; I am sure
I need it, but have forebore; though it is none of the endearingest
considerations, that I have not had the present of a skin, or a pound of
tobacco since I came over: though they are like to have the most advantage by
it, and promised me so much! --

Pray, prevent people's withdrawing from us, what you can; they cannot mend
themselves; and they that go will find it so, in a while; for I believe, God
has blessed that poor place; and the reason of my stay here, and the service I
am, and have been of, to the conscientious, shall be rewarded on my solitary
province. -- Remember me to the people, and let them know, my heart's desire
toward them; and shall embrace the first opportunity to make my abode with
them.

Once more, let me hear from you, and have a copy of the laws, as my other
letter directs, and you shall soon hear from me to your content; so I bid you
heartily farewell.

Given at Holland-house, this 27th. of the Tenth-month, 1687.

In 1687, Third month, -- the names of the Members of Assembly were, For
Philadelphia.
Humphrey Morrey, William Salway, John Bevan, Less Cock, Daniel Pastorius,
Joseph Paul.
For New Castle.
Johannes Dehaes, Edward Blake, Valen. Hollingsworth, John White, Speaker, John
Darby, Richard Noble.
For Bucks.
Thomas Langhorne, Robert Hall, Nicholas Walne, Robert Lucas, Henry Baker,
Edward Bennet.
For Kent.
John Brinkloe, William Berry, Richard Wilson, Thomas Pemberton, William
Freeland, Benoni Bishop.
For Chester.
John Blunston, George Maris, Bartholo. Coppock, Caleb Pusey, Edward Bezar,
Randel Vernon.
For Sussex.
Luke Watson, Henry Smith, Henry Molestine, Henry Bowman, Samuel Gray, Henry
Stretcher.



expressing his ardent desire for its prosperity, and to reside in it himself;
in one of which to Thomas Lloyd, about this time, are the following
expressions, viz. -- "No honor, interest, W. Penn longs to be in Pennsylvania.
or pleasure, in this part of the world, shall be able to check my desires to
live and die among you; and, though to my grief, my stay is yet prolonged, on
private and public accounts, yet, depend upon it, Pennsylvania is my worldly
delight, and end of all places on the earth.

"Now, though I have, to please thee, given thee a quietus from all public
business, my intention is to constitute thee Deputy Governor, and two, in the
character of assistants; either of whom and thyself, to be able to do all as
fully as I my self can do; only I wait thy consent to the employment; of which
advise me," etc. -- "by all that is reverent, tender and friendly, He is
importantly employed in England.
I beseech thy care, condescension and help, for that poor province. I am here
serving God and friends, and the nation; which I hope God will reward to mine
and you," etc.

Notwithstanding the strict friendship, and good disposition, which, from the
beginning, had been wisely cultivated and established by the Proprietary and
inhabitants, or first settlers, of the province, with the Indians, and,
afterward pursued in such manner, as to leave no reasonable cause for fears
and suspicions between them; yet, as in all countries wickedly disposed persons
are found, whose delight is, if possible, to disturb the public tranquillity;
so we find, in the infancy of this colony, when justice, peace and harmony so
universally predominated, it was possible, nevertheless, for idle reports, and
vain rumors to take place, and gain so far on unguarded minds, as to create
very alarming apprehensions, respecting the Indians; Of an Indian alarm.
-- the consideration of their large numbers, at that time, in proportion to
the fewness of the European settlers, rather favoring such apprehensions; of
which we have the following instance.

In, or about, the year 1688, the inhabitants of Philadelphia, and places
adjacent, were alarmed with the report of an intended insurrection of the
Indians, An Indian alarm, etc.
to cut off all the English, on a certain appointed day. This was communicated
by two Indian women of West-Jersey, to an old Dutch inhabitant, near Chester,
to be on the next fourth day of the week. Several Friends or Quakers, upon
hearing this report, being conscious of their just conduct toward the Indians,
and sensible of nothing that could reasonably disgust them, endeavored to
appease the people's fears. The said fourth day being come, about ten o'clock,
in the night, a messenger arrived at Chester, out of the woods, and told the
people, that three families, about nine miles distant, which he named, were all
cut off by the Indians. -- This report coming to a Friend, then at Chester,
about midnight he took with him two young men, on horseback, to the place, in
order to examine into the truth of the affair. -- They found the three houses,
but no body in them, and yet no signs of murder; -- their inhabitants, alarmed
in a similar manner, had fled to the houses of their parents, at Ridley creek,
about a mile from thence. The master of one of these families, being from home,
had been informed five hundred Indians were actually collected at Naaman's
creek, in pursuit of their design, to kill the English; and as he was hastening
to his house, he thought he heard his boy crying out, and saying, "What shall I
do, my Dame is killed! Upon which, instead of going home, to know the certainty
of the affair, he ran off, to acquaint the government, at Philadelphia; but
being met by a person of more prudence than himself, before he got to the city,
he was persuaded by him to return. --

The report notwithstanding soon arrived at the city; and was told with such
alarming circumstances, that a messenger was immediately dispatched to Marcus
Hook, near the said Naaman's creek to enquire the truth of it. He quickly
returned and confirmed the report, but with this variation; that it was at
Brandywine creek, An Indian alarm, etc.
at an Indian town, where the five hundred Indians were assembled; and, that
they, having a lame king, had carried him away, with all their women and
children. These circumstances rendered the affair still more alarming, and,
with many, amounted to a certainty.

The Council were, at that time, sitting at Philadelphia on other affairs, when
one of them, a Friend, supposed to be Caleb Pusey, Cal^b Pusey came from London
to Pennsylvania, with his family, in 1682; and from that time till his death,
near 45 years, was a very useful and valuable member of society, both religious
and civil. He was long one of the Provincial and Governor's council; and diverse
times in the Assembly: -- He is said to have been a man of good example, both
in public and private life; and est^^med a wor^^y Elder among his friends the
Quakers. -- By his care, part of the ma^^rials, from which this history of
Pennsylvania is composed, were preserved; -- being a man of good understanding
and abilities, in diverse respects; and in the relation of a neighbor, husband,
parent, master and friend, had particularly an amiable character. He lived in
Chester county; and died in the Twelfth month, 1725, in the 76th. year of his
age.
who lived in Chester county, voluntarily offered himself to go to the place,
provided they would name five others to accompany him, without weapons; which
being soon agreed on, they rode to the place; but, instead of meeting with five
hundred warriors, they found the old king quietly lying, with his lame foot
along on the ground, and his head, at ease, on a kind of pillow, the women at
work, in the field, and the children playing together. --

When they had entered the wigwam, the king presently asked them very mildly,
"What they all came for?" They told him the report, which the Indian women had
raised; and asked him, whether the Indians had any thing against the English?
He appeared much displeased at the report and said, "The women ought to be
burnt to death; and that they had nothing against the English;" -- adding,
"'It Is true there are about fifteen pounds yet behind of our pay for the land,
which William Penn bought, but as you are still on it, and improving it, An
Indian alarm, etc.
to your own use, we are not in haste for our pay; but when the English come to
settle it, we expect to be paid." -- This, the messengers, thinking very
reasonable, told him, they would undoubtedly be paid for their land. --

One of the company further expressed himself to the Indian king, in the
following manner; "That the great God, who made the world, and all things
therein, consequently made all mankind, both Indians and English; and as he
made all, so his love was extended to all; which, was plainly shown, by his
causing the rain and dews to fall on the ground of both Indians and English
alike; that it might equally produce what the Indians, as well as what the
English sowed or planted in it, for the sustenance of life; and also by his
making the sun to shine equally on all, both Indians and English, to nourish
them; and that seeing the great Being, which made them all, extended his love
thus to all, so they were mutually bound to love one another." --

The king answered, "What they had said was true; and as God has given you
corn, I would advise you to get it in; (it being then harvest time) for we
intend you no harm." -- They parted amicably; and the messengers, returning,
put an end to the people's fears.

Appointment of Lieutenant Governor Blackwell.
In consequence of Thomas Lloyd's request, to be released from the public
affairs of the government, in the latter part of the year 1688, he was
accordingly succeeded by Captain John Blackwell; Blackwell's wife was general
Lambert's daughter; she, coming to William Penn* on other business, soon after
he received this application from Thomas Lloyd, was asked by him, whether she
thought her husband (who was then in New En^land, and for whom William Penn, by
some of his letters, seems to have had a great esteem) would accept of the
government of Pennsylvania? -- She answered, "He would." A commission was
therefore sent him, with the following instruction, viz.

(L. S.) Instructions for Lieutenant Governor Blackwell, or whom else they may
concern.
I. THAT things be transacted in my name, by the style of my patent only, viz.
Absolute Proprietary of Pennsylvania, etc. if not contrary to the charter and
laws of the Province, as I suppose not.

II. That commissions signed and sealed by me here shall be sufficient warrants
and directions to pass them under the great seal.

III. To collect the laws, that are in being, and send them over to me, in a
stitched book, by the very first opportunity; which I have hitherto often, and
so much, in vain, desired.

IV. To be careful that speedy, as well as thorough and impartial justice be
done; and virtue, in all, cherished, and vice, in all, punished.

V. That fines be in proportion, both to the fault and ability of the party,
that so they may be paid.

VI. That feuds between persuasions, or nations, or countries, be suppressed
and extinguished, if any be; and, if none, that by a good conduct, they may be
prevented.

VII. That the widow, orphan, and absent may be particularly regarded, in their
rights; for their cry will be loudest in all ears; but, by absent, I mean such
as are so of necessity.

VIII. To countenance the Commissioners of property, where land is unseated, or
people are unruly in their settlements, or comply not with reasonable
obligations, about bounds, banks, timber, etc. For though we come to a
wilderness, it was not that we should continue it so.

IX. That the Sheriffs of their respective counties be charged with the receipt
of my rents, fines, etc. as they do in England, and give security to the
Receiver General, for the same,

X. To have a special care, that Sheriffs and clerks of the peace impose not
upon the people; and that the magistrates live peaceably and soberly; -- for I
could not endure one loose, or litigious person in authority. -- Let them be
men having some fear of God, and hating covetousness, whatever be their
persuasion: to employ others is to profane an ordinance of God.

XI. That care be taken of the roads, and highways, in the country; that they
may be straight and commodious for travelers; for I understand, they are
turned about by the planters; which is a mischief, that must not be endured.

XII. Consider by what means, or methods, the good and prosperity of the
plantation may be promoted; what laws, in being, are unnecessary, or defective,
and what are wanting; and in each particular hereof, let me have advice as
distinctly, and as speedily as may be.

XIII. Rule the meek meekly; and those that will not be ruled, rule with
authority; and God Almighty prosper all honest and prudent endeavors.

Given at London, this 25th. of the Seventh-month, 1688. WILLIAM PENN.



who arrived in the Tenth-month this year; whom the Proprietary had
commissioned to be his Lieutenant Governor. He was a person, whom William Penn
seems to have highly esteemed; and, at the time of his appointment, was in New
England.

1689.
Blackwell met the Assembly in the Third-month 1689; but, by reason of some
misunderstanding, or dissension, Governor Blackwell disagrees with the Council
and returns to England.
between him and some of the Council, the public affairs were not managed with
the desired harmony and satisfaction; and but little done during his
administration, which continued only till the Twelfth-month this year, when he
returned to England; William Penn, in a letter to one of his friends in
Pennsylvania, dated the 30th. of the Tenth-month, 1689, respecting the
appointment* etc of Governor Blackwell, declares,

-- "Since no Friend would undertake the Governor's place, I took one that was
not, and a stranger; that he might be impartial, and more reverenced: He is, in
England and Ireland, of great repute, for ability, integrity and virtue; I
thought I did well; it was for good; the Lord knows it, and no end of my own.
You see what I have done upon the complaints: but I must say, I fear his
peevishness to some Friends has not risen out of the dust, without occasion, if
any where, let it be searched out and judged: the Lord keep us all in the
gentle mind that is easy to be entreated,' etc. -- "Bear with me God knows, if
I love you, or no, or desire my lot to be with you;" -- "I have sought the
province more than myself," etc.

Of the active members of Council, about the time of Blackwell's
administration, appear the following names, viz.

John Simcock, William Clark, Arthur Cook, William Stockdale, William Yardly,
Luke Watson, John Cann, Samuel Richardson Griffith Jones, Thomas Duckett,
Grissith Owen, John Bri^kloe, Johannes Dehaes.

and the government of the province, Elected 2mo. 11th. 1690.
according to charter, devolved again on the Council, Thomas Lloyd, President.

Reasons for B^ackwell's appointment, etc.
The appointment of Blackwell, who was no Quaker, to be Deputy Governor,
appears, by the Proprietary's letters to his friends, in the province, to have
been, because no suitable person, who was of that society, would undertake the
office; that his views thereby were more for the public good, than his own
private interest; which, he declares, he was sorry were not answered according
to his expectation; and that notwithstanding he was apprehensive occasion had
been given by some particulars, in the province, for this misunderstanding,
yet, that he had duly regarded their complaints, and afforded them suitable
relief.

Cicero was justly called the father of his country, for preserving it from the
designs of a most detestable rebellion, but William Penn, W. Penn may justly be
styled Father of his country.
with still greater propriety, may be styled the parent of his: In that he not
only planted it with industry and virtue, and endowed it with a generous and
excellent constitution, but with unremitted care and assiduity, he also
cherished it with the best and most affectionate advice and instruction; The
following, which he writ them this year, are specimens of this kind, viz.

My dear Friends and Brethren,
IF it be with you, as I can say it is with me, in the presence of God, then
are we one in him; for neither length of days, nor distance of place, nor all
the many waters, between us, can separate my heart and affection from you: but
my love, yea, the love of God, my Father, and your Father, abounds toward you,
with endeared salutations to you all, and an holy kiss in Christ: and for you,
and the blessing of you and yours, with grace, peace and prosperity, are my
knees bowed to the God of all our mercies and preservations; that an holy,
blameless people, without guile and wrath, brawling and selfishness, you may be
made and kept, in all things; that God may spread his great Name over you, and
a make wall of defense about you. and create a glory upon the same, to your
unspeakable joy, and the renown of his own great power. For this my eyes have
beheld under the sun, that all is vanity, in comparison of him; and that happy
and blessed is that people, whose God is the Lord: for the nation, or province,
upon the earth, that will not reverence him, and call, in righteousness, upon
him, and, in all their undertakings, have his glory first in their eye, shall
be cut off: He will vex, visit and trouble that people, that they may know he
rules in the kingdoms of men. Wherefore, the Lord guide you, by his own
spirit, and preserve you a lively, green and savory people to his praise.

Great revolutions have been, of late, in this land of your nativity: and where
they may period, the Lord knows. It can be no new thing for us, to meet with
exercises Europe looks like a sea of trouble. -- Wars all over it like to be
this Summer. -- I strongly desire to see you, before it be spent, if the Lord
will; and I can say in his sight, that, to improve my interest with King James,
for tender consciences, and that a Christian liberty might be legally settled,
though against my own interest, was that which has separated me from you
chiefly -- I desire your remembrance before the Lord; as you are not, and
cannot be, forgotten, in my addresses and approaches to him; who rest in his
unchangeable love, dear friends and brethren, yours unalterably, in the
communion of the blessed truth,

WILLIAM PENN.
The 2d. of the First-month, 1689.

Hammersmith, the 30th. of the Tenth-month, 1689. Dear Friends,
I cannot slip this opportunity; but send you the endeared salutations of my
love, that, in the truth, gives me frequent occasions to remember you, and
earnestly desire your preservation to God, as well as your comfort and
prosperity in outward things; about which have a care, that they grow not too
fast upon you, nor too many for you; I mean, as to the (...) and (...), that
a^^^nd them, in the (...) of your spirits: for it is a blessed state, to enjoy
and use of the world, in the dominion of his life and power, that has quickened
us, by his light and spirit a people to himself: for, in this stands all our
peace and blessedness, that God be eyed, in the first place, that we set him on
our right (...), that (...) that (...) eye be directed toward him, in all
things, as the eye of a handmaid to her mistress; that we may be able to say,
in truth and righteousness, we have none in Heaven, but him, nor any on earth,
besides him. This it is, that keeps God (...), where; for (...) put on (...)
all his blessed teachings and leadings, and make no provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof: Friends, they are deep words, and deeper things. -- I
know you understand me. and I hope you feel me; who have your eyes to the mark,
and look to the joy before you, that is above all things, in this momentary,
troublesome and busy world. -- And, now, friends, I have a word more to you;
and that is this, that faith, hope and charity are the great helps and marks of
true Christians; but above all charity is the love of God, or divine love; --
blessed are they, that are come to it and hold the truth in it, and work and
act in it; for they, poor indeed in spirit, of their own, but rich in God's; --
they are meek; -- they inherit; -- all other states are a brangle, in
comparison; but this enjoys; -- this possesses; this reigns! O, come into this
love more and more; for to this shall all gifts and operations give place; and
they do so, in the hearts of those, that are come to know Charity greatest in
them. -- It will preserve peace in the church; -- peace in the state; -- peace
in families, aye, and peace in particular bosoms. God Almighty draw, I beseech
him* all your hearts into this heavenly love more and more, and that the work
of it may shine out, to God's glory and your comfort.

For matters here; -- as to myself, I am well and free; -- and for the church
of God, liberty continues. But, in the nations of Europe, great wars, and
rumors of wars, such as have not been almost from the beginning Suns are
turning into darkness, and moons into blood; for the noteable day is at the
door. -- It could not he born for some of you, when you went for America, that
such a day should come; but coming it is; for almost every eye sees it, and
tongue says it; some thousands, alas! have already felt it. Sanctify,
therefore, the Lord, in your hearts; be satisfied in him, in your lot; and walk
worthy of his daily mercy and attendance upon you, and care over you, and the
Lord keep you to the end, I am, in truth, that makes us near to God, and one to
another,

Your faithful friend and brother, WILLIAM PENN.


In this year likewise I find the following copy of a letter from the
Proprietor, said to be read in Council, dated, London, the 12th. of the
Sixth-month, 1689, viz.

Friends,
I heartily wish you all well, and beseech God to guide you in the ways of
righteousness and peace. I have thought sit upon my further stop, in these
parts, to throw all into your hands; that you may all see the confidence I have
in you, and the desire I have to give you all possible contentment. I do
earnestly press your constant attendance upon the government, and the diligent
pursuit of peace and virtue; and God Almighty strengthen your hands, in so good
a work. I also recommend to you the particular discipline of that town you meet
in: that sobriety and gravity be maintained, and authority kept in respect. --
As it comes in your way, countenance my officers in collecting my small
revenue. -- Let the laws, you pass, hold so long only as I shall not declare my
dissent; that so my share may not lie excluded, or finally concluded, without
my notice; in sine, let them be confirmable by me, as you will see by the
commission I left, when I left the province. -- And if you desire a Deputy
Governor, rather name three, or five, and I shall name one of them; -- so as
you consider of a comfortable subsistence; that the government may not go a
begging. -- I do not do this, to lie a binding precedent, but to give you, and
the people you represent. the fullest pledges I am able, at this distance, of
my regard to them. Whatever you do, I desire, beseech and charge you all to
avoid factions and parties, whisperings and reportings, and all animosities;
that, putting your common shoulders to the public work, you may have the reward
of good men and patriots; and so I bid you heartily farewell.

WILLIAM PENN.
Given at London, this 12th. of the Sixth-month, 1689.


tending more effectually to fix and confirm that bond of love and affection,
between him and his people, upon the most certain and lasting foundation; which
is the best preservative against all disorders: -- He treated them as beloved
children; W. Penn's affection.
while they regarded him as a tender father: This, in part, appears, by his
various epistles of this nature, besides those respecting the more temporal
concerns of the province; which, from time to time, he writ to them, during his
life; and in a language more pathetic and endearing, it is impossible for the
most affectionate parent to address his beloved offspring; of these that are
yet extant, I find several this year; a specimen of which appears below, in the
notes.

The year 1689 gave rise to the Friends' public school, in Philadelphia; which
afterward, Rise of the Friends' School in Philadelphia, etc.
in the year 1697, upon the petition of Samuel Carpenter, Edward Shippen,
Anthony Morris, James Fox, David Lloyd, William Southby and John Jones, in
behalf of themselves and others, to Deputy Markham, was first incorporated by
charter; and, after that, confirmed by a fresh patent from William Penn, dated
the 25th. of October 1701; and also by another, dated the 22d. of the
Fifth-month 1708; whereby the corporation was, "For ever thereafter to consist
of fifteen discreet and religious persons, of the people called Quakers, by the
name of, The Overseers of the public school, found in Philadelphia, Of Friends
School.
at the request, cost and charges of the people called Quakers;" but its last
and present charter, from William Penn confirming all the preceding charters,
and further extending the corporation, with larger powers and privileges, etc.
is dated the 29th. of November, 1711; wherein the Overseers, nominated and
appointed, were Samuel Carpenter, the elder, Edward Shippen, Griffith Owen,
Thomas Story, Anthony Morris, Richard Hill, Isaac Norris, Samuel Preston,
Jonathan Dickinson, Nathan Stanbury, Thomas Masters, Nicholas Waln, Caleb
Pusey, Rowland Ellis and James Logan; by which charter the Overseers were
afterward to be chosen by the corporation.

Its design.
This was the first institution of the kind, in Pennsylvania, intended not only
to facilitate the acquisition of the more generally used parts of learning,
among all ranks, or degrees, of the people, (the poorer sort being taught
gratis, and the rich, or more wealthy, still paying a proportion for their
children's instruction) but also the better, and more extensively to promote a
virtuous and learned education, than could be affected by any other manner, was
the end of the design: Which, in the preamble to the said present charter, is
thus expressed, viz. --

"Whereas, the prosperity and welfare of any people depend, in great measure,
upon the good education of youth, and their early introduction in the
principles of true religion and virtue, and qualifying them to serve their
country and themselves, by breeding them in reading, writing, and learning of
languages, and useful arts and sciences, suitable to their sex, age and degree;
which cannot be affected, in any manner, so well as by erecting public schools,
for the purposes aforesaid." etc.

For these laudable purposes, therefore, a number of the principal inhabitants
of Philadelphia, being Quakers, in the Fifth-month this year, agreed with
George Keith, who then resided at Freehold (now called Monmouth) in New Jersey,
to undertake the charge He accordingly removed to Philadelphia, and was the
first master of that school; but continued only about one year. "George Keith
was a native of Aberdeen, in Scotland, a man of learning, and had been of note
among the Quakers, etc. (of which see more hereafter.) He came to East Jersey
diverse years before this time; was afterward Surveyor-general of that
division; and, in 1687, he ascertained and marked the line of division between
East and West Jersey. His salary for officiating in this school, was fifty
pounds per annum, with a house for his family to live in, a school-house
provided, and the profits of the school beside, for one year. For two years
more his school was to be made worth one hundred and twenty pounds per annum,
if he thought fit to stay so long; he was to teach the poor gratis. He
continued in this station about one year, and then his usher, Thomas Makin,
was, at his desire, appointed to succeed him, etc.

Note. -- The terms for teaching, etc. here, in early time, appear by the
following extract from the journals of Council, viz.

"Tenth-month 26th. 1683, Enoch Flower undertakes to teach school in the town
of Philadelphia, on the following terms, viz.

"To learn to read English, four shillings by the quarter; to write, six
shillings by ditto; to read, write and cast accounts, eight shillings by the
quarter: boarding a scholar, that is to say, diet, lodging, washing and
schooling, ten pounds for one whole year."

Note. -- Enoch Flower is said to have come from Corsham in Wiltshire.




CHAPTER X.
William Penn's troubles and difficulties after the revolution in England. --
He is prevented by his enemies from visiting and assisting the province in a
time of its greatest need. -- Extract from his letter to Thomas Lloyd. -- His
epistle to his friends in London. -- Disagreement between the province and
territories. -- Declaration of the Council, and other proceedings relating to
the difference. -- Names of the members of Assembly, in 1690. -- Two Deputy
Governors. -- The Proprietor's concern at this difference. -- Extract from one
of his letters, respecting it. -- Further proceedings of the province. -- A
promulgated bill. -- Names of some members of Council. -- A letter of the two
Deputies and their Councils to the Proprietary, etc.

W. Penn's affairs about the time of the revolution in 1688 etc.
IT has already been observed, that, during most of the time since the
Proprietary's return to England, in 1684, much of his public action and service
were in that nation; and that his intimacy at court, and friendship with King
James the Second, which his great obligation to that royal family, and the
situation of his own affairs may, both from gratitude and interest, easily
account for, exposed him to many unjust censures; but in the year 1688, upon
the change of government, the state of his affairs there began to have a very
different, and more unfavourable aspect: -- For the attempts which had been
made by the King, in favor of popery and arbitrary power, had occasioned the
measures of the revolution, which now began to take place in the government
there, by means of the Prince of Orange, "who landed at Torbay, in Devonshire,
on the fifth of November, W. Penn's affairs about the time of the revolution in
1688 etc.
1688, to the great joy of the English nation. Many of King James's officers
and army soon joined the Prince; and the King, perceiving the hearts of the
people alienated from him, withdrew himself, and went over to France. Hence by
a Convention, called shortly after, the said Prince of Orange, and the Princess
Mary, his consort, King James's daughter, were declared King and Queen of
England, etc. and were proclaimed on the thirteenth of February, 1688-9.

"Upon this turn of the times, William Penn's late friendship at court having
rendered him suspected of disaffection to the present government, on the tenth
of December, 1688, when he was walking in White Hall, he was sent for by the
Lords of the Council, then sitting; and though nothing appeared against him,
and himself assured them, -- "That he had done nothing, but what he could
answer before God, and all the princes in the world; that he loved his country,
and the Protestant religion above his life, and never acted against either;
that all he ever aimed at, in his public endeavors, was no other than what the
Prince himself had declared for; that King James was always his friend, and in
gratitude, he was the King's, and did ever, as much as in him lay, influence
him to his true interest." -- Notwithstanding they obliged him to give
securities for his appearance the first day of the next term, which he did; and
then he was continued, on the same security, to Easter-term following; on the
last day of which, nothing having been laid to his charge, he was cleared in
open court.

"In the year 1690, he was again brought before the Lords of the Council, upon
an accusation of holding a correspondence with the late King James; and they
requiring sureties for his appearance, he appealed to King William himself; W.
Penn's affairs about the time of the revolution in 1688 etc.
who, after a conference of near two hours, inclined to acquit him, but, to
please some of the Council, he was held upon bail, for a while; and, in
Trinity-term, the same year, was again discharged.

"He was attacked a third time, and his name inserted in a proclamation, dated
July the 18th. 1690; wherein he, with diverse others, to the number of eighteen,
were charged with adhering to the kingdom's enemies; but proof failing,
respecting him, he was again cleared by order of the King's Bench Court, at
Westminster, in the last day of Michaelmas-term, 1690.

"Being now again at liberty, he proposed to go a second time to Pennsylvania,
and published proposals in print, for another settlement there. He had so far
prepared for this transportation that an order for a convoy was granted him by
the Secretary of State, when his voyage was prevented by a fresh accusation
against him, backed with the oath of one William Fuller, a wretch, afterward
by Parliament declared a cheat and impostor; and a warrant was thereupon
granted, for his apprehension; which he narrowly escaped, at his return from
the funeral of George Fox, the first preacher among the Quakers, on the 16th.
of January, 1690-1." W. Penn, in a letter to Thomas Lloyd, dated, "England, the
14th. of the Fourth-month, 1691," writes on this subject, as follows: --

Dear Friend,
My love, in the unchangeable truth, salutes thee and thine, and the friends
and family of God, in those parts, desiring your temporal and everlasting
welfare, with an unfeigned affection.

By this time thou will have heard of the renewal of my troubles, the only let
of my return, being in the midst of my preparations, with a great company of
adventurers, when they fell upon me. -- The jealousies of some, and unworthy
dealing of others have made way for them; but under and over it all, the
ancient rock has been my shelter and comfort; and I hope yet to see your faces,
with our ancient satisfaction. -- The Lord grant, if it be for his glory, whose
I desire to be, in all conditions; for this world passes away, and the form
and beauty of it fades; but there are eternal habitations for the faithful;
among whom I pray that my lot may be, rather than among the princes of the
earth.

I hope I need not urge my circumstances, to excite thy love, care and concern
for me and my suffering interest, in that country. I know thou have better
learned Christ and Cato, if I may so say, and wilt embrace such an opportunity
to choose to express thy friendship and sincerity; nor is uncertainty and
changeableness thy fault; wherefore I will say no more, but desire that my
afflictions may cease, if not cure your animosities, or discontents, within
yourselves, if yet they have continued; and that thou will both in government,
and to my Commissionners of property, yield thy assistance all thou can. --
By all this God may prepare me to be fitter for future service, even to you
there. I ask the people forgiveness for my long stay; but when I consider how
much it has been my great loss, and for an ungrateful generation, it is
punishment! -- It has been 20,000 pounds to my damage, in the country, and
above 10,000 pounds here, and to the province 500 families; but the wise God,
that can do what he pleases, as well as see what is in man's heart, is able to
requite all; and I am persuaded, all shall yet work together for good, in this
very thing, if we can overlook all, that stands in the way of our views
Godward, in public matters. -- See that all be done prudently and humbly; and
keep down irreverence and looseness, and cherish industry and sobriety. The
Lord God Almighty be with you, and amongst you, to his praise and your peace.
Salute me to John Simcock, R. Turner, A. Cook, T. Janny, Ph. Pemberton, S.
Richardson, W. Yardly, the Welsh Friends, and Plymouth Friends, indeed to all
of them. --

Thou have heard of our great loss of dear John Burnyeat, and Robert Lodge, one
in Ireland, and the other in England, in about the same week; and Robert Barclay,
Th. Salthouse, and dearly beloved George Fox since: -- He died at Henry
Gouldney's, by Gracious-street meeting house; where he preached his farewell
the First Day, and departed the Third, at Night, between nine and ten. -- I was
with him; he earnestly recommended to me his love to you all; and said,
William, mind poor Friends in America; he died triumphantly over death, very
easily foresaw his change; he was buried on the Sixth-day; like a general
meeting; 2000 people at his burial, Firends and others: -- I was never more
public than that day; I felt myself easy; he was got into his Inn, before the
storm that is coming overtook him; and that night, very providentially I
escaped the messenger's hands: -- I shall add only, that Friends have had an
extraordinary time, this General Meeting; so that God supplied that visible
loss with his glorious presence. R. Davies there, but not thy brother. In
sincere love I bid thee, thy wife and family, and friends, farewell,

Thy true friend, WILLIAM PENN.





Though William Penn had hitherto defended himself before the King and Council,
1690.
yet he now thought it more prudent to retire, W. Penn obliged to retire in
private, etc.
than to hazard the sacrificing of his innocence to the oaths of a profligate
villain; accordingly after an expensive preparation for a large embarkation of
fresh colonists for America, To the great disadvantage of his affairs, and
those of his province etc.
he was not only obliged to desist therefrom, and, at a most critical and
necessitous time, in the affairs of his young country to decline furnishing a
large increase to its inhabitants, and those means, for its further regulation,
establishment and happiness, which, it was most probable such an addition, with
his presence, would have administered, but he also appeared very little in
public, for two or three years afterward; and the great disadvantage and
embarrassment, which this disappointment occasioned, both in his private
affairs, and those of his colony, at this time, appear, in its effects, the
more considerable, on account of the disorder, or dissension, between the
province and territories; and also the religious disturbance, in the affair of
George Keith; both which began about this time; which, it is most probable, his
long wanted presence and abilities there would have prevented, or, at least,
some of the consequences of them.

He writes in his retirement.
Yet the product of this retirement was several valuable treatises, on diverse
subject, which, both for his own amusement, and the common good of the present
and future times, he writ, during this restraint upon his liberty, till the
latter end of the year, 1693; which, as they are extant in his printed works,
the world would otherwise, probably, never have seen, nor had the advantage of
them. But, first, respecting his retirement, lest his Friends, the Quakers,
should entertain any sinister thoughts of him, he sent the following epistle to
their Yearly-meetings, in London, viz.

The 30th. of the Third-month, 1691. My beloved, dear and honored brethren,
W. Penn's Epistle to his Friends in London, in 1691.
MY unchangeable love salutes you; and though I am absent from you, yet I feel
the sweet and lowly life of your heavenly fellowship, by which I am with you,
and a partaker amongst you, whom I have loved above my chiefest joy: Receive no
evil surmisings, neither suffer hard thoughts, through the insinuations of any,
to enter your minds against me, your afflicted, but not forsaken friend and
brother. My enemies are yours, and, in the ground, mine for your sakes; W.
Penn's Epistle to his Friends in London, in 1691.
and that God sees in secret, and will one day reward openly. My privacy is
not, because men have sworn truly, but falsely, against me; "For wicked men
have laid in wait for me, and false witnesses have laid to my charge things
that I knew not;" who have never sought myself, but the good of all, through
great exercises; and have done some good, and would have done more, and hurt no
man; but always desired that truth and righteousness, mercy and peace might
take place amongst us. Feel me near you, my dear and beloved brethren, and
leave me not, neither forsake, but wrestle with him, that is able to prevail
against the cruel desires of some, but we may yet meet in the congregations of
his people, as in days past, to our mutual comfort: The everlasting God of his
chosen, in all generations, be in the midst of you, and crown your most solemn
assemblies with his blessed presence! that his tender, meek, lowly and heavenly
love and life, may flow among you, and that he would please to make it a
seasoning and fruitful opportunity to you, desiring to be remembered of you
before him, in the nearest and freshest accesses, who cannot forget you, in the
nearest relation,

Your faithful friend and brother, WILLIAM PENN.


Though the Proprietary had, both by charter and otherwise, endeavored to
connect the province and territories of Pennsylvania, in legislation and
government, so as to form one General Assembly, yet the jealousies, and
difference of sentiment, in some cases, which afterward arose between the
Representatives of each part, in their legislative capacity, tending to create
separate interests, and a rupture between them, were frequently the occasion of
great uneasiness to him; whose view was always to keep them united, judging it
most for the interest of them both, as well as his own.

Hence, after Blackwell's departure for England, in the year 1690, the
irregularities, which ensued, or were attempted, in consequence of this
difference, appear, by the following declaration of the Council, and other
public proceedings, viz.

(L. S.) By the President and Council of Pennsylvania and counties annexed.
Present,
Thomas Lloyd, President. John Simcock, William Clark, Arthur Cook, William
Stockdale, William Yardly, Samuel Richardson, Griffith Jones, Thomas Duckett,
Griffith Owen.
Declaration of the President and Council, in 1690.
WHEREAS, the Provincial Council, according to the powers of the present
commission of government, have, at their first sitting, chosen a President,
Viz. Tho. Lloyd, 11th. of the 2mo. 1689-90.
and have since, in a legislative council, continued him, till they should see
cause to alter their choice; and having likewise ordered the succeeding
councils to be called by him, or, in his absence, by notice sent by six members
from this place; yet, notwithstanding, these members, William Clark, Luke
Watson, Griffith Jones, John Brinkloe, John Cann, Johannes D'Haes, did privily
meet together, in the council-room, upon the twenty-first instant, without
signifying the least syllable of their intentions, of having a council, either
to Thomas Lloyd, the elected and continued President, or to any member of the
province; and there, in an irregular and undue manner, have presumed to act, as
a council, and have issued forth pretended commissions, for constituting
Provincial Judges, contrary to the express letter of the laws, and have
nominated some therein, who, under their present circumstances, are unqualified
for that station; as, upon occasion, shall be made appear; and have voted
extravagant and contradictory orders. This board, having well considered their
disorderly and unprecedented way of meeting, Declaration of Council.
cannot but entirely disallow and disown their so clandestine meeting, to be a
council; for should such a proceeding be, in the least countenanced, the
consequence thereof would unavoidably introduce a rupture and confusion, in the
present frame of government: For, by the same reason, that any six members
privately met, without notice had from, or given to, any of the rest, may
represent the Governor and Council, in this place, by the same methods, two
other six members elsewhere may represent two Governors and Councils more, at
the same time, in this government; Note, the whole number was 18, 3 for each
county.
which is an absurdity, not to be tolerated. And further, this Council, being
under an obligation of asserting the Governor's power and authority, lodged in
a regular Provincial Council, and for the undeceiving of many well minded
persons, who otherwise may be abused by their late sitting, have unanimously,
by this instrument, in writing, declared this to be our sense and judgment,
that all entries, orders and commissions made and given forth by the aforesaid
six members, at the council-room, upon the twenty-first instant, are hereby
deemed null, and of no Note. -- Third month, 1690, the names of the members of
Assembly were: -- For Philadelphia.
William Salway, Humphrey Morrey, Thomas Fitzwater, Charles Pickering, Paul
Saunders, Abraham Updegrave.
For New Castle.
Edward Blake, Henry Williams, Richard Halliwell, John Darby, William Grant,
John Donaldson.
For Bucks.
Joseph Growdon, Speaker, Henry Paynter, Richard Hough, Henry Baker, Edmund
Bennett, John Cook.
For Kent.
John Barnes, John Betts, Daniel Brown, Ezekiel Needham, Richard Curtis,
William Freeland.
For Chester.
John Bristow, William Jenkins, Robert Pile, Joshua Fern, George Maris, Caleb
Pusey.
For Sussex.
John Hill, Samuel Gray, Robert Clifton. Henry Smith, Baptist Newcomb, Thomas
Branscon.

force. Whereof all Magistrates, officers and other persons concerned, in this
government, are to take notice accordingly.

Given at Philadelphia, 26th. of the Ninth-month, 1690. THOMAS LLOYD, President.

This disagreement appears afterward to have increased, 1691.
and, in the fore part of the year 1691, proceeded to greater extreme. The
following proposals, said to be made to the Provincial Council, by Griffith
Jones and William Clark, in behalf, and for the ease and satisfaction of the
inhabitants of the three lower counties, or the territories, may further show
the views of the members for the said counties, in this affair, viz.

I. "That there be forthwith a writ issued forth, for choosing a member of
Council, for the county of Sussex, in the room of Thomas Clifton.

II. "That the commissions given out, by both Councils, for judges, be wholly
laid aside; and that the inhabitants of the three lower counties may recommend
to the council two persons to be commissionated, for judges, to act the next
Spring, and that to continue no longer.

III. "That, at the next legislative council, a bill be proposed by the
council, to enable the nine numbers of the lower counties, or any six of them,
to appoint three judges, to act in that station, in the said three counties,
and that there be also three for the province, always provided; that the judges
do act by the laws of Pennsylvania.

IV. "That for the ease of the charge, there be a dispensing with the meeting
of the Assembly, unless it be for the confirming of these alterations.

V. "That all other officers be, from time to time, appointed by the said nine
members of the three lower counties, or any six of them, to act (...) and th^^
(...) other officers may be imposed upon them.

VI. "That the fairs for New castle be confirmed unto them. All which being by
you granted, we hope, may be a means to keep things quiet; which shall be
diligently endeavored by your real friends, although otherwise represented, or
suspected."


Three modes of Executive government offered by Wm. Penn.
The Proprietary, whether to gratify, or indulge the humor of the colony, and
thereby induce a coalescence of the two parties, or with whatever other design,
(which, no doubt, was well intended,) had left to the choice of the Council,
three different methods, or modes, of the executive part of government, viz.
either that of the Council, of five commissioners, or of a Deputy Governor:
This affair, with other matters, being, about that time, agitated in Council,
and the province, or the majority, inclining to the last of these methods,
seven members, for the lower counties, viz. William Clark, 1691.
John Cann, John Brinkloe, John Hill, Richard Halliwell, Albertus Jacobs and
George Martin drew up and signed a formal protest, or declaration, directed to
the members of Council, of the province of Pennsylvania; dated, Philadelphia,
the first of the Second-month, 1691.

In this they declared, --

First, "That the mode of the five commissioners was the most agreeable to
them, Declaration and Protest of the lower Counties.
or to the counties, which they represented.

Secondly, "That the commission of the Council was the next, though much less
convenient, than that of the five commissioners; on account of the
encroachments thereby made upon their rights and privileges, by the province,
in imposing officers upon them, without their consent, or approbation.

Thirdly, "That the method of a Deputy Governor was the most disagreeable and
grievous of any; on account of the choice of all officers being placed in a
single person, and the expense, or charge, of his support: therefore they would
not agree to accept of that commission.

Fourthly, "But that, rather than the country should be without government,
they would consent to that of the Council; provided no officers whatever were
imposed upon any of the three lower counties, without the consent of the
respective members of Council for these counties.

Fifthly, "That they desired to excuse themselves for not agreeing to have
these things put to the vote; which, they said, they had experienced, the
members for the province would scarce ever do, till they were sure it would go
against them.

Sixthly, "That they, in behalf of the lower counties, protested against the
acceptance of any commission, but that of the five persons, and resolved, that
should the province act otherwise, they would govern themselves by the
commission, then in force, till the Proprietary's pleasure should be known
therein:" -- And thereupon they immediately withdrew their attendance.

What just or sufficient cause, they had for this conduct, does not clearly
appear: it gave many of the members of the Provincial Council, as well as the
Proprietary himself, much concern and uneasiness; Endeavors used to reconcile
them, etc.
and great endeavors were used, and much pains taken by both, to reconcile
them; but not with all the desired success: for their greatest ostensible
objection against this commission of a Deputy Governor, which the province most
inclined to, appearing to be the expense of his support, and their jealousy of
having their officers removed, so, to relieve their apprehensions, in these
respects, etc. at President Lloyd's request, John Simcock, John Bristow, John
Delavall, with David Lloyd, went after them, to New Castle, to endeavor their
return, etc. but in vain. The President writ to them by these persons, as
follows, viz. "John Cann, John Brinkloe, George Martin, William Clark, R.
Halliwell, John Hill, Albert Jacobs.

Friends,
I am sorry for this breach, which you have made upon the laws, charter and
council procedure; you have withdrawn your attendance, without any just cause;
lay aside obstinacy, wilful neglect and self interest, I cannot conceive what
can support you, at last, but the absurd lenity of the Government. Recollect
yourselves; consider well the confusion, to which this your rashness may expose
you, and many innocent inhabitants of the lower counties; and return unto your
duty, and repesentative service here, and we shall lovingly receive you, and so
dispatch, I hope, in a short time, the present emergencies before us. And I do
further, for your encouragement, assure you, and faithfully promise unto you,
that the charge of the Chair, and support of me under this present commission,
shall not press, nor burden you, or them, whom you represent, one penny,
unless you jointly, and at your voluntary accord, not only offer, but request
the acceptance of your benevolence, through the method of a General Assembly.
-- I have not further at this time, but request you to be serious, and, if you
desire to be apart, let it be done with the same solemnity, whereby you were
united to us. Your officers, duly qualified, shall continue till our
Proprietary's pleasure be further known, and not to be removed, without your
respective concurrence. I expect to see you soon up with us.

Your abused Friend and Chairman.
Council-room, the 4th. of the Second-month, 1691.




Hence, upon the province preferring the choice of a Deputy Governor, contrary
to the mind of the territories, Th. Lloyd Governor of the Province and W.
Markham of the Territories.
and Thomas Lloyd being preferred to that office, (which he appears to have
accepted with some reluctance) the Proprietary commissionated him Governor of
the province, and the Secretary, William Markham, who appears to have joined
and retired with the protesting members, in their abrupt separation, was, in
like manner, appointed over the lower counties, under certain restrictions.

This division of the Legislature appears to have been much against the
Proprietary's mind; W. Penn grieved at this division etc.
who seems to have apprehended dangerous, if not fatal, consequences from it.
The Proprietary's sentiments and grief, on this occasion, appear, in part, in
the following extract from one of his letters to a friend, viz.

29th of the Fourth-month, 1692. Loving friend,
I have thine of the 13th. instant, thy love and good intention toward me I
receive and accept. But, pray, consider how little I am in fault; and how ill I
am rewarded by some in that Province. -- I left it quiet, and the government in
the council. Thomas Lloyd grew weary of this form; writ, and got others to
write, to change it to a deputyship; I sent to know, if he would have it; in
the meanwhile writ to me, he would not meddle, and desired a quietus, or
dismiss: -- Upon this captain Blackwell's wife, general Lambert's daughter,
coming to me about presenting something of her husband's to the King; and
remembering him to be a man of sobriety and parts, asked for him, then in New
England; and if he would accept of the government of Pennsylvania, etc. -- This
displeased: -- I altered and left it to them, to choose either the government of
the council, or five commissioners, or a deputy: What could be tenderer? Now I
perceive Thomas Lloyd is chosen by the three upper, but not the three lower
counties; and sits down with this broken choice: This has grieved and wounded
me and mine, I fear to the hazard of all! Whatever the morals of the lower
counties are, it was embraced as a mercy, that we got and united them to the
province; and a great charter ties them; and this particular ambition has
broken it; for the striving can arise from nothing else; and what is that
spirit that would sooner divide the child, than let things run in their own
channel, but that which sacrifices all bowels to wilfulness! Had they learned
what this means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, there had been no
breaches nor animosities there till I had come, at least. I desire thee to
write to them; which they will mind now more, than upon the spot; and lay their
union upon them; for else the Governor of New York is like to have all; if he
has it not already. The Lord forgive them their unspeakable injury to me and
mine. I have sent, nine months ago, to J. Goodson a commission, if my letter
prevails not, that was to unite them, that Thomas Lloyd be Governor above, and
captain Markham, below, under such and such restrictions, etc -- but hear not a
word of this. I was going the Second-month at farthest, all things preparing,
as friends of London know, when this trouble broke out upon me, in the
Eleventh: and such have been my hardships, could not get clear without snares,
etc. so, wait God's time, who has a hand in all this; and, I believe, in the
end, every way, for good; so, in true love to thee and thine, and earnest
desires to see their faces, I conclude

Thy real friend, WILLIAM PENN.



He blamed, or, at least, appeared displeased with Thomas Lloyd's conduct, in
accepting of a partial choice, or that of the province only, as if it were in
his power to have prevented this division; but the Provincial Council excused
him in a letter thereon to the Proprietary and entirely exculpated him from
being accessory thereto, or in any manner promoting this disagreement, throwing
the whole blame on the territory men: they declared, that, instead of being a
gainer by any public offices, which he had held, Thomas Lloyd had wasted, or
considerably worsted his estate thereby; that, as he was well known to be a
lover and promoter of concord and union, and preferred a private life, so, "He
never accepted of that commission, but by the importunity of his friends, or,
at the earnest request of the province itself. This letter was signed by Arthur
Cook, John Simcock, Samuel Richardson, James Fox, George Murrie and Samuel
Carpenter.

Duration of this mode of government, etc.
The province and territories continued, in this manner, about two years; or,
till the arrival of Governor Fletcher of New York, in April, 1693; and though
they managed better, in this situation, than the Proprietary, at first, seems
to have expected from it, and with more harmony than they had done, for some
time before; never^heless, it will hereafter appear that the continued
refractoriness of the territories, in their refusing to accept of the new
charter, in 1701, was, at length, the occasion of their total separation from
the province, in legislation.

The revolution and measures, taken by the province, in consequence of this
conduct of the territories, T. Lloyd Deputy Governor from 3mo. 10th. 1691.
with the form of the legislative proceeding, in the Deputyship of Governor
Lloyd, which commenced about the Third-month, 1691, and under the charter then
in force are, in part, exhibited by the following promulgated bills; which
appear to have been passed into laws, in the same year, viz.

The Deputy Governor and Freemen of the province of Pennsylvania, in Council
met at Philadelphia, on the seventeenth day of the Sixth-month, 1691, have
prepared and published, according to law and charter, these following bills,
for the notice and concurrence of the Freemen, in Assembly to meet, the tenth
day of the Seventh-month next, at Philadelphia, aforesaid, in the form and
style of laws, then and there to be confirmed, amended, or rejected, as the
General Assembly, in their wisdom, shall see meet.
At an Assembly held at Philadelphia, the tenth day of the Seventh-month, anno
dom. 1691.
WHEREAS, A promulgated bill.
by an act of General Assembly held at Chester, alias Upland, in the
Tenth-month, 1682, it is, among other things, enacted by the Proprietary and
Governor of this province of Pennsylvania, with the advice and consent of the
Deputies of the Freemen of the same province and counties annexed, in the said
Assembly met, that the counties of New Castle, Jones and Whorekills, alias
Deal, should be annexed, and are thereby annexed, unto the province of
Pennsylvania, as of the proper territory thereof; and the people therein should
be governed by the same laws, and enjoy the same privileges, in all respects,
as the inhabitants of Pennsylvania did, or should, enjoy from time to time, as
by the same act, more at large appears: But, lest the said Proprietary and
Freemen of the said province should by the said union, be deprived of the
immunities and powers then before invested in them, apart from the said annexed
counties, by virtue of the King's letters patent, and first charter of
liberties, or should otherwise be impeded or obstructed, in any act of
government, which might relate to the public good, justice, peace and safety of
the said province, which might not so immediately concern the territories, it
was, at the same General Assembly, further enacted, that all matters and
things, not therein provided for, which should, or might, concern the public
good, justice, peace and safety of the said province, and the raising and
imposing taxes, customs, duties, or charges whatsoever, should be, and are,
thereby referred to the order, prudence and determination of the Governor and
Freemen of the said province, from time to time; which said laws have been
sithence continued in, and by, the succeeding General Assemblies: Now, for as
much as the present state and emergency of this government requires some speedy
provision, for the support and safety thereof, and for the better establishing
the justice and peace of the same, by reason of the breach, that the
Representatives of the said annexed counties have lately made, in wilfully
absenting themselves from their charteral attendance, in the last legislative
Council and Assembly, and declining their other incumbent duties and services
to the present constitutions of this province; as also, in opposing and
tumultuously preventing the election of new members, to supply the neglect of
the said absenting Representatives, withstanding all provincial acts of
government, and denying the powers of the same: Therefore, for preventing all
doubts and scruples concerning the meeting, sitting and proceeding of this
present General Assembly, Be it declared and enacted, and it is declared and
enacted, by the Deputy Governor, with the assent of the Representatives of the
Freemen of the said province, in General Assembly met, by the King and Queen's
authority, that the meetings of Council, since the dissent and refusal
aforesaid, of the Representatives of the said annexed counties, and the
meetings of the Deputy Governor and Representatives of the province, in
Provincial Council and Assembly met, on the tenth day of the Third-month last
past, at Philadelphia, and now sitting, in this present General Assembly, are
the Provincial Council and Assembly of this province of Pennsylvania; and are
hereby declared, enacted and adjudged so to be, to all intents, constructions
and purposes, notwithstanding the absence of the Representatives of the said
counties annexed: -- And, for removing all objections, that may arise
concerning the validity, force and continuation of the laws of this government,
Be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That all these laws, that
were made, continued and stood unrepealed at the last General Assembly, held at
New Castle, in the year 1690, are hereby declared and enacted to stand in force
and be continued respectively, until the publication of other laws, which
shall be made by the next General Assembly of this province.

Ex per DAVID LLOYD, Cl. Council.

As this division had occasioned much anxiety to the Proprietary, of which both
parties were sensible, In the minutes of the Provincial Council, in the Summer
of the year 1691, appear the following names of the active members of that
board, viz. John Simcock, John Delavall, William Stockdale, Arthur Cook, Joseph
Growdon, Griffith Owen, John Curtis, Thomas Duckett, John Bristow, Thomas
Janny, William Jenkins.

so to relieve him, 1692.
at least in part, from his apprehensions and uneasiness, on that account, in
the forepart of the year 1692, Both parties unitedly write to the Proprietor.
the two deputies and their Councils unitedly writ him the following letter,
viz.

From the Council-room at Philadelphia, the 6th. of the Second-month, 1692.
Worthy Governor,
Their letter to him.
THESE few lines, we hope, may much ease thy mind, in reference to thy
exercises, concerning the affairs of thy government here, by informing thee,
that, with unanimous accord, we rest satisfied with thy two deputations, sent
for executive government of the province, and counties annexed: and thy
deputies concurring amicably, at this time, to act as one general government,
in legislation, we have proceeded in the preparing jointly some few bills; that
thereby our present united actings may be as well published, as the respective
services of the government answered. -- What particular transactions of moment,
which have occurred upon our calm debates of the choice of three, we refer to
the minutes for thy satisfaction: We heartily wish thee well; and, with longing
expectations, desire thy speedy return unto us; where, we doubt not, but thou will find a most grateful reception, and better face of affairs, than may seem
to thee there, at this distance; so, bidding thee adieu, at this time, we
remain,

Thy faithful and well-wishing friends, THOMAS LLOYD. WILLIAM MARKHAM. Arthur
Cook, Jno. Cann, Jos. Growdon, John Delavall, Rich. Halliwell, Griffith Owen,
George Martin, Wm. Jenkins. John Bristow, Albertus Jacobs, Hugh Roberts, Sa.
Gray, Samuel Lewis, Richard Wilson, William Biles.


CHAPTER XI.
Schism and separation between George Keith and the Quakers. -- Their testimony
of denial against him. -- His conduct afterward. -- Some judicial proceedings
against him, etc. -- The Magistrates' declaration of the reasons for these
proceedings. -- This affair, and the difference between the Province and
Territories, give William Penn great concern and trouble. He is deprived of the
government by King William and Queen Mary. -- Their commission to Fletcher,
Governor of New York. -- Fletcher's letter to Deputy Lloyd.

IN the year 1691, an affair happened among the Quakers, in this part of the
world, The schism of George Keith, etc.
which gave them much uneasiness and trouble, in their religious capacity, more
especially in this Province, and the neighboring places. This was the
difference and separation between them and George Keith, before mentioned. He
had been an eminent preacher and writer among them, for many years; and had
published several well-written treatises, in defense of their religious
principles, yet extant. He was a man of quick natural parts, and considerable
literary abilities; acute in argument, and very ready and able in logical
disputations, and nice distinctions, on theological subjects; but, said to be,
of a brittle temper, and over-bearing disposition of mind; not sufficiently
tempered and qualified with that Christian moderation and charity, which give
command over the human passions; the distinguishing characteristic of true
Christianity: of which he himself had not only made high profession, but also,
in his younger years, as appears by his writings, had a good understanding. His
great confidence in his own superior abilities seems to have been one, G.
Keith's schism, etc.
if not the chief, introductory cause of this unhappy dispute; -- When men set
too high a value on themselves, and others will not come up to their price,
then they are discontented. He is said to have had too much life in argument
and disputation, on religious points of controversy, and sometimes to have
exhibited an unbecoming vanity on victory thereby obtained over his opponents,
even, prior to the schism between him and his friends: for having, some time
before, been on a visit to New England, he is represented as having indulged
his natural propensity this way, among the preachers and inhabitants there, in
a very extravagant manner: Which disposition of mind, from that time forward,
appeared to have so far got the ascendancy over him, that, on his return, he
began to exhibit the same, even, among his friends, beginning with finding
fault, proposing and urging new regulations, in the society, in respect to the
discipline of it, and complaining, "There was too great a slackness therein."
-- Upon his friends not readily joining with him and his proposals, in the
manner he expected, he became still more captious, and more disposed to seek
matters of reproach and offense against diverse in the society, and to make the
worst of them; charging some of his friends, His allegation against the Quakers
who were generally well esteemed and approved ministers, with preaching false
doctrine; and, it is said, even, in points contrary to what himself had
formerly held and declared, in his writings, in defense of the Quakers, and
their principles. He found fault with his friends being in the magistracy, and
their executing the penal laws against malefactors, as being inconsistent with
their religious profession; and, in short, contended that he and such as joined
with him, were the true Quakers, and all the rest, who opposed him, were
apostates.

These were the principal allegations, which, in beginning of the dispute, he
appears to have made against the Quakers. The principal things, Their charges
against him.
if not the whole, with which I find him charged by them, at that time, appear
to be his over-bearing temper, and unchristian disposition of mind, in grossly
vilifying and disparaging diverse members of the society, who were universally
and highly approved among them, and entirely rejecting their advice and
judgment, in the affair; the consequence of an overheated and intemperate zeal:
which, at last, proceeded so far as to occasion such a breach, that, He is
disowned, etc. in 1692.
on the 20th. day of the Fourth-month, 1692, a declaration, or testimony of
denial, was drawn up against him, at a meeting of the ministers of the society
at Philadelphia: wherein both he and his conduct were publicly disowned by them.

This declaration, which was confirmed at the next following General Yearly
Meeting, held at Burlington, the seventh of the Seventh-month, exhibits more
fully the charges against him, and may further elucidate the case to the more
inquisitive: Which Testimony, as it may, probably, be curious to some, if not
instructive, is, therefore, placed in the notes. The Declaration, or Testimony,
of Denial against George Keith, was expressed as follows, viz.

To the several Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in Pennsylvania, East and West
Jersey, and elsewhere, as there may be occasion.
Beloved Friends,
IN tender love, and with spirits bowed down before the Lord, is this our
salutation unto you; earnestly desiring your growth, and daily preservation, in
the ancient truth, and in the simplicity of the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and our hope and breathings are, that no insinuations, or wiles, of the
enemy shall prevail, to turn you aside from your steadfastness, or cause you to
esteem lightly of the rock and way of God's salvation unto you, but that you
may be kept in the light and life, which was, and is, the just man's path, to
the end of our days, Amen!

Now, dear Friends, it is with sorrow of spirits and grief of souls, that we
signify unto you the tedious exercise, and vexatious perplexity, we have met
with, in our late friend, George Keith, for several months past. With mourning
and lamentation do we say, How is this mighty man fallen! How is his shield
cast away, as though he had not known the oil of the holy Ointment! How shall
it be told in Gath, and published in the streets of Askalon! Will not the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, when they hear that he is fallen upon
the soaring mountains, and from the high places of Israel? While thou walkedst
in the counsel of God, and were little in thy own eyes, thy bow did abide in
strength; thy sword returned not empty from the fat of the enemies of God --
thy bow returned not back. His enemies were then vile unto thee* and his
followers honorable in thy esteem. Oh, how lovely were thou, in that day, when
his beauty was upon thee; and when his comeliness covered thee! Why should his
ornaments exalt thee, which were given to humble thee before him? And how art
thou fallen from thy first love, and art become treacherous to the spouse of
thy youth. Consider where thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works

But so it has happened, Friends, lest any flesh should glory, but become
silent before the Lord, that this once eminent (...), and instrument of renown,
in the hand of the Lord, while he kept his first habitation, and knew the
government of Truth over his own spirit; and witnessed the same to be a bridle
to his tongue, was then serviceable, both in pen and speech, to the churches of
Christ. But now, and of late, it is too obvious and apparent, that being
degenerated from the lowly, meek and peaceable spirit of Christ Jesus, and
grown cool in charity and love toward his brethren, he is gone into a spirit
of enmity, wrath, and self-exaltation, contention and janglings; and, as a
person without the fear of God before his eyes, and without regard to his
Christian brethren, and letting loose to an extravagant tongue, he has broken
out into many ungodly speeches, raising accusations, and passionate
threatenings toward many of his brethren and elders; and that upon slender
occasions. And when some in Christian duty, have laid before him his unsavory
words, and abusive language, as a person of common civility would loath, it
has been too frequent with him, and that, in a transport of heat and passion,
to call some of his brethren, in the ministry, and other elders, and that upon
small provocations, (if any) Fools, ignorant Heathens, Infidels, silly Souls,
Liars, Heretics, rotten Ran^ers, Muggl^tonians, and other names of that
infamous strain; thereby to our grief, foaming out his own shame. And further,
his anger and envy being cruel against us, and not contenting himself with his
harshness against persons, he proceeded, in bitterness of spirit, to charge our
meetings with being come together to cloak heresy and deceit; and publishing
openly several times, that there were more doctrines of devils, and damnable
heresies, among the Quakers, than in any profession among the Protestants. He
has long objected against our Discipline, even, soon after his coming among
us, and having prepared a draught of his own, and the same not finding the
expected reception, he seemed disgusted. Since he has often quarrelled with us
about Confession, declaring, "That he knew none given forth by the body of
Friends, to his satisfaction;" and often charged most of us with being unsound
in the faith. We have offered, in several meetings, for his satisfaction, and
to prevent strife among us, and for preserving the peace of the church, to
deliver a Confession of our Christian faith, in the words of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, the Author of our Christian faith, and in the words of
the Apostles and Disciples, his faithful followers; or we would concur, and
agree upon a Confession, and have it transmitted for approbation of the Yearly
Meeting here, or the Yearly Meeting in London; yet, it was offered unto him, at
the same time, that a Confession, concerning the main matters of controversy,
should be given out of a book of his own; but all was slighted, as
insufficient. The Lord knows the trouble, which we have had with this unruly
member; and the openness of our hearts, and well-wishes toward him,
notwithstanding his rage and violence against us; and of the endeavors of many
in this place, to have gained upon him by a friendly converse, and by other
means, not inconsiderable to a brotherly freedom; but our labor hitherto seems
to be as water spilt upon a rock. And this meeting, having orderly and tenderly
dealt with him, for his abusive language, and disorderly behavior, he has not
only slighted all applications of gaining him to a sense of his ill-treatment
and miscarriages, but, in an insulting manner, said to the friends appointed by
the meeting, to admonish him, "That be trampled the judgment of the Meeting
under his feet, as dirt." And has, of late, set up a separate meeting here;
where he has, like an open opposer, not only reviled several friends, by
exposing their religious reputations, in mixed auditories of some hundreds,
endeavoring to render them and friends here, by the press and otherwise, a
scorn to the profane, and the song of the drunkard; but he has traduced and
vilified our worthy traveling friends, James Dickinson and Thomas Wilson, in
their powerful and savory ministry, whose service is not only here, but, in
most meetings in England, Scotland and Ireland, well known to have a seal in
the hearts of many thousands of the Israel of God. He has also within a few
weeks, appeared in opposition, as it were, to the body of Friends, by putting
on his hat, when our well-received and recommended friend, James Dickinson, was
at prayer; and that, in a meeting of near a thousand Friends and others; and so
going out of the meeting, to the great disquiet thereof, and to the drawing
some scores into the same opposition with him, by his ill example. And he thus
persisting in his repeated opposition, hard speeches, and continued separation,
and laboring like an unwearyed adversary, to widen the breach, made by him,
and so, abusing some of the neighboring meetings, by being, as yet, under that
covering of being owned by us; we are hereby brought under a religious
constraint, and to prevent other meetings from being further injured by him, to
give forth this Testimony, strained, as it were, from us, by his many and
violent provocations, viz. That we cannot own him, in such ungodly speeches,
and disorderly behavior, or, in his separate meetings; and that we disown the
same, as proceeding from a wrong spirit, which brings into disorder inwardly,
and leads into distraction and confusion outwardly. And, until he condemn and
decline the same, we cannot receive him, in his public ministry, and would have
him cease to offer his gift, as such, among us, or elsewhere among Friends,
till he be reconciled to his offended brethren. And as those few of our
brethren, in the gift of the ministry, who are gone out with George Keith, into
his uncharitable and dividing spirit, (the miserable effects whereof many of us
have sufficiently known, in Old England, and other parts) our judgment is,
that, while they continue such, they become unqualified to the work of the
Gospel, as degenerating from the guidance of God's blessed and peaceable
spirit; in their hearts, (from whence proceeds the effectual New Testament
ministry) and being turned from the peaceable fruits thereof, are gone to
un-charity and contention.

And now, all you, who have walked in fellowship and communion with us, and are
drawn aside, through inconsideration, or otherwise, into the spirit of
separation and prejudice against our meetings, orderly established; and wherein
we have often been mutually refreshed together; we cannot but, in the fear of
God, and in love to your souls, admonish you also of the insecurity of your
present state, and that, therein we cannot have unity with you; and unless you
return from under that spirit, dryness and barrenness from the Lord, will be
your reward.

And so, dear Friends, we exhort you all to behave your selves, in the spirit
of meekness, and pea^eable truth, upon all occasions, but more especially upon
any discourse, or conference, with any of them, who are discontented among you,
or started aside from you; and avoid all heats and contentions in matters of
faith and worship; and let not the salt of the covenant be wanting in your
words and actions; for, thereby the favor of your conversation will reach the
witness of God in them. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all,
Amen.

Given forth by the Meeting of Public Friends, in Philadelphia, the twentieth
of the Fourth-month, 1692. Thomas Lloyd, John Willsford, Nicholas Waln, William
Watson, George Maris, Thomas Duckett, Joshua Fearne, Evan Morris, Richard
Walter, John Simcock, Griffith Owen, John Brown, Henry Willis, Paul Saunders,
John Blunston, William Cooper, Thomas Thackary, William Biles, Samuel Jenings,
John Delavall, William Yardly, Joseph Kirkbride, Walter Fawcit, Hugh Roberts,
Robert Owen, William Walker, John Lynam, George Gray.



In confirmation of this Testimony and Declaration against George Keith, the
Yearly Meeting at Burlington, on the seventh of the Seventh-month, 1692, say
thus, --

"WE find it our duty to join with our brethren, in their Testimony against
that spirit of railing lying, slandering, and falsely accusing, which has
risen, and acted, notoriously in George Keith, and his adherents; which has
led them into a mischievous and hurtful separation. And we do hereby declare,
that we have not, nor can have, unity, in spirit, with any of them, until they
return and repent of their evils aforesaid," etc.

Extracted from their Testimony on the occasion, signed by 214 Names.


The Yearly Meeting in London, in the Third-month, 1694, unanimously declared
it to be their sense and judgment, -- "That the said George Keith was gone from
the blessed unity of the peaceable spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ* and has
thereby separated himself from the holy fellowship of the church of Christ; and
that, while he is in an unreconciled and uncharitable state, he ought not to
preach, or pray, in any of Friends' meetings, nor be owned, or received as one
of us, until by a public and hearty acknowledgement of the great offense, he
has given, and hurt he has done, and condemnation of himself therefore, he
gives proof of his unfeigned repentance, and does his endeavors to remove and
take off the reproach he has brought upon Truth and Friends; which, in the
love of God, we heartily desire, for his soul's sake."

Respecting diverse of the persons, who signed the preceding paper of Denial
against George Keith, see in other places of this history, viz. of Thomas
Lloyd, John Simcock, Griffith Owen, William Biles, Samuel Jenings, John
Delavall, Joseph Kirkbride, Hugh Roberts, Robert Owen, etc.

John Lynam came from Derbyshire; was a preacher and writer among the Quakers;
died in Pennsylvania and was buried in Philadelphia, in the Second-month, School.

William Stockdale came from Ireland; was a writer and preacher among the
Quakers; died in Pennsylvania, and was buried at Philadelphia, in the
Seventh-month, 1693.

Da^iel Wills, from Northampton, in England, removed to New Jersey in 1677, and
died in Barbados; -- a preacher among the Quakers.

John Willsford, from Leicestershire; a preacher and writer among the Quakers;
removed to New Jersey, and died at Burlington in that province.

Note, Some of the principal persons who adhered to Keith, and were men of
rank, character and reputation, in these provinces, and diverse of them great
preachers and much followed, were, Thomas Budd, George Hutchinson, Robert
Turner, Francis Rawle, John Heart, Charles Read, etc.

Note. -- "In the year, 1692, the Quakers, in Pennsylvania made a collection of
a sum of money, in conjunction with their friends, in England, for the relief
of some of their society, who were taken prisoners by the Sallee-men, to
Marqueness, in Turkey; and in suffering there: which was sent to the society in
London, for them to dispose of for that purpose." M. S.




1692.
He drew off a large number of people with him, some of considerable account, in
the society; and set up separate meetings, in diverse places: These called
themselves Christian Quakers and Friends, boasted of their large numbers, and
looked upon the rest as Apostates; many books were written, and much
altercation and dispute ensued, on both sides.

He appealed, or complained, He appeals to the Quakers in England.
to the Yearly Meeting of the society, in London, against the Quakers of
Pennsylvania, who had disowned him, and appeared there in person; where he was
confronted by diverse from the province. But, in this place, it is said, his
passion and wrath so far prevailed over him, and his demeanor was so
unreasonable and outrageous, and so much disposed for contention and dispute,
that notwithstanding all possible endeavors for a reconciliation, and healing
measures taking place between them, his denial was there finally confirmed.

He thenceforward became a public and bitter enemy, as far as in him lay,
against the Quakers, He becomes a publicenemy to the Quakers.
in general; preaching and writing against them with all imaginable virulency:
In which he appeared afterward to be employed by their adversaries, for that
purpose; for having joined with the Episcopal Clergy, in England, and served
there for some time, as a Vicar, ordained by the Bishop of London, He becomes a
clergyman and gives the Quakers more trouble in America, etc.
he afterward returned to America; where, as a Clergyman, in orders, he
officiated in his new function for about twelve months; and, having there given
the Quakers all the trouble in his power, he returned again to England by way
of Virginia. In this visit, it is said, he was generally slighted, both by
those, who before had been his adherents, and others: And that his conduct was
so glaringly inconsistent with his former pretensions; and his behavior
toward the Quakers so manifestly arising from a malignant disposition of mind,
and disappointed malice, notwithstanding all the superior abilities, Is
generally despised.
which he possessed, and made use of, he was universally despised by sober and
thinking people of all societies.

After his return to England, he was fixed in a benefice, in Sussex; and
continued to write against his former Friends, as a bitter enemy; but, as far
as appears, with a sinking reputation. At last, on his deathbed, from a well
authenticated account, it is asserted, Account of his Deathbed expressions, etc.
he thus expressed himself; "I wish I had died when I was a Quaker; for then I
am sure it would have been well with my soul." -- This is an instance of the
weakness of the human mind, even, when aided with the acquirements of science
and superior knowledge; it shows how far from their real interest and true
happiness, strong passions and unruly tempers may sometimes hurry, even, men of
understanding; and how widely different things appear, in times of ambition,
rage and revenge, from what they really are, in our cool and reflecting moments.

This schism made a great disturbance, in the province, for a time, and in some
other places, among the Quakers; yet many, or the major part, Many return again
to the Quakers.
of those persons, who had thus separated themselves, through the conduct of
this person, are said, to have returned soon after to the society.

But because Keith had, (as accounts say) by abusive language and printed
publications, vilified diverse persons in the Magistracy, tending to subvert
that absolutely necessary institution and order in civil society, and thereby
had drawn upon himself some judicial proceedings, on that account, Judicial
proceedings against him.
some persons have been disposed to charge the Quakers, if possible, with
persecution for religion; and as this appears to be the only case, in which
their enemies pretend to have just ground to accuse them of this evil, I shall,
therefore, endeavor here to lay before the reader, that part of this
transaction as circumstantially as the accounts remaining of it will permit.

In the beginning of the year 1691, a person, named Babit, with some others,
stole a small sloop, from a wharf, in Philadelphia; and in going down the river
with it, committed diverse robberies; of which intelligence being early given to
the Magistrates, three of them gave out a warrant, in the nature of a Hue and
Cry, to take them, in order to a legal trial and punishment; by virtue of which
they were taken, and brought to justice. The Magistrates, who granted this
warrant, being Quakers, George Keith, and his party, G. Keith censures the
magistrates.
soon after took occasion from thence to represent it as inconsistent with
their principles against fighting. -- He called Thomas Lloyd, the Deputy
Governor, who was accounted a person of a mild temper and deportment, good
sense, and unblemished character, and whose unwearyed endeavors, to serve him,
are said to have merited a different treatment, And vilifies them, etc.
"An impudent man, and a pityful Governor;" asking him, "Why he did not send
him to jail?" and telling him, "His back had long itched for a whipping; and
that he would print and expose them all over America, if not over Europe;" and
one of the Magistrates, who was well known to be a modest and peaceable man, he
opprobriously called, "An impudent rascal:" Such his conduct is represented to
have been.

Besides, being much enraged, he had published several virulent pieces; He
reflects on the Magistrates in print, etc.
one of which indecently reflecting on the above mentioned transaction, and on
several of the principal Magistrates in their judicial capacity, and thereby
lessening the lawful authority of the magistracy, in the view of the baser sort
of the people, who began thereupon to take greater liberties; wherefore the
printers, William Bradford and John M'Comb, who had published it, were, by a
warrant, from five Magistrates, viz. Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel
Richardson, Humphrey Murray and Robert Ewer, taken up, examined, and upon their
contemptuous behavior to the court and justices, in their examination, and
upon their refusal to give security, to answer at court, The Printers
committed, etc.
the usual practice in all similar occasions, they were committed; and though
they were under no confinement, being entirely at large, on their bare word
only, yet, (which seems to have been done by them, to answer some particular
design) at a certain time, having occasion to sign a paper, when they could not
be admitted into the prison itself, They sign a paper from the prison.
it is said, they got into the entry of it, and there dated, and signed the
said paper, as from the prison: -- But they were soon discharged, without being
brought to a trial.

G Keith and Tho. Budd presented by the Grand Jury, etc.
George Keith and Thomas Budd were also presented by the Grand Jury of
Philadelphia, as authors of another book, of the like tendency, in the
following words, viz. "We, of the Grand Jury, do present George Keith and
Thomas Budd, as authors of a book, entitled, The plea of the innocent, where,
in page third, about the latter end of the same, they, the said George Keith
and Thomas Budd, defamingly accuse Samuel Jenings, he being a Judge and a
Magistrate, of this province, of being too high and imperious in worldly
courts, calling him, impudent, presumptuous and insolent man, greatly exposing
his reputation, and of an ill precedent, and contrary to the law, in that case
made and provided."

The lenity of the magistracy is said to have been very remarkable toward the
actions and behavior of diverse of these people, when compared with the
provocations given; which, by apparent design, had not only been, but also
still continued to be, so extremely notorious and abusive, as well as
derogatory to the principal persons in authority, in their judicial capacity,
that, it is said, the rabble became greatly encouraged thereby, to despise and
inveigh against the acts of government, and to render it more and more
difficult to bring offenders to justice; it was, therefore, thought proper that
this presentment should be prosecuted; They are tried and fined.
so the matter was brought to a trial, and the parties fined five pounds each;
but the fines were never exacted.

All possible art and means were said to be used, These proceedings represented
as being on a religious account by some.
which the enemies to the Quakers, the disaffected to the administration, and
the more libertine part of the people, in the province were capable of, to
magnify these judicial proceedings, and to represent them, as being on a
religious account; and with great assiduity, artifice and noise, they were by
these propagated as such, both at home and abroad; upon which the Magistrates
published the reasons of their conduct, in the following paper, viz.

At a private sessions held for the county of Philadelphia, the 25th. of the
Sixth-month, 1692, before
Justices of the county.
Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson, Humphrey Murray, Anthony
Morris, Robert Ewer,
A declaration of the Magistrates
WHEREAS, the government of this province being, by the late King of England's
peculiar favor, vested, and since continued, in Governor Penn, who thought fit
to make his, and our worthy friend, Thomas Lloyd, his Deputy Governor, by, and
under whom the Magistrates do act, in the government; and, whereas, it has
been proved before us, that George Keith, being a resident here, did, contrary
to his duty, publicly revile the said Deputy Governor, by calling him an
impudent man, telling him, "He was not fit to be a Governor, and that his name
would stink;" with many other slighting and abusive expressions, both to him
and the Magistrates; (and he, that uses such exorbitancy of speech toward our
said Governor, may be supposed, will easily dare to call the members of Council
and Magistrates impudent rascals, as he has lately called one, in an open
assembly, that was constituted, by the Proprietary, to be a Magistrate) and he
also charges the Magistrates, who are ministers here, with engrossing the
magisterial power into their hands, that they might usurp authority over him;
saying also, "He hoped in God he should shortly see their power taken from
them;" all which he acted in an indecent manner.

And further, the said George Keith, with several of his adherents, having,
some few days since, with unusual insolence, by a printed sheet, called, "An
appeal," etc. traduced and vilely misrepresented the industry, care, readiness
and vigilance of some magistrates and others here, in their late proceedings
against the privateers, Babit, and his crew, in order to bring them to condign
punishment; whereby to discourage such attempts, A declaration of the
Magistrates
for the future; and have thereby also defamed and arraigned the determinations
of the principal judicature, against murderers; and not only so, but also, by
wrong insinuations, have labored to possess the readers of their pamphlet,
that it is inconsistent for those who are ministers of the gospel, to act as
Magistrates; which, if granted, will render our said Proprietary incapable of
the powers, given him by the said King's letters patent; and so prostitute the
validity of every act of government, more especially in the executive part
thereof, to the courtesy and censure of all factious spirits, and
malcontents, under the same.

Now, forasmuch as we, as well as others, have born, and still do patiently
endure, the said George Keith, and his adherents, in their many personal
reflections against us, and their gross revilings of our religious society,
yet, we cannot, without the violation of our trust to the King and government,
as also to the inhabitants of this government, pass by, or connive at, such
part of the said pamphlet and speeches, that have a tendency to sedition and
disturbance of the peace, as also to the subversion of the present government,
or, to the aspersion of the Magistrates thereof.

Therefore, for the undeceiving of all people, we have thought fit, by this
public writing, not only to signify, that our procedure against the persons now
in the Sheriff's custody, as well as what we intend against others concerned,
(in its proper place) respects only that part of the said printed sheet, which
appears to have the tendency aforesaid, and not any part relating to
differences in religion; but also these are to caution such, who are well
affected to the security, peace, and legal administration of justice, in this
place, that they give no countenance to any revilers, or contemners of
authority, Magistrates or magistracy; as also, to warn all other persons, that
they forbear the further publishing and spreading of the said pamphlets, as
they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Given under our hands, and seal of the county, the day, year and place,
aforesaid.

W. Penn at first displeased with part of these proceedings
This affair of George Keith gave much concern to William Penn, who appeared, at
first, rather to have censured part of these proceedings against him; whom he
regarded as his old friend, more especially his trial; at which by some of his
letters, he appeared to be much displeased: In a letter, dated, Tenth-month,
1693, (see hereafter) W. Penn mentions this trial of George Keith, in these
words, viz.

"The trial of Geo. Keith has been industriously spread all about the nation,
especially at London, at the Court Westminster Hall, and the Parliament House;
the odium it has contracted in some, stirred up in others; the advantage the
disaffected among us make by it, against unity, against Friends having power,
against me and you in particular, are great and lamentable; the Lord put a holy
stop, by his wise power, to this evil work, and bring that which is wrong under
his righteous judgment."


but after he was made fully acquainted with the nature and circumstances of
the whole transaction, and was convinced of George Keith's great change, he
appears to have been as ready and active as any others, in endeavoring to
clear the society from the imputation of being the cause of the unhappy schism.
But the difference between the province and territories continued still much to
affect him, and to increase his apprehensions of very disagreeable
consequences; as appears by his manner of writing to some of the principal
persons, in the administration, about this time. In a letter to a friend,
dated, Fourth-month, 1692, (see page 357) speaking on this division, he says,
-- "I desire thee to write to them; which they will mind now more than upon the
spot; and lay their union upon them; for else the Governor of New York is like
to have all; if he has it not already. The Lord forgive them their unspeakable
injury to me and mine," etc.

In another letter to the principal persons in the administration, in the
Seventh-month, 1693, he says, -- "I writ you per Samuel Jenings of what was
like to ensue upon the differences there, and the conduct I thought fit to be
taken," etc.




It cannot reasonably be imagined that the court of King William could be very
favorably disposed to a person, 1693.
who had been so much in friendship with the late King James, W. Penn's
difficulty after the revolution.
as William Penn had been; though King William himself seems to have had a
great regard for him, and his known general great humanity and catholic spirit
toward all, without distinction of party, rendered him respected among men of
opposite principles both in relilion and politics; yet his enemies, more
especially in the latter of these characters, never had a fairer opportunity
against him, than at this time; hence, when his young colony most needed his
presence and assistance, they not only effectually prevented his giving it that
aid, as before mentioned, but also now so far misrepresented, or magnified,
these disorders in it, The patent of King William, dated, August, 1694, by
which William Penn was restored to his government, mentioning the causes of the
resumption of it, at this time, by the crown, begins in this manner, viz,

"WHEREAS, upon information, that by reason of great miscarriages in the
government of our province of Pensilvania, in America, and the absence of the
Proprietor, the same was fallen into disorder and confusion," etc:


which, in great measure, arose from his too long absence from it, thus
occasioned by themselves, or, that, in consequence thereof, W. Penn deprived of
the government of Pennsylvania, etc.

Which is conferred on Benjamin Fletcher, Governor of N. York.


he was, in the year, 1692, deprived of the government of Pennsylvania and the
territories, by King William and Queen Mary; who granted a commission to
Benjamin Fletcher, Governor of New York, dated October the 21st. in the fourth
year of William and Mary, anno 1692, to take them under his government; which
commission arrived, in the beginning of the year 1693, and is as follows, viz.

William and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc.
To our trusty and well-beloved Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire, our Captain General
and Commander in Chief of our province of New York, and the territories
depending thereon, in America, Greeting:
His commission.
WHEREAS, by our commission, under our great seal of England, bearing date the
eighteenth day of March, in the fourth year of our reign, we have constituted
and appointed you, the said Benjamin Fletcher, to be our Captain General, and
Governor in chief, in and over our province of New York, and the dependences
thereon in America; and have thereby granted unto you full power and authority,
with the advice and consent of our Council, as need shall require, to summon
and call General Assemblies of the inhabitants, being freeholders, within the
said province, according to the usage of the province of New York; and that the
persons thereupon duly elected by the major part of the freeholders of the
respective counties and places, and so returned, and having before their
sitting, taken the oaths appointed by act of Parliament, to be taken instead of
the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and subscribed the test; and without
taking and subscribing whereof none shall be capable of sitting, though
elected, shall be called the General Assembly of that our said province, and
have thereby granted unto you, the said Benjamin Fletcher, by and with the
consent of our said Council and Assembly, or the major part of them, full power
and authority, to make, constitute and ordain, laws, statutes and ordinances
for the public peace, welfare, and good government of our said province, and of
the people and inhabitants thereof; which said laws, statutes and ordinances
are to be, as near as may be, agreeable to the laws and statutes of this our
kingdom of England; provided that all such laws, statutes and ordinances be,
within three months, or sooner, Fletcher's commission.
after the making thereof, transmitted unto us, under our seal of New York, for
our approbation, or disallowance of the same; and in case any, or all of them,
not before confirmed by us, shall, at any time, be disallowed, and not
approved, and so signified by us, our heirs and successors, under our, or their
sign manual, or signet, or by order of our or their, Privy Council, unto you,
the said Benjamin Fletcher, or to the Commander in Chief of the province of
New York, for the time being, then such, and so many of them, as shall be so
disallowed and not approved, shall from thence forth cease, determine and
become utterly void, and of none effect: And to the end that nothing may be
passed, or done, by our said Council and Assembly to the prejudice of us, our
heirs and successors, we have hereby willed and ordained, that you, the said
Benjamin Fletcher, shall have and enjoy one negative voice, in the making and
passing of all laws, statutes and ordinances, as aforesaid; and that you shall
and may, from time to time, as you shall judge it necessary, adjourn, prorogue
and dissolve all General Assemblies aforesaid.

We, therefore, reposing special trust and confidence in the prudence, courage
and loyalty of you, the said Benjamin Fletcher, to be our Captain General, and
Governor in Chief, in and over our province of Pennsylvania, and in the country
of New Castle, and all the tracts of land depending thereon, in America, and we
do accordingly, by these presents, command and require you to take the said
province and country under your government, and for the better ordering,
governing and ruling over said province and country, and the tracts and
territories depending thereon, we do hereby give and grant unto you, the said
Benjamin Fletcher, all and every the like powers and authorities, as in our
said commission, bearing date the eighteenth day of March, Fletcher's
commission.
in the fourth year of our reign, are given, granted and appointed you, for the
ruling and governing our province of New York, to be exercised, in like manner,
by you, the said Benjamin Fletcher, in and over our said province of
Pennsylvania, and the country of New Castle, and the territories and tracts of
land, depending thereon in America.


Governor Fletcher, upon receiving this commission, repaired to his new
government, after having first notified his intention by the following letter,
directed,

To the honorable Thomas Lloyd, Esquire, Deputy Governor of Pennsylvania.
SIR,
Governor Flet^her's letter to Go. Lloyd.
HAVING received their Majesties' commission, under the great seal, for the
government of Pennsylvania, and being required to make a speedy repair to that
province, I think fit to acquaint you, that I propose to begin my journey from
home, on Monday, the twenty-fourth instant, and desire the Council, and
principal freeholders may have notice; that their Majesties' commands may be
communicated to them, so soon as I arrive, which, I hope, may be the
twenty-ninth.

I am, Sir, your very loving friend, BENJAMIN FLETCHER.
New York, April the 19th. 1693.

CHAPTER XII.
Governor Fletcher arrives at Philadelphia. -- Names of the members of Assembly
convened by him, in 1693. -- Council's address to the Governor. -- Proceedings
of the Governor and Assembly, etc. -- The Queen's letter to Governor Fletcher,
respecting the defense of Albany. -- Assembly's address to the Governor, with
his answer. -- The Assembly's remonstrance, with other proceedings. -- A law
for the support of government, etc. -- Assembly's petition to the Governor. --
Resolve of the Assembly, and protest of some of its members. -- John Delavall.
-- Governor Fletcher dissolves the Assembly, appoints William Markham his
Deputy, and departs for New York. -- His message to the Assembly in 1694.
Conclusion of Fletcher's administration, etc. -- Death and memorial of the
former Deputy Governor, Thomas Lloyd.

COLONEL Fletcher arrived at Philadelphia with more pomp, and splendid
attendance, 1693.
than had been usually seen before in Pennsylvania; Gov. Fletcher arrives at
Philadelphia.
and the persons in the present administration appear to have given up the
government to him, without any notification, or order, to them, either from the
crown, or the Proprietary; for which, afterward, The Proprietor disapproves of
the too hasty surrender of the government.
in a letter to certain of them, William Penn seems to have blamed their
conduct, especially that of his Deputy Lloyd; but yet apprehending their view,
in so doing, to have been intended for the best, he excused them. He likewise
writ to Fletcher himself, cautioning him to beware of meddling with it, in the
present circumstances, and reminding him of his particular obligation to him.
This the Proprietary having mentioned in the abovesaid letter, to his friends
in the province, the following answer, respecting the Governor of New York, was
returned by six of them, viz. Arthur Cook, John Simcock, James Fox, Samuel
Richardson, George Murrie and Samuel Carpenter, in a letter to the Proprietary,
dated, Philadelphia, the 18th. Eleventh-month, 1693-4, viz. "That if the said
letter (to Fletcher) had come in time (as we are informed) he would hardly have
proceeded so far, in taking this government; and, therefore, we could have
wished it had come sooner, if happily it had been a means to prevent so great
trouble and loss to thee and us; who are (as we stand related) great sharers
with thee, in all things tending to the hurt of the province." --

Governor Fletcher, soon after his arrival, called an Assembly: prior to which,
a dispute, arising between him and the Council, respecting the mode of electing
and convening them, occasioned the following address to him, from the members
of the Council, delivered on the 29th. of April, viz. Note. -- In the
Third-month, 1693, the Names of the Members of Assembly, convened by Governor
Fletcher, on the sixteenth, were --

For Bucks.
Joseph Growdon, Speaker, John Swift, Henry Paynter.
For Chester.
John Simcock, George Maris, David Lloyd.
For Kent.
John Brinkloe, John Walker, William Manloe.
For Philadelphia.
Samuel Carpenter, Samuel Richardson, John White, James Fox.
For Newcastle.
Edward Blake, Cornelius Empson, Henry Williams, Richard Halwell.
For Sussex.
Albertus Jacobs, Thomas Pembert^^, Samuel Preston.



To Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General, and Governor in chief," etc.
The humble address of the freemen of the province of Pennsylvania, presented
by their delegates, Members of the Provincial Council, shows,
THAT, whereas, The Council's address to governor Fletcher.
the late King Charles the the second, in the thirty-third year of his reign,
by letters patent, under the great seal of England, did, for the consideration
therein mentioned, grant unto William Penn and his assigns, this colony, or
tract of land, erecting the same into a Province, calling it Pennsylvania, and
constituting the said William Penn, absolute Proprietary of the said Province,
saving (among other things) the sovereignty thereof, with power also, by virtue
of the said royal charter, to the said William Penn, his deputies and
lieutenants, to make laws, with the advice and assent of the freemen of the
said province, or the greatest part of them, or of their delegates, or
deputies, whom, for the enacting of the said laws, when, as often as need
required, he, the said William Penn, should assemble, in such sort, as to him
should seem best, with diverse other great powers, immunities and privileges, in
the same charter contained, which, relation being thereunto had, may more at
large appear.

By virtue, and in pursuance whereof the said Proprietary, William Penn, with
the advice and consent of the freemen of this Province, in General Assembly
met, at Philadelphia, (in 1683) did enact, that the time for the meeting of the
freemen, to choose their Deputies, to represent them in Provincial Council, and
General Assembly, should be on the 10th. day of the First-month, yearly; and
the members chosen, for the Provincial Council (consisting of three persons out
of each county) should give their attendance, within twenty days after
election, in order to propose bills; and the members of Assembly, being six out
of each county, The Council's address to governor Fletcher.
should meet on the tenth of the Third-month, called May, yearly, in order to
pass those proposed bills into laws; but, in case any of the said members
should either be of ill fame, or wilfully absent from their service, or happen
to die, it is provided by another law, (made in 1684) that it shall be lawful
for the Proprietary and Governor, within ten days after knowledge of the same,
to issue out a writ to the Sheriff of the county, for which the party was
chosen, immediately to summon the freemen to elect another member, etc.

Now, forasmuch as the present emergency of affairs, in this province, may
require a General Assembly to be speedily called, and since we conceive it has
pleased the King and Queen so far to countenance our laws and constitution as
to direct the present governancy to rule thereby, until the laws be duly made,
to alter, or amend the same;

We, therefore, earnestly desire, that no other measures may be taken, for
electing, or convening, our legislative power, than our recited laws and
constitutions of this government prescribe, the rather, for that the said King
did, by his letters patent, enjoin, require and command, that the laws made, as
aforesaid, should be most absolute and available in law, and that all the liege
people and subjects of the said late King, his heirs and successors, should
observe and keep the same inviolable, in these parts.

Joseph Growdon, John Bristow, John Delavall, John Simcock, Hugh Roberts,
Samuel Lewis, Richard Hough.



The Assembly, being met on the 16th. of the Third-month, presented their
Speaker, Joseph Growdon, to the Governor, for his approbation; Proceedngs of
the Governor and Assembly
who being accepted, the oaths and tests were presented to the whole house, in
the manner of other governments, under the immediate administration of the
crown; but some of the members, being scrupulous of taking oaths, and refusing
to be sworn, were indulged with subscribing to the declarations and
professions, mentioned in the act of Parliament, for liberty of conscience,
made in the first year of King William and Queen Mary. This the Governor told
them was an act of grace, and not of right, so as to be drawn into precedent in
future.

It does not appear that either the Proprietary, The government and privileges
of Pennsylvania not forfeited.
or the people of Pennsylvania, had forfeited those rights and privileges,
whose enjoyment had been the compact of their settlement of the province; of
which privileges, those which respected their religious, or conscientious
scruples were the chief; but the contrary rather is manifest: For
notwithstanding what was alleged for depriving the Proprietary of the
government, it was well known that the suspicion of his adhering too much to
King James was the principal, if not the only, cause for rendering him
incapable of attending so properly to it, as it seemed at that time to require:
But nothing was ever proved, to confirm what was alleged against him, in that
respect; though it injured him so far, as to oblige him, for a time, to be in
secret, and to be absent too long from his province; whereby some disorders
happened in it, that in all probability, would otherwise have been prevented;
but none of such magnitude, as to violate, or prevent, the regular
administration of justice, as seems to have been alleged by the enemies of the
prosperity of the province; much less to give just occasion for depriving the
colonists of their dearly bought rights and privileges, granted by charter,
confirmed by laws, and familiarized by custom; though it might be called a
favor, to enjoy them, where power alone has the rule, without having any
regard to justice: For notwithstanding the Governor was changed, yet it was
presumed the government, or constitution, was not, in consequence thereof, to
be violated, or altered, and that the inhabitants of Pennsylvania had as just a
right to be governed according to the usage of Pennsylvania, and their own
laws, then in force, Vide Fletcher's commission, etc. page 378.
as those of New York had to be governed according to the usage of that
province, though their usages were different, so long as justice was equally
well administered by the former, as by the latter, and in a manner more
agreeable to them.

The Assembly, however, in consideration of the present circumstances of
affairs, thought it most prudent to submit, though not consistent with a
privilege, to which, in their apprehension, they had a right, and below the
justice of their claim; and, for the present, acknowledged the same, as an act
of grace and savor, proceeding from the justice and kindness of the Governor.

The Assembly being qualified, the Governor communicated to them a letter, The
Queen's letter to Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire, Captain General, and Governor in
Chief, in and over the Province of Pennsylvania, etc.

Mary R.
Trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well.
WHEREAS, it has been represented unto us in council, in behalf of our province
of New York, in America, that the same having been at great expense, for the
preservation and defense of Albany, its Frontiers, against the French (by the
loss of which province the inhabitants of Maryland and Virginia would not be
able to live, but in garrison) and having h^therto preserved that post, the
burden thereby is now intolerable to the inhabitants there. We think it
reasonable and necessary that our several colonies and provinces of New
England, Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania should be aiding and assisting*
from time to time, to the Governor, or Commander in Chief, of our said province
of New York, in the maintenance and defense of it, during the present war; and
accordingly our will and pleasure is, That upon the application of the said
Governor, or Commander in Chief, you do immediately send him such aid, or
assistance, in men or otherwise, for the security of the said province, from
the attempts of the French or Indians, as the condition of the said
plantations, under your government, shall permit; and our further pleasure is,
that as soon as conveniently may be, you agree with the Governors of New
England, Virginia and Maryland, unto whom we have sent the like dir^^tions,
upon a quota of men, or other assistance, to be given by each colony, or
province, for the defense of New York, as occasion may require the same; and
that you return a speedy account of your proceedings herein, to the end that
further directions may be given, as shall be necessary for securing the fort of
Albany, and the province of New York, from the attempts of our enemies, in
those parts: and so we bid you farewell.

Given at our court, at Whitehall, the 11th. day of October, 1692, in the
fourth year of our reign. By her Majesty's command, NOTTINGHAM.



which he had received, in the last year, from the Queen, setting forth, that
the expense, for the preservation and defense of Albany, against the French,
Proceedings of the Assembly.
which had been intolerable to the inhabitants there; and that, as it was a
frontier, by which several of the other colonies were, in some measure,
defended, it was thought reasonable that those colonies should be assisting,
from time to time, to the government of New York, in the maintenance and
defense of it, during the war.

The first question put by the Assemby, after their meeting, was, How far the
laws of the province, and constitution of the government, founded on the powers
of the King's letters patent to the Proprietary, William Penn, were in force?
upon which it was unanimously Resolved, Resolution of the Assembly.
"That the laws of this province, that were in force and practice before the
arrival of this present Governor, are still in force; and that the Assembly
have a right humbly to move the Governor for a continuation, or confirmation
thereof." -- Accordingly the following address was drawn up and presented to
the Governor, viz.

To Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire, Captain General, and Governor in Chief, of the
province of Pennsylvania, and country of New Castle,
The humble address of the Freemen of said province and country, Shows,
The address of the Assembly.
THAT since it has pleased the King and Queen, that the absence of our
Proprietary's personal attendance, in this government, should be superseded by
thee, or thy Lieutenant, we, the Representatives of the Freemen of the said
province and territories (with due respect to the powers of thy commission, and
hearty acknowledgment of thy good will, care and tenderness toward us) do
readily acquiesce with the King's pleasure therein, earnestly beseeching that
our procedure in legislation may be according to the usual method and laws of
this government, founded upon the late King's letters patent; which we humbly
conceive to be yet in force, and therefore, we desire the same may be confirmed
unto us, as our rights and liberties. -- And we, with all faithfulness and
sincerity, to give what assurance we are capable of, in the present
circumstances we are, to answer the Queen's letter, and thy request, according
to our ability.

Third-month 17th. 1693.

To which the Governor returned this answer, viz.

Gentlemen,
The Governor's answer to the Assembly.
I, with the Council, have considered your address, and am sorry to find your
desires grounded upon so great mistakes. -- The absence of the Proprietary is
the least cause mentioned in their Majesties' letters patent, for their
Majesties' asserting their undoubted right of governing their subjects, in this
province: There are reasons of greater moment; as, the neglects and
miscarriages, in the late administration; the want of necessary defense against
the enemy, and the danger of being lost from the crown.

The constitution of their Majesties' government, and that of Mr. Penn, are in
a direct opposition, one to the other; if you will be tenacious in stickling
for this, it is a plain demonstration, use what words you please, that, indeed,
you decline the other.

I shall readily concur with you, in doing any thing, that may conduce to your
safety, prosperity and satisfaction, provided your requests are consistent with
the laws of England, their Majesties' letters patent, and the trust and
confidence their Majesties' have reposed in me.

Time is very precious to me, I hope you will desist from all unnecessary
debates, and fall, in earnest, upon those matters, I have already mentioned to
you, and for which you are principally convened.


The debates of the House, upon this answer to their address, produced the
following remonstrance to the Governor, viz.

To Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire, Captain General, and Governor in Chief, in and
over the Province of Pennsylvania, Country of New Castle, and tracts of Land
depending; --
The remonstrance of the Freemen of the said Province and Country, in Assembly
met,
Humbly shows,
THAT, having, with all dutiful respect, The Assembly 's remonstrance.
read and considered the Governor's answer to our address, this morning, We, in
answer thereunto, with submission say, we conceive that our desires were not
grounded on mistakes, in relation to the Proprietary's absence.

But, as to the other clause, mentioned by the Governor, of their Majesties'
asserting their undoubted right of governing their subjects, in this Province,
etc. we, with all readiness and cheerfulness, own accordingly to the right of
the King and Queen, whose prosperity and happy reign we heartily desire; and as
to the other reasons rendered, for superseding our Proprietary's governancy, we
apprehend they are founded on misinformations: for the courts of justice were
open, in all counties, in this government, and justice duly executed, from the
highest crimes of treason and murder, to the determining the lowest differences
about property, before the date, or arrival of the Governor's commission;
neither do we apprehend that the province was in danger of being lost from the
crown, although the government was in the hands of some, whose principles were
not for war; and we conceive that the present governancy has no direct
opposition (with respect to the King's government here in general) to our
Proprietary, William Penn's, though the exercise of thy authority, at present,
supersedes that of our said Proprietary; nevertheless we readily own thee for
our lawful Governor, saving to ourselves, and those whom we represent, our and
their just rights and privileges.

JOSEPH GROWDON, Speaker.
The 17th. of the Third-month, 1693.

What reply the Governor made, or whether any, does not appear; but the
Assembly, having thus modestly asserted their privileges, proceeded to enact
sundry laws. One for the support of government, and such others as were thought
necessary, either to be renewed, or repealed, for the public good, being sent
up to the Governor and Council, the latter were detained by them for some time,
to see what the Assembly would do, in consequence of the Queen's letter. This
delay, with the Governor's asserting, "that the Assembly should have no account
of the bill, (of supply, or for the support of government The law, for the
support of government, was as follows, viz.

"Anno regni Gulielmi and Miriae, regis and reginae Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae, quinto.
"An act for granting to King William and Queen Mary the rate of one Penny per
Pound upon the clear value of all real and personal estates, and six shillings
per head, upon such as are not otherwise rated by this act, to be employed by
the Governor of this province of Pennsylvania, and Territories thereof, for the
time being, toward the support of this government.
"SINCE it has pleased the King and Queen to take the government of this
province and country into their own hands, and supply the absence of our
Proprietor by so worthy a person, who gives us such great assurances of his
good desires to preserve and confirm us in our rights and liberties, We, the
Representatives, met in General Assembly, with humble submission to the King
and Queen's pleasure therein, and with all dutiful acknowledgments of their
love and tender regard to the reasonable laws and constitutions, as well as
protection, of this government; do humbly present the said King and Queen with
the free gift of the rates and assessments herein after mentioned; which we
desire they will please to accept of, as a testimony of our dutiful affections
toward them; and we do likewise desire, that the King and Queen would be
pleased to give and allow one-half thereof to Benjamin Fletcher, Captain
General and Governor in Chief in and over this province and country, etc. That
it may be so enacted.

Be it, therefore, enacted, by the Governor, Council, and Representatives,
convened in General Assembly, and by the authority of the same, That all and
every person and persons, within this government, having personal estates,
either in their possession, or in the possession of others, in trust for them,
over and besides the household goods and implements they use, and such sums of
money as they really owe, or ought to pay, shall yield and pay to the use
aforesaid, after the rate of one penny per pound; and to the end that this tax
may be laid with such equality and indifference as may be, upon all lands
within this government, and that a due regard may be had to the many tracts of
uncultivated and unimproved lands, which produce rather a charge, than profit,
to the owners thereof, Be it enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That all
lands, and other real, as also the personal estates, shall be, and are hereby
charged, for one year only, and no longer, with one penny for one pound clear
value.

And be further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all freemen, within
this province and territories, who have been out of their servitude, by the
space of six months, and shall not be otherwise rated by this act, nor worth
one hundred pounds, shall pay unto the use aforesaid, the sum of six shillings
per head: Provided always, That our Chief Proprietary and his late Deputies in
government, shall not be assessed, or otherwise chargeable, by virtue of this
act: Provided also, That no person, or persons, shall be taxed by this act, who
have a great charge of children, and become indigent in the world, and are so
far in debt, that the clear value of their real and personal estate does not
amount to thirty pounds.

And, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That, for the be^ter
assessing, ordering, levying and collecting the several sums of money, to be
paid as aforesaid, and for the more effectual putting this act in execution, it
shall and may be lawful for all, or any two, or more, of the Members of this
Assembly, within the respective counties, for which they serve, to call to
their assistance three of the Justices, or other substantial freeholders of the
respective counties, and within two months after the publication hereof, to
meet together at such place, or places, within each county, as they shall
respectively agree upon, in order to assess the rates, mentioned in this act,
and also to appoint Receivers, or Collectors, to receive or gather, the same;
and, after such meeting had, the said Assessors shall, by warrant from some
Justice of the Peace of the proper county, cause the Constables, within the
said county, to bring in certificates, in writing, of the names of every
person, residing within the limits of those places, with which they shall be
charged, and of the substances and values of every of them, who are to be rated
by this act; which said Constables shall be paid or allowed by the Collectors,
three pence per pound, for their trouble therein And the said Assessors are
hereby enjoined to ascertain and inform themselves, by all lawful means they
can, of the true valuation of the clear estates, both real and personal, within
those counties and limits, with which they shall be charged respectively; and,
being so hereof ascertained, they are to assess themselves and others for, and
in respect of, the said estates, according to the rates aforementioned, having
due regard to the ability of the people, and to the unprofitable land, they
hold; and thereupon to appoint such, and so many collectors, or receivers,
thereof, as they the said assessors, shall think fit, within their respective
limits; for which service the said assessors shall receive, or be allowed, six
pence per pound out of the said assessment.

"And, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the rates,
assessments and taxations, aforesaid, shall be made and ascertained with what
expedition may be, so that the moiety, or hall part, thereof* may be levied,
collected and paid to the receivers respectively, on or before, the 10th. day
of the Ninth-month next, and the other half thereof, on, or before, the 10th.
day of the Second-month. 1694, at such places, as the said assessors shall
appoint, which said assessments, with the names and several values of their
respective estates, together also with the real sums, levied by this act, shall
be returned, and ^^ir^y certified by the said collectors, to the next General
Assembly* after the same is assessed, as aforesaid.

"And, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That, if any of the
said assessors shall neglect or refuse, to make such assessments, as by this
act is required, or in case the collectors, so, as aforesaid, chosen, shall
deny, neglect, or refuse, to collect any sum, or sums, of money in form above
mentioned, assessed, and be convicted thereon, shall be fined at the discretion
of the justices of the respective county courts.

"And, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That, if any person,
or persons, whatsoever, within this government, who shall be assessed, or rated
any sum, or sums of money, by virtue of this act, to be levied, shall deny,
refuse, or delay, to pay the same, that then it shall be lawful for any such
collector, by virtue of a warrant, under the hand and seal of any Justice of
the Peace, for the county, where such offender shall reside, who, by virtue of
this act, are required and authorized to grant such warrants, to levy the same
by distress and sale of such person's, or persons' goods and chattels,
returning the overplus, if any be, to the owner, after the sum assessed, or
distrained for, with all charges, are deducted.

"And, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the moneys, or
effects, gathered, or received, by the said collectors, within their respective
limits, by virtue of this act shall, from time to time, be duly paid to such
Treasurer as shall be appointed by the Governor, to receive the same; whose
receipts shall be a sufficient discharge unto such collectors; which said
collectors, for gathering the said particular sums, shall retain in their hands
respectively, for every twenty shillings by them paid is, as aforesaid, the sum
of one shilling, as a reward for their pains and service; Provided always, That
if any person, or persons certified and assessed, or rated for, or in respect
of any estate* for which, by this act, ^e, or they, is or may be rated, do find
him, or themselves, aggrieved with such rating, and do, within ten days after,
complain to any three of the assessors, that signed, or allowed, his, or their
rate, who shall, within ten days after such complaint, particularly examine the
person complai^ing, or any other person, touching the value of the
complainant's (...) and personal estate; and thereupon the said assessors shall
abate, de^^^^, or increase the said assessments, according as complaints shall
appear, either by the party's own attest, or proof of others.

"And, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That, if any person be
sued, for any thing done, in pursuance of this act, such person, so (...), may
plead the general issue, and give this act in special matter, in evidence; and
if the plaintiff, or prosecutor, shall he cast, the defendant shall recover
treble damages; Provided always, That none shall be hereby punished, by virtue
of this act, for any neglect, or miscarriage, in the execution thereof, but
within one year after such offense; Provided also, and be it further enacted by
the authority aforesaid. That the several collectors shall gather and receive
the respective sums assessed, as aforesaid, in current money of this Province,
or for want thereof, in good merchantable country produce, at the current
market price.

Note, From the sums raised by this tax of one penny in the pound, in each
county, as exhibited below, from the votes of Assembly, may pretty nearly be
estimated the value of all the private estates and property, at that time, in
the province and territories, viz.

Counties. Sums. Philadelphia, L314 11 11 Newcastle, 143 15 0 Sussex, 101 1 9
Kent, 88 2 10 Chester, 65 0 7 Bucks, 48 4 1 Total. L 760 16 2

In the latter end of the year 1693, died, in Philadelphia, John Delavall, a
member of the Provincial Council. He had formerly been a Captain of the militia
in New York; but, afterward, joining in religious society with the Quakers, he
became an eminent Preacher among them; and is said to have been one of the
first, or early settlers in New Jersey; from whence he removed to Philadelphia:
where, having married Hanab, the eldest daughter of Thomas Lloyd, he continued
a useful and worthy member of society till his death. M. S.


) till they came, in a full house, before him, to give the last sanction to the
laws;" -- "and, that he saw nothing would do, but an annexion to New York," --
induced the house to send the following petition to the Governor.

To Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire, Captain General, and Governor in Chief, in and
over the province of Pennsylvania, country of New Castle, and tracts of land
depending,
The humble petition of the Freemen of the said province and country, in
Assemby met,
Shows,
Assembly's petition to the Governor.
THAT they, being deeply sensible of the many inconveniences that may attend a
misunderstanding between the Governor and Freemen, do earnestly desire all
occasions may be taken away, and with all humility, beg the Governor would be
pleased, in tender regard to the trust, lodged in the said Representatives, to
condescend so far, as to inform them, which of their bills the Governor will
accept, amend, or reject; that, by knowing which of the said bills are disliked
by the Governor, the Assembly may dispose themselves to acquiesce with the
Governor's pleasure, or endeavor to satisfy the Governor and Council with the
reasonableness of the said bills; which, being done, will remove all doubts and
troubles from our minds, upon that occasion, and we shall proceed with
cheerfulness to finish this General Assembly, to the King's honor, and the
general satisfaction of the Governor and government.

Third-month 31st. 1693.

Notwithstanding the soft and pliant terms of this petition, the Assembly
unanimously resolved, "That all bills sent to the Governor and Council, in
order to be amended, ought to be returned to this house, to have their further
approbation, upon such amendments, before they can have their final assent, to
pass into laws;" Resolution of the Assembly.
-- And there was a party in the house, who strenuously asserted their
undoubted rights, as founded on their then present charter of privileges, but,
being the smaller number, all they could do terminated in the following
protest, viz.

Philadelphia, Fourth-month 1st. 1693.
WE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, Protest of Members of Assembly.
Representatives of the Freemen of his province, in Assembly, do declare, it is
the undoubted right of this house to receive back from the Governor and Council
all such bills as are sent up for their approbation, or amendments, and debate
the same, as the body of the bills, and that the denial of that right is
destructive to the Freemen of making laws; and we do also declare, it is the
right of the Assembly, that before any bill, for supplies, be presented, for
the last sanction, aggrievances ought to be redressed: -- therefore, we, with
protestation (saving our just rights in Assembly) do declare, that the assent
of such of us as were for sending up the bill, for the supply, this morning,
was merely in consideration of the Governor's speedy departure, but that it
should not be drawn into example, or precedent, for the future.

David Lloyd, James Fox, John Swift, John White, George Maris, Samuel
Richardson, John Simcock, Samuel Preston, Samuel Carpenter, Henry Paynter.



According to the Assembly's petition the Governor sent back several bills,
with his objections, for amendments; which, being agreed to, were afterward
passed. And the rolls of such old laws, as the Assembly did not think fit to
repeal, to prevent any doubt of their being in force, being sent up to him,
were signed by him, for confirmation. After which he dissolved the Assembly, by
their own advice, Governor Fletcher appoints W. Markham his Deputy, and goes to
New York.
and departed for his government at New York, having first appointed William
Markham, Lieutenant Governor in his stead, in Pennsylvania.

During Governor Fletcher's administration here, he appears to have been
several times in the province, 1694.
but never long at one time. He met the Assembly again in the Third-month,
1694; and, in a message to them, dated, Philadelphia, May 23d. 1694, he
acquaints them,

Gov. Fletcher's message to the Assembly.
"That he had been disappointed in meeting them sooner, according to his
intention, and direction given for calling the Assembly, by reason of being
under a necessity to repair to Albany, on intimation given, that the five
nation Indians, which had been so long faithful to the English, were now
debauched to the French interest, and entering into a league with the Governor
of Canada; which was a matter of the highest importance to the neighboring
colonies, and required his utmost abilities and application to prevent.

"That he was come to lay the whole affair before them, assuring them, that
their own Indians here would be compelled to join the fatal confederacy.

"That, in consequence hereof, he had seen fourscore fine farms all deserted
about Albany.

"That the Jerseys had done more for the common defense than all the other
adjacent provinces.

"That he considered their principles, that they could not carry arms, nor levy
money, to make war, though for their own defense, yet he hoped they would not
refuse to feed the hungry and cloth the naked; that was, to supply the Indian
nations with such necessaries, as may influence their continued friendship to
these provinces.

"Lastly, that he was ready, 1694.
as far as in him lay, consistent with the rules of loyalty, and a just regard
to liberty and property, to redress their grievances, if they had any."

During this, and the succeeding session, End of Governor Fletcher's
administration.
in September, this year, several laws were passed; which ends the
administration of Governor Fletcher. --

But what return was made by the house to his request, in the latter part of
the above message, does not clearly appear; only I find, that, in a letter of
the Proprietary, dated, Bristol, fifth of the Ninth-month, 1695, which seems to
allude to part of the present proceedings, W. Penn complains of and blames the
province in part.
he observes and complains of there being factious persons in the colony, that
disturbed, or threatened the tranquillity of the government; -- and he blames
the province For refusing to send money to New York, for what he calls a common
defense, urging their compliance, and expressing the danger of their
oversetting the government again, by such refusal; which, before that time, was
restored to him, Markham being his Deputy. This letter was directed to Arthur
Cook, John Simcock, Samuel Carpenter, John Goodson, Samuel Richardson, Robert
Turner, Phineas Pemberton, and David Lloyd.

In a postscript to this letter, he further declares, -- "I must say, that what
I have spent upon the province, as Governor and Planter, is the foundation of
my present encumbrance, as Ph. F. (Philip Ford) knows, and asserted to the
Lords of Plantations lately, to be L4000 more in the whole, than I ever
received for lands, besides what it has cost me here."




On the 10th. of the Seventh-month this year (1694) died Thomas Lloyd, Death
and character of Tho Lloyd.
the Proprietary's late Deputy Governor, aged about fifty-four years. His
father was a person of some fortune, rank and esteem; of an ancient family and
estate, called Dolobran, in Montgomeryshire, in North Wales, This his son
Thomas Lloyd was a younger brother, and was educated in the best schools; from
which he was removed to the university of Oxford; where he is said to have made
considerable proficiency; and, being endowed with good natural parts, and an
amiable disposition of mind, Death and character of Th. Lloyd.
he attracted the regard and esteem of persons of rank and figure, and was
afterward in the way to considerable preferment, in the world; but, being of a
sober and religious way of thinking, he joined with the Quakers, and renounced
all worldly considerations, for that peace of mind, and real mental felicity,
which he believed to be the effect of true religion; and became an highly
esteemed preacher in that society. There is extant in manuscript, partly
obliterated, minutes of a religious dispute or conference, held at Lanfwillin,
in September, 1681, between the bishop of St. Asaph, and Charles and Thomas
Lloyd, brothers, with a number of others on both sides, as taken by the bishop,
entitled,

"An account of a conference between the right reverend the Bishop of St.
Asaph, and Mr. Charles Lloyd and Mr. Thomas Lloyd," etc.

It is a learned and ingenious dispute, marked with moderation, on both sides,
chiefly in the syllogistical method, on baptism, and what is called the Lord's
Supper, etc. with diverse Greek quotations and explanations, from the New
Testament, -- occasioned by the Bishop's requesting them to give their reasons
for their separation from the church, etc.

The conference, etc. continued several days.


In consequence of which, having suffered much unmerited reproach, persecution
and loss of property, in his native country, he afterward removed to
Pennsylvania, among the first, or early settlers, and was one of William Penn's
most intimate friends. He was mostly one of the principal persons in the
government, from his first arrival, and of very great service in the public
affairs: Yet he appears to have so much disliked such a public kind of life,
that, from the sole view of serving his country, when it so much needed it, he
is said to have accepted of the eminent offices, which, at different times, he
held in the administration, etc. for he was so far from making advantage, or
profit, to himself, by thus devoting his superior abilities, that it is
asserted, he worsted, or lessened, his private estate thereby.

In both his civil and religious capacity, in diverse respects, the great
utility of his conduct and management, during the infant and early state of the
province and colony, appear to have been very extensive and conspicuous, till
his death; Death and character of Th. Lloyd.
insomuch that he was universally beloved by all degrees of the people, both
for his good services, and the excellency of those amiable qualities, which,
from the advantages of birth, education, religion, and good sense, are
represented to have united in him, to distinguish his character, and render him
a bright and shining example of piety, virtue and integrity, through every
department, stage and vicissitude of both his private and public life. He died
on the sixth day of his sickness; during which time, his expressions to his
friends, about him, are mentioned, as expressive of the state of his mind, and
the consequence of a life, well spent; some of which were, -- "I die in unity
and in love with all faithful friends; I have fought a good sight; I have kept
the faith; which stands not in the wisdom of words, but in the power of God; I
have sought not for strife and contention, but for the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ and the simplicity of the Gospel; -- I lay down my head in peace, and
desire you may all do so." -- "Friends farewell all." --

Note. -- The above account and character of him is the purport of a much
larger written memorial, signed by thirty-two names, etc.




CHAPTER XIII.
William Penn cleared of the accusations against him, and his government
restored. -- His letter on this subject and other things. -- Death of his wife,
Gulielma Maria. -- He commissionates William Markham his Lieutenant Governor.
-- Copy of the instrument by which he was reinstated in his government in 1694.
-- His useful employment in England. His second marriage. -- Death of his
eldest son, Springett. -- Ancient testimony of the Quakers renewed, etc. --
William Penn visits his friends, the Quakers, in Ireland, etc. -- Governor
Markham's administration. -- His writ for calling an Assembly, in 1695. --
Proceedings of the Assembly in 1696. Their remonstrance, etc. -- Further
proceedings of the Legislature; wherein a bill of settlement is agreed to and
passed, called the third frame of government, etc. -- Names of the members of
Assembly in School. -- State of the province about this time. -- A Proclamation.

1693.
WE now return to William Penn; who, in the latter part of the year 1693,
through the mediation of his friends, W. Penn's enlargement, etc.
the Lords, Rochester, Ranelagh and Sidney, in which the Lord Summers, the Duke
of Buckingham and Sir John Trenchard were also assisting, was admitted to make
his innocence appear; which he did so effectually, that he was not only readily
acquitted of the charge against him, but also had his government restored.

The three first mentioned Lords went to the King, on the 25th. of November,
and represented to him William Penn's case, "As not only hard, Three Lords
intersede with the King in favor of W. Penn.
but oppressive; that there was nothing against him, but what impostors, or
those, that were fled, or that had, since their pardon, refused to verify, and
as^^d William Penn pardon, for saying what they (...)) alleged against him;
that they (the said Lords) had long known William Penn, some of them thirty
years, and had never known him to do an ill thing, but many good offices; and,
that, if it was not for being thought to go abroad in defiance of the
government, he would have done it two years ago; that he was, therefore,
willing to wait to go about his business, as before, with leav^ that he might
be the better respected, in the liberty he took to follow it." William Penn
mentions this, among other things, in the following manner, in a letter,
directed to Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Carpenter, John Simcock Samuel Richardson,
Samuel Jenings, Henry Murray, Arthur Cook, John Jones, etc. viz.

Hodsdon, the 11th. of the Tenth-month, 1693. Friends,
THIS comes by the Pennsylvania Merchant, -- Harrison, commander, and C.
Saunders, merchant. By them and this know, that it has pleased God to work my
enlargement, by three Lords representing my case, as not only hard, but
oppressive; that there was nothing against me, but what impostors, or those
that are fled, or that have, since their pardon, refused to verify, (and asked
me pardon, for saying what they did) alleged against me; that they had long
known me, some of them thirty years, and had never known me to do an ill thing,
but many good offices; and, that, for not being thought to go abroad in
defiance to the government, I might and would have done it, two years ago; and,
that I was, therefore, willing to wait to go about my affairs, as before, with
leave; that I might be the better respected, in the liberty I took to follow it.

King William answered, "That I was his old acquaintance, as well as theirs;
and, that I might follow my business as freely as ever; and that he had nothing
to say to me." -- Upon which they pressed him to command one of them, to
declare the same to the Secretary of State, Sir John Trenchard, that if I came
to him, or otherwise, he might signify the same to me; -- which he also did: --
The Lords were Rochester, Ranelagh, and Sidney; and the last, as my greatest
acquaintance, was to tell the Secretary; accordingly he did; and the Secretary,
after speaking himself, and having it from King William's own mouth, appointed
me a time to meet him at home; and did, with the Marquis of Winchester, and
told me, I was as free as ever; and, as he doubted not my prudence about my
quiet living, so he assured me, I should not be molested, or injured in any of
my affairs, at least while he held that post. The Secretary is my old friend,
and one I served, after the D of Monmouth and Lord Russel's business: I carried
him in my coach to Windsor, and presented him to King James; and when the
revolution came, he bought my four horses, that carried us. It was about three
or four months before the revolution. The lords spoke the 23th of November, and
he discharged me on the 30th.

From the Secretary I went to our meeting, at the Bull and Mouth; thence to
visit the sanctuary of my solitude; and after that, to see my poor wife and
children; my eldest being with me all this while. My wife is yet weakly; but I
am not without hopes of her recovery; who is of the best of wives and women.

From all this you may apprehend that I may yet see America, and shall
certainly judge things, as I find them: for I have had hard measure among you;
the province disgraced, and all our interest wounded: though I am tender and
merciful, I am just; and neither my relations in blood, nor in judgment, I
hope, shall be able to byas me into a wrong sense, or apprehension: and I hope
once more to unite you upon a common bottom: -- Thus far of my enlargement,
which, from a multitude of business, at this time, I send in another hand; I
was also surprised at the short notice given me to write in. -- The trial of
George Keith has been industriously spread all about the nation, especially at
London, at the Court, Westminster Hall, and the Parliament House; the odium, it
has contracted in some, stirred up in others; the advantage, the disaffected
among us make by it, against unity, against Friends' having power, against me
an^ you, in particular, are great and lamentable; the Lord put a holy stop, by
his wise power, to this evil work, and bring that which is so wrong, under his
righteous judgment. -- That you have a regard to my right, I cannot but value;
and hope it is that, and not humor, or disappointment, that engaged you to
decline; Oh, the sorrowful conclusion of eight or nine years' government! but I
hope soon to see an end of all this, if the Lord will; so, not willing to lose
this opportunity, and especially upon this occasion, I salute you all in the
unchangeable truth of our God, desiring your preservation, in that which is
more valuable than all the world, to them that love it, and taste the virtue of
it." -- "Friends generally well; the war continues; great losses; poverty
looking men in the face; and scarcety of bread also coming on apace; but
Ireland helps, where it is at 23 and half-a-crown the bushel wheat; this is
your harvest; I desire my love to Friends and your families; and the Lord
preserve you in his fear; and what you can, make up your breaches; my love
salutes you, and bids you, heartily, farewell.

Your real Friend, WILLIAM PENN.





King William answered, "That William Penn was his old acquaintance, King
William's answer, etc.
as well as theirs; -- that he might follow his business, as freely as ever;
and that he had nothing to say to him." -- Upon which they pressed him to
command one of them to declare the same to the Secretary of State, Sir John
Trenchard; that, if he came to him, or otherwise, he might signify the same to
him; which the King readily did; and the Lord Sidney, as William Penn's
greatest acquaintance, was to tell the Secretary; which being done, the
Secretary, after speaking himself, and having orders from the King, appointed
William Penn a time to meet him at home; who then (November 30th.) in company
with the Marquis of Winchester, told him, "He was as free as ever," adding,
"That he doubted not his prudence about his quiet living, so he assured him, he
should not be molested, or injured, in any of his affairs, at least, while he
held that post."

Soon after this William Penn lost his beloved wife, Gulielma Maria, Death of
his wife Gulielma Maria.
who died in the Twelfth-month this year; (1693) with whom he had lived, in all
the endearments of that nearest relation, about twenty-one years; her excellent
character, and pious exit, are related by himself in his printed works.

He was reinstated in his government of Pennsylvania, by letters patent, W.
Penn is re-instated in his government and Markham appointed his deputy.
dated 20th. day of August, in the sixth year of the reign of William and Mary;
The copy of a duplicate of the grant, by which William Penn was restored to the
Government of Pennsylvania, is as follows, viz.

William and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, defenders of the Faith, etc.
WHEREAS, upon information, that, by reason of great miscarriages, in the
government of our province of Pensilvania, in America, and the absence of the
Proprietor, the same was fallen into disorder and confusion; by means whereof
not only the public peace, and administration of justice was broken and
violated, but there was also great want of provision for the guard and defense
of our said province against our enemies; whereby it was apprehended that our
said province, and the adjacent colonies were much in danger of being lost from
the crown of England: for prevention thereof, as much as in us lay, and for the
better defense and security of our subjects, inhabiting these parts, during
this time of war, we did find it absolutely necessary to take the government
thereof into our hands, and under our immediate care and protection, and did,
therefore, by letters patent, under our great seal of England, bearing date the
twenty-first day of October, in the fourth year of our reign, constitute and
appoint our trusty and well-beloved Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire, our Captain
General, and Governor in Chief, of our province of New York, to be our Captain
General, and Governor in Chief, in and over our said province of Pensilvania,
and country of Newcastle, and all the territories and tracts of land depending
thereon, in America, with directions to take the said province and country
under his government, and did thereby grant unto him, the said Benjamin
Fletcher, and in case of his death, or absence, out of our provinces of New
York and Pensilvania, our country of Newcastle, and our colonies of East and
West Jersey, unto such person, as should be appointed by us to be Commander in
Chief of our said province of New York, or to our Council of our said province,
the like powers and authorities, as were granted by our commission to the said
Benjamin Fletcher, bearing date, the eighteenth day of March, in the said
fourth year of our reign, for the ruling and governing of our said province of
New York. And whereas, humble application has been made unto us, by our trusty
and well-beloved William Pen, Esquire, Proprietor of our said province of
Pensilvania, that he may be restored to the administration of the government
thereof, as formerly. And whereas, the said Proprietor has given us good
assurance, that he will take care of the government of our said province and
territories, and provide for the safety and security thereof, all that in him
lies, We have thereupon thought fit to restore him to the administration of the
government of our said province and territories, and accordingly Our Will and
Pleasure is, That so much of the said commission, bearing date the twenty-first
day of October, in the fourth year of our reign, as does constitute and appoint
our ^rusty and well-beloved Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire, to be our Captain
General, and Governor in Chief, of our said province of Pensilvania and country
of Newcastle, and the territories and tracts of land depending thereon in
America together with all the powers and authorities thereby granted for the
ruling and governing of our said province and country, do, from the publication
of these our letters patent, cease, determine, and become void, and accordingly
the same are hereby declared void; of which all persons, whom it may concern,
are to take notice, and govern themselves accordingly, under pain of our
highest displeasure.

IN WITNESS whereof, we have caused these our letters to be made patent.
Witness, Ourselves, at Westminster, the twentieth day of August, in the sixth
year of our reign. By Writ of Privy Seal, PIGOTT.


About the beginning of the year 1696, the late King James intending an
invasion of England, for which great preparations being made in France, and a
plot being discovered, in England; against King William it occasioned
declarations to be drawn up and signed; in the manner of associations, not only
by the two Houses of Parliament, but also by all the corporations in England;
and the dissenters likewise presenting declarations to the King somewhat
similar to these, the Quakers, in that nation, to show their loyalty, etc.
published the following declaration thereupon, in print; which here may show
the judgment and behavior of that people there, on such occasions as are
therein expressed, viz.

The Ancient Testimony of the people called Quakers renewed, with respect to
the King and Government, and touching the present Association.
WE, the said people, do solemnly and sincerely declare, That it has been our
judgment and principle, from the first day we were called to profess the light
of Christ Jesus manifested in our consciences, unto this day, that the setting
up and putting down kings and governments is God's peculiar prerogative, for
causes best known to himself; and that it is not our work, or business, to have
any hand, or contrivance therein, nor to be busy-bodies, in matters above our
station; much less to plot, or contrive the ruin, or overturn, of any of them:
But to pray for the king, and for the safety of our nation, and good of all
men, that we may live a peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty,
under the government, which he is pleased to set over us.

And, according to this our ancient and innocent principle, we have often given
forth our testimony, and now do, against all plotting, conspiracies, and
contriving insurrections against the King, or the government, and against all
treacherous, barbarous and murderous designs whatsoever, as works of the devil
and darkness; and we sincerely bless God, and are heartily thankful to the king
and government, for the liberty and privileges we enjoy under them, by law,
esteeming it our duty to be true and faithful to them.

And whereas, we, the said people, are required to sign the said association,
we sincerely declare, that our refusing so to do, is not out of any
disaffection to the King, or Government, nor in opposition to his being
declared rightful and lawful King of these realms, but purely because we
cannot, for conscience' sake, sight, kill, or revenge, either for ourselves, or
any man else.

And we believe that the timely discovery and prevention of the late barbarous
design and mischievous plot against the King and Government, and the sad
effects it might have had, is an eminent mercy from Almighty God; for which we,
and the whole nation, have great cause to be humbly thankful to him, and to
pray for the continuance of his mercies to them and us.

From a meeting of the said people, in London, the 23d. of the First-month,
called March, 1695-6.

The Names of the Members of Assembly, in 1695, were: --

For Philadelphia.
Edward Shippen, Speaker, Alexander Beardsley, James Fox, Robert Owen, John
Bevan, John Parsons.
For New Castle.
Joseph England, Valentine Hollingsworth, George Harland, Edward Gibbs, Henry
Hollingsworth, Cornelius Empson.
For Bucks.
Joshua Hoopes, Henry Paxon, Samuel Dark, Nicholas Waln, John Swift, Joseph
Miller.
For Kent.
John Betts, William Rodney, William Morton, Simon Irons, Daniel Brown, John
Hilliard.
For Chester.
John Blunston, Bartholo. Coppock, Will^am Jenkins, Robert Piles, Walter
Forest, Philip Roman.
For Sussex.
John Stockley, Thomas Oldman, Joseph Booth, Henry Moleston, James Peterkill,
Jonathan Bailey.

(1694) after which he sent a commission to William Markham, 1694.
constituting him his Lieutenant Governor of Pennsylvania and territories,
dated Ninth-month 24th. 1694.

Now for several years successively his beneficent services, and useful
actions, diverse ways, His services in England, etc.
in his native country, particularly to his own religious society, are
represented to have been very considerable; in which time he published diverse
useful treatises, on different subjects; which may be seen in the collection of
his writings in print; he was likewise a solicitor to the government, for the
relief of his friends the Quakers, in the case of oaths.

On the fifth of the First-month 1695-6, W. Penn's second marriage, etc.
he consummated his second marriage, at Bristol, with Hannah, the daughter of
Thomas Callowhill, and grand daughter of Dennis Hollister, an eminent merchant
of that city. 1696.
She was said to be a religious young woman, of excellent qualities; with whom
he lived during the rest of his life; and had issue by her, four sons and one
daughter.

Death of his eldest son Springett.
In the Second-month, 1696, his eldest son, by his former wife, named Springett,
died at Worminghurst, in Sussex, of a consumption, in the twenty-first year of
his age; a most hopeful and promising young man; whose character may be seen in
his father's writings, together with that of his mother, before mentioned.

W. Penn visits Ireland, etc.
After this William Penn paid a religious visit to his friends, the Quakers, in
Ireland, accompanied by John Everott and Thomas Story; who were likewise two
eminent preachers in that society; and he writ several treatises in vindication
of his religious principles, etc. till the year 1699, when he began to make
preparation to revisit his province of Pennsylvania.

Proceedings of Gov. Markham and the Assembly.
William Markham, being by the Proprietary, after is restoration, constituted,
or appointed, his Deputy Governor, as before observed, first, under that
appointment, met a Council on the 20th. of April, and an Assembly, on the 10th.
of September, 1695; which, after they had sat some time, appear to have been
unexpectedly dissolved by Markham. The form of the writ, 1695.
for calling that Assembly, was as follows, viz.

(L. S.) William Markham, Esquire, Governor under William Penn, absolute
Proprietary of the province of Pennsylvania and counties annexed, to Arthur
Meston, Sheriff of the county of Kent, Greeting:
WHEREAS, their sacred Majesty's, Governor's writ for calling the Assembly.
William and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, defenders of the faith, etc. did, by their letters patent,
under the great seal of England, bearing date the one and twentieth day of
October, in the fourth year of their reign, for the reasons therein expressed,
find it absolutely necessary to take the government of said province of
Pennsylvania into their own hands, and under their immediate care and
protection; and, therefore, did constitute and appoint Benjamin Fletcher,
Esquire, Captain General, and Governor in Chief of their Majesties' province of
New York, to be Captain General, in and over their said Majesties' province of
Pennsylvania, and country of New Castle, and all the tracts of land depending
thereon in America, thereby commanding and requiring him, the said Benjamin
Fletcher, to take the said province of Pennsylvania and country under his
government; who accordingly took the same under his government, by publication
of the said letters patent, in the town of Philadelphia, upon the 26th. of
April, 1693: And whereas, their sacred Majesty's have since been most
graciously pleased, by their letters patent, under the great seal of England,
bearing date the 20th. day of August, in the sixth year of their reign, for the
reasons therein expressed, to restore to the said William Penn, Proprietary of
the said province of Pennsylvania and territories, unto the administration of
the government thereof: And whereas, the said William Penn has been pleased,
Markham's writ, etc.
by his commission, under his hand, and seal of the said province, bearing date
the 29th. day of the Ninth-month, 1694, to constitute me Governor, under him,
of the said province of Pennsylvania, and counties annexed, strictly charging
and commanding me, to govern according to the known laws and usages thereof. I,
therefore, by virtue of the said power and authority, derived unto me, command
you, that forthwith you summon all the Freemen of your said county, to meet
upon the tenth day of April, at the usual place of meeting, then and there,
according to law and charter, to choose three persons, to serve in Provincial
Council, one for three years, one for two years, and one other for one year;
and six persons to serve as members of Assembly; and upon the election of
members of Council, to acquaint them to attend me on the 20th. day of April
next, at Philadelphia, to form a Provincial Council, to advise with me, in
matters relating to the government; whereof they are not to fail; and make
return of the names of the said Freemen, so to be chosen, and of this writ,
into the Secretary's office, for the said province and territories, at and
before the said 20th. day of April next; -- hereof fail not at your peril; and
for your so doing this shall be your sufficient warrant.

Given under my hand, and seal of the province, this 26 th. day of March,
annoque regni regis et reginae, Gulielmi et Mariae, nunc Angliae, etc. septimo,
in the fourteenth year of the Proprietary's government, annoque Domini 1695.
WILLIAM MARKHAM.


1696.
After this he called another Assembly, to meet at Philadelphia, Proceedings of
the Assembly.
on the 26th. of the Eighth-month, 1696. This Assembly chose John Simcock of
Chester, for their Speaker; and, in a message to the Governor, they observed,
1696.
that though he had convened them, by his writs, not so conformable to their
charter, as they could desire, Pro^^^^ings o^ (...) Assembly.
(which was upon Fletcher's plan) yet they had obeyed the same, and considered
what he had laid before them, viz. "To answer the late Queen's letter, and the
Proprietary's promise upon his restoration to the government;" respecting which
they told him, "That they were unanimously ready and willing to perform their
duty therein, so far as in them lay, if the Governor would settle them in their
former constitution, enjoyed before the government was committed to Governor
Fletcher's trust;" which affairs, with the proceedings of the last Assembly,
appear more fully in the following remonstrance, viz.

To William Markham, Governor under William Penn, Proprietor of the province of
Pennsylvania, and territories thereunto belonging,
The remonstrance of the Freemen of the said province and territories, convened
in Assembly, by virtue of the Governor's writs, at Philadelphia, the 28th. of
October, in the eighth year of King William's reign, over England, etc. annoque
Domini 1696.
Humbly shows,
THAT, whereas, The Assembly's remonstrance to Governor Markham.
the late King Charles the second, by his royal charter, made in the
thirty-third year of his reign, under the great seal of England, was pleased to
signify, that William Penn, (out of a commendable desire to enlarge the British
empire, and promote such useful commodities as might be of benefit to the King
and his dominions, as also to induce the savage nations, by gentle and just
manners, to the love of civil society, and the Christian religion) had humbly
sought leave to transport an ample colony into this country; wherefore, the
said King, favoring the petition, and good purpose of the said William Penn,
did, The Assembly's remonstrance.
in and by the said charter, for him, his heirs and successors, give and grant
unto the said William Penn, his heirs and assigns, all this said country, and
tract of land, called Pennsylvania, and constituted him, the said William Penn,
absolute Proprietor thereof, vesting him, and such as were to be adventurers
with him, the settlers and inhabitants of said province, with diverse powers,
privileges and immunities, under the reservations, provisos and restrictions,
in the said charter specified; charging all officers, etc. to be, at all times
aiding and assisting to the said William Penn, and unto the said inhabitants
and merchants of the said province, in the full use and fruition of the
benefits of the said charter.

In pursuance whereof the said William Penn, and diverse substantial persons,
who first embarked with him, in that so commendable a design, did soon
afterward (by the advice of learned council) conclude upon a certain frame of
government, consistent with the powers of the said patent, but suitable with
the religious persuasion of the major part of the undertakers, and well
accommodated to all. This model, together with the franchises and immunities
expressly granted by the aforesaid letters patent to the people, did induce
them to conceive (and, we hope, upon just grounds too) that since the King had
been so favorably pleased to incorporate them, and in so great a measure,
connected the people's privileges with their properties, that they could not be
any more divested of the one, than the other, but by due course of law, and
proved more than ordinary motives to incline several hundreds to transport
themselves and families into this country, out of diverse parts; so that this
province has not been, at first, populated under William Penn's government,
with transported felons, or criminals, but mostly, the people called Quakers,
men of truth and sobriety, having visible estates and credit in the world; who,
The Assembly's remonstrance.
with no less desires of that freedom, to answer the end of the King's grant,
(with respect to propagating the Christian religion) were made willing to leave
their native land, part with their friends and near relations, and remove
themselves into the wilderness, hoping to enjoy their said privileges and
liberties, more than any prospect, they had of worldly advantage, or
preferment; and when they arrived here, exposed themselves and tender families
to great hardships, (attending the hazard and inconveniences of a new
plantation) exhausted their estates, and have not been at all chargeable to the
crown, in so considerable a settlement, as is well known; but before they could
thoroughly come into a comfortable way of living and put themselves into a
capacity to pay either their particular, or public debts, this government
became (it seems) as the butt of our neighbor's envy; who, misrepresenting
things at home, did obtain a commission from the King and Queen, constituting
Colonel Fletcher, Commander in Chief over this province and territories; who,
during his governancy, diverted the course of our legislative procedure, and
introduced another method; and continued the same, until the said King and
Queen were favorably pleased, by their letters patent, to restore the said
Proprietary to the administration of the government of this province and
territories; upon which restoration, the power and authority, which Colonel
Fletcher had made use of, to lay aside our charteral rights and privileges,
were, by the said patent, determined, and made void.

Wherefore, the Proprietary thought fit to authorize thee, to act according to
the known laws and usages of this government: In pursuance whereof thou wast
pleased to issue forth thy writs, directed to the respective Sheriffs of this
province and territories, The Assembly's remonstrance.
commanding them to summon all the Freemen of the respective counties to meet
upon the tenth day of the month called April, 1695, in the usual place of
meeting, then and there, according to law and charter, to choose three persons,
in each county, to serve in Provincial Council, one for three years, one for
two years, and the other for one year; and six persons out of each county, to
serve as Members of Assembly. In obedience to which writs elections were made,
and a General Assembly began to be held here, on the tenth day of September,
1695: -- And, truly, those of us, that attended that service, were glad, when
thou so frequently expressed thy readiness to confirm our rights and
privileges, adding, That thou would not so much as endeavor to diminish
them; which gave further encouragement to the then Representatives; who, with
much alacrity, and dutiful acknowledgments of the King's justice and favor, in
restoring the said Proprietary to his rights, did proceed to manifest their
affections to the King, as well as their readiness to answer his expectations,
about supporting this government, so far as, in conscience, they could,
according to their ability, and circumstances of affairs; and so agreed to make
an assessment of money, upon all estates within this province and country, for
the support of government; which, together with the L250 Sterling, thentofore
raised, and made payable to Colonel Fletcher, toward the support of this
government, and not expressly appointed for any other particular use, they, the
said Representatives, humbly desired might be deemed and taken, instead of the
assistance required from this country; the same being in answer to the late
Queen's letter, so far as, in conscience and abilities, they could comply
therewith; and so perfected the bill, ready for thy passing; having joined
therewith only one bill, modelled with thy approbation, and corrected according
to thy own direction, containing some fundamental liberties, which we look upon
to be as much the people's rights, as the land they hold. The Assembly's
remonstrance.


But, instead of giving thy sanction to those bills, thou have, contrary to the
tenor of said writs, and against our legislative rights and privileges,
undertaken to dissolve both Council and Assembly; which, we understand, was so
surprising and unexpected to the said Representatives, that they had neither
time to explain their real intentions, in what they urged and insisted on, or
opportunity to see the minutes of their journal perfected; whereby their
proceedings might have been more fully and fairly rendered.

And we are given to understand, and those of us that were concerned in that
dissolved Assembly, do declare, That where any thing has been there voted,
about proceeding in legislation, without the formality of promulgating bills,
according to charter, it was chiefly to expedite the passing of the Money-bill,
to answer the late Queen's letter, in manner afor^said, and not intended to be
brought into examp^e, unless agreed on, to be inserted in the other bill, or
New act of settlement. And we also understand, that where mention was then made
of any difficulty, or inconvenience, in resuming the charter, it was but in
circumstantials, and had respect only to the time of meeting, number of
members, and such like, not that we then did, or do now, think that the people
had any way forfeited, or lost, the benefit and privileges in those branches
thereof, which direct, that this government, according to the powers of the
King's patent, and the late Duke of York's deeds of feoffment, should consist
of the Proprietary, Governor and Freemen of the said province and territories,
and in form of a Provincial Council and Assembly, chosen by the people; and
that the Governor, or his Deputy, should perform no act of state, that relates
to the justice, trade, treasury, or safety of the province and territories, but
by the advice of the said Provincial Council; The Assembly's remonstrance.
and such other fundamental parts of the said charter, wherewith we are
invested by virtue of the King's letters patent, for restoring, the Proprietary.

Now, for as much as thou have refused to pass the said bill, or New Act of
Settlement, and not inclined to the advice of thy assistant, in issuing forth
writs, for choosing Members of Council and Assembly, on the last charteral day
of election, but used thy endeavors to discourage the people then to elect,
and have now convened us, contrary to our former usage, notwithstanding we
still hold ourselves concerned to embrace this opportunity, as we are, and
shall be, ready, upon all occasions, to express our duty and affection to the
King, for his justice and favors to the government, and our well-wishes to
thyself, we desire thee to take some speedy course to establish us in our just
rights and privileges, whereby we may be in a fit posture effectually to answer
and observe the King's command, relating to this government, and the
Proprietary's engagements, in that behalf, so far as our religious persuasions
can admit.

Signed by order of the House, JOHN SIMCOCKE, Speaker.


Proceeding of the Governor and Assembly.
It does not appear what particular answer the Governor gave to this
remonstrance; but that the Speaker, with the house, waited upon him, at his
desire; to whom he delivered a letter, from the late Governor Fletcher,
requesting money, for the relief of the Indians at Albany. Upon which, on the
31st. of the Eighth-month, 1696, a committee of the house, being joined by a
committee of the Council, in order to answer the Queen's letter, and preserve
the people's privileges, agreed in recommending the following expedient, viz.

"That the Governor, at the request of the Assembly, would be pleased to pass
an act, (of settlement, must be understood) with a salvo to the Proprietary and
people; and that he would also issue out his writs, for choosing a full number
of representatives, on the 10th. day of the First-month next, to serve in
Provincial Council and Assembly, according to the charter, until the
Proprietary's pleasure be known therein; and that, if the Proprietary shall
disapprove the same, then this act shall be void, and no ways prejudicial to
him, nor the people, in relation to the validity, or invalidity, of the said
charter." -- This was unanimously approved by the Assembly. A bill of
settlement, and a money bill were thereupon agreed upon, prepared and passed.

The money bill was for raising three hundred pounds, for the support of
government, and relieving the distressed Indians, inhabiting above Albany, in
answer to the Queen's letter; which money, being immediately wanted, was,
therefore, borrowed, until it could be raised by the act, and remitted to
Colonel Fletcher, at New York, to be applied to the use intended.

The bill of settlement being finished, The third frame of government.
besides four others, passed by Markham, it thence became the third frame of
government; and, being afterward enforced by some other laws, it continued in
force till the year 1701. By this charter, or frame of government, the council
was to consist of only two members out of each county, and the Assembly of
four: making in all twelve members of council, and twenty-four of the Assembly,
etc. See the appendix, No. 4.

In a committee of Council, in 1697, appear the following names, viz.

Samuel Carpenter, Richard Halwell, Phineas Pemberton, William Clarke, Caleb
Pusey, John Curtis.
In School, the Names of the Members of Assembly were:

For Philadelphia.
Anthony Morris, James Fox, Samuel Richardson, Andrew Bankson.
For New Castle.
Adam Peterson, Edward Gibbs, John Grubb, Joseph England.
For Bucks.
Phi. Pemberton, Speaker. Robert Heaton, Joseph Kirkbride, Henry Baker.
For Kent.
Richard Wilson, Robert Edmonds, Henry Moleston, William Moreton,
For Chester.
Caleb Pusey, Samuel Levis, Nathaniel Newlin, Robert Carter.
For Sussex.
Thomas Oldman, Jonathan Bailey, Luke Watson, junior, Cornelius Willbank.



In year 1697, Governor Fletcher of New York, 1697. Fletcher solicits further
aid for the Indians.
in a letter to Markham, informed him, that the three hundred pounds, sent last
year, was expended in contingences, to feed and cloth the Indians, as was
desired; and that he requested further assistance. A committee of the Council
and Assembly, to whom the affair was referred, 1697.
in their report, in answer to this letter, expressed their acknowledgments for
his, and that government's regard and candor to them, in applying that money
to the use intended; -- but, as to further supply, at present, they urged the
infancy, poverty, and incumbered state of the colony, in excuse for
noncompliance; -- at the same time, declaring their readiness to observe the
King's further commands, according to their, religious persuasions and
abilities."

School.
From about this time, till the arrival of the Proprietary, Accounts at this
time defective.
in the latter part of the year 1699, the accounts of the public affairs appear
defective, or not many of much importance now occur. The province seems, at
that time, to have enjoyed a state of great tranquillity and prosperity, when
compared with that of other countries; but, it cannot be supposed, without some
of those difficulties, which always attend the settlement of new colonies, and
generally affect some more than others, of those concerned, and, in proportion,
cause uneasinesses among them; from which it would be unreasonable, even, to
expect an entire exemption, in the state of human affairs; And, as prosperity
and success create envy, in malignant minds, so we find, in this province, that
whatever was a little amiss, at any time, it was generally exaggerated, and its
true state misrepresented, This colony had enemies after the revolution.
either by those who were natural enemies to its prosperity, or by discontented
spirits, within it, both in early time and since: This appears, at least, in
part, to have been the cause of depriving the Proprietary of his government, in
1692; and of some part, of the royal requisitions, from such an infant,
incumbered, and particularly circumstanced colony, both in early and later
times.

But however wicked people may endeavor to cover themselves, by mixing among
those of reputation, and the dishonest screen their character, by associating
with the honest, yet something of this malignity of mind in some persons out of
the province, besides what might, in reality, have been out of order in it,
seems, at least, in part, to have administered occasion, for the following
proclamation, with some others of the same nature, which were published in the
year, School.

By the Governor and Council of the province of Pennsylvania, and counties
annexed.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS, our Proprietary has lately given us to understand of sundry
accusations, A Proc^amation of the Governor and Council.
or complaints, against this government, for conniving at illegal trade and
harboring of pirates; as also of the reports, that are gone to England, about
the growth of vice and looseness here.

As to the former, it is evident, that they are the effects of the envy and
emulation of those, who, by such unfair and indirect means, would accomplish
their designs against this government: For that we are satisfied the generality
of the people, merchants and traders of this province and territories, are
innocent and clear of those imputations. And this country so posited,
Philadelphia is become the road, A Proclamation.
where sailors and others do frequently pass and repass between Virginia and
New England, so that it cannot be avoided, but the bad, as well as the good,
will be entertained, in such an intercourse; and since common charity obliges
us not to presume any persons guilty (especially of such great enormities) till
by some legal probability, they appear so to be; and though we find that the
Magistrates and people, in general, are, and have been, ready and, perhaps,
more active and conscientious to serve the King and his officers, against all
unlawful trade and piracy, when any such offenses have, by any means, come to
their knowledge, than any of those neighboring colonies, who have been so
querimonious against us, in that behalf; yet, we can do no less than, pursuant
to our Proprietary's commands, put all in mind of their respective duties; that
there be no just cause for such complaints.

And, as concerning vice, we also find, that the Magistrates have been careful
and diligent to suppress it; but their endeavors have been sometimes
ineffectual therein; by reason, that the ordinaries, or drinking houses,
especially in Philadelphia, grow too numerous, and the keepers thereof
disorderly, and regardless of the tenor and obligations of their licenses,
whereby they prove ungrateful to the Governor, and a reproach to the government.

Therefore, these are strictly to charge and command all Magistrates and
officers whatsoever, within the province and territories, as they regard the
honor of God, and their allegiance to the King, faithfully to put in execution
all the acts, or laws of trade and navigation, and also the laws and statutes
extant against piracy, whenever there is any such occasion; and to use their
utmost diligence and care in preventing, suppressing and punishing all vice,
disorders and loose living, wheresoever, and in whomsoever it shall appear. A
proclamation.
And to that end, it is, by the Governor and Council, ordained, that, from and
after the first day of March next ensuing, the Justices of the Peace of each
county, in the province and territories, at their respective general, or
private sessions, nominate and pitch upon such and so many ordinary keepers, or
innholders, within the respective counties, as they shall be well assured will
keep orders, and discourage vice: And the Governor is pleased to condescend
that he will license those so approved of by the Justices, and will permit no
other, to keep taverns, inns, or drinking houses, within this government, than
such as shall be so recommended, from time to time.

And we further strictly charge and command all persons, within this
government, as they will answer the contrary at their peril, that they give due
assistance to the Magistrates and officers aforesaid, in putting the said laws
in execution, and suppressing vice, that the wrath of God, and the King's
displeasure may not be drawn upon this poor country.

Dated at Philadelphia, the twelfth day of the Twelfth-month, February, being
the ninth year of the reign of William the Third, of England, etc. King, anno.
Domini 1697.8. Signed by order of the Governor and Council, Per PATRICK
ROBINSON.

CHAPTER XIV.
William Penn, with his wife and family, sail for Pennsylvania. -- Extract from
his valedictory epistle to his Friends in Europe. -- Yellow Fever in
Pennsylvania. -- Thomas Story, Arthur Cook and Thomas Fitzwater. --
Proceedings of the Governor and Assembly against piracy and illicit trade. --
The Proprietary's concern for the benefit of the Indians and Negroes, with the
measures used. -- He meets Assemblies both at Philadelphia and New Castle, etc.
and prepares a new charter. -- Order of Council, for a watch on the seacoast,
etc. -- Money requested of the Assembly for the fortifications on the frontiers
of New York. -- Assembly's Address to the Proprietary on this occasion. --
Observation on the nature of this requisition, etc. -- Articles of Agreement
between William Penn and the Indians about Susquehanna, etc. -- Means provided
for the benefit of the Indians.

1699.
IN the Sixth-month of the year 1699, William Penn, with his wife and family,
took shipping for Pennsylvania; W. Penn fails for Pennsylvania.
and, on the third day of the next following month, from on board the ship,
lying in Cowes' road, near the Isle of Weight, he took his farewell of his
Friends, in a valedictory epistle, directed to all the people called Quakers,
in Europe. This epistle consists chiefly of religious admonition, and may be
seen in his printed works: -- The following concluding expressions show the
nature and spirit of it, viz.

-- And now, to the whole family and flock of God, in this European part of the
world, of the same communion, according to the dispensation of God, be they
high or low, young or old, rich or poor, wise or simple, strong or weak, male
or female, bond or free, I send this parting salutation of my most dear love,
in the truth; beseeching you all to have me and mine in rememberance, not only,
when upon the mighty waters, but when in the solitary deserts of America, if it
please the Lord to bring us safe thither; for I am not above the love and
prayers of my dear brethren, knowing I need them, and have often found, by good
experience, that they avail much with the Lord.

I must leave you, but I can never forget you; for my love to you has been, as
David's and Jonathan's, above the love of women; and suffer me to say, that, to
my power, I have, from the first, endeavored to serve you, (and my poor
country too, and that at my own charge) with an upright mind, however
misunderstood and treated by some, whom I heartily forgive.

Accept you my services, and ever love and remember, my dear friends and
brethren, your old, true and affectionate friend, brother and servant, in
Christ Jesus,

WILLIAM PENN.
Cowes, Isle of Weight, weighing anchor, the 3d. of the Seventh-month, 1699.


He sailed on the ninth of the same month; and was near three months out at
sea; so that he did not arrive in Pennsylvania until the beginning of the
Tenth-month: when a dangerous and contagious distemper, called the Yellow
Fever, Yellow Fever in Philadelphia.
having raged in the province, and carried off great numbers of people, had
ceased. This remarkable sickness, which, in the latter part of this year, had
caused a great mortality in Philadelphia, had, for some time before, been very
fatal in some parts of the West India islands.

Thomas Story, Tho. Story arrives in Pennsylvania.
before mentioned to have accompanied William Penn to Ireland, in the last
year, School, a man of note and good abilities, and afterward of much utility,
in diverse respects, to the province, first arrived in Pennsylvania, in, or
about, this same year, 1699, by way of Virginia, on a religious visit to the
colonies, in the service of preaching the gospel. Thomas Story was born in
Cumberland, in the north of England; he had a good education and was brought up
to the law. After he came to man's estate, and maturity of judgment, he joined
with the Quakers, and became an eminent preacher in their society. He was an
intimate Friend of William Penn; and, soon after his arrival in the Province,
was elected one of the council. He was appointed the first Recorder of the city
of Philadelphia, by charter, in 1701. In the year 1706, having married Ann, the
daughter of Edward Shippen, and settled in the city, he continued to be of good
and great service to the country, for a number of years, both in a religious
and civil capacity, discharging the different and important offices, which he
held* with great honor, skill and integrity, till about the year 1714; when,
after his wife's decease, he returned, by way of Barbado^s, to England; where
he continued the remainder of his life, and died at Carl^ste, in the year 1742,
aged about eighty years.

The following character of him was published in England, about the time of his
decease, viz.

"London, June 21st. 1742.
"Monday last, died of a paralytic disorder Mr. Thomas Story, an eminent
preacher among the Quakers: a man justly esteemed and loved, not only by that
society, but by many others, not of the meanest rank, who had the pleasure of
his acquaintance. He was truly a great and good man; whose principles led him
to the performance of every moral and Christian duty; and whose life and
doctrine concurred, in rendering him a fit example for gospel ministers, in
wisdom, piety and humility. He had, without any professed application to the
sciences, acquired a general knowledge in natural philosophy, and most branches
of the mathematics; and had the most refined and extensive ideas in the
metaphysics: but the inward and eternal happiness of mankind was his favorite
study. He was a complete gentleman, generous in his sentiments, affable in his
behavior, free and communicative to people in all stations and circumstances.
His time was chiefly devoted to the service of God, in discharging that public
concern of preaching the gospel; which he esteemed his indispensable duty. Of
the good effect of whose extraordinary qualification and faithful labors there
are many living witnesses. In short, if temperance, patience, forgiving
injuries, humility, faith and charity, are characteristics of a good man, and a
minister of Christ, he was one."

On the second day of the Eighth-month, 1699, died Arthur Cook, a worthy
magistrate of Philadelphia He was one of the people called Quakers; and came
from London, among the first, or more early settlers of the province. He had
served in diverse of the most considerable posts, in the government, with a good
character.

In the same month, died Thomas Fitzwater, a valuable member of society, and a
preacher among the Quakers.


In his Journal of his Life, speaking of this sickness, at Philadelphia, where
he was then present, he says: -- "Great was the Majesty and Hand of the Lord,
His account of the effect of this sickness in Philadelphia.
great was the fear, that fell upon all flesh; I saw no lofty, or airy
countenance, nor heard any vain jesting, to move men to laughter; nor witty
repartee, to raise mirth; nor extravagant feasting, to excite the lusts and
desires of the flesh above measure; but every face gathered paleness, and many
hearts were humbled, and countenances fallen and sunk, as such that waited,
every moment, to be summoned to the bar, and numbered to the grave."

The Proprietary and his family were received with the universal joy of the
inhabitants, in general; which was the greater, The Proprietor received with
great joy.
on account of his known intention to fix his residence among them, during the
remainder of his life.

Soon after his arrival he met the Assembly; The Proprietor meets the Assembly,
etc.
but it being then a very rigorous season, in the winter, much public business
does not appear to have been transacted, at that time, besides attempting to
discourage piracy and illicit trade; for which principally, at that time, the
Proprietary seems to have convened them. He strongly represented the odium,
Piracy and illicit trade discouraged
to which he said this government was exposed at home, on this account; and the
obligations, which he was under, to his superiors, to correct the same: Hence
two laws were passed, for these purposes, and measures taken to clear the
government from all unjust imputations of this nature. In the votes of
Assembly, at this time, there appears to have been one person, named James
Brown, a member of the House, and son-in-law of William Markham, accused, or
suspected of piracy: -- In consequence of which he was expelled the House; --
But I find no proof of what was alleged against him on that account.


In the First-month of the year 1700, 1700.
William Penn, at the monthly meeting of his Friends, W. Penn's concern for the
Indians and Negroes
the Quakers, in Philadelphia, laid before them his concern, in which, he said,
his mind had long been engaged, for the benefit and welfare of the Negroes and
Indians; exhorting and pressing them to the full discharge of their duty, every
way, in reference to these people; but more especially in regard to their
mental part; that they might as frequently as possible have the advantage of
attending religious meetings, and the benefit of being duly informed in the
true Christian religion. Hence a meeting was appointed more particularly for
the Negroes once every month; and means were used to have more frequent
meetings with the Indians; William Penn taking part of the charge upon himself,
particularly, the manner of it, and the procuring of interpreters.

1700.
The next Assembly was convened at Philadelphia, on the 10th. day of the
Third-month; which was dissolved in the next month following, An Assembly held
at Philadelphia, and another at Newcastle.
and another convened at Newcastle, in October. The and upper counties, or the
province, being dissatisfied with the charter, which had been passed by
Markham, in 1696, part of the business of these Assemblies was the
consideration and preparation of a new one, better adapted to their minds and
circumstances.

Preparation of the new charter
The Proprietary had diverse meetings with the different Assemblies, during his
residence in the province; wherein a great variety of public business was
transacted with much harmony, and general satisfaction: Part of which was the
framing a body of laws, with the aforesaid new and last charter of privileges;
the latter of which was not finished till the month of October, in the next
following year. The number of laws, passed by the Proprietary, during his stay,
this time, in the country, was one hundred; of which the major part were passed
at New Castle.

N. B. In the spring of the year 1701, the sea coast, etc. appears to have been
so infested by pirates, as well as the dangers consequent on a French war, that
the Governor and Council issued the following order, for the prevention of any
surprise, etc. in that respect, viz.

At a Council held in Philadelphia the 2d. of the Fourth-month, 1701. Present:
The Proprietor and Governor.
Edward Shippen, Samuel Carpenter, Thomas Story, Griffith Owen, Caleb Pusey.
FOR the greater security of this province and territories, and for preventing,
as far as may be surprises by vessels from sea.

Ordered, That the Magistrates, for the county of Sussex, shall appoint, and
take care take a constant watch and ward be kept, on the hithermost Cape, near
Lewis, in the said county: and in case any vessel appear from the sea, that may
with good grounds, be suspected of evil designs against any part of the
government;

Ordered, That the said watch shall forthwith give notice thereof, with as
exact a description and account of the vessel, as possibly they can, to the
Sheriff of the said county; who is required immediately to dispatch a
messenger, express, with the same to the county of Ken^ from thence to be
forwarded from Sheriff to Sher^^^ through every county, till it be brought to
the Government, at Philadelphia; which watch and expresses shall be a
provincial charge.

Signed by order, JAMES LOGAN, Secretary.

Note. -- "In the First-month 6th. 1701, Ordered, That there shall be no
slaughterhouse suffered in, or about, the town of Philadelphia, but over the
river Delaware, where the tide may carry off all the garbage, gore, etc. (the
places to be appointed by the Magistrates) under penalty of forfeiting their
meat."

Journals of the Council of Pennsylvania.




In the beginning of the Sixth-month, 1701, 1701.
the Proprietary acquainted the Assembly, The proprietor lays the King's letter
before the Assembly.
"That the occasion of his calling them, at that time (though it was with
reluctance, considering the season) was, to lay before them the King's letter,
requiring three hundred and fifty pounds sterling, from this government,
toward the fortifications, intended on the frontiers of New York; and though
he might have something else to lay before them, yet he deferred all, till they
had considered this point." --

After considering and debating on the subject of this letter, the Assembly
excused themselves, at present, from complying with the said requisition, by
the following address to the Proprietary, viz.

"To William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of Pennsylvania.
"The humble address of the Assembly.
"May it please our Proprietary and Governor,
"WE, The Assembly's address to the Proprietor on the occasion.
the Freemen of the province and territories, in Assembly met, having perused
the King's letter, requiring a contribution of three hundred and fifty pounds
sterling, toward erecting of forts, on the frontiers of New York, etc. and
having duly weighed and considered our duty and loyalty to our sovereign, do
humbly address and represent, that, by the reason of the infancy of this
colony, and the great charge and cost, the inhabitants have hitherto been at,
in the settlement thereof, and because of the late great sums of money, which
have been assessed on the province and territories, The Assembly's address
by way of impost and taxes, besides the arrears of quit-rents, owing by the
people, our present capacity will hardly admit of levying of money, at this
time. And further, taking into consideration, that the adjacent provinces have
hitherto (as far as we can understand) done nothing in this matter; we are,
therefore, humbly of opinion, and accordingly move, that the further
consideration of the King's letter may be referred to another meeting of
Assembly, or until more emergent occasions shall require our further
proceedings therein: In the meantime we earnestly desire the Proprietary would
heartily represent our conditions to the King, and assure him of our readiness
(according to our abilities) to acquiesce with, and answer, his commands, so
far as our religious persuasions shall permit, as becomes loyal and faithful
subjects so to do."

Though the Assembly, in this case, appeared not unwilling to contribute to the
common defense, if the circumstances of the colony would have permitted; and
the Proprietary himself particularly further urged a compliance, in this
matter, in his speech to the next following Assembly; yet the nature of this
letter and requisition, to such a young and infant colony, considering the
principles, upon which it was primarily planted and founded, seems to indicate,
Pennsylvania not without enemies at Court.
that it was not without enemies, at Court: for the pacific principles and
motives, or views, of William Penn, and of the first and early adventurers, in
general, under him, in their settling this wilderness, it is presumed, could not
possibly be less known, at this time, to the administration at home, than they
were before, to the persons in power, when the royal charter was granted by
King Charles the second; from which knowledge of them it was impossible that
any thing immediately, or directly, of a military nature could reasonably be
expected in the settlement: -- which charter expressly mentions, the motives
for the said grant were, Motives for the grant and settlement of Pennsylvania.
-- "A commendable desire of William Penn to enlarge our English empire, and
promote such useful commodities as may be of benefit to us, and our dominions,
and also to reduce the savage natives, by gentle and just manners, to the love
of civil society, and Christian religion;" -- besides a debt, due from the
government to his father, admiral Penn.

Such motives as these, Pennsylvania was not first settled from views of a
military nature, but the contrary.
and not those of a military nature, were most certainly the chief inducement
for the settlement of Pennsylvania, not only in the settlers themselves,
together with the peaceable enjoyment of their religion, and civil liberties,
but also in those, who made the grant; -- if they properly knew to whom, and on
what principles they made it; which it would be very absurd to deny: -- As for
the experiment, or consequence, of the operation of these principles, or
motives, in the province, it will, in part, hereafter appear in this history.

The cultivation of peace and civilization, and of the articles of trade and
commerce, in which the Quakers were known to excel, War not better than peace,
etc.
must be acknowledged to be no less important and necessary, to render a state
happy and prosperous, than weapons of war, and fighting of battles; and these
people were then, and have since been still more known, from experience, to
practice, as well as profess, those ways and means, which excel the latter, so
far as the prevention of an evil does the cure of it.

Moreover, since it is improbable, Motives and means of peace rather to be
encouraged.
that people of this kind will ever be very numerous, if we judge of the future
by what is past; but that war and its consequences, will be more likely to
prevail among the generality of mankind, so long as the cause of it exists in
the human race; so the rarity of such people, their innocence, and known great
utility, in other respects, seem, according to reason, to render them rather
objects of encouragement, in their own way, than of oppression, even, from the
military department itself, but more especially so, ^here peace is preferred to
war: -- But, if it should be otherwise, and they should so increase, as much to
prevail among mankind, then the occasion for war would consequently so much
decrease, or be taken away; which would be a happy change indeed.

Transactions between W. Penn and the Indians.
In the Second-month, 1701, Connoodaghtoh, king of the Susquahanna, Minquays or
Conestogo Indians; Wopaththa. (alias Opessah) king of the Shawanese;
Weewhinjough, chief of the Ganawese, inhabiting of the head of Potomack; also
Ahookassongh, brother to the emperor, (or great king of the Onondagoes) of the
Five Nations, having arrived at Philadelphia, with other Indians of note, etc.
in number about forty, after a treaty, and several speeches between them and
William Penn, in Council, the following articles of agreement were solemnly
made, concluded, and the instrument for the same, duly executed by both
parties, viz.

Articles of Agreement.
"ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT, indented, made, concluded and agreed upon, at
Philadelphia, the 23d. day of the Second-month, called April, 1701, between
William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pensilvania, and
territories thereunto belonging, on the one part, and Connoodaghtoh, king of
the Indians, inhabiting upon and about, the river Susquahanna, in the said
province, and Widaagh (alias Orettyagh;) Koqueash and Andaggy, Junckquagh,
chiefs of the said nations of Indians; and Wopaththa, king, and Lemoytungh and
Pemoyajoaagh, chiefs of the nations of the Shawanna Indians; and Ahookassongh,
brother to the emperor, for, and in behalf of the emperor; and Weewhinjough,
Chequittayh, Takyewsan and Woapraskoa, chiefs of the nations of the Indians,
inhabiting in and about the northern part of the river Potomack, in the said
province, for, and in behalf of themselves and successors, and their several
nations and people, on the other part, as follows:

"That, Their friendship confirmed.
as hitherto there has always been a good understanding and neighborhood
between the said William Penn, and his Lieutenants, since his first arrival in
the said province, and the several nations of Indians, inhabiting in and about
the same, so there shall be, for ever hereafter, a firm and lasting peace
continued between William Penn, his heirs and successors, and all the English,
and other Christian inhabitants of the said province, and the said kings and
chiefs, and their successors, and all the several people of the nations of
Indians aforesaid; and that they shall, for ever hereafter, be as one head, and
one heart, and live in true friendship and amity, as one people.

"Item, That the said kings and chiefs (each for himself, and his people,
engaging) shall, at no time, Never to injure one another.
hurt, injure, or defraud, or suffer to be hurt, injured, or defrauded, by any
of their Indians, any inhabitant, or inhabitants of the said province, either
their persons or estates; And that the said William Penn, his heirs and
successors, shall not suffer to be done, or committed, by any of the subjects
of England, within the said province, any act of hostility, or violence, wrong
or injury to, or against any of the said Indians; but shall, on both sides, at
all times, readily do justice, and perform all acts and offices of friendship
and good will, to oblige each other to a lasting peace, as aforesaid.

"Item, To be subject to the laws of the government.
That all and every of the said kings and chiefs, and all and every particular
of the nations under them, shall, at all times, behave themselves regularly and
soberly, according to the laws of this government, while they live near, or
among the Christian inhabitants thereof, and that the said Indians shall have
the full and free privileges and immunities of all the said laws, as any other
inhabitant; they duly owning and acknowledging the authority of the crown of
England, and government of this province.

Not to aid or abet the enemies of the government.
"Item, That none of the said Indians shall, at any time, be aiding, assisting,
or abetting any other nation, whether Indians, or others, that shall not, at
such time, be in amity with the crown of England, and with this government.

To give due notice of all Designs.
"Item, That, if, at any time, any of the said Indians, by means of evil minded
persons, and sowers of sedition, should hear any unkind or disadvantageous
reports of the English, as if they had evil designs against any of the said
Indians, in such case, such Indians shall send notice thereof, to the said
William Penn, his heirs, or successors, or their lieutenants, and shall not
give credence to the said reports, till by that means they shall be fully
satisfied concerning the truth thereof; and that the said William Penn, his
heirs and successors, or their lieutenants, shall, at all times, in such case,
do the like by them.

Not to admit strange Indians to settle in the province.
"Item, That the said kings and chiefs, and their successors, shall not suffer
any strange nations of Indians to settle, or plant, on the further side of
Susquahanna, or about Potomack river, but such as are there already seated, nor
bring any other Indians into any part of this province, without the special
approbation and permission of the said William Penn, his heirs and successors.

Regulation of the Indian trade.
"Item, That, for the prevention of abuses, that are too frequently put upon
the said Indians, in trade, the said William Penn, his heirs and successors,
shall not suffer, or permit, any person to trade, or converse, with any of the
said Indians, but such as shall be first allowed and approved, by an
instrument, under the hand and seal of him, the said William Penn, or his
heirs, or successors, or their Lieutenants; and that the said Indians shall
suffer no person whatsoever to buy or sell, or have commerce with any of them,
the said Indians, but such as shall first be approved, as aforesaid.

"Item, That the said Indians shall not sell, or dispose of, any of their
skins, peltry, or furs, or any other effects of their hunting, to any person,
or persons whatsoever, out of the said province, nor to any other person, but
such as shall be authorized, to trade with them, as aforesaid: And, that, for
their encouragement, the said William Penn, his heirs and successors, shall
take care to have them, the said Indians, duly furnished with all sorts of
necessary goods, for their use, at reasonable rates.

"Item, That the Potomack Indians, aforesaid, Of the Potomack Indians.
with their colony, shall have free leave of the said William Penn, to settle
upon any part of Potomack river, within the bounds of this province: They
strictly observing and practicing all, and singular, the articles aforesaid, to
them relating.

"Item, The Indians of Conestogo, upon, Confirmation of former sale of lands,
etc.
and about, the river, Susquahanna, and more especially, the said
Connoodaghtoh, their king, does fully agree to, and by these presents,
absolutely ratify the bargain and sale of lands, lying near and about the said
river, formerly made to the said William Penn, his heirs and successors; and
since, by Orettyagh and Andaggy, Junckquagh, parties to these presents,
confirmed to the said William Penn, his heirs and successors, by a deed,
bearing date, the 13th. day of September last, under their hands and seals,
duly executed. And the said Connoodaghtoh does, for himself and his nation,
covenant and agree, that he will at all times, be ready further to confirm, and
make good the said sale, according to the tenor of the same; and that the said
Indians of Susquahanna shall answer the said William Penn, his heirs and
successors, for the good behavior and conduct of the said Potomack Indians;
and for their performing the several articles herein expressed.

W. Penn obliges himself, etc. to perpetual friendship with the Indians.
"Item, The said William Penn does hereby promise, for himself, his heirs and
successors, that he and they will, at all times, show themselves true friends
and brothers to all, and every of the said Indians, by assisting them with the
best of their advices, directions and counsels, and will, in all things, just
and reasonable, befriend them; they behaving themselves, as aforesaid, and
submitting to the laws of this province, in all things, as the English, and
other Christians therein, do; -- To which they, the said Indians, hereby agree
and oblige themselves, and their posterity for ever.

These Articles never to be broken
"In witness whereof, the said parties have, as a confirmation, made mutual
presents to each other; the Indians, in five parcels of skins, and the said
William Penn, in several English goods and merchandises, as a binding pledge of
the premises, never to be broken or violated; -- And, as a further testimony
thereof, have also to these presents set their hands and seals, the day and
year above written."

Abuses in the Indian trade, etc.
After this, in the Third-month, the Proprietary having represented to the
Council, the great abuses, committed in the Indian trade, with the dangers and
disadvantages, which might arise from thence to the province, and having
proposed, that proper measures should be concerted, for the regulation thereof,
and for redressing certain grievances, respecting the same, Resolution to
correct them.
it was Resolved, as absolutely necessary, that some effectual method should be
agreed on and used for carrying on the trade by a certain number, or company,
of persons, with a joint stock, under certain regulations and restrictions,
more particularly in regard to spirituous liquors sold them; which company
should use all reasonable means and endeavors to induce the Indians to a true
sense of a proper value and esteem of the Christian religion, by setting before
them good examples of probity and candor, both in commerce and behavior; and
that care should be taken to have them duly instructed in the fundamentals of
Christianity: -- This appears afterward to have been, in a good degree, put in
execution, so far as was judged requisite, or found practicable.

CHAPTER XV.
The Proprietor's administration, though attended with difficulties, was
distinguished with great paternal care, and happy consequences. -- Reasons for
his return to England. -- Names of the members of Assembly, in 1701. -- The
Proprietary's speech to the Assembly, with their answer. -- Further proceedings
between them. -- The Proprietary takes leave of the Indians, and gives them
good advice. -- Disagreement between the province and territories revives
again. -- The Proprietary endeavors to reconcile them. -- His letter to the
Assembly, urging their agreement, etc. -- The last charter of Pennsylvania,
etc. -- Charter of the Council, etc. -- The Proprietary also grants a charter
to the city of Philadelphia, -- Its purport. -- Andrew Hamilton of New Jersey
being constituted Deputy Governor, and James Logan Secretary of the province.
-- The Proprietary sails for England.

1701.
IT was thought, from some circumstances, that the Proprietary's real intention,
The Proprietary's application and diligence
at this time, was to spend the remainder of his life, in his province, as
himself declared, and that without being obliged to cross the ocean any more;
he accordingly applied himself with much diligence and assiduity to the offices
of government, and the establishment of wholesome regulations and usages; in
which the inevitable difficulties, arising from the various dispositions, Yet
cannot please all.
and opposite interests and claims of such a mixture of different kinds of
people and humors, as the colony consisted of, and in so much liberty as they
enjoyed, afforded him much trial of skill and patience: yet his administration
was distinguished by great paternal care and influence, as well as provident
circumspection; and both the province and territories, notwithstanding the
difficulties, hardships, and inevitable disappointments, which, more or less,
always attend the settlement and well ordering of any new country, appear to
have so much tried the patience of some of the people, as to occasion him more
trouble, in some respects, than otherwise probably would have been necessary,
were, in reality, when compared with other places of similar age and
circumstances, in an easy, flourishing and happy condition.

But, during this time of his absence from England, Transactions in England
call home the Proprietary
it appears that measures were in agitation there, for reducing both his, and
the other proprietary governments, in America, into regal ones, under pretense
of advancing the prerogative of the crown, and the national advantage; Attempts
of this nature were likewise afterward made, as appears in Anderson's history
of trade and commerce. vol 2d. under the year 1715; wherein are the following
observations on this head, viz.

-- "Upon a petition of the agent for the planters and merchants of Carolina,
and of the other miserable inhabitants of that colony, oppressed by the Lords
Proprietaries, and their defense against the Indians neglected, etc. the House
of Commons addressed the King, to send them relief, and in the said year,
(1715) a bill was brought into the British House of Commons, for the better
regulation of the charter and proprietary governments, in America, and of his
Majesty's plantations there The principal scope of which was, for the reducing
all the said proprietary charter governments into regal ones. Ever since the
proprietary colonies began to be very considerable, i. e. since the death of
King Charles the second, and more especially since the revolution, anno 1688,
both King William and Queen Ann's councils and ministries foresaw the great
consequence, it would be of to the Crown and Kingdom, to buy off the Lords
Proprietaries of colonies, before they should grow too powerful; and frequent
treaties were held with them by the Ministers of the Crown, for that end;
particularly with the truly great Mr. William Penn, for the purchase of
Pennsylvania." --


and a bill, for that purpose, was actually brought into the House of Lords:
Upon which, such of the owners of land in Pennsylvania, as were then in
England, immediately represented the hardship of their case to the Parliament,
soliciting time for William Penn's return, to answer for himself; and
accordingly they dispatched to him an account of the state of the affair, and
pressed his return, as soon as possible; with which he found it indispensably
necessary to comply. He summons the Assembly.
This first occasioned his summoning of that Assembly, which agreed to the
charter of privileges before mentioned; to whom, on the 16th. of September,
1701, he made the following speech, The Names of the Members of this Assembly,
for the respective counties, chosen according to the Governor's writs, were: --

For Philadelphia.
Anthony Morris, Samuel Richardson, Nicholas Walne, Isaac Norris.
For New Castle.
Jasper Yeates, John Donnaldson, Richard Hallowell, Adam Peterson.
For Bucks.
Joseph Growdon, Speaker, John Swift, Joshua Hoopes, Will^am Paxton.
For Kent.
William Rodney, John Brinkloe, William Morton, John Walker.
For Chester.
John Blunston, Robert Pile, Nathaniel Newlin, Andrew Job.
For Sussex.
William Clarke, Luke Watson, junior, Samuel Preston, Joseph Booth.

viz.

Friends,
The Proprietary's speech to the Assembly.
YOU cannot be more concerned, than I am, at the frequency of your service, in
Assembly, since I am very sensible of the trouble and charge, it contracts upon
the country: But the motives being considered, and that you must have met, of
course, in the next month, I hope you will not think it an hardship now.

The reason, that hastens your sessions, is the necessity, I am under, through
the endeavors of the enemies of the prosperity of this country, to go for
England, where, taking advantage of my absence, some have attempted, by false,
or unreasonable charges, to undermine our government, and thereby the true
value of our labors and prosperity. Government having been our first
encouragement, I confess, I cannot think of such a voyage without great
reluctance of mind, having promised myself the quietness of a wilderness, and
that I might stay so long, at least, with you, The Proprietary's speech to the
Assembly.
as to render every body entirely easy and safe. For my heart is among you, as
well as my body, whatever some people may please to think: and no unkindness,
or disappointment shall (with submission to God's Providence) ever be able to
alter my love to the country, and resolution to return, and settle my family
and posterity in it: But having reason to believe, I can, at this time, best
serve you and myself, on that side of the water, neither the rudeness of the
season, nor tender circumstances of my family can overruled my inclinations to
undertake it.

Think, therefore, (since all men are mortal) of some suitable expedient and
provision, for your safety, as well in your privileges, as property, and you
will find me ready to comply with whatsoever may render us happy, by a nearer
union of our interests.

Review again your laws; propose new ones, that may better your circumstances;
and what you do, do it quickly, remembering that the Parliament sits the end of
next month; and that the sooner I am there, the safer, I hope, we shall be here.

I must recommend to your serious thoughts and care the King's letter to me,
for the assistance of New York, Vide page 425.
with three hundred and fifty pounds sterling, as a frontier government; and
therefore exposed to a much greater expense, in proportion to other colonies;
which I called the last Assembly to take into their consideration, and they
were pleased, for the reasons then given, to refer to this.

I am also to tell you the good news of the Governor of New-York's happy issue
of his conferences with the five nations of Indians; that he has not only made
peace with them, for the King's subjects of that colony; but (as I had by some
letters before desired him) for those of all other governments, The
Proprietary's speech to the Assembly.
under the crown of England, on the continent of America, as also the nations
of Indians, within these respective colonies; which certainly merits our
acknowledgments.

I have done, when I have told you, that unanimity and dispatch are the life of
business, and that I desire and expect from you, for your own sakes; since it
may so much contribute to the disappointment of those, that too long have
sought the ruin of our young country.

To this speech the Assembly replied in the following address.

May it please the Proprietary and Governor,
The Assembly's answer.
WE have, this day, in our Assembly, read thy speech, delivered yesterday, in
Council; and, having duly considered the same, cannot but be under a deep sense
of sorrow, for thy purpose of so speedily leaving us, and at the same time,
taking notice of thy paternal regard to us, and our posterity, the Freeholders
of this province and territories annexed, in thy loving and kind expressions of
being ready to comply with whatsoever expedient and provisions shall offer, for
our safety, as well in privileges as property, and what else may render us
happy, in a nearer union of interests; not doubting the performance of what
thou have been so lovingly pleased to promise, we do, in much humility, and, as
a token of our gratitude, return unto thee, the unfeigned thanks of this house.

Subscribed by order of the house, JOSEPH GROWDON, Speaker.

After this the Assembly presented to him another address, consisting of
twenty-one articles. It respected his successor, in the government, and the
confirmation of certain privileges, therein specified. To every one of which he
made a special answer. The first of these articles, so far as regarded a proper
person to succeed him, as Deputy, being particularly insisted on, he
condesended so much as to make them an offer, to nominate a substitute
themselves! From which, acknowledging the favor offered them, they modestly
excused themselves; declaring they did not think themselves qualified for the
choice, and desired to leave it to the Governor's pleasure. The rest of the
petition of this address (which, Vide Appendix, No. 5.
with the Governor's answer, may be seen in the appendix No. 5) so far as the
Proprietary thought proper to comply with it, was either afterward granted, in
the two charters of the province and city, then in agitation, or otherwise
mutually agreed, to general satisfaction; though in some parts of it, the
Assembly had meddled with his property, in such a particular manner, as, he
declares, was not properly cognizable by them, in that capacity. "At a Council
held in Philadelphia, the 26th of the Seventh-mouth, 1701.

Present: The Proprietary and Governor.

Samuel Carpenter, Thomas Story, John Guest, Caleb Pusey.
THE Governor having desired a conference with the Assembly, they attended,
requesting to know his pleasure.

The Governor signified to them, that, in his speech, he had recommended to
them, to consider their privileges as well as property, in which he had justly
given privileges the precedence to property, as the bulwark, to secure the
other; but they, in their address (which he had considered) insisted not only
on property alone, but upon such particulars as could, by no means, be
cognizable by an Assembly; and lay only between him and the particulars
concerned: In which he had done, and always would do, to the utmost, what
becomes an honest man, to all those he agreed with; -- but he would never
suffer an Assembly to intermeddle with his property, lest it should be drawn
into a precedent, if it should please God ^ Governor should preside here,
distinct from the Proprietary, etc.

Minutes of Council.


The Sachems of the Susquahanna and Shawanna Indians, and others of that
people, The Indians come to take leave of the Proprietor.
being come to Philadelphia, to take leave of the Proprietary, on the 7th. of
the Eighth-month, he spoke to them in Council, His speech to them.
The Members of Council present were: --

Edward Shippen, Thomas Story, Samuel Carpenter, Caleb Pusey, John Guest,
Griffith Owen.


and told them, "That the Assembly was then enacting a law, according to their
desire, to prevent their being abused by selling of rum among them; that he
requested them to unite all their endeavors, and their utmost exertion, in
conjunction with those of the government, to put the said law in execution.

At the same time he likewise informed them, "That now, Extract from the
Minutes of Council.
this was like to be his last interview with them, at least before his return;
-- That he had always loved and been kind to them; and ever should continue so
to be, not through any politic design, or, on account of self interest, but
from a most real affection:" -- "And he desired them, in his absence, to
cultivate friendship with those, whom he should leave behind in authority; as
they would always, in some degree, continue to be so to them, as himself had
ever been; -- Lastly, That he had charged the members of Council, and then also
renewed the same charge, that they should, in all respects, be kind to them,
and entertain them with all courtesy and demonstrations of good will, as
himself had ever done: which the said members promised faithfully to observe;
-- then, after making them some presents, they withdrew."

Disagreement between the Province and Territories.
But during these transactions, and while the charter of privileges was under
consideration and preparing, the disagreement, which had before appeared,
between the members of Assembly for the the province and those for the
territories, began again to exhibit itself, and grow worse, tending to an open
rupture. The territory men were said to have been for obtaining some exclusive
powers, or rights, particular to themselves, which, being thought unreasonable,
could not, therefore, be granted them; and not being able to carry their point,
on the 10th. instant, Disagreement between the Province and Territories.
the members for the territories abruptly left the House; declaring their
intention of returning to their respective homes. But, on the 14th. most of
them appeared before the Proprietary, in Council, remonstrating against some
proceedings of the Assembly, on the 10th. instant, which, they declared, were,
in their consequences, highly injurious and destructive to the privileges of
the lower counties, and which, consistent with their duty to their
constituents, they apprehended, they could not sit there, to see carried on;
and, therefore, they informed the Governor, they thought it best for them to
depart to their respective habitations: --

The Proprietary further enquired into the affair and both heard and answered
all their reasons and objections; and then told them, "That he took this their
conduct very unkind, even to himself in particular."

Upon which Jasper Yeates, in behalf of the rest, endeavored to excuse, or
further explain, their behavior, in this action, by declaring their great
affection and regard for the Proprietary, but, that they must be true to those,
whom they represented. --

At another meeting of the Proprietary and Members of Council, on the same day,
the Assembly being sent for, both those for the province, and the secluding
members appeared;

The Proprietary told them, "That his time being short, he must come briefly to
the point; that it was no small wound to him, to think, that at the earnest
desire of the lower counties, as well as the good will of the upper, he had
engaged in an undertaking, which cost him, at least, two or three thousand
pounds, to unite them, and yet, that they should now endanger that union, and
divide, after they had been recognized as one, not only by the King's
commission to Governor Fletcher, but also by his letters patent, The Proprietor
endeavors to reconcile the Province and Territories.
for his own restoration, and the King's several letters: -- he, therefore,
would not have any thing resolved on, but what was considerate and weighty,
lest it should look as unkind, and now, at his departure, carry a very ill
report of them to England."

The territory members objected, that they were great sufferers by that act of
union, however it was, at first, intended; and could not support the burden of
the charge.

The Proprietary replied, "They were free to break off, and might act
distinctly by themselves;" at which they seemed pleased, and expressed their
satisfaction; "But then," continued the Proprietary, "it must be upon amicable
terms, and a good understanding; -- That they must first resolve to settle the
laws; -- and that, as the interest of the province, and that of those lower
counties would be inseparably the same, they should both use a conduct
consistent with that relation," etc.

They remain obstinate.
They appear to have remained obstinate, by the following letter of the
Proprietary, written the next day, and directed to the Speaker, to be
communicated to the whole House, viz.

Friends,
The Proprietary's letter to the Assembly.
YOUR union is what I desire; but your peace and accommodating one another, is
what I must expect from you: The reputation of it is something; the reality
much more. And I desire you to remember and observe what I say: Yield in
circumstantials, to preserve essentials; and, being safe in one another, you
will always be so in esteem with me. Make me not sad, now I am going to leave
you; since it is for you, as well as for,

Your Friend and Proprietary and Governor, WILLIAM PENN.
October 15th. 1701.

Hence the Proprietary's influence and authority, though with difficulty,
appear to have prevailed on them, to a present accommodation, They come to a
present accommodation.
with the provision, in the following charter, for a conditional separation, if
they chose it, within the space of three years.

In May, 1700, The charter of privileges executed.
the former charter having been surrendered into the hands of the Proprietary
and Governor, by six parts in seven of the Assembly, on the 28th. day of
October, 1701, just before his departure, the Council, the Assembly of the
province, and several of the principal inhabitants of Philadelphia attending,
he presented them with their last charter of privileges, which is as follows,
viz.

THE CHARTER OF PRIVILEGES, The charter itself.
Granted by William Penn, Esquire, to the inhabitants of Pennsylvania and
territories.
William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the province of Pennsylvania, and
territories thereunto belonging, to all, to whom these presents shall come,
sends Greeting:
WHEREAS, King Charles the second, Recital of the King's Letters Patent.
by his letters patent, under the great seal of England, bearing date, the
fourth day of March, in the year one thousand six hundred and eighty, was
graciously pleased to give and grant unto me, and my heirs and assigns for
ever, this province of Pennsylvania, with diverse great powers and
jurisdictions, for the well government thereof.

And whereas, the King's dearest brother, James, Duke of York and Albany, etc.
by his deeds of feoffment, Of the D. of York's deeds of feoffment.
under his hand and seal, duly perfected, bearing date, the 24th. day of
August, one thousand six hundred, eighty and two, did grant unto me, my heirs
and assigns, all that tract of land, now called the territories of
Pennsylvania, together with powers and jurisdictions, for the good government
thereof.

And of the former charter.
And whereas, for the encouragement of all the freemen and planters, that might
be concerned in the said province and territories, and for the good government
thereof, I, the said William Penn, in the year one thousand, six hundred and
eighty and three, for me, my heirs and assigns, did grant and confirm unto all
the freemen, planters and adventurers therein, diverse liberties, franchises and
properties, as, by the said grant, entitled, "The frame of the government of
the province of Pennsylvania and territories thereunto belonging, in America,"
may appear; which charter, or frame, being found, in some parts of it, not so
suitable to the present circumstances of the inhabitants, was, in the
Third-month, in the year one thousand seven hundred, delivered up to me, by six
parts of seven of the freemen of this province and territories, in General
Assembly met, provision being made in the said charter for that end and purpose.

And whereas, I was then pleased to promise, that I would restore the said
charter to them again, with necessary alterations, or, in lieu thereof, give
them another, better adapted to answer the present circumstances and conditions
of the said inhabitants; which they have now, by the Representatives, in
General Assembly met, at Philadelphia, requested me to grant.

KNOW YE THEREFORE, That, for the further well-being, and good government of
the said province and territories; and in pursuance of the rights and powers,
before mentioned, I, the said William Penn, do declare, grant and confirm unto
all the freemen, planters and adventurers, and other inhabitants of, and in,
the said Province and Territories thereunto annexed, forever.

I. BECAUSE no people can be truly happy, though under the greatest enjoyment
of civil liberties, if abridged of the freedom of their consciences, as to
religious profession and worship; And Almighty God being the only Lord of
conscience, Liberty of conscience, etc. granted
Father of lights and spirits; and the Author, as well as Object, of all divine
knowledge, faith and worship, who only does enlighten the mind, and purswade
and convince the understandings of people, I do hereby grant and declare, that
no person, or persons, inhabiting this province or territories, who shall
confess and acknowledge one Almighty God, the Creator, Upholder, and Ruler of
the world; and profess him, or themselves obliged to live quietly under the
civil government, shall be, in any case, molested, or prejudiced, in his or
their person, or estate, because of his or their conscientious persuasion, or
practice, nor be compelled, to frequent, or maintain, any religious worship,
place or ministry, contrary to his, or their mind, or to do or suffer, any
other act, or thing, contrary to their religious persuasion.

And, that all persons, Christians of all kinds capable of offices, etc.
who also profess to believe in Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, shall
be capable (notwithstanding their other persuasions, or practices, in point of
conscience and religion) to serve this government in any capacity, both
legislatively and executively, he, or they solemnly promising, when lawfully
required, allegiance to the King, as sovereign, and fidelity to the Proprietary
and Governor, and taking the attests, as now established by law, made at
Newcastle, in the year one thousand seven hundred, entitled, Repealed by the
queen anno 1705.
"An act directing the attests of several officers and ministers, as now
amended and confirmed this present Assembly.

II. For the well-governing of this province and territories, there shall be an
Assembly, An Assembly to be chosen annually.
yearly chosen, by the freemen thereof, to consist of four persons out of each
county, of most note for virtue, wisdom and ability, (or of a greater number,
at any time, as the Governor and Assembly shall agree) upon the first day of
October, for ever; and shall sit on the fourteenth of the same month at
Philadelphia, unless the Governor and Council, for the time being, shall see
cause to appoint another place, within the said province or territories: which
Assembly shall have power to choose a Speaker, Powers and privileges of the
Assembly.
and other their officers; and shall be judges of the qualifications and
elections of their own members; sit upon their own adjournments, appoint
committees; propose bills, in order to pass into laws; impeach criminals and
redress grievances; and shall have all other powers and privileges of an
Assembly, according to the rights of the freeborn subjects of England, and as
is usual in any of the King's plantations in America.

And if any county, or counties, shall refuse, or neglect, to choose their
respective representatives, as aforesaid, or if chosen, do not meet to serve in
Assembly, Two-thirds met to have the whole power, etc.
those, who are so chosen and met, shall have the full power of an Assembly, in
as ample a manner as if all the Representatives had been chosen and met,
provided they are not less than two-thirds of the whole number, that ought to
meet.

Qualifications of electors and elected.
And, that the qualifications of electors and elected, and all other matters and
things relating to elections of Representatives, to serve in Assemblies, though
not herein particularly expressed, shall be and remain, as by a law of this
government, made at Newcastle, Repealed by the Queen, 1705.
in the year one thousand seven hundred, entitled, "An act to ascertain the
number of members of Assembly, and to regulate the elections."

III. That the freemen in each respective county, at the time and place of
meeting, for electing their representatives, to serve in Assembly, may, so
often as there shall be occasion, choose a double number of persons, to present
to the Governor, for sheriffs and coroners, to serve for three years if they so
long behave themselves well, Elections of Sheriffs and Coroners.
out of which elections and presentiments the Governor shall nominate and
commissionate one for each of the said offices, the third after such
presentment, or else the first named in such presentment, for each office, as
aforesaid, shall stand and serve in that office, for the time before
respectively limited: In case of death and default, such vacancies shall be
supplied by the Governor, to serve to the end of the said term.

Provided always, That, if the said freemen shall, at any time neglect, or
decline to choose a person, or persons, for either, or both the aforesaid
offices, then, and in such case, the persons, that are, or shall be, in the
respective offices of Sheriffs, or Coroners, at the time of election, shall
remain therein, until they shall be removed by another election, as aforesaid.

And, Of the clerk of the peace.
that the Justices of the respective counties shall, or may, nominate, or
present, to the Governor, three persons, to serve for Clerk of the Peace for
the said county, when there is a vacancy; one of which the Governor shall
commissionate within ten days after such presentment, or else the first
nominated shall serve in the said office, during good behavior.

IV. That the laws of this government shall be in this style, viz. By the
Governor, Style of the laws.
with the consent and approbation of the Freemen in General Assembly met, and
shall be, after confirmation by the Governor, forthwith recorded in the
Rolls-office, and kept at Philadelphia; unless the Governor and Assembly shall
agree to appoint another place.

V. That all criminals shall have the same privileges of witnesses and council,
Privilege of criminals.
as their prosecutors.

VI. That no person, or persons, shall, or may, at any time hereafter, be
obliged to answer any complaint, matter, or thing, whatsoever, relating to
property, before the Governor and Council, Disputes of property not to come
before the Governor and Council.
or in any other place, but in the ordinary courts of justice, unless appeals
thereunto shall be hereafter, by law appointed.

VII. That no person within this government shall be licensed by the Governer,
to keep ordinary, tavern, Tavern-keepers, etc. to be recommended before
licensed.
or house of public entertainment, but such, who are first recommended to him,
under the hands of the justices of the respective counties, signed in open
court; which justices are, and shall be, hereby empowered to suppress and
forbid any person keeping such public house, as aforesaid, upon their
misbehaviour, on such penalties, as the law does, or shall, direct; and to
recommend others, from time to time, as they shall see occasion.

Estates of persons killing themselves, etc.
VIII. If any person, through temptation, or melancholy, shall destroy himself,
his estate, real and personal, shall, notwithstanding, descend to his wife and
children, or relations, as if he had died a natural death; and if any person
shall be destroyed or killed by casualty, or accident, there shall be no
forfeiture to the Governor by reason thereof.

And no act, law or ordinance whatsoever shall, at any time hereafter, be made,
or done, to alter, change, or diminish the form, or effect of this charter, or
of any part, or clause, therein, contrary to the true intent, and meaning
thereof, without the consent of the Governor, for the time being, and six parts
of seven of the Assembly met.

Liberty of conscience shall be for ever.
And, because the happiness of mankind depends so much upon the enjoying of
liberty of their consciences, as aforesaid, I do hereby solemnly declare,
promise and grant, for me, my heirs and assigns, that the first article of this
charter, relating to liberty of conscience, and every part and clause therein,
according to the true intent and meaning thereof, shall be kept, and remain,
without any alteration, inviolably for ever.

And, lastly, I, the said William Penn, The Proprietary solemnly confirms this
charter.
Proprietary and Governor of the province of Pennsylvania, and territories
thereunto belonging, for myself, my heirs and assigns, have solemnly declared,
granted and confirmed, and do hereby solemnly declare, grant and confirm, that
neither I, my heirs or assigns, shall procure, or do, any thing, or things,
whereby the liberties, in this charter contained and expressed, nor any part
thereof, shall be infringed, or broken: And if any thing shall be procured, or
done, by any person, or persons, contrary to these presents, it shall be held
of no force, or effect.

In witness whereof, I, the said William Penn, Date.
of Philadelphia, in Pennsylvania, have unto this charter of liberties set my
hand and broad seal, this twenty-eighth day of October, in the year of our Lord
one thousand seven hundred and one, being the thirteenth year of the reign of
King William the third, over England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc. and
the twenty-first year of my government.

And, notwithstanding the closure and test of this present charter, as
aforesaid, Proviso, that the province and territories may separate in
legislation, etc.
I think fit to add this following proviso thereunto, as part of the same, that
is to say* That, notwithstanding any clause, or clauses, in the above mentioned
charter, obliging the province and territories to join together in legislation,
I am content, and do hereby declare, that if the Representatives of the
province and territories shall not hereafter agree to join together in
legislation, and that the same shall be signified to me, or my Deputy, in open
Assembly, or otherwise from under the hands and seals of the Representatives,
for the time being, of the province and territories, or the major part of
either of them, at any time, within three years from the date hereof, that, in
such case, the inhabitants of each of the three counties of this province shall
not have less than eight persons to represent them in Assembly, for the
province; and the inhabitants of the town of Philadelphia (when the said town
is incorporated) two persons, to represent them in Assembly; and the
inhabitants of each county in the territories shall have as many persons to
represent them, in a distinct Assembly, for the territories, as shall be by
them, requested, as aforesaid.

To enjoy the same privileges, when separated as when connected.
Notwithstanding which separation of the province and territories, in respect of
legislation, I do hereby promise, grant and declare, that the inhabitants of
both province and territories shall separately enjoy all other liberties,
privileges and benefits granted jointly to them, in this charter, any law,
usage, or custom of this government heretofore made and practiced, or any law
made and passed by the General Assembly to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

WILLIAM PENN.
This charter of privileges being distinctly read in Assembly, and the whole,
and every part thereof, being approved of, and agreed to, by us, We do
thankfully receive the same from our Proprietary and Governor at Philadelphia,
this twenty-eighth day of October, one thousand seven hundred and one, 1701.

Signed on behalf, and by order, of the Assembly, per JOSEPH GROWDON, Speaker.
Edward Shippen, Proprietary and Governor's Council. Phineas Pemberton,
Proprietary and Governor's Council. Samuel Carpenter, Proprietary and
Governor's Council. Griffith Owen, Proprietary and Governor's Council. Caleb
Pusey, Proprietary and Governor's Council. Thomas Story, Proprietary and
Governor's Council.




The Proprietary likewise, by letters patent, under the great seal, The
Proprietor also constitutes a council of state.
bearing even date with this charter, established a Council of state for the
province and territories, "To consult, and assist the Proprietary himself, or
his Lieutenants, or Deputies, with the best of their advice and counsel, in
public affairs and matters relating to the government, and to the peace,
well-being and safety of the people thereof: and, in the absence of the
Proprietary, or upon the Lieutenant's death, or incapacity, to exercise all,
and singular, the powers of government," etc. This instrument was as follows,
viz.

WILLIAM PENN, true and absolute Proprietor and Governor in chief of the
province of Pennsylvania, and territories thereunto belonging, to all, to whom
these presents shall come, sends Greeting:
KNOW YE, That I have nominated, appointed and ordained my trusty a^^
well-beloved friends, Edward Shippen, John Guest, Samuel Carpenter, William
Clark, Thomas Story, Griffith Owen, Phincas Pemberton, Samuel Finney, Caleb
Pusey and John Blunston, to be my Council of State, for the government of the
said province of Pennsylvania, and counties annexed; of whom any four shall be
a quorum, to consult and assist with the best of their advice and couns^l, me,
or my Lieutenant, or Deputy Governor, for the time being, in all public affairs
and matters relating to the said government, and to the peace, safety and
well-being of the people thereof; and in the absence of me, and of my
Lieutenant, out of the said province and territories; or upon my Lieutenant^s
decease, or other incapacity, I do, by these presents, give and grant to the
said Edward Shippen, etc. or any five of them, to exercise all, and singular,
the powers, jurisdictions and authorities whatsoever to me and my heirs, by
virtue of the Royal Charter, or letters patent of King Charles the second,
given and granted, that are, or shall be necessary for the well-governing of
the said province, and territories, and for the administering, maintaining and
executing of justice, and providing for the safety and well-being of the said
people, during such absence: they, and each of them, the said Edward Shippen,
etc. to continue in place till my further order shall be known.

And I do hereby further grant to my Lieutenant Governor, for the time being,
full power and authority, upon the decease, or removal, of any of the said
Council, to nominate and appoint others to serve in their place and stead, also
to add to the number, when, and so often, as my said Lieutenant shall see
cause; and in case he shall not appoint a President, then the first named, or
the next to him, shall, and is hereby empowered to take the chair.

Given under my hand, etc. at Philadelphia, the 28th. of October, in the 13th.
year of King William, A. D. 1701.




Moreover before the Proprietary left the country, he favored the town of
Philadelphia, then become very considerable, and in a flourishing condition,
with a particular memorial of his benevolence, by granting the inhabitants
thereof, likewise a charter of privileges, The Proprietor grants a charter to
Philadelphia.
See this charter, in the appendix No 6. It is dated October 25th. By this
charte^, Philadelphia is constituted a city, bounded, incorporated and endowed
with diverse privileges and immunities for the good order, regulation and
government thereof, as therein described and expressed. Edward Shippen was
appointed the first Mayor; Thomas Story, the Recorder, and Thomas Farmer.
Sheriff; and the first town clerk, and clerk of the peace, court and courts, as
appointed in this charter, was Robert Ashton. -- The first Aldermen hereby
appointed, were Joshua Carpenter, Griffith Jones, Anthony Morris, Joseph
Wilcox, Nathan Stanbury, Charles Read, Thomas Masters, and William Carter; who,
with the Mayor and Recorder, are Justices of the peace for the time being, etc

The first Common Council-men were, John Parsons, William Hudson, W^^liam Lee,
Nehemiah Allen, Thomas Paschall, John Budd, junior, Edward Smon^, Samuel
Buckley, James Atkinson, Penticost Teague, Francis Cook, and Henry Badcock. --
The Mayor is chosen annually, by at least five of the Aldermen and nine of the
Common Council; whose number is unlimited; and they are afterward chosen, in
the same manner, by themselves, or by the Corporation; which consists of the
Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Common Council-men, by the name of, "The Mayor
and Co^monalty of Philadelphia, etc."


for its particular regulation, good-order, government and police.

And, having constituted Andrew Hamilton, Esquire one of the Proprietors of East
New Jersey, and some time Governor of both East and West New Jersey, Andrew
Hamilton appointed Deputy Governor, and W. Penn sails for England.
his Deputy Governor, he sailed for England; James Logan being, by commission,
appointed Secretary of the province, and Clerk of the Council of the same.
"James Logan was, by commission, under the lesser seal of the government, from
the Proprietary William Penn, bearing date the 10th. of December, 1701, and by
another commission, under the great seal, dated, the 27th. of October, 1701,
appointed Secretary of the province, and Clerk of the Council of the same."


CHAPTER XVI.
Cause of the Proprietary's return removed. -- King William dies, and is
succeeded by Queen Anne. -- William Penn in favor at court. -- Governor
Hamilton's administration and death. -- Province and territories
irreconcilable. -- They agree to a separation, in legislation; Edward Shippen,
President of the Council. -- Resolve of the Provincial Assembly after
separation. -- Declaration and Test, signed by the members, etc. -- John Evans
arrives Deputy Governor, and endeavors to reunite the province and
territories in legislation, but in vain. The Governor displeased with the
Assembly of the province. -- David Lloyd. -- Governor's proclamation for
raising a militia. -- He meets the Assembly of the territories at Newcastle. --
The Provincial Assembly remonstrate to the Proprietary. -- They refuse the
Governor, etc. a copy of their remonstrance. -- Part of the Governor's speech,
in 1705, respecting the effect of this proceeding. -- A very different Assembly
elected, and more harmony succeeds. -- Names of the members of this Assembly.
-- Thomas Chalkley's visit to the Indians at Connestogo, with a memorial of
him. -- A singular act of Assembly in Connecticut, repealed by the crown, etc.
Pennsylvania particularly affected in times of war, and subject to
misrepresentations, on account of the Quakers' principles against war; which
now existed between England and France and Spain.

WILLIAM PENN arrived at Portsmouth, 1701.
about the middle of December. But after his return to England, the bill,
before mentioned, for reducing the proprietary governments, into regal ones,
which, through the solicitations of his friends, had been postponed, the last
session of Parliament, was entirely dropped, Cause of the Proprietors return to
England, dropped.

King William dies and Queen Ann succeeds.


and no further progress made in that affair. Soon after this, or, on the 18th.
of the First-month, 1701-2, King William died; and the Princess Anne, of
Denmark, succeeding to the throne, commenced her reign with moderation and
clemency.

W. Penn in favor at Court, etc.
William Penn, being in the Queen's favor, was often at court; and for his
convenience, on that account, he took lodgings at Kensington; where, at his
leisure hours, he writ several useful and excellent treatises, on diverse
subjects; for the instruction and benefit of posterity; which may be seen in
his works.

Governor Hamilton's administration and death.
Governor Hamilton's administration, in Pennsylvania, after the Proprietary's
departure, continued only till the Twelfth-month in the next following year,
1702, when he died: The principal part of which was taken up in endeavoring an
union between the province and territories, in legislation; respecting which
the Proprietary, by his presence and authority, had prevailed on them to a
present compliance: For they had not yet accepted the new charter; and they had
three years allowed them to signify their refusal. For this purpose Hamilton
labored much with them, and used many arguments to induce them to unite, but
without success. Upon his death the government devolved on the Council, Edward
Shippen being President.

The Province and Territories agree to a separation.
During this time of dispute, or endeavors, for an union between the
Representatives of the province and territories, not much other public business
of importance appears to have been transacted in the affairs of the government.
The latter persisted in an absolute refusal to join with the former, in
legislation, till it was finally, in the year 1703, agreed and settled between
them, that they should compose different and distinct Assemblies, entirely
independent on each other; pursuant to the liberty, allowed by a clause in the
charter, for that purpose; which clause was said to have been there inserted by
the particular and special means of the Representatives of the territories,
with previous full intention of the separation, which ensued; and in this
capacity they have ever acted since that time.

The province now, by charter, Assembly for the Province, etc.
also claimed a separate Representative of its own, consisting of eight
members, for each of the three counties, and two, for the city of Philadelphia;
which members, being, in October 1703, convened and duly qualified, according
to law, their first Resolution was in the following words -- Note. "At an
Assembly begun at Philadelphia, in October, one thousand seven hundred and
three,

Edward Shippen, Esquire, President of the Council. President and Council, from
February, 1702-3, to February, 1703-4.

The declaration and test, signed by the Members of this Assembly,

WE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, elected Representatives by the
freemen of the respective counties, in this province of Pennsylvania, and the
city of Philadelphia, in pursuance of the Proprietary's charter to serve in
Assembly, do, each of us for himself, solemnly promise and declare, that we
will be true and faithful to Queen Anne of England, etc. And we do solemnly
promise and declare, That we, from our hearts, abhor, detest and renounce, as
impious and heretical, that damnable doctrine and position, that princes
excommunicated, or deprived, by the Pope, or any other authority of the Sea of
Rome, may be deposed or murdered, by their subjects, or any other whatsoever;
And we do declare, that no foreign prince, person, prelate, state, or
potentate, has or ought to have any power, jurisdiction, superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority, ecclesiastical, or spiritual, within the realm of
England, and the dominions the unto belonging.

And we, and each of us, do solemnly and sincerely profess, testify and
declare, That we do believe, that, in the sacrament of the Lord's supper, there
is not any transubstantiation of the elements of bread and wine into the body
and blood of Christ, at, or after the consecration thereof by any person
whatsoever; and that the invocation, or adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any
other Saint, and the sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the church
of Rome, are superstitious and idolatrous.

And we, and each of us for himself, do solemnly profess, testify and declare,
That we do make this declaration, and every part thereof, in the plain and
ordinary sense of the words read unto us, as they are commonly understood by
English Protestants, without any evasion, equivocation, or mental reservation
whatsoever; and without any dispensation already granted for this purpose by
the Pope, or any other authority whatsoever; or without any hope of any such
dispensation from any person, or authority whatsoever; or without thinking that
we are, or can be, acquitted before God or man, or absolved of this
declaration, or any part thereof, although the Pope or any other person or
persons, or power whatsoever, should dispense with, or annul, the same, or
declare that it was null and void from the beginning.

And we, the said subscribing Representatives, and each of us, for himself, do
solemnly and sincerely profess faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ,
his eternal Son, the true God, and in the Holy Spirit, one God, blessed for
ever more; and we do acknowledge the holy scriptures to be given by divine
inspiration.

Nicholas Pile, John Bennet, Andrew Job, David Lewis, Nathaniel Newlin, Joseph
Baker, Robert Carter, Joseph Wood, William Biles, Joseph Growdon, Tobias
Dymmoke, Richard Hough, William Paxton, Jeremiah Langhorn, Joshua Hoopes,
Thomas Stevenson, Rowland Ellis, Nicholas Walne, Samuel Richardson, Isaac
Norris, David Lloyd, Speaker, Anthony Morris, Samuel Cart, Griffith Jones,
Joseph Wilcox, Charles Read.
Votes of Assembly.





"Resolved, That the Representatives, or Delegates, First resolve of the
Provincial Assembly.
of the freeholders of this Province, according to the powers granted by the
Proprietary and Governor, by his Charter, dated the twenty-eighth day of
October, anno Domini 1701, may meet in Assembly, on the 14th. day of October
yearly, at Philadelphia, or elsewhere, as shall be appointed by the Governor
and Council, for the time being; and so continue, on their own adjournments,
from time to time, during the year of their service, as they shall find
occasion, or think fit, for preparing bills, debating thereon, and voting, in
order to their being passed into laws; appointing committees, redressing of
grievances, and impeaching of criminals, as they shall see meet, in as ample a
manner, as any of the assemblies of this province and territories have
hitherto, at any time done, or might legally do, as effectually, to all intents
and purposes, as any of the neighboring governments, under the crown of
England, have power to do, according to the rights and privileges of the
freeborn subjects of England, as near as may be, 1703.
respecting the infancy of the government, and the capacities of the people:
And that the said Assembly, as often as the Governor, for the time being, shall
require, attend on him, in order to legislation; and to answer all other just
ends of assemblies, in any emergencies, or reasons of state; but shall not be
subject, at any time, to be by him adjourned, prorogued, or dissolved."

After this, The Council and Assembly differ about the power of adjourning.
when the President and Council proposed to confer with the Assembly about a
proper time to meet again, the latter assumed the power of adjourning wholly to
themselves; and upon the President and Council's objecting against this extent
of the Assembly's claim of sitting wholly upon their own adjournments, etc.
they immediately adjourned themselves to the 1st. day of the Third-month next,
without giving the Council any further time to confer with them about it.

Such was the state of things when John Evans who was appointed Deputy Governor
by the Proprietor, with the Queen's royal approbation, 1704. Arrival of
Governor Evans.
on the death of Andrew Hamilton, Who convenes an Assembly of both the Province
and Territories together.
arrived in the province, in the Twelfth-month, 1703; who, having first
augmented the number of the Members of Council, Among the names of the Members
of Council, in the Twelfth-month, 1703, about the time, or soon after Governor
Evans's arrival, appear to be, William Penn, junior, Roger Mompesson, Edward
Shippen, John Guest, Samuel Carpenter, Thomas Story, Griffith Owen, Caleb
Pusey, William Trent, Richard Hill, Samuel Finney, James Logan.


Also for the three lower counties were: -- William Clark, William Rodney,
Jasper Yeats.


Minutes of Coun^^l.

William Penn, junior, appears to have been called to the Board and made a
member of Council, in the Twelfth-month 8th. 1703, and probably came from
England with Governor Evans, etc.


in the Second-month (April) 1704, convened the Representatives both of the
province and territories, 1704.
at the same time and place, in the Council Chamber in Philadelphia.

Governor Evans, notwithstanding the steps which had been taken, and the
agreement made between the province and territories, before his arrival,
respecting their future acting in a separate capacity, and independent of each
other, in legislation, according to the provision made for the same by charter,
renewed the attempt for uniting them; and his first speech to the
Representatives of both places, was chiefly calculated to endeavor a reunion;
and it consisted of such arguments and insinuations as appeared to him most
cogent, and likely to bring about a coalition, so necessary for their mutual
benefit.

The territories incline to unite.
To this the members of the territories, who before appeared to have principally
occasioned the division, now seemed willing to accede, to accept the charter on
conditions, and to unite with the members of the province, But the province
refuses.
in legislation; but the latter, who had so long been hampered with the
refractory behavior of the former, now, in their turn, absolutely refused to
be connected with them; and adhered to their prior agreement for a separation.
The names of the Members for the Territories were: -- "James Conts, "John
Healy, "Roelof de Haes, "Isaac Gooding, William Rodney, John Brinkloe, William
Morton, Arthur Meston, John Hill, William Bagwell, Robert Burton, Richard
Painter.



Which commences a disagreement between the Governor and Assembly.
Thus all negotiation on this head came to an end; and the Assembly of the
province incurred the Governor's displeasure, by refusing to comply with his
recommendation; which, with the disputes, that afterward arose between them,
on three bills proposed by the Assembly, one to confirm the great charter of
privileges of the province, another to confirm that of the city of
Philadelphia, and a bill of property; which the Governor refused to pass,
without such amendments as the Assembly would not agree to; and they being
likewise disgusted at some expressions of one of the council, J Guest.
respecting their proceedings, occasioned such misunderstanding between the
Governor and the House, that, in consequence thereof, but little of moment
appears to have been transacted, in the public affairs of the government,
during the sittings of this, and the next succeeding Assembly; D. Lloyd,
Speaker, etc.
at the head of both which appeared David Lloyd, David Lloyd was, many years,
Speaker of the Assembly; and in the time of Thomas Lloyd, appears to have been
Clerk of the Council. He distinguished himself by giving constant opposition to
what was afterward called the Proprietary interest. He had been brought up to
the law; and was one of the principal antagonists of the Governors Evans and
Gookin; he is represented to have been one of the chief instruments in
separating the province of Pennsylvania from the lower counties, so as to
compose Assemblies independent on each other. -- He came from England, in, or
about, the year 1686; and was commissioned Attorney General by William Penn, in
Second-month, 24th. that year. He was a person afterward much esteemed among
his friends the Quakers and others; being generally accounted a man of
integrity, and considerable abilities, both in his civil and religious
capacity: but his political talents seem to have been more for dividing than
uniting diff^^ent interests. He died at Chester, where he had lived, in the
beginning of August, 1731, when he was Chief Justice of Pennsylvania.
as Speaker.

In the latter part of the year 1704, Gov. Evans meets the first Assembly at
Newcastle, etc.
Governor Evans met the Assembly of the lower counties, at Newcastle; which was
the first Assembly, that had acted there in legislation, independent of the
province, after the Proprietary's departure, prior to which he published a
proclamation, He publishes a proclamation, etc.
to raise a militia, among such, whose religious persuasion was not against
bearing of arms; it being in the time of the war between England, and France
and Spain. This proclamation was as follows, viz.

By the honorable Lieutenant Governor of the province of Pennsylvania, and
territories thereunto belonging;
FORASMUCH as the Queen's most excellent Majesty, and the rest of her Majesty's
allies, are now engaged in a vigorous war against France and Spain, for
maintaining and preserving the liberty and balance of Europe; which, as it
engages the subjects of the said crowns and states in open hosti^^^^, so it
lays her Majesty's subjects, in this government, under a necessity of being
well armed and diciplined, as well for the honor and service of her Majesty,
as for the defense and preservation of our religion, lives and liberties; all
which her Majesty having duly weighed and considered, was graciously pleased to
command, that due preparation, should be made, in this government, for the
defense and security of the same, against any attempts, that might be made upon
it by the enemy, during this time of war: Therefore, in obedience to her
Majesty's royal command, and to the end that the inhabitants of this government
may be in a posture of defense and readiness, to withstand and repel all acts
of hostility, that the enemy shall attempt against them, I do hereby strictly
command and require all persons residing in this government, whose persuasion
will, on any account, permit them to take up arms, in their own defense, that
forthwith they do provide themselves with a good firelock and ammunition, in
order to enlist themselves in the Militia, which I am now settling in this
government; and every inhabitant thereof is, without delay, to repair and
enlist themselves with the officer, or officers, commissioned to command in
that district, where such inhabitant dwells. And I do further command all
persons, that they take due notice hereof, and give obedience, and be to their
utmost, aiding and assisting to the said officers, in all things relating to
the exercising the power given them, in their commissions, as they will answer
the contrary at their peril.

Given under my hand and great seal, at Philadelphia, the 25th. of May, in the
third year of the reign of our sovereign Lady, Anne, over England, etc. annoque
Domini, 1704. J. E.





But, from what had already passed between the Governor, and the Assembly of
the province, the latter fell into such an ill humor, The Assembly complain to
the Proprietor against Governor Evans. etc.
that in the Sixth-month, 1704, they privately drew up a representation, or
remonstrance, in a letter to the Proprietary; which was said to be filled with
complaints, highly reflecting, even, on the Proprietary himself, as well as the
Deputy Governor, Evans, and the Secretary, James Logan.

They refuse the Governor a copy of what they writ, etc.
Some time after, when the Governor heard of this, he, by a written message to
the House, required a copy of it; which was likewise done by a formal petition
from seven persons; who were all, either of the Governor's Council, or
otherwise of the principal inhabitants, and Quakers, viz. Edward Shippen,
Thomas Story, Richard Hill, William Hudson, Pentecost Teague, Thomas Chalkley,
and William Southby; these, with many others, considering the present ill
humor of the Assembly, thought themselves highly interested in the nature of
such a proceeding; but they were all peremtorily refused by the Assembly.

What effect which these proceedings had with the Proprietary in England, may,
in part, appear from the Governor's speech to the Assembly, in the forepart of
the year 1705, in which, among other things, he thus expresses himself,
respecting the Proprietary's sentiments on the causes of his differing with the
Assembly, and of their letter to the Proprietary, viz.

"The Proprietary, Gentlemen, 1705. Part of the Governor's speech to the
Assembly, etc
is so far from agreeing with your opinion, in these matters, that he is
greatly surprised to see, instead of suitable supplies, for the maintenance of
government, and defraying public charges, for the public safety, time only lost
(while his constant expenses run on) in disputes upon heads, which he had as
fully settled before his departure, as could, on the best precautions, be
thought convenient, or reasonable, even, at a time, when he was leaving you in
doubt whether it would be possible to divert the bill, then moving in
Parliament, for annexing all these governments to the crown; which being now
diverted, and himself secure in the possession of his right, so long as his
circumstances shall render the administration of it practicable, he is the more
astonished to find you, for whose sakes chiefly, and not his own, he has
undergone the late fatigues, and expensive troubles, in maintaining it, express
no greater sense of gratitude, than has hitherto appeared.

"The Proprietary also further assures us, that had those three bills (of which
copies were sent home) been passed into acts here, they would certainly have
been vacated by her Majesty, being looked on by men of skill, to whom they have
been shown, as very great absurdities; but, what I must not be silent in is,
that he highly resents that heinous indignity, and most scandalous treatment he
has met with, in a letter, directed not only to himself, but also to be shown
to some other persons, disaffected to him, 1705.
in the name of the Assembly and people of this province, of which I have
formerly demanded a copy, Part of the Governor's speech, etc.
but was then denied it, under pretense (when it was too late) that it should
be recalled: If that letter was the act of the people truly represented, he
thinks such proceedings are sufficient to cancel all obligations of care over
them; but if done by particular persons only, and it is an imposture in the name
of the whole, he expects the country will purge themselves, and take care that
due satisfaction be given him. --

-- "The Proprietary (who, it is well known, has hitherto supported this
government) upon such treatment, as he has met with, is frequently solicited to
resign and throw up all, without any further care; but his tenderness to those
in the place, whom he knows to be still true and honest, prevails with him to
give the people yet an opportunity of showing what they will do, before all be
brought to a closing period.

"Methods have been taken to provoke him to this, that there might be the
greater show of blame for it, when done, though it could not be avoided; but
assure yourselves, that he will be justified by all reasonable men, for
withdrawing the exercise of his care over those, that being so often invited to
it, take so little of themselves," etc.

A different Assembly chosen, etc.
The nature and consequence of these disputes appear to have caused a
considerable change in the choice of the members of the next elected Assembly,
in October 1705; of which Joseph Growdon was Speaker. The Names of the Members
of this Assembly, which, in general, appears to have been composed of some of
the most respectable persons in the province, were, for the county of
Philadelphia.
Isaac Norris, Richard Hill, Rowland Ellis, Reese Thomas, Samuel Cart, John
Goodson, William Carter, John Cook.
Bucks.
Joseph Growdon, Speaker. John Swift, Jeremiah Langhorn, Joshua Hoopes, Tobias
Dymock, Henry Paxton, Samuel Carpenter, William Paxton.
Chester.
Robert Pile, Richard Webb, Caleb Pusey, Nicholas Fairlarnb, John Bennit, Isaac
Tailor, Nathaniel Newlin, Joseph Coeburn.


City of Philadelphia, -- David Lloyd and Edward Shippen, senior.




Better understanding between the Governor and Assembly.
This Assembly acted so very different from the two last preceding, as to
produce a much better understanding between them and the Governor, in
consequence of which a great number of laws were passed, and the public affairs
of the government, for a time, bore a more favorable and promising aspect.

In this year 1705, Thomas Chalkley, Thomas Chalkley visits the Indians at
Conestogo, etc.
one of the seven persons before mentioned, who petitioned the Assembly of the
last year, 1704, a preacher among the Quakers, paid a religious visit to the
Indians, at Conestogo, near the river Susquahanna, in Pennsylvania, in company
with some of his friends, of the same religious society. Thomas Chalkley, with
his wife and family, removed from England, in the year 1701, into Pennsylvania;
where he settled and resided, during the remainder of his life; which was
upwards of forty years; excepting that part of it, in which the necessary
affairs of trade and business took him abroad, in a seafaring way, etc. but
more especially in the discharge of what he believed to be his duty, as a
minister of the gospel; which, it is left on record, was his principal and most
delightful employment: This he is said to have performed through many deep
trials and exercises, various ways, in different parts of the world, with good
success.

He was a person much beloved and highly esteemed by a very numerous
acquaintance; in that he had many virtues, and these of the more amiable kind:
he is said to have been of a meek and quiet spirit, and to have had an engaging
sweetness, both in his ministry and conversation. He died in the island of
Tortola, in America, in the year 1741, when on a religious visit there, in the
service of preaching the gospel. -- Though he had not the advantage of what is
called a literary education, or of much learning, yet he lest behind him some
printed works on religious subjects, and a journal of his life, (from which the
above account is extracted) written in a plain and simple, yet very easy and
engaging style; which were an acceptable legacy to many lovers of his memory.


The Indians, who consisted chiefly of Senecas and Shawanese, received them
with great kindness: they were much affected by their visit, Queen Ojuncho.
more especially a certain woman of eminence among them, who appeared to have
authority, and spoke much in their Councils; the reason for which was, when the
Indians were asked, one of them replied, "Because some women are wiser than
some men, and that she was an Empress among them;" -- She told Thomas Chalkley,
and the other friends, Queen Ojuncho.
that she looked upon their coming to be more than natural; because they did
not come to buy nor sell, nor yet gain, but in love and respect to them, and
desired their welfare both here and hereafter. -- She related to them a dream,
which she had three days before; which, being interpreted was, "That she was in
London, and that London was the finest place she ever saw, (it was like
Philadelphia, but much larger) and she went across six streets, and in the
seventh she saw William Penn preaching to the people; which was a great
multitude; and both she and William Penn rejoiced to see each other, after the
meeting she went to him, and he told her, that in a little time, he would come
over and preach to them also; of which she was very glad: and now, she said,
her dream was fulfilled; for one of his friends was come to preach to them."
And she advised the Indians to hear and treat the friends kindly; which they
accordingly did. --

This one instance, among many, which might he given, is here mentioned, to
show the love and regard, these people had for the memory of William Penn; as
the consequence of his just and kind treatment of them; and the sense which
they had of his regard for their real good, and true happiness.

England at war with France and Spain, produces difficulty in Pennsylvania.
England was now at war with France and Spain; in consequence of which no part
of the British dominions could be entirely exempt from danger. In all times of
war Pennsylvania is said to have been exposed more or less to difficulties, on
account of the Quakers, who were the most important and considerable part of
the inhabitants, being principled against war of every kind: but then, in
consequence of their pacific conduct, it was manifest, more happy effects were
produced, in proportion, as the arts of peace, in a sober and industrious
people, are preferable to those of war; though they were strenuously opposed,
as well by the internal as by the external enemies of the constitution of the
province; and that both through ignorance and design. Note. About this time
(anno 1705) the Quakers in America seem to have had reason to be alarmed by a
singular act of Assembly, passed in the colony of Connecticut, entitled only,
Heretics: The substance or purport of it appears, by the order of Queen Anne,
in Council, made upon that occasion, as follows, viz.

"At the Court of Kensington, the 11th. day of October, 1705. Present: --
H^ Royal Highness, Prince George of Denmark, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Lord President, Duke of Somerset, Duke of Ormond,
Earl of Ranelaugh, Mr. Boil, Mr. Secretary Hedges, Mr. Secretary Harley, Lord
Chief Justice Holt, Lord Chief Justice Trevor, Mr. Vernon, Mr. Earl.
"A Representation, from the Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plantations,
being this day read at the board, upon an act, passed in her Majesty's colony
of Connecticut, entitled only, Heretics, whereby it is enacted, that all, who
shall entertain any Quakers, Ranters, Adamites, and other Heretics, are made
liable to the penalty of five pounds, and five pounds per week for every town,
that shall so entertain them; that all Quakers shall be committed to prison, or
be sent out of the colony; that whoever shall hold unnecessary discourse with
Quakers shall forfeit twenty shillings; that whoever shall keep any Quakers'
books, the Governor, Magistrates and Elders excepted, shall forfeit ten
shillings; and that all such books be suppressed; that no master of any vessel
do land any Quakers, without carrying them away again, under the penalty of
twenty pounds.

"And the said Lords Commissioners, humbly offering that the said act be
repealed by her Majesty; it being contrary to the liberty of conscience
indulged to dissenters by the laws of England, as also to the charter granted
to that colony.

"Her Majesty, with the advice of her Privy Council, is pleased to declare her
disallowance and disapprobation of the said act; and pursuant to her Majesty's
royal pleasure thereupon, the said act, passed in her Majesty's colony of
Connecticut, in New England, entitled, Heretics, is hereby repealed, and
declared null and void, and of no effect.

In gratitude for this order, the Quakers, in London, addressed the Queen, in
the following manner, viz.

May it please the Queen,
WE, thy protestant dissenting subjects, commonly called Quakers, in London,
having lately been the Queen's humble petitioners, on behalf of our friends, in
New England, against a law, made in Connecticut, for their suppression, which
law, the Queen has been graciously pleased to disallow, and make void, now find
ourselves engaged, in duty and gratitude, to make the just returns of our
thankful acknowledgments to the Queen, for this eminent instance of inviolably
maintaining the toleration; and do, therefore, humbly crave leave, on this
occasion, to repeat the sincere assurance of our Christian and peaceable
subjection, and unfeigned joy, for the Queen's mild and gentle government,
aiming at the good of all her people.

May the blessing of the Almighty so prosper and accomplish the Queen's just
desires of union among her subjects, of firm peace in Europe, and of the
increase of virtue, that, in the delightful fruition thereof, the Queen may
enjoy many days, and after a life of comfort, be translated to a glorious
immortality.

Signed on behalf of the said people, by JOHN FIELD. JOSEPH WYETH.


The Queen's answer.

"Let the gentlemen know, I thank them heartily for this address; and that,
while they continue so good subjects, they need not doubt of my protection."

Note. The winter of the year 1705, was remarkable, in Pennsylvania for a great
snow, in general, about one yard deep.




For, though the fidelity of the Quakers to the King and Government, their
punctuality in paying their taxes, The Quakers punctual in paying taxes to the
government.
and their conscientiously and strictly declining all illicit trade, or
defrauding of the royal revenue, in any respect, have, in all parts of the
British dominions, never been exceeded by any others; which, in an industrious
people, are things of very great importance and utility, to any government;
yet, in this of province, by reason of their not personally themselves
complying in military preparations, nor joining in actual service of that
nature, or immediately employing others, as substitutes, therein, though they
never attempted to lay any restraint upon other people, who were among them,
But the consequences of their principles sometimes misrepresented, etc.
respecting these affairs, consistent with the law of nations, and self
defense, or agreeable to the limitations of the royal charter, they have,
nevertheless, frequently labored under very unjust imputations, and the charge
of wrong consequences, formed by the false reasoning of their enemies, in this
respect.

CHAPTER XVII.
Governor Evans's disposition and conduct. -- His treatment of the Quakers'
principles on war. -- False alarm at Philadelphia. -- Fort and exactions at
Newcastle. -- Richard Hill. -- Isaac Norris. -- Samuel Preston, etc. --
Assembly's address to the Governor, etc. -- Further proceeding and dispute
between the Governor and Assembly. -- Assembly displeased with the Secretary
James Logan. -- Memorial of James Logan. -- The Assembly impeach the Secretary.
-- Heads of an angry remonstrance to the Proprietor against the Governor and
Secretary, etc. -- These disputes continue till the arrival of Governor Gookin,
in the beginning of 1709. -- Names of the Members of Assembly and Council, etc.
-- Difficulties of the Proprietor about this time. --

GOVERNOR EVANS appears to have been an active young man, 1705.
of a temper scarcely indifferent to any thing, Gov. Evans did not attend
sufficiently to the disposition of the people, etc.
zealous to promote what he thought the service and interest of the Proprietary
required, but not sufficiently studying the genius and disposition of the
people, over whom he presided. His warm zeal to push his own views, in some
things, contrary to those of the Assembly, tended to produce such extreme
opposition and dislike between them, as were scarcely warrantable, and might
have had fatal effects; the natural consequence of men's tempers being too much
agitated and inflamed; besides the liberties of his private life and conduct
are represented to have been such as rendered him offensive to a sober and
religious people. He was moreover said to want neither ingenuity nor abilities,
so much as a proper application of them; for which years and experience are so
generally requisite. But his disappointment, on his first arrival, in not being
able to prevail on the Assembly of the province to admit of a reunion with
that of the territories, which he had so much set his mind upon, with the
nature of certain following proceedings of the former, appear to have
occasioned his imprudently joining with the Assembly of the latter, He joins
with the Assembly of the territories to incommode the Province.
in some acts, which seemed more calculated to incommode the province, than for
any real utility to either; from which kind of conduct it could not be
reasonably supposed any good understanding could arise, or be long cherished,
between them.

The Governor had endeavored to form a militia through the government, but so
far as appears, and which could not be reasonably expected otherwise, not with
much success. He knew the Quakers' principles were against bearing arms and
war, yet, as the inexperience and assuming of youth, as well as the prejudice
of more advanced years, is sometimes ready to regard a contrariety of
sentiment, in others, more especially if it differ much from the common
opinion, in the highest point of absurdity, without duly examining into the
merits of it; He treats the Quakers principles against war, as absurd.
so Governor Evans, by part of his conduct, appears to have regarded and
treated the principles of the Quakers, in respect to self defense, as a mere
notion, which would never endure a serious trial; and by the following
imprudent scheme and experiment, instead of answering any useful intention to
the public, he is said not only to have alienated the Quakers further from him,
but also highly disgusted such of the people in general, as were not concerned
in the contrivance, or execution of it.

Governor Evans, in conjunction with Robert French of Newcastle, Thomas Clark,
an attorney at law, of Philadelphia, 1706.
and some others of his associates, it is said, for their diversion, and to try
the disposition of the people, Account of the false alarm, etc.
but most probably that of the Quakers chiefly, concerted a scheme to raise and
carry on a false alarm, in order most effectually to terrify the inhabitants by
a sudden surprise, and thereby oblige them to have recourse to arms, for their
defense.

It was at the time of the fair in Philadelphia, on the 16th. day of the
Third-month, O. S. 1706, when this plot was put in execution; French acted at
Newcastle, by sending up a messenger to the governor, at Philadelphia, in the
greatest haste, and apparent consternation, to acquaint him, that a number of
vessels were then actually in the river, and as high up as a place, which he
named. Upon this news immediately the Governor acted his part; and, by his
emissaries, made it fly through the city; while himself with a drawn sword in
his hand, on horseback, rode through the streets, in seeming great commotion,
and a behavior adapted to the nature of the occasion, commanded and entreated
people of all ranks to be properly assisting on the emergency, etc. There were
two noted false alarms formerly, in the province. The former was that of the
Indians, in 1688. The latter was this, in Governor Evans's time; to one of
which Thomas Makin, before mentioned in the notes, page 211; seems to allude,
in the following lines, viz.

"Sed semel hic rumor mendax clamavit ad arma,
"Incola cui nimium credulus omnis erat.
"Haec male-sana die suit acta tragaedia quadam,
"Cum convenerunt undique turba frequens;
"Scilicet ut major fieret commotus in urbe,
"Notior et mutis rumor ubique foret,
"Usque adeo suit hac confusus in urbe tumultus,
"Ut neque tuncleges, ordo nec ullus erat.
"Hic removere sua instanti properabat ab host,
"Ille nihil contra jussit ab urbe vehi;
"Sed quodcunque sibi voluit dementia talis,
"Haec damno multis est memoranda dies:
"Vespere sed tandem fuit hoc stratagema detectum,
"Fabula tunc istam f^^iit acta diem."
But once to arms false rumor called here;
To which the people commonly give ear.
'Twas on a certain day the plot began,
Deluded crowds together madly ran:
By artful means the stratagem was laid,
And great commotions through the city made;
So wild the tumult, and so great the fear,
No law nor order was observed there:
While from the approaching foes to haste away,
One urged, another orders gave to stay.
This strange affair, whatever was designed,
For loss to many, will be kept in mind.
The evening did the plot's design betray;
The farce was ended with the closing day.



The stratagem, in part succeeded; and the suddenness of the surprise, with the
noise of precipitation consequent thereon, threw many of the people into very
great fright and consternation, insomuch that it is said, Account of the false
alarm, etc.
some threw their plate and most valuable effects down their wells and
little-houses; that others hid themselves, in the best manner they could, while
many retired further up the river, with what they could most readily carry off;
so that some of the creeks seemed full of boats, and small craft; those of a
larger size running as far as Burlington, and some higher up the river; --
Several women are said to have miscarried by the fright and terror, into which
they were thrown, and much mischief ensued. It was observed, that, in an
Almanac published this year, in Philadelphia, was inserted the following
distich, opposite to this very time, viz.

"Wise men wonder, good men grieve,
Knaves invent, and fools believe."



But the design, it is said, was suspected, or understood, by the more
considerate part of the people, even at the beginning; and endeavors
accordingly were used, to prevent its taking effect; but the conduct and
artifice of the Governor, with the help of his numerous assistants, and the
easy credulity, common to the more inconsiderate part of mankind, very much
frustrated these endeavors, till the first transport of amazement had subsided.

James Logan, the Secretary, though he was one of the people called Quakers,
was accused or suspected, of being privy to the affair. He denied the charge;
but endeavored to palliate the action, and excuse the Governor; which rendered
him the more suspected. The design, Account of the false alarm, etc.
though it had such a considerable effect, turned out entirely contrary to the
expectation of the authors and promoters of it; for the people were soon
undeceived; and when they saw how grossly they had been imposed upon, many of
them so highly resented the usage, that the authors and promoters thereof were
now obliged to consult their own safety from the fury of an enraged populace.

As to the Quakers, it is said the principal part of them were attending their
religious meeting as usual, on that day of the week, even in the midst of the
confusion; and, as if they were aware of the design, in general, behaved
themselves so far consistently, that only four persons, who had any pretense to
be accounted of that society, appeared under arms, at the place of rendezvous,
appointed on the occasion.

With this action, whereby the Governor rendered himself odious to the
generality of the inhabitants of Philadelphia, may be mentioned the following;
by which he incurred, in a particular manner, the displeasure of the trading
part of the province.

Soon after the Assembly of the territories had met in legislation, independent
of the province, Of the fort and exactions at Newcastle, etc.
Governor Evans proposed to them the building a fort at Newcastle; upon which a
law was passed there, entitled, "An act for erecting and maintaining a fort,
for her Majesty's service, at the town of Newcastle upon Delaware." This law
imposed a duty of half a pound of Gunpowder, for every ton, that all vessels
whatever, coming from the sea up the river, should measure by the carpenters
rule, whose major part was not owned by persons residing on the river and bay
of Delaware; (except ships of war) and by it all vessels, both inward and
outward, were obliged to stop, drop anchor, and the commander to go on shore,
make report, and have leave to pass; from the commanding officer of the said
fort, Of the fort and exactions at Newcastle, etc.
under penalty of paying five pounds, besides twenty shillings for the first
gun, thirty for the second, and forty for every gun afterward, that should be
fired on the occasion, in case of neglect, besides the forfeiture of five
pounds, for contempt, etc.

This law was considered as a manifest infraction of the privileges granted by
the royal charter to the settlers and inhabitants of Pennsylvania; and still
more so, from the manner in which it was put in execution; for they had legally
an undoubted right to the free use of the river and bay, without any
interruption, obstruction or imposition from any quarter whatever; and the
violent means which consequently became necessary to enforce a law upon such a
defective foundation, and not even countenanced by the law itself, soon became
a great nuisance, and an intolerable grievance to the trading part of
Pennsylvania, and others concerned in its commerce. -- Besides, it was
alleged, that the fort itself, as it was situated and circumstanced, had it
been under better management and more warrantable direction, could not possibly
be much security to the river, nor protection to the vessels that might happen
to be chased, or assaulted in it.

The city of Philadelphia was much concerned at these proceedings, and the
trading part thereof were highly incensed at this invasion of their just
liberties; accordingly endeavors were used to have the affair properly
redressed, but without success.

At length Richard Hill, one of the Governor's Council, a bold man, and of
considerable abilities and influence in the province, together with Isaac
Norris and Samuel Preston, all Quakers, and men of the first rank and esteem,
was determined to try to remove this nuisance, by a different method from any
that had been yet attempted. These three persons being men of considerable note
and eminence, either at this time, or afterward, in the province, a short
sketch of their character, as I find it in M. S. here follows, viz.

Richard Hill was born in Maryland, brought up to the sea, and afterward
settled in Philadelphia, having there married the widow of John Delaval,
Hannah, the eldest daughter of the late Governor Lloyd, a woman of an excellent
character, and very much esteemed and beloved. -- He was twenty-five years a
member of the Governor's Council, diverse times Speaker of the Assembly, held
several offices of trust, was, for several years, first Commissioner of
property, and, during the last ten years of his life, he was one of the
Provincial Judges.

His services, in the religious society of his friends, the Quakers, of which
he was, for many years, an active member, are said likewise to have been very
considerable He had by nature and acquisition such a constant firmness, as
furnished him with undaunted resolution, to execute whatever he undertook. His
sound judgment, his great esteem for the English constitution and laws, his
tenderness for the liberty of the subject, and his zeal for preserving the
reputable order established in his own religious community, with his great
generosity to proper objects, qualified him for the greatest services, in every
station in which he was engaged, and rendered him of very great and uncommon
value, in the place where he lived. He died in Philadelphia, on the 9th. of
September, 1729.

Isaac Norris, of Philadelphia, held many public offices, with great repution
and honor; and his services, in the affairs of his own religious community,
entitled him to very high and uncommon esteem among his friends the Quakers; in
which he was a principal person in good offices. He is said to have been
endowed with good natural abilities; which he improved and applied to the
benefit of mankind, as a man truly sensible that one of the chief ends of man's
existence is to be useful and beneficent to the human race; which he showed by
his uniform conduct; and that to answer this end men are to be taken as they
are, and their lesser failings to be endured, where they cannot be amended; the
utility of his great talents was manifested by a prudent and consistent
conduct, in which he so much the more effectually succeeded and excelled, and
that agreeable to duty and a good conscience, by constantly cherishing a temper
and disposition of mind, which overlooks or passes by the many dislikes,
deficiencies and ungrateful things, in others, which are so commonly incident
to mankind; so that, by preserving through life, a christian moderation, and an
even hand, he was, on all occasions, qualified to use and exert his abilities
to more advantage: His example in this was noble and conspicuous, and his
character, in most respects, so honorable among men, in general, and his
conduct so universally beneficial, especially to those of his own religious
community, that he was an ornament to his country and profession, and his death
a great loss to both; which was in the year 1735, when he was Chief Justice of
Pennsylvania.

Samuel Preston, likewise of Philadelphia, was, for a long time, one of the
Governor's Council, and Treasurer of the province of Pennsylvania; which
offices he discharged with much honor and fidelity. He was a man of great
integrity to what he believed was his duty; his conduct in life, very
instructive, and his practice a continual series of good offices. He was a
person of such remarkable benevolence, and open disposition of mind, as
rendered advice and reproof, from him, the more acceptable and serviceable; and
being of a fair and clean character, good judgment, and suitable presence of
mind, his usefulness, in that capacity, was the more extensive and successful.
He was a very valuable member of society, among his friends, the Quakers,
undertaking and performing many difficult offices, and social duties therein,
with great cheerfulness, alacrity and utility; and was highly esteemed by them,
as an elder, who ruled well in his social capacity, and was worthy of double
honor. -- He died in September, 1743 aged about eighty years.

The worth of wise and virtuous men is inestimable, and their loss to the
community, not easily repaired. It is to be regretted, that frequently their
great value and importance are not sufficiently seen, or understood and
attended to, till after we are deprived of them, and can no longer be benefited
by their presence and society, etc.

-- "Virtutem incolumem odimus;
Sublatam ex oculis, querimus, in vidi,"
HORAT.


Hill had a vessel, named the Philadelphia; then loaded and just going out,
Account of the fort and exactions at Newcastle, etc.
to sea; but doubting of his captain's resolution to pass the fort, without
submitting to the imposition, he, in company with the other two, went in the
vessel down the river, and dropped anchor a little before they came to the fort;
Norris and Preston went on shore, to inform the officers, at the fort, that the
vessel was regularly cleared; and to use such persuasion, as they were capable
of, that she might pass without interruption, etc. but to no purpose: Hill,
therefore, taking command of the sloop, stood to the helm, and passed the fort,
without receiving any damage, though the firing was kept up till he was clear;
and the guns were pointed in such a direction, that a shot went through the
mainsail. As soon as the sloop was got clear of the fort, John French, the
commander of it, put off in a boat, manned and armed, in order to bring her to,
in that manner; when he came along side, Hill ordered a rope to be thrown him,
upon which they fastened the boat, and French went on board; the rope was then
immediately cut, and the boat falling a stern, French was conducted a prisoner
to the cabin; -- who, now seeing his situation, pleaded his indisposition of
body: upon which Hill asked him, "If that was really the case, why did he come
there? -- Lord Cornbury, Governor of New Jersey, and as such claiming to be
Vice Admiral of the river Delaware, happened, at that time, to be at Salem,
Account of the fort and exactions at Newcastle, etc.
a little lower down, on the Jersey side of the river; to him the prisoner was
brought, to give an account of his conduct. In this place, after French, in a
coarse manner, had been sufficiently reprimanded by Lord Cornbury, upon a
suitable submission and promises made, he was at length dismissed, but not
without marks of derision from some of the attendants.

This put a finishing stroke to these proceedings at the fort of Newcastle; and
thus ended the enterprise; in which Hill's friends, especially his anxious
wife, a person of note and high esteem, who, at Philadelphia, heard the report
of the guns, could not but be particularly concerned, fearing lest his
resolution should be attended with bad consequences: but they were soon
agreeably relieved from their apprehensions of that kind; and his conduct in
this affair, made an open way for others.

But Richard Hill did not suffer the affair to rest here; for, accompanied by a
large number of the inhabitants of Philadelphia, he attended the General
Assembly; and, by petition, in such manner, laid the affair before them, that
it produced an address to the Governor, from the House, without so much as one
dissenting vote, dated the 10th. of May, 1707, highly resenting these
proceedings, on the river Delaware, and at Newcastle, which I do not find were
afterward continued. This address was as follows, viz.

"To John Evans, Esquire, by the Queen's royal approbation, Lieutenant Governor
of the province of Pennsylvania, and of the three lower counties of Newcastle,
Kent and Sussex, on Delaware river.
The humble Address of the Representatives of the freemen of the said province,
in General Assembly met, the 10th. day of the month called May, 1707, shows,
THAT a petition of above two hundred and twenty of the merchants and other
inhabitants of the said province, but mostly of the city of Philadelphia,
having been presented to this House, complaining of very great abuses and
oppressions, which some of the inhabitants of the county of Newcastle have
committed upon several of these petitioners, by color of a certain ordinance,
or act of Assembly, lately passed there by the said Lieutenant Governor, and
Representatives of the freemen of the said three lower counties, entitled "An
act for erecting and maintaining a fort for her Majesty's service, at the town
of Newcastle upon Delaware;" which act, as also the several affidavits,
relating to the matter complained of, being read, we thought proper, in the
first place, to consider the royal charter of the late King Charles the second,
to the Proprietary, bearing date the fourth day of March, in the three and
thirtieth year of his reign, whereby the free and undisturbed use and
continuance in, and passage unto, and out of, all the ports, harbors, bays,
waters, rivers, isles and inlents, belonging unto, or leading to, or from this
country, with the other powers and liberties, mentioned in the said petition,
are granted to the Proprietary and inhabitants of this province, as the
petitioners set forth; and we further observe, that by the said charter, the
Queen's liege people of this province are to be subject to no laws, but such as
are consonant to reason, and as near as may be, agreeable to the laws, statutes
and rights of the kingdom of England.

In the next place we have inspected the late Duke of York's deeds of feoffment
to the Proprietary, for the said three lower counties, as also the late King
Charles the second's grant to the Duke, for the same lands; and when we call to
mind how the Representatives of the lower counties broke off, and refused to
proceed legislatively, in conjunction with the Representatives of the province,
under the Proprietary's administration; but how far they can be justified in
making laws to raise money on the Queen's subjects in this government, we
intend shall be further considered hereafter; in the mean time we shall insist
that the liberty of the free use, and passage to, and out of, the ports of this
province, granted us by the above recited royal charter, is well warranted by
the laws of England; and that no imposition can, by any act, or ordinance, made
at Newcastle, be laid upon any vessel, bound to, or from, any port in this
province, which does not unload at some key, or place, within the said lower
counties; and we conceive, that upon a strict examination of their said act of
Assembly, it will most evidently appear, that the vessels not bound to, or out
of, some port or place there, cannot legally be obliged to comply with the
impositions of the said act.

Therefore this house, having fully and maturely weighed the nature of the said
act, and the use that is, and has been made of it, found themselves obliged, in
duty to the Queen, and justice to the people they represent, to come to the
following resolutions, N. C. D.

First, That it is the opinion of this House, that the laid act of Assembly
might be by the Governor, intended for the Queen's service, and security of her
subjects, yet the manner of putting the same in execution proves an apparent
violation of the said royal charter, as well as the common and statute laws of
England, and is destructive to trade, and tends to the depopulating and ruin of
this province.

Secondly, That it is the opinion of this House, that the firing of shot at the
sloop Philadelphia, in the several affidavits mentioned, when she was duly
cleared, at this port of Philadelphia, as the acts of navigation direct, and
had the Governor's Let-pass, and upon her voyage to Barbados, is not warranted
by the said act of Assembly; but that those, who fired at the said sloop, after
they had notice what she was, and how she was cleared, ought to be prosecuted,
as persons committing hostilities against the Queen's liege people.

Thirdly, That it is the opinion of this House, that, in case the master of the
said sloop had been liable to pay either Powder-money, or other mulets, imposed
by the said act, yet the forcing him out of the vessel, and imprisoning him,
when security was offered, for answering the supposed offense, is not warranted
by the said act, but is most illegal and arbitrary.

We, having thus presented our opinion of the said act, entreat, that thou
would use the most effectual methods to put a speedy stop to the said
exorbitant practices, great abuses and oppressions, mentioned in the said
petition (a copy whereof we humbly lay before thee;) and that the authors of
these arbitrary actions and oppressions complained of, may be prosecuted
according to law, and be no longer permitted to abuse the Queen's authority,
and stand in open defiance of her royal Uncle's grant, obstruct our lawful
commerce, and invade our liberties, rights and properties, and under the
pretense of fortifying the river, for the service of the Queen, commit
hostilities and depredations upon her liege people.





The act of Assembly, for establishing courts of judicature, in the province,
in the year 1701, having been repealed by the crown, Of the bill of Courts, etc.
the Governor, in order to supply the intention of that act, for the regulation
of courts, recommended to the consideration of the House, the draught of a
bill, which he had prepared for that purpose, as being better, and more
suitably adapted, than the act which had been repealed. -- This the Assembly
not only rejected, but drew up one themselves, instead of it, so widely
different, that the Governor and they were not able to agree to certain
particulars contained in it; which were alleged by the Governor, as tending to
"break in upon the Proprietary's powers of government, or his just interest;"
and, after much dispute and altercation, and time spent to no purpose, the
Governor proceeded, by an ordinance, in such case provided in the royal
charter, to open the courts of justice, till further, or better provision and
regulation should be made by act of Assembly.

The House being disappointed in not carrying their point, in the manner they
desired, D. Lloyd heads the Assembly, etc.
were very much chagrined. They were headed by David Lloyd, their Speaker, as
before mentioned, a person of good esteem and character among the people, and
who had been brought up to the law; but through most of his public conduct,
appears to have distinguished himself in nothing so much, as by his constant
opposition to the claims of the Proprietary. Having failed in this their
contest with the Governor, Against James Logan, etc.
the Assembly, in the next place, were determined, if possible, to take their
revenge on the Secretary, James Logan, who was also one of the Council; and
they accordingly pointed the force of their resentment against him; whom they
regarded, in great measure, as the cause of their miscarriage, in the bill of
courts, and of much of the misunderstanding between them and the Governor.

James Logan was a man of considerable understanding and abilities, perhaps
exceeded by few, or none, James Logan supports the Proprietary's interest, etc.
in the province; he espoused and firmly supported the Proprietary's interest,
and had great influence in the Council; but to persons of inferior abilities
and less acquirements, he is represented by some, not always to have conducted
himself in that courteous and condescending manner, which gains respect, and is
an ornament to superior parts; which rendered him somewhat unpopular, and
sometimes provoked his enemies to carry their animosity against him to
unwarrantable extremes. "James Logan was descended of a family originally from
Scotland; where, in the troubles of that country, occasioned by the affair of
Earl Gawrie, in the reign of James the VI. his grandfather, Robert Logan, was
deprived of a considerable estate; in consequence of which his father, Patrick
Logan, being in reduced circumstances, removed into Ireland, and fixed his
residence at Lurgan, the place of his son James's birth. Patrick Logan had the
benefit of a good education, in the university of Edinburgh; where he commenced
master of arts; -- but afterward joined in religious society with the Quakers.
-- This, his son, James Logan, being endowed with a good genius, and favored
with a suitable education, made considerable proficiency in diverse branches of
learning and science; after which he went to England; from whence, in the year
1699, and about the 25th. of his age, he removed to Pennsylvania, in company
with William Penn, in his latter voyage to America; and, in 1701, he was, by
commission from the Proprietary, appointed Secretary of the province, and Clerk
of the Council for the same.

His life was afterward much employed in public affairs: -- The department
allotted him, in the time of the Governors, Evans and Gookin, exposed him to
much altercation with David Lloyd, then at the head of the Assembly, as
Speaker, and a large number that joined him. He adhered to what was deemed the
proprietary interest; and exerted himself with great fidelity to it. He held
the several offices of Provincial Secretary, Commissioner of property, Chief
Justice, and for near two years, governed the province, as President of the
Council. --

Many years before his death he retired pretty much from the hurry and
encumbrance of public affairs, and spent the latter part of his time,
principally at Stanton, his country seat, near Germantown, about five or six
miles from Philadelphia; where he enjoyed, among his books, that leisure in
which men of letters take delight, and corresponded with the literati in
different parts of Europe. He was well versed in both ancient and modern
learning, acquainted with the oriental tongues, a master of the Latin, Greek,
French and Italian languages; deeply skilled in the Mathematics, and in natural
and moral philosophy; as several pieces of his own writing, in Latin, etc.
demonstrate; some of which have gone through diverse impressions, in different
parts of Europe, and are highly esteemed: Among his productions of this nature,
his Experimenta Meletemata de plantarum generatione, or his Experiments on the
Indian corn, or Maize of America, with his observations arising therefrom, on
the generation of plants, published in Latin, at Leyden, in 1739, and
afterward, in 1747, republished in London, with an English version on the
opposite page, by Dr. J. Fothergill, are both curious and ingenious. -- Along
with this piece was likewise printed, in Latin, at Leyden, another treatise, by
the same author, entitled, "Canonum pro inveniendis refractionum, tum
simplicium, tum in lentibus duplicium focis, demonstrationes geometricae." --
"Autore Jacobo Logan. Judice supremo et Praeside provinciae Pensilvaniensis, in
America." -- And, in his old age, he translated Cicero's excellent treatise, De
senectuta; which, with his explanatory notes, was printed in Philadelphia, with
a preface or encomium, by Benjamin Franklin, afterward Dr. Franklin, of that
city, in 1744. -- He was one of the people called Quakers, and died on the
31st. of October, 1751, aged about 77 years; -- leaving, as a monument of his
public spirit and benevolence to the people of Pennsylvania, a library; which
he had been fifty years in collecting; (since called the Loganian Library)
intending it for the common use and benefit of all lovers of learning. It was
said to contain the best editions of the best books, in various languages, arts
and sciences, and to be the largest, and by far the most valuable, collection
of the kind, at that time, in this part of the world.

He had several children, who survived him; of whom his eldest son William,
lately deceased, was many years a member of the Governor's Council.




The province appears to have exhibited something of the nature of party, from
its early institution, even, in some, who strongly professed more noble and
generous motives of conduct. Party spirit, the offspring of narrow and selfish
views, is deeply interwoven in human nature; of which, perhaps, it is
impossible to be wholly divested. Party spirit only injurious in the extreme.
But as the human passions are only injurious, when they are not kept under
proper restriction and government, so it is the extreme alone of party design,
which, in reality, is so pernicious to human society; while its moderate
exertion excites a stricter attention to men's real interests, and under proper
management and direction, becomes subservient to the more effectual security of
the public good.

The nature and length of this, and other disputes, with the dislike and odium,
The Assembly disgusted with the Governor's conduct, etc.
which some parts of the Governor's private conduct, are said to have created,
in the more sober part of the inhabitants, by his frequently descending below
the dignity of his station, in midnight revels, and low frolicks of youthful
folly, very much lessened his authority, and raised the spirit of party to a
higher degree, than had been known before. The consequence of which was, what
is generally that of all extremes, the product of things more or less
indefensible, on both sides: a detail of which proceedings, as they are
published in the journals, or votes of the house of Assembly of those times,
would be too tedious here to be minutely stated. -- They produced a number of
accusations against the Secretary; They impeach the Secretary;
which the Assembly styled articles of impeachment. Upon these the Assembly
took measures to impeach him in form, before the Governor, as an evil
counselor, and guilty of high misdemeanors; -- But through the Governor's
management and protection, they were not able for the present, But are
disappointed, etc.
to effect any thing further against him; and there is on record his petition
to the Governor and Council, requesting that proper measures should be taken to
clear his character from the false representations, Votes of Assembly, etc.
and gross abuses of the Assembly, by a fair trial.

The Assembly intend to get the Governor removed.
The Assembly, being thus repulsed, in respect to Jamas Logan, were still more
exasperated; and so much were they displeased with the Governor's conduct, that
they were determined to endeavor to have him removed. His public
administration was not only disagreeable to them, in his manner of acting for
his principal's interest, but also the example of his private conduct was much
complained of, as having a bad influence and effect on the morals of many of
the people. 1707.


For this purpose, therefore, They draw up a remonstrance to the Proprietary.
in the summer of the year 1707, the Assembly drew up a remonstrance to the
Proprietary, containing a catalogue of the particulars of his
mal-administration, or which they esteemed to be such, with a complaint against
James Logan; the principal of which have already been mentioned: -- In this
remonstrance, after having reminded the Proprietary of their former complaints,
in the year 1704, they further represent: --

The Lieutenant Governor's abominable and unwarrantable conduct with the
Indians, Heads of the remonstrance.
on a visit to them, at Conestogoe.

His refusing to pass the bill of courts, without their agreeing to his
amendments; though they only left two of his objections unremoved; and his
setting up courts by his ordinance.

His refusal to try the Secretary, upon their impeachment, by questioning his
own authority to judge, and their's to impeach, in the method they proposed.

His imposition on the trade of the province, by means of the law passed at
Newcastle; whereby he unjustly exacted large sums of the people; with the
abuses and consequences of the said law.

Certain unjustifiable and oppressive proceedings, respecting the militia,
which he had formed, according to his proclamation before mentioned.

His refusing to pass a bill, in the year 1704, to explain and confirm the
charter of the city of Philadelphia; -- The multiplying of taverns and
alehouses, in the city, as nurseries of vice, by his means; and his imposing
licenses on the keepers of those houses, without law, or precedent.

His refusing to pass a bill, in 1704, for explaining and confirming the
charter of privileges of the province; Heads of the remonstrance.
his rejecting the people's choice of Sheriff and Coroner, for the city and
county of Philadelphia, in said year, contrary to the said charter: His
licencing several taverns and alehouses in Philadelphia, against, and without
the recommendation of, the city magistrates; -- with his sending a message to
dismiss the Assembly, on their complaining of his conduct, against the form and
effect of said charter, and known usage, etc.

His appropriating certain moneys to his own use which the Assembly intended
otherwise; and his secreting the objections of the lords of trade to certain
laws which had been repealed; whereby they fell again into the same error.

The project and consequences of the false alarm, before mentioned.

The arbitrary exaction of twelve shillings from every master of a vessel,
outward bound, for a let-pass, notwithstanding their being cleared, according
to the acts of navigation.

His permitting French Papists to trade with, and reside among, the Indians,
and their wicked behavior among them.

His granting a commission for privateering, in 1706.

His beating and evilly treating Solomon Cresson, the Constable, for doing his
duty at a tavern, in one of his midnight revels; though he knew not that the
Governor was there.

His excesses and debaucheries, to the great encouragement of wickedness, and
weakening the hands of the magistrates, by his ill example, etc. Note. About
the year 1707, Vincent Caldwell, Thomas Wickerman, Joel Bailey, Thomas Hope,
Guyan Miller, and other Friends, or Quakers, settled in Kennet, Chester county.
M. S.


And against the Secretary, James Logan, it was alleged, --

That he knew the above mentioned alarm was false; but, instead of using such
means, Heads of the remonstrance.
as were in his power, to prevent it, he, by his conduct, under pretense of
coming at the truth of the affair, made it worse.

That, as Commissioner of Property, to manage the Proprietary's land affairs,
he had detained certain deeds, for lands, from the owners unjustly; and to some
persons, denied patents for their lands, to which they were entitled.

That he had appointed wood-rangers, at large, over the located lands of the
inhabitants, in common with those of the Proprietary; for which he had no
right; in which accordingly they took up strays, etc. in an indiscriminate
manner; which ought to have been restricted solely to the Proprietary's lands.

These are called by the Assembly, in this remonstrance, part of their many
grievances; which was sent to their agents, George Whitehead, William Mead and
Thomas Lower, in London; with a very angry letter, to be communicated to the
Proprietary.

The Governor, getting intelligence of what was going forward, in the Assembly,
The Governor demands a copy of this representation, but in vain.
by a message to the House, required them to lay before him, the address or
representation, which he was informed, they intended to send to England; and
that they should not presume to send any thing of that nature out of the
government, till the same had been fully communicated to him, according to
justice, and the practice of other governments. -- This had no effect with
them; and the Assembly adjourned to the 23d. of September.

On the first of October, at the anniversary election, the choice of
Representatives, in Assembly, falling mostly on the same persons, as in the
preceding year, The disputes, etc. continue.
consequently but little of moment was done in the public affairs of the
government, besides the continuation of the former disputes and alternations,
respecting the bill of courts, and the other obnoxious parts of the Governor's
administration; whence both sides became more untractable, and less disposed to
unite in any salutary purpose, for the public good.

But it is observed, respecting these proceedings, that, though the parties
were very free with each other's conduct, yet, they are said mostly to have
kept within the rules of decency and order; and, in all their differences, both
parties, in the strongest terms, professed their sincerest desires and
intentions thereby, for the service of their country; and that they had nothing
so much in view, in these proceedings, as the real and best advantage of the
community. The names of the Members of this Assembly, elected October, 1707,
were: -- For Philadelphia county.
David Lloyd, Speaker, John Roberts, Griffith Jones, Francis Rawle, Joseph
Wilcox, Robert Jones, Joshua Carpenter, Samuel Richardson.
For Bucks county.
Henry Paxon, Samuel Dark, John Swift, William Paxon, Thomas Hilborn, William
Biles, Ezra Croasdale, Samuel Beaks.
For Chester county.
Francis Chadds, William Smith, Samuel Levis, Richard Hayes, John Hood, William
Garret, John Bethel, Evan Lewis.
City of Philadelphia.
Francis Cook, William Lee.


Among the names of the Members of Council, in the year 1708, appear to be: --
Edward Shippen, Joseph Growdon, Samuel Carpenter, Thomas Story, Caleb Pusey,
Willam Trent, Richard Hill, George Roch, Joseph Pidgeon, Samuel Finny, Griffith
Owen, Jasper Yeats, James Logan.


To these, in March 1709, were added, Isaac Norris, Samuel Preston, Captain
Anthony Palmer.

Note. Thomas Story was also keeper of the great seal, and Master of the Rolls.

James Logan likewise Secretary and Clerk of the Council.




In this state continued the affairs of the province till the beginning of the
year, 1709, 1708.
Gov. Evans succeeded by Governor Gookin.
when the Assembly's complaints to the Proprietary having proved effectual,
Governor Evans was removed from the administration, and Charles Gookin
succeeded him, in the government.

It appears not improbable, The Proprietary under difficulty about this time,
etc.
but that the Proprietary for some time past, must have been under no small
uneasiness and difficulty, respecting his province: For his great generosity
and expense, in settling it, with his other acts of beneficence, and the
attention due to such a series of conduct, had so far impaired his estate, in
Europe, and involved him in debt, that, in the year 1708, in order to pay the
same, he borrowed from certain of his friends, a large sum of money; for which
he mortgaged the province. Anderson (before mentioned in the notes) under the
year, 1715, observes, viz.

"Ever since the proprietary colonies began to be very considerable, i.e. since
the death of King Charles the second, and more especially since the revolution,
anno 1688, both King William's and Queen Ann's councils and ministries foresaw
the great consequence it would be to the crown and kingdom, to buy off the
Lords Proprietaries of Colonies, before they should grow too powerful; and
frequent treaties were held with them by the ministers of the crown, for that
end; particularly with the truly great Mr. William Penn, for the purchase of
his fine province of Pennsylvania. His demand was L 20,000, and Queen Anne, in
council, referred that demand to the Lords Commissioners of trade and
plantations; whose report was referred by the Queen, to the Lords Commissioners
of the Treasury; soon after which an agreement was made with Mr. Penn, for L
12,000, for the said province; but, he being soon after seized with an
apoplexy, which disabled him to execute the same, a stop was put to that
bargain; until, by the Queen's order, a bill, in Parliament, should be prepared
for that end. Whilst that bill was depending, Mr. Joshua Gee and others, who
were mortgagees, under the said Mr. Penn, petitioned the House of Commons for
relief; wherein they represented that Mr. Penn having purchased of the Indians
their title to that country, had by his industry and great charge, improved the
country and established considerable colonies therein, whereby he had very much
impared his estate, in Europe; and that, in the year, 1708, to clear a debt
contracted for settling and improving the said colonies, he had borrowed of the
said mortgagees L 6,600, to whom he had mortgaged the said province, and all
the powers of government."

Note. The names of the mortgagees were, "Henry Gouldney of London, Joshua Gee,
Silvanus Grove, John Woods, of the same place; and Thomas Callowhill, Thomas
Oade and Jeffry Pennell, of Bristol, and John Field of London, and Thomas
Cuppage of Lambs-town, in Ireland." M. S.

Note. -- In a manuscript, signed Philadelphia, appearing to have been writ
about the fourth year of Governor Gordon's administration, for a particular
purpose, by James Logan, is the following observation, viz.

-- "When the Proprietor, by the fraud of a treacherous steward, was obliged to
mortgage the Province, the Trustees of that mortgage, with his concurrence,
appointed five persons, in whose character they were best satisfied, viz.
Edward Shippen, Samuel Carpenter, Richard Hill* Isaac Norris and James Logan,
to be their commissioners, or agents. And the Proprietor, in a full confidence
in the same persons, appointed them, with one more, to be trustees also of his
will. Not long after this, the two first died, and the other three continued to
discharge the trust, they had undertaken," etc. M. S.

Oldmixon, in his account of the British colonies, published in 1708, says, --
"We shall not enter into any enquiries into the causes of the trouble, that has
been given Mr. Penn lately, about the province of Pennsylvania; it appears to
us, by what we have heard of it from others, for from himself we never had any
information concerning it, that he has been involved in it, by his bounty to
the Indians, his generosity, in minding the public affairs of the colony, more
than his own private ones; his humanity to those, who have not made suitable
returns: his confidence in those, that have betrayed him; and the rigor of the
severest equity; a word, that borders the nearest to injustice of any. It Is
certainly the duty of this colony to maintain the Proprietary, who has laid out
his All, for the maintenance of them, in the possession of his territory; and
the public, in gratitude, ought to make good what they reap the benefit of.
This is all said out of justice to the merit of this gentleman, otherwise it
would have been without his consent.

The same author mentions the names of the Members of Council, and of the
persons in office, in Governor Evans's administration, as follows: -- The
Council consisted of: -- Edward Shippen, Samuel Carpenter, William Trent,
Thomas Story, Richard Hill, William Rodney, Caleb Pusey, and James Logan.
Joseph Growdon, Speaker of the Assembly Thomas Story, Master of the Rolls.
William Clark, Edward Shippen, Joseph Growdon, William Guest, Judges. Colonel
Robert Quarry, Judge of the Admiralty. Samuel Carpenter, Treasurer. James
Logan, Government's Secretary. R. Lowther, Attorney General. Peter Evans,
Register. Edward Penington, late Surveyor General. Robert Ashton, Clerk of the
Peace, for the town and county of Philadelphia.





1709.
Besides, it cannot be supposed, but that the nature of the disputes between the
Assembly and his Deputy Governor, The Proprietary incited to dispose of the
Government, etc.
at the same time, could not have been agreeable to him, for, notwithstanding
what appears to have been amiss, or defective in the conduct of the latter, it
was then visible, and more so afterward, in part of the transactions of some
of these Assemblies, that a discontented and factious disposition, or party,
was increasing in the province, against his interest endeavoring to divide
that, in appearance, which, in reality, was one, and ought never to be
separated, not even in idea; tending to render the government uneasy to him,
and under views, or pretense of gaining more privileges and liberties to
endanger those, which they had: This, it is certain, would have been the case,
at that time, had the Proprietary made use of those means, which were then
absolutely in his power, to terminate his difficulties, to his present
advantage, but, most probably, unfavourable to the views of those who opposed
him, by his disposing of the government to the crown; to which his private
circumstances, the solicitations of the ministry, and this conduct in the
province, so much incited him. "In the year 1707, he was unhappily involved in
a suit of law with the executors of a person, who had been formerly his
steward; against whose demands he thought both conscience and justice required
his endeavors to defend himself. But his cause (though many thought him
aggrieved) was attended with such circumstances, as that the Court of Chancery
did not think it proper to relieve him; wherefore he was obliged to dwell in
the Old Baily within the rules of the Fleet, some part both of this, and the
next ensuing year, until such time, as the matter, in dispute, was
accommodated."

Penn's life, in his printed works.




END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
INDEX TO THE History of Pennsylvania. VOLUME I.
Preface dedicatory to the inhabitants of Pennsylvania, respecting the design,
materials and subject of the work; with observations, etc. Page. 3 to 17
INTRODUCTION, -- Part Is It. -- Containing -- Memoirs of the life of William
Penn, prior to his founding the province of Pennsylvania. Page. 19 to 27
Account of the rise, religious system and practice, or manners, of the people
called Quakers. Page. 27 to 81 Memoirs of William Penn's life continued till
about the timeof the grant and settlement of Pennsylvania. Page. 81 to 102
INTRODUCTION, -- Part IId. -- Containing -- A summary of the ancient Virginia,
etc. with the settlement, government and proceedings of the Dutch and Swedes,
on Hudson, or North river, and on the bay and river of Delaware, etc. including
the first rise of the colony of Maryland, etc. Page. 103 to 121 Conquest and
capture of New-Netherland from the Dutch by the English; -- with the rise of
New York and New Jersey, and the government and public proceedings there, till
the division of the latter into East and West New Jersey, etc. Page. 121 to 136
First and early settlement, government and public transactions, with a sketch
of the religious and general state, etc. of West New Jersey, etc. till about
the time of the colonization of Pennsylvania. Page. 136 to 167 William Penn's
motive and design in the colonization of Pennsylvania. Page. 167 to 169 Anno.
1680. Cause and manner of obtaining the grant; -- with Anderson's account of
the first rise of the province. Page. 169 to 171 Anno. 1681. Royal charter of
King Charles the second to William Penn. Page. 171 to 187 Boundary between
Maryland and Pennsylvania disputed; -- with the real extent and content of the
province as afterward agreed and settled, etc. Page. 187 and 188 The King's
declaration, in consequence of the grant and charter, etc. Page. 189 The
Proprietary publishes an account of the province. Offers terms of sale for
land, and conditions of settlement; which he mixes with good advice to the
adventurers. Page. 189 to 191 Origin and nature of the quit-rents, etc. Ibid.
Free society of traders in Pennsylvania formed, etc. Page. 191 The Proprietary
publishes the first conditions, or concessions, agreed on by him and the first
adventurers; -- with one of the stipulations therein contained, etc. Page. 192
Sailing of the first three ships from England to Pennsylvania with William
Markham and Commissioners; names of some of the passengers; of whom Joseph
Kirkbride is an instance of successful industry, etc. Page. 193 and 194
Importance of treating the Indians well, exemplified in William Penn's conduct
toward them. Page. 194 William Penn's letter to the Indians by his
Commissioners. Page. 195 Anno. 1682. First frame of government and laws, etc.
agreed on and published in England, etc. Page. 196 Part of the preface, and
purport of said frame; -- with one of these first laws. Page. 196 to 200 The
Duke of York's deed of release of the province to William Penn. Page. 200 The
Proprietary obtains, from the Duke of York, the three lower counties on
Delaware, called the territories of Pennsylvania; -- with the right of the Duke
to the same, etc Page. 201 and 202 Boundaries between Maryland and Pennsylvania
with said territories not yet finally settled, etc. Page. 203 William Penn
writes a valedictory epistle to his friends, the Quakers, in England, and sails
for Pennsylvania in August, 1682. Page. 204 Many of the passengers, in the same
ship with him, die of the smallpox, in their passage. Ibid. The Proprietary's
reception at Newcastle and Chester; -- with the places of public worship in the
province and territories, at that time. Page. 205 Proceedings of the first
General Assembly, held at Chester, where the Proprietary naturalizes the
foreigners, etc. Page. 206 Preamble to the laws passed at Chester, in December,
1682, with their titles, etc. Page. 207 and 208 William Penn visits New York
and Maryland, etc. and is kindly received by the Lord Baltimore; -- but they do
not agree about their boundaries, etc. Page. 208 Extract of a letter from the
Proprietary, at Chester on Delaware, expressing his satisfaction with the
country, and his service, or employment, there, sc. Page. 209 William Penn has
different kinds of enemies, and opposition from persons of contrary characters;
-- which appears in another letter from Chester aforesaid, to one who had
unjustly reflected on him, etc. Page. 210 William Penn first meets the Indians
in person; -- his just and beneficent treatment of them; -- with the good
consequences, etc. Page. 211 and 212 Extracts from some Indian treaties,
expressive of the grateful remembrance of the Indians afterward, of William
Penn, etc. Page. 213 to 215 Arrival of the first and early colonists; -- number
of vessels, and places of their first residence. Page. 216 General character
and manners of said colonists; -- some of their names; with the rapid
colonization of the province; and the establishment of some of the first
religious meetings of the Quakers in the country, etc. Page. 217 and 218 The
nature and manner of both the civil and religious conduct of the early
colonists so reasonable and inviting as to induce many to flock to the province
from different parts of Europe. Page. 219 Some Germans arrive from Cresheim in
Germany, and begin the settlement of German-town. Ibid. First arrival and
settlement of the Welsh; with short memorials of some of them. Page. 220 to 222
The first settlers exposed to difficulty and hardships; -- some instances; --
yet favored and relieved by the Indians. Page. 222 to 224 First business of
these colonists, on their arrival; -- with their entertainment, and affecting
prospect, etc. but they prosper, etc. Page. 224 to 228 Part of the Planter's
speech to his neighbors and countrymen in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, on
their design in their settlement of that country, etc. Ibid. Richard Townsend's
testimony on the first and early settlement of Pennsylvania, etc. Page. 228 to
233 Plan of Philadelphia first begun; -- the site of the ground, and the first
house built on it. Page. 234 John Key, the first born of English parents in
Philadelphia. Ibid. Anno. 1683. Settled parts of the province and territories
divided into counties; Sheriffs and other officers appointed, etc. Ibid. First
General Assembly convened at Philadelphia; with the form of the Proprietary's
writ for convening them. Page. 235 Names of the Members of the first Council
and Assembly; -- with short memorials of some of them. Page. 235 to 237
Proceedings of said Assembly, etc. Page. 237 to 239 A new, or second, frame of
government, or charter of privileges, agreed on and confirmed, etc. Page. 239
to 240 First grand and petit jury and court of justice in Pennsylvania. Ibid
Their sentence on a person for counterfeiting money. Page. 241 Plan of
Philadelphia finished; -- with a particular description of said plan, etc.
Page. 241 to 245 Dr. Douglas on the variation of the compass at Philadelphia,
etc. Ibid. William Penn's attention to a variety of affairs discovers a genius
capable of promoting general improvement, etc. Ibid. The Proprietary's letter
to the committee of the Free Society of Traders of Pennsylvania, residing in
London; -- giving a general description of said province, its natural history
and state, at that time. Page. 246 to 265 Difficulty and dispute between
William Penn and the Lord Baltimore, respecting the boundaries of their
provinces, etc. Page. 265 to 267 A proclamation of the Lord Baltimore. Ibid.
William Penn's letter to the Lords of plantations, in London, respecting his
dispute with the Proprietary of Maryland. Page. 267 to 274 Lord Baltimore's
commission to Colonel George Talbot, to make a demand of William Penn, etc.
with said demand. Page. 274 to 276 William Penn's answer to said demand. Page.
276 to 283 Anno. 1684. Forceable entry from Maryland on several plantations in
the lower counties; with means used to redress and prevent such proceedings in
future. Page. 283 Difficulty of restraining the Indians from strong liquors,
etc. Page. 284 William Penn, being under necessity of returning to England,
commissionates the Provincial Council to act in his stead, etc. with other
appointments. Page. 285 to 288 The Proprietary's commission to the Judges; with
the names of the Members of Assembly, etc. Ibid. Oldmixon's account of the
state of the province about this time. Ibid. William Penn's affectionate
farewell to his friends in Pennsylvania, written from on board the ship, on his
departure for England. Page. 288 to 290 Short memorial of Thomas Langhorne from
Westmoreland in England. Ibid. Anno. 1685. Death of King Charles the second,
and the succession of James the second to the crown. Page. 290 to 292 Extract
of the Proprietary's letter on this and other affairs. Ibid. William Penn's
interest at Court, and with the King, not employed for his own emolument, but
in beneficence, friendship and charity to the distressed, and for a general
good, etc. though misrepresented and falsely accused, as a promoter of the
contrary, etc. Page. 292 to 293 Names of the Members of Assembly. Ibid.
Boundary between Maryland and the territories of Pennsylvania determined by the
King in Council. Page. 293 Purport of the order of Council, on this affair.
Ibid. Description of said boundary, and the extent of said territories of
Pennsylvania. Page. 294 Boundaries between the counties of the the province
ascertained. Page. 295 Nicholas Moore, chief justice of the province, accused
of mal-practices, and impeached by the Assembly before the Council, with other
instances of the Assembly's authority. Page. 295 and 296 A letter from the
Proprietary to the Magistrates against disorders, etc. Ibid. Proceedings of the
Assembly against N. Moore, etc. Page. 297 Assembly's letter to the Proprietary
on this affair. Ibid. The particulars of Moore's case not sufficiently clear,
etc. Page. 298 Extracts from the Proprietary's letters about this time, etc.
Page. 299 Necessity of the Proprietary's presence in the province. Page. 300
Some proceedings of the Provincial Council. Ibid. Further means used by the
Quakers to prevent the Indians from obtaining strong liquors, and to instruct
them in the principles of Christianity, Page. 300 and 301 Anno. 1686. William
Penn publishes a further account of Pennsylvania; -- writes on toleration, etc.
visits Holland and Germany; is employed in promoting religion and virtue, in
his native country; -- yet attentive to advance the prosperity of his province
and prevent disorders in it, etc. Page. 302 His great expense and generosity
exceed his circumstances, etc. with extracts from his letters on the subject,
etc. Page. 303 More settlers from Holland and Germany increase the settlement
of Germantown. Page. 304 The Proprietary appoints five Commissioners of State;
to whom he commits the government instead of the Council. Ibid. Instructions to
these commissioners at different times. Page. 305 to 308 The industry and
conduct of the inhabitants of Pennsylvania contribute to its future greatness;
-- and William Penn's interest at court is beneficial to his suffering friends,
the Quakers, and others in Great Britain, but exposes him to unjust suspicion
and misrepresentation. Page. 308 Dr. Tillotson, afterward Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, acknowledges his mistake respecting William Penn, etc. Ibid.
William Penn engaged for the national good, and general liberty of conscience,
etc. and continues to distinguish himself in defense of an impartial toleration
in religion, though unjustly censured, etc. Page. 309 About thirteen hundred of
the people, called Quakers, who were in prison for their religion, were set at
liberty, by the King's proclamation, etc. Ibid. Anno. 1687. The Quakers justly
grateful for this relief, though censured on that account by some, etc. Page.
310 William Penn appears to have accompanied the King in a progress through
diverse counties in England. Ibid. William Penn's speech to the King on
delivering to him the Quakers' address for their relief from cruel sufferings.
Page. 311 The Quakers' address to James the second, etc. with the King's
answer, etc. Page. 312 Objections against William Penn and the Quakers
addressing the King on this affair obviated, etc. Page. 313 Anno. 1688. William
Penn still laboring under jealousies and unjust reflections, on account of his
intimacy at court, his friend William Popple writes to him on the subject.
Page. 314 William Popple's letter to William Penn, requesting him to clear his
character. Page. 314 to 321 William Penn's letter, in answer to William Popple,
etc. Page. 321 to 332 The Proprietary's presence and assistance in his province
much wanted; -- his detention from it being against his mind, as expressed in a
letter to Thomas Lloyd, who had requested to be released from public affairs,
etc. Page. 332 to 335 His letter to Thomas Lloyd, and the five Commissioners of
State, etc. on Tho. Lloyd's request and other affairs; with the names of the
Members of Assembly. Ibid. Account of an Indian false alarm, or intended
insurrection to destroy the English in Pennsylvania. Page. 335 to 338 Short
memorial of Caleb Pusey, a member of Council, etc. Ibid. Captain John Blackwell
appointed Deputy Governor by the Proprietary. Page. 339 Blackwell's
instructions, etc. Ibid. Anno. 1689. He meets the Assembly, disagrees with the
Council and returns to England. Page. 340 Cause and design of Blackwell's
appointment, etc. with the names of the Members of Council. Ibid. Reasons why
William Penn may justly be styled The father of his country. Page. 341 to 343
Three of his epistles, or letters, to his friends in Pennsylvania. Ibid.
Institution of the first public grammar school in Pennsylvania by the Quakers;
-- its different charters, and principal design, etc. Page. 343 to 345 George
Keith first master of said school; his salary, character, etc. with the common
terms for teaching school in those times, etc. Ibid. Anno. 1690. William Penn's
troubles and difficulties at, and after the revolution, in England, greatly to
his loss, and the disadvantage of the province, which much needed his presence
and assistance. Page. 346 to 350 Anno. 1691. His letter to Thomas Lloyd on this
subject and other affairs. Ibid. William Penn, being obliged to retire in
private, for a time, writes several valuable treatises in his retirement, etc.
Ibid. His epistle to the yearly meeting of his Friends, the Quakers, in London,
on his present situation, etc. Page. 351 Disagreement between the province and
territories. Ibid. Proceedings of the former, in reference to this difference;
-- with the names of the Members of Assembly in 1690, and proposals of the
territories respecting said difference, etc. Page. 352 to 355 Protest of the
territories against the proceedings of the province. Page. 355 Endeavors of
the province to reconcile them, in vain; -- with President Lloyd's letter to
the seceding Members of the territories, for that end. Page. 356 Thomas Lloyd
made Governor of the province, and William Markham of the territories by the
Proprietary, though this division was disagreeable to him. Page. 357 The
Proprietary's letter to a friend, expressing his grief on this account, etc.
Page. 358 Proceedings in this state of government, etc. with the names of the
Members of the Provincial Council. Page. 359 to 362 The province and
territories unite in writing to the Proprietary to relieve his apprehensions
respecting this separation. Page. 362 Schism and separation between George
Keith and the Quakers, with the allegations on both sides, etc. Page. 363 to
365 He is disowned by them; -- with their declaration, or testimony, of denial
against him, etc. Page. 365 to 369 His conduct afterward, etc. Page. 369 and
370 Anno. 1692. Account of some judicial proceedings against him. Page. 371 to
374 The Magistrates' declaration of their reasons for said proceedings. Page.
374 to 376 This affair of George Keith gave the Quakers and William Penn much
trouble; -- his trial more particularly appears to have been displeasing to
William Penn. Page. 376 William Penn, by means of his enemies, at court,
deprived of the government of Pennsylvania in 1692; -- with the causes
alleged, etc. Page. 377 The King and Queen's commission to B. Fletcher,
Governor of New York, for the government of Pennsylvania. Page. 378 to 380
Anno. 1693. Fletcher's letter to Deputy Lloyd, upon his receiving said
commission. Page. 380 Governor Fletcher arrives at Philadelphia; -- to whom the
government appears to have been surrendered without any previous order from
England to the authority in Pennsylvania. Page. 381 Names of the Members of
Assembly convened by Fletcher. Page. 382 The Councils address to Governor
Fletcher; -- with the alteration of the mode of administering the oaths and
tests to the Assembly, etc. Page. 383 to 385 This change of the government
hardly consistent with strict justice, etc. Page. 385 The Queen's letter to
Governor Fletcher, respecting the defense of Albany. Page. 386 Proceedings of
the Assembly. Page. 387 Assembly's address to Governor Fletcher, with his
answer. Page. 388 Assembly's remonstrance, etc. Page. 390 Further proceedings
of the Assembly. Page. 390 to 394 A law imposing one penny per pound value on
all estates, real and personal, and six shillings per head, etc. Ibid. Death
and memorial of John Delavall. Ibid. Assembly's petition to the Governor. Page.
394 A resolve of the Assembly; -- with a protest of eight Members. Page. 395
Governor Fletcher agrees to the petition of the Assembly; and afterward
dissolves them, at their own request; -- appoints William Markham his Deputy,
and goes to New York. Page. 395 and 396 Governor Fletcher's application, by
message, to the Assembly of Pennsylvania in 1694, for assistance, to preserve
the friendship of the Five Indian nations. Page. 396 William Penn afterward
blamed the Assembly for their backwardness in assisting New York, etc. Page.
397 Death and character of the former Deputy Governor Thomas Lloyd; -- with
some of his death bed expressions, etc. Page. 397 to 400 William Penn acquitted
of the accusations against him; -- and his government of Pennsylvania soon
after restored, through the mediation of certain noble Lords, his friends, etc.
Page. 400 The Proprietary's letter to certain friends in the Province, on this
affair, etc. Page. 401 and 402 Death of his wife, Gulielma Maria,
Twelfth-month, 1693. Page. 402 Anno. 1694. Copy of the grant by which the
Proprietary was reinstated in his government. Page. 403 The Proprietary
commissions W. Markham his Deputy Governor, Ninth-month, 24th. 1694. Ibid.
Ancient testimony of the People called Quakers, respecting the King and
Government about this time. Page. 405 The Proprietary's various good services,
in England, for diverse years after this time, very considerable. Ibid. Anno.
1696. His second marriage; -- and death of his eldest son Springett. Page. 406
William Penn visits his friends, the Quakers, in Ireland, etc. Ibid. Governor
Markham meets the Assembly in 1695; -- with the form of his writ, for calling
said Assembly. Page. 407 and 408 Proceedings between Governor Markham and the
Assembly, in 1696. Page. 409 Remonstrance of the Assembly to Governor Markham
exhibiting some transactions in the preceding year. Page. 409 to 414 Further
proceedings, etc. wherein several laws are agreed on and passed; -- with a
third frame of government, etc. Page. 415 Anno. 1697. Governor Fletcher of
New York solicits for more money to assist the Indians, etc. but does not
succeed; names of the Members of Council and Assembly; state of the Province
about this time. Page. 416 Anno. School. A proclamation of the Governor and
Council against vice and illicit trade. Page. 417 to 420 Anno. 1699. The
Proprietary, with his family, fails for Pennsylvania, and arrives there after a
distemper, called the Yellow Fever, had ceased, etc. Page. 420 Extract from
William Penn's valedictory epistle to his friends, the Quakers, in Europe.
Page. 421 Thomas Story's account of the effect of said Yellow Fever in
Philadelphia. Ibid. Memorial and character of Tho. Story. Page. 421 and 422
Death of A. Cook and T. Fitzwater. Ibid. The Proprietary meets the Assembly,
who take measures against piracy, etc. Page. 423 Anno. 1700. William Penn lays
before his friends, the Quakers, at their monthly meeting, in Philadelphia, his
concern for the Indians and Negroes; exhorting them to their duty, respecting
these people. Ibid. He meets diverse assemblies, at different times, while in
the country; -- passes 100 laws, and prepares a new charter. Page. 424 An order
of Council for placing a watch on the sea coast. Ibid. Anno. 1701. The
Proprietary lays before the Assembly the King's letter, requiring 350l.
sterling, toward the fortifications on the frontiers of New York, etc. Page.
425 The Assembly's address to the Proprietary, excusing their noncompliance,
for the present. Ibid. The nature of said requisition seemed rather
unreasonable, considering the present circumstances of Pennsylvania. Page. 426
to 428 Articles of agreement, between William Penn and the Susquahanna Indians.
Page. 428 to 432 The Proprietary represents to the Council, the abuses in the
Indian trade, etc. Page. 432 and 433 The Proprietary's administration, though
attended with difficulty, is managed with prudence and paternal care; and the
colony prospers, etc. Page. 434 Necessity and reason for the Proprietary's
return to England, with an extract from Anderson on trade, etc. Page. 435 The
Proprietary's speech to the Assembly, on the necessity of his return to
England, etc. with their answer; -- with the names of the Members of this
Assembly. Page. 436 to 438 The Assembly present an address to the Proprietary
respecting his successor, privileges and property, etc. with his answer to
certain parts of it, etc. Page. 439 The Indians come to take leave of the
Proprietary, with part of his speech and advice to them, etc. Page. 440
Disagreement between the province and territories again discovers itself; --
with proceedings between them and the Proprietary on the subject, etc. Page.
440 to 442 The Proprietary's letter to the Assembly on their disagreement; --
he prevails on them to a present accommodation. Ibid. The last charter of
privileges granted by William Penn, October, 1701. Page. 443 to 451 The
Proprietary constitutes a Council of state for the province and territories,
with their charter, etc. Page. 451 He likewise grants a charter to the
inhabitants of Philadelphia, constituting it a city, etc. Page. 452 Andrew
Hamilton, of New Jersey, appointed Deputy Governor, and James Logan, Secretary
of the province. Ibid. Soon after the Proprietary's arrival in England, the
cause of his return, or the attempt to reduce the Proprietary governments into
regal ones, was dropped. Page. 453 Anno. 1702. Death of King William; --
succession of the Princess Anne of Denmark to the crown; -- William Penn in
favor at court, etc. Page. 454 Governor Hamilton's administration and death.
Ibid. Anno. 1703. The province and territories irreconcilable; -- they at
length agree to a separation; -- Edward Shippen President of the Council, etc.
Ibid. First resolve of the Provincial Assembly on this occasion. Page. 455 and
456 Declaration and test of the Members. Ibid. John Evans arrives Deputy
Governor from England, Twelfth-month, 1703. Page. 457 Anno. 1704. Governor
Evans augments the Council, and convenes the Assembly of both the province and
territories; -- names of the Members of Council, etc. Ibid. He endeavors, in
vain, to unite them. Page. 458 The Governor being displeased with the members
of the province for refusing to comply with his recommendation to unite with
the territories and for some other affairs, occasions the beginning of an
unhappy disagreement. Ibid. Account of David Lloyd, Speaker of the Assembly.
Page. 459 The Governor meets the Assembly of the territories at New Castle; --
his proclamation for raising a militia, etc. Ibid. The Assembly of the province
remonstrate to the Proprietary against Governor Evans, and Secretary Logan.
Page. 460 The Governor requires to see a copy of their remonstrance, as well as
some other principal persons, but are refused. Ibid. Anno. 1705. Part of
Governor Evans's speech to the Assembly, relative to the reception of said
remonstrance with the Proprietary; -- reflecting on their conduct, etc. Page.
461 and 462 A very great change in the Assembly, elected October, 1705; -- more
harmony between them and the Governor; -- and names of the Members. Page. 462
Thomas Chalkley's visit to the Indians;and with a short memorial of him. Page.
463 The war, at this time, between England and France and Spain produces
difficulty in Pennsylvania, and that the Quakers in such cases, were liable to
be misrepresented. Page. 464 to 467 A singular act of Assembly, in Connecticut,
against the Quakers, etc. repealed by Queen Anne, etc. with the Quakers'
address to the Queen, on the occasion, etc. Ibid. Governor Evans did not
sufficiently study the genius and disposition of the people; -- his contempt of
the Quakers' principles, and favoring measures to incommode the province,
productive of ill consequences, etc. Page. 467 and 468 Anno. 1706. Account of
the false alarm, etc. with Thomas Makin's mention of the same. Page. 468 to 471
Exactions at New Castle, etc. Page. 472 Means of redress of this grievance, by
Richard Hill, Isaac Norris and Samuel Preston, Quakers, etc. with short
memorials of these three persons. Page. 472 to 476 Assembly's address to the
Governor in 1707, relating to the affair at New Castle, etc. Ibid. Proceedings
and disagreement between the Governor and Assembly, respecting the bill of
courts, etc. in which the latter, being disappointed by the Governor, direct
their resentment against the Secretary, James Logan. Page. 477 and 478
Character and memorial of James Logan. Page. 478 and 479 The province not
entirely free from party spirit: -- which is only injurious in the extreme,
etc. Page. 479 Governor Evans's administration being disagreeable to the
Assembly and people; -- the Assembly attempt to impeach the Secretary before
the Governor, but are by him prevented in their design. Page. 480 Anno. 1707.
The Assembly remonstrate to the Proprietary, and try to get Governor Evans
removed, etc. Ibid. Heads of their remonstrance against him and the Secretary
James Logan. Page. 481 to 483 Continuation of these disputes till the beginning
of the year 1709, when Go^ (...) Names of the Members of Council and Assembly
about this time. Ibid. Anno. 1708. The Proprietary being under difficulties,
mortgages the province, etc. Page. 485 These disputes of some of the
Assemblies, with his embarrassment, probably conducive to his disposing of the
government to the crown, etc. Page. 486 and 487 Oldmixon's account of William
Penn's difficulties and treatment about this time; with the names of the
officers of government in Evans's administration. Ibid.
Errata, and Emendata, in this Volume.
Page. Line. Errata. Emendata. 7 last line but then do, But then does, (or
does.) 94 5 Bemen and the Hague, Bremen and the Hague. 158 8 or their religious
society, of their religious society. 165 5 Queen Ann, Queen Anne. 219 18
States, State. 221 10 flourishing, flourishing. 221 Note their is, there is. 223
4 or, nor. 223 Note part of country, part of the country. 260 20 Peter
Styresant, Peter Styvesant. 276 37 nor never will, nor ever will. 341 Note and
a make wall, and make a wall. 342 ditto to enjoy and use of the world, to enjoy
and use the world. 344 2 found, founded. 344 25 affected, effected. 344 37
affected, effected. 354 conclusion of the note omitted, viz. otherwise
represented, or suspected. 359 1 revolution, resolution. 359 7 bills which
appear to have been passed into laws, bill, which appears to have been passed
into a law. 377 19 the word (or) to be omitted. 378 18 advise, advice. 391 Note
and be further enacted, and be it further enacted. 393 ditto shall he cast,
shall be cast. 452 ditto Edward Smont, Edward Smout. 458 ditto James Conts,
James Couts. 461 1 what effect which these proceedings had, what effect these
proceedings had. 463 Note much leaning, much learning. 464 5 nor yet gain, nor
get gain. 469 Note mutis, multis.

WILLIAM PENN



