EDWIN AND ANGELINA; OR THE BANDITTI. AN OPERA, IN THREE ACTS.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street. -- 1797. --

Copy-right secured according to Law.

To REUBEN and ABIGAIL SMITH, Lichfield, Connecticut.
MY DEAR PARENTS,
I CAN not resist the feelings which impel me to seize this first, and perhaps
only, opportunity, of publicly testifying to you my respect and affection. --
To you I am indebted, not merely for life, but for instruction and example
happily calculated to explain, and impress me with a sense of, its value, and
the inestimable purposes to which it may be applied. If, in my past or future
conduct, any conformity to your desires and precepts appear; if, by any past or
future exertions of mine, the welfare of mankind be in any degree promoted; to
your cares, to your vigilance, to your virtues, will it be owing. It is,
therefore, a simple act of justice, to make my first acknowledgments to you. --
The panegyric of a poet, on his patron, may justly be suspected; but who will
venture to question the sincerity of a son, who dedicates to his parents? --
Nor need your modesty be wounded, by this public mark of my esteem. Should my
conduct prove me worthy to claim relation to you, it will best pronounce your
eulogy: my follies and my vices can only affect myself. -- Accept then, my dear
parents, this new proof of my sincere and filial love.

E. H. SMITH.

PREFACE.
AN Author, of some reputation, has declared it as his opinion, that every
Preface should be historical; and explain, not only the design of the work it
precedes, but the circumstances and motives which led to its composition. It
would ill become me to controvert a doctrine so convenient for my present
purpose. Authors, it is true, are apt to measure the respect of others for
their productions, by the estimation in which they are held by themselves. In
this they may be, and often are, deceived. Yet, perhaps, they do not greatly
err, when they suppose the history of their performances would not be
unpleasing to those who have thought the performances themselves worthy of
their attention. Such an error, at least, is venial; and will, I hope, be
pardoned by those who may deem the succeeding statement unnecessary.

The principal scenes of the following Drama were composed in March, 1791; as
an exercise, to beguile the weariness of a short period of involuntary leisure;
and without any view to theatrical representation. From that time, till the
month of October, 1793, they lay neglected, and almost forgotten. An accident
then bringing them to recollection, several short scenes were added, agreeable
to my original design; and the whole adapted to the Stage. The piece was
presented to the then Managers of The Old American Company, for their
acceptance, the December following; but the peculiar situation of the Theater
prevented any attention to this application, till June, 1794; when, on a change
in the management, it was accepted. An interval of six months, and a further
acquaintance with the Stage, had convinced me that the Piece might undergo
alterations, with advantage. These were undertaken, immediately: the loss of a
comic character, which was now rejected, was supplied by two new scenes;
additional songs were composed; and a Drama of two acts, in prose, was
converted into the Opera, in its present form, in the course of the succeeding
month. The inherent defects of the plan were such as could not be remedied,
without bestowing on the subject a degree of attention incompatible with
professional engagements; and which I, therefore, thought myself justified in
withholding. But should this performance meet the same generous indulgence, in
private, with which it was received, in public, I shall neither attempt to
disarm Criticism of her severity, nor be ashamed of this feeble effort to
contribute to the rational amusement of my fellow-citizens.

New York, Feb. 15, 1797. P. S. It may not be improper to observe, (though the
reader can scarcely be supposed uninformed, in this particular,) that the
first, second, third, fifth and sixth songs, in the third Act of the following
Drama, are from Goldsmith; and all, except the first, from the Ballad of "Edwin
and Angelina." I have taken the liberty to make a slight alteration in the
second, to accommodate it more perfectly to my purpose; and it will be obvious
that, in the principal scene between Edwin and Angelina, I have availed myself
of the sentiments, and, as far as possible, of the very expressions of the
Author.



PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
SIFRID, Mr. HODGKINSON. EDWIN, Mr. TYLER. ETHELBERT, Mr. MARTIN. WALTER, Mr.
CROSBY. EDRED, Mr. MUNTO. HUGO, Mr. MILLER. BANDITTI. ANGELINA, Mrs.
HODGKINSON.
The Scene lies in a Forest, on the northern extremity of England; and in a
Cavern, and the entrance of a Hermitage, in the Forest.

Time, that of the Representation.

The Reader is desired to correct the following Errors of the Press, which
occur in the subsequent Pages.
Page 14, line 4th from the bottom, for "joys" read joy.

Page 39, line 6th from the top, for "pluming" read plumy.

Page 67, line 9th from the top, for "the" read he.

EDWIN AND ANGELINA.
ACT FIRST.
SCENE I.
SIFRID enters, as from an Engagement. SIFRID. AWAY! detested thought!....I
will not think!
Visionary forms, phantoms of horror,
Hover not around me! -- A murderer!
A Youth so beautifully formed withal;
Of such magnanimous and warlike soul;
'Twas damnable! -- A robber! -- Observant, --
Watching the unsuspicious step of Wealth,
And with infuriate, with relentless rage,
Marring the works of nature and of man! --
-- Damnation! And what to me is Nature?
What, but a treacherous and detested guide,
Leading my footsteps up the height of heaven,
To hurl me thence precipitate to hell?
What Man? but a dark savage, furious for his prey,
And armed with subtiler skill, by reason's aid,
To seize, and to secure, it? Full of wiles,
When powerless; empowered, a gaunt hyaena,
Snatching at life, and gluttonous of death.
'Twas man that bowed, oppressed, destroyed me,
Girded with power, that ravished every blessing;
Ease, liberty, and love: -- that cast me forth,
Drove out, a monster, from the haunts of men,
To foam and chafe, to prowl for prey, and shake,
With fierce alarms, these wild resounding woods.
-- O woods, ye woods, who lift your towering trunks,
And wave your dark tops in the northern breeze,
Safe from the barbarous and despoiling axe; --
Thou cavern'd rock, grotesque and rude, whose top
The mountain-laurel, and whose shelving side
The gadding frost-vine, cover and adorn; --
And ye, ye fountains, whose translucent streams,
Irriguous, beautify the forest wild,
Bursting, white-foaming, from this rocky cave,
Fit haunt of souls like mine! -- O bear me witness!
To you alone my sorrows I unfold;
Covering my face with smiles, or, on my brow,
Bearing the stern look of revengeful war,
Before my fellows: -- O be witness ye!
Once I was happy: competence and ease,
And glorious freedom, blessed me; and, supreme,
Extent, and height, and crown, of every joy,
Love, ardent and sincere, I felt, I knew,
And saw returned, successful. No remorse
Steept its foul bitter in my cup of bliss.
-- Remorse! -- stern God of Vengeance! why remorse?
Was it not man, proud man, insulting man,
Tyrannous, and boastful of his noble blood,
That tore, with ruffian hand, my joys away?
Do I not right to make him smart for this?
To spoil him of his wealth, strip him of power,
And over his rich domains spread wasting war?
-- Thou know, inscrutable God! thou know well,
That never on the weak my vengeance came;
That I have never stripped the poor, but saved
His humble cot, and spared his little flock.
The mountain streams, full, deep, and wide,
By bounds uncheckt, majestic, slow,
Roll peaceful down the sloping side,
And bless the ways through which they flow.
But, if proud man shall dare restrain,
Forests nor rocks withstand their force;
They thunder headlong to the plain;
And desolation marks their course.
Yet, over the low and humble vale,
Gently, their waters they diffuse;
Green springs the blade, and, through the dale,
Each faded flower its bloom renews.

SCENE II.
Enter, to SIFRID, EDRED and WALTER; as from pursuit. SIFRID. EDRED. WALTER.
SIFRID (As they enter.) Welcome, brave chiefs! What? have you just returned?
Say, did we not the conflict well sustain?
With valorous and gallant use of arms?

EDRED. O noble chief! most terrible this night!
Most fierce and deadly this our last encounter!
If we, in each attempt, so much must dare,
Hazard so much; naught but increase of strength,
Or the most desperate prowess, can uphold us.
Alarm already speaks of us.

WALTER. Be it so.
Strong in our nature, and inured to toil,
Of suffering patient, and resolved of mind,
We fight with double 'vantage: while the cause, --
Thrice damned oppression, -- which the strength impairs
Of tyrant lordlings, gives us growing force.
Think you that men, men like themselves endowed,
Or to themselves superior, long will bend,
To the low dust, the knee, -- and stoop the head,
To slavish vassalage, and feudal pride?
And tremble in a mis-nam'd Noble's presence?
It cannot be: soon will they spurn the yoke,
Fly to our aid, and emulate our zeal.
If not, -- we are ourselves, -- we have a chief, --
And, Sifrid at our head, we dare oppose
The utmost front of tyrannous invasion.

SIFRID. Thanks my friend!
Nor of your love, nor courage do I doubt:
But all must not be valorous as him
With whom we last contended. To my soul,
Used as I am to carnage and to blood,
The blow, which caused his death, gave many pangs.
When he beheld his dear companions slain,
With such a generous disregard of life
He fought; such brave indignancy, that he,
Of all the band of love, alone was left;
The single wearer of detested life;
I could have snatched him to my soul, kissed him,
And called him brother. But why lament him?
The world has cast me out, and let it perish!

EDRED and WALTER. It Is nobly spoken. Captain!

WALTER. Now, by my soul!
Did I not hope to spread devouring flame,
And shake, over peers, the desolating scourge;
Were not my earnest expectation, soon,
Death in the van, and ruin in the rear,
To raze the castle, mine the haughty towers,
And bow their sky-assailing heads to earth;
Existence were my scorn, my very hate,
The heavy vengeance of the angry heavens.

SIFRID. O we have suffered foul, foul wrongs, my brother!
And, by the arm of God! we will have right,
Have sweet revenge!

EDRED and WALTER. We will!

SIFRID. But where are they,
Our bold compeers, and brothers, in this cause?
They were not wont, with such a leaden pace,
Behind their chief to loiter.

EDRED. Nor do they.
Fiercely they urge pursuit, if chance their steps
May yet overtake two recreant knaves, who fled,
Diverse, their braver friends most base forsaking.

SIFRID. (Agitated, and to himself.) And must there be more blood? and more of
murder?

EDRED. Of blood?

WALTER. Of murder? -- What means our Captain?

SIFRID. (To himself.) Almighty God! thou know 'twas not my fault --
That I was clean of hands, humane of heart --
Had rather died myself, than wronged a brother --

WALTER. Sifrid! Thou prat'st! By heaven! I am ashamed;
I blush for thee: -- Think on thy duty chief!

SIFRID. (Still inattentive.) And him I thought my friend -- whose soul I deemed
The very fount whence truth and honor flowed --
Demons of hell shall torture him for this!

WALTER. Why now I know thee: throw aside this gloom:
Observe how fair the day, and what its promise.

EDRED. See how the glowing sun shoots his fierce beams,
Urging the traveller, overcome with heat,
To seek the shady covert of these woods.
Observe! and banish sorrow from thy soul.
The safe and calm retreat of peace,
May court and cherish thoughts like these,
And draw, from sadness, sweetest joy
But, 'mid the loud alarms of war,
A sterner tone the soul should share,
And ruder scenes its hopes employ.

SCENE III.
The Banditti shout, behind the Scenes, and show themselves, coming down the
Avenues, bringing HUGO bound. EDRED speaks as they enter. SIFRID, EDRED,
WALTER, BANDITTI, and HUGO. EDRED. Hark! it is our friends! that shout bespeaks
success.
(By the Band.) Here let mirth, let pleasure dwell;
Hence all grief and sadness fly;
Glory brightens up our cell;
Riches all our wants supply.
(Single Voice.) When wars surround, and dangers rise,
The wise and brave should shun surprise;
With steady valor meet their rage,
With sober courage battle wage.
But, when the doubtful conflict's past,
And triumph crowns their arms at last;
When all its treasures wealth imparts,
Care swift should vanish from their hearts.
(By the Band.) Here let mirth, let pleasure dwell;
Hence all grief and sadness fly;
Glory brightens up our cell;
Riches all our wants supply.

ALL BANDITTI. Long life to Sifrid!

SIFRID. Welcome, thrice welcome,
Noble brothers! Now, by my head I swear,
It joys me much to see you thus return;
So full of life, of spirit, and of joy;
With numbers so entire; after such rude
And dangerous conflict. Triumph like to this
Our Band knew never, -- victory so complete.

FIRST BAND. Never, our Captain: some half-score except,
Who fell, sore pressed by numbers, all return.

SIFRID. It Is well. But say, who is this captive slave?

FIRST BAND. A trembling, coward knave; a very fool;
Whom we, deceived, pursued; mistaking him
For one of nobler sort, and bolder heart,
Who somehow has escaped us. -- (To Hugo.) Sirrah, knave!
Hold up thy head. -- (To Sifrid.) So full is he of fear,
As yet, our Chief, we naught have learnt of him.

SIFRID. (To Hugo.) Captive! resume thy courage man! Look up!
There shall no harm be done thee -- Fear thou yet?
Fellow, I swear to thee upon my sword,
Nay, by my head I swear, no mischievous,
Or deadly evil, shall be practiced on thee.
Who? What thou art? Why here? Briefly unfold.

HUGO. Dread Sir, have mercy on me! Naught am I,
But a poor slave, the follower of a lord,
Who, through this country, seeks a wandering maid;
For whose dear love all comfort he foregoes.
But yester-morn, he joined him to a band,
Of noble knights, who sought the North of Wales;
For better safety, traveling together.
Alas! most sad mischance! none of that band,
My master's self except, now tastes of life.

SIFRID. And he?

HUGO. He, he alone, escaped; urging,
With wondrous speed, down the steep rock, his flight.

SIFRID. Haste thee! disclose his name and quality.

HUGO. 'Mid England's Peers, the first; -- Earl Ethelbert.

SIFRID. Earl Ethelbert! -- Thunder of Heaven! -- What he? --
And roam these woods? -- He here? within my power?
Why yes! -- it is well! -- Now, by the arm of God! --
Vengeance! -- revenge! -- O! it is well! -- it is well! --

EDRED. (To Walter.) What may this mean?

WALTER. (To Edred.) Speak to him, Edred.

EDRED. (To Walter.) I will.
Captain! brother! friend! Sifrid! -- What ails thee?
What dreadful passion agitates thy soul?

SIFRID. Can he love? -- Curses blast his love! -- No -- no --
I will have ample, will have sweet revenge!

EDRED. Sifrid! -- He hears me not. -- Sifrid, my friend!
Are we not sworn to thee? -- Tell us thy wrong.

SIFRID. Forgive me! O my good friends, forgive me!
I have done much injustice to your love,
Thus long to hide it from you; but will now --
(To the Band.) Bear hence that slave, and see him close confined!
Then, my kind brothers, hasten to return;
For I would bare my heart, and naught conceal.
The generous heart, distressed with shame,
Still, still would hide its grief;
Nor ever the inglorious reason name,
While far is yet relief.
But when redress at length appears,
Its wrongs concealed no more,
Each friend the shameful secret hears,
And aids revenge's power.

SCENE IV.
The Banditti return. SIFRID. EDRED. WALTER. BANDITTI. SIFRID. (To those who
enter.) My brothers, it is well. -- 'Mid all my griefs,
Much does it joy my soul to find such friends.

FIRST BANDIT. Captain, we love you.

SIFRID. Nay, I know it well,
And now confide my story to your love.
-- 'Twas my most hapless lot my birth to gain
In the same city with Earl Ethelbert.
His sire, of the first rank, (as sure you know,)
Was wealthy; and reported generous.
I was of noble birth -- but -- poor. -- While young,
Distinction proud was neither known nor felt:
Like passions, and resembling taste, were ours;
And in sweet friendship's bands united us.

EDRED. And what could interrupt? -- He did not dare --

SIFRID. Observe! -- To manhood now arrived, his sire
To France dismissed him, hoping his improvement.
-- O fatal error! thus alone to trust,
Remote from friends, in life's most dangerous prime,
Gay, inconsiderate, and warm-glowing youth! --
-- 'Twas there his passions gained the mastery;
And he, profuse of wealth, unawed by rule,
And ignorant of restraint; flattered, carest,
His every humor studied; all his wants,
His passions all, supplied; grew vain, debauched,
Selfish and mercenary, false and cruel.

EDRED. Ha! -- I see -- The Earl --

SIFRID. Give heed! -- It so befell,
Himself far off, and rioting in joys,
His father died. Then, and not till then, he,
To receive, at once, estate and title,
From abroad, returned.

EDRED. Splendidly, no doubt;
With dissolute and arrogant demeanor.

SIFRID. Most true. -- In place exalted, he no more
His former friend recognized; now, indeed.
A simple husbandman, of manners plain.
Nor did neglect alone content his soul;
Which, first estranged, soon hurried on to hate,
And urged his hand to deeds of foul oppression.

WALTER. Most execrable villain!

SIFRID. I was weak --

WALTER. Damned, damned villain!

SIFRID. Nor yet was quite subdued,
Though deeply wounded, the true love I bore him. --
To struggle was but vain. His rank and power,
Banished all hope, and might defy all strength.
Convinced, I left my farm; becoming tenant
To a neighboring Lord. There I saw, and loved,
The daughter of a man like me.

WALTER. And Ethelbert --
The Earl --

SIFRID. Wealth, alone, she had not. -- I scorned it* --

WALTER. And she? --

SIFRID. Had not heard of affectation:
I was beloved.

EDRED. And you were happy?

SIFRID. No!

EDRED. No?

SIFRID. O, no! This lord, this Ethelbert, this Earl,
Must have -- O foul appendage! shame to rank!
A Mistress.

WALTER. And he did strive --

SIFRID. Strove to gain,
Betray, corrupt, my Emma.

WALTER. Thief! villain!

SIFRID. Submissive, tender, complaisant, and mild,
The importuning lover long he played:
But she was constant; and with armed force,
At night, he bore her captive to his tower.

WALTER. Ruffian accursed!

SIFRID. Nor knew we where she was.
He tried all arts; but she, inflexible,
To faithlessness or shame, did death prefer.

ALL BAND. Noble woman!

EDRED. The Earl --

SIFRID. With disappointment raised to frantic rage,
And furious that to him I caused denial;
He nor restrained, nor limited his hate.
Me, he procured imprisoned; -- basely fed; --

WALTER. Tyrant!

SIFRID. I had forgiven him, -- but he held,
In vile captivity, my love; and hoped,
By long attention, to overcome her hate.
A year past on; he caused report be spread,
Nay, told her, I was dead. And then -- (wildly.)

EDRED. (Alarmed.) Sifrid!

SIFRID. Did ever know what 'twas to love, good Edred? --
Alas! I Have known. -- Have ever known the bliss
Of love returned? And heard the gentle "Yes"
Fall from the trembling lip of blushful maid? --

EDRED. Captain!

SIFRID. This have I known. -- And when thou look'dst
To bear thy treasure home, did some one come,
One whom thou never had wronged, good Edred? one
On whom thou would lavisht all thy friendly store?
Came such an one between thy love and thee?
Say, did his baleful arm sunder ye, then?
Doom her to death, and tell thee she was dead?
Knew'st thou such grief? -- And yet -- This I have known. -- (A pause --
Sifrid covers his eyes.)

EDRED. Captain, 'twere well,
Weak, and overcome with sorrow, as thou art,
To spare recital of what yet remains.

SIFRID. No, my good Edred, no! I feel renewed: --
I thank thee that thou'st roused my memory: --
What follows is most brief.
When now some years had seen me thus imprisoned,
I forced escape; nor of my friends, nor kin,
I stayed to learn; but fled. Our former Chief,
As well you know, received me. And hence my deeds,
My fortune, and my various life, you know.
But let them pass: -- Ethelbert roams these woods, --
You are brave; -- I am your leader; -- and you --

EDRED. Have sworn to obey --

SIFRID. And will support me?

ALL. To death.

SIFRID. Dear friends -- I cannot speak -- my tears,
They best can tell how truly I do thank you. --
-- But we must scour the woods, and keep the watch. --
You Rino, guard the entrance: we will swift
Enclose the forest: Vengeance the watchword,
And revenge the aim. -- He can not escape.
Whenever Oppression dares to urge,
With lash, or steel, on man her claim,
The dastard basely bears the scourge,
And meanly meets the poignard's aim.
Not so the brave, with lion heart,
He even her deadliest rage defies;
Victorious triumphs over her art;
Or, not triumphing, nobly dies.
Or yet, awhile her chains he bears,
'Till Heaven the favoring signal gives;
Then, of revenge the sword he rears;
And, while the Tyrant dies, he lives.

END OF ACT I.
ACT SECOND.
SCENE I.
A different part of the forest. ANGELINA enters, disguised in the habit of a
Pilgrim. ANGELINA. With melancholy steps, hopeless I wander;
And no repose, no sheltering shed, discern.
-- O Edwin! how has vanity repaid me! --
With wreck of happiness, and loss of peace.
Hated by thee, myself I hate, and find,
From solitude, whence ease I hoped, new pains. --
-- 'Mid these wild woods, hostile, or full of fear,
Wherever I come, the beasts menacing howl,
Or fly, as from some desolating fiend.
The warblers cease their songs, or flit away,
And on the distant trees' soft-waving tops,
Insult my sorrows with their merriest notes.
The forest green, and every budding plant,
Flowers, and the springing blade, and mantling vine,
All the full blessing of the spring enjoy;
And to my soul new melancholy add. --
-- My tears incessant flow! -- Alas! how sad,
How desolate is life; when but to think
On those whom most we love, afflicts us most.
The soft, and gently-pleasing woe,
Which two fond hearts, divided, know,
The soul with sweetest suffering moves;
But O! when guilt with absence joins,
Grief it to agony refines,
And fires to rage the breast that loves.

She goes out. SCENE II.
ETHELBERT enters from the opposite side. ETHELBERT. What have I not
encountered? Famine; flood;
The tyger's haunts; and fierce and dangerous battle.
-- True, I escaped; I live; but vainly live:
Alas! Heaven smiles not on my enterprise.
-- And can it be? am I the same? unchanged?
And is it Ethelbert that danger braves?
Why toil has been my hate; my very jest
Was constancy; and love, my fixed contempt.
-- O Angelina! peerless maid! a world
Of unknown beauty, have thou opened unto me.
Transporting sight! were not the glorious scene,
By recollection of foul crimes, obscured.
-- O Sifrid! Emma! not of pangs like mine,
Though ye are wretched both, by me made wretched,
Not of such pangs, such anguish, are ye slaves.
Yours is the grief which from oppression springs,
And even 'mid all your woes does innocence,
With its sweet peace, your sorrowing souls support.
But I -- a very wretch -- (whose tongue has dared
At all of sacred use to scoff; whose hand,
Still has achieved whatever wild passion prompted;)
The sport of agony, -- know no relief.
-- Thou Angelina! it is thou, whose voice
Has lured me back, to virtue, from perdition.
Thou fliest: -- in vain I seek thee; -- and in vain
The woods I penetrate. Day and the night
Slow pass, and on my faint and weary way,
Sorrowing I see returning morning break.
The lover, journeying to his fair,
Beholds, with joy, the day appear,
To light him on his short'ning way;
But ah! if far from her he roam,
Unwisht, he sees the morning come;
For distance grows with every day.
He goes out.
SCENE III.
ANGELINA returns. ANGELINA. Fainting, enfeebled, in a ceaseless round,
I wander still. Each opening lures my steps
To some contiguous path; and that, alas!
With wily bend, conducts to whence I moved.
Fatigue and grief o'erpower and weigh me down.
(A pause, she leans against the side scene.) -- Sweet are the days of youth,
when innocence
Lives in the breast, and heightens every charm.
But ah! with years' increase, joy flies afar;
Like the young bird, who leaves his native clime,
When summer fails; but not like him returns.
The bird, when summer charms no more,
Forsakes his native clime,
And wantons over the southern vales,
Which feel perpetual prime.
Yet when the season smiles again,
Raptured he seeks his favorite plain.
But joy, as riper days advance,
To younger bosoms goes;
Nor ever returns, for hapless man
No second summer knows.

SCENE IV.
ETHELBERT enters, from the opposite side, without observing, and unobserved
by, ANGELINA. ANGELINA. ETHELBERT. ETHELBERT. (To himself.) Whence is that
voice so sweetly melancholy?
Do the celestial denizens of air
Visit this forest? Or is all around,
As sure to me beseems, enchantment strange?

ANGELINA. (Seeing him.) Heavens! it is Ethelbert!

ETHELBERT. Which way soever
My footsteps stray, still the same spot appears,
Unbidden, and restrains my further course.
And when reflection tells me I am here,
And wherefore here; and when it all reviews,
Which here has past; I startle at myself;
And question hold if it be truth.
(Observing Angelina.) Pilgrim!
I pr'ythee stay. -- Nay, -- whither do thou fly?
I am no robber that would do thee harm;
But a most hapless man, here lost, and here
Enforced to wander. -- Nay, do not leave me!
(Catching hold of her garment.) Leave me not here alone, unhelpt to perish!
Silent! -- still silent! -- (Discovering who it is.)
Angelina! Heaven!

ANGELINA. (Aside.) Lost! lost, forever!

ETHELBERT. And is it thee? Indeed? And have I found thee?
O fate! I thank thee! She is found! is safe!
Speak to me, Angelina! art thou well?
Uninjur'd? Safe? Ah! how have thou escaped
The numerous perils which beset thee round?
How have thy delicate and tender limbs
Sustained the fierce extremes of temperature?
The sickly mists of day, and dews of night?
-- Speak, O speak to me, my Angelina!
-- And is it possible, that while the tears,
Of transport, for thy safety, bathe my cheeks;
O, is it possible! that thou with such
Cold, cold demeanor, can receive me?

ANGELINA. Ethelbert! beware!
Withhold me not; nor follow thou my steps.
Now thou do know what most I wished concealed,
Let it content thee; and do thou release me.

ETHELBERT. Release thee? -- Astonishment! Impossible!
Have thou not lost thy way? deceived, perchance,
By the wild beauty of some favorite walk,
Skirting thy loved paternal towers, 'till Eve
Over thee, unconscious, cast her starless shade;
And conjured up some demon, whose false lamp,
With devious glare, betrayed thee 'mid these horrors?
Have I not sought, and found thee? And shall not
My hand conduct thee to thy native dome?

ANGELINA. Never.

ETHELBERT. Never! -- What frenzy has possessed thee? --
Never? -- Never return? -- It cannot be.

ANGELINA. See thou not where we are? -- Release thy hold.

ETHELBERT. Think thou I would enforce thy stay? -- O, no!

(Loosing his hold.) ANGELINA. It Is well: I know thee now. -- When to the world
I voluntary farewell bade --

ETHELBERT. O, no! (With great vehemence.)
Thou do not mean it. No, it cannot be,
That hither thou have strayed of choice. What charm
Have these drear forests, and huge craggy rocks,
For one, like thee, the idol of the world?
-- O do not let thy hate of Ethelbert
Urge thee, thus madly, to renounce that care
With which he will, inviolate, restore thee.

ANGELINA. Earl Ethelbert!

ETHELBERT. Do thou distrust me then? --
I swear, upon the honor of a Peer:
And surely thou may trust his oath, whose heart,
With holiest love, adores thee. -- If thou did know
How many days of grief, how many nights
Of sleepless anguish, thy departure caused;
Sure they would plead within that gentle breast,
For some small gracious token of compassion.
-- O think how hard the lot of Ethelbert;
Leaving the accustomed pleasures of his state;
Anxious, distracted, for thy loss; these woods,
Horrid with every dreadful death, exploring;
Fired with the hope to shield thy precious life,
And safe restore thee: -- Think what pangs are his
To find his zeal repulst; and, in the stead
Of kind regard, to meet thy fiercer scorn.

ANGELINA. Hear Ethelbert. To thee, thou know well,
I never have used deceit; but have been frank.
Why should my words want credit with thee, then?
I do assure thee, on a maiden's faith,
That not unwillingly I roam these woods.
Nor do thou follow me. -- Think not I scorn thee. --
No, Ethelbert: ever since I saw thy change,
Thou have possessed esteem: and nothing more
This heart can give thee. -- Farewell: -- and leave me.

ETHELBERT. Too beauteous maid! do not! O do not ask it!
If thou will wander here, vouchsafe me leave,
(I will not speak of love,) to be thy guard.
Nay, do not frown! -- O thou shall ever find me
Most submissive. All day I will provide,
And bring thee food; and all the live-long night,
Thou sleeping, guard thee from approaching harm.

ANGELINA. It may not be. My purpose needs no aid.
Farewell. (Turning, and proceeding.)

ETHELBERT. Stop, I conjure -- Angelina!
(She looks back, and stops.) Thou must not go! -- Heavens! think what perilous,
What dreadful fates surround thee. These dark woods,
"Tangled with horrid thorn;" these ruinous rocks,
Frowning with death; should thou escape these ills,
On thy dank couch the hissing snake may dart,
And rabid wolves hem in thy daily walk.
Should Heaven protect thee from such foes as these,
Who, who shall save thee from more savage men?
Men, who do live on violence and lust?
Think, Angelina! think before thou mov'st!
O! it were more dreadful than any death.

ANGELINA. Sure, Ethelbert, thy passion does obscure
Thy sight. Consider well this garb. Who knows,
Thus far from winding Tyne, Earl Orgar's daughter?
What man but, seeing me, shall deem me man?
And of such holy sort, that he shall feel
His duty bind him, to defend, not harm, me?

ETHELBERT. What garb can hide thy loveliness? What garb
The ruffian hand of violence disarm? --
But if thou'st no compassion on thyself,
Still let humanity restrain thy steps.
Whatever of good I have, to thee I owe it.
By thee half-torn from vice, yet not confirmed
In virtue. And will thou, after such toil,
And in this feverous state of soul, forsake me?
Say, will thou not pursue, perfect, thy work?
Has Ethelbert been led to virtue's path,
And will his guide, his angel guide, even there,
Desert him? -- O! for pity's sake relent! --
Who, when you are gone, shall aid my tremulous steps,
And warm my doubting heart to virtuous deeds?

ANGELINA. Thou know but little of the power of virtue,
If thou do doubt its efficacy here.
Be virtuous, -- thou must, perforce, be happy.
Be virtuous, --

ETHELBERT. Ah! what is virtue, without
(What constitutes its worth) the bright reward?
Be then compassionate. -- I do not ask,
I will not ask, for love.
(Kneeling and seizing her hand.) Hear me! -- I swear,
By every fainted soul, in yonder heaven,
Thou shall be safe, be free. I conjure thee
Hear me! It Is for thyself, for thy own life,
For thy own peace, for thy eternal peace,
I plead. Speak, Angelina!

ANGELINA. Urge me not:
Seek not reproach: Release my hand.

(A rushing noise is heard.) ETHELBERT. Hear'st that?
It is our foes, the ruffians of the wood!
Haste, ere they rush upon us; for they come:
The dry leaves rustle, and the forest shakes.
Yield to my care! By all in earth and heaven
Thou valuest, I adjure thee! Let us fly!
(A loud shout, and the Banditti appear.) I will defend thee with my life.

SCENE V.
(As Ethelbert turns to defend, Angelina escapes. The Banditti, with Sifrid at
their head, rush in, surround and seize Ethelbert; who is able to make but
short resistance.) ETHELBERT. SIFRID. BANDITTI. SIFRID. Bind, and bear him to
the Cavern.

(The Banditti bind Ethelbert, and bear him out.) SCENE VI.
SIFRID, alone. SIFRID. How shall I act? What do? What purpose choose?
My soul, at thought of cruelty, recoils;
Deeply as he has wronged me. -- Shall I bear,
In bondage rigorous, his spirit down?
Or shall I throw concealment off; reject
All temporizing means; and, front to front,
Load him with accusation and reproach?
The mother, anxious for her child,
Whose country calls him to the field,
Danger and glory long comparing;
And each, herself, in fancy, sharing;
Still, with fond arms, the youth constrains;
Nor thinks, embracing, she detains.
So, in my changing, wavering, mind;
To different acts, by turns, inclined;
On direful vengeance now resolving;
And now some milder fate revolving;
No settled purpose bears the sway,
And long, and longer, grows delay.

He goes out. SCENE VII.
The inside of the Cavern: ETHELBERT discovered, bound, walking in front of the
Stage: the BANDITTI silent, in the back part of the Scene, keeping guard.
ETHELBERT. BANDITTI. ETHELBERT. (To himself.) Heavens! to what dreadful fate am
I reserved?
These are no common thieves. Untoucht remains
Whatever of worth, whatever of use, I had.
Nor hold they ought of converse with each other;
Nor yet, to my enquiries, make reply.
Their Chief, -- what majesty! -- I shrunk, dismayed,
Before the piercing terrors of his eye.
Knowledge of him most surely I have none.
Why should I start! -- but that the sense of guilt,
For crimes against so many men committed,
Makes me to fear in every man a foe:
Perchance in him.

SCENE VIII.
ETHELBERT. BANDITTI. SIFRID. SIFRID. (To the Banditti.) Remove the prisoner's
bonds,
And leave us to ourselves, my gentle friends.

(The Banditti unbind Ethelbert, and go out.) SCENE IX.
ETHELBERT. SIFRID. (Sifrid walks about -- agitated -- occasionally stopping,
and measuring Ethelbert with his eye -- at length he exclaims.) SIFRID.
Monster! you are now within my power.

ETHELBERT. (With surprise.) Monster!

SIFRID. Thou know me not?

ETHELBERT. No.

SIFRID. My form, familiar erst,
Has then the hand of time so far defaced?
Or have foul injuries, from thee received,
Destroyed the well-known features of my youth?
Or rests the cause with thee? It Is dignity,
Perchance, above remembrance elevates.
Or do thy cruelties a hell so great,
So fierce, become, thou fear new punishments,
Should recollection show thee who I am? --
Think of the man thou most have wronged -- and then,
Know me for Sifrid.

ETHELBERT. Sifrid!

SIFRID. Yes, Sifrid.
And does my name, alone, banish the color
From thy changing cheek? -- Tremble at my wrath,
Base man! does not that name, within thy breast,
Awake more tortures than thou fear hereafter? --
O wretch! wretch!

ETHELBERT. I do confess --

SIFRID. No -- no -- no --
Do not: -- Confession ill becomes thee now.

ETHELBERT. Nay, hear me! I --

SIFRID. Would talk of palliation: --
O thou have sinned beyond its utmost reach,
And hardly can the hand of Heaven itself
Erase so deep a blot.

ETHELBERT. But yet --

SIFRID. O, no! --
Did thou not force me from my home?

ETHELBERT. I did.

SIFRID. With hell-born cruelty pursue me?

ETHELBERT. It Is true.

SIFRID. Captive, in chains, shut from the sun, the air,
All intercourse of friends, by thy command,
For months, for years, I languisht.
Thy villain hand each little good rent from me;
Or ever, with interposition rude,
Prevented its advance. -- No pleasing sounds --
Not even the pluming warblers' of the spring,
To all her offspring, Nature's common gift,
Ever approached me: -- but, instead, deep groans;
The felon's rattling chains, the murderer's oaths;
And, -- worse than all, -- thy proud insulting taunts.
And more -- Monster of inhumanity! --
And more -- Did thou not tear my Emma from me?
Within a noisome cell confine? Weary,
With offers of vile lust, her virgin soul?
Say, did thou not?

ETHELBERT. All, all is true.

SIFRID. Yes, yes! And do I live to see thee here?
The dark assassin of my love? my life? --
Wretch! what do thou deserve?

ETHELBERT. To be heard.

SIFRID. Heard?
And is there aught, that is villainous, undone,
Which, in this little space of life, allowed,
Thou hop'st to do? -- Or, can thy speech recall
Past times; retrace the years of frantic grief;
And once more place me where I erst was happy?
Oh, no! -- Thou'st filled the measure of thy guilt;
Triumphed over every sacred tie, that binds,
In fellowship, the man to man. -- And what,
Plunged as thou art in crimes, is left to do?
Is there, of justice, one unbroken law?

ETHELBERT. Tyrant! beyond all patience have thou urged me,
And I will speak. -- Justice! -- Talk thou of justice?
Show me in all the ample page of right,
In all truth's code, a rule, or even a plea,
To consecrate, or to excuse, thy trade.
Robber! thou can not. -- Him does it become,
The armed leader of a ruffian band,
To hold discourse of justice? And shall he,
Who strips the unwary traveller of life;
The midnight door of sleeping wealth who breaks;
Who tears, from age, its honor, and from youth,
From helpless youth, its innocence;
Shall he of justice question?

SIFRID. Villain!

ETHELBERT. Villain to thee! Show me the plundered stores,
Rent from the industrious tenants of my fields.
Disclose the vast incalculable sum,
Swept from the puissant nobles of the realm. --
Ha! do thou shake with rage? grow pale with shame?
Conceal it, Sir; it ill becomes a thief.

SIFRID. Monster! if any guilt is mine, -- tremble!
Yes, tremble for thyself, the accursed cause!
Who, tearing from me all that life endears;
Exalting each dark passion of my soul;
Have made me breathe with naught but fell revenge. --
-- O had thou torn all wealth, all honor, from me;
Made me still poorer than the wandering wretch, --
Sordid petitioner of daily food; --
Heapt to the heavens, imprisonment, and pain;
Sicken'd all ears with tales of infamy;
And still had left my Emma to be mine;
I had been blessed; had loaded thee with blessing;
And Heaven had seen me spotless and devout.

ETHELBERT. Emma is yours.

SIFRID. (Fiercely.) Have thou not murdered her?

ETHELBERT. (With horror.) No! -- no!

SIFRID. (With terrible fury.) Villain! have thou not murdered her?

ETHELBERT. She lives.

SIFRID. (Wildly.) Not dead?

ETHELBERT. She lives, to love and bless thee.

SIFRID. (Faintly; and laboring for breath and utterance.) Oh! it can not be!
-- It can not! -- can not!
Merciful Heaven! -- this tumult of my soul!
(He leans against the Cavern. After awhile, as though he supposed it some new
imposition in Ethelbert, he starts; and drawing a dagger, seizes Ethelbert by
the arm.) Most damned impostor! --
(Ethelbert remains unappalled. Sifrid, looking on his face, observes it --
drops the dagger, and exclaiming) He could not do it! --
(Sinks into a reverie.)
ETHELBERT. (After a short silence.) Sifrid! -- He hears me not. -- Thy Emma
lives.
She lives, indeed; and thee alone requires;
Whose hoped return will all her joys renew.

SIFRID. (Starting from his reverie.) And whence is this? -- From thee?

ETHELBERT. O, heap not shame,
Too vast already, on my humbled head!
For I will all disclose; nor dare conceal
Aught of near import, so thou be composed.

SIFRID. Speak on. Thou have my promise.

ETHELBERT. The tears of Emma, silent as they fell,
Softened my flinty heart. Compassion, then,
A guest unknown before, entered my breast --
Who does not know what sweet affinity
Love bears to gentle sorrow? -- Now, indeed,
A purer flame shot through my altered soul.
The grief, the modestly-reproachful woe,
Unwavering, matchless, constancy, of Emma,
Chilled every glow of passion, bent my heart,
Reproved my guilt, and humbled me to silence.
Affection builds not on remorse. I shunned,
I fled, her presence; -- but, to feel the force,
And sink the slave, of Angelina's beauty.
I saw, and loved: -- loved; and of love became
The thrall successless. -- Was I unhappy? --
Had not my murderous hand rent the fond ties,
Dissolved the fairy bliss, cankered the buds of love? --
Frenzy possessed me; -- and remorseful grief,
With agonies so dreadful, shook my frame,
That reason tottered on her throne; and hope,
That I should ever revive, my friends forsook.
Thy Emma then --

SIFRID. (Furiously.) What did thou say of Emma?

ETHELBERT. O, be calm, my friend! Let these tears declare
I am repentant. Thy sorrowing Emma
Consol'd and served me, with unceasing care;
And once again to life restored me.

SIFRID. (With ecstacy.) She did!

ETHELBERT. Hence, every vice cast off, with earnest zeal,
I strove my many mischiefs to repair.
What could I do for Emma? Half my wealth
Was proffered, but refused.

SIFRID. (Proudly.) No doubt it was.

ETHELBERT. With care solicitous, over all the realm,
My trusty slaves dispatched, still sought thee out.
Meantime, with her I loved, my suit advanced not.
With pleased regard she saw me turn from vice;
And witnest kind respect, but never love.
At length she fled. With unremitting zeal,
I sought her long; each town and village searching.
In vain. -- This day, as full of grief I strayed,
Whether by chance, or Heaven's conducting hand,
The long lost fair I found; when, captive made,
Hither have I been led, in some poor sort,
The wrongs on thee enforced, to expiate.

SIFRID. To expiate? -- O Emma! do thou live? --
Would I could grant thee more than my forgiveness.

ETHELBERT. (Kneeling.) And can thou then the injuries forget --?

SIFRID. (Raising him.) Come to my soul, thou man of blessed repentance.

ETHELBERT. O, nobleness divine! (They embrace.)

SIFRID. (After a pause.) Our band, with speed,
Shall circle, and shall scour the forest through.
To them each part well known, the wandering Fair
Shall soon be found, and peace again be thine.

ETHELBERT. Excellent man! how greatly have I wronged thee!
Duet.
Sweet are the fleet and flying hours,
Serene, when friendship lives:
But sweeter far their joyful course,
When love, once lost, revives.
For who can heave the sorrowing sigh,
Regretful of the wrong,
When fond forgiveness fills the eye,
And trembles on the tongue?

END OF ACT II.
ACT THIRD.
SCENE I.
A Hermitage: EDWIN, disguised as a Hermit, sitting in the entrance; in
profound contemplation. He rises, and comes, slowly, forward. EDWIN. O Memory?
thou fond deceiver;
Still importunate and vain;
To former joys recurring ever;
And turning all the past to pain.
Thou, like the world, the oppressed oppressing;
Thy smiles increase the wretch's woe;
And he who wants each other blessing,
In thee must ever find a foe.
(Walks in great agitation.) How sad! and, yet, how true! How many suns
Have cours'd their daily round; how many moons
Have silvered over this dell, and sunk in night;
Since first I entered! -- Yet, nor the jocund
Sun, nor moon soft-smiling, cheer my soul.
In vain, the hermit's sacred robe invests me;
In vain, at earliest morn and deepest night,
I kneel before my rustic altar; press,
With trembling lips, the crucifix; and strive
To frame some apt, and well-according prayer;
Love and despair still triumph in my breast.
Angelina! -- Angelina! -- This cell,
These dark and dreary woods, alone reply;
Alone make answer to my mournful cries.
Time! thine are the spendthrift's promises!
And life! you are full of agony! Ah where!
Where shall the wretched find some sure repose?

SCENE II.
As EDWIN is slowly crossing the Stage, ANGELINA enters -- at first, not seeing
him. EDWIN. ANGELINA. ANGELINA. Now am I safe, and baffled is pursuit;
But, faint and lost, I know not where to fly.
(Seeing Edwin.) Turn gentle hermit of the dale,
And guide my lonely way,
To where some rock o'ershades the vale,
From fiercely-blazing day.
For here, forlorn and lost, I tread;
With fainting steps and slow;
Where wilds, immeasurably spread,
Seem lengthening as I go.

EDWIN. (Turns, and advances.) Pilgrim! fatigue sits heavy on thy frame;
Let me support thee: thou have gone too far.

(Assists her.) ANGELINA. Indeed, my father, I have greatly strayed;
And, much I fear, shall find no place of rest.

(Sighs.) EDWIN. Let not affliction prey upon thy mind:
Each path, that hither leads, or hence, I know.
With me, the night, repose; and ruddy morn
Shall light thee through the wood; myself thy guide.
Then turn, my son, and freely share
Whatever my cell bestows;
My rushy couch, my frugal fare,
My blessing, and repose.
(He leads her into the cell.)
SCENE III.
The inside of the Cavern. ETHELBERT alone. ETHELBERT. With what a generous and
unceasing care
Does Sifrid seek to serve me! Could I once,
What my full soul is anxious to disclose,
Unfold; and draw him from this fatal snare;
All would be well.

SCENE IV.
Enter, to ETHELBERT, SIFRID -- with a wild and distracted air; as having just
dismissed the BANDITTI; and without observing ETHELBERT. ETHELBERT. SIFRID.
SIFRID. (To himself) They Are gone; all gone; at last I am alone!
Would I had been so ever! Never known man!
Had perished ere my eyes were opened to light!
Or withered, an untimely fruit! -- O where!
Where are the golden visions that, but now,
Ravished my soul, with ecstacies of joy?
Where now the treacherous hope which made thee mine,
Too faithful Emma? Never more shall I,
With arms of love, encircle thee. No more! --
Would God that I had died, -- that thou had died,
Ere this accursed hour of dark despair.
That we were slumbering in the peaceful grave.
Now, when shall I know peace? Never! never! --
O that I knew not that thou still did live!
That yet I thought thee dead! Then, as before,
I now should rise, fierce-panting for revenge.
Thy fancied death -- my own soul wrongs -- despair --
United, would urge on my furious hand;
And make the work of death seem just and joyful.
But now, -- horrible state! -- though heaven itself
Entices me to turn; -- though I do know
Where it will plunge me; -- stand upon the brink; --
Tottering; -- I must -- (starting back) horror! horror!

ETHELBERT. Sifrid!

SIFRID. Who calls upon that wretch? (Seeing Ethelbert.) And is it thee?
(Tenderly.)

ETHELBERT. It Is me, it is Ethelbert, it is thy friend!
Why do thou look thus wildly on me, Sifrid?
What is it that so shakes thy frame? What cause --?

SIFRID. Have I not cause enough, -- Eternal Powers!
Have I not cause enough, for my distress?

ETHELBERT. Whence is this dreadful passion which destroys thee?
Art thou not master of thy native fields?
Is not thy Emma free, and faithful to thee?
Does she not languish for thy quick return?

SIFRID. Ay, but my oath! For I am bound; have sworn.

ETHELBERT. And think thou any oath has force to bind
Against the eternal ordinance of Heaven?
Believe it not. -- What have thou sworn to do?
To murder and despoil, is it not? -- Beware!
The positive injunction sure is plain;
Casting stern condemnation in thy face.

SIFRID. Ay, but my truth is pledged; my honor given;
And were eternal death the sure event,
I Have sworn upon my soul, -- and must go on.

ETHELBERT. Horrid, but powerless, oath.

SIFRID. Immutable!
O agony supreme! I see my fate. --
Emma! -- yes, thee I must leave: -- Forever!
I must fulfill my destiny of death.
The wrath of Heaven falls heavy, and I sink.

(A short pause.) ETHELBERT. O be calm, my dearest friend! Let sweet peace
Soft settle on thy soul, and sooth its woes.

SIFRID. Never more shall peace visit this bosom.

ETHELBERT. Nay, think not so! -- it shall, my friend, it shall.
Observe the pleasing prospects that invite thee.
Untoucht, thy hamlet, and paternal fields:
These, by thy care, shall thrive; there shall thou live;
And, with thy Emma, see thy joys renewed.

SIFRID. Never again, will joy be mine!

ETHELBERT. It will. --
Leave but these scenes, and, 'mid thy native shades.
Gain independence from the cultured soil;
Thou shall be truly happy. -- Here, around,
On every side, danger approaches swift.
The alarmed nation hastens to destroy thee.
Toils, dangers, and distress, and many deaths,
Perchance of thy best chiefs, most sure await thee.
If fortunate at first, it can not last;
Unfortunate, thy people's, and thy, lot,
How dreadful! The reverse, how sweet! Where thou,
Where they, a ready pardon, from the throne,
Procured, secure, the joys of peace may taste;
And life steal on, serene, to honored age.

SIFRID. O I do see how many, many joys,
I might, full sure, obtain! But, I have sworn.

ETHELBERT. And will not they, to whom thy oath is given,
Like thee, discern the danger, and avoid it?
Do thou not think thy brothers of the war
Would share thy toil?

SIFRID. (With frantic ecstacy.) They will!
(Suddenly relapsing into despair.) No! they can not.
I must still live a very wretch.

ETHELBERT. (A pause.) Sifrid!
What mean thou? Wherefore can they not?

SIFRID. Ask not.
Leave me, my friend, to perish. Thy kindness
Can not, now, avail me.

ETHELBERT. Sifrid, I can not,
Must not, leave thee. -- Explain what thou do mean.

SIFRID. Are we not bound by mutual oaths, to death?
Is it not death to him who first shall dare
Request a change? And how shall I, who framed,
Proposed, the oath; exacted their acceptance;
Dare, first, to seek exemption from its bonds?
O, would they but relent; unite, with me,
In more endeared toils; (to Ethelbert) thou will have raised
A weight that presses me to deep perdition.

ETHELBERT. Thy passion, Sifrid, does unman thy soul;
And makes thee estimate the danger more
Than reason will allow. -- Cheer up my friend!
And when, from this their search, thy Band return,
Do thou address them with a manly zeal:
Point but their way, and I will fields bestow,
Untilled, through fear of their despoiling hands,
Which soon would bud and blossom, by their aid.

SIFRID. It Is well! -- I am resolved! It can not be
But only death. -- Emma! I can not bring
Thee hither; -- and, without thee, this little,
Little day of life, were agony; were death. --
I will address them.

ETHELBERT. Fear not; they will comply.
Pardon, and rural wealth, shall crown the act;
And fairer suns shall rise to gild thy day.

SIFRID. Most generous man! I can not speak my thanks.
When, in our youth, a friend we find,
Of like desires, congenial mind,
What joy the generous passion gives!
Within the soul what transport lives!
But when, where fixed had envious fate,
Suspicion dire, and causeless hate,
Reviving love awakes its fires, --
What bliss the unlooked for good inspires!

They go out. SCENE V.
The Hermitage: EDWIN and ANGELINA discovered, sitting in the entrance of the
cell: a small table spread; and covered with a variety of fruits. EDWIN.
ANGELINA. EDWIN. Scarce do thou taste my fruits: -- O be not sad!
I will conduct thee, with the early dawn,
Where terminates the forest.

ANGELINA. Ah! Father!
I fear I then shall be more distant far,
Than ever, from my journey's wisht-for end.

(Sighs.) EDWIN. Unhappy Youth! what do thou wish? what seek?

ANGELINA. I seek in vain. -- I seek -- for -- happiness. (Sighs.)

EDWIN. Is happiness thy wish; here rest; here dwell.
Remote from courts, and palaces, and kings;
From domes of grandeur, and from halls of wealth;
Far from the poisonous city's busy hum;
From Passion's reign, and fierce Ambition's war,
Borne on the winnowing gale, flies Happiness.
She loves, with Peace her sister, to reside
In cottages and vales; by running streams;
In woods; and on the cliff's rude, hanging brow:
For there, if yet, perchance, on earth they dwell,
Meets she Integrity, and sober Toil;
And Innocence, and sweet Simplicity:
And often the Hermit's cell she deigns to visit;
With Piety her guide, and mild Repose
Her fair attendant. -- This, then, be this thy --

ANGELINA. And do meek Piety and Peace, in truth,
Visit so often then thy cell, my Father?

EDWIN. (Apart.) That question! -- Be still my heart! -- (To her.) Do thou
doubt! --
But whence, poor Youth, the sorrows of thy breast?
The rose still blooms upon thy cheek; nor there
Trace I the characters of villain guilt.
Yet, often ambitious is the youthful mind.
Say, do thou thirst for Power? (She sighs.)
Ah! remember!
It Is but of momentary worth alone;
Lifting the proud heart of forgetful man
Above the worship pure of Heaven. It draws
From Virtue's paths; and all her smiling train, --
Even Fortitude, depart: and when appear
Misfortune and her frightful troop, the soul,
Debased, no longer can itself support.

ANGELINA. Father, I wish it not.

EDWIN. And what is Wealth?
What, but, like Power, corrupter of the heart?
To every ill exposing more the man,
And hard'ning more to sense of others' grief.
Avarice and pride increasing; and the soul
Binding to earth, not lifting up to heaven.
Does it, on man, one virtuous wish bestow?
Or brings it happiness?

ANGELINA. Alas! it does not.
Power might be mine; and Wealth I can command;
But where, ah! where, is happiness?

EDWIN. Poor Youth!
And have thou dreamt of Friendship? Fixed thy soul
Upon a fancied friend, and found him false?
-- O Phantom, subject of eternal praise!
Man's foul betrayer, murderer of his peace;
Of wealth and fame thou still-attendant shade;
The base deserter of the cheated wretch;
What art thou, visionary fiend, that man
Should ever be condemned to think thou art,
(Though thou were never seen,) and still to seek thee? --
(To her.) Grieve not for this; -- our earthly lot is woe;
And we but bare our bosoms to the stroke,
The assassin's stroke, when we embrace a friend.
Say, do thou mourn for one as such supposed?

ANGELINA. O, no! I never yet so blessed was
As, even in fancy, to possess a friend.

EDWIN. And Love, -- Love has, perhaps, tormented thee?
Have to a fair-one ever opened thy soul?
Have loved? to be the jest, the scoff, the scorn,
The play-thing, of a heart insensible?
(She sighs deeply.) Thy only answer is of sighs and tears. --
O Heaven! and has sincerity again,
Again has truth been wounded?
(To her.) Have thou loved?
(She sighs more deeply, and appears greatly agitated.) Let her be thy scorn!
-- Ha! know thou not yet,
That air, not truth, is measure of affection?
-- Almighty Father! wherefore did thy wrath
Create me man? Was it to see all worth,
And every bright perfection of the mind,
Humbled before the arrogance of wealth?
False pride of birth? and tyranny of power? --
Know thou not this? -- The heart of man, himself,
These have beguiled; and, of his daughter's peace,
Have made her sire the assassin.

ANGELINA. (In tears, and lifting up her hands.) O, my God!

EDWIN. (Not noticing her emotion.) For these has woman, vain, and trifling
wretch! --
(All fond desires, and sweet affections shunned;
Each nobler passion of the soul cast off;)
Rejected love: deceived, -- destroyed, -- spurned it,
With acrimonious, with insulting scorn.

ANGELINA. (Starting up with wildness, clasping her hands, and pressing them to
her head; her hat, at the same time, falling off, and her long hair floating
down her back.) Gracious, gracious God! -- Spare me! -- O spare me!

EDWIN. What do I see? -- a woman?
(She sinks faintly into his arms.) It is herself!
She dies! -- Angelina! -- What shall I do? --
(Distractedly.) Soft! -- she revives! -- I Will throw me at her feet, --

ANGELINA. (Reviving.) Where am I? -- where?

EDWIN. (Apart.) Discovery might destroy my only hope.

ANGELINA. (More revived.) Where have I been?

EDWIN. (Supporting her.) Compose thyself, my Child!
Be calm; and tell me whence these transports wild;
And let me sooth the sorrows of thy soul.

ANGELINA. (With great emotion.) I can not speak!

EDWIN. (Tenderly.) Sit down. -- Be not disturbed.
I am, myself, the very child of woe,
And can disclose whence consolation springs.

ANGELINA. My tears prevent all utterance.

EDWIN. It Is well. --
Yes, let them flow. Composure flies afar
From where sit mute Despair and tearless Anguish;
But gently lights, where Grief her sacred dew
Sheds 'round the mourner. (A pause.)

ANGELINA. Thou art too kind, my Father. -- Ah! forgive
A wretch, whose feet, unhallowed, have disturbed
Thy cell serene of piety and peace.

EDWIN. (Apart.) Of peace? -- alas! (To her.) Do not condemn thyself:
The Power who rules is good; and our weak feet,
Though often he permit to stray, yet still
It Is but a devious path, to good conducting.

ANGELINA. I gain sweet hope and courage from the thought.
And sure compassion dwells within thy breast;
And thou will pity one who has been led
Astray by love; who seeks for peace, but finds
(The sole companion of her way) despair.

EDWIN. (Passionately.) Despair! -- Proceed, my child. -- (Apart.) What shall I
hear?

ANGELINA. How shall I speak of happy times, which, erst,
Saw me, the daughter of an ancient Earl,
With wealth's proud splendors, blandishments of ease,
And art's and nature's, copious stores, surrounded?
Adored, and sung, by every neighboring Chief;
While flattery, with music joined its voice;
Echoing along the winding banks of Tyne?
-- O blissful days of innocence and peace!
Early, how early lost!

EDWIN. Cease not, thou fair --

ANGELINA. Frequent and numerous were the suing crowds,
To the warm proffers of whose love, real,
Or yet pretended, ready ear I lent;
While my young mind, intoxicate, drank in
Delicious draughts of flattery.

EDWIN. Detest --

ANGELINA. Detestable indeed. -- Among the rest,
Most simply clad, but graced with virtue's guise;
Not armed with wealth or power, but full of worth;
Whose mind was wisdom's throne; a Youth was seen.
Ah! how my bosom panted at his sight!
Of love he never spoke; and with disdain,
Most noble, of the flatterer's art --

EDWIN. (Passionately extending his arms.) My An --
(Partly recollecting himself.) Speak! what of him!

ANGELINA. Amazement! What mean thou?
Know thou aught --?

EDWIN. (Recollecting himself, yet hesitating.) Pardon -- forgive me, daughter!
--
Be not alarmed! -- Go on -- I nothing meant!
The thoughtlessness of youth did cause my warmth.

ANGELINA. The musk-rose, which unfolds its tender flowers
Unto the early sun; the dew, which loves to hang
Its trembling lustres on the silver bell,
The lily of the vale; his purer mind
But faintly emulate. The rose, the dew,
With charms inconstant shine: their charms were his;
But, woe to me! mine was their constancy. --
Wretch that I am! I trifled with his love,
Scofft at his pain, who only lived for me!

EDWIN. (Agitated.) Haste thee --!

ANGELINA. Wretched woman! -- on what far shore.
What land unknown, murdered by thy disdain,
Has he, who loved thee, died? -- And died for thee?
(She walks about -- in extreme agitation -- Edwin regarding her fixedly, and
with an attitude evidencing the most entire and distressful concern.) But mine
the sorrow, mine the fault,
And well my life shall pay;
I Will seek the solitude he sought;
And stretch me where he lay.
And there, forlorn, despairing, hid,
I Will lay me down, and die;
'Twas so, for me, that Edwin did,
And so, for him, will I.

EDWIN. (Forcibly, and passionately, clasping her to his breast.) "Forbid it
Heaven!"

ANGELINA. (Endeavoring to disengage herself.) Man --

EDWIN. Turn, Angelina, ever dear,
My charmer, turn, to see
Thy own, thy long-lost, Edwin, here;
Restored to love and thee.
Thus let me hold thee to my heart,
And every care resign:
And shall we never, never part?
My life! my all that is mine?
No, never, from this hour to part;
We'll live and love so true,
The sigh that rends thy constant heart,
Shall break thy Edwin's too.
(They embrace.)
SCENE VI.
ETHELBERT, SIFRID, and BANDITTI, burst through the Wood, and advance hastily.
(Angelina shrieks faintly, and clings to Edwin -- who raises his staff, in
defense, -- while, with his left arm, he supports her.) EDWIN. ANGELINA.
ETHELBERT. SIFRID. BANDITTI. ETHELBERT. It Is she! and in another's arms! --
Hermit!
Release --

EDWIN. Robber! thou die if thou advance.

ETHELBERT. See not our numbers? -- Wherefore should I hurt thee?

EDWIN. Single, unarmed, I will defend my charge,
"Against a world in arms." (To Angelina.) Fear not, my love!
Heaven combats on the side of right.

ETHELBERT. (Angrily.) Old man,
Provoke me not!

EDWIN. Proud boy, away! (To her.) Be calm.
(To him.) Dare not! -- (To her.) My Angelina --

ANGELINA. (Faintly, and looking up to him.) O, forbear!
Risk not thy life!

ETHELBERT. (Fiercely.) Hermit, be brief. By heaven,
Naught shall detain her.

EDWIN. As thou valuest life,
Advance not.

SIFRID. Peace! let me be heard, my friends. --
Holy man, we come not here to injure thee:
Far be from us impiety so base.
Earl Ethelbert most dearly loves the maid
Whom thou withhold'st: and surely thou do know
Of what fierce quality and fiery power
Is love; and wilt forgive impetuous speech.
He seeks but to restore her to her friends,
And gain her hand: for, he does so adore,
Above all earthly good he prizeth it.
And why should thou detain? why not release,
And give, her to his wish? -- His noble soul
Disdains a force superior to employ. --
Be obstinate no more -- but yield --

EDWIN. (With great firmness.) Never.

ETHELBERT. I would not harm that reverend form, or dash,
Against the earth, thy sacred head;
But, were thou young, thy life should answer me,
For thy high insolence, old man!

EDWIN. (Throwing off his disguise.) Off! off!
Ye trappings of dishonorable peace!
Array of bondage, vestments of disgrace!
Hence, the monk's cowl, and hermit's staff! and now,
Come forth thou sword of ancestry heroic!
(To Ethelbert.) Villain! I dare thee!

ETHELBERT. (In great surprise.) Edwin!

EDWIN. (Fiercely advancing.) Edwin, Lord!

ETHELBERT. (With great emotion.) The savior of my life!
The murderer of my love!

EDWIN. Nay, hang not back!
We stand upon the perilous brink of death,
And one must surely leap.

ETHELBERT. (Greatly agitated.) Almighty God!
Whence? -- wherefore? -- why is this? -- My life! -- my love!
Gratitude! -- Passion! -- It can not -- can not be! --
(Walks distractedly.) Come to my breast each noble sentiment?
Arm, arm my soul, and make it all your own, --
That I -- (irresolutely) I can not do it -- (firmly) I will --
That I may spare his love, who saved my life.
(All stand in a posture of surprise.)
EDWIN. Why do we wait?

ETHELBERT. After ingratitude
So base, if with repentant heart I come,
Say, noble Edwin, can thou yet forgive me?
Angelina, daughter of heaven, can thou?

EDWIN. Whenever Earl Ethelbert becomes himself,
He shall not want a friend.

(Edwin drops his sword; they meet, and embrace* Angelina advances.) ETHELBERT.
Angelina,
I owe thee all: -- compassionate my woes;
Forget my errors; if thou can, forgive.

(Angelina places one hand in his -- the other in Edwin's.) ANGELINA. When
Edwin pardons, I can never refuse.

EDWIN. (Drawing her toward him.) My Angelina!

ETHELBERT. Excellent woman!
(To the Band.) My friends, one mystery remains to you.
It is to Edwin that I owe my life;
Rescued, at risk of his, from men whose souls
No mercy knew. Already had they stripped
And bound me; and their reared swords
Menaced my death; when, (a delivering spirit,)
He came, with lightning speed -- withering their powers.
Three fell beneath his hand; and, to the fourth,
Humbled, and full of promises, he gave
Life, freedom, and security. -- Bleeding,
Nor conscious of my state, me he conveyed
To where attention dwelt; and only left,
When, in returned strength, vigorous he saw me.
But -- O how! -- how shall I relate the rest?
Vainglorious, cruel, execrably base, --
In the remembrance, Sifrid, of thy woes,
Learn thou the shameful history of his.

SCENE VII.
Enter WALTER and EDRED, with other BANDITTI. EDWIN. ANGELINA. SIFRID.
ETHELBERT. WALTER. EDRED. BANDITTI. SIFRID. (To Walter, etc. as they enter.)
Happily arrived, my friends!

ETHELBERT. (To Sifrid.) Remember!

SIFRID. (To Ethelbert.) I do. -- (To the Banditti.) My friends! Hear all.
To my fond arms, Earl Ethelbert restores
The woman of my love; unto my care,
My fields paternal, and my earliest home.

WALTER. Sifrid!

SIFRID. Nay, more --

WALTER. Chief! think upon thy oath!
And how you are bound to us, and we to thee!
Think of the forfeit too!
(The Banditti draw their swords, and encircle Sifrid.)
SIFRID. (To the Band.) Deem not that I,
So used to blood and death, shall shrink with fear.
I know my life is forfeit; and that you,
As most shall please, may spare, or may exact it.
I have well weighed the terms, and place that life,
Now more than ever dear, upon the issue. --
If it shall please you to allow me chance,
I will unfold my purpose.

WALTER. (Looking round upon the Banditti, who nod their assent.) It Is granted.

SIFRID. For myself, I plead not. I will not strive
To move your pity for a wretch, who, long,
From all the valued, banished; finds, at length,
The happiness he lost, within his reach.
No! -- for yourselves, it is, I plead; for you,
By many union'd toils, to me endeared. --
It Is not to me alone, this noble Earl
(Pointing to Ethelbert.) Does offer good; he, generously, to you,
Extends his manors, and invites acceptance.

WALTER And is this thy mighty purpose? For this
Have thou forsworn thyself, and purchased death?
What charm, think thou, to tempt us from our woods,
Is there in vassalage? -- Are we not free?
And shall we stoop to bondage? (To the Band.) What say You --
Shall we be bond or free?

ALL BANDITTI. Free!

SIFRID. Cursed be he
Who shall attempt to make ye slaves. -- My friends!
Ye do mistake: -- Not vassalage, but wealth,
Is offered; -- not bonds, but independence. --
Think of the value of the proffered boon!
To your own hearts I speak; what has revenge
Of pleasure so unmixt, as rural ease,
And independent toil? -- Weigh, and compare,
This mighty mass of good, with that estate
In which you stand. -- Behold, by you arouz'd,
The assembled vengeance of the nation haste,
Wide desolation over your shades to pour.
What can you do to stem this torrent?

WALTER. Die.

SIFRID. And will thy death, the death of these brave men,
Confer such lading glory on your names,
As to have cast revenge aside, when penitence,
With outstretcht arms, implored you to forgive?
What glory can arise, from spurning life,
When ready pardon waits, when wealth invites,
And nature and humanity beseech?
Let me not plead in vain! O! as in scenes,
Where danger and where death hideous appeared,
Where rapine and destruction armed the hand,
I have been often your guide; let me still lead
Where peace does spread her shades, and where
Dwells sweet humanity! -- If not, -- it is well! --
Here strike! -- I bare my breast! the heart within
Beats only for your good. -- Here plunge your swords!
For, without Emma, never more shall joy
Visit the soul of Sifrid; never more
Will he seek for revenge in fields of death. --
Why do ye linger?

WALTER. (Sheathing his sword.) 'Twas man's oppression made me what I am;
Let it be due to man that I become
Such as I ought to be. --

EDRED. (Replacing his sword.) Walter has spoken.

SIFRID. Shall I then lead? and will you follow me?

ALL BAND. (Putting up their swords.) We will.

ETHELBERT. (To the Band.) My friends! this your resolve is sure
The very work of Heaven. (To all.) O! we will form
A little world of love; all wrongs forgot,
And all our errors: for all have errors;
Nor is the Libertine's, nor Robber's, life,
More false to nature than the Anchorite's.

EDWIN. All must, indeed, amend: all will amend.
Our energies, long time, so ill-directed,
Henceforth, with wondrous joy, shall bless the land:
While men shall say --

SIFRID. Not deeply, in their souls,
Could Vice her dark, polluted seat have fixed,
Who could, so easily, her chains cast off,
And bow their wills to Virtue's rightful sway.
Chorus. Now burst the shout of joy around,
And let the forest wide resound.
Peace, henceforth, forever reigns;
And laughing Plenty loads our plains:
Then burst the shout of joy around,
And let the forest wide resound.

SIFRID. Fierce Despair,

EDWIN. And frantic Grief,

BOTH. Find, at length, unhop'd relief:

ANGELINA. Wayward Beauty,

ETHELBERT. Brutal Lust,

BOTH. Learn to feel, and dare be just.
Chorus. Burst, then, the shout of joy around,
And let the forest wide resound.

ETHELBERT. The waters of the living fount,
Dashed in cascades, in columns tossed,
Nor nurse the root, nor swell the blade,
Wasted in foam, dispersed, and lost;
But, issuing in a gentle stream,
Through smiling meads, rejoicing stray;
Perennial flow; and fruits, and flowers,
And living verdure, mark their way:
Chorus. Loud burst the shouts of joy around,
And plains, and forests, wide resound.

EDWIN. The mineral, sleeping in the mine,
Decks not the board, nor glows in coin,
While droop the languid arts;
Refined, its power, wherever it flies,
Bids newborn wonders round arise,
New energy imparts;
Chorus. While burst the shouts of joy around,
And plains, and busy shores, resound.

ANGELINA. The meteor gilds the face of night,
The pilgrim trusts the faithless light,
And sinks in lonely death;
But, by the moon's serener ray,
Unharm'd, the wanderer speeds his way,
Over many an unknown heath;
Chorus. And swells the notes of joy around,
And bids the peaceful shades resound.

SIFRID. When, armed with terror, through the sky
The lightenings slash, the thunders roar;
When rush the tempests, from on high,
Howl over the sea, and sweep the shore;
The whelmed ship sinks, the cottage (...)
And ruin every heart appalls:
But, when the lively breezes blow,
And fan, with gentle gales, the land;
Or bid their airy currents flow,
And swell the sail that quits the strand;
Smooth glides the ship, the cottage smiles,
And gay content each heart beguiles;
Chorus. While bursts the shout of joy around,
And earth and heaven the strain resound.

END.

