THE SIREN, OR VOCAL ENCHANTRESS: BEING A COLLECTION OF THE NEWEST AND MOST
ADMIRED MISCELLANEOUS, -- PATHETIC, AND PASSIONATE, -- ANACREONTIC AND JOVIAL,
-- COMIC, INGENIOUS, AND WITTY, -- SEA, HUNTING, AND MASONIC SONGS. SELECTED
FROM THE MOST APPROVED SENTIMENTAL, HUMOROUS, AND INGENIOUS PUBLICATIONS;
INCLUDING ALL THE BEST SONGS OF Dibdin Edwin, etc.

WILMINGTON; PRINTED BY BONSAL AND NILES, IN MARKET-STREET 1797

JAMES WILSON,
Bookseller and Stationer, No. 5. opposite the Upper Market-House, Wilmington
(Del.) has for sale an extensive variety of small (...) for Country stores,
Chap-men, etc. among which are the following:

Arabian Nights, Academy of Compliments, Blossoms of mo^ity, Chesterfield's
Letters, Cock Robin, Children's Friend, Davidies, Dream-book, Death of Cain,
Death of Abel, Female Policy Detected, Funny Companion, Gentlemen's Pocket
Farrier, Jovial Songster, Jack Horner, Jacky Idle and Dicky Diligent, Journey
to New York, King Pippin, Letter-Writer, Life of Joseph, Mountain ^per, (...),
Philip ^uarl, Robinson Crusoe, Rusels seven Sermons, Rural Songster, Sinbad the
Sailor, Select Stories, Vocal Companion, Valentine (...) Orson, (...) Masters,
Seven Wise Mistresses, etc, etc.
THE SIREN: PART I. MISCELLANEOUS SONGS.

WILMINGTON: PRINTED FOR BONSAL and NILES AND JAMES WILSON.

THE SIREN: PART I. MISCELLANEOUS SONGS.
SONG. HENRY.
MY heart from my bosom would fly,
And wander, oh! wander afar,
Reflection bedews my sad eye,
For Henry is gone to the war.
Oh! ye winds, to my Henry bear
One drop, let it fall on his breast;
The tear, as a pearl he will wear,
And I in remembrance be blessed.
In vain smiles the glittering scene,
In vain blooms the roseat flower,
The sunshine of April's not seen,
I have only to do with the shower.
Oh, ye winds, etc.
Ye winds that have borne-Run away,
Restore my dear youth to my arms;
Restore me to sunshine and day --
It Is night till my Henry returns,
Oh, ye winds, etc
SONG. THE STOLEN KISS.
ON a mossy bank reclined,
Beauteous Chloe lay reposing;
Over her breast each amorous wind,
Wanton played, its sweets disclosing;
Tempted with the swelling charms,
Colin, happy swain, drew nigh her,
^oftly stole into her arms,
Laid his script and sheep-hook by her.
Over her downy panting breast,
His delighted singers roving,
To her lips his lips he pressed,
In the ecstacy of loving;
Chloe, wakened with his kiss,
Pleased, yet frowning, to conceal it;
Cried, true lovers share the bliss,
Why then, Colin, would you steal it?
SONG. THE KISS REPAID.
CHLOE, by that borrowed kiss,
I, alas, am quite undone;
'Twas so sweet, so fraught with bliss,
Thousands will not pay that one,
Lest the debt should break your heart,
Roguish Chloe smiling cries,
Come, a thousand then in part,
For the present shall suffice.
SONG. THE IMAGINARY KISS.
WHEN Fanny I saw, as she tripp'd over the gree^
Fair, blooming, soft, artless and kind;
Fond love in her eyes, wit and sense in her mein,
And warmness with modesty joined:
Transported with sudden amazement I stood,
Fast rivetted down to the place;
Her delicate shape, easy motion, I viewed,
And wandered over every grace.
Ye Gods! what luxuriance of beauty, I cry,
What raptures must dwell in her arms;
On her lip I could feast, on her breast I could die,
O, Fanny, how sweet are thy charms:
Whilst thus in idea my passion I fed,
Soft transports my senses invade;
Young Damon stepped up, with the substance he (...).
And left me to kiss the dear shade.
SONG. THE BRUNETTE.
MY heart's soft emotions admit no disguise,
To cheat the poor nymph of the plain;
For the passion I feel is confessed by my eyes,
And love shows the wound of the swain:
And such were my plaints when I happily met
The arch'hazel eyes of my lovely Brunette.
Would you know all the magic that lives in her mein,
By which my fond heart s^h s^won;
Go take (like the Grecian) each beauty that is seen,
And comprise all their graces in one:
Then wonder, like me, at the pleasure fraught Be^,
And wear the soft chains of the lovely Brunette.
The wandering kidlings that sport on the hills,
Leave their browsing to list to her lay;
She charms the swift course of the murmuring rills,
And arrests the bright chariot of day:
The wind shops, (...) to list to my Bet,
And gratefully ten the accomplished Brunette.
SONG. MELISSA.
YE rivers so limpid and clear,
Who reflect, as in cadence you flow,
All the beauties that vary the year;
All the flowers on your margins that grow:
How blessed on your banks could I dwell,
Were Melissa the pleasure to share,
And teach your sweet echoes to tell
With what fondness I dote on the fair.
Ye harvests (...) wave in the breeze,
As far as the view can extend!
Ye mountains, umbrageous with trees,
Whose tops so majestic ascend;
Your landscape what joy to survey,
Were Melissa with me to admire;
Then the harvest would glitter, how gay
How majestic the mountains aspire.
In pensive regret whilst I rove,
The fragrance of flowers to inhale;
Or watch from the pasture the grove,
Each music that floats on the gale:
Alas! the delusion how vain!
Nor odours nor harmony please
A heart agonizing with pain,
Which tries every posture for ease.
If anxious to flatter my woes,
Or the languor of absence to cheer,
Her breath I would catch in the rose,
Or her voice in the nightingale heart;
To cheat my despair of its prey,
What object her charms can assume?
How harsh is the nightingale's lay,
How insipid the rose's perfume?
Ye zephyrs that visit my fair,
Ye sun beams around her that play,
Does her sympathy dwell on my care,
Does she number the hours of my stay?
First perish ambition and wealth,
First perish all else that is dear,
Ere one sigh should escape her by stealth,
Ere my absence should cost her one tear.
When, when shall her beauties once more,
This desolate bosom surprise?
Ye fates, the blessed moment restore
When I bask'd in the beams of her eyes;
When, with sweet emulation of heart,
Our kindness we struggled to show;
But the more that we strove to impart,
We felt it more ardently glow.
SONG. THE VIRGIN'S FIRST LOVE.
HOW sweet is the joy when our blushes impart,
The youthful affection that glows in the heart,
When prudence and duty and reason approve,
The timid delight of the virgin's first love.
But if the fond virgin be destined to feel
A passion she must in her bosom conceal,
Let a stern parent's anger the flame disapprove,
Where then is the delight of the virgin's first love?
(...) stolen the glance by which love is confessed,
If the sigh when half-heav'd be with terror suppressed;
If the whisper of passion cold caution must move,
Where then is the delight of the virgin's first love.
Of if her fond bosom with tenderness sighs
For a lover, who ceases her passion to prize,
Forgetting the vows with which warmly he strove.
To gain the soft charms of the virgin's first love.
If, tempted by interest he ventures to shun
The gentle affections his tenderness won,
With another through passion's wild mazes to rove --
Where Is then the delight of the virgin's first love?
See her eye, when the tale of his treach'ry she heart,
Now beaming with scorn, and now glist'ning with tears^
How great is the anguish she is fated to prove!
Farewell the delight of the virgin's first love.
No more sweet emotion shall glow on her cheek,
But paleness her bosom's keen agony speak,
And dimmed by affliction that eye shall now prove,
Which spoke the mild warmth of the virgin's first love.
And now, sad companion of mental distress,
Disease steals upon her in health's flattering dress;
Sure the blush on that cheek every fear must remove
Ah! no, it is the effect of the virgin's first love.
(...) the color that glows on her check,
Her eye boasts ^lustre no language can speak;
Yet, vain are the hopes these appearances prove,
Fond parent! they spring from the virgin's first love.
And now, not unconscious that death hovers near,
On her face see the smiles of contentment appear;
No struggle, no groan, his dread summons to prove,
He ends the fond dream of the virgin's first love.
Ye nymphs! ere your bosoms with tenderness heave
Let your prudent choice a glad sanction receive,
Lest hopeless affection's keen anguish you prove,
And Hymen never smile on the virgin's first love.
But chiefly beware that the much (...)
Is wholly devoted to you and to truth,
Lest the anguish of slighted affection you prove,
And death end the dream of the virgin's first love.
SONG. THE LASS OF RICHMOND-HILL.
ON Richmond-hill there lives a lass,
More blight than May Day morn;
Whose charms all other maids surpass,
A rose without a thorn:
This lass so neat, with smiles so sweet,
Has won my right good will;
I Would crowns resign, to call her mine,
Sweet lass of Richmond-hill.
Ye zephyrs gay that fan the air,
Or wanton through the grove,
O whisper to my charming fair,
I die for her I love.
This lass, etc.
How happy will the shepherd be,
Who calls this nymph his own,
O may her smiles be fixed on me,
Mine Is fixed on her alone.
This lass, etc.
SONG. PEGGY PERKINS.
LET bards elate,
Of Sue or Kate,
And Moggy take their fill^
And pleased rehearse,
In jingling verse,
The lass of Richmond-hill-o:
A lass more bright,
My amorous slight,
Impelled by love's fond working^
Shall loudly sing,
Like any thing.
Some men compare
The favorite fair
To every thing in nature,
Her eyes divine
Are suns that shine,
And so on with each ^eature:
Leave, leave, ye fools,
These backney'd r^les,
And all such subtle quickings;
Sun, moon, and stars,
Are all a farce,
Compared with Peggy Perkins.
Each twanging dart
That through my heart
From Cupid's how has morric'^.
Were it a tree
Why I should be
For all the world a forest:
Five hundred fops,
Witth shrugs and hops,
And (...), and smiles, and smirking^
Most willing she
Would ^are for me --
Oh! what a Peggy Perkins.
SONG. THE SCOLD.
THE plague of one's life
Is surely a wise;
Who still ^^renting of evil:
F^ ^ning till night,
All is wrong, nothing right,
A scold is ^re worse (...) the devil.
When I first gave a kiss,
I thought that (...)
Was centered in sweet pretty Mary;
But now I am wed,
O! I wish I was dead,
Her temper I find the contrary.
Let me say what I will,
Her tongue will not lay still,
Like the clack of a mill is it going;
If I stop up my ears,
In a rage she appears,
And more hot then her passion is glowing.
If I go, or I stay,
At home or away,
Each serves her alike for a riot;
Though a foe to all strife,
Such a devil's my wife,
(...) never will let me be quiet.
SONG.
YE fair married dames, who so often deplore
That a lover once blessed is a lover no more;
Attend to my courssel, nor blush to be taught,
That prudence must cherish what beauty has caught.
The bloom of your cheek, and the glance of your eye,
Your roses and Iillies may make the men sigh;
Your roses Iillies, and sighs pass away,
And passion will die as your beauties decay.
Use the man that you wed like your favorite guittar,
Though music in both, they are both apt to jar;
How tuneful and soft from a delicate touch,
Not handled too roughly, nor played on too much!
The sparrow and linnet will feed from your hand,
Grow tame by your kindness, and come at command;
Exert with your husband the same happy skill,
For hearts, like your birds, may be tamed to your will.
Be gay and good humored, complying and kind,
Turn the chief of your care from your face to your mind;
It Is thus that a wife may her conquest improve,
And Hymen shall rivet the fetters of LOVE.
SONG TWEED SIDE
WHAT beauties does Flora disclose!
How sweet are her smiles upon Tweed!
But Mary's, still sweeter than those,
Both nature and fancy exceed.
No daisy nor sweet blushing rose,
Nor all the gay flowers of the field,
Nor Tweed gliding gently through those,
Such beauty and pleasure can yield.
The warblers are heard in each grove,
The linnet, the lark, and the thrush,
The blackbird, and sweet cooing dove,
With music enchant every bush.
Come let us go forth to the mead.
Let us see the primroses spring;
We'll lodge in some village on Tweed,
And love while the feathered folks sing.
How does my love pass the long day?
Does Mary not tend a few sheep?
Do they never carelessly stray
While happily she lies asleep?
Tweed's murmurs should lull her to rest;
Kind nature indulging my bliss,
To relieve the soft pains of my breast
I Would steal an ambrosical kiss.
It Is she does the virgins excel,
No beauty with her can compare;
Love's graces all round her do dwell,
She Is fairest where thousands are fair.
Say, charmer, where do thy flocks stray?
Oh! tell me at noon where they feed:
Shall I seek them on sweet winding Tay,
Or the pleasanter banks of the Tweed?
SONG. THE CHOICE.
I AM told by the wise ones, a maid I will die,
They say I Am too nice, but the charge I deny;
I know but too well how the time flies along,
That we live but few years, and fewer are young;
But I hate to be cheated, and never will buy
Whole ages of sorrow for moments of joy;
I never will wed 'till a youth I can find,
Where the friend and the lover are equally joined.
No pedant, though learned, or foolishly gay,
Or laughing because he has nothing to say;
To every fair-one obliging and free,
But never be loving to any but me --
In whose tender bosom my soul can confide,
Whose kindness can soothe me, whose counsels can guide,
Such a youth I would marry, if such I could find,
Where the friend and the lover are equally joined.
From such a dear lover as here I describe,
No dangers should fright me, nor millions should bribe;
But until this astonishing creature I know,
I am single and happy, and still will be so;
You may laugh, and suppose I am nicer than wise,
But I Will shun the dull fop, the pert coxcomb despise;
Nor ere will I marry 'till the youth I can find,
Where the friend and the lover are equally joined.
SONG.
AS the other day milking I sat in the vale,
Young Damon came up to address his soft tale,
So sudden I started, and gave him a frown,
For he frightened my cow, and my milk was kicked down.
Lord bless me! says I, what a-deuce can you mean,
To come thus upon me, unthought of unseen!
I never will approve of the love you pretend,
^line
I little thought now he would his passion advance,
But pretty excuses made up the mischance:
He begged a kind kiss, which I gave him I vow,
And I laid my own self, all the fault on the cow.
How many ways love can the bosom invade!
His bait proved too strong, alas! for a maid:
He hinted that wedlock was what he would be at,
But I thought it was best to say nothing of that.
I flutter all over whenever he comes nigh,
For if he should press, I should surely comply;
And never shall be angry, my heart itself tells,
Though he flings down my milk, or does any thing else.
SONG. PLATO'S ADVICE.
SAYS Plato why should man be vain?
Since bounteous heaven has made him great,
Why looks he with insolent disdain
On those undeck'd with wealth or state?
Can splendid robes, or beds of down,
Or costly gems that deck the fair,
Can all the glories of a crown,
Give health, or ease the brow of care?
The sceptered king, the burdened slave,
The humble, and the haughty, die;
The rich, the poor, the base, the brave,
In dust, without distinction, lie?
Go, search the tombs where monarchs rest,
Who once the greatest titles bore;
The wealth and glory they possessed,
And all their honors are no more.
So glides the meteor through the sky,
And spreads along a gilded train;
But, when it is short-lived beauties die,
Dissolves to common air again.
So it is with us, my jovial souls! --
Let friendship reign while here we stay;
Let Us crown our joys with flowing bowls, --
When Jove commands we must away.
SONG. IF I EVER BECOME PARSON.
IF I ever become Parson, for so I Am inclined
May I have a snug benefice pat to my mind,
Large enough to admit of a wife at my table,
A cow in my yard, and a nag, in my stable;
May my flock never embroil me in quarrel or strife,
In good humor may I live all the days of my life,
In good humor may I live all the days of my life,
And die before tired of myself or my wife.
May my first fruits, and tithes, make me always appear
With a clear, though coarse, shirt all the days of the year;
For of all living things not excepting a swine,
The beastliest of beasts is a beastly Divine.
May I live etc.
With a friend or too near me, of equal degree,
As like me in all things, as pea is like pea,
Who, on pudding, or joint, contented could dine.
With a glass of old port, or October divine.
May etc.
With a quarto or two of prime choice on my shelf,
To retire to whenever I Am tired with myself,
With a good natured muse to converse with at pleasure,
To wrap me in rhyme, or inspire me with measure.
May etc.
To enjoy what I have without wishing for more,
Since contentment with little, is doubling one's store,
And when I Am no more, may my successor say,
He Is gone, and I wish I could live the same way.
For his flock never embroiled him in quarrel or strife,
In good humor he lived all the days of his life,
In good humor he lived all the days of his life,
And died before tired of himself or his wife.
SONG. MY FRIEND AND PITCHER.
THE wealthy fool with gold in store,
Will still defire to grow richer,
Give me but health, I ask no more,
My charming girl, my friend and pitcher,
My friend so rare, my girl so fair,
With such, what mortal can be richer;
Give me but these, a fig for care,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
From morning sun I Would never grieve,
To toil a hedger or a ditcher,
If that, when I came home at eve,
I might enjoy my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
Though fortune ever shuns my door,
I know not what can thus bewitch her;
With all my heart can I be poor,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
SONG. THE DEATH OF GENERAL WOLF.
IN a mouldering cave, where the wretched retreat,
Britannia ^at wasted with care;
She wept for her WOLF, then exclaimed against fate;
And gave herself up to despair;
The walls of her cell were insculptur'd around
With the exploits of her favorite son;
And even the dust as it lay on the ground,
Was engraved with the deeds he had done,
The sire of the gods, from his chrystiline throne,
Beheld this disconsolate dame;
And moved with her fate he sent Mercury down,
And these were tidings that came,
Britannia forbear, not a sigh nor a tear,
For thy Wolf so deservedly loved.
Your grief shall be changed into triumphs of joy,
For thy Wolf is not dead, but removed.
The sons of the earth, the proud giants of old,
Have broke from their darksome abodes,
And such is the news as in heaven it is told
They are marching to war with the gods;
A council was held in the chamber of Jove,
Where they came to this final decree,
That Wolf should be called to the armies above.
And the charge was entrusted to me.
To the plains of Quebec with these orders I flew:
He begged for a moment's delay.
He cried Oh! forbear, let me victory hear,
And then thy command I Will obey;
With a dark'ning film I encompassed his eyes,
And conveyed him away in an urn;
Lest the fondness he bore for his own native shore
Should persuade him again to return.
SONG. YOUNG COLIN.
FROM morning till night, and wherever I go,
Young Colin pursues me, though still I say No,
Ye matrens experienced inform me, I pray.
In a point that is so critical, what shall I say?
Soft sonnets he makes on my beauty and wit,
Such praises a bosom that is tender must hit;
He vows he will love me for ever and aye;
In points that is so critical, what can I say?
He brought me a garland, the sweetest ever seen,
And saluting me, called me his heart's little queen:
In my breast, like a bird, I found something play,
Instruct a young virgin then what she must say.
But vain my petition, you heed not my call,
But leave me unguarded to stand or to fall;
No more I Will solicit, no longer I Will pray,
Let prudence inform me in what I shall say.
When next he approaches, with care in his eye,
If he asks me to wed, I vow I Will comply,
At church he may (...) take me for ever and aye,
And I warrant you then I shall know what to say.
SONG. I WOULD RATHER BE EXCUSED.
RETURNING from the fair one eve,
Across you verdant plain,
Young Harry said he would see me home;
A tight a comely swain.
He begged I would a fairing take,
And would not be refused;
Then asked a kiss, I blushed and cried,
I Would rather be excused.
You're coy, said he, my pretty maid,
I mean no harm I swear;
Long time I have in secret sighed
For you my charming fair:
But if my tenderness offend,
And if my love's refused,
I Will leave you -- what, alone? cried I,
I Would rather be excused.
He pressed my hand and on we walked,
He warmly urged his suit;
But still to all he said I was
Most obstinately mute.
At length, got home, he angry cried,
My fondness is abused;
Then die a maid -- indeed, said I,
I Would rather be excused.
SONG. PADDY BULL'S EXPEDITION.
WHEN I took my departure from Dublin's sweet town,
And for England's ownself through the seas I did plow;
For four long days I was tossed up and down,
Like a quid of chewed hay in the throat of a cow;
While afraid off the deck in the ocean to slip, sir,
I clung like a cat, fast hold for to keep, sir;
Round about the big post that grows out of the ship, sir,
O I never thought more to sing langolee.
Thus standing stock still, all the while I was moving,
Till Irelands coast I saw clean out of sight;
Myself the next day a true Irishman proving,
When leaving the ship on the shore for to light;
As the board they put out was too narrow to quarter,
The first step I took was in such a totter,
That I jumped upon land, to my neck up in water;
O that was no time to sing langolee.
But as sharp cold and hunger I never yet knew more,
And my stomach and bowels did grumble and growl,
I thought the best way to get each in good humor,
Was to take out, the wrinkles of both, by my soul;
So I went to a house where roast meat they provide, sir,
With a whirligig, which up the chimney I spied, sir,
And which grinds all their smoke into powder besides, sir --
It Is true as I am now singing langolee.
Then I went to the landlord of all the stage coaches,
That set sail for London each night of the week,
To whom I obnoxiously made my approaches,
As a birth aboard one I was come for to seek;
But as for the inside, I Would no cash in my casket,
Says I, with your leave, I make bold, Sir, to ask it,
When the coach is gone off, pray what time goes the basket?
For then I can ride and sing langolee.
When, making his mouth up -- "the basket, says he, sir,
Goes after the coach a full hour or two;"
Very well, Sir, says I, that is the thing then for me, sir,
But the (...) a word that he told me was true;
For though one went before, and the other behind sir,
They set off cheek by jole at the very same time, sir,
So the same day, at night, I set out by moonshine, sir,
All alone by myself singing langolee.
O long life to the moon, for a brave noble creature,
That serves us for lamplight each night in the dark!
While the sun only shines in the day, which, by nature,
Wants no light at all -- as you all may remark;
But as for the moon, by my soul I Will be bound, sir,
It would save the whole nation a great many pounds, sir,
To subscribe for to light him up all the year round, sir,
Or I Will never sing more about Langolee.
SONG.
THOUGH Leixlip is proud of its close shady bowers,
Its clear falling waters and murmurring cascades,
Its groves of fine myrtles, its beds of sweet flowers,
Its lads so well d^ss'd, and its neat pretty maids;
As each his own village must still make the most of,
In praise of dear Carton I hope I Am not wrong:
Dear Carton! containing what kingdoms may boast of!
It Is Norah, dear Norah! the theme of my song.
Be gentlemen fine, with their spurs and nice boots on,
Their horses to start on the Curragh of Kildare;
Or dance at a ball with their Sunday new suits on,
Laced waistcoat, white gloves, and their nice powdered hair;
Poor Pat, while so blessed in his mean humble station,
For gold or for acres he never shall long;
One sweet smile can give him the wealth of a nation,
From Norah, dear Norah, the theme of my song.
A SONG FOR ENGLISHMEN. THE TAXES.
HARD, hard are the times, is the cry, it is no wonder;
For with taxes we are so most vilely kept under:
What with taxes on this thing, and taxes on 'tother,
Its strange how we live, and bring both ends together.
Derry down, down, down, derry down.
From the crown of the head to the soles of the feet,
We are taxed in all things so wondrous complete,
Bedaubed with stamps, as with bile^ was old Job,
We had need of his patience to bear with the load.
Derry down, etc.
The hat that defends us from cold and from rain,
And the gloves that we wear for a purpose the same,
Even the shoes on our feet, which we cannot well want,
The leather they are made of must pay for the stamp.
Derry down, etc.
For the light from the heavens we are forced to pay,
Else from our apartments Pit shuts out the day,
Then we grovel in darkness like moles in the ground,
For unless we pay for it no light's to found.
Derry down, etc.
If we light up a candle, it is all the same,
For there Billy the minister's with us gain;
There is no escaping his merciless paws,
For he stops every gap by his new excise laws.
Derry down etc.
If our lives we would spend in a bachelor state,
We Are taxed because we are in want of a mate,
If our minds they should alter, and we take a spouse,
The king must be paid before we pay our vows.
Derry down, etc.
When married, although perhaps little to spare,
Yet one still wishes children that little to heir,
Should heaven be pleased with our wish to comply,
And spouse be laid up in bed for to cry.
^
Be It boy, or be it girl, to him it is the same,
He must have his quota e're it get a name;
Although never a groat over to make our friends happy
It Is all the same ^ing to this hard taxing chappie.
Derry down, etc.
There is no door left open through which we can go,
No crevice nor corner, but what he does know;
At the gates of grim death he has set up his pole,
And there is none enters there but their friends must pay toll.
Derry down, down, down derry down.
DUET. -- POOR. SOLDIER.
Pat. A ROSE-TREE full in bearing,
Had sweet flowers fair to see;
One rose beyond comparing,
For beauty attracted me.
Though eager once to win it.
Lovely, blooming, fresh, and gay,
I find a canker in it,
And now throw it far away.

Norah. How fine this morning early,
The sun shining clear and bright;
So late I loved you dearly,
Though lost now each fond delight.
The clouds seem big with showers,
Sunny beams no more are seen, --
Farewell ye happy hours,
Your falsehood has changed the scene.

Both repeat. The clouds seem big, etc. to the end.

DEAR IS MY NATIVE VALE.
DEAR is my little native vale,
The ring-dove builds and warbles there;
Close by my cot she tells her tale
To every passing villager.
The squirrel leaps from tree to tree
And shells his nuts at liberty.
In orange groves and myrtle bowers,
That breathe a gale of fragrance round,
I charm the fairy-footed hours
With my loved lute's romantic sound;
Or crowns of living laurel weave
For those that win the race at eve.
The shepherd's horn, at break of day,
The balled danced in twilight glade;
The canzonet and roundelay,
Sung in the silent green wood shade.
These simple joys that never fail,
Shall bind me to my native vale.
SONG -- ROSINA.
WHEN bidden to the wake or fair,
The joy of each free-hearted swain,
Till Phoebe promised to be there,
I loiter'd last of all the train.
If chance some fairing caught my eye, --
The ribbon gay, or silken glove!
With eager haste I ran to buy,
For what is gold compared to love?
My poesy on her bosom placed,
Could Harry's sweeter scents exhale;
Her auburn locks my ribbon graced,
And fluttered in the wanton gale.
With scorn she hears me now complain,
Nor can my rustic presents move:
Her heart prefers a richer swain,
And gold, alas! has banished love
SONG. THE JEW BROKER.
YE jobbers, underwriters, ye tribe of pen and ink,
Wid my fall lal de ra, etc.
Who on the alley's gay parterre your tea and coffee drink,
Wid my fall lal de ra, etc.
Rattling up your yellow boys, come hither at my call,
I Am buyer and I Am seller, and can sarve you all.
Wid my fall lal de ra, etc.
Ye bulls, ye bears, ye lame ducks, and all the waddling crew,
It 'twas not for us smouchers, I don't know what you would do,
If ever you want shecurities, it is we dat find good pail,
Our friends have got de tarnish, -- but den they shometimes fail.
Wid my fall, etc.
If nobleman have lost race-horse, and all their money spent,
My heart it melts, I draw de pond, I lend for cent per cent;
But if a life you would ensure dats old and crazy grown,
De ways and means I Will let you know, to get de business done.
Wild my fall, etc.
Ye captains and ye colonels, ye jointer'd widows all,
To little Isaac come when your stocks begin to fall;
I Will put ye in a method once more to raise de cash,
I Will bye into your sinking-funds -- dat you may cut a flash.
Wid my fall, etc.
Ye parsons wid good livings, ye courtiers wid good place,
Advice I Will give you cratis, and tink upon your case;
I dare ish poshibility, for you I Will raise de dust, --
But den you must excuse me if I sarve myself de first.
Wid my fall, etc.
I give advice to every tribe but physic and de law,
But they out-wit the Jews themselves, for bills at sight they draw:
We, when we lend our monish, run some risk -- though it is but small, --
But they take all de monish, and run no risk at all.
Wid my fall, etc.
ON FRIENDSHIP.
THE world, my dear Myra, is full of deceit,
And friendship's a jewel we seldom can meet;
How strange does it seem, that in searching around,
This source of content is so rare to be found.
O friendship! thou balm and rich sweetner of life,
Kind parent of ease, and composer of strife;
Without thee, alas! what are riches and power,
But empty delusion, the joys of an hour?
How much to be prized and esteemed is a friend,
On whom we may always with safety depend;
Our joys when extended, will always increase,
And griefs, when divided, are hushed into peace.
When fortune is smiling, what crowds will appear.
Their kindness to offer, and friendship sincere;
Yet change but the prospect, and point out distress,
No longer to court you they eagerly press.
SONG -- FARMER.
A FLAXEN-headed cow boy,
As simple as may be,
And next a merry plough boy,
I whistled over the lea:
But now a saucy footman,
I strut in worsted lace,
And soon I Will be a butler,
And wag my jolly face.
When steward I Am promoted,
I Will snip a tradesman's bill,
My master's coffers empty,
My pockets for to fill:
When lolling in my chariot,
So great a man I Will be,
You Will forget the little plough-boy
That whistled over the lea.
I Will buy votes at elections,
But when I Have made the pelf,
I Will stand poll for parliament,
And then vote in myself:
Whatever's good for me, sir,
I never will oppose;
When all my AYES are sold of,
Why, then I Will sell my NOES.
I Will joke, harangue, and paragraph,
With speeches charm the ear,
And when I Am tired on my legs,
Then I Will (...) nown a peer.
In court or city honor,
So great a man (...) be,
You Will forget the little plough-boy
That whistled over the lea.
SONG. ALONE BY THE LIGHT OF THE MOON.
THE day is departed and round spom the cloud,
The moon in her beauty appears,
The voice of the Nightingale warbles aloud,
The music of love in our ears:
Maria, appear now the season's so sweet
While the beat of the heart is in tune,
The time is so tender for lovers to meet,
Alone by the light of the moon.
I cannot, when present, unfold what I feel;
I sigh -- can a lover do more?
Her name to the shepherds I never reveal,
Yet I think of her all the day over,
Maria my love, do you long for the grove?
Do you sigh for an interview soon?
Does ever a kind thought run on me as you rove,
Alone by the light of the moon.
Your name from the shepherds whenever I hear,
My bosom is all in a glow;
Your voice when it vibrates so sweet through mine ear,
My heart thrills -- my eyes overflow.
Ye powr's of the sky, will your bounty divine,
Indulge a fond lover his boon?
Shall heart spring to heart, and Maria be mine,
Alone by the light of the moon.
SONG. POOR MADELON.
CAN you to the battle march away,
And leave me here complaining.
I am sure 'twill break my heart to stay,
When you are gone campaining
CHORUS.
Ah! no, ah! no, poor Madelon,
Will never quit her rover,
Ah! no, Ah! no, poor Madelon,
Will go with you all the world over.
Cheer, cheer my love you shall not grieve,
A soldier true you will find me,
I could not have the heart to leave
My little girl behind me.
Ah! no, Ah! no, etc.
Can you to the battle go,
To woman's fear a (...)!
No fears my breast shall ever know,
But when my love's in danger.
Ah! no, Ah! no, etc.
Then let the world jog as it will,
Let all our friends forsake us,
We both shall be as happy still,
As love and war can make us,
Ah! no, Ah! no, etc.
SONG. DEATH OR VICTORY
HARK the din of distant war,
How noble is the clangour.
Pale death as^cuds his ebon care,
Clad in terrific anger.
A doubtful fate the soldier tries,
Who joins the gallant quarrel;
Perhaps on the cold ground he lies,
No wife no friend to close his eyes,
Though nobly mourned; perhaps returned,
He Is crowned with victory's laurel.
How many who disdaing fear,
Ruth on the desperate duty,
Shall claim the tribute of the tear,
That dims the eye of beauty.
A doubtful fate the soldier tries
Who joins the gallant quarrel,
Perhaps on the cold ground he lies,
No wife no friend, no close his eyes,
Though no nobly mourned; perhaps returned,
He Is crowned with victory's laurel.
What noble fate can fortune give,
Renown shall tell the story,
If we should fall, but if we live
'We live our country's glory.
It Is true a doubtful fate be tries,
Who joins the gallant quarrel;
Perhaps on the cold ground he lies,
No wife no friend to close his eyes,
Though nobly mourned; perhaps returned,
He Is crowned with victory's laurel.
SONG. THE SOLDIER'S ADIEU.
ADIEU, adieu, my only life,
My honor calls me from thee;
Remember you are a soldier's wife,
Those tears but ill become thee.
What though by duty I am called,
Where thundering cannons rattle,
Where valor's self might stand appalled;
When on the wings of thy dear love,
Chorus.
To heaven above thy fervent orisons are flown,
The tender prayer thou putt'st up there
Shall call a guardian angel down,
To watch me in the battle.
My safety ^y fair truth shall be,
As sword and buckler serving,
My life shall be more dear to me
Because of thy preserving,
Let peril come, let horror threat,
Let thundering cannons rattle,
I fearless seek the conflict's heat,
Assured when on the the wings of love,
To heaven above, etc,
Enough, with that benignant smile
Some kindred god insp^'d thee,
Who saw thy bosom void of guile,
Who wondered and admired thee;
I go, assured my life adieu,
Though thundering cannons rattle,
Though murdering carnage stalk in view,
When on the wings of thy true love,
To heaven above, etc.
SONG.
ERE around the huge oak that o'ershadows you mill,
The fond ivy had dared to entwine;
Ere the church was a ruin that nods on the hill,
Or the rook built his nest on the pine.
Could I track the time -- a fair distant date,
Since my forefathers toiled in this field:
And the farm I now hold on your honor's estate,
Is the same that my grandfather tilled.
He dying bequeathed to his sons a good name,
Which unsullied descended to me,
For my child I Have preserved it unblemished with shame,
And it still from a spot shall be free.
SONG. THE CAPTIVE.
OH! think on my fate, once I freedom enjoyed.
Was as happy, as happy could be! --
But pleasure is fled! even hope is destroyed!
A captive, alas! on the sea:
I taken by the foe -- 'twas the fiat of fate,
To tear me from her I adore!
When thought brings to mind my once happy state,
I sigh! while I tug at the oar.
Hard, hard is my fate! oh how galling my chain!
My life's steered by misery's chart;
And though against my tyrants I scorn to complain,
Tears gush forth to ease my full heart:
I disdain even to shrink, though I feel the sharp lash;
Yet my heart bleeds for her I adore!
While around me, the unfeeling billows will dash,
I sigh! and still tug at the oar.
How fortune deceives! I had pleasure in tow,
The port where she dwelt we'd in view;
But the wished nuptial morn was o'er-clouded with woe,
And, dear Anna! I was hurried from you;
Our shallop was boarded, and I born away.
To behold my dear Anna no more!
But despair wastes my spirits, my form feels decay!
He sighed -- and expired at the ear!
SONG. COLIN AND LUCY.
ADIEU to the village delights,
Which lately my fancy enjoyed;
No longer the country invites,
To me all its pleasures are void:
Adieu thou sweet health breathing hill;
Thou can not my comfort restore;
For ever adieu my dear vill,
My Lucy, alas! is no more.
She, she was the cure of my pain,
My blessing, my honor, my pride,
She never gave me cause to complain,
'Till that fatal day when sire died:
Her eyes, that so beautiful shone,
Are closed for ever in sleep;
And mine, since my Lucy is gone,
Have nothing to do but to weep.
Could my tears the bright angel restore,
Like a fountain, they never should ^ease;
But Lucy, alas! is no more,
And I am a stranger to peace:
Let me copy, with fervor devout,
The virtues that glowed in her heart;
Then soon, when life's sand is run out,
We shall meet again never to part.
SONG. FROM SAPPHO.
BLESSED as the immortal gods is he,
The youth who fondly sits by thee,
And hears and sees thee all the while,
Softly speak, and softly smile!
'Twas this deprived my soul ofrest,
And raised such tumults in my breast;
For while I gazed, in transport tossed,
My breath was gone, my voice was lost.
My bosom glowed, a subtle flame
Ran quick through all my vital frame:
Over my dun eyes a darkness hung.
My ears with hollow murmurs rung.
In dewy damps my limbs were chilled,
My blood with gentle horrors thrilled;
My feeble pulse forgot to play,
I fainted, sunk, and died away.
SONG. PARODY ON THE ABOVE,
DRUNK as a dragon sure is he,
The youth that dines or sups with thee.
And sees and hears thee full of sun,
Loudly laugh, and quaintly pun.
'Twas this first made me love my dose,
And raised such pimples on my nose;
For while I filled to every toast,
My health was gone, my senses lost.
I found the claret and champaign
Inflame my blood, and mad my brain;
The toast fell fault'ring from my tongue.
I hardly heard the the catch I sung.
I felt my gorge with sickness rise;
The candles danced before my eyes:
My sight grew dim, the room turned round;
I tumbled senseless on the ground.
SONG.
FROM the man that I love, though my heart I disguise
I will freely describe the wretch I despise;
And if he has the sense but to balance a straw,
He will sure take a hint from the picture I draw.
And he if he has sense, etc.
A wit without sense, without fury a beau;
Like a parrot he chatters, and struts like a crow;
A peacock in pride, in grimace a babcon;
In courage a hind, in conceit a gascoon.
A peacock, etc.
As a vulture rapacious, in falsehood a fox;
Inconstant as waves, and unfeeling as rocks;
As a tiger ferocious, perverse as a hog;
In mischief an ape, and in fawning a dog.
As a tiger, etc.
In a word, to sum up all his talents together,
His heart is of lead, and his brain is of feather:
Yet if he has sense but to balance a straw,
He will sure take a hint from the picture I draw,
Yet if he has sense to balance a straw, etc.
SONG.
GENTEEL is my Damon, engaging his air,
His face, like the morn, both ru^y and fair;
Soft love sits enthroned in the beam of his eyes,
He Is manly, yet tender, he is fond and yet wise.
He Is ever good humored, he is generous and gay,
His presence can always drive sorrow away:
No vanity sways him, no folly is seen,
But open his temper, and noble his mien.
By virtue illumined his actions appear,
His passions are calm, and his ^eason is clear:
An affable sweetness attends on his speech,
He Is willing to learn, though he is able to teach.
He has promised to love me -- his word I Will believe,
For his heart is too honest to let him deceive;
Then blame me, ye fair one, if justly you can,
Since the picture I Have drawn is exactly the man.
SONG. THE DESPONDING NEGRO.
ON Afric's wide plains where the lion now roaring,
With freedom stalks forth the vast desert exploring;
I was dragged from my hut and enchain'd as a slave,
In a dark floating dungeon upon the salt wave.
Spare a halfpenny, spare a halfpenny;
Spare a halfpenny to a poor Negro.
Tossed on the wild main, I all wildly desparing.
Burst my chains rushed on deck with my eye balls wide glaring,
When the lightnings dread blast struck the inlets of day,
And its glorious bright beams shut forever away.
Spare a halfpenny etc.
The despoiler of man, then his prospect thus losing,
Of gain by my sale, not a blind a bargain choosing,
As my value compared with my keeping, was light,
Had me dashed overboard, in the dead of night.
Spare a halfpenny; etc.
And but for a bark to Britannia's coast bound then,
All my cares by that plunge in the deep had been down'd then
But by moonlight descried I was s^tch'd from the wave,
And reluctantly robbed of a watery grave.
Spare a halfpenny, etc.
How dis^strous my fate, freedom's groundtho' I tread now,
Torn from home, wife and children, wandering for bread now,
While seas roll between us, which never can be crossed
And hope's distant glimm'rings in darkness are lost.
Spare a halfpenny, etc.
But of minds foul and fair when the judge and the pond (...)
Shall restore light and rest to the blind and the wanderer,
The European's deep dye may outrival the sloe,
And the soul of an Ethiop prove white as the snow.
Spare a halfpenny, etc.
SONG. INDIFFERENCE.
THE world's a strange world, child, it must be confessed
We all of distress have our share,
But since I must struggle to live with the rest,
By my troth it is no great matter where:
We all must put up with what fortune has sent,
Be therefore one's lot poor or rich,
So there is but a portion of ease and content,
By my troth it is no great matter which.
A living's a living, and so there is an end;
If one honestly gets just enough,
And something to spare for the wants of a friend,
By by troth it is no great matter how:
In this world about nothing we busy appear,
And, I Have said it again and again,
Since quit it one must, if one's conscience is clear,
By my troth it is no great matter when.
SONG. ROSINA.
WHEN William, at eve, meets me down at the style
How sweet is the nightingale's song!
Of the day I forget all the labor and toil,
While the moon plays yon branches among.
By her beams, without blushing, I hear him complain,
And believe every word of his song;
You know not how sweet it is to love the dear swain,
Whilst the moon plays you branches among.
SONG. THE MAID OF THE MILL.
WILLIAM. I HAVE kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maids,
And changed them as often do you see;
But of all the fair maidens that dance on the green,
The maid of the mill for me.

PHOEBE. There Is fifty young men have told me fine tales,
And called me the fairest she;
But of all the gay youths that sport on the green,
Young Harry's the lad for me.

WILLIAM. Her eyes are as black as the sloe in the hedge,
Her face like the blossoms in May;
Her teeth are as white as the new shorn flock,
Her breath like the new made hay.

PHOEBE. He Is tall and he is straight as the poplar tree,
His cheeks are as fresh as a rose;
He looks like a squire of high degree
When dressed in his Sundays clothes.

THE SIREN: PART II. PATHETIC and PASSIONATE SONGS.
WILMINGTON: PRINTED FOR BONSAL and NILES, AND JAMES WILSON.

THE SIREN: PART II. PATHETIC SONGS, etc.
SONG. MARIA.
'TWAS near a thicket's calm retreat,
Under a poplar tree,
Maria chose her wretched seat,
To mourn her sorrows free;
Her lovely form was sweet to view,
As dawn at opening day;
But, ah! she mourned her love not true,
And wept her cares away.
The brook flowed gently at her feet,
In murmurs smooth along;
Her pipe, which once she tuned so sweet,
Had now forgot its song;
No more to charm the vale she tries,
For grief has filled her breast;
Those joys which once she used to prize,
But love has robbed her rest.
Poor haplers maid! who can behold
Thy sorrows so severe,
And hear thy love-lorn story told,
Without a falling tear:
Maria, luckless maid, adieu,
Thy sorrows soon must cease,
For heaven will take a mail (...),
To everlasting peace.
SONG. YE FAIR POSSESSED.
YE fair possessed of every charm,
To captivate the will,
Whose smiles can rage itself disarm,
Whose frowns at once can kill:
Say will you deign the verse (...),
Where flattery bears no part,
And honest verse, that flows sincere;
And candid fr^ the heart.
Great is your power; but greater yet,
Mankind it might engage:
If as ye all can make a net,
Ye all can make a cage.
Each (...) a thousand hearts may take;
For who is to beauty blind?
But to what end a prisoner make,
Unless you have strength to bind?
Attend the council often told,
Too often told in vain;
Learn that best art, the art to hold,
And lock the lover's chain.
Gamesters to little purpose win,
Who lose again as fast;
Though beauty may the charm begin,
It Is swee^ess makes it last.
SONG. A LAPLAND LOVE SONG.
THOU rising sun whose gladsome ray,
Invites my fair to rural play,
Dispei the mist and clear the skies,
And ^ing my Orra to my eyes.
Oh! were I sure my dear to view,
I Would climb the pine tree's topmost bough,
Alost in air that q^ivering plays,
And round and round for ever gaze.
My Orra Moor, where art thou laid?
What woods conceal my sleeping maid?
Up by the roots enraged I Will tear
The trees that hide my promised fair.
O could I ride on clouds and skies,
Or on the raven's pinions rise!
Ye storks, ye swans, a moment stay,
And waft a lover on his way.
My bliss too long my bride denies,
Apace the wafting summer flies;
Not yet the wint'ry blasts I fear;
Not storms or nights shall keep me here.
What may for strength with steel compare?
Oh! love has stronger fetters far!
By bolts of steel are limbs confined,
But cruel love enchains the mind.
No longer then perplex the breast:
When thoughts perp^ext, the first are best:
(...) mad to go, it is death to stay:
Away to Orra, haste away.
SONG. SELIM'S COMPLAINT.
NIGHT over the world her curtain hung,
The bird of eve melodious sung
Her anthem at the finished day:
When Selim, on a bank reclined,
Beneath a spreading willow tree,
Thus spoke the feelings of his mind --
'Oh Lucy, shed a tear for me.'
'Yes, had I all that heaven could give,
Were my possessions rich and great,
Then for my Lucy would I live,
Then at her feet a suppliant wait:
But, since hard poverty's my lot,
No hope remains to wed with thee;
Thy beauties never can grace my cot --
'Oh! Lucy, shed a tear for me.'
Deprived of all that life could bless,
The torment, life, no more I crave;
The hour that offers happiness,
Is that which marks my hapless grave:
Be each fond wish enjoyed of thine,
May heaven protect and comfort thee!
The turf must press this head of mine --
'Oh! Lucy, shed a tear for me.'
SONG. THE WILLOW OF THE DEE.
THE sun descendin gthro' the sky,
Had warned the tuneful choir to rest:
The star of eve unfolding high,
In glittering splendour graced the west
When, all despairing and forlorn,
A beauteous maid I chanced to see,
In wildest notes she seemed to mourn,
Beside the willow of the Dee.
Ah! Jemmy, why -- she fondly cried,
From these lone arms do you delay;
And fear not I shall angry chide,
With tears your long and lingering stay;
With glory's laurel to be crowned,
Has stole your fickle heart from me;
And I alone am weeping found,
Beside the willow of the Dee.
I vainly hoped a swift return,
When you to battle glowing went;
But now I fear to view your urn,
To sorrowing love and friendship sent:
Then shall these roses lose their bloom,
To death's cold hand I soon shall flee;
And pitying love shall mark my tomb,
Beside the willow of the Dee.
SONG. KATE.
'TWAS near a fear beat rock reclined,
The beauteous love-lorn Kate;
She had no friend to soothe her mind,
But mourned her hapless fate.
Her only love was out at sea,
Far from his native shore;
In tears she wept her sorrows free,
Lest he return no more.
Thus would she sigh the live long day,
For dangers he may prove:
While sorrow marked her lonely way,
With firm unshaken love.
Though hope often bade her cares to cease,
And checked the falling tear;
Yet, ah! in vain, the hours of peace
Appear no longer near.
So droons the (...) in the vale,
So faces the new blown rose,
When tempests and rude winds assail,
Their sweets no more disclose.
Then farewell, Kate, let pity cheer,
And soothe thee with address;
So may each future day appear
One scene of happiness.
SONG. THE AFFECTIONATE SOLDIER.
'TWAS in the evening of a win'try day,
When safe returning from a long campaign,
Allen over toiled and weary with the way,
Came home to see his Sally once again.
His battered arms he carelessly threw down,
And viewed his Sally with enraptured eyes:
But she received, him with a modest frown --
She knew not Allen in his rough disguise.
His hair was knotted and his beard unshorn,
His tattered coutrements about him hung;
A tear of pleasure did his cheeks adorn,
And blessings fell in torrents from his tongue.
Am I so altered by this cruel trade,
That you your faithful Allen have forgot:
Or has your heart to some other strayed?
Ah! why did I escape the murdering shot.
When this he spoke, her wonted color fled,
She ran and sunk upon her Allen's breast;
All pale awhile, she looked like one that is dead,
He kissed, she breathed, and all her love consess'd.
Yes, my delight, though ^lter'd as thou art,
Reduced by honest courage to this strait;
Thou art the golden treasure of my heart,
My long lest husband, and my wished for mate.
SONG. THE SEDUCED FAIR.
SHE came from the hills of the West,
A smile of contentment she wore;
Her heart was a garden of rest;
But, ah! the sweet season is over.
How often by the streams in the wood,
Delighted she would ramble and rove;
And, while she stood marking the flood,
Would tune up a stanza of love.
In rural diversion and play,
The summers glide smoothly along;
And her winters passed briskly away,
Cheered up with a tale or a song.
At length a destroyer came by,
A youth of more person than parts,
Well skilled in the arts of the eye,
The conquest and havoc of hearts.
He led her by fountains and stre^ms,
He wooed her with sonnets and books;
He told her his tales and his dreams,
And marked their effect in ner looks.
He taught her by midnight to roam,
Where spirits and specter affright;
For passions increase with the gloom,
And caution expires with the light,
A length, like a rose from the spray,
Like a lily just plucked from its stem,
She drooped, and she faded away,
Thrown by and neglected like them.
SONG. WILLIAM AND ANNA.
WAKE and sing when wint'ry wings,
Are howling loud upon the lea^
And louder gales my fancy finds,
For William on the forming sea:
But, claming soon the pictured storm,
Sweet hopes into my bosom creep,
And tell, me, summer breezes warm,
Shall waft him safely over the deep.
Four years on India's sultry coast,
Has war's rude voice my love detained,
While here, to every pleasure loft,
His Anna's languid form remam'd:
And over the steep rock still to lean,
And eager watch the gliding sail,
That languid form is duly seen,
At rudy morn and evening pale.
But, ah! no handkerchief I mark,
Stream from the deck in cr^^son dye,
Dear signal -- wanting thee, the bark
Is hailed by many a mournful sigh:
Its shouts discordant seem to me,
Loud echoing over the stony pier;
Since William's face I cannot see,
Since William's voice I cannot here.
SONG. THE FAITHFUL NYMPH.
ESCAPED my love the cannon's ire,
That thunders over the troubled main?
Escaped my love the fever's five,
That burns so fierce on India's plain?
That face grows wan by sultry clime,
By watching, dim, those radiant eyes:
But love disdains the rage of time,
Though youth decays, though beauty flies.
O! if he has, I can resign
With scarce a sigh the blooming grace,
That in his form was wont to shine;
An honest heart is all to me,
Nor soil nor time makes that look old;
And dearer shall the jewel be,
Than youth or beauty, fame or gold.
SONG. MA CHERE AMIE.
MA Chere Amie, my charming fair,
Whose smiles can banish every care,
In kind compassion smile on me,
Whose only care is love of thee.
Ma chere amie,
Under sweet friendship's sacred name,
My bosom caught the tender flame;
May friendship in thy bosom be,
Converted into love for me.
Ma chere amie,
Together reared, together grown,
O let us now unite in one;
Let pity soften thy decree,
I droop, dear maid, I die for thee.
Ma chere amie.
SONG. MON CHER AMI.
MON cher ami, ami tres cher,
My love shall-sooth thy every care;
Thou in return shall smile on me,
Nor aught but joy our life shall see.
Mon cher ami.
Under sweet friendship's sacred name,
Thy breast shall still retain the flame,
With which it (...) has glowed for me,
(...) ^^nstant, wedded friend I Will be.
Mon cher ami.
United thus, may every year
Thy Lydia grow to thee more dear.
Nor sue from pity more from me,
Nor droop from her who lives for thee.
Mon cher ami.
SONG. SORROWS OF WERTER.
WHEN Werter fair Charlotte Leheld.
As she danced with the nymph's on the gre^n,
He thought every maid she excelled,
And he praised the soft grace of her mien:
But all her accomplishments known,
Gentle Werter began to adore;
He sighs for a heart not her own,
And the joys of poor Werter are over,
Though vows the fair Charlotte engaged,
As a friend gentle Werter was dear,
Her smiles often his sorrows assuag'd,
While beauty has dropped a soft tear:
Urged by love, he grew bold, and she cried,
Werter, leave me, and see me no more;
He sighed -- he obeyed -- and he died,
Then the sorrows of Werter deplore.
Ye nymphs, let not Cupid deceive,
Under pity's soft garb hide his dart,
Werter's sorrows are laid in the grave,
While pity still wrings Charlotte's heart:
And often over his grave has she cried,
While with flowerets she decked it all over,
He saw me, he loved, and he died,
Then the sorrows of Werter deplore.
SONG MA CHERE AMI
MA chere ami I let not despair,
Your bosom fill with anxious care,
Whose heart's so open, mind so free --
I Will think of him who thinks of me.
Ma chere ami
Charge not a tender virgin's same
With rudeness to confess the same;
Oh! pardon all the faults you see,
And think of her who thinks of thee,
Ma chere ami.
Then let us to the church incline,
And Hymen wait our hands to join,
For ever after happy be,
I blessed with you, and you with me.
Ma chere ami.
SONG. THE UNHAPPY MAID.
FAREWELL, ye green fields and sweet groves,
Where Strephon engaged my poor heart;
Where nightingales warble their throats,
And nature is dressed without art;
No pleasure they now can afford,
Nor music can lull me to rest;
For Strephon proves false to his word,
And Phyllis can never be blessed.
Often times, by the side of a spring,
Where roses and lillies appear,
Gay Strephon of Phyllis would sing;
For Phyllis was all he held dear;
So soon as he found by my eyes
The passion that glowed in my breast;
He then to my grief and surprise,
Proved all he had said was a jest.
Too soon, to my sorrow I find,
The beauties alone that will last
Are those that are fixed in the mind,
Which envy, nor time, cannot blast;
Beware then, ye fair, how ye trust
The fool, who to love makes pretense;
For Strephon to me had been just,
If nature had blessed him with sense.
SONG. ROBIN HOOD.
I TRAVERSED Judah's barren sand,
At beauty's altar to adore;
But there the Turks had spoiled the land,
And Sion's daughters were no more.
In Greece the bold imperious mien,
The wanton look, the leering eye,
Bade love's devotion not be seen
Where constancy is never nigh.
From thence to Italy's fair shore
I bent my never ceasing way,
And to Loretta's temple bore
A mind devoted still to pray.
But there, too, Superstition's hand
Had sicklied every feature over,
And made me soon regain the land,
Where beauty fills the western shore.
Where Hymen, with celestial power,
Conuubial transport does adorn;
We are purest virtue sports the hour
That ushers in each happy morn,
(...) daughters of Columbia's land,
Where'ere I go, where'ere I stray;
O Charity's sweet children bland,
^
SONG. FLOWERS OF EDINBURGH.
MY love was once a bonny lad,
He was the flower of all his kin,
The absence of his bonny face
Has rent my tender heart in swain.
I day nor night find no delight,
In silent tears I still complain;
And exclaim against those my rival soes,
That ha'e taken from me my darling swain.
Despair and anguish fills my breast,
Since I have lost my blooming rose;
I sigh and moan while others rest,
His absence yields me no repose.
To seek my lover I Will range and rove,
Through every grove and distant plain;
Thus I Will never cease, but spend my days,
To hear tidings from my darling swain.
There Is naething strange in nature's change,
Since parents show such cruelty;
They caused my love from me to range,
And knows not to what destiny,
The pretty kids and tender lambs
May cease to sport upon the plains;
But I Will mourn and lame at in deep discontent
The absence of my darling swain.
Kind Neptune, let me thee entreat,
To send a fair and pleasant gale;
Ye dolphins sweet, upon me wait,
And convey me on your tail;
Heavens bless my voyage with success.
While crossing of the raging main,
And send me safe over to that distant shore,
To meet my lovely, darling swain.
All joy and mirth at our return
Shall then abound from Tweed to Tay:
The bells shall ring, and sweet birds sing,
To grace and crown our nuptial day.
Thus b^ess'd w^ charms in my love's arms,
^
Then I Will range no more to a distant shore,
But in love will enjoy my darling swain.
SONG. ROSLIN CASTLE.
'TWAS in that season of the year.
When all things gay and sweet appear.
That Colin, with the morning ray,
Arose and sung his rural lay.
Of Nanny's charms the shepherd sung,
The hills and dales with Nanny rung,
While Roslin castle heard the swain,
And echoed back the cheerful strain.
Awake, sweet muse, the breathing spring,
With rapture warms, awake and sing;
Awake, and join the vocal throng,
And had the morning with a song;
To Nanny raise the cheerful lay,
O bid her haste and come away;
In sweetest smiles herself adorn,
And add new graces to the morn.
O hark, my love, on every spray
Each feathered warbler tunes his lay^;
(...) beauty fires the ravished throng,
And love inspires the me^ting song;
Then let my ravished notes arise,
For beauty darts from Nanny's eyes,
And love my rising bosom warms,
And fills my soul with sweet alar^s.
O come, my love, thy Colin's lay,
With rapture calls, O come away;
Come, while the muse this wreath shall twine
Around that mo^est brow of thine;
O hither haste, and with thee bring
That beauty, ^looming spring,
Those graces that divinely shine,
And charm this ravisn'd heart of mine.
SONG.
TO the brook and the willow that heard him complain,
Poor Colin went weeping and told them his pain,
Sweet stream, he cried, sadly I Will teach thee to flow.
And the waters shall rise to the brink with my woe,
All restless and painful my Celia now sies,
And counts the sad moments of time as it flies;
To the nymph, my heart loves, ye soft slumbers repair,
Spread your downy wings over her and make your care;
Let me be left restless, mine eyes never close,
So the sleep that I lose give my dear one repose.
Sweet stream! if you chance by her pillow to creep,
Perhaps your soft murmurs may lull her to sleep.
But if I am doomed to be wretched indeed,
And the loss of my charmer the sates have decreed,
Believe me, thou fair one, thou dear one, believe,
Few sighs to thy loss, and few tears will I give;
One fate to thy COLIN and thee shall betide,
And soon lay thy shepherd down by thy cold side.
Then glide, gentle brook, and to lose thyself haste,
Bear this to my willow; this verse is my last.
SONG.
THOUGH cruel you seem to my pain,
And hate me because I am true;
Yet, Phyllis, you love a false swain,
Who has other nymphs in his view.
Enjoyment's a trifle to him,
To me what a heaven 'twould be!
To him but a woman you seem,
But, ah! you're an angel to me.
Those lips which he touches in haste,
To them I forever could grow;
Still clinging around that dear waist
Which he spans as beside him you go.
That arm, like a lily so white,
Which over his shoulders you lay,
My bosom could warm it all night,
My lipo they could press it all day.
Were I like^ monarch to reign,
Were graces my subjects to the,
I Would leave them and, fly to the ^ain,
To dwell in a cottage w^ thee,
But if I must feel your disdain,
If tears cannot cruelty drown,
Oh! let me not live in this pain,
But give me my death in a frown.
SONG.
DEAR Chloe while thus beyond measure
You treat me with doubt and disdain;
You rob all your youth of its pleasure,
And hoard upon on old age of pain:
Your maxim that love ^s still founded.
On charms that will quickly decay,
You will find to be very ill grounded
When once you its dictates obey.
The passion from beauty first drawn
Your kindness will vastly improve;
Soft looks and gay smiles are the dawn,
Fruition's the sunshine of love;
And though the bright beams of your eyes
Should be clouded, that now now are so gay,
And darkness obscure all the skies,
We never can forget it was day.
Old Derby with Joan by his file
You often have regarded with wonder;
He is dropsical and she is sore-ey'd,
Yet they are ever uneasy asunder;
Together they totter about
And sit in the sun at the door,
And at night when o'd Derby's pot's out,
No beauty or wit they possess
Their several failings to smother,
The^ what are the charms can you guess
That make them so fond of each other?
It Is the pleasing remembrance of youth,
The endearments that love did bestow,
The thoughts of past pleasure and truth,
The best of all blessings below.
These traces forever will last
Which sickness nor time can remove;
For when youth and beauty are past,
And age brings the winter of love,
A friendship insensibly grows,
By reviews of such raptures as these,
And the current of fondness still slows,
Which decrepit old age cannot freeze.
SONG.
OH! turn away those truel eyes,
The stars of my undoing;
Or death in such a bright disguise
May tempt a second wooing
Punish their blindly impious pride
Who dare contemn thy glory;
It was my fall that deify'd
Thy name and sealed thy story,
Yet no new sufferings can prepare
A higher praise to crown thee;
Though my first death proclaim thee fair,
My second will dethrone thee.
Lovers will doubt thou can entice
No other for thy fuel;
And if thou burn one victim twice,
Think thee both poor and cruel.
SONG.
IN vain, fond youth, thy tears give ^'er;
What more alas? can Flavia do!
Thy (...) own, thy fate deplore:
All are not happy that are true.
Suppress those sighs and weep no more;
Should heaven and earth with thee combine,
'Twere all in vain; since any power
To crown thy love, must alter mine.
But if revenge can ease thy pain,
I Will sooth the ills I cannot cure,
Tell that I drag a hopeless chain,
And all that I inflict, endure.
SONG.
DESPAIRING beside a clear stream,
A shepherd forsaken was laid,
And whilst a false nymph was his theme,
A willow supported his head;
The wind that blew over the plain
To his sighs with a sigh did reply,
And the brook in return to his pain
Ran mournfully murmuring by.
Alas! silly swain that I was!
Thus sadly complaining he cried;
When first I beheld that fair face,
'Twere better by far I had died.
She talked and I blessed the dear tongue,
When she smiled 'twas a pleasure too great;
I listened and cried when she sung,
Was a nightingale ever so sweet.
How foolish was I to believe
She would dote on so lowly a clown,
Or that her fond heart would not grieve
To forsake the sine folks of the town;
To think (...) so gay,
So kind (...) constant would prove,
To go clad like our maidens in gray,
And live in a courage on love.
What though I have skill to complain,
Though the Muses my temples have crowned?
What though when they hear my soft strain,
The virgins set weeping around?
Ah Colin, thy hopes are (...) vain,
Thy pipe and thy laure resign,
Thy fair one inclines to a swain
Whose music is sweeter than thine.
And you my companions so dear,
Who sorrow to see me betrayed,
Whatever I suffer, forbear,
Forbear to accuse the false maid;
Though through the wide world we should range,
It Is in vain from our fortune to fly,
'Twas here is to be false and to change,
It Is mine to be constant and die.
If while my hard fate I sustain,
In her breast any pity is found,
Let her come with the nymphs of the plain,
And see me laid low in the ground:
The last humble boon that I crave,
Is to shade me with cypress and yew,
And when she looks down on my grave,
Let her own that her shepherd was true.
Then to her new love let her go,
And deck her in golden array,
Be finest at every fine show,
And frolic it all the long day:
While Colin forgotten and gone,
No more shall be heard of or seen,
Unless when beneath the pale moon,
His ghost shall glide over the green.
A PASTORAL BALLAD, In Four Parts, by W. SHENSTONE.
I. ABSENCE.
YE shepherds so cheerful and gay,
Whose flocks never carelessly roam;
Should Corydon's happen to stray,
^o! call the poor wanderers home.
All^ me to muse and to sigh,
Nor (...) of the change that ye find;
None on^ was so watchful as I:
I have left my dear Phyllis behind.
Now I know what it is to have strove
With the (...) of doubt and desire;
What it is, to admire and to love,
And to leave her we love and admire.
Ah lead forth my flock in the morn,
And the damps of each evening repel;
Alas! I am faint and forlorn:
I have bade my dear Phyllis farewell.
Since Phyllis vouchsafed me a look,
I never once dreamt of my vine;
May I lose both my pipe and my crook,
If I knew of a kid that was mine.
I prized every hour that went by,
Beyond all that had pleased me before:
But now they are past and I sigh;
And I grieve that I prized them no more.
But why do I languish in vain?
Why wander thus pensivly here?
Oh! why did I come from the plain,
Where I fed on the smiles of my dear?
They ^ll me, my favorite maid,
The pride of that valley is flown;
Alas! where with her I have strayed,
I could wander with pleasure, alone.
When sorc'd the fair nymph to forego,
What anguish I felt at my heart!
Yet I thought, (...) it might not be so,
She gazed, as I slowly withdrew;
My path I could hardly discern;
So sweetly she bid me adieu,
I thought that she bade me return.
The pilgrim that journeys all day
To visit some far distant shrine,
If he bears but a relic away,
Is happy, nor heard to repine.
Thus widely removed from the fair,
Where my vows, my devotion, I owe,
Soft Hope is the relic I bear,
And my solace wherever I go.
II. HOPE.
MY banks they are furnished with bees,
Whose murmur invites one to sleep;
My grottos are shaded with trees,
And my hills are white over with sheep.
I seldom have met with a loss,
Such health do my fountains bestow;
My fountains all bordered with moss,
Where the bare bells and violets grow.
Not a pine in my grove is there seen,
But with tendrils of woodbine is bound;
Not a beech's more beautiful green,
But a sweet briar entwines it around.
Not my fields, in the prime of the year,
More charms than my cattle unfold:
Not a brook that is limpid and clear,
But it glitters with fishes of gold.
One would think she might like to retire
To the bower I have labored to rear;
Not a shrub that I heard her admire,
But I hasted and planted it there.
Oh how sudden the jessamine strove
With the lilac to render it gay!
Already it calls for my love,
To prune the wild branches away.
From the p^ins, from the woodlands and groves,
What str^^^ of wild melody flow?
How the nightingales warble their love
From thickets of roses that blow!
And when her bright torn shall appear,
Each bird shall harmo^ ^^in
In a concert so soft and so clear,
As she may not be found to resign.
I have found out a gift for my fair,
I have found where the wood pigeons breed:
But let me that plunder forbear,
She will say 'twas a barberous deed:
For he never could be true, she averred,
Who could rob a poor bird of its young;
And I loved her the more when I heard
Such tenderness fail from her tongue.
I have heard her with sweetness un^^^^
How that pity was due to a dove;
That it ever attended the bold,
And she called it the sister of love.
But her words such a pleasure convey,
So much I her accents adore,
Let her speak, and whatever she say,
M^thinks I should love her the more.
Can a bosom so gentle remain
Unmoved when her Corydon sighs!
Will a nymph that is fond of the plain,
These plains and this valley despise?
Dear regions of silence and shade!
Soft scenes of contentment and ease!
Where I could have pleasingly strayed,
If aught in her absence, could please.
(...) where (...) my Phyllida stray?
And where are her grots and her bowr's?
Are the groves and (...) valleys as gay,
And the sheph^rds as gentle as ours?
The grove^ may perhaps be as fair,
And the face of the valleys as fine,
The swains may in manners compare,
But their love is not equal to mine.
III. SOLICITUDE.
WHY will you my passion reprove?
Why term it a folly to grieve?
E're I show you the charms of my love,
She is fairer than you can believe.
With her mien she enamours the brave;
With her wit she engages the free;
With her modesty pleases the grave;
She is every way pleasing to me.
O you that have been of her train,
Come and join in my amorous lays;
I could lay down my life for the swain,
That will but sing a song in her praise.
When he sings may the nymphs of the town
Come trooping, and listen the while;
Nay on him let not Phyllida frown;
But I cannot allow her to smile.
For when Paridel tries in the dance
Any favor with Phyllis to find,
O how, with one trivial glance.
Might the ruin the peace of my mind!
In ringlets he dresses his hair!
And his crook is be studded around;
And his pipe -- oh may Phyllis beware
Of a magic there is in the found.
It Is his with mock passion to glow;
It Is his in smooth tales to unfold,
How her face is (...) bright as the snow,
And her bosom, be sure, is as cold:
How the nightingale labors the strain,
With the notes of his charmer to vie;
How they vary their accents in vain,
Repine at her triumphs, and die.
To the grove or the garden he strays,
And pillages every sweet;
Then suiting the wreath to his lays,
He throws it at Phyllis's feet.
O Phyllis, he whispers, more fair,
More sweet than the jessamin's flower!
What are pinks, in a morn, to compare?
What is eglantine, after a shower?
Then the Elly no longer is white;
Then the rose is deprived of its bloom;
Then the viole^ die with despite,
And the wood^ines give up their perfume,
Thus ^^des the soft numbers along,
And (...) no shepherd his peer;
Yet I never should envy the song,
Were not Phyllis to lend it an ear.
Let his crook be with hyacinths bound,
So Phyllis the trophy despise;
Let his forehead with laurels be crowned,
So they shine not in Phyllis's eyes.
The language that flows from the heart
Is a stranger to Paridel's tongue;
Yet may she beware of his art,
Or sure I must envy the song.
IV. DISAPPOINTMENT.
YE shepherds give ear to my lay,
And take no more heed of my sheep
They have nothing to do, but to stray;
I have nothing to do, but to weep.
Yet do not my folly reprove;
She was fair and my passion begun;
She smiled and I could not but love;
She is faithless and I am undone.
Perhaps I was void of all thought,
Perhaps it was plain to foresee,
That a nymph so complete would be sought
By a swain more engaging than me.
Ah! love every hope can inspire:
It banishes wisdom the while;
And the lip of the nymph we admire
Seems forever adorned with a smile.
She is faithless and I am undone;
Ye that witness the woes I endure,
Let reason instruct you to shun
What it cannot instruct you to cure.
Beware how you loiter in vain
Amid nymphs of a higher degree:
It is not for me to explain
How fair and how fickle they be.
Alas! from the day that we met,
What hope of an end to my woes?
When I cannot endure to forget
The glance that undid my repose.
Yet time may diminish the pain:
The flower, the shrub, and the tree,
Which I reared for her pleasure in vain,
In time may have comfort for me.
The sweets of a dew sprinkled rose,
The found of a murmuring stream,
The peace which from solitude flows,
Henceforth shall be Corydon's theme;
High transports are shown to the sight,
But we are not to find them our own;
Fate never bestowed such delight,
As I with my Phyllis had known.
O ye woods, spread your branches apace;
To your deepest recesses I fly;
I would hide with the beasts of the chase;
I would vanish from every eye.
Yet my reed shall resound through the grove
With the same sad complaint it begun;
How she smiled, and I could not but love;
Was faithless, and I am undone!
SONG. To the Memory of WILLIAM SHENSTONE, Esquire
COME, shepherds, we'll follow the hearse,
And see our loved Corydon laid;
Though sorrow may blemish the verse,
Yet let the sad tribute be paid.
They called him the pride of the plain:
In sooth he was gentle and kind;
He marked in his elegant strain,
The graces that glowed in his mind.
On purpose he planted yon trees,
That birds in the covert might dwell;
He culter'd the thyme for the bees,
But never would rifle their cell.
Ye lambkins that played at his feet,
Go bleat, and your master bemoan:
His music was artless and sweet,
His manners as mild as your own.
No verdure shall cover the vale,
No bloom on the blossoms appear;
The sweets of the forest shall fail,
And winter discolor the year.
No birds in our hedges shall sing,
(Our hedges so vocal before)
Since he that should welcome the spring,
Can greet the gay season no more.
His Phyllis was fond of his praise,
And poets came round in a throng;
They listened, and envied his lays,
But which of them equaled his song?
Ye shepherds henceforward be mute,
For lost is the pastoral strain;
So give me my Corydon's flute,
And thus -- let me break it in twain.
SONG.
WHEN forced from dear Hebe to go,
What anguish I felt at my heart!
And I thought, but it might not be so;
She was sorry to see me depart.
She cast such a languishing view,
My path I could scarcely discern:
So sweetly she bade me adieu!
I thought that she bade me return.
Methought, she might like to retire
To the grove I had labored to rear;
For, whatever I heard her admire,
I hasted, and planted it there.
Her voice such a pleasure conveys,
So much I her accents adore;
Let her speak and whatever she says,
I Am sure still to love her the more.
And now, ere I haste to the plain,
Come, shepherds, and talk of her ways;
I could lay down my life for the swain
That would sing me a song in her praise.
While he sings, may the maids of the town:
Come flocking, and listen awhile;
Nor on him let Hebe once frown,
But I cannot allow her to smile.
To see, when my charmer goes by,
Some hermit peeps out of his cell,
How he thinks of his youth with a sigh,
How fondly he wishes her well!
On him she may smile, if she please;
'Twill warm the cold bosom of age; --
But cease, gentle, Hebe, Oh, cease!
Such softness will ruin the sage.
I Have stole from no flowerets that glow,
To paint the dear charms I approve;
For what can a blossom bestow
So sweet, so delightful as love?
I sing in a rustical way,
A shepherd, and one of the throng;
Yet Hebe approves of my lay, --
Go, poets, and envy my song.
SONG. THE MAID IN BEDLAM.
ONE morning very early, one morning in the spring.
I heard a maid in Bedlam, who mournfully did sing;
Her chains she rattled on her hands while sweetly thus sing she,
I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh cruel were his parents, who sent my love to sea,
And cruel, cruel was the ship that bore my love from me,
Yet I love his parents, since they are his, although they have ruined me;
And I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
O should it please the pitying powers to call me to the sky,
I Would claim a guardian angel's charge, around my love to fly;
To guard him from all dangers how happy should I be!
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
I Will make a strawy garland, I Will make it wond'rou^ fine,
With roses, lilies, daisies, I Will mix the eglantine:
And I Will present it to my love when he returns from sea,
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh if I were a little bird to build upon his breast;
Or if I were a nightingale to sing my love to rest!
To gaze upon his lovely eyes all my reward should be;
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh if I were an eagle, to soar into the sky!
I Would gaze around with piercinge yet where I my love might spy,
Butah! unhappy maiden, that love you never shall see,
Yet I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
OSCAR'S (...).
O see that form that faintly gleams;
It Is Oscar come to cheer my dreams,
On wings of wind he flies away,
O stay my lovely Of car stay.
Wake Ossian, last of Fingal's line
And mix thy tears and sighs with mine.
Awake the harp to doleful lays,
And sooth my soul with Oscar's praise.
The shell is ceased in Oscar's hall,
Since gloomy Kerber wrought the fall,
The roe on Morven lightly bounds,
Nor hear the cry of Oscar's hounds.
SONG. GRAMACHREE.
AS down on Banna's banks I strayed,
One evening in May,
The little birds, in blithest notes,
Made vocal every spray;
They sung their little takes of love,
They sung them over and over,
Ah! gramachree, ma cholleenouge,
M^ Molly ashtore!
The (...) py'd and all the sweets,
The dawn of nature yields,
The primrose pale, and vi'let blue,
Lay scattered over the fields;
Such fragrance in the bosom lies,
Of her whom I adore.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
I laid me down upon a bank,
Bewailing my sad fate,
That doomed me thus the (...)
How can she break the honest heart,
That wears her in its core?
Ah! gramachree, etc.
You said you loved me, Molly dear,
Ah! why did I believe?
Yet who could think such tender words,
Were meant but to deceive?
That love was all I asked on earth,
Nay, Heaven could give no more.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
O! had I all the flocks that graze
On yonder yellow hill,
Or lowed for me the numerous herds
That you green pasture fill:
With her I love, I Would gladly share,
My kine and fleecy store.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
Two turtle doves above my head,
Sat courting on a bough,
I'envy'd them their happiness,
To see them bill and coo;
Such fondness once for me she showed,
But now, alas! it is over.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
Then fare thee well, my Molly dear,
Thy loss I ever shall mourn;
While life remains in Strephon's heart,
'Twill beat for thee alone;
Though thou art false, may Heaven on thee
Its choicest blessings pour.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
SONG. THE BANKS OF THE DEE.
'TWAS summer and softly the breezes were blowing,
^
At the foot of a rock where the river was flowing,
I sat myself down on the banks of the Dee.
Flow on lovely Dee, flow on thou sweet river,
Thy banks, purest stream, shall be dear to me ever;
For there I first gained the affection and favor,
Of Jemie the glory and pride of the Dee.
But now he is gone from me, and left me thus morning,
To quell the proud rebels for valiant is he:
And ah! there is no hopes of his speedy returning,
To wander again on the banks of the Dee.
He Is gone, hapless youth! over the loud roaring billows,
The kindest and sweetest of all the gay fellows;
And left me to stray amongst the once loved willows,
The loneliest maid on the banks of the Dee.
But time and my prayerr, may perhaps yet restore him,
Blessed peace may restore my dear shepherd to me;
And when he returns, with such care I Will watch over him;
He never shall leave the sweet banks of the Dee.
The Dee then shall flow, all its beauties displaying;
The lambs on its banks shall again be seen playing;
While I, with my Jamie, am carelessly straying,
And tasting again all the sweets of the Dee.
ADDITION BY A LADY.
THUS sung the fair maid on the banks of the river,
And sweetly re-echo'd each neighboring tree;
But now all these hopes must vanish for ever,
Since Jamie shall never see the banks of the Dee.
On a foreign shore the sweet youth lay dying,
In a foreign grave his body's now lying;
While friends and acquaintance in Scotland are crying
For Jamie the glory and pride of the Dee.
Mis-hap on the hand by whom he was wounded;
Mis-hap on the wars that called him away
From a circle of friends by which he was surrounded,
Who mourn for dear Jamie the tedious day.
Oh! poor hapless maiden, who mourns discentented,
The loss of a lover so justly lamented;
By time, only time, can her grief be contented,
And all her dull hours become cheerful and gay.
'Twas (...) and bravery made him leave her mourning,
From unjust rebellion his country to free;
He left her, in hopes of his speedy returning
To wander again on the banks of the Dee.
For this he despised all dangers and perils;
'Twas thus he espoused Britannia's quarrels,
That when he came home he might crown her with laurels,
The happiest maid on the banks of the Dee.
But fate had determined his fall to be glorious,
Though dreadful the thought must be unto me;
He fell like brave Wolf where the troops were victorious,
Sure each tender heart must bewail the decree:
Yet, though he is gone, the once faithful lover,
And all our fine schemes of true happiness over,
No doubt he implored his pity and favor
For me he had left on the banks of the Dee.
SONG. FIDELE'S TOMB.
TO fair Fidele's glassy tomb,
Soft maids and village hinds shall bring,
Each opening sweet of earliest bloom,
And rifle all the breathing spring.
No wailing ghost shall dare appear,
To vex with shrieks this quiet grove,
But shepherd lads assemble here,
And tender virgins own their love.
No withered witch shall here be seen,
No goblins lead their nightly crew;
But female fays shall haunt the green,
And deck thy grave with pearly dew.
The red-breast often at evening hours,
Shall kindly lend its little aid,
With hoary moss and gathered flowers,
To deck the ground where thou art laid.
When howling winds and beating rain,
In tempest shake the Sylvian cell,
Or midst the chase upon the plain,
The tender thought on thee shall dwell,
Each lonely scene shall thee restore,
For thee the tear be daily shed.
Beloved till-life could charm no more,
And mourned till pity's self is dead.
SONG. BALINAMONE ORA.
WHEREVER I Am going, and all the day long,
Abroad or at home, or alone in a throng,
I find that my passion's so lively and strong,
That your name, when I Am silent, runs still in my song,
Sing Balinamone Ora, Balinamone Ora
A kiss of your sweet lips for me.
Since the first time I saw you I take no repose;
I sleep all the day to forget half my woes:
So hot is the flame in my bosom which glows,
By St. Patrick I fear it will burn through my clothes.
Sing Balinamone Ora, Balinamone Ora,
Your pretty black hair for me.
In my conscience, I fear I shall die in my grave,
Unless you comply, and poor Phelim will shave,
And grant the petition your lover does crave,
Who never was free till you made him your slave;
Sing Balinamone Ora, Balinamone Ora,
Your pretty black eyes for me.
On that happy day, when I make you my bride,
With a swinging long sword, how I Will strut and I Will stride,
In a coach and six horses with honey I Will ride.
As before you I walk to the church by your side.
Sing Balinamone Ora, Balinamone Ora,
^
SONG. BRAES OF BALLENDEAN.
BENEATH a green shade, a lovely young swain,
One evening reclined to discover his pain:
So sad, yet so sweetly, he warbled his woe,
The winds ceased to breathe and the fountains to flow;
Rude winds, with compassion, could hear him complain,
Yet Chloe, less gentle, was deaf to his strain.
How happy, he cried, my moments once flew,
Ever Chloe's bright charms first flashed in my view!
Those eyes, then, with pleasure, the dawn could survey;
Nor smiled the fair morning more cheerful than they.
Now, scenes of distress please only my sight:
I sicken in pleasure, and languish in light.
Through changes, in vain, relief I pursue,
All, all, but conspire my griefs to renew:
From sunshine, to zephyrs and shades, we repair;
To sunshine we fly from too piercing an air:
But love's ardent fever burns always the same!
No winter can cool it, no summer inflame.
But, see! the pale moon, all clouded, retires!
The breezes grow cool, not Strephon's desires!
I fly from the dangers of tempest and wind:
Yet nourish the madness that preys on my mind.
Ah, wretch! how can life be worthy thy care,
Since lengt'ning its moments but lengthens despair?
THE SIREN: PART III. ANACREONTIC and JOVIAL SONGS.

WILMINGTON: PRINTED FOR BONSAL and NILES, AND JAMES WILSON.

THE SIREN: PART III. ANACREONTIC and JOVIAL SONGS.
SONG. THE BROWN JUG.
DEAR TOM, this brown jug that now foams with mild ale,
Out of which I will drink to sweet Kate of the vale,
Was once Toby Filpot, a thirsty old soul,
As e'ere drank a bottle, or fathomed a bowl;
In boozing about 'twas his pride to excel,
And among jolly topers he bore off the bell.
It chanced, as in dog days he sat at his ease,
In his flower-woven arbor, as gay as you please,
With a friend and a pipe, puffing sorrow away,
And with honest old stingo was soaking his clay;
His breath doors of life on a sudden were shut,
And he died full as big as a Dorchester butt.
His body, when long in the ground it had lain,
And time into clay had dissolved it again,
A potter found out, in its covert so sung,
And with part of fat Toby he made this brown jug;
Now sacred to friendship, to mirth and mild ^e
So here is to my lovely sweet Kate of the vale.
SONG, AGNES AND TOBY: or a SEQUEL TO T^^ BROWN JUG.
MY true hearty fellows, who smoke with such glee,
To beg your attention for once I Will make free;
And sing of our pipes while thus merry and snug,
We lighten our care as we lighten our jug:
This jug which from Toby its origin boasts,
Old Toby, whose memory enlivens our toasts.
Toby's fame, like his size, spread so great by his ale,
That for Agnes no room could be found in the tale;
Honest Agnes, the social support of his life,
Both for quasting and size was well paired as his wife,
Therefore singing her praise we with joy will regale,
Whilst our pipes and our jug give a zest to our ale.
The potter who s^rewdly found Toby's semains,
Thought again there to visit might answer his pains,
Where in brief, he found Agnes, whose death as her life,
Made her qualified duly to lie as his wife;
Her fair fame all the (...) ^ucessantly quote,
Whose vicar the following ^^^itaph wrote;
Agnes Filpot, the wife of old Toby renowned,
Who lived whilst on earth, now lies dead in this ground;
Old Care of her grieving for Toby -- to bilk
She softened her sorrows with brandy and milk;
Swollen quite silky she thrived, 'till her skin gave a crack,
When Death poping in -- laid her here on her back.
At these lines our shrewd potter a happy thought started,
That Agnes and Toby should never be parted;
So he took of her clay, which was -- white as her milk,
And tempered with brandy till softer than silk;
And forming these pipes, he advised, sly and snug,
That we kiss HER fair clay, and shake hands with HIS jug.
SONG. DRINKING-SONG.
WHAT argufies pride and ambition?
Soon or late death must take us in tow:
Each bullet has got its commission,
And when our time's come we must go;
Then drink and sing, hang pain and sorrow,
The halter was made for the neck,
He that is now live and lusty -- to morrow
Perhaps may be stretched on the deck.
There was little Tom Linstock, of Dover,
Got killed, and left Polly in pain,
Poll cried, but her grief was soon over,
And then she got married again.
Then drink, etc.
Jack Junk was ill used by Bet Crocker,
And so took to guzzling the stuff,
'Till he tumbled in old Davy's locker,
And there he got liquor enough.
Then drink, etc.
For our prize money then to the protector,
Take our joy while it is going our freak;
For what argufies calling the doctor,
When the anchor of life is a peak.
Then drink, etc
SONG. NOTHING LIKE GROG.
A Plague of those musty old ^ubbers,
Who tells us to fast and to think,
And patient fall in with life's rubbers,
With nothing but water to drink:
A can of good stuff had they twiggd it,
'Twould have set him with pleasure agog;
And, spite of the rules,
Of the schools,
The old fools
Would all of 'em swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
My father, when last I from Guinea
Returned with abundance of wealth,
Cried Jack, never be such a ninny
To drink -- said I father your health:
So I showed him the stuff and he twigg'd it,
And it set the old codger agog,
And he swigg'd, and mother,
And sister, and brother,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And (...) there was nothing like grog.
The Other day as the chaplain was preaching,
Behind him I curiously slunk,
And while he our duty was teaching,
As how we should never get drunk,
I showed him the stuff, and he twigg'd it,
And it soon set his rev're^ce agog,
And he swigg'd, and Nick swigg'd,
And Ben swigg'd, and Dick swigg'd,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
Then trust me, there is nothing like drinking,
So pleasant on this side the grave;
I^ keeps the unhappy from thinking,
And makes even more valiant the brave:
As for me, from the moment I twigg'd it,
The good ^uff has so set me agog,
(...) or well, late or early,
Wind foully or fairly,
Hel^ a-lee or a-weather,
For (...) together,
(...) constantly (...),
And, (...) nothing like grog
SONG.
IF life is a bubble, and breaks with a bl^st,
You must toss off your wine, if you would wish it to last;
For this bubble may wall be destroyed with a puff,
If it is not kept floating in liquor enough.
If life is a flower, as philosophern say,
It Is a very good hint, understood the right way:
For if life is a flower, any block head can tell,
If you would have it look fresh, you must moisten it well.
This life is no more than (...) journey, it is said,
Where the roads, for most parts, are confoundedly bad:
Then let wine be our spur, and each trav'ler will own,
That whatever the roads we jog merrily on.
This world to a theater, liken'd has been,
Where each man around has a part in the scene;
It Is our part to get drunk, and it is matter of fact,
That the more you all drink, boys the better you will act.
This life is a dream, in which many will weep,
Who have strange silly (...) and cry in their sleep:
But for us, when we wake from our dream, 'twill be said,
That the tears of the tank^^ were all that we shed.
SONG.
MY temples with cluster of grapes I Will entwine,
And barter all joy for a goblet of wine;
In search of a Venus no longer I Will run,
But stop and forget her at Bacchus's tun.
Yet why thus resolve to relinquish the fair?
It Is folly with spirits like mine, to despair;
For what mighty charms can be found in a glass,
If not filled to the health of some favorite lass?
It Is woman whose charms every rapture impart,
And lend a new spring to the pulse of the heart;
The miser himself (so supreme is her sway)
Grows convert to love, and resigns her his key.
At the sound of her voice, sorrow lifts up her head,
And poverty listens, well pleased, from her shed:
While age, in ecstacy, hobbling along,
Beats time with his crutch to the tune of her song.
Then bring me a goblet from Bacchus's hoard.
The largest and deepest that stands on the board:
I Will fill up a brimmer, and drink to the fair;
It Is the thrist of a lover and pledge me who dare.
SONG. PUSH ABOUT THE BRISK GLASS.
PUSH about the brisk glass, I proclaim him an ass,
Who at cares of this world would repine,
'Twas our sorrows to drown, and dispel Fortune's frown,
That Jove sent us, Jove sent us, the juice of the vine.
It Is this in all sects the true interest protects,
And enlivens the lump of our clay:
The parson's looks teach, though against it they preach,
Then believe them, believe them, who pleases, I say.
It Is not long ago, that a vicar I know,
Whose name 'twere ungodly to tell,
Who over bottle and bowl, fat with many good soul,
Full of glee, 'till ding dong, ding dong went the bell.
Then having a hiccup, took the chair with a kick up,
I must go, else the church will complain.
But friends don't think me rude, for I swear by my priesthood,
I Will but preach, I Will but preach and be with you again.
The parson went straight, though he staggered in gait,
With his sermon in mem'ry's large chest,
To the pulpit be goes, but soon falls in a dose,
Crying excellent, excellent wine I protest.
The whole congregation, in strange consternation,
Left the church, with a sigh a^ the cause;
But the clerk, more devout, cried, sir, they are all out --
Then fill 'em, then fill 'em, again my brave boys!
In law, 'twas designed, justice still should be blind,
Yet she will squint if self-interest do call,
And I Am certain I could, over a hogshead that is good,
Bribe the council, the council, judge, jury, and all.
If to drink be a fau't, for so we are all taught,
Old Noah could tipple they say,
And we learn from thence, all mortals of sense
Should be sons of old Noah, old Noah, huzza!
SONG. The TEAR that bedews SENSIBILITY'S SHRINE.
THOUGH Bacchus may boast of his care killing bowl,
And folly in thought drowning revels delight;
Such worship alas! has no charms for the soul,
When softer devotions the senses invite:
When softer devotions the senses invite.
To the arrow of fate, or the canker of care,
His potions oblivious a balm may bestow,
But to fancy that feeds on the charms of the fair,
The death of reflection's the birth of all woe.
The death, etc.
What soul that is possessed of a dream so divine,
With riot would bid the sweet vision begone,
For the tear that bedews sensibility's shrine,
Is a drop of more worth than all Bacchus's tun.
Is a drop, etc.
The tender excess which enamours the heart,
To few is imparted, to millions denied,
It Is the brain of the victim that tempers the dare,
And fools jest at that for which sages have died.
And fools, etc.
Each change and excess has through life been my doom,
And well can I speak of its joy and its strife;
The bottle affords us a glimpse through the gloom,
But love's the true sunshine that gladdens our life.
But love's, etc.
Come then, rosy Venus, and spread over my sight,
The magic illusions that ravish the soul,
Awake in my breast the soft dream of delight,
And drop from thy myrtle one leaf in my bowl.
And drop, etc.
Then deep will I drink of the nectar divine,
Nor ever jolly god from thy banquet remove,
But each ^^be of my heart ever thirst for the wine,
That Is mellow'd by friendship, and sweet'ned by love,
That Is mellow'd, etc.
SONG.
BY the gaily circling glass
We can see how minutes pass;
By the hollow cask we are told
How the waining night grows old.
Soon, too soon, the basy day
Drives us from our sports away.
What have we with day to do?
Sons of care! 'twas made for you.
SONG.
WHAT Cato advises most certainly wise is,
Not always to labor, but sometimes to play;
To mingle sweet pleasure with search after treasure,
Indulging at night for the toils of the day.
And while the dull miser esteems himself wiser,
His bags to increase, while his health must decay;
Our souls we enlighten, our fancies we brighten,
And pass the long evenings in pleasure away.
All cheerful and hearty, we set aside party,
With some tender fair each bright bumper is crowned;
Here Bacchus invites us, there Venus delights us,
And care in an ocean of Mad^ria is drowned.
See there is our physician, we know no ambition:
For where there is good wine and good company found,
Thus happy together, in spite of all weather,
It Is sunshine and summer withus the year round.
SONG.
ROVING about, good fellows to meet,
I met with a man upon Sal^sbury dale;
I saw by his face that he was in good case
To go and shake hands with a pot of good ale.
The beggar who begs without any legs,
And has not a rags to cover her tail,
Is as happy in rags as the miser with bags,
If once she shakes hands with a pot of good ale.
The old parish vicar, when he is in his liquor,
Does merrily at his parishoners rail,
"Come pay all your tithes or I Will kiss all your wives,"
When once he shakes hands with a pot of good ale.
The old parish-clerk, his eyes are so dark,
He cannot well read, the print is so small;
But he will see every letter, and sing the psalms better,
If once he shakes hands with a pot of good ale.
The farmer who hedges and ditches all day,
And wearies himself out at the plough tail,
He Will talk of great things, about princes and kings,
When once he sits down to a pot of good ale.
If, in drinking about, we chance to fall out,
Or any thing else our senses assail;
If words comes to blows, or a sharp bloody nose,
We'll drink and shake hands with a pot of good ale.
SONG. WHEN THE FANCY STIRRING BOWL.
WHEN the fancy stirring bowl
Wakes its world of pleasure,
Glowing visions gild my soul,
And life's an endless treasure;
Memory decks my wasted heart,
Fresh with gay desires,
Rays divine my senses dart,
And kiddling hope inspires,
Then who'd be grave,
When wine can save
The heaviest soul from sinking,
And magic grapes
Give angel shapes,
To every girl we are drinking.
Here sweet benignity and love
Shed their influence round me,
Gathered ills of life remove,
And leave me as they found me,
Though my head may swim, yet true
Still to nature's feeling;
Peace and beauty swim there too,
And rock me as I Am reeling.
Then who'd be grave, etc.
On youth's soft pillow tender truth,
Her pensive lesson taught me,
Age soon mocked the dream of youth,
And wisdom waked and caught me,
A bargain then with love I knocked
To hold the pleasing gipsey,
Then wise to keep my bosom locked,
But turn the key when tipsey.
Then who'd be grave, etc.
When time assuag'd my heated heart
The grey-beard blind and simple,
Forgot to cool one little part
Just flushed by Lucy's dimple.
That part's enough of beauty's type
To warm an honest fellow;
And though it touch me not when ripe,
It melts still while I Am mellow.
Then who'd be grave, etc.
SONG.
POH! pox of this nonsense, I pr'ythee give over,
And talk of your Phyllis and Chloe no more;
Their face, and their air, and their mien; what a rout!
Here Is to thee, my good lad, push the bottle about.
Let finical fops play the fool and the ape,
They dare not confide in the juice of the grape;
But we honest fellows -- 'sdeath! who'd ever think
Of puling for love, while he is able to drink?
It Is wine, only wine, that true pleasure bestows;
Our joys it increases, and lightens our woes;
Remember what topers of old used to sing,
The man that is drunk is as great as a king.
If Cupid assaults you, there is law for his tricks;
Anacreon's Cases see, page twenty-six:
The precedent's glorious, and just, by my soul;
Lay hold on and drown the young dog in a bowl.
What Is life but a frolic, a song, and a laugh?
My toast shall be this, whilst I Have liquor to quaff;
"May mirth and good fellowship always abound?"
Boys, fill up a bumper, and let it go round.
SONG.
CONTENTED I am, and contented I Will be.
For what can this world more afford,
Than a friend that will sociably tipple with me.
And a cellar that is plenteously stored?
See! my vault door is open, decend every guest.
Top that cask, for the wine we will try;
It Is as sweet as the lips of your love to your take.
And as bright as her cheeks to your eye.
In a piece of slit hoop I my candle have stuck,
'Twill light us each bottle to hand;
The foot of my glass for the purpose I Have broke,
For I hate that a bumper should stand.
Sound that pipe -- it is in tune, and the binns are well, filled,
View that heap of Maderia in the rear:
Those bottles are Burgundy; see how they are pil'd.
Like artillery, tier over tier.
My cellar's my camp, and my soldiers my fla^,
All gloriously ranged in review;
When I cast my eyes round, I consider my casks
As kingdoms I Have got to subdue.
It Is my will when I die, not a tear (...) shed,
No hic jacet be engraved on my (...);
But pour on my coffin a bottle of red,
And say that my drinking is do^.
SONG.
NOW we are free from college rules,
From systems out of season;
From lumber of the lying schools,
And syllogistic reason:
Never more we'll have defined
If matter thinks or thinks not,
All the matter we shall mind,
Is he who drinks or drinks not.
Metaphysical to trace,
The mind or soul abstracted;
Or prove infinity of space,
By cause on cause affected.
Better souls we cannot become
By immaterial thinking;
And as to space, we want no room,
Plenum vacuum, minus, plus,
Are learned words and rare too;
Those term^ (...) tutors may discuss.
And these that please may hear too.
A plenum (...) our wine we show,
With plus and plus behind, Sir;
And when our cash is minus low.
A vacuum soon we find, Sir.
Cop^rnicus, that learned sage,
Dane Tycho's error proving,
Declares (I don't know in what page)
That Earth round Sol is moving:
But which goes round, what is that to us?
Each is ^^^haps a notion;
With earth or sun we'll make no fuss,
But mind the glasses' motion.
Great Galileo ill was used
By superstition's fury;
And An^ (...) abused
By ignoramus jury.
But feet to feet we (...) attest,
Nor fear a (...) scurry,
For when we are drunk, probatum est,
We Are tumbling topsy turvey.
Newton talked of lights and shades,
And different colors knew, sir;
But let not us disturb our heads,
We'll study only two, sir;
White and red our glasses boast,
True humour's rarefaction;
After him we'll name our toast, --
The center of attraction.
On that thesis we'll declaim,
With Stratum super stratum;
There Is magic in the mighty name,
It Is nature's postulatum.
Wine in nature's next to love,
Then wisely let us blend 'em;
First, though, physically prove,
That tempus est bibendum.
SONG. ANACREON.
To Anacreon, in heaven where he sat in full glee,
A few sons of harmony sent a petition,
That he their inspirer and patron would be;
When this answer arrived from the jolly old Grecian:
Voice, fiddle and flute,
No longer be mute,
I Will lend you my name and inspire you to boot:
And besides, I Will instruct ye, like me to entwine,
The myrtle of Venus with Bacchus's vine.
The uews through Olympus immediately flew,
When old Thunder pretended to give himself airs,
If these mortals are suffered their schemes to pursue,
The devil a goddess will stay above stairs.
Hark! already they cry,
In transports of joy,
Away to the sons of Anacreon we'll fly:
And there with good fellows, we'll learn to entwine,
The myrtle of Venus with Bacchus's vine.
The yellow hair'd god, with his nine fusty maids;
From Helicon's banks will incontinent flee;
Idali^ will boast but of tenantless shades,
And the bi-forked hill a mere desert will be:
My thunder, no fear on it,
Shall soon do its errand,
And dam'me! I Will swinge the ringleaders, I warrant,
I Will trim the young dogs for thus daring to twine
The myrtle of Venus with Bacchus's vine.
A cello rose up, and said prithee never quarrel,
Goodking of the gods, with my vot'ries below;
Your thunder is useless, then showing his laurel,
Cried Sic evitable fulmen you know!
Then over each head
My laurels I Will spread.
So my sons from your crackers no mischief shall dread,
While snug in their club-room, they jovially 'twine.,
The myrtle of Venus with Bacchus's vine.
Next Momus rose up with his risible phiz,
And swore with Apollo he would che^rfully Join;
The full tide of harmony still shall be his,
But the song and the catch, and the laugh shall be mine;
Then, Jove, be not jealous
Of these honest fellows;
Cried Jove, we relent, since the truth you now tell us,
And swear by old Styx, that they long shall entwine
The myrthe of Venus with Bacchus's vine.
Ye sons of Anacreon, then join hand in hand,
Preserve unanimity, friendship and love,
It Is yours to support what is so happily planned,
You Have the sanction of gods and the f^at of Jove:
While thus we agree.
Our toast let it be,
May our club flourish happy, united and free
And long may the sons of Anacreon entwine,
The myrtle of Venus with Bacchus's vine.
SONG.
YE froli^some sparks of the game,
Ye misers both wretched and old,
Come listen to Isaac by name,
Who once had his ha^^^ of gold,
With seven score acres of land,
Of corn and of cattle great store;
Though now I have none at command,
Yet still I am as gay as before.
Then why should we quarrel for riches,
Or any such gli^tering toys?
A light hears and a thin pair of breeches,
Go through the world, brave boys!
My father was clothed in leather,
My mother in sheep's rasse^ gray.
They labored in all forts of weather,
That I might go gallant and gay.
My rapier, hat mounted with feather,
A heart too as light as a cork!
What my old dad had raked up together,
I spread all abroad with my fork.
Then why, etc.
The merchant, who trades on the seas
For riches, you very well know,
Can never be much at his ease,
When blustering tempests do blow.
His happiness can be but small,
For fear of some terrible news;
But he that has nothing at all,
Has little or nothing to lose.
Then why, etc.
Should they make me a justice of peace,
An alderman, sheriff or may'r,
With riches my cares would increase,
And drive me quit into despair.
I love to be jovial and free,
And quite unconcerned in the state;
My mind is a kingdom to me;
There Is a danger in being too great.
Then why, etc.
My fortune is pretty well spent,
My lands, my cattle, and corn:
Yet I am as full of content
As I was ever since I was born.
I never will be troubled with wealth,
My pockets are drained very dry;
I walk where I please for my health,
And never fear wanting not I.
Then why, etc.
Some say that old Care killed the cat
And starved her for fear she should die;
But I Will be wiser than that,
For the devil a care I Will come nigh;
But to toss off the jolly full bowl,
To drive away sorrow and strife;
Here Is health to that honest brave soul
Who never took care in his life.
Then why, etc.
SONG.
Let care be a stranger to each jovial soul
Who, Aristippus like, can his passions contro^ul:
Of wisest philosophers wisest was he,
Who, attentive to ease, let his mind still be free:
The Prince, Peer, or Peasant to him were the same,
For pleased he was pleasing to all where he came,
But still turned his back on contention and strife,
Resolving to live all the days of his life.
A friend to mankind, all mankind was his friend,
And the peace of his mind was his ultimate end;
He sound fault with none if none sound fault with him,
If his friend had a humor, he humored h^e whim;
If wine was the word, why he bumper'd his glass,
If love was the topic, he toasted his lass;
But still turned his back on contention and strife,
Resolving to live all the days of his life.
If councils disputed, if council^ agreed,
He found fault with neither; for this was his creed,
That let them be guided by folly or sense,
'Twould be semper eadem an hundred years hence.
He thought 'twas unsocial to be mal-content,
If the (...) went with him, with the tide too he went;
But still turned his back on contention and strife,
Resolving to live all the days of his life.
Was the nation at war, he wished well to the sword;
If a peace was concluded, a peace was his word;
Disquiet to him of body or mind,
Was the longitude only he never could find,
The philosopher's stone was but graver and pain,
And all who had sought it, had (...)
He still turned his back (...)
Resolving to live all the days of (...)
Then let us all follow Aristippus's rules,
And deem his opponents both asses and mules;
Let those not contented to lead or to drive,
By the bees of their sex be drove out of their hive;
Expelled from the mansions of quiet and ease,
May they never find out the blessed art how to please;
While our friends and ourselves, not forgetting our wives.
By those maxims may live all the days of our lives.
SONG.
WITH a cheerful old friend, and a merry old song,
And a tankard of porter, I Would sit the night long,
And laugh at the follies of those that repine, --
Though I must drink porter while they can drink wine.
I envy no mortal, be he ever so great, --
Nor scorn I the wretch for his lowly estate;
But what I abhor, and deem as a curse,
Is meanness of spirit, -- not poorness of purse.
Then let us, companions, be jovial and gay,
And cheerfully spend life's remainder away;
Upheld by a friend, our fees we'll despise, --
For, the more we are envied, the higher we rise.
SONG.
WHEN Jove was resolved to create the round earth,
He subpoena'd the virtues divine, --
Young Bacchus he sat precedentum of mirth,
And the toast was "wit, women and wine."
The sentiment tickled the ear of each god, --
Apollo he winked at the Nine;
And Venus gave Mars, too, a sly wanton nod,
When she drank to wit, women, and wine.
Old Jove shook his sides, and the cap put around,
While Juno, for once looked divine;
These blessings, says he, shall on earth now abound,
And the toast is wit, women, and wine.
These are joys, worthy gods, which to mortals are given,
Says Momus, who will not repine?
For what is worth our notice, pray tell me, in heaven,
If man have wit, women, and wine.
This joke you will repent, I Will lay fifty to seven,
Such attraction no power can decline;
Old Jove, by yourself you will keep house in heaven,
For we'll follow wit, women, and wine.
You Are right, says old Jove, let us hence to the earth,
Men and gods think variety fine;
Who'd stay in the clouds, when goodnature and mirth,
Are below with wit, women, and wine.
SONG. THE CAN OF GROG.
WHILE up the shrouds the sailor goes,
Or ventures on the yard,
The landman, who no better knows,
Believes his lot is hard.
But Jack, with smiles, each danger meets,
Casts anchor, heaves the log,
Trims all the sails, belays the sheets,
And drinks his can of grog.
When mountains high the waves that swell
The vessel rudely bear,
Now sinking in a hollow dell,
Now quivering in the air.
Bold Jack, etc.
When waves against rocks and quicksands roar,
You never hear him repine,
Freezing near Greenland's icy shore,
Or burning near the line.
Bold Jack, etc.
If to engage they give the word,
To quarters all repair,
While splinter'd masts go by the board,
And shot sing through the air.
Bold Jack, etc.
SONG. ONE BOTTLE MORE.
ASSIST me, ye lads, who have hearts void of guile,
To sing in the praise of old Ireland's isle,
Where true hospitality opens the door,
And friendship detains us for one bottle more,
One bottle more, arra', one bottle more,
And friendship detains us for one bottle more.
Old England, your taunts on our country forbear;
With our bulls, and our brogues, we are true and sinc^,
For if but one bottle remained in our store,
We have generous hearts to give that bottle more.
At Candy's in Church-Street I Will sing of a set
Of six Irish blades who together had met;
Four bottles a piece made us call for our score,
And nothing remained but one bottle more.
Our bill being paid we were loath to depart,
For friendship had grappled each man by the heart;
Where the least touch, you know, makes an Irishman roar,
And the whack from shilela brought six bottles more.
Slow Phoebus had shone through our windows so bright,
Quite happy to view his blessed children of light;
So we parted with hearts neither sorry nor sore,
Resolving next night to drink twelve bottles more.
SONG. THE HAPPY FELLOW.
WITH my jug in one hand, and my pipe in the other,
I Will drink to my neighbor and friend;
My cares in a whiff of tobacco I Will smother,
Since life I know shortly must end:
While Ceres most kindly refills my brown jug,
With good ale I will make myself mellow;
In my old wicker chair I will seat myself snug,
Like a jolly and true hearted fellow.
I Will never trouble my head with the cares of the nation,
I Have enough of my own for to mind;
For the cares of this life are but grief and vexation,
To death we must all be consigned:
Then I laugh, drink and smoke, and leave nothing to pay,
But drop like a pear that is ripe and mellow;
And when cold in my coffin I Will leave them to say,
He Is gone, what a hearty good fellow.
SONG. YE LADS OF TRUE SPIRIT.
YE lads of true spirit, pay courtship to claret,
Released from the trouble of thinking:
A fool, long ago, said we nothing could know;
The fellow knew nothing of drinking.
To pore over Plato, or practice with Cato,
Dispassionate dunces might make us;
But men now more wise, self-denial despise,
And live by the lessons of Bacchus.
Big-wig'd, in sine coach, see the doctor approach;
He solemnly up the stairs paces:
Looks grave -- smells his cane -- applies singure to vein,
And counts the repeats with grimaces.
As he holds pen in hand, life and death are at stand --
A toss up which party shall take us.
Away with such cant -- no prescription we want,
But the nourishing nostrum of Bacchus.
We jollily join in the practice of wine,
While misers 'midst plenty are pining;
While ladies are scorning, and lovers are mourning,
We laugh at wealth, wenching and whining.
Drink, drink, now it is prime; toss a bottle to Time,
He Will not make such haste to overtake us;
His threats we prevent, and his cracks we cement,
By the styptical balsam of Bacchus.
What work is there made, by the newspaper trade,
Of this man's and the other man's station!
The ins are all bad, and the outs are all mad;
In and out is the cry of the nation.
The politic patter which both parties chatter,
From bumpering freely s^an't shake us;
With half-pints in hand, independent we'll stand
To defend Magna Charta of Bacchus.
Be your motions well tim,d: be all charged and all prim'd,
Have a care -- right and left -- and make ready.
Right hand to glass join -- at your lips rest your wine:
Be all in your exercise steady.
Our levels we boast, when our women we toast;
May graciously they undertake us!
No more we desire -- so drink and give fire,
A volley to beauty and Bacchus!
SINCE THERE IS SO SMALL DIFFERENCE.
SINCE there is so small difference 'twixt drowning and drinking,
We'll tipple and pray too, like mariners sinking.
While they drink salt water, we'll pledge them in wine,
And pay our devotion at Bacchus shrine,
O! Bacchus, great Bacchus, for ever defend us,
And plentiful store of good Burgundy send us.
THE SIREN: PART IV. COMIC, INGENIOUS and WITTY SONGS.

WILMINGTON: PRINTED FOR BONSAL and NILES, AND JAMES WILSON.

THE SIREN: PART IV. COMIC, INGENIOUS and WITTY SONGS.
SONG. THE WOMEN ALL TELL ME.
THE women all tell me I Am false to my lass;
That I quit my poor Chloe and stick to my glass;
But to you men of reason, my reasons I Will own;
And if you don't like them, why -- let them alone.
Although I have left her, the truth I Will declare;
I believe she was good, and I Am sure she was fair;
But goodness and charms in a bumper I see,
That make it as good and as charming as s^e.
My Chloe had dimples and smiles, I must own,
But though she could smile, yet, in truth she could frown:
But tell me, ye lovers of liquor divine,
Did you ever see a frown in a bumper of wine?
Her lilies and roses were just in their prime;
Yet lilies and roses are conquered by time:
(...) in wine, from its age, such a benefit flows,
(...) we like it the better, the older it grows.
They tell me my love would in time have been cloyed,
And that beauty's insipid when once it is enjoyed;
But in wine I both time and enjoyment defy;
For the longer I drink the more thirsty am I.
Let murders, and battles, and history prove
The mischiefs that wait upon rivals in love:
But in drinking, thank heaven, no rival contends;
For the more we love liquor, the more we are friends,
She too might have poisoned the joy of my life,
With nurses and babies, and squalling and strife;
But my wine neither nurses nor babies can bring,
And a big-bellied bottle's a mighty good thing.
We shorten our days when with love we engage;
It brings on diseases, and hastens old age:
But wine from grim death can its votaries save.
And keep out the other leg when there is one in the grave.
Perhaps like her sex, ever false to her word,
She had left me to get an estate or a lord:
But my bumper (regarding not title or pelf)
Will stand by me when I cannot stand by myself.
Then, my dear Chloe, no longer complain,
She Is rid of her lover, and I of my pain;
For in wine, mighty wine, many comforts I spy:
Should you doubt what I say -- take a bumper and try.
SONG. CHOICE OF A WIFE.
GIVE me the nymph who no beauty can boast,
But health and good humor to make her my toast;
If straight, I don't care whether slender or fat,
And six feet or four -- well never quarrel for that.
Whatever her complexion, I vow I don't care:
If brown, it is lasting -- more pleasing if fair:
And though in her cheeks, I no dimples should see,
Let her smile -- and each dell is a dimple to me.
Let her locks be the reddest that ever was seen:
And her eyes -- may be even any color -- but green:
For in eyes, though so various in histre and hue,
I swear I Have no choice -- only let her have two.
It Is true, I Would dispense with a throne on her back;
And white teeth, I own, are genteeler than black:
A little round chin too's a beauty I Have heard:
But I only desire -- she may not have a beard.
SONG. OBADIAH'S COURTSHIP.
A Favorite new Trio.
SLOW. Obadiah. O ALAS! I Have lost my lover,
Hem -- hem -- hem --
How shall I the loss recover?
Hem -- hem -- hem -- hem --

QUICK. Simon. Walk up to her and salute her,
I'arle arle arle a!
Praise the charms that are about her,
Farle arle arle a!

SLOW. Obadiah. O young maid, (...) you are pretty,
Hem -- hem -- hem --
Handsome, charming, wise and wit^y,
Hem -- hem -- hem -- hem --

QUICK. Rebecca. O young (...) you do but flatter,
Farle arle, etc.
The very heart of you does patter,
Farle arle, etc.

SLOW. Obadiah to Simon. See, ah! see, how she disdains me,
Hem -- hem -- hem --
O could you but recommend me,
Hem -- hem -- hem -- hem --

QUICK. Simon. Recommend the fair to love thee,
Farle arle, etc.
Court her when the spirit moves thee,
Farle arle, etc.

SLOW. Obadiah. O powerful Spirit! often I try thee.
Hem -- hem -- hem --
All I can do she still denies me,
Hem -- hem -- hem -- hem --

QUICK. Simon. Court her in the way of finners,
Farle arle, etc.
I Will lay my life that ye shall win her;
Farle arle, etc.

NEW GROUP OF LOVERS.
Tune -- Moderation and Alteration.

I WILL sing you a song about a young lady that lived in Aberdeen,
Whem, in my younger days, I remember to have very often seen;
She had a vast number of suitors, lovers I mean,
Who adored her like a Venus, or an Indian Queen.
Ad^ration!
She was neither tall nor slender, plump, jolly nor round,
But a good looking damsel as possibly could be found*
Heiress of a good many houses, and a bit of very pleasant ground,
Which would have amounted, as was supposed, to very near five thousand pound.
Temptation!
First ^osted her Mr. Starch the grocer, equipt in a new tye-wig,
^h a large flashy curl at each ear, nicely powdered and very trig;
He had great hopes one day of becoming Lord Mayor, so he looked mighty big,
And came in cutting as many capers as if he had been dancing a jig.
Oftentation!
He told her, very politely, he had come her affections to engage,
But he had scarcely got the words well spoke, till the lady called on her page,
And desired he might show the gentleman to his shop to fell his Congou and
Sage;
So Mr. Starch was very much affronted, and left the house in a terrible rage.
Indignation!
Next came a Lawyer, as big as my Lord Chancellor, and with majestic bow,
Presented his petition in due form -- for who had a better title to sue?
He swore he would plead her cause for nothing, which the very seldom do,
And that he would bring an action of forthcoming against the whole crew.
Litigation!
But proceeding against the right forms of love, she treated him with scorn,
Protesting she never saw such impudence since ever she was born,
She rung her bell instantly on her servants to put him to the born,
And he was tossed in a blanket, thrown down stairs, and had his face sadly
torn.
Condemnation!
Next appeared a Physician, a character equally great,
With all the consequential airs of a Minister of State;
And though, during this bloody scene, he was obliged to wait,
On his appearance he expected a much better fate.
Expectation!
On his entrance, with some ceremony, he made bold to sit down,
And informed her he was a person of great fame and renown,
Well known to all the young bloods of fortune, and rakes in the town,
And that he was even sometimes employed by gentry of of the gown.
Occupation!
During this speech, in every feature importance you might trace;
But stretching out his fine white hand to feel her pulse with a grace,
The lady returned his politeness with a smack in the face,
And bid him begone, for he should never examine her case.
Examination!
Next came Jack Flip, a good honest open-hearted tar,
Whose face looked nothing better of many a noble scar;
He swore by his jacket, blood and buttons, that he had traveled -- Lord knows
how far!
And was all politeness, having studied twenty years on board a Man of War.
Education!
So, coming briskly up, he lay close under her lee-boom,
But finding his tackling not clear, and the weather like to gloom,
And fearing some damages, should the vessel chance to loom,
He about ship the very first broadside, and left her searoom.
Resignation!
Then came a Right Worshipful Brother Mason, accepted and free,
None could claim a better title to lady's favor than he;
But though to he sure he told her as much as he could to any She,
She conjured him to be gone, for his secret she cared not a T.
Conjuration!
Being at length deserted by Lawyers, Physicians, and Beaux,
And arrived at the grand climacte^^c of all female woes,
When the pale parchment cheek takes the place of the rose,
And the chin, like a nut-cracker, kisses the nose.
Alteration!
To complete all her folly, which she now viewed with sorrow and regret,
And to avoid leading apes, which, to be sure, is a very hard fate,
She deter^'d to embrace the first offer of a mate;
So consigned all her charms to an old fool quite worn out of date.
Consignation!
Now it must strike every one with astonishment and surprise,
What in the name of wonder could have blinded this lady's bright eyes,
The comforts of youth and of life thus foolishly to despise,
And then, in the end, be contented with a blank for a prize!
Infatuation!
I hope then every pretty young lady, now lift'ning to me,
In this plain obvious moral will most readily agree,
That the fruit should always be pulled ere it rot on the tree,
When they know what the dis^al termination must be.
Termination!
SONG. HUMPHRY GUBBIN'S COURTSHIP.
A Courting I went to my love,
Who is sweeter than roses in May;
And when I came to her by Jove,
The devil a word could I say.
I walked with her into the garden,
There fully intending to woo her!
But may I never be worth a farthing,
If of love I said any thing to her.
I clasped her hand close to my breast,
While my heart was as light as a feather;
Yet nothing I said, I protest,
But -- Madam it is very fine weather.
To an arbor I did her attend,
She asked me to come and sit by her;
I crept to the furthermost end,
For I was afraid to come nigh her.
I asked her which way was the wind,
For I thought in some talk we must enter;
Why, sir, (she answered, and grinn'd)
Have you just sent your wits for a venture?
Then I followed her into the house,
There I vowed I my passion would try;
But there I was still as a mouse:
Oh! what a dull booby was I!
SONG. JACKY BULL FROM FRANCE.
IN Jacky Bull, when bound for France,
The gosling you discover:
But taught to ride to fence and dance,
A finished goose comes over.
With his tierce and carte -- fa! fa!
And his cotillion so smart -- ha! ha!
He charms each female heart -- oh! la!
As Jacky returns from Dover.
For cocks and dogs, see 'squire at home,
The prince of country tonies;
Returned from Paris, Spa, or Rome,
Our 'squire's a nice Adonis.
With his tierce and carte -- fa! fa!
And his cotillion so smart -- ha! ha!
He charms the female heart -- oh, la!
The pink of macaronies.
SONG.
A Master I have, and I am his man,
Galloping dreary dun,
And he will get a wife as fast as he can,
With a haily, gaily,
Gambo raily,
Giggling,
Niggling,
Galloping galloway, draggle tail dreary dun.
I saddled his steed so fine and so gay,
Galloping dreary dun:
I mounted my mule and we both rode away,
With our haily, etc.
We canter'd along until it grew dark,
Galloping dreary dun:
The nightingale sung instead of the lark,
With her haily, etc.
We met with a friar, and asked him our way,
Galloping dreary dun;
By the Lord, says the friar, you are both astray,
With your haily, etc.
Our journey, I fear, will do us no good,
Galloping dreary dun;
We wander alone, like the babes in the wood,
With our haily, etc.
(...) master is fighting and I Will take a peep,
Galloping dreary dun;
But now I think on it -- I Would better go sleep,
With my haily, etc.
SONG. AS SURE AS A GUN.
ALL you who w^u'd wish to succeed with a lass,
Learn how the affair's to be done:
For, if you stand fooling, and shy, like an ass,
You Will loose her as sure as a gun.
With a whining, and sighing, and vows, and all that,
As far as you please you may run;
She Will hear you, and jeer you, and give you a pat,
But jilt you as sure as a gun.
To worship, and call her bright goddess, is fine,
But, mark you the consequence -- mum;
The baggage will think herself really divine,
And scorn you, as sure as a gun.
Then be with a maiden, bold, frolic, and stout,
And no opportunity shun;
She Will tell you she hates you, and swear she will cry out,
But ^^m -- she is as sure as a gun.
SONG. CHELSEA PENSIONER.
SING the loves of John and Jean;
Sing the loves of Jean and John,
John for her would leave a queen,
Jean for him the noblest don.
She Is his queen,
He Is her don.
John loves Jean,
And Jean loves John.
What^^er rejoices happy Jean
Is sure to burst the sides of John,
Does she, for grief, look thin and lean,
He instantly is pale and wan:
Thin and lean,
Pale and wan,
John loves Jean,
And Jean loves John.
It Was the lilly hand of Jean
Filled the glass of happy John;
And, heavens! how joyful was she seen
When he was for a license gone!
Joyful seen,
They Will dance anon,
For John weds Jean,
And Jean weds John.
John has taken to wife his Jean,
Jean's become the spouse of John,
She no longer is his queen,
He no longer is her don.
No more queen,
No more don;
John hates Jean,
And Jean hates John.
Whatever it is that pleases Jean,
Is certain now to displease John;
With scolding they are grown thin and lean,
With spleen and spite they are pale and wan.
Thin and lean,
Pale and wan,
John hates Jean,
And Jean hates John.
John prays heaven to take his Jean
Jean at the devil wishes John;
He Will dancing on her grave be seen,
^
They Will gay be seen,
Dead and gone,
For John hates Jean.
And Jean hates John.
SONG. NANCY AND THE MILLER.
ONE midsummer morning, when nature looked gay,
The birds full of song, and the flocks full of play,
When earth seemed to answer the smiles from above
And all things proclaimed it a season of love;
My mother cried, Nancy, come have to the mill,
If the corn be not ground you may scold if you will.
The freedom to use my tongue pleased me, no doubt;
A woman, alas! would be nothing without;
I went toward the mill without any delay,
And conn'd over the words I determined to say:
But when I came near it, I found it stock still,
Bless my stars now, cried I, huff him rarely I will.
The Miller to market that instant was gone,
The work it was left to the care of his son:
Now, though I can scold well as any one can,
I thought 'twould be wrong for to scold the young man:
I said, I Am surpised you can use me so ill,
I must have my corn ground, I must and I will.
Sweet maid, cried the youth, the fault is not mine,
No corn in the town I Would grind sooner than thine;
There Is no one more ready in pleasing the fair,
The mill shall go merrily round, I declare.
But hark how the birds sing, and see how they bill,
I must have a kiss first, I must and I will.
My corn being done, I toward home bent my way,
He whispered he would something of moment to say:
Insisted to hand me along the green mead,
And there swore he loved are indeed, and indeed!
And that he would be constant and true to me still,
And since that I Have liked him, and like him I will.
I often say, Mother, the miller I Will huff.
She laughs and cries, Go, girl, aye plague him enough;
And scarce a day passes, but by her desire.
I get a sly kiss from the youth I admire.
If wedlock he wishes, his wish I Will fulfill,
And I Will answer O yes, with a hearty good will.
SONG. DOT AND CARRY ONE.
POUNDS, shillings, pence, and farthings, I
Have at my fingers end,
And how to sell, and how to buy,
To borrow or to lend;
Put this though I never went to school,
My pate has ran upon,
Addition is my golden rule,
Ha! dot and carry one.
At loss and gain a scholar got,
Right early was I taught
To gain of guineas all I could,
To lose the devil a groat:
For fractions and divisions, when
They practice sword and gun,
Substract myself I will, and then
Ha! dot and carry one.
But words no more I Will numerate,
And thus sum total lies:
Of war no more I Will sing or prate,
Reduction I Will despise:
And, if cockade and roguish eye
Has not my Susan won;
If she is resolved to multiply,
Ha! dot and carry one.
SONG. THE SAILORS WATERY GRAVE.
WHILE over the raging roaring seas,
The sailor's heart is sore oppressed,
While landsman safe, with health and ease,
For wives and children we have no rest;
To them perhaps never shall return,
Our litale saving cannot save,
But we are lost! and they long mourn,
The sailors cold! cold! watery grave.
K^^d landsmen, oh! reflect a while,
The awful sceues that us befall,
On sailors orphans cast a smile,
Poor hearts! should they for pity call;
To them perhaps never to return,
Our little savings cannot save,
But we are lost! and they long mourn.
The sailors cold! cold! watery grave.
AIR.
Sung in The Farmer.

GAD-a-mercy! devil's in me.
All the damsels wish to win me;
Like a maypole round me clutter.
Hanging garlands -- fuss and flutter!
Lilting, cap'ring, grinning, smirking;
Pouting, bobbing, winking jerking;
Kates and Betties;
Polls and Letties,
All were poting, gentle creatures,
On these features. --
To their aprons all would pin me,
Gad-a-mercy! devil's in me,
All the damsels wish to win me.
Black hair'd damsels, red hair'd damsels;
Six feet damsels, three feet damsels;
Pale faced damsels, plump faced damsels;
Small legged damsels, thick legged damsels;
Pretty, ugly, black hair'd, red hair'd, six feet, there feet,
Pale faced, plump faced, small legged, thick legged, dainty, dowdy;
All run after me, Sir, me;
For, when pretty fellows we,
Pretty maids are frank and free.
For their stays taking measure
Of the ladies, oh they pleasure!
Oh, such tempting looks they gi'me;
Wishing of my heart to nim me;
Pat and cry, you devil Jemmy!
Pretty ladys, ugly ladys, etc.
SONG. MEDLEY OF LOVERS, Sung in Sherwood Forest.
WHEN the men a courting came,
Flattering with their prittle prattle,
Of their fool'ries I made game,
Rallied with my tittle tattle:
Cooing to me,
Wooing to me,
Teazing of me,
Pleasing of me,
Offering pelf,
Each silly elf,
Came cooing, wooing, bowing to me.
The divine, with looks demure,
Talked of tithes and eating plenty;
Showed the profits of his cure,
And vowed to treat me with each dainty.
Cooing to me, etc.
The learned sergeant of the law,
Showed his parchments, briefs, and papers;
In his deeds I found a flaw,
So dismissed him in the vapors.
Cooing to me, etc,
Physic now displays his wealth,
With his nostrums -- but the fact is,
I resolved to keep my health;
Nor die a martyr to his practice.
Cooing to me, etc.
But at last a swain bowed low,
Candid, handsome, tall and clever,
Squeezed my hand -- I cannot tell how,
But he won my heart for ever.
Cooing to me,
Wooing to me:
Teazing of me,
Pleazing of me,
Offering pelf,
Each filly elf;
I sent all other wooers from me.
SONG. MY DEAR, HOW DO YOU DO?
TO hear a sweet goldfinch's former,
This morning I put on my bonnet
But scarce in the meadow, pies on it^,
When the captain appears in my view:
I felt an odd sort of sensation,
My heart beat in strange palpitation,
I blushed like a pink, or carnation,
When he said, my dear, how do you (...)
The dickens, says I, here has popp'd him,
He thought to slip by, but I stopped him,
So my very best curtsey I dropped him,
With air then he took off his hat:
He seemed with my person enchanted,
He squeezed my hand -- how my heart panted,
He asked for a kiss, which I granted,
And, pray now, what harm was in that?
Says I, Sir, for what do you take me?
He swore a fine lady he would make me,
No, them him, he would never forsake me,
And then on his knee he stooped down;
His handkerchief, la! smelt so sweetly,
His white teeth he showed so completely,
He managed the matter (...) neatly,
I never can be kissed by a clown.
SONG. THE BALLAD SINGERS.
BE it known to all those whosoe'er it regards,
That we singers of ballads were always called bards;
And from Ida to Grubb-street the muses who follow
Are, each mother's son the true spawn of Apollo:
Thus recording great men, or a flea, or a star,
Or the spheres, or a jew's-harp, we are all on a par;
Nor in this do I tell you a word of a lie,
For Homer sung ballads, so likewise do I.
Don't you know what the ancients were? -- great things they talked,
How they rode on Pegasus -- that is to say, walked;
That near kindred gods they drove Phoebus's chariot,
The English of which (...) they lived in the garret,
And thus they went forward, Diogenes quaff'd,
Heraclitus cried, and Democritus laughed,
Menander made multitudes both laugh and cry,
But Homer sung baliads, so likewise do I.
Thus did they strange whimsical notions pursue;
Some argued upon one leg, and some upon two;
To which last my pretensions are not hypothetic,
For it is certainly clear I Am a parapetatic:
Lycurgus and Solon 'bout laws made a pother,
Which went in at one ear and then out at 'tother,
Old songs such as mine are will nobody buy?
Come, Homer fung ballads, fo likewise do I.
Historic was Pliny, and Plato divine,
Ovid wrote about love and Anacreon wine;
Great Cicero argued to every man's palate,
And when he was out -- 'twas a hole in the ballad:
Thus to great men of old, who have made such a rout,
My claim to call cousin I Have fairly made out;
And if any hereafter my right should deny,
Tell 'em Homer sung ballads so likewise do I.
THE BRIDEWELL SONG.
YE Scamps, ye Pads, ye Diverse, and all upon the lay,
In Tothill-fields gay sheep-walk, like lambs ye sport and play.
Rattling up your darbies, come hither at my call,
I Am jigger dubber here, and you're welcome to mill doll.
With my tow, row, etc.
At your insurance office the flats you have taken in,
The game you have played my kiddy, your always sure to win;
First you touch the shiners -- the numbers up -- you break,
With your insuring policy, I Would not insure your neck!
With my tow, row, etc,
My peepers, who have we here now ^why this is sure black Moll,
Why, ma'am, you're of the fair sex, so welcome to mill doll.
The Cull with you who'd venture into a snoozing ken,
Like blackamoor Othello, should put out the light and then --
With my tow, row, etc.
I (...) my flashy coachman, that you will take better care,
(...) little bub come the slang upon your fare,
Your jazy pays the garnish, unless the sees you tip,
Though you're a flashy coachman, here the gagger holds the whip.
With my tow, row, etc.
CHORUS.
We Are Scamps, we are Pads, we are Diverse, we are all upon the lay,
In Tothill-fields gay sheep walk, like lambs we sport and play;
Rattling up our darbies, we are hither at your call,
You are jigger dubber here, and we are forced for to milldoll.
With our tow, row, etc.
SONG. AMO AMAS.
AMO amas,
I love a lass,
As a cedar tall and slender:
Sweet cowslips grace
Is her nomn'tive case,
And she is of the feminine gender.
CHORUS.
Rorum little,
Sunt divorum.
Harum scarum,
Divo! --
Tag rag, merry derry, perriwig and hat-band,
Hic, hoc, horum, gentivo!
Can I decline,
A nymph divine?
Her voice as the lute is dulcis;
Her oculus bright,
Her manus white;
And soft, when I tacto, her pulse is.
Rorum, little, etc,
Oh, my bella,
My puella!
I Will kiss, seculla seculorum:
If I Have luck, sir,
She Is my uxor;
O dies benedictorum!
Rorum, little, etc.
SONG.
DEVIL burn 'em -- those wits are jack asses:
Tumble down their vile books from my shelves a
They goddesses make of their lasses,
And simpletons make of themselves.
Away with their nonsense, away!
Moggy Timbertoe let me indite:
Whose eye is as bright as the day,
And whose tongue is as still as the night.
With storms should the elements crack,
How fearless is virtue the while!
Let the brave be dismayed at the smack:
Her fa^ wears an ever-green smile.
So gratefully Phyllidia moves.
So lightly she trips over the ground,
Each shepherd that looks at her loves,
Each shepherdess envies the wound.
But how would the blunderers stare
To see little Timbertoe run!
Or, how would Miss Phyllidia bear
To foot it forever on one!
I knew that her fortune was noble:
I was smit with her presence behind:
And, blessed with a similar hobble,
I wrote her a piece of my mind.
"My love I no longer can stifle,
Like a cinder I Am burnt black and blue;
Nor can I be cured by a trifle.
Unless I Have that trifle from you:
We have two pretty legs here between us,
And a very complete pair of eyes;
The folk than on one side have seen us,
Have seen nothing there to despise.
"It is not your cottage I want,
Against an old oak's broad body reclined,
With a wide-gaping window in front,
And a snug little peep hole behind.
It is not the smell of your kitchen,
Where plenty and cleanliness please,
With a ham and a half of a stitch in
Reserve for potatoes and pease.
"It is not your mare to ride double,
Bereft, like ourselves, of one eye;
No, nor twenty fat geese on the stubble,
Nor a sow and nine pigs in the stye.
It is not, dear Moggy, your purse,
But your person, I Phelim, adore;
And I Will take you for better for worse;
Will any man take you for more?"
SONG, Bow Wow Wow.
I WILL sing you song, faith I Am singing it now here,
I don't mean to affront either small or big bow wow here:
The subject I have chosen it is the canine race,
To prove, like us, two leged dogs, they are a very fine race,
Bow, wow, wow, Fall, lal, lal, addi, addi,
Bow, wow, wow.
Like you and I other dogs may be counted sad dogs;
And as we will not drink water, some may think us mad dogs:
A courtier is a spaniel, a citizen's a dull dog,
A soldier is a mastiff, a sailor's a bull dog.
Bow, wow, etc.
An old maid comes from church, to poor no lady kinder;
A lusty dog her footman, with prayer book behind her:
A poor boy asks a farthing, gets plenty of good kicking;
But little Shock, her lap-dog, must have a roasted chicken.
Bow, wow, etc.
When silly dogs, for property, uncle, son, and brother,
Grin and snarl look mighty gruff, and worry one another;
Should they a bit of equity from justice beg the loan of,
That cunning dog the lawer, Snap, carries quick the bone off.
Bow, wow, etc.
A poet's a lank greyhound, for the public he runs game down;
A critic is a cur that strives to run his fame down;
And though he cannot follow where the noble sport invites him,
"He slyly steals behind, and by the heel he bites him."
Bow, wow, etc.
You Have a choice pack of friends while to feed 'em "you are able;
"Your dog, for his morsel, chrouches under your table;
"Your friends they will turn tail in misfortune or disaster;
"But your poor faithful dog will never forsake his "master."
Bow, wow, etc.
New Bow, Wow.
NOW listen, my friends, to an old dog's new story,
Which contains of his race the pretentions to glory;
For we dogs may be found in every rank and station,
Since puppies are caressed as the first of the nation.
Bow, wow, wow, fall lal de iddy oddy, bow, wow, wow,
The flatterer's a canting dog, he is always a fawning,
An alderman's a sleepy dog, that is always a yawning,
A lawyer is a greedy dog, lives only upon mischief,
A Physician is a dreedful dog, of murdring he the chief.
Bow, wow wow,.
A taylor's a setting dog, whose game is a goose, sir,
A husband's a simple dog that is hanged in a noose sir;
A cuckold is a common dog, which many wives will tell ye,
A glutton is a cremming dog, he loves you for his belly.
Bow, wow, wow.
A swindler is a sorry dog, he always lives by cheating,
A Frenchman is a nimble dog, that runs from every beating;
A soldier is a noble dog, in every rank and station,
A sailor is a hearty dog, as any in the nation.
Bow, wow, wow.
A lover is a wretched dog, without his pretty dear, sir,
A bully is a swaggering dog, I neither love nor fear, sir;
A miser is a saving dog, that keeps an inch of candle,
And a coxcomb is a lap-dog for pretty maids to dandle.
Bow, wow, wow.
A cook is a charming dog, when he gives us good cheer, sir,
A sot is a soaking dog, at wine, punch or beer, sir;
A landlord is a cheating dog, he chalks you two for one, sir,
And a rogue is a sad dog, that thousands has undone, sir.
Bow, wow, wow.
A gambler is a shuffling dog, he tricks by the cards sir,
A bailiff is a sly dog, that bites very hard, sir;
A rake is a jolly dog, whom all women fancy,
And I am your faithful dog, as any here you can see.
Bow, wow, wow,
SONG. KISSING.
Sung in the Woodman.

There Is a something in kissing -- I cannot tell why,
Makes my heart in a tumult jump more than breast high:
For nine times in ten,
So teazing,
And pleasing,
We find those rude creatures, the dear kissing men,
That we wish it repeated again, and again.
Though a kiss stop my breath, oh! how little care I,
Since a woman at some time or other must die!
For nine times in ten,
So teazing,
And pleasing,
We find those rude creatures, the dear kissing men,
That we wish it repeated again, and again,
SONG. DEBORAH AND JONATHAN.
JONATHAN a wooing went,
He was such a bonny man!
And matrimony was the bent,
Of little jolly Jonathan:
Deborah, the damsel's name,
Buxem was and frisky-o!
And sure as ever Sunday came,
He drove her in his whisky-o;
Oh the whisky!
Fine and srisky!
What a happy maid and man,
Deborah and Jonathan!
Jonathan a squabby elf,
Very short though strong enough,
Found his wooing, like himself,
Not half a quater long enough:
Cries he -- 'twill be a lucky hit,
With wealthy Deb. to tether-o!
So dug for Deb. the marriage pit,
And in they fell together-o!
O the tumble,
Jolt and jumble,
What a frisky wife and man,
Deborah and Jonathan,
Deborah had money got,
Jonathan diminished it;
Drank about, nor left his pot,
'Till fifty times he finished it;
When tipsey he, then Deb. will pout;
When sober scratch and quarrel-o!
He bangs the door, damns, flounces out,
And soaks again his barrel-o!
O the croaking,
Scratching, soaking;
What a happy maid and man,
Deborah and Jonathan.
SONG. NEVER RECKON CHICKENS BEFORE THEY ARE HATCHED.
(Fish Woman.) I HAVE oftentimes heard my old grandmother say,
That we are more like to fall the higher we climb;
Then since things have turned out in this here same way,
If I was you, Joe, I Would be wiser next time:
And since all is not gold that glitters, take care,
No more in so slender a net to be caught;
Nor to value the castle that is built in the air,
Nor to reckon your chickens before they are hate'd.

(Potatoe Woman.) I say, Joe, what a comical figure you cut,
Why, some how or other you're in the wrong box;
Quite queer'd in a minute -- Lord, how you did strut,
When you talked of your turkies, your hens and your cocks;
And now not a word -- well, what would you say,
If I with my little your bad fortunes patc'd:
Would you promise me never again from this day,
To reckon your chickens before they are hatched.

(Egg Man.) With the greatest of pleasure, so give us thy hand,
For though we have no titles, no houses or lands,
We Have none of the troubles that follow the great:
As for Sukey by she I have done very bad,
But my cousin, Jack Rattling, with her shall be matched;
I know that he loves her, and Jack is a lad
That never reckons his chickens before they are hatched.

SONG. THE PLAYTHINGS OF LIFE.
ALL men are mere children, all women the same,
Who, increasing in years get a different name;
But still the pursuit of each great girl or boy,
Is after some pretty fantastic new toy.
Which, when first obtained, for a moment they prize,
Yet the next they destroy, or neglect, or despise;
While the world's one large nurs'ry of envy and strife,
Where the bantlings contend for the playthings of life.
What more than mere toys, though of such high renown,
Are the bishop's lawn sleeves or the judge's fur'd gown?
What coronets, mitres, wigs, patches, or wands,
What ribbands, or medals, caps, tassels, and bands?
What all tinsel of state, jewels, garters and strings,
Which kings can bestow, and which deck even kings?
Yet these are the baubles that generate strife,
Among children who pant for the playthings of life!
Hark! mortals, your passions for gew-gaws repress,
To few be attached, nor to those to excess;
For excess will to evil convey every good,
Your joy turn to anguish, to poison your food:
While the choice, made with prudence, by prudence confined,
Rids the body feel bliss, without paining the mind;
And thus wise to husband, and husband to wise,
Prove the best and most permanent playthings of life.
SONG. FOUR AND TWENTY FIDDLERS ALL ON A ROW.
FOUR and twenty fiddlers all on a row,
Four and twenty fiddlers all on a row;
There was fiddle faddle, and ummi dim double
daminie demi semi quibble down below; --.
It Is my lady's holiday, therefore we'll be merry.
Four and twenty harpsichords all on a row;
There was slow time, quick time, common and triple time, in concord, unison
and discord, with fiddle faddle, etc,
Four and twenty ladies all on arow;
There was tittle tattle, prittle, prattle, do you take in the world: no, I
take in the public, with slow time, etc.
Four and twenty washerwomen all on a row;
Up to their elbows in suds, with prittle prattle, tittle tattle, taking in the
world and the public, with slow time etc.
Four and twenty parliament men all on a row;
There was majority and minority, in argument and reason, without any treason,
up to their elbows in in suds, with tittle tattle, etc.
Four and twenty lawyers all on a row;
There was deed of conveyance with a settlement in tail, majority and minority,
up to their elbows in suds, with tittle tattle, etc,
Four and twenty old-maids all on a row;
There was oh! I hate all male creatures, with their deeds of conveyance and
settlements in toll, etc.
Four and twenty box-lobbly loungers all on a row;
There was in at ^alf price in whole boots, a disgrace to all male creatures,
with their deeds of conveyance, etc.
Four and twenty anctioneers all on a row;
There was who bids more, a very pretty lot just a go^
Four and twenty committee men all on row;
There was impeachment of India governors, charges of high crimes and
misdemeanors, a pretty lot, who bids more, just a-going, in at half price with
whole boots, a disgrace, etc.
Four and twenty lingos all on a row;
There was Moses, Homer, Judas and Wat Tyler, with charges of high treason and
misdemeanors, a pretty lot, who bids more, just a-going, in at half price with
whole boots, a disgrace to all male creatures, with their deeds of conveyance,
and settlements in tail, majority and minority, argument, and reason without
any treason, tittle, tattle, prittle prattle, up to their elbows in fuds,
taking in the world and the public, by slow time, quick time, in concord,
unison, and discord, with fiddle saddle, etc.
ALL IN THE WRONG.
IT has long been my fate to be thought in the wrong,
And my fate it continues to be;
The wise and the wealthy still make it their song,
And the clerk and the cottar agree.
There is nothing I do, and there is nothing I say
But some one or other thinks wrong;
And to please them I sind there is no other way,
But to do nothing and still hold my tongue.
Says the free- thinking sophist, 'The times are refined,
'In sense to a wand'rous degree;
'Your old-fashioned Creeds do but setter the mind,
'And it is wrong not to seek to be free.'
Says the sage Politician 'Your natural share,
'Of talents would raise you much higher;
'Than thus to crawl on in your present low sphere,
'And it is wrong in you not to aspire.'
Says the man of the world. Your dull stoic life
'Is surely deserving of Mame;
You have children to care for as well as a wise,
'And it is wrong not to lay up so them.'
Says the fat gormondizer, 'To eat and to drink
'Is the true sumnum bonum of man;
'Life is nothing without it whatever you may think,
'And it is wrong not to live while you can.'
Says the new made Divine, 'Your old modes we reject,
'Nor give ourselves trouble about them;
'It is manners and dress that procure us respect,
'And it is wrong to look for it without them.
Says the old peevish sot, in a fit of the spleen,
'Ah me! but your manners are vile:
'A parson that is blyth is a shame to be seen,
'And it is wrong in you even to smile.'
Says the clown, when I tell him to do what he ought,
'Sir, what ever your character be;
'To obey you in this I will never be brought,
'And it is wrong to be meddling with me.'
Says my wise, when she wants so and so for the house,
'Our matters to ruin must go,
'Your reading and writing's for no kind of use,
'And it is wrong to neglect the house so.'
Thus all judge of me by their taste or their wit,
And I Am censured by old and by young:
Who in one point agree, though in others they split
That in something I Am still in the wrong.
But let them say on to the end of the song,
It shall make no impression on me,
If to differ from such be to be in the wrong,
In the wrong I hope always to be.
SONG. THE GOSSIPS.
TWO gossips they merrily met,
At nine in the morning full soon;
And they were resolved for a whet,
To keep their sweet voices in tune.
Away to the tavern they went;
"Here, Joan, I do vow and protest,
That I have a crown yet unspent;
Come, let us have a cup of the best.
"And I have another, perhaps
"A piece of the very same sort;
"Why should we sit thrumming of caps?
"Come, drawer, and fill us a quart;
"And let it be liquor or life,
"Canary, or sparkling wine:
"For I am a buxom young wise,
"And I love to go gallant and fine."
The drawer, as blithe as a bird,
Came skipping with cap in his hand,
"Dear ladies, I give you my word,
"The best shall be at your command."
A quart of canary be at your command."
A quart of canary he drew,
Joan filled up a glass and begun,
"Here, gossips, a bumper to you:"
"I Will pledge you, girl, were it a tun."
"And pray gossip, did not you hear
"The common report of the town,
"A squire of five hundred a year
"Is married to Doll of the Crown:
"A draggle-tail'd shut, on my word,
"Her clothes hanging ragged and soul;
"In troth he would fain have a bird
"That would give a groat for an owl,
"And she had a sister last ^^ar,
"Whose name they (...) Galloping Peg,
"She Would take up a straw with her ear;
"I warrant her right as my leg!
"A brewer he got her with child:
"But even let them brew as they bake;
"I knew she was wanton and wild;
"But I Will neither meddle nor make."
"Nor I, gossip Joan, by my troth,
"Though nevertheless I Have been told,
"She stole seven yards of broad cloth,
"A ring and a (...) of (...)
"A smock and a new pair of shoes;
"A flourishing madam was she: --
"But Margery told me the news;
"And it never shall go further for me.
"We were at a gossiping club,
"Where we had a chirruping cup
"Of good humming liquor, strong oub!
"Your husband's name there it was up,
"For bearing a powerful sway,
"All neighbors his valor have seen;
"For he is a cuckold, they say --
"A constable, gossip, I mean.
"Dear gossip, a slip of the tongue:
"No harm was intended in mind;
"Chance words they will mingle among
"Our others we commonly find.
"I hope you will not take it a miss."
"No, no, that were folly in us;
"And if we perhaps get a kiss,
"Pray, what are our husbands the worse?"
SONG. THE THING.
FINE songsters apologies too often use:
When called on I Am ready to sing.
With hums and with haws never attempt to refuse:
And egad, s^s, I Will give you the thing, the thing, and egad, Sirs, I Will give
you the thing.
Conceited our beaux arm in arm walk the street;
In idleness take their full swing:
Each levels his glass when a lady they meet;
And if handsome, they swear -- she is the thing.
Thus at Smithfield the jockey his nag will commend:
What a shape! why, he is sit for the king!
He Is sound wind and limb, on the word of a friend?
And for spirits -- he is really the thing.
With smile of self-interest the landlord imparts,
Butt-entire I always do bring:
Old stinge I draw that will cherish your hearts;
And in flavor indeed -- it is the thing.
See Jenny with Jockey to playhouse repair
Miss Brent to hear warble and sing;
Pretenders to music, they praise every air
With I vow and protest -- she is the thing.
The sportsinen with joy veiws the hare in full fpeed,
In eqstacy hears the sky ring;
With cry of the hounds, and of each neighing steed,
And in transport he cries -- it is the thing.
The prude her own person consults in the glass,
Admiring her finger and ring;
Then concludes that her beauty all others surpass,
And that man must confess -- she is the thing.
Jack Tar, full of glee, to the garden will stroll,
In search, Sirs, of something like l -- g;
There boards on Moll Jenkins, and swears by his soul
She Is rigged fore and aft -- quite the thing.
The parson, well pleased, trims the smoking Sir Loin,
And slyly leers at the pudding;
Lord bless me, he cries, how nobly I dine!
O pudding and beef is -- the thing.
But, clasped in the arms of a good natured pair,
With mutual embraces we cling;
That enjoyment alone dispels every care,
Which you all must allow is -- the thing.
SONG.
KIND nature had thrown off the load,
Which in winter she commonly bore;
And the sun jogged along the same road
He had traveled some thousand times over.
Mother earth had put on her new cloths,
'Twas, in English, the sweet month of May:
When love led me forch by the nose,
Where dear Moggy Timbertoe lay.
On the marge of a river reclined,
I trembled to see her asleep:
Lest she would wake on the side that was blind,
And roll a-down into the deep.
Young zephry played roguishly by,
And whistl'd quite up to her kn^e;
I respectfully shut my one eye,
And the devil a bit did I see.
^rice I roared out. -- "Arise, pretty maid!"
But she could not have heard the last trump;
Yet thrice to get up she essayed,
And thrice she feel down again plump.
Then quick to assist her I went;
She was pleased my affection to see;
Her single eye shone with content,
And doubly it shone upon me.
She drew from her bosom my letter;
Love drew from his quiver a dart:
Ah, thought I, she cannot have a better
To trip up the heels of your heart.
She smiled when I kissed her dear hand
Do your pleasure, -- as much as to say;
Yet so sweetly she bids me command,
By my faith, that she makes me obey.
Oh, what pleasure to see her lips jabber
About something that nobody knows!
And their taste is just like bonny-clabber
With 'tatoes bobbing up to one's nose.
Ye scenes of nonsensical noise,
Where often with pleasure I strove;
I fly from your bumkinly joys
To the bosom of beauty and love.
No longer the cudgel I wield;
The glories of wrestling I shun;
Ye shepherps, the cob of the field
Is content with the fame he has won.
Gentle hope, like an owl on her nest.
Stretch over my soul thy soft wing!
And the rapture, that cannot be expressed,
Get up, little Gimlet, and sing.
SONG.
YE clouds of a dirt-colour dye,
Besmut the bright face of the sun!
And let not the moon's silver eye
Make game of a lover undone!
Brown, brown be the earth; and ye floods,
Tumble back to your streams, or lie still!
Ye beasts of the field to the woods!
Ye feathered fowls fly where you will!
Plague take it -- this love's a vile passion;
It Is not worth an honest man's care,
It begins with a world of vexation;
It ends in disgust or despair.
These girls are so full of vagary,
One never knows when they are right!
They Will lead you a dance till you're weary,
Then marry another in spite.
I pity these poor honest fellows,
Tied fast to their aprons for life;
They first give 'em cause to be jealous,
Then, -- "Dare you suspect your own wife?"
I thought I Would secured my dear Moggy,
As safe as a thief in a mill;
But I Am popt in a hole that is boggy,
And there I may lie if I will.
I found out a gift for my lass,
I found out the maker at York;
'Twas an eye neatly fashioned of glass,
'Twas a leg nicely finished of cork.
"Special good are the members I bring,"
Said I; and, to please her the more,
"My dear you will sind 'em the thing;
For I tried, and I proved them before.
"Look here, my sweet creature, to grace,
How charming this eye-ball does shine;
It will give a new bloom on your face;
See, its fellow illuminates mine.
Here Is a limb! Your acceptance I beg:
Oh, it is better than that log of wood;
It Is a brother to this little pog;"
And I caper'd as high as I could.
How false are the pleasures we know!
How severe is the parg of disgrace!
When I offered them both, and bowed low;
Why, she gave me a kick in the face.
Disappointment so blinded mine eye,
So consus'd the fine things I Would to say.
That my path I could hardly espy,
As in andgeon I hobbl'd away.
SONG. THE VICAR AND MOSES.
THERE was once -- it is said,
When -- it is out of my head; --
Aye, and where too -- yet true is my tale;
That a round bellied vicar,
Bepimpled with liquor,
Could stick to no text like good ale,
Tol derol, lol der^ lol, etc.
He one night'g in to dose,
For, under the rose,
The priest was that night non se ipse;
Non se ipse, you will say,
What is that to the lay? --
In plain English the^ parson was tipsey.
When the clerk coming in,
With his hand-bobbing chin,
As solemn and sniv'ling as may be,
The vicar he gaped,
His clerk hemmed and scraped,
Saying -- Please, sir, to bury a baby.
Now our author supposes
The clerk's name was Moses,
Who looked at his master so rosy;
He blink'd with one eye,
And with wig all awry,
He hiccup'd out -- How cheers it, Mozy?
A child, sir, is carried,
For you to be buried; --
Bury me, Moses! -- no, that wont do. --
Lord, sir, says the clerk,
You are all in the dark,
It Is a child to he buried, not you.
Well, Moses, dent hurry --
The infant we'll bury; --
But, master, the corpse cannot stay:
What! -- cannot it? -- but why?
For once, then, we'll try
If a corpse, Moses, can run away.
But Moses replied,
The parish will chide,
For keeping them out in cold weather:
Then, Mozy, quoth he,
Pray tell 'em from me,
I Will bury them warm all together.
But, sir, it rains hard,
Pray have some regard; --
Regard, Moses! that makes me stay;
For no corpse young or old,
In the rain can catch cold,
But, Moses, faith, you or I may.
Moses begged to be gone,
Saying, sir, the rain's done;
Please to rise, and I Will lend you my hand; --
It Is hard, quoth the vicar,
To leave thus my liquor,
And go -- when I Am sure I cannot stand.
At length, though sore troubled,
To churchyard he hobbled,
Lamenting the length of the way;
For, Moses, quoth he,
Were I bishop, do you see,
I neither need walk, preach, nor pray.
When he came to the grave,
Says he, Moses -- a stave; --
Lord, where is my tobacco box hid?
I protest this (...) walking
Prevents me from talking;
So, Moses, pray give me a quid.
Then he opened his book,
And therein seemed to look,
Whilst over the page only he squinted;
Crying, Moses, I Am vexed,
For I cannot see the text,
This book is so damnably printed.
Woman of a man born --
No -- that is wrong -- the leaf's torn; --
Upon woman the natural swell is;
Were men got with child
The world would run wild,
You and I, Moses, might have big bellies.
Our g^ts would be pressed hard
Were we got with bastard;
How wonderful are our supposes! --
What midwife would do it?
He Would be hardly put to it,
Lord bless us, to lay me and Moses.
So, Moses, come forth,
Pat the child into earth,
And dust to dust, dust it away;
^
We should soon turn to dust,
If we were not to moisten our clay.
Moses, hear what I say,
When it is night, it is not day.
Now in former times, saints can work miracles,
And raise from the dead --
There Is no more to be said --
For, Moses, I Have dropped down my spectacles.
Moses -- mind what I say; --
Life's alas! but a day --
Nay, sometimes it is over at noon; --
Man is but a flower,
Cut down in an hour,
It Is s^ong ale, Moses, does it soon.
So one pot, and then;
Moses answered, amen! --
And thus far we have carried the farce on;
It Is the vice of the times
To relish those rhymes,
Where the redicule runs on a parson.
But satire detests
Immorality's jests,
All profane or immodest expression;
So now we'll conclude,
And drink, as we should,
To the good folks, of every profession.
Tol derol, lol derol lol, etc.
SONG.
TUNE -- MODERATION AND ALTERATION.

IN an old quiet parish, on a brown, healthy, old moor.
Stands my master's old gate, whose old threshold is wore,
With many an old friend, who for liquor would roar;
And ^ork'd the old sherry -- that I had tasted before;
But it was in moderation, etc.
There I had an old quiet pantry, of the servants was the head,
And kept the key of the old cellar, and old plate, and chipped the brown bread.
If an odd old barrel was missing, it was easily said,
That the very old beer was one morning found dead,
But this was in moderation, etc.
But we had a good old custom when the week did begin,
To show by my account I had not wasted a pin,
For my Lord, though he was bountiful, thought waste was a sin,
And never would lay out much but when my Lady lay in,
But still it was in moderation, etc.
Good lack! good lack! how once Dame fortune did frown!
I left my old quiet pantry, to trudge from town to town:
Worn quite off my legs in search off bobs, thumps, and cracks on the crown;
I was fairly knocked up, and very near foully knocked down,
Alteration! Oh! it was a wonderful alteration.
A PARSON WHO HAD THE REMARKABLE FOIBLE.
A PARSON, who had the remarkable foible
Of minding his bottle much more than his Bible,
Was deemed, by his neighbors, to be less perplexed
In handing a tankard than handling a text.
Derry down, down, down, derry down.
Perched up in his pulpit, one Sunday, he cried,
'My dearly beloved, make patience your guide,
'And, in all your troubles, mischances, and crosses,
'Remember the patience of Job in his losses.'
Derry down etc.
This Parson had got a cask of good beer,
By way of a present -- it is no matter wh^,
Suffice it to say, it was toothsome and good,
And he loved it as dearly as he loved his own blood.
Derry down, etc.
The Church Service in haste being a-scrambled over,
The hogs found away through the old cellar door,
And, by the sweet scent of the beer barrel led,
Had knocked out the spiggot of cork from its head.
Derry down, etc.
^ut spouted the liquor abroad on the ground,
These unbidden guests quast it merrily round,
Nor from their diversion, and merriment, ceased,
Until every hog there was as drunk as a beast.
Derry down, etc.
The grave lecture and prayers, now being at an end.
He brings along with him a neighboring friend,
To be a partaker of Sunday's good cheer,
And taste the delicious October strong beer.
Derry down, etc.
The table being covered, and all things laid snug,
Here, wise, says the Parson, Go bring us a mug:
But a mug of what! -- he had searce time to tell her,
Till -- Yonder, cries his wife, are the hogs in the cellar.
Derry down, etc.
To be sure, they have got in when we have been at prayers,
To be sure, you're a fool go get you down staire,
And bring what I call for and see what is the matter,
For I now myself hear a grunting and clatter.
Derry down, etc.
She went; but, returning, with sorrowful face,
In suitable phrases, related the case;
He raved like a madman, about in the room,
And then beat his wife, and the hogs, with a broom.
Derry down, etc.
Was ever a poor fellow so pestered as I?
This slut keeps a house much worse than a stye;
How can e you to put your hogs in the kitchen?
Was that a fit place to put hogs, ye Witch, in?
Derry down, etc.
Dear husband! what terrible noise you make here
About a poor beggarly barrel of beer;
You should, in your troubles, mischances, and crosses,
Remember, the patience of Job in his losses,
Derry down, etc.
Pox upon Job! cried the priest in a rage,
This barrel of beer was near twelve years of age,
And ye are an ignorant sot like like his wife.
For Job never had such a barrel in his life.
Derry down. etc.
SONG.
MY sweet pretty Mogg, you're as soft as a bog
And wild as a kitten, and wild as a kitten:
Those eyes in your face -- (O pity my case!)
Poor Dermot has smitten, poor Dermot has smitten.
For softer than silk, and as fair as new milk,
Your ^ly white hand is, your lilly white hand is:
Your shape'n like a pail; from your head to your tail,
You're strait as a wand is, you're strait as a wand is,
Your lips red as cherries, and your curling hair is
As black as the devil, as black as the devil:
Your breath is as sweet too as any potatoe,
Or orange from Seville, or orange from Seville;
When dressed in your bodice, you trip like a goddess
So nimble, so frisky, so nimble, so frisky;
A kiss on your cheek ('it is so soft and so sleek)
Would warmme like whisky, would warm me like whiskey.
I grunt and I pine, and I sob like a swine,
Because you're so cruel, because you're so cruel;
No rest can I take; and asleep or awake
I dream of my jewel, I dream of my jewel.
Your hate then give over; nor Dermot your love;
So cruelly handle, so cruelly handle!
Or Dermot must die, like a pig in a stye,
Or snuff of a candle, or snuff of a candle.
THERE be lovers, of life so profuse,
If a mistress but happen to frown,
That will give their wise heads to a noose.
Or will take to the water and drown.
Now, why should we quarrel with life,
Since life is at best but a span?
Is the loss of a termagant wife,
Such an horrid misfortune to man!
A termagant wife is the d^^il;
And can Moggy a termagant prove?
Her foot, to be sure, made me reel;
But perhaps 'twas a proof of her love.
Ah, Phelim, said I to myself,
Why will not thy vanity see,
That a lady possessed of such pelt,
May buy a much better than the^?
Then I called myself dastardly devil,
And thought upon all I Would been told:
How that beauty despises a snivel,
And yields to the touch of the bold.
He Is a knave and a naddy to boot,
That Is a bash'd, when a maiden says -- nay,
And hastily gives up his suit,
Because he cannot have his own way.
I knew that the gifts would allure,
And I followed the issue to see;
But scarce had I gone from the door,
Little Moggy came hopping to me.
On her lips I imprinted a kiss,
And another intended -- but, Oh!
She caught such a foretaste of bliss,
That she quaked from her top to her toe
I feared that an ague had seized her,
Her color so went and so came;
But soon I perceived that it pleased her;
And, pleased, I repeated the same.
Toward church I observed her eye squint;
Certain proof that she meant to be kind:
So I quickly improved on the hint,
And I silently told her my mind.
But when her compliance I guest,
I thought that my heart would run wild:
By St. Patrick, it bampt in my breast,
Like the kicks of a never born child.
To the parson I artfully strayed,
Who knew our perfections to scan;
He vowed, so accomplished a maid
Never wedded so finished a man.
He declared we were formed for delight,
Though to give honest Levi his due,
Time and stingo so bother'd his light.
That he scarce knew a P from a Q.
He blessed us again and again,
In hopes I would double his pay;
But before the clerk snuffled amen,
We hopt like two magpies away.
SONG.
YOU may say what you will, but Belinda's too tall
And Stella's all bone, and her shape is too small;
Dear Chloe's my wish, though extensive her charms,
Though the front of her stays is too wide for my arms.
It Is certain Miss Panny's a sweet little dear,
And zephyrs bring odor when Lucy is near
But Chloe's all sweetness by nature designed;
We might call her a hogshead of double refined.
When she dances, then leaps my fond heart like a frog;
When with rapture I press her, I Am lost in a fog:
I beg for a kiss, while my vows I renew,
And imbibe half a pint of ambrosial dow.
She frequently mentions young Strephon the beau:
But why should I reckon my rival a see?
^en let him proceed, it will never give me pain;
We both shall (...) more than our arms will contain.
I Have often overheard the ill natured expression,
That beauty so bulky must pall in possession:
In his notion the critic is surely misled,
Love's flame by her fat will be constantly fed.
Some nymphs have angelical sweetness and grace,
But Chloe has rather a cherubim's face:
She Is always good humored, facetious, and free,
And only gives pain when she sits on my knee.
I start not, as timorous fribbles have done,
At the substance of three or four females in one:
First balance her weight with American coin,
Then let the dear ponderous charmer be mine.
SONG.
TUNE -- MOGGY LAUDER.
I MARRIED with a scolding wife
The fourteenth of November;
She proved the torment of my life
By one unruly member.
Long did I bear the heavy yoke,
And many griess attended,
But, to my comfort be it spoke.
Now, now her life is ended.
Fall a riddle al al al, etc.
Her body is bestowed well,
A handsome grave does hide her,
But sure her soul is not in hell,
The De'll could never abide her.
I rather think the is aloft,
And imitating thunder,
For why? methinks I hear her voice
Touring the clouds asunder.
Fall a riddle etc.
IT is, I believe,
Next Hollantide eve,
A twelvemonth since first I began
To hold up my head,
In love to be read.
And to construe the looks of a man.
Young Damon I saw,
He kissed me oh la!
I vow through my bosom it ran;
My lips he so pressed.
It Is true, I protest.
I thought him a duce of a man.
Philander the gay
I met at the play,
My heart beat a furious ratan;
Because you must know,
I sometime ago,
Had hopes of his being the man.
Brisk Strephon came next;
But then I was vexed,
He played with Miss Phillis's fan;
I own to be sure,
I could not endure
To see myself robbed of a man,
My mother and aunts,
Still watching my haunts,
Obstruct me as much as they can,
But what do I care?
I vow and declare,
I Will fir myself soon with a man.
THREE WEEKS AFTER MARRIAGE.
WILLY, after courting long,
Married me on Sunday:
All that day I held my tongue.
But scold'd him on Monday:
Tuesday I grew dull and sad,
Wednesday passed in scorning:
Thursday drove me nearly mad --
But Friday what a morning!
Till at length that balm of life --
Money! -- brought a better day:
So we loved like man and wife,
Kissing fond on Saturday.
Willy next began the week,
Tippling all the Sunday;
Therefore I provoked to speak,
Scolded him on Monday:
Tuesday called him drunken sot,
Wednesday lubber lazy:
Thursday having mended not,
Friday set me crazy:
Though I hoped the fool would think
Wiser on the latter day,
Not a sous, for grub or drink,
Earnt he on the Saturday.
Bent at last to change my plan,
Every future Sunday,
For 'twas plain I first began
Wrong upon the Monday:
Tuesday then I calmer (...)
Wednesday more indulgent;
Thursday peace and comfort seemed,
Friday shone refulgent;
Chacing thus corroding strife
Every day's a better day;
Joy and pleasure cheering life,
From Saturday to Saturday.
THE SIREN: PART V. SEA, HUNTING and MASONIC SONGS.

WILMINGTON: PRINTED FOR BONSAL and NILES, AND JAMES WILSON.

THE SIREN: PART V. SEA, HUNTING, and MASONIC SONGS.
SONG. POOR JACK.
Go patter to lubbers and swabs, do you see,
'Bout danger, and fear, and the like,
A tight water boat and good sea room give me,
And t'ent to a little I Will strike;
Though the tempest top-gallant masts smack smooth should smite,
And shiver each splinter of wood,
Clear the wreck, stow the yards, and bowse every thing tight,
And under reef'd forefail we'll scud:
Avast, nor don't think me a milk-sop so soft,
To be taken for trifles a-back,
For they say there is a providence sits up aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Why I heard our good Chaplain palaver one day
About souls, heaven, mercy and such --
And, my timbers! what lingo he would coil and belay!
Why 'twas all just as one as high Dutch;
But he said, how a sparrow cannot fou der, do you see,
Without orders that come down below,
And many sure things that prove clearly to me
That providence takes us in tow;
For says he, do you mind me, let storms ever so often
Take the topsails of sailors aback,
There Is a sweet little cherub that sits up aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
I said to our Poll, for you see she would cry,
When last we weighed anchor for sea,
What argufies sniv'ling and piping your eye?
Why what a great fool you must be!
Cannot you see the world's wide, and there is room for us all,
Both for seamen and lubbers ashore;
And if to old Davy I should go, friend Poll,
Why you never will hear of me more:
What then all is a hazard, come do ^t be so soft,
Perhaps I may laughing come back;
For do you see there is a cherub sits smiling aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Do You mind me, a sailor should be every inch,
All as one as a piece of the ship,
And with her brave the world without offering to slinch,
From the moment the anchor's a-trip;
As for me, in all weathers, all times, sides, and ends,
Nought's a trouble from duty that springs,
For my heart is my Poll's, and my rhino my friend's,
And as for my life it is the king's:
Even when my time comes, never believe me so soft,
As with grief to be taken aback;
That same little cherub that sits up aloft,
Will look out a good birth for poor Jack.
SONG. THE SWEET LITTLE ANGEL
WHEN Jack parted from me to plough the salt deep,
Alas I may not see him again;
In spite of his talking I could not but weep,
To help it I Am sure was in (...)
Then he broke from my arms, and bid me farewell,
Saying, Poll, come, my soul, it will not do;
So do you hear, avast whining and sobing, my girl,
It Is all foolish nonsense in you;
I could not help thinking that Jack was in right,
From something that whispered do you see,
There Is a sweet little angel that sits out of fight.
Will restore my poor Jack unto me.
Yet while he is at a distance each thought is employed
And naught can delight me on shore;
I fancy at times that the ship is destroyed,
And Jack I shall never see more;
But then its but fancy! that angel above,
Who can do such a wonder of things,
I know will never suffer a harm to my love,
And so to myself I thus sings:
What matters repining, my heart shall be light,
For something that whispers, do you see,
There Is a sweet little angel that sits out of sight,
Will restore my poor Jack unto me.
But should that sweet angel, wherever he be,
Forget to look out after Jack,
Why then he never may return unto me,
Ah! never, no never come back:
But, Oh! it cannot be he is too good and too kind,
To make the salt water his grave;
And why should I then each tale teller mind,
Or dread every turbulent wave?
Besides I never will kind Providence slight,
For a something there whisper's do you see,
There Is a sweet little angle that sits out of sight,
Will restore my poor Jack unto me.
SONG. TOM BOWLING,
HERE, a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling.
The darling of our crew;
No more he will hear the tempest howling,
For death has brought him to:
His farm was of the manliest beauty,
His heart was kind and soft;
Faithful below he did his duty,
But now he is gone aloft.
Tom never from his word departed,
His virtues were so rare,
His friends were many, and true hearted,
His Poll was kind and fair:
And then he would sing so blithe and jolly,
Ah! many's the time and often;
But mirth is turned to melancholy,
For Tom is gone aloft.
Yet shall poor Tom find pleasant weather,
When he who all commands
Shall give, to call life's crew together,
The word to pipe (...):
Thus death, who kings and tars dispatches,
In vain Tom's life had doff'd:
For, though his body's under hate^,
His soul is gone aloft.
SONG. BEN BACKSTAY.
BEN Backstay loved the gentle Anna,
Constant as purity was she;
Her honey words succ'ring manna,
Cheered him each voyage he made to sea,
One fatal morning saw them parting,
While each the other's sorrow dried;
They by the tear that then was starting,
Vowed to be constant 'till they died.
At distance from his Anna's beauty,
While howling winds the sky deform,
Ben, sighs and well performs his duty,
And braves for love the frightful storm;
Alas! in vain! the vessel battered,
On a rock splitting, opened wide,
While lacerated, torn and shattered
Ben thought of Anna, sighed and died.
The semblance of each charming feature,
That Been had worn around his neck,
Where art stood sub stitute for nature,
A tar, his friend, saved from the wreck:
In servent hope while Anna burning,
Blushed as she wished to be a bride;
The portrait came, joy turned to mourning,
She saw, grew pale, sunk down and died.
SONG. THE SAILOR'S RETURN.
THE busy true their fails unbending,
The ship in harbor safe arrived;
Jack Oakum, all his perils ending,
Had made the port where Kitty lived.
His rigging -- no one dare attack it,
Tight fore and aft, above, below,
Long quartered shoes, check shirt, blue jacket,
And trowsers like (...) driven snow.
His honest heart with pleasure glowing,
He flew like lightning to the side;
Scarce had they been a bo^ts length rowing,
Before his Kitty he espy^
A flowing pendant gaily slutter'd
From her neat made hat of (...)
^ed was her cheek when first (...)
^
And now the gazing crew surround her,
While, secure from all alarms,
Swift as a ball from a nine pounder,
They dart into each others arms.
SONG. JACK'S REVENGE.
WHEN last from the straits we had fairly cast anchor,
I went bonny Kitty to hail,
With quintables stored, for our voyage was a spanker,
And bran new was every sail:
But I knew well enough how, with words as sweet as honey,
They trick us poor tars of our gold,
And when the fly gypsies had fingered the money,
The bag they give poor Jack to hold.
So I chased her, do you see, my lads under false colors,
Swore my wishes were all at an end,
That I sported a way all my good looking dollars,
And borrowed my togs of a friend:
Oh! then had you seen her no longer my honey,
'Twas varlet, audacious, and bold,
Begone from my sight, now you have spent all your money,
For Kitty the bag you may hold.
With that I took out double handfuls of shiners,
And scornfully bid her good bye,
'Twould have done your heart good had you then seen her (...) airs,
How she would leer, and she would sob, and she would sigh:
But I stood well the broadside -- while jewel and honey
She called me I put up the gold,
And bearing away, as I sacked all the money,
Left the bag (...) Ma'am Kitty to hold.
SONG. JACK RATLIN.
JACK RATLIN was the ablest seaman,
None like him could hand, reef, and steer,
No dangerous toil but he would encounter,
With skill, and in contempt of fear:
In fight a lion the battle ended,
Meek as the ^leating lamb he would prove;
Thus Jack had manners, courage, merit,
Yet did he sigh and all for love.
The song, the jest, the flowing liquor,
For none of these had Jack regard;
He, while his messmates were car^using,
High sitting on the pendant yard,
Would think upon his fair one's beauties,
Swear never from such charms to rove,
That truly he would adore them living,
And, dying, sigh -- to end his love.
The same express the crew commanded
Once more to veiw their native land,
Among the rest brought Jack some tidings,
Would it had been his love's fair hand?
Oh! fate! -- her death defaced the letter,
Instant his pulse forgot to move,
With qu^v'ring lips, and eyes uplifted,
He heaved a sigh, and died for love.
SONG. THE KIND HONEST HEART OF A TAR.
YET, though I Have no fortune to offer,
i have something to put on a par;
Come then, and accept of my offer,
It Is the kind honest heart of a tar.
Never let such a trifle as this is,
Girls, be to your pleasure a bar,
You Will be rich, though it is only in kisses,
With the kind honest heart of a tar.
Besides, I am none of your ninies,
The next time I come from afar;
I Will give you a lap full of guineas,
With the kind honest heart of a tar.
Your lords, with their fine baby faces,
That strut in a garter and star,
Have they under their tambour and laces,
The kind honest heart of a tar.
I Have this here to say, now, and mind it,
If love, that no hazard can mar,
You are seeking, you will certainly find it,
In the kind honest heart of a tar.
SONG. THE SAILOR BOY CAPERING ASHORE.
POLL dang' it how do you do,
Nan will not you gi'us a buss,
Why what is to do wi' you,
Why here is a pretty fuss;
Say, shall we kiss and toy,
I goes to see no more,
Oh! I Am the sailor's boy,
For capering a shore.
Father he apprentic'd me,
All to a coasting ship,
I b'ing resolved do you see,
To give 'em all the slip,
I got to Yarmouth fair,
Where I had been before,
So father found me there,
A capering a shore.
Next out to India,
I went a Guinea pig,
We got to Table Bay,
But mind a pretty rig,
^
Left me and many more,
Among the Hottentots,
A capering a shore.
I love's a bit of hop,
Life's never the worse for it,
If in my wake should drop,
A fiddle "that is your sort,"
Thrice tumble up a hoy,
Once get the labor over
Then see the sailor boy,
A capering a shore.
SONG. THE HEAVING OF THE LEAD.
WHEN sailing for Columbia's land,
With favoring gale our ship we steered;
And scudding up to gain the strand.
The lofty pines at length appeared.
To heave the lead the seamen sprung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
"By the deep Nine!"
And bearing up, to gain the port,
Some well known object kept in view,
An Abbey tower, an harbor, fort:
Or beacon, to the vessel true,
While often the lead the seaman flung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
"By the mark seven."
And as the much loved shore was near,
With transport we beheld the roof;
Where dwelt a friend or partner dear,
Of faith and love a matchless proof,
The lead once more the seaman flung,
And to the watchful pilot sung,
"Quarter less five."
SONG.
WHEN the anchor's weighed, and the ship's unmoor'd,
And landsmen lag behind, sir,
The sailor joyful skips on board,
And, swearing, prays for a wind sir;
Towing here, he-hoing there,
Steadily, readily, merrily, cheerily,
Still from care and thinking free,
Is a sailor's life at sea,
When we sail with a fresh'ning breeze,
The landsmen all grow sick, sir;
The sailor lolls with his mind at ease,
And the song and the can go quick, sir:
Laughing here, quaffing there,
Steadily, readily, etc.
When the wind at night whistles over the deep,
And sings to landsmen dreary;
The sailor fearless goes to sleep,
Or takes his watch most chearly;
Boozing here, snoozing there,
Steadily, readily, etc.
When the sky grows black, and the wind blows hard,
And landsmen skulk below, sir,
Jack mounts up to the top-sail yard,
And turns his quid as he goes, sir;
Hawling here, bawling there,
Steadily, readily, etc.
When the foaming waves run mountains high,
And landsmen cry all is gone, sir,
The sailor hangs 'twixt sea and sky,
And jokes with Davy Jones, sir;
Dashing here, clashing there,
Steadily, readily, etc.
When the ship, do you see, becomes a wreck,
And landsmen hoist the boat, sir,
The sailor scorns to quit the deck,
While a single plank's afloat, sir;
Swearing here, tearing there,
^
THE DISCONSOLATE SAILOR.
WHEN my money was gone that I gained in the wars,
And the world 'gan to frown on my fate;
What mattered my zeal or my honored scars,
When indiff'rence stood at each gate.
The face that would smile when my purse was well (...)
Showed a different aspect to me;
And when that I could naught but ingratit (...).
I ^'d once again to the sea.
I thought it unwise to repine at my lot,
Or to bear with cold looks on the shore;
So I packed up the trifling remnants I Would got,
And a trifle, alas! was my store.
A handkerchief held all the treasure I had,
Which over my shoulder I threw;
Away then I trudged with a heart rather sad,
To join with some jolly ship's crew.
The sea was less troubled by far than my mind,
For when the wide main I surveyed,
I could not help thinking the world was unkind,
And fortune a slippery jade.
And I vowed, if once I could take her in tow,
I Would let the ungrateful one see:
That the turbulent winds and the billows could show,
More kindness than they did to me.
SONG. SWEET POLL OF PLYMOUTH.
SWEET Poll of Plymouth was my dear,
When forced from her to go; --
A down her cheeks rained many a tear,
My he^ was fraught with woe.
Our anchor weighed for sea we stood.
The land we left behind;
Her tears then swelled the briny flood,
My sighs increased the wind.
We plowed the deep, and now between
Us lay the ocean wide;
For five long years I had not seen
My sweet, my bonny bride.
That time I sailed the world around,
All for my true love's sake;
But pressed as we were homeward bound,
I thought my heart would break.
The press-gang bold I asked in vain
To let me once on shore:
I longed to see my Poll again,
But saw my Poll no more.
And have they torn my love away!
And is he gone! -- she cried:
My Polly -- sweetest flower of May,
She languish'd, drooped, and died.
SONG. THE SAILOR'S FAREWELL.
THE top-sail shivers in the wind,
The ship she casts to sea,
But yet my soul, my heart my mind,
Are, Mary, moored with thee;
For though thy sailor's bound afar,
Still love shall be his leading star.
Should landsmen flatter when we are sailed,
O doubt their artful tales;
No gallant sailor ever failed
If love breathed constant gales;
Thou art the compass of my soul,
Which steers my heart from pole to pole.
Sirens in every port we meet,
More fell than rocks and waves;
But such as grace the British fleet,
Are lovers, and not slaves;
No foes our courage shall subdue,
Although we have left our hearts with you.
These are our cares -- but if you're kind,
We'll scorn the dashing main,
The rocks, the billows, and the wind,
The power of France and Spain:
Now England's glory rests with you,
Our sails are full -- sweet girls, adieu!
SONG. THE BONNY SAILOR.
MY bonny sailor's won my mind!
My heart is now with him at sea;
I hope the summer's western breeze
Will bring him safely back to me!
I wish to hear what glorious toils;
What dangers he has undergone:
What forts he stormed, how great the spoils
From France and Spain my sailor's won.
A thousand terrors chilled my breast,
When fancy brought the foe in view;
And day and night I Have had no rest,
Lest every gale a tempest blew.
Bring, gentle gales, my sailor home?
His ship at anchor may I see!
Three years are sure enough to roam:
Too long for one that loves like me.
His face by sukry climes is wan,
His eyes, by watching, shine less bright:
But still I Will own my charming man,
And run to meet him when in sight.
His honest heart is what I prize:
No weather can make that look old:
Though altered were his face and eyes.
SONG. BALLAD, IN (...) V^LCAN
THE moment Aurora peeped into my room,
I put on my clothes and I called to my groom;
And, my head heavy still, from the f^mes of last night,
Took a bumper of ^andy to set all things right;
And now (...) Fleet, Dauple and Gray,
Who seemed longing to hear the glad found hark away.
Will Whistle by this (...) his hounds,
Whose exthey nothing cou^ (...) bounds,
First sorward came Jowler, then S^entwell, then Snare,
Three better smunch harriers never sltarted a hare.
Then Sweet^ps, then Driver, then St^unch, and then Tray,
All ready to open at hark, hark away.
'Twas now by the clock about five in the morn,
And we all galloped of to the sound of the horn;
Jack Gater, Bill Babbler, and Dick at the gun,
And by this time the merry Tom Fairplay made one,
Who, while we were jogging on blithsome and gay,
Sung a song, and the chorus was -- Hark, hark away.
And now Jemmy ^cher had every bush beat,
And no signs of madam, nor trace of her feet;
Nay, we just had begun our sad fortunes to curse,
When all of a sudden out starts Mrs. Puss;
Men, horses, and dogs all the glad call obey,
And echo was heard to cry -- hark, hark away.
The chase was a fine one, she took over the plain,
Which she doubled, and doubled, and doubled again;
Till at last she to cover returned out of breath,
Where I and Will Whistle were in at the death;
Then in triumph for you I the hare did display,
And cried to the horns, my boys, hark, hark away,
SONG. HARK! HARK!
HARK! hark! the joy inspiring horn,
Salutes the rosy rising morn,
And echoes through the dale;
With clamorous peals the hills resound,
The hounds quick-scented scour the ground,
And snuff the fragrant gale.
Nor gates nor hedges can impede
The brisk high mettl'd starting steed,
The jovial pack pursue;
Like lightning darting over the plains,
The distant hills with speed he gains,
And sees the game in view.
Her path the timid ha(...)sakes,
And to the copse for (...) makes,
There pants a while ^or breath;
When now the noise alarms her ear,
Her haunt's descried, her fate is near,
She sees approaching death.
Directed by the well-known breeze,
The hounds their trembling victim seize;
She faints, she falls, she dies:
The distant coursers now come in,
And join the loud triumphant din,
Till echo rend the skies.
SONG. FROM THE EAST BREAKS THE MORN.
FROM the east breaks the morn,
See the sun beams a lorn
The wild heath and the mountains so high,
Shrilly opes the staunch hound,
The steed neighs to the sound,
And the doods and the valleys reply.
Our forefathers, so good,
Proved their greatness of blood
By encount'ring the pard and the boar;
Ruddy health bloomed the face,
Age and youth urged the chase,
And taught woodlands and forests to roa^.
Hence of noble descent,
Hills and wilds we frequent,
Where the bosom of nature's revealed;
Though in life's busy day
Man of man make a prey,
Still let ours be the prey of the field.
With the chase in full sight,
Gods! how great the delight!
How cur mutual sensations refine!
Where is care? where is fear?
Like the winds in the rear,
And the man's lost in something divine.
Now to horse, my brave boys:
Lo! each pants for the joys
That anon shall enliven the whole:
Then at eve we'll dismount,
Toils and pleasures recount,
And renew the chase over the bowl.
SONG. THE DUSKY NIGHT.
THE dusky night rides down the sky,
And ushers in the morn;
The hounds all join in jovial cry,
The huntsman winds his horn.
And a hunting we will go, etc.
The wife around her husband throws
Her arms to make him stay:
My dear, it rains, it hails, it blows,
You cannot hunt to day.
Yet a hunting, etc.
Sly Reynard now like lightning flies,
And sweeps across the vale;
But when the hounds too near he spies
He drops his bushy tail.
Then a hunting, etc.
Fond echo seems to like the sport,
And join the jovial cry;
The woods and hills the sound ret ort,
And music fills the sky,
When a hunting, etc.
At last his strength to faintness worn,
Poor Reynard ceases flight;
Then hungry homeward we return
To feast away the night.
And a drinking, etc.
Ye jovial hunters in the morn
Prepare then for the chase;
Rise at the sounding of the horn,
And health with sport embrace,
When a hunting, etc.
SONG. NOW PHOEBUS GILDS.
NOW Phoebus gilds the orient skies,
The lark begins the lay,
The sonorous horn bids sp^rtsmen rise,
To hail the new born day,
The hounds are out, their cheerful notes resound,
While distant hills return it all around.
Over hill and over dale,
Over ditches, over pale,
As swift as the wind we pursue,
The fox or the hare,
Or the swift footed deer,
No matter what sport is in veiw.
Health waits on the chase,
Paints with blushes the face,
Spleen and vapors are left in the rear.
The brooks and the floods,
And the deep embrown'd woods,
Delightful around us appear.
To the sports of the field,
All others must yield,
For hunting's of ancient renown;
Kings and Princes, of old,
Have this pastime extolled
Royal hunters have sat on the throne.
Hills and valleys o'erpast,
Now homeward we haste,
And our mistresses hearty embrace:
New strength we obtain,
By our sports on the plain,
For strength still attends^on the chase.
Now the bowl comes in veiw,
Which with glee we pursue,
And thus happily finish the day:
To the huntress divine,
To Diana we join,
While each chorus loudly huzza.
SONG. AWAY TO THE FIELD.
AWAY to the field see the morning looks gray,
And sweetly be-dapled forbodes a fine day:
The hounds are all eager the sport to embrace,
And carol aloud to be led to the chase,
Then hark in the morn to the call of the horn,
And join with the jovial crew,
While the season invite; with all it is delights,
The health giving chase to pursae.
How charming the sight, when Aurora first dawns,
To see the bright beagles spread over the lawns;
To welcome the sun now recuming from rest,
There mattins they chant as they merrily quest.
Then hark in the morn, etc.
But oh! how each bosom with transport it fills,
To start just as Phoebus peeps over the hills;
While joyous from valley to valley resounds
The snouts of the hunters and cry of the hounds.
Then hark in the morn, etc.
See how the brave hunters with courage elate,
Fly hedges or ditches, or top the barred gate;
Borne by their bold coursers, no danger they fear,
And give to the winds all vexation and care,
Then hark in the morn, etc.
Ye cits for the chase, quit the joys of the town,
And scorn the dull pleasure of sleeping in down;
Uncertain your toil, or for honor, or wealth,
Ours still is repaid with contentment and health.
Then hark in the morn, etc.
SONG. THE TWINS OF LATONA.
THE twins of Latona so kind to my boon,
Arise to partake of the chase;
And Sol lend a ray to chaste Dian's fair moon,
And a smile to the smiles of her face,
For the sport I delight in, the bright Queen of love,
With myrtles my brows shall adorn,
While Pan breaks his chaunter, and skulks in the grove,
Excelled by the sound of the horn.
The dogs are uncoupl'd, and sweet is their cry,
Yet sweeter the notes of sweet echo's reply;
Hark forward, hark forward, the game is in view,
But love is the game that I wish to pursue.
The stag from his chamber of woodbine peeps out,
His sentence he hears in the gale;
Yet flies, till entangl'd in fear and in doubt,
His courage and constancy fail.
Surrounded by foes, he prepares for the sray,
Despair taking place of his fear!
With antlers erected a while stands at bay,
Then surrenders his life with a tear.
The dogs are, etc.
SONG. BRIGHT PHOEBUS.
BRIGHT Phoebus has mounted the chariot of day,
And the horns and the hounds call each sportsman away;
Through meadows and woods with speed now they bound,
Whilst health, rosy health, is in exercise found,
Hark away is the word to the sound of the horn,
And echo, blithe echo, makes jovial the morn.
Each hill and each valley is lovely to view,
While puss flies the covert and dogs quick pursue;
Behold where she flies over the wide spreading plain,
While the loud opening pack pursue her amain.
Hark away, etc.
At length puss is caught, and lies panting for breath,
And the shout of the huntsman's the signal o^ death,
No joys can delight like the sperts of the field,
To hunting all pastime and pleasure must yield.
Hark away, etc.
SONG.
LET Masonry from pole to pole
Her secret laws expand;
Far as the mighty waters roll,
That virtue has not left mankind,
Her social maxims prove;
For stamped upon the Mason's mind
Are unity and love.
Ascending to her native sky,
Let masonry increase;
A glorious pillar raised on high,
Integrity its base.
Peace adds to olive-boughs entwined,
An emblematic dove;
As stamped upon each Mason's mind
Are unity and love.
SONG. THE ENTERED PRENTICE'S SONG.
COME let us prepare,
We brothers that are
Assembled on merry occasion;
Let Us drink, laugh, and sing,
Our wine has a spring,
Here Is a health to an accepted Mason.
The world is in pain,
Our secrets to gain,
And still let them wonder and gaze on;
'Till they are brought to the light,
They Will never know the right
Word or sign of an^ ^pted Mason,
It Is this, and it is that,
They cannot tell what,
Why so many great men in the nation
Should aprons put on,
To make themselves one,
With a free and an accepted Mason.
Great Kings, Dukes, and Lords,
Have laid by their swords,
Our Mystery to put a good grace on;
And thought themselves fan^'d,
To hear themselves named,
With a free and an accepted Meson.
Antiquity's pride
We have on our fide,
Which makes men just in their station;
There Is naught but what is good,
To be understood,
By a free and an accepted Mason.
We'er true and sincere,
And just to the Fair,
They Will trust us on any occasion:
No mortal can more
The ladies adore,
Than a free and an accepted Mason.
Then join hand inhand,
By each brother firm stand,
Let Us be merry and put a bright face on;
What mortal can boast
So noble a toast,
As a free and an accepted Mason.
(Thriee repeated in due form.)

SONG.
LET Mason's fame resound,
Throughout all the nation round,
From pole to pole.
See what felicity,
Harmless simplicity,
Like electricity,
Runs through the whole.
Such sweet variety,
Never had society
Ever before:
Faith, hope, and charity,
Love and sincerity,
Without temerity,
Charm more and more.
When in the Lodge we are met,
And in due order set,
Happy are we:
Our works are glorious,
Deeds meritorious,
Never censorious,
But great and free.
When folly's sons arise,
Masonry to despise,
Scorn at their spite,
Laugh at their ignorance,
Pity their want of sense,
Never let them give offense,
Firmer unite.
Masons have long been free,
And may they ever be
Great as of yore:
For many ages past,
Masonry has stood fast,
And may its glories last
Till time's no more.
SONG.
ONCE I was blind, and could not see,
For all was dark around.
But Providence did pity me,
And soon a friend I sound:
Through hidden paths my friend me led,
Such paths as babblers never shall tread,
With a fa, la, la, etc.
All stumbling blocks he took away,
That I might walk secure;
And brought me e're the break of day,
To Sol's great temple door;
Where we both admittance found,
By help of magic spell and sound,
With a fa, la, la, etc.
But the curber of my bold attempt
Did soon my breast alarm,
By hinting I was not exempt,
(If rash) from future harm;
Which put a stop to rising pride,
And make me trust more to my guide.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
Round and round I then was brought
To mighty Sol's great throne,
Where I was obliged to stop,
Till I myself made known:
Then with great noise I round was brought
For to obtain -- that which I sought.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
In humble posture and due form,
I listened with good will;
Instead of mighty noise and storm,
All now was hushed and still:
Such charming sounds I then did hear.
As quite dispelled all doubt and sear.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
The mighty monarch then from his throne,
Bid darkness then withdraw;
No sooner said than it was done,
And I great things then saw:
But what they were, I will not tell,
Yet such they are as here shall dwell.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
Then round and round me he did tie
A noble ancient charm;
All future darkness to desy,
And guard from Cowan's harm;
Then sent me back from whence I came,
Not what I was, but what I am.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
And now I Am made an upright man,
And levelled with the best:
I Will square my acts the best I can,
Within an honest breast:
I Will toast my friends both day and night,
And those blessed hands brought me to light,
With a fa, la, la, etc.
SONG.
ARISE and sound thy trumpet, fame,
Free Masonry aloud proclaim
To realms and world unknown,
To realms, etc.
Tell them 'twas this great David's son,
The wise, the matchless Selomon,
Prized far above his throne,
Prized etc.
The solemn temple's cloud-capt towers,
And stately domes are works of ours,
By us those piles were raised;
Then bid mankind with songs advance,
And through the etherial vast expanse,
Let Masonry be praised.
We help the poor in time of need,
The naked clothe, the hungry feed,
It Is our foundation stone;
We build upon the noblest plan, Chorus three Times.
While friendship rivets man to man, Chorus three Times.
And makes us all as one. Chorus three Times.
Thy trumpet, fame, yet louder blow,
And let the distant regions know,
Free Masonry is this:
Almighty wisdom gave it birth,
While Heaven fixed it here on earth,
A type of future bliss.
SONG.
IT is my d uty to obey
The masters ordination,
At his desire I sing a lay
At our Hall's Dedication.
The Brethren of Free-masonry
Place mirth on Friendship's border:
No mortal can more jovial be
With decency and order.
Join hand in hand a jovial band
Each brother fill his station.
In Chorus sing, all in a ring,
At our Hall's Dedication.
The Misers heart is bent on wealth,
He cannot enjoy his treasure
He Is sure to iron-band his pelf,
And with it locks his pleasure.
Masonic treasures nobler are
They Are mirth with friendship blended,
A flowing bowl, a secret rare,
To social sou's extended.
Join, etc.
We never envy the man that is great,
Who noble titles bears,
Or him who carried is in state,
And marks of honor wears:
For in the mind true greatness lies
Our title's past contending,
We all a badge of honor prize,
That is of Heaven's sending.
Join, etc.
We'll banish sullen discontent,
We have in our possession.
An art divine by Heaven sent,
And sacred information;
While we within the compass are,
No evil can perplex us,
While by the plumb-line, rule, and square,
Kind Providence protects us.
Join, etc.
May secrecy and unity
Still influence our actions,
And honesty and probity
Still govern our transactions:
Bless Masonry in countries all,
And all Masonic Sages,
May our Lodge flourish in this Hall
Unto remotest ages.
Jom, etc.
SONG. THE LUCKY ESCAPE.
I THAT was once a ploughman, a sailor am now,
No lark that aloft in the sky,
Ever slutter'd his wings to give speed to the plough,
Was so gay and so careless as I.
But my friend was a carfindo aboard a king's ship,
And he ax'd me to go just to sea for a trip,
And he talk'k of such things,
As if sailors were kings,
And so teazing did keep,
That I left my poor plough to go ploughing the deep.
No longer the horn,
Called me up in the morn,
I trusted the carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
I did not much like to be aboard a ship,
When in danger there is no door to creep out;
I liked the jolly tars I liked bembo and flip,
But I did not like rocking about:
By and by came hurrican, I did not like that,
Next a battle that many a sailor laid flat,
Ah! cried I who would roam,
That like me had a home,
When I sow and I Would reap,
Ere I left my poor plough to go ploughing the deep.
Where sweetly the horn,
Called me up in the morn,
Ere I trusted the carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
At last safe I landed and in a whole skin,
Nor did I make any long stay,
Ere I found by a friend that I ax'd for my kin,
Father dead, and my wife ran away:
Ah who but thyself, said I, have thou to blame,
Wives loosing their husbands often loose their good name;
Ah why did I roam,
When so happy at home,
I could sow and could reap,
Ere I left my poor plough to go ploughing the deep.
When so sweetly the horn
Called me up in the morn,
Curse light noon the carpenter and the inconstant wind,
That made (...) for to go and leave my dear behind.
Why, if that be the case, said this very same friend,
And you b'ent no more minded to roam,
Gi's a shake by the fist, all your care's at an end,
Dad's alive and your wife's safe at home.
Stark starting with joy, I lept out of my skin,
Buss'd my wife, mother, sister, and all of my kin;
Now, cried I, let them roam,
Who want a good home,
I am well so I Will keep,
Nor again leave my plough to go ploughing the deep
Once more shall the horn,
Call me up in the morn,
Nor shall any d -- carfindo nor the inconstant wind
Ever tempt me for to go and leave my dear behind.
FINIS.
INDEX.
Note -- The songs pages 22, 34, 36, and 44, Part iv. are parodies on
Shenstone's Pastoral Ballad, page 22. Part ii.

Part. Fol. As 'tother day milking I sat in the vale: i. 15 A rose tree in full
bearing, bid 24 A flaxen headed cow-boy, -- ib Adieu, adieu, my only life, --
31 Adieu to the village delights, -- 33 As down on Banna's banks I strayed, ii.
31 A plague on those musty old lubbers, iii. 5 Assist me ye lads who have
hearts void of guile, -- 22 A courting I went to my love, iv. 10 A master I
have, and I am his man, -- 11 All you who would wish to succeed with a lass, --
12 Amo amas, -- 21 All men are mere children, all women the same, -- 23 A
parson who had the remarkable foible, -- 41 Away to the field, see the morning
looks gray, v. 20 Arise and sound thy trumpet, fame, -- 27 Blessed as the
immortal gods is be, i. 34 Beneath a green shade, a lovely young swain, ii. 36
By the gaily circling glass, iii. 10 Be it known to all those whomsoe'er it
regards, iv. 19 Ben Backstay loved the gentle Anna, v. 6 Bright Phoebus has
mounted the chariot of day, -- 22 Chloe by that borrowed kiss, i. 6 Can you to
the battle march away, -- 29 Come, shepherds, we'll follow the hearse, ii. 28
Contented I am, and contented I Will be, iii. 13 Come let us prepare, v. 23 Dear
is my little native vale, i. 25 Drunk as a dragon sure is be, -- 34 Dear Chloe
whilst thus beyond measure, ii. 18 Despairing beside a clear stream, -- 20 Dear
Tom this brown jug that now foams with mild ale, iii. 3 Devil burn 'em -- those
wits and jackasses, iv. 22 Ere around the huge oak that o'ershadows you mill i.
32 Escaped my love the cannon's ire, ii. 10 From morning 'till night, and
wherever I go, i. 19 From the man that I love though my heart I disguise, -- 35
Farewell, ye green fields and sweet groves, ii. 13 Four and twenty fiddlers all
on a row, iv. 29 Fine songsiers apologies too often use, -- 33 From the east
breaks the morn, v. 17 Genteel is my Damon, engaging his air, i. 35 Give me the
nymph who no beauty can boast, iv. 4 Gad a-mercy! devil's in me, -- 16 Go
patter to lubbers and swabs, do you see, v. 3 How sweet is the joy when our
blushes impart, i. 9 Hard, hard are the times is the cry, it is no wonder, -- 23
Hark, the din of distant war, -- 30 Here, a sheer bulk, lies poor Tom Bowling,
v. 6 Hark! hark! the joy-inspiring horn, -- 17 If I become parson, for so I Am
inclined, i. 17 In a mouldering cave where the wretched retreat, -- ib. I Have
kissed and I Have pralted with fifty fair maids, -- 48 Itravers'd Judah's barren
sands, ii. 14 In vain, fond youth, thy tears give over, -- 20 If life's a
bubble, and breaks with a blast, iii. 7 I Will sing you a song about a young lady
that lived in Aberdeen, iv 6 In Jacky Bull when bound for France, -- 10 I Will
sing you a song, faith I Am singing it now, sir, -- 23 Jonathan a wooing went,
-- 26 I Have oftentimes heard my old grandmother say, -- 27 It has long been my
fate to be thought in the wrong, -- 30 In an old quiet parish, on a brown
healthy old moor, -- 40 I married with a scolding wife, -- 46 Push about the
brisk glass, I proclaim him an ass iii. 8 Pob! pox of this nonsense, I prithee
give over, -- 13 Pounds, shillings, pence, and farthings I iv. 15 Poli, dang
it, how do you do v. 10 Returning from the fair one eve, i. 20 Roving about, good
fellows to meet, iii. 11 Says Plato why should man be vain? i. 16 She came from
the hills of the west, ii. 9 Since there is so small difference 'twixt drowning
and drinking, iii. 24 Sing the loves of John and Jean, iv. 12 Sweet Poll of
Plymouth was my dear, v. 13 The plague of one's life, i. 12 The wealthy fool
with gold in store, -- 18 Though Lexlip is proud of its close shady bowers, -- 22
The world, my dear Myra, is full of deceit, -- 27 The day is departed, and
round from the cloud, -- 28 The world's a strange world, child, it must be
confessed, -- 37 'Twas near a thickset's calm retreat, ii. 3 Thou rising sun
whose gladsome ray, -- 5 The sun descending through the sky, -- 6 'Twas near a
sea-beat rock reclined, -- 7 'Twas in the evening of a winter day, -- 8 'Twas
in that season of the year, -- 16 To the brock and the willow, forsaking the
plain, -- 17 Though cruel you seem to my pain, -- ib. 'Twas summer and softly the
breezes were blowing, -- 32 Thus sung the fair maid on the banks of the river,
-- 33 To fair Fidelia's grassy tomb, -- 34 Though Bacchus may boast of his
care-killing bowl, iii. 9 To Anacrconin heaven where be sat in full glee, -- 16
The women all tell me I Am false to my lass, iv. 3 To hear a sweet goldfinch's
sonnet, -- 18 There Is something in kissing -- I connot tell why, -- 25 It is, I
believe, -- 47 Jack Ratlin was the ablest seaman, v. 9 It is my duty to obey,
-- 28 I that once was a ploughboy a sailor am now, -- 29 Kind Nature had thrown
off the load, iv. 34 Let bards elate, i. 11 Let care be a stranger to each
jovial soul, iii. 19 Let masonry from pole to pole, v. 22 Let Mason's fame
resound, -- 24 My heart from my bosom would fly, i. 5 My heart's soft emotions
admit no disuise, -- 7 Ma cher amie, my charming fair, ii. 11 Mon cher ami,
amitres cher, -- ib. Ma chere ami! let not despair, -- 13 My love was once a
bonny lad, -- 15 My banks are all furnished with bees, -- 23 My true hearty
fellows, who smoke with such gleo, iii. 4 My temples with clusters of grapes
I Will entwine, -- 7 My sweet pretty Mog, you're as soft as a bog, iv. 43 My
bonny sailor's won my mind, v. 15 Night over the world her curtain hung, ii. 5
Now we are free from college rules, iii. 14 Now listen, my friends, to an old
dog's new story iv. 24 Now Peoebus gilds the orient skies, v. 19 On a mossy
bank reclined, i. 6 On Richmond hill there lives a lass, -- 11 O think on my
fate! once I freedom enjoyed, -- 32 On Afric's wide plains, where the lion now
roaring, -- 36 Oh! turn away those cruel eyes, ii. 19 One morning very early,
one morning in the spring, -- 30 O see that form that faintly gleams, -- 31 O
alas! I Have lost my lover, iv. 5 One midsummer morning, when nature looked gay,
-- 14 Once I was blind and could not see, v. 25 Two gessips they merrily met,
-- 31 There was once -- it is said, -- 37 There be lovers of life so profuse.
-- 44 The busy crew their sails unbending, v. 7 The topsail shivers in the
wind, -- 14 The moment Aurora peeped into my room, -- 16 The dusky night rides
down the sky, -- 18 The twins of Latona so kind to me boon, -- 21 When Fanny I
saw as she trip'd over the green, i. 7 What beauties does Flora disclose! -- 14
When I took my departure from Dublin's sweet city, -- 21 When bidden to the
wake or fair, -- 25 When William at eve meets me down at the style, -- 38 Wake
and sing when wintry winds, ii. 9 When Werter fair Charlotte beheld, -- 12 Why
will you my passion reprove, -- 25 When forced from dear Hebe to go, -- 28
Wherever I Am going and all the day long, -- 35 What argufies pride and
ambition? iii. 5 What Cato advises, most certainly wise is, -- 10 When the
fancy stirring bowl, -- 12 With a cheerful old friend, and a merry old song, --
20 When Jove was resolved to create the round earth, -- ib. When up the shrouds
the sailor goes, -- 21 With my jug in one hand, and my pipe in the other, -- 23
While over the raging roaring seas, iv. 16 When the men a courting came, -- 17
Willy, after courting long, -- 48 When Jack parted from me to plough the salt
deep, v. 4 When last from the straits we had fairly cast anchor, -- 8 When
failing for Columbia's land, -- 11 When the anchor's weighed and ship's
unmcor'd -- 12 When my money was gone that I gained in the wars, -- 13 Ye
rivers so limpid and clear, i. 8 Ye fair married dames who so often deplore, --
13 Ye jobbers, underwriters, ye tribe of pen and ink, -- 26 Ye fair possessed
of every charm, ii. 4 Ye shepherds so cheerful and gay, -- 22 Ye shephers give
ear to my lay, -- 26 Ye frolicksome sparks of the game, iii. 17 Ye lads of true
spirit, pay courtship to claret, -- 23 Ye scamps, ye pads, ye diverse, and all
upon the lay, -- 20 Ye clouds of dirt color dye, -- 36 You may say what you
will, but Belinda's too tall, -- 45 Yet though I Have no fortune to offer, v. 9


