Narrative of the Life, Last Dying Speech and Confession OF JOHN YOUNG,
Condemned to be executed this Day, for the Murder of ROBERT BARWICK, One of the
Deputy Sheriffs.

The following Hymn was composed by John Young, to be sung at the place of
Execution.

To thee my God I daily sigh, but not for golden stores
Nor covet I the brightest Gems on the rich Eastern shore,
Nor Pleasures soft enticing charms, my fond desires alure.
2. For greater things than earth can yield, my wishes would secure,
Those blissful, These Transporting Smiles, that brighten heaven above,
The boundless riches of thy grace, and treasures of thy love
3. O let our tongues be one to praise our God on High,
Who from his bosom sent his Son, to fetch us strangers nigh
O my Savior's pierced side poured out a double Flood,
4. By water we are Purified, and Pardoned by the blood
It cost him cries, and many tears, to bring us near to God
Great was our Debt, and it appears to make our payment good.
5. What though the Hosts of death and hell all armed against me stood,
Terrors no more shall shake my soul, my refuge is my God,
Arise O Lord, fulfill thy Grace, while I thy Glory sing,
6. My God has broke the Serpents teeth, and Death has lost his sting,
Salvation to the lord belongs, his arm alone can save,
Blessing attend thy people here, and reach beyond the grave.
[PRICE SIXPENCE.]

Dying Speech, Life and Confession Of JOHN YOUNG,
"Man is born to trouble as the Sparks fly upwards"
THE World usually anticipate from an unfortunate man in a situation like mine,
a dying confession; not so much to comply with this custom as to remove the
odium that now does, and after my decease may exist in the minds of many, if I
pass hence into eternity, "from whose bourne no traveller returns," without
such a narrative, has induced me to pen the following lines. To vouch for the
truth of them I presume nothing need be said more, than that they are the last
words of a dying man, who looks forward with the pleasing hope of salvation and
comfort in regions of bliss far beyond what this transitory life can afford.

I die, so do all mankind, but I die untimely, mine is an unhappy end It needs
not then that I speak of my parents and relations, who or what they are, is of
little moment to the Public, thus silent, they will avoid the taunts of
unfeeling men I shall therefore touch not on the transactions of my life at an
early period, but confine myself to those leading points, that have
precipitated me in the vortex of ignominious dissolution.

In 1793 I was in a respected situation at Philadelphia as a publisher of
Music, carressed by men of Virtue and Influence, as I had no capital I was
necessitated to attempt to extend the Sale of my Merchandise by Subscription
over the whole Continent, with this view I proceeded to Charleston, from thence
to New York, took up my Lodgings at Mrs. Weisenfelt's, finding myself unable to
prosecute my plan on an extensive Scale, and being much pressed for Money I
engaged with Mr. Ricketts as a Musician, about this time I became acquainted
with a Mr. Daniel Thew, Notary Public of this City, from the apparent
advantages that might arise by the Publication of Music, he made me proposals
to advance a capital provided he received his part of the Profit, we agreed,
the Sum was to be 3 col. at his request I went to Boston to obtain Subscribers,
he advanced for the expense of my Journey 95 Dollars. On my arrival, and
afterward I wrote him several Letters, but receiving no answer I suspected his
intentions were to deceive me, in consequence of which I returned to NewYork,
on my arrival at my lodgings I found the the whole of my Apparel gone as well
as upwards of 100 scratched Songs, I could gain no further information on the
subject, more than that Mr. Thew as my partner had taken possession my room and
removed every thing in a few days after my departure for Boston; in a short
time I was served with a writ at the suit of this very Thew, for the moneys
advanced for my Journey from Boston and about 30 dollars in addition, which he
had paid on my account; destitute as I was, I must have gone to Gaol, had not
that worthy man Mr. Abraham Skinner by his humanity prevented it, a succession
of disappointments involved me in difficulties, my Creditors became clamorous,
I was again arrested in the Bear Market by one who called himself a deputy
Sheriff, Handay side.
and was dragged near a mile, when lo! I discovered he had no writ, but was
privy to Mr. Canon's having one against me, to whose custody I was turned over,
Thus it is Debtors are abused, thus it is, in a State who boast their
protection of the subject and their detestation of despotic sway, permit their
administrators of Justice to twist an arbitary construction of the Laws, to
countenance these hirelings to distress the honest though unfortunate Citizens it
requires more than mortal fortitude to resist punishing such mortals, who
regard more extortion, than the administration of Justice

I was conducted to Goal previous to this, and after my connection with Thew, I
entered into partnership with one Isaac Samo, to whose baseness I attribute
Berwick's and my death. He advanced me 50 dollars, and afterward 60 more, in
part of his contract with me of 150 dollars, the sum agreed on. Soon after the
commence-of the publication, I was arrested as above mentioned. Samo refused to
bail me; he pretended the business would be at a stand, and he should loose his
money. Though it appeared plain to me afterward, his only intention was to get
all the materials in his own hands, and gather from me as much information as
possible, relative to the business, with the view of commencing by himself, and
leaving me in my misfortunes.

I continued in confinement near four months, when I was relieved by a new
contract with Mr. Ricketts; some time after my discharge I received a note from
a Mr. CONSTANT an Attorney, requesting to see me. I called on him, he informed
me he had an account against me at the suit of Mrs. Miller, with whom I
formerly boarded, I was astonished, as I did not conceive I was indebted to her
any thing; she had at various times received money from me to the amount of
Eighty-three dollars, and had departed for Amsterdam; I refusing payment he
served a writ on me, for which I gave bail, my astonishment afterward ceased
when I was informed by a Mr. Crawford, wholesale Grocer at the Ship-Yards, that
this VERY HONEST LAWYER CONSTANT, had purchased for Ten Dollars this imaginary
debt of Mrs Miller; shame, shame on such practices, practices that disgrace the
name of civilization, which every honest mind must revolt at, and which I am
sorry too say, is too much countenanced by those whose duty as well as
inclination should teach to punish more than encourage such infamy.

From this period I was continually harrassed with writ after writ till my life
became miserable, at this time Samo called on me, proposed as there was little
prospect of continuing the business, I should give him my notes for the money
advanced and he would wholly relinquish what he had of mine, I complied; gave
them at 60, 90, and 120 days. I repeatedly sent for the articles belonging to
me but without effect, but seemed to intimate he should hold them as security
for payment of the Notes, this was an act of the greatest injustice which he
best knows how to reconcile being compelled secret myself fearful of arrest, I
neglected to give speciel bail to Constants suit, he obtained executiion
against me, I was taken to Goal and remained in confinement thirteen weeks,
when I was discharged by pledging an Instrument and my Note for 85 dollars, in
the interim Samo's notes became due, he pressed me for the payment after my
discharge though he still held my property the only means I had of raising the
money for his payment, we had frequent conversation on this subject but could
not effect any settlement.

At last on my return from Col. Burr's where I had been with music to Mrs.
Temple, when scarcely in the house ten minutes Berwick called on me said he had
something against me at the suit of Samo; I requested him to go with me to
Samo's house about 30 yards distant, on my arrival I solicited a settlement,
Samo observed he had nothing to do in the business, my stay was not more than
three minutes we then walked away, this was at the top of Cedar street, we
never went into any place nor spoke to any one till I stopped at the bottom of
the Park. I never saw the writ, nor any thing he had against me, I requested
him to go with me to some other place he positively said no; distres'd in mind,
harras'd with my cares, and the dread of again being confined operated at this
moment to determine me not to go to Gaol, I put my hand in pocket drew out a
Pistol and at the same Time desired him repeatly aloud to keep his distance, he
rashly refused my advice, rushed on the mouth of the Pistol, I fired without
any direction other than a pointed arm, he fell -- Let any man Judge what time
it will take for two persons to walk a smart pace from the top of Cedar street
to the bottom of the Park, which was all the time he was with me except when at
Samo's, they then can form an opinion what credit ought to be given to those
who swore Berwick and I were together three hours previous to his death; as for
the writ, I call God to witness I never saw it till the morning of my trial
before the Court.

I pity from my Soul those three unfortunate perjured people who swore against
me. I pray God to have mercy on them.

The one that swore he heard Berwick say he was tired going about from place to
place with me for three hours and that he would go no further.

The poor wretch that swore we walked arm and arm together and that I declared
he had taken many persons but should never take another when I shot him; they
are both false. The day of punishment will come when their perjured consciences
will rise up in judgment against them.

And the Mulatto who swore she was so near us, that the smoke went in her face,
and yet did not hear a word that passed between Berwick and myself; she
certainly must have been between us, otherwise it could not have gone in her
face, as I saw it rise direct between Berwick and me.

I forgive them all, as well as my enemies who have deluded these people, and
pray God to forgive them, as I hope he will forgive me. God Almighty bless my
friends and all good people.

To authenticate the above writings, Mr. Abraham Skinner has the writings
between Thew and me, Mr. Hunn, the agreement between Samo and myself, or on Mr.
Watson, now in Prison, who is in possession of the last writing between Isaac
Samo and me, executed at the time I gave my note, though he afterward refused
to comply with his own signature; he has likewise an account in Mrs. Millar's
hand writing of what was due her, which CONSTANT gave me so much trouble about.

Creditors trust not your papers in the hands of those tolerated Leeches, that
call themselves Sheriff's Officers, Creditor or Debtor is of little consequence
to them, their only object is to suck profit to themselves. Many Attorneys are
no better, a Bill of Costs, and not the advantage of the Creditor, is usually
the stimulus to their industry.

Creditors! turn your Eyes to the only Bastile in this Land of boasted Freedom,
see there many unfortunate worthy Citizens, shut up from the World, their
families, friends and relatives; and why: because they are unable to discharge
in FULL their debts, remember that one Years imprisonment will not pay one
shilling of debt, remember that Liberty is a darling blessing, cherished in the
heart of Man. It Is by the enjoyment of this Blessing only You can ever expect
payment. For (...) are deprived of their exertions for the maintenance of their
(...) Offspring, consequently the means to discharge your debt. Be wise,
enlarge your Prisoners, lest they (...) the small portion of Money, adverse
Fortune has left them, of which they wish you to partake, but alas ye choose
only the (...) -- Turn your serious thoughts on this subject else it is too
late for your benefit or their exertions. -- To ye who legislate, it is a duty
you owe your Constituents, to frame just and equitable laws between Debtor and
Creditor; let not the state of New York be longer execrated for its oppression
of the Unfortunate, while surrounding states are progressing to acts of
humanity, that ever should characterize the Advocates of Freedom No longer
continue to admit a code of laws to be in force that are mostly founded in
despotism and barbarity. Do honor to yourselves, and justice to those you
represent, by acts of wisdom and justice -- Remember it is the Words of a Dying
Man who has experienced (...).

I shall now conclude with only one more remark, that is on the severity of the
Court, allowing me so short a time for preparation for my trial, though I
informed them I was not prepared with my Witnesses and Counsel.

The Lord God have Mercy on all my Friends, and God Bless them, Adieu.

August 17, 1797. JOHN YOUNG.
The above Narrative was written by the unhappy man himself, and published at
his particular desire; the Original with other papers are in the possession of
Mr. Watson.




