ORATION, DELIVERED BEFORE THE GENERAL SOCIETY OF MECHANICS AND TRADESMEN THE
TAMMANY SOCIETY, OR COLUMBIAN ORDER, THE DEMOCRATIC AND NEW YORK COOPER
SOCIETIES AND OTHER CITIZENS. JULY 4th, 1797.

MEANS FOR THE PRESERVATION OF PUBLIC LIBERTY.

AN ORATION DELIVERED IN THE NEW DUTCH CHURCH, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1797.
BEING THE TWENTY-FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF OUR INDEPENDENCE.

BY G. J. WARNER.

"COLUMBIA, Hail! immortal be thy Reign,
Without a king, we till the smiling Plain:
Without a king, the Laws maintain their Sway,
While Honor bids each generous Heart obey.
Be OURS the Task, the Ambitious to restrain,
And this great Lesson teach -- that kings are vain;
That warring Realms to certain Ruin haste,
That kings subsist by War; and Wars are Waste;
So shall OUR NATION, formed on VIRTUE's Plan,
Remain the GUARDIAN of the RIGHTS OF MAN."
Freneau. NEW YORK: PRINTED AT THE ARGUS OFFICE, FOR THOMAS GREENLEAF AND
NAPHTALI JUDAH, 1797.

ADVERTISEMENT
THE far greater part of that numerous and respectable Assembly, who honored
with their Presence and Approbation the Exercises which took place at the
Church, on the 4 th Instant, will readily perceive some of the Reasons which
have led to the Publication of this Address. The many Applications which have
been made to the Author for its Appearance, in this Form, have been esteemed
additional Inducements to lay it before THE PUBLIC, notwithstanding its many
Imperfections.

New York, 12 th July, 1797. CITIZEN,
WE are deputed in behalf of the GENERAL SOCIETY of MECHANICS and TRADESMEN,
the TAMMANY SOCIETY, or COLUMBIAN ORDER, the DEMOCRATIC, and NEW YORK COOPER
SOCIETIES, to present you their thanks, for your Pertinent and Patriotic
ORATION delivered before them on the 4th inst* and to request of you a copy for
publication.

We are, With all due respect, Your Fellow Citizens, NAPHTALI JUDAH, Mech.
Soc'y. THOMAS GREENLEAF, Tam. do. JOHN MERSEREAU, Democra. do. JOHN UTT,
Cooper's do.

GEORGE JAMES WARNER.



TO MY FELLOW CITIZENS, or whose advantage they were principally intended)
THESE FEW OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESERVATION OF Public Liberty, ARE RESPECTFULLY
INSCRIBED, BY THE AUTHOR.

ORATION, ON PUBLIC LIBERTY, etc.
FELLOW CITIZENS,
AGAIN we are met to celebrate the Birthday of OUR NATION. One, untaught in the
Schools of Science, is deputed to address you on the great, the interesting
event. In undertaking the task, he trusts that your candor will accompany him,
and that you will not be disappointed by the absence of talents which his
situation in life has prevented him from acquiring. He does not aspire to lead
the judgment, or to rouse the passions by any elocutive strains -- the display
of Ciceronian oratory or of Demosthenian eloquence; he will be amply gratified,
if he can only command your attention while he delivers a few plain sentiments,
expressed in the sincerity of patriotism.

The Historians of our country have acquainted us with the rise, progress, and
establishment of her freedom and independence. They have told us, and many here
this day well remember, how the earnest petitions of the people for a redress
of grievances were disregarded; every new supplication producing some new
outrage, or some severer act of oppression. A mere posture of defense was at
length deemed a signal for the spilling of blood, and at Lexington it first
streamed, in the glorious cause of Freedom and our Country. Thus rendered
hopeless of gaining by submission, and left without prospect of any reasonable
accommodation; finding our Country invaded, our Towns fired, and our Citizens
inhumanly butchered, the delegates from the then provinces, solemnly appealing
to Heaven for the rectitude of their intentions, declared America emancipated
from the yoke of Monarchic Sovereignty, and freed from any dependence on
BRITAIN.

The language of that celebrated declaration we have just heard It had just
before been read by a citizen.
. It was the voice of an oppressed people exclaiming against the assumptions of
a Government, which while it was arrogating every thing to itself, contemplated
to leave us nothing. The sentiments contained in it, ought to be deeply
engraven on every heart -- they point out the true condition of man -- they
speak the language of a bold resistance to tyranny, and we may indeed expect
that Liberty herself will expire, when they shall cease to be longer respected
among us.

This, however, we have reason to hope will not be the case. We trust that the
same American spirit and virtue which animated to the contest the Heroes of the
Revolution, and induced them to prefer toil, and poverty, and suffering, and
death to the slavery of their Country, will still predominate in every breast.
It was gloriously triumphant over the proud legions of DESPOTIC BRITAIN; and it
has subsequently prevailed in directing the National Convention of '87, to the
Constitutional establishment of the liberty we at this day enjoy. May it ever
continue the safeguard of Republican virtue, the scourge of anarchy, and our
guide to the summit of political happiness!

To those who faithfully accomplished these events, we shall ever feel
ourselves greatly indebted, while a sense of LIBERTY and of JUSTICE prevails
among us. The glory which as a people we have acquired by the Revolution, and
the prosperity and happiness we have experienced since that period, have amply
repaid us for all the hardships endured, and all the dangers encountered in its
accomplishment. TO PERPETUATE the advantages we possess unimpaired to the
latest posterity, is now a duty incumbent on us, as the original actors are
daily passing away from this stage of human things, and as they vanish are
seeming to say to their posterity, 'improve on what we have done, and let not
our labors be lost to the future benefit of Mankind.'

Perhaps the present opportunity cannot be better employed, than by calling
your attention for a few moments, to some of the means necessary to effect this
desirable end.

And first, in addition to the sound system of Legislative policy which has
been GENERALLY adopted in our country, and has grown out of the principles of
our Revolution, we must individually encourage by example and by precept, the
practice of all the moral virtues. Without these no free government can long
exist. That they are the only true sources of individual happiness is generally
conceded, though unfortunately they are but little practiced.

The Bible, a venerable old book, now too often laid by on the shelf, dusty and
neglected, contains an ample enumeration of them, and a glorious promise of the
advantages resulting from their general application and use. This leading
principle in the composition of a free government, "Do unto others as you would
others should do unto you," is derived from that invaluable source; and were
all our actions performed under the influence of this principle, union, equal
liberty, and the steady administration of justice might certainly be expected
as the happy result. We should then become better men, more disinterested
patriots and honester politicians. For what man is there who possesses virtuous
sentiments himself, and would not cherish and approve of them in others? Who
that sincerely loves liberty, would not conscientiously wish its enjoyment to
all the members of the community, and join in every proper measure necessary to
its preservation?

The principle contended for, is so plain in itself, that it would scarcely
have been deemed necessary to call it into view, on this occasion, were it not,
that many at the present time show themselves willing to evade every injunction
to the strict observance of the duties of morality, as bordering too much on
the principles of the Christian Religion, a remnant of superstition, which the
superior light of the present day has rendered quite unfashionable.

Secondly. We must guard as a most invaluable privilege, the freedom and rights
of election. WHEREVER the wealthy by the influence of riches, are enabled to
direct the choice of public officers, there the downfall of liberty cannot be
very remote. It is our own fault if an influence so dangerous, has become in
any measure prevalent among us. It would not be the case if the people did not
consent to become the dupes of design. It is because tradesmen, mechanics, and
the industrious classes of society consider themselves of TOO LITTLE
CONSEQUENCE to the body politic that any thing belonging to the system of
oppression at all obtains. We ought to spurn from us with disdain, the
individual who would solicit our vote, from motives of personal consideration.
He ought not to be listened to, who would demand it as the price of friendship,
or who would expect it from regard to his superior riches. It too often happens
that men only capable of attracting public notice by an ostentatious display of
their wealth, are deemed best qualified to protect the rights of the people,
and consequently receive their suffrages; while our choice ought only to be
directed to men of TALENTS and VIRTUE whatever their situation in life may be.
The possession of riches is not necessarily accompanied by superior
understanding or goodness of heart. On the contrary, the experience of ages
confirms this opinion, that a state of mediocrity is more favorable to them
both.

If, instead of improving on its original plan, our government, at any future
period, should be irresistably impelled in an unalterable course toward
despotism, the dividing line between the rich and the poor will be distinctly
marked, and the latter will be found in a state of vassallage and dependence on
the former.

Be it your care then, my fellow-citizens, to guard with unceasing vigilance
against the growth of this evil; assume the native dignity of your character
and maintain with a modest but determined spirit, the liberty of opinion.
Suffer no one to DICTATE imperiously what line of conduct you are to pursue;
but at the same time let no one be sacrificed at the altar of public vengeance,
for a candid and liberal expression of his sentiments.

Thirdly. We must endeavor to acquaint ourselves with the political situation
and relative interests of our country. Without this information, we shall
either be unable to form an accurate opinion of our own, or often become the
dupes of the designing. The PUBLIC PRINTS naturally present themselves as the
vehicles of this necessary knowledge. Those conducted in a spirit of
liberality, yet altogether consonant to the principles on which our revolution
was achieved, should employ the public attention and meet its decided support.
It will be found, that a JUST and EQUAL GOVERNMENT will ever derive additional
stability, as the PEOPLE obtain a more general knowledge of its principles and
operations. The result is, that every sincere friend to our NATIONAL
CONSTITUTION, ought sedulously to promote the dissemination of this knowledge,
as a barrier to the risings of sedition, as well as to the encroachments of
arbitrary power.

Fourthly. Be solicitous that your children are properly educated. "Education,"
says the celebrated Godwin, "has the advantage of taking MIND in its original
state, a soil prepared for culture, and as yet uninfested with weeds: certainly
the task is much easier, to plant right and virtuous dispositions in
unprejudiced understandings, than to root up errors that have already, as it
were, become a part of ourselves." Give your children, then, as your ability
may permit, the opportunity of receiving instruction in the commonest branches;
and if possible, instruct them yourselves, as to the RIGHTS which they possess,
and the DUTIES which they owe to society. Teach them to love their country; to
contend for liberty; to despise monarchy: -- That while constitutions and
written forms are susceptible of improvement, the principles of TRUTH and of
JUSTICE are eternal and imprescriptible. Learn them, as their political creed,
that immortal declaration of our rights and emancipation, the promulgation of
which, we have this day met to celebrate. Encourage them to the reverence of
the aged; to the exercise of candor, sincerity, and universal benevolence; and
in general to the practice of every social and moral virtue.

Thus will the increase of knowledge and patriotism be promoted, and we shall
have far less reason to fear the PREDICTED reign of VICE and TYRANNY. How often
have we been told, that our government, fast following in the footsteps of the
ancient establishments of Europe, will soon overtake them in a career of
despotism? Have we not heard the language of complaint resounding through the
nation -- 'the sword of the REVOLUTION, long since returned to its scabbard, is
buried in rust; the rights which it maintained, and the principles which it
defended, are nearly forgotten. A FATAL SECURITY, while it obliterates and
cancels what is past, opens an ample field for the sports of TYRANNY and the
arts of CORRUPTION! Reflection, the nurse of manly and heroic sentiments, the
guardian, life, and protector of public freedom, is extinguished! The hoary
WARRIOR feels our ingratitude and laments our weakness. The tear of regret
steals down his channeled cheek. On the precipice of the grave, he sighs for
the misfortunes and the servitude of future generations. Seven LONG YEARS have
I toiled in vain -- the principles for which I struggled, are withering away --
the rising generation are forgetting their rights, and neglecting the duties of
freemen. I rejoice that I cannot live, to be a witness of the shame and
enthralment of my country. It wounds me to the heart, to see some of those who
gallantly fought by my side -- who swore never to survive the disgrace of their
country, the determined advocates of measures that are pregnant with public
ruin. With indignation I see them pursuing maxims of government, that lead to
the misery and degradation of mankind. BUT, I see them through the veil of
years, and feel myself incapable of arresting their progress. Yet a little time
and I am no more -- a perversion of principle and a corruption of heart, will
insult my memory, and triumph over my grave!' Who can view without emotion,
this interesting picture of our situation, which the imagination has drawn? Who
is there, that would designedly render it just? If none of US would, then ought
we to endeavor to preserve the purity of public morals, and to keep a watchful
eye over the conduct of our public officers: for whatever their political
sentiment may be, we ought never to forget that they are MEN.

Well aware of the rocks, on which SO MANY have been dashed to pieces, let us
by a sacred regard to social duty, endeavor to preserve our POLITICAL BARQUS
safe, in her progress on the OCEAN OF TIME.

MY COUNTRYMEN! You have been famed for the accomplishment of a glorious
revolution, and for the establishment of an excellent form of government;
preserve with the most scrupulous attention the great advantages you possess.
By your all-important exertions the progress of mind has been greatly
accelerated; and the HUMAN RACE must ultimately be benefited by them. The long
enslaved nations of EUROPE, have caught the blaze of freedom, and are following
your example, in adopting the principles of self-government: The hydra of
despotism will THERE soon be subdued, and order and fair liberty, will arise
out of the confusion, dismay, and carnage in which the nations are involved.
Already the mild lights of reason and philosophy become superior to the
skepticism and delusion, of the ignorant and designing. Behold! the era of
CENERAL VIRTUE, LIBERTY, and HAPPINESS is at hand, may our endeavors be united
to hasten its approach!

ODE
(COMPOSED FOR THE OCCASION, BY P. FRENEAU.)
THE MUSIC PERFORMED BY THE URANIAN MUSICAL SOCIETY.
ONCE more our annual debt to pay
We meet on this auspicious day,
That shall through every coming age
The feelings of mankind engage;
Red war will soon be changed for peace,
All human woe for human bliss,
And nations that embrace again
Enjoy a long pacific reign.
CHORUS.
Thou source of every pure delight,
Fair Peace! extend thy sway,
While to thy standard we invite
All nations on this day.
O dire effects of tyrant power,
How have ye darkened every hour,
And bade those years embitter'd flow
That nature meant for bliss below!
With sceptred pride and looks of awe
OPPRESSION gave the world her law;
And Man, that should such laws disdain,
Has bowed to her malignant reign.
CHORUS.
Thou source, etc.
Here, on our quiet native coast
No more we dread the warlike host
That once alarmed, when Britons rose,
And made COLUMBIA'S sons their foes --
Parent of every cruel art
That stains the soul, that steels the heart,
Dire War! with all thy bleeding hand
Molest no more this happy land!
CHORUS.
But source, etc.
May now all despots disappear
And man to man be less severe --
The ties of love more firmly bind
Than fetters that enchain mankind. --
But VIRTUE must her rights maintain,
Or short, too short, is FREEDOM'S reign;
And when her precepts we despise
Tyrants and Kings again will rise.
CHORUS.
O VIRTUE! source of pure delight,
Extend thy happy sway, etc.
No more a plundering, pageant race,
Man shall in every clime embrace:
And we, on this secluded shore,
Involved in horrid wars no more,
On this returning annual day,
To Heaven our grateful tribute pay,
That here the happy times began
That made mankind the friends of Man.
CHORUS.
Thou source, etc.

