A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS PUBLISHED IN AMERICA, AND FOR SALE AT THE BOOKSTORE OF
JOHN WEST, No. 75, Cornhill, BOSTON.

Boston: PRINTED BY SAMUEL ETHERIDGE.

1797.

JOHN WEST's Catalogue of Books.
Dols. Cts. ADAMS' Flowers of Ancient and Modern History, 2 vols. ^ ^^ --
Flowers of Modern Travels: being elegant, entertaining, and instructive
Extracts, from the most celebrated Travelers; particularly Lord Lyttleton, Sir
W. Hamilton, Baron de Tott, Dr. Johnson, Dr. Moore, Addison, Brydone, Wraxall,
Savery, etc. etc. 2 vols. 1 75 Adams' (his Excellency John) twenty-six Letters
upon the Revolution of America, written in Holland, in the year 1780, 37 Adams'
(Hannah) View of the various Religious Denominations which have appeared in the
world, from the beginning of the Christian era, to the present day, etc. 1 67
Alexander's History of Women, from the earliest antiquity to the present time,
2 vols. 3 50 Alexander's Virgil, translated into literal English Prose, with
explanatory Notes, 2 25 Alkin's Letters to his Son, on various Topics, relative
to Literature, and the conduct of Life. 1 50 American Spectator; or,
Matrimonial Preceptor; a Collection of Essays, Epistles, Precepts, and
Examples, relating to the Married State, 1 -- Young Man's best Companion:
containing Spelling, Reading, Writing, Arithmetic, Bookkeeping -- Measuring --
Guaging, Letters on Business, Friendship, etc. Forms of Deeds, Bonds, etc. a
very useful and valuable book for Young Men, 8 ^ American Pocket Atlas,
containing a map of each State, and of the United States, with a concise
description of each state, 1 25 -- Justice's Assistant, 1 75 -- Theater, 2
vols. 2 50 -- Clerk's Magazine, New Edition, 1 -- Remembrancer; or, an
Impartial Collection of Essays, Resolves, etc. relative, to the Treaty with
Great Britain, 3 vols. 3 50 -- Farmer's Letters; describing certain Provincial
Situations, Manners and Customs; and conveying some idea of the State of the
People of North America, 83 -- Preceptor; being a new Selection of Lessons for
Reading and Speaking; designed for the Use of Schools, 62 Same book, 37 --
Coast Pilot; with directions for Sailing into and out of all the Principal
Harbors, with a Tide Table, etc. etc. 75 -- Atlas, containing, Twenty Maps of
the different parts of America, and one Chart of the W. Indies, 5 Ditto,
Colored, 6 Arabian Nights Entertainments, consisting of one Thousand and one
pleasing and instructive Stories, 2 vols. 1 75 Antidote to Deism, 2 vols. 1 75
Afflicted Man's Companion, (by Willison) 75 Atlas, for the present European
War, including every place where the War has been carried on, 2 Artist's
Assistant, in Drawing, Perspective, Painting, etc. 37 Art of Speaking, 75
Addison's Evidences of the Christian Religion, 75 Almoran and Hamet, an
Oriental Tale, 62 Alexis, or the Cottage in the Woods, a Novel, 87 Art of
Courting, 75 Akenside's Pleasures of Imagination, to which is added,
Armstrong's Art of preserving Health, 62 Arnold's (I. L. Esquire.) Miscellaneous
Poems, 87

B
BURKITT's Exposition of the New Testament, with Practical Observations,
wherein the whole of the Sacred Text is recited, and the Sense explained, 4to.
7 Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, from this world to that which is to come, with
the Life of the Author, 75 -- Holy War, 62 and 75 -- Law and Grace, 25 --
Visions for Youth, 25 Boyle's Voyages and Adventures, in various parts of the
World, 75 Beattie's Elements of Moral Science, 2 vols. 1 75 Brydone's Tour
through Sicily and Malta, 1 Baron Trenck, complete, 6 s and 1 25 -- Abridged,
25 Blair's Sermons, 2 vols. 8vo. 3 -- 3 vols. 12mo. 3 Bennet's Letters to a
young Lady, on a variety of useful and interesting Subjects, 75 -- and
Strictures, 87 -- Strictures, on Female Education, 40 Beccaria on Crimes and
Punishments, with a Commentary by M. de Voltaire, 75 Booth's Reign of Grace,
from its Rise to its Consummation, 87 Burton's Lectures on Female Education and
Manners, 75 Beauties of the Creation, 87 -- of History; or Pictures of Virtue
and Vice drawn from real Life, 2 vols. 2 -- of Stern, including all his
Pathetic Tales and most distinguished Observations on Life, 56 -- of Hervey, 87
-- of Fielding, carefully selected from his Works, with some Account of his
Life, 50 Berridge's Christian World Umasked, 75 Brissot on the Commerce of
America with Europe, with a Sketch of the Life of Brissot, 1 Burn's Abridgment
of the American Justice, 1 50 Belknap's American Biography, 1 75 and 1 50 --
History of New Hampshire, 3 vols. 5 -- Dissertations, on the Character, Death,
and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and the Evidence of his Gospel, 62 Blair's
Lectures on Rhetoric and the Belles Lettres, 2 vols. 3 33 Same work abridged,
75 Bell on the Venereal Disease, 1 Buchan's Domestic Medicine; or, Family
Physician, 1 75 Burgh's Dignity of Human Nature, in four Books, 1st of
Prudence; 2d of Knowledge; 3d of Virtue; 4th of Revealed Religion, 1 75
Butler's Analogy of Religion, Natural and Revealed, to the Constitution and
course of Nature, 1 50 Bell's System of Surgery, 8 50 Same work abridged by
Waters, 2 50 Brigg's Art of Cookery, 1 25 Boston's Human Nature, in its Four
Fold State, 87 Barlow's Works, containing, advice to the Privileged Orders, a
Letter to the National Convention of France, etc. 75 Bellisarius, by M.
Marmontel, 75 British Album, containing the Poems of, Della Crusca, Anna
Matilda, Arly -- Benedict; the Bard, etc. etc. 1 25 Baxter's Call to the
Unconverted, to Turn and Live, and accept of Mercy, while Mercy may be had,
etc. 62 Brown's Introduction to the Right Understanding, of the Oracles of God,
62 Brothers' (Richard) Prophecies, 1 Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest; or, a
Treatise of the Blessed State of the Saints in their enjoyment of God in
Heaven, 87 Bogatzky's Golden Treasury for the Children of God: Consisting of
Select Texts of the Bible, with Practical Observations in Prose and Verse, for
every day in the year, 75 Baillie's Morbid Anatomy of some of the most
important parts of the Human Body, 1 25 Brief Account of the Associated
Presbyteries, 37 Boulanger on the Principles and Effects of the Christian
Religion, 75 Booth's Essay on the Kingdom of Christ, 40 Bell's Treatise on the
Management of Ulcers, 1 50 Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England, 4
vols. 4 67 Brown's Elements of Medicine, 1 67 and 2 -- Concordance to the Holy
Scriptures, 1

C
COLUMBIAN ORATOR: containing a Variety of Original Pieces; together with
Rules; calculated to improve Youth and others, in the ornamental and useful Art
of Eloquence; by Caleb Bingham, Author of American Preceptor, etc. This work is
the latest of the kind, and has already obtained a preference in many Schools
and Academies, 75 Camilla: or, a Picture of Youth, a Novel, by the Author of
Evelina, and Cecilia, 3 Vols. 3 Cook's three Voyages to the Pacific Ocean, to
which is prefixed, the Life of Capt. Cook, 2 vols. with Plates, 2 50 Same Work,
4 vols. 8vo. 8 Charlotte, a Tale of Truth, by Mrs. Rowson, 75 Curiosities of
Literature, consisting of Anecdotes, Characters and Observations, 50 Cowper's
Poems, and Task, 2 vols. 1 50 Campbell on Miracles, 83 Children's Friend, by
Berquin, 4 vols. 3 Either vol. may be had separate, at 75 Coghlan's (Mrs.)
Memoirs, written by herself, 67 Columbian Muse, a Selection of American Poetry,
75 Chesterfield's Principles of Politeness, 37 Calvary, or the Death of Christ,
a Poem, by R. Cumberland, 75 Count Roderick's Castle, a Tale, 75 Children's
Friend, abridged, 50 Citizen of the World, or Letters from a Chinese
Philosopher, residing in London, to his friends in the East, 1 Campbell's
Sacramental Meditations on the Sufferings and Death of Christ, 33 Cooper's
History of North America, 37 Cooper's History of South America, 37 -- of the
Grecian States, 37 Chapone's Letters on the Improvement of the Mind, 62
Christian Remembrancer; or short Reflections upon the Faith, Life, and Conduct
of a real Christian, 62 Cullen's Synopsis and Nosology, 83 -- Physiology, 66
Chambaud's Idioms of the French and English Languages, 62 Centaur, not
Fabulous; in Six Letters to a Friend, on the Life in Vogue, 66 Carver's Travels
through the Interior parts of North America, for more than 5000 miles, 83
Children's Miscellany, with Plates, 1 Conductor Generalis, 2 Carey's Account of
the Fever in Philadelphia, 50 -- Miscellaneous Trifles, in prose, 75
Cheselden's Anatomy of the Human Body, with 40 Copperplates, 2 Coxe's View of
the United States of America, 2 Christian's, Scholar's and Farmer's Magazine, 2
vols. 2 50 Complete Fortune Teller; being a new and regular System for
foretelling future events, by Astrology, Physiognomy, Palmistry, Moles, Cards,
Dreams, etc. 50 Cecilia: or, Memoirs of an Heiress, by the Author of Evelina
and Camilla, 3 vols. 3 Cullen's First Lines of the Practice of Physic: with
practical and explanatory Notes, and the Life and Portrait of the Author, 2
vols. 4 Cullen's Materia Medica, 2 vols, 3 33 Castles of Athlin and Dunbayne; a
Highland Story, by the Author of Romance of the Forest, Mysteries of Udolpho,
etc. etc. 75 Constitutions of the several United States, and of the Federal
Government, 75 Cavern of Death, a Moral Tale, 62 Cheselden's Anatomical Tables,
1 25 Compendious System of Mineralogy and Metalgy, extracted from the American
Encyclopedia, 1 33

D
DODDRIDGE's Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul, illustrated in a course
of serious and practical Addresses, suited to persons of every character and
circumstance, 75 Same Work, 62 Ditto. 87 -- Ten Sermons on Regeneration, 75
Dodsley's Select Fables of Esop and other Fabulists, 75 Democrat; or, Intrigues
and Adventures of Jean le Noir, 1 Devil on Two Sticks, 75 Dickinson's familiar
Letters to a Gentleman upon a variety of seasonable and important subjects in
Religion, 87 Dickinson's five Discourses, concerning some important points of
Christian Faith, 62 Death of Abel and Cain, from the German of Gesner, 50
Dana's Selection of Lessons, in Reading, and Speaking, 75 De Lolme's
Constitution of England; in which it is compared with the Republican Form of
Government, and the Monarchies in Europe, 1 Dodd's Thoughts in Prison, to which
are added, Miscellaneous Pieces, 62 Divine Maxims and Observations, 66 Dean's
New England Farmer, or Georgical Dictionary, 1 50 -- do. New Edition with large
additions, 2 Dilworth's Art of Bookkeeping, 87 Davles's Sermons on important
Subjects, 3 vols. 5 25 Same work, 2 vols. 4 Dumourier's Memoirs, written by
himself, 1 Defense of Usury, showing the Impolicy of legal restraints on the
terms of Pecuniary Bargains, by I. Bentham, Esquire. 75 Dialogues between the
Pulpit and Reading Desk, by Rev. E. Smith, 42 D'Arcy, a Novel, by Charlotte
Smith, 75 Dodd's Reflections on Death, 33 Dwight's comprehensive System of
Geography, by way of Question and Answer, for the Use of Schools, 33
D'Argenson's Civil, Moral, Literary and Political Essays; interspersed with
Characters, Portraits and Anecdotes, 75 Dialogues of Devils, 87 Dyer's Titles
of Christ, 62

E
ELEMENTS of MORALITY, for the use of Children; with an introductory Address 87
Edwards on Religious Affections, to Parents, 1 Enfield's Speaker: or,
Miscellaneous Pieces, selected from the best English writers, 87 -- Prayers,
for the use of Families, 62 -- Biographical Sermons: or, a Series of Discourses
on the principal characters in Scripture, 62 Espinasse's Digest of the Law of
Actions at Nisi Prius, 2 vols. 2 50 -- Cases, argued and ruled at Nisi Prius, 1
50 Erskine's Sermons upon the most important and interesting subjects, 1 --
Gospel Sonnets: or, Spiritual Songs, 62 Eliot's Medical Pocket Book, 75
Edwards' History of Redemption, with Notes, Historical, Critical and
Theological, 2 Same work without Notes, 1 50 Edward's on the Millenium, 1 25
Emma Corbett, a Novel, 2 vols. 1 25 English Hermit, or the unparalleled
Sufferings and Surprising Adventures of Philip Quarll, an Englishman, 75
Evelina; or a young Lady's Entrance into the world, by the Author of Cecilia
and Camilla, 2 vols. 1 50 Evening Amusements for the Ladies; or, Original
Anecdotes, intended to promote a love of virtue in young minds, 62 Economy of
Human Life, 25 Edinburgh New Dispensatory -- new Edition, 2 50 Estimate of
Religion in the fashionable World, by Hannah More, 37

F
FLECHERE's (Rev. John W.) Pastoral and Familiar Letters to a number of Persons
-- also six Letters on the spiritual Manifestation of the Son of God, 75
Federal Ready Reckoner; or, Trader's Valuable Guide, in purchasing and selling
all kinds of Articles, in Dollars and Cents, 50 Fordyce's Addresses to Young
Men, 1 -- Sermons to Young Women, 1 Franklin's (Dr.) Life, written by himself,
66 Frankli^^^ (Dr.) Life and Essays, 1 Fisher's Young Man's best Companion, 87
Fenning's Arithmetic; or, American Youth's Instructor, 75 Flavel's Husbandry
Spiritualized; or, the Heavenly Use of Earthly things, 83 Fair Hibernian, a
Novel, 75 Female Jockey Club; or, a Sketch of the Manners of the Age, 75 Family
Instructor, relating to Parents and Children -- Masters and Servants --
Husbands and Wives, 75 Friend of Youth translated from the French of
M^^^erquin, 2 vols. 1 50 Flowers of Ancient and Modern History, 2 vols. 1 50
Fraser's Young Gentleman and Lady's Assistant, containing Geography, Natural
History, Rhetoric, Arithm^^^^, and Miscellany, 75 Farmer's Friend, or, the
History of Charles Worthy, 75 Fool of Quality; or, the History of Henry, Earl
of Moreland, by Mr. Brook, 3 vols. 2 50 Foresters, an American Tale; being a
Sequel to the History of John Bull the Clo^hier, a new Edition, with additions,
1 Fiske's twenty-two Sermons on various and important Subjects; chiefly
practical, 1 50 Freeman's Massachusetts Justice; being a Collection of the Laws
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, relative to the Power and Duty of
Justices of the Peace, etc. 1 75 Fleetwood's Life of Christ; together with the
Lives and Sufferings of his Holy Apostles and Disciples, 2 vols. 3 50 Flavel's
Token for Mourners; or, the Advice of Christ to a distressed Mother, 37
Flavel's Saint indeed, or the great work of a Christian, opened and pressed, 37
Fabulous Histories, for the Amusement of young persons, 44 Frugal Housewife, or
Complete Woman Cook, 50 Festival of Love: a Collection of Cytherian Poems,
containing Elegant Translations (...) Anacreon, Sappho, etc. etc. and Original
Pieces, 1 25 Findley's History of the Insurrection in the four Western Counties
of Pennsylvania, in the Year 1^^4. 1 ^ Fuller's Letters, in which the
Calvinistic and Socinian Systems are Examined and Compared as to their Moral
Tendency, 1

G
GUTHRIE's Modern Geography; improved, corrected, and greatly enlarged, 2 vols.
4to. with a vol. of Maps, 16 Goldsmiths, History of the Earth and Animated
Nature* 4 vols. with elegant Plates, 9 -- Abridgment of the History of Rome, 87
-- Abridgment of the History of England, 87 -- Essays and Poems, including
Deserted Village, Retaliation, etc. 75 Gentleman's Parental Monitor, 50 Grove,
on the Nature and Design of the Lord's Supper, 62 Gardiner's Inquiry into the
Nature, Cause, and Cure of the Gout, 57 Guide and Counselor of Human Life, 55
Guthrie's Saving Interest in Christ, and the way to attain it, 62 Gordon's
History of the American Revolution, 3 vols. 8vo. 5 25 Gay's Fables, 33
Gardner's (Col. James) Life, with a Sermon occasioned by his heroic Death, 66
Gospel News; being a brief Attempt to consider the Evidences of the Truth of
the Gospel, by Shippie Townsend, 1 25 Ghost Seer; or, Apparitionist; a
Fragment, 75

H
HUNTER's Sacred Biography; or, the History of the Patriarchs; to which is
added, the History of Deborah, Ruth and Hannah, 3 vols. 6 Same work, 6 vols. 7
50 Hutchins^^^^ History of Massachusetts, from the first settlement thereof, in
1628, until the year 1750, 2 vols. 4 Humphrey's (Col.) Miscellaneous Works, 1
50 -- Poems, 42 -- Life of Genesis Putman, 62 Hopkins' System of Divinity, 2 vols.
4 -- Treatise on the (...), 1 12 Hapless Orphan, a Novel, 2 vols. 1 50 Harris's
Natural History of the Bible, 87 Hive; or, Collection of Thoughts on Civil,
Moral Sentimental and Religious Subjects, 75 Hamilton on the Management of
Female Complaints and of Children, in early Infancy, 1 Hervey's Meditations and
Contemplations, 87 Haunted Priory; or, the Fortunes of the House of Rayo, 83
Hayes on Coughs and Colds, with ample directions for the Prevention and Cure of
Consumptions, to which are added, Observations on the Hooping Cough and Asthma,
40 Historical Journal of the American War, extracted from the Publications of
the Massachusetts Historical Society, 1 ^ Hunter on the Blood, Inflammation and
gunshot Wounds, with an account of the Author's life, 2 vols. 4 Hume's History
of England; 6 vols. with Plates, 13 50 Horne's Commentary on the Book of
Psalms, 2 25 Hubbard's Narrative, of the Indian Wars, in New England, 75
History of Joseph Andrews, by Fielding, 83 -- of America, from the
Encyclopedia, New Ed. 1 Hunter on the Venereal Disease, 2 ^0 Hardie's Tablet of
Memory, containing the most memorable Events in History, from the earliest
period, till 1795, etc. etc 1

I
INTERESTING MEMOIRS, 75 Inquisitor; or, Invisible Rambler, by Mrs. Rowson, 87
Imlay's History of Kentuckey, 2 vols. 1 50 Index of the various subjects
contained in the Sacred Scriptures, 50 -- to the Laws of Massachusetts; from
the Adoption of the Constitution to the Year 1796. 75 Infernal Conference; or,
Dialogues of Devils, by the Listener, 1 and 1 50

J
JACKSON on the Fevers of Jamaica, with Observations on the Intermitting Fever
of America, and hints on the means of Preserving the Health of Soldiers in Hot
Climates, 1 Jenks Prayers and Offices of Devotion for Families and Particular
Persons, 87 Julia de Roubigne, a Novel, by the Author of Man of the World, etc.
75 Jenyns' Inquiry into the Nature and Origin of Evil, 62 -- View of the
Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion, 66 -- Lectures to a Select Company
of Friends, 66 Josephus's History of the Ancient Jews, (by Whiston,) 6 vols. 5
-- do. (by Maynard,) Folio, Elegant Plates, 11 Jefferson's, (his Excellency
Thomas,) Notes on the State of Virginia, 1 50 Jockey Club; or, a Sketch of the
Manners of the Age, 1 25 Johnson (Mrs.) Captivity; containing an account of her
Sufferings, during four Years, with the Indians and French, 75 John Bull
(History of) 62 Jones' (Sir, William,) Essay on the Law of Bailments, 75
Junius's Letters with a Copious Index, 1 Joseph Andrews, by Fielding, 83

K
KLOPSTOCKS MESSIAH, (by Collyer,) 87 Knox's Moral and Literary Essays, 2 vols.
2 Keate's Sketches from Nature, 83 Kaime's Elements of Criticism, with the
Author's last Corrections and Additions, 2 vols. 4 Ke^^^'s Account of the Pelew
Islands, situated in the W^^^^^n part of the Pacific Ocean, Composed from the
Journals of Capt. Wilson, 75 Kelburn's, (Sinclare) Five Sermons on the Divinity
of Christ, 75

L
LOWTH's Translation of the Book of Isaiah, which is added, a Plain, Concise
and Particular Explanation of each Chapter, 75 Locke's Essay on the Human
Understanding, Abridg'd, 87 Lee's (Gen.) Life and Memoirs, 1 Lavater's Essays
on Physiognomy, 1 33 -- Aphorisms on Man, 55 Life of Christ, with Discourses
upon the Nativity, Baptism, Miracles, Resurrection, etc. etc. Also the Lives,
Acts, and Deaths of the Apostles, 62 -- and Adventures of Baron Frederick
Trenck, 1 -- do. Abridged, 25 Life and Religious Labors of Sarah Grubb, 87 --
of Dr. Franklin, 66 -- of Joseph, Son of Israel; chiefly designed to allure
Young Minds to a love of the Sacred Scriptures, by Macgowan, 62 -- Life of
Alexander the Great; King of Macedon, compiled from the Ancient History of M.
Rollin, 75 -- Life of James Lackington, the present Bookseller in Chiswill
Street, London, written by himself, 75 -- of William Glenclinne, Preacher of
the Gospel, written by himself, 37 -- Travels and Philanthropic Labors of the
late John Howard, Esquire. 62 Letters of certain Jews to M. Voltaire, containing an
Apology for their own People, and for the Old Testament, etc. 2 Letchworth's
Discourses to the Quakers, Lathrop's (Dr. Joseph) Sermons on Various Subjects,
1 50 Lay Preacher; or, Short Sermons for Idle Readers, 62 Ladies' Pocket
Library; containing Miss Mores, Essays; Dr. Gregory's Legacy to his Daughters;
Mrs. Chapones Letter on the Government of the Temper; Swift's Letter to a Young
Lady Newly Married; Moore's Fables for the Female Sex, etc. etc. 87 -- Literary
Companion; or, a Collection of Essays adapted for the instruction and amusement
of the Female Sex, 50 -- P^^^^tal Monitor, 50 -- Advice to her Children, 62 and
1 Letter Writer; or, the Art of Correspondence, containing Letters on Business,
Friendship, Love, and every other Subject; Forms of Message Cards: Moral
Reflections, etc. 62 and 75 Looking Glass for the Mind, an Elegant Collection
of Stories and Interesting Tales, particularly adapted for Youth, 75 Lendrum's
History of the American Revolution, to which is prefixed, a General History of
North and South America, etc. 2 vols. 2 Laws of Massachusetts, from the
establishment of its Constitution, to the first Session of the General Court,
in 1788, 2 L'Abeille Francoise, (French Be) 1 12 Lyttleton's Dialogues of the
Dead, 75 Louisa the Lovely Orphan; or, the Cottage on the Moor, 62 Looker-On, a
Periodical Paper, 2 vols. Laws of the United States, a new Edition, revised by
Order of Congress, 3 vols. Love's Art of Surveying, 1 25 Lempriere's Tour from
Gibralter to Tangiers, Sallee, Santa Cruz and Morocco, 87 Letters of an Italian
Nun, and an English Gentleman, from the French of Roussean, 62 Lounger, a
Periodical Paper, Published at Edingburgh, in '85, '86, and '87, 2 vols. 1 50

MOORE's (Dr. John) Travels through France, Switzerland, and Germany, 2 vols. 3
50 -- Zeluco; or, Various Views of Human Nature, 1 75 -- Journal during a
residence in France, from the beginning of August, to the middle of December,
1792, 2 vol^* 1 75 -- Medical Sketches, 1 25 Moral Instructions, of a Father to
his Son, 50 Morse's American Universal Geography, New Edition, Corrected and
greatly Enlarged, 2 vols. 4 50 Same Work, Abridged, 1 -- Elements of Geography,
for the use of Children and Schools, 30 Massachusetts Magazine for the Years
1791, '92, '93, '94, and '95, each vol. 3 Moore's System of Surveying, without
the use of Scale and Compasses; or, a Table of Logarithms, etc. etc. 1 50
Memoirs of the Lives, Characters, and Writings, of Dr. Isaac Watts, and Dr.
Philip Doddridge, 1 25 Message of the President of the United States, to
Congress, relative to France and Great Britain, December 5. 1793. 87
Macartney's Embassy to China, in the Years 1792, '93, and '94, with Accounts of
the Customs and Manners of the Chinese, and a Description of the Country,
Towns, Cities, etc. etc. 1 Milton's Paradise Lost, Regained, and Poems, with
the Life of the Author, 1 M'Ewen on the Types, Figures and Allegories of the
Old Testament, 75 Mc Fingal, an Epic Poem, by John Trum^^^^, Esquire. 42 Mill's
System of Farriery, 1 ^ -- Treatise on Cattle, ^7 Mentoria; or (...) Young
(...) Friend (by Mrs. Rowson,) 7^ Moor's (^dward) Fables for the Ladies, to
which (...) ^^ded, Fables of Flora, by (...) Langhorne, 37 and 50 Moore's
(Hamilton) Young Gentleman and Lady's Monitor, being a Collection of select
Pieces from the best modern Writers, 75 and 87 Melmoth's Essays on the Sublime
and Beautiful of Scripture, to which is added, Dr. Dwight's Dissertation on the
Poetry, History, and Eloquence of the Bible, 62 Mason's (John) Student and
Pastor; or, Directions how to attain to Eminence and Usefulness in those
respective Characters, 62 Mason (John) on Self Knowledge; showing the Nature
and Benefit of that important Science, and the way to attain it, 75 Man of the
World, a Novel, by the Author of Julia de Roubig^e, Man of Feeling, etc. 87
Mirror, a periodical Paper, Published at Edingburgh in the Years, 1779, and
'80, 1 25 and 1 66 Man of Feeling, by the Author of Man of the World, 62 and 75
Marmontel's Bellisarius, 75 Memoirs of Mrs. Coghlan: Daughter of the late Major
Moncrie^^e, written by herself, 62 Memoirs of Genesis Dumourier, written by
himself, 1 Mysteries of Udolpho: a Romance, by the Author of Romance of the
Forest; a Sicilian Romance, etc. 3 vols. 2 50 Montague (Edward W.) Life,
Travels and Adventures; (...) remarks on the Manners and C^^^oms of the
Oriental World, 50 Moral Library; containing Macbride's Principles of Vir^^^
and Morality; Villette's Essay on the H^ppiness of the ^^fe to come; etc. etc.
75 Messiah: attempted from the German (...) K^^^^stock, by Joseph Collyer, 87
Millot's Elements of Ancient and Modern History, 5 vols. 8 50 Memoirs of Mons.
and Madame du F. extracted from Mrs. William's Letters on the French
Revolution, 25 Marten's Law of Nations, 2 Memoirs of the Year 2500, translated
from the French, 1 Massachusetts Compiler, of Theoretical and Practical
Elements of Sacred Vocal Music, 1 75

N
NEWTON's (Bishop) Dissertations on the Prophecies, which have remarkably been
fulfilled, and at this time are fulfilling in the world, 2 vols. 3 New Robinson
Crusoe; an Instructive and Entertaining History, 87 Newton's (Rev. John) Works,
6 vols. 5 -- Olney Hymns, 66 -- Letters to a wife, 87 -- Sermons, 75
Northcote's Translation of Van Swieten, on the Diseases incident to Armies, and
the method of cure, 75 Neckar, on the Importance of Religious Opinions, 87
Nature and Art, a Novel by Mrs. Inchbald, 87 Netley Abbey, a Go^^^c Story,
Nichelson's Philosophy (New Ed.) 2 vols. 4

O
OVID's Art of Love, together with his Remedy of Love* the (...) ^istory of
Love, and Armstrong's Economy of Love, 66 Owen, on the Nature, Power, Deceit,
and ^^revalency of in-dwelling S^^ in Believers, etc. etc. 87 Odiorne's Po^^,
on the Progress of Refinement on ^ame, etc. 75 Or^on's (Rev. Job) Letters to a
Young Clergyman, 37 Ossian's Poems; translated by Macpherson, 2 Original Poems,
(...) Lady, revised by W. Cowper, Esquire. 44

P
PALEY's View of the Evidences of Christian^^^ 1 75 Same Work, 12mo. 1 12 --
Moral and Political Philosophy, 2 Pain's (William) Practical Builder; or,
Workman's General Assistant, engraved on 83 Plates, with explanations, 4 --
Builder's Pocket Treasure, correctly Engraven on 55 Plates, with explanations.
2 ^^^hington's, Chemical, and Economical Essays, 1 12 Perkins's (Rev. Nathan)
Twenty-four Discourses, 1 50 Plowden's History of the British Empire, 1 25
Pik^^^ New and Complete, System of Arithmetic, composed for the (...) of the
Citizens of the United States; New Edition, with additions, 2 25 -- ^he Work
Abridged, 87 Priestly's (Dr. Joseph^^ Discourses on the Evi^ence of revealed
Religion, 1 Pike and Howard's Religious Cases of ^onscience, Answered in an
Ev^^^^lical Manner, to which is added, the Spiritual Companion; or, the
Professing Christian, tried at the Bar of God's ^^rd, 1 Putnam's (Gen.) Life,
by Col. Humphreys, 62 Probate (...) and Assistant to Probate Courts, Executors,
Administr^^^^^, Guardians, etc. etc. 62 Peter Pinda^^^ Poetical Works (New Ed.)
2 vols. 2 25 Power of Sympath^* or, the Triumph of Nature, a Novel founded in
Truth, 83 Pleasures of Memory, with some other Po^^^, elegantly Printed, on
Wove Paper, with beautiful Plates, 1 Philip Quarll, the English Hermit, who was
lately discovered upon an uninhabited Islan^ in the South Sea, where (...) had
lived upwards of fifty Years without any human assistance, 75 Pope's
Translation of Homer's Iliad 1 Poetical Miscellany, a collection of valu^^^^
pieces from Goldsmith, Pope, etc. 66 Pleasing Instructor; on Entertaining
Moralist, Consisting of Sele^^ ^ssays, Allegories, etc. collected from the most
eminent English Authors; to which are added, New Thoughts on Education, 87
Pope's Poems, containing his Essay on Man; Essay on Criticism; Messiah etc.
etc. with an Account of his Life, ^ Price's (Dr. Richard) Sermons on the
Security and Happiness of Virtuous Course, on the Goodness of God and the
Resurrection of Lazurus, to which are added, Sermons on the Christian Doctrine
as received by the different denominations of Christians, 75 Pomfret's Poems,
on Several Occasions, to which are added, his Remains, with some account of his
Life, and Writings, 37 and 50 Poor Man's Help, and Young Man's Guide, (by
Burkitt) containing Doctrinal Instructions; Practical Directions; Forms of
Prayer; Hymns, etc. etc. 50 Purity and Holiness set forth, with Pathetic
Energy, by an eminent Minister of the Go^pel, amongst the people called
QUAKERS, 42 Petitpierre's Thoughts on Divine Goodness, relative to the
Government of Moral Agents, particularly Displayed in Future Rewards and
Punishments, 87 Paul and Mary, an Indian Story, translated from the French of
M. de St. Pierre, 40 Pelew Islands, account of, by Keate, 75 Proceedings of the
Society of United Irishmen, 75 Pocket-Farriery; containing Ten Minutes Advice
to the Purchasers of Horses; Receipts for the Cure of Diseases incident to
Horses; Sheep and Lambs, Hogs, Dogs, etc. with Plates, 62 Pilgrim's Progress,
by Bunyan, from this world to that which is to come, delivered under the
Similitude of a Dream; with the Life of the Author, 75 Perry's Standard English
Dictionary, with a comprehensive English Grammar, etc. etc. ten Dollars doz. 1
President WASHINGTON's, Speeches to Congress, with their Answers, the Addresses
to the President, with his Answers, etc. etc. 1 Paine's (Thomas) Writings,
containing, Rights of Man, Common Sense, Crisis, etc. etc. 2 Paul and Virginia,
from the French of St. Pierre, 62 ^/^ -- French and English, 2 vols. 1 ^5 Peter
Porcupine's Works; containing Bone to Gnaw, New Year's Gift, Little plain
English, etc. 2 Percival's Father's Instructions, consisting of Moral Tales,
Fables and Reflections, 66

R
REVOLUTION in France, (Impartial History of) from its Commencement to the
Death of the Queen, and the Execution of the Deputies of the Gironde Party, by
a Society of Gentlemen, 2 Rowe's (Mrs. Eliz.) Letters from the Dead to the
Living; to which are added, Letters Moral and Entertaining, in Prose and Verse,
75 -- Devout Exercises of the Heart in Meditation, Prayer, Praise, etc. 33
Rippon's Selection of Hymns, intended as an Appendix to Dr. Watts' 62 Rush's
Medical Observations, 2 vols. 3 Rochefaucault's Maxims, 25 Rasselas and
Dinarbas; or, the Prince of Abissinia, a Tale, by Dr. Johnson, 75 Relly's
Union; or, a Treatise of the Consanguinity and Affinity between Christ and his
Church, 66 Rawson's Compendium of Military Duty, adapted for the Militia of the
United States, 1 25 Robertson's (Dr.) Historical Disquisition, conconcerning
Ancient India, with observations on their Policy, Laws, Arts, Sciences, etc. 1
75 Revolutionary Justice displayed; or, an Inside View of the Various Prisons
of Paris, under the Government of Robertspierre, and the Jacobins, 50 and 62
Royal Captives; a Fragment of Secret History, copied from an old Manuscript, by
Ann Yearsley, 2 vols. 1 66 Religious Courtship; or, the Necessity of Marrying
Religious Husbands and Wives only, 75 Roderick Random, a Novel, by Smollett, in
2 vols. 1 50

S
SHAKESPEARE's Works, Complete, corrected from the latest and best London
Editions, with Notes, by Samuel Johnson: a Glosery, and the Life of the Author,
8 vols. 8 Scott's Force of Truth; an Authentic Narritive, 44 Smellie's
Midwifery, Abridged, with Anatomical Tables and Explanations, 1 12 Sky Lark;
or, Complete Modern Songster, 66 Sicilian Romance, by the Author of the Romance
of the Forest: Mysteries of Udolpho, etc. 87 Smith's Letters to Married Women,
on Nursing, and the Management of Children, 66 Seraphical Young Shepherd; being
a very remarkable Account of a Shepherd in France, etc. 66 Scott's Lessons in
Elocution, a Selection of Pieces in Prose, and Verse, designed for the Use of
Schools, 87 Sandford and Merton, a Tale intended for the Use of Children, 1
Same Work, Abridged, 57 and 50 Sentimental Lucubrations, by Peter Pennyless, 50
Scott's United States Gazetteer, containing an exact account, of the Cities,
Towns, Harbors, Rivers, Soil, Produce, Trade, etc. etc. etc. with nineteen
Maps, 1 50 Stuben's Exercise, containing regulations for the Order and
Discipline of the Troops of the United States, with the Militia acts,
illustrated with 8 Plates, 66 SENECA's Morals, by way of Abstract, to which is
added, a Discourse under the title of an After Thought, 1 Scougal's Life of God
in the Soul of Man, with Rules for a Holy Life, 62 Spirit of Despotism, 1
Select Pamphlets, chiefly on the Political affairs of America; in the early
part of the Revolution, 1 50 Secrets of Arts, or approved directions for
Engraving, Painting, Guilding, Varnishing, Dying, etc. the whole comprising a
great variety of Useful Information, 83 Saunders's (Dan.) Journal of his
Travels and Sufferings, on the Coast of Arabia, where he was cast away July 10,
1792, 50 Spanish Grammar; or, the Elements of the Spanish Language, together
with an English Grammar, for the Use of Spaniards, by I. G. Del Pino, 1
Sterne's Sentimental Journey through France and Italy, 75 Seabury (Bishop)
Discourses on Several important Subjects, 2 vols. 3 Stewart's Elements of the
Philosophy of the Human Mind, 2 Smith's History of New York, from the First
Discovery, to the Year 1732, 1 25 Sullivan's (Hon. James) History of the
District of Maine, with a correct Map, 2 Stephen's Literary Miscellany;
containing Elegant Selections of Fugitive Pieces, in Prose and Verse, 2 vols. 2
25 Smellie's Philosophy of Natural History, 2 Smith's (Charlotte) Elegiac
Sonnets, 25 Simple Story; by Mrs. Inchbald, 1 Sorrows of Werter: a German
Story, 62 Smith's (Adam) Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations, 3 vols. 3 System of Chemistry, from the Encyclopedia, 2 50 Sentimental
Beauties and Moral Delineations, from the Writings of the celebrated Dr. Blair
and other Authors, 50

T
TRIALS of the Human Heart; a Novel, by Mrs. Rowson, Author of Charlotte, etc.
etc. 2 vols. 2 Travels of Cyrus, to which is annexed, a Discourse upon the
Theology and Mythology of the Pagans, 87 Tour in Holland, in the Year 1784, by
an American, 1 12 Telemachus; French and English, 2 vols. 2 25 Same Work in
English, 1 vol. 1 12 Same Work in French, 1 vol. 1 12 Turner's Bookkeeping,
after the Italian Method, with forms of Bills, Notes, etc. 25 Thomson's
Seasons, with an account of his Life and Writings, 75 Town Officer; or, the
Power and Duty of Selectmen, Town Clerks, Constables, and all other Town
Officers, with Forms for their use, by S. Freeman, 75 Tom Jones, a Novel, by
Henry Fielding, Esquire. 3 vols. 3 Transactions of the College of Physicians of
Philadelphia, 1 Trimmer's Introduction to the Knowledge of Nature, adapted to
the Capacities of Children, 50

V
VATTEL's Law of Nations; or, Principles of the Law of Nature, applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, 2 Village Curate, a Poem, 50
Vicar of Wakefield, by Dr. Goldsmith, 42, 50 and 75 Voltaire's Philosophical
Dictionary, 1 Voyages of Amasis, French and English, 1 Volney's Ruins of
Empires, 1

U
UNITED States Magazine; or, General Repository of Instruction and Amusement, 1
50

W
WASHINGTON's Official Letters, to Congress during the late War between this
Country and Great Britain, with an Elegant Portrait, 2 vols. 2 25 -- Epistles,
Domestic, Confidential and Official, to Mr. Lund Washington, British Admiral,
Arbuthnot and Digby, etc. etc. etc. none of which are contained in the above
Volumes, 1 12 -- Collection of Speeches to Congress and Answers. Addresses to
him during his Presidency; Answers, etc. 1 Wallis on the Art of preventing
Diseases and Restoring Health, adapted to persons of every capacity, 2 Watts's
Glory of Christ as God-Man, displayed in three discourses, 1 25 -- Lyric Poems,
sacred to Devotion and Piety; Virtue, Honor and Friendship; the Memory of the
Dead, 67 -- Miscellaneous Thoughts in Prose and Verse, on Natural, Moral and
Divine Subjects, 87 -- Logic; or, the Right Use of Reason in the Inquiry after
Truth, 1 Winchester's Lectures on the Prophecies, that remain to be fulfilled,
2 vols. 2 75 -- Dialogues, on Universal Restoration, with some Account of the
Author's Life, 62 and 75 Watson's (Bishop) Apology for Christianity, addressed
to Edward Gibbon, Esquire. 75 -- Apology for the Bible, being a Refutation of
Paine's Age of Reason, 37 and 50 Willison's Afflicted Man's Companion, or, a
Directory for Persons and Families, Afflicted with Sickness, or any other
Distress. Very necessary for all Families, 75 Willison's Sacramental,
Meditations and Advices, grounded upon Scripture Texts proper for Communicants,
with a short Christian Directory, etc. etc. 75 Whitefield's ten Sermons on
various important subjects, 75 Whitney's History of the County of Worcester,
with a correct Map, 1 50 West (Stephen) on Moral Agency, 1 75 White's (Joseph)
Sermons, 1 50 Wollstonecraft's Vindication of the Rights of Women, with
strictures on Moral and Political Subjects, 1 50 -- Historical and Moral View
of the French Revolution, 1 Warren's (Mrs.) Poems, Dramatic and Miscellaneous,
1 Williams's (Helen Maria) Letters on interesting parts of the French
Revolution, 2 vols. 1 62 1/^ -- Continuation of do. from 31st May, 1793, till
28th of July, 1794, and of the Scenes which passed in the Prisons of Paris, 87
Whole Duty of Women; to which is added, the Economy of Human Life, 50 -- Duty
of Man, laid down in a Plain and Familiar Way, for the use of all; very
necessary for Families, 1 Wisdom in Miniature; or, the Young Gentleman and
Ladies' Pleasing Instructor, 33 Workman's Elements of Geography, with 8 Maps,
50 White on Lying-in-Women, 1 50 William's History of Vermont, with a Map, 2
Warville on the Commerce of America, with Europe, etc. 1 Westley' Life and
Death of the Rev. John Fletcher, 62

Y
YOUNG's Letters; or, Calvanism and Universalism, contrasted, 50 -- (Dr.) Night
Thoughts, on Life, Death, and Immortality; with the Life of the Author, etc. 83

Z
Zimmerman on Solitude, with respect to its influence upon the Mind and Heart,
^7

TRAGEDIES.
Almeyda; or, the Rival Kings. Barbarossa. Cato, by Addison. Crensa, Queen of
Athens. Grecian Daughter. Gamester. George Barnwell. Gustavus Vasa. Hamlet,
Prince of Denmark. Lorenzo, by R. Murray, Esquire. Revenge. Mariamne. Robbers.
COMEDIES.
Belle's Stratagem. Bold Stroke for a Wife. Busy Body. Cutter of Coleman
Street. Dramatist. Deserted Daughter. Bank Note. Columbus. False Appearances.
Foundling. Hypocrite. Imposters. Jew. Man and Wife. Natural Son. Provoked
Husband, Road to Ruin, Suspicious Husband, She Stoops to Conquer; or, the
Mistakes of a Night* School for Scandal, Twelfth Night, West Indian, Wild Oats,
Young Quaker, Love's Frailties Child of Nature Married Man,
COMIC OPERAS.
Battle of Hexham, Incle and Yarico, Mountaineers, Haunted Tower, Lionel and
Clarissa, Lord of the Manor, Love in a Village, Governess, Woodman, Slaves in
Algiers, Highland Reel,
FARCES, etc. etc.
Dols. Cts. Children in the Wood, 12 and 20 Bon Ton; or, High Life above
Stairs, 12 Agreeable Surprise, 12 Midnight hour, 12 Don Juan, 12 Citizen, 12
Midas, 12 Lying Valet, 12 Farmer, 12 Deserter, 12 Quaker, 12 Poor Soldier, 12
Prisoner at Large, 12 Poor Vulcan, 12 No Song No Supper, 12 Miller of
Mansfield, 12 Spoiled Child, 12 Rosina, 12

SMALL BOOKS AND PAMPHLETS.
Exercises of Cavalry, 12 Valentine and Orson, 25 Children's Friend, Abridged,
25 Life of Baron Trenck, Abridged, 25 Memoirs of Mons. and Mad. du F. 25 Fairy
Tales, 25 History of the Holy Bible, 33 Catechism of Nature, 20 Arabian Nights
Entertainments, Abridged, 25 Doddridge's Sermons, 25 Easy Way to Prolong Life,
25 Prompter, 20 Three Brothers, 25 Lovers Instructor, 25 Search after
Happiness, by Hannah More, 10 Pope's Essay on Man, 12 Father's Legacy, by Dr.
Gregory, 25 Life of the Queen of France, 25 Age of Infidelity, 20 Astronomical
Catechism, 9 Deserted Village, by Goldsmith, 10 Massachusett's and United
State's Militia Law, 12 Tom Paine's Jests, 20 Trader's Companion, 17 Whole Duty
of Woman, 12 The Treaty with England, its Merits and Demerits, 33 An Account of
Algiers, 25 Humphrey's Poem on Industry, 20 Observations on Priestley's
Emigration to America, 37 Priestley's Answer to Pain, 25 Tytlers do. do. 37
Peter Pindar on Hair Powder Tax, 25 Paine's Principles of Government, 17 Signs
of the Times, by Bechino, 37 Clark on Christianity, 25 Account of New York
Fever, 37 Winchester's Three Woe Trumpets, 25 Paine's Rights of Man, 3^
Conspiracy of Kings, (by Barlow,) 12 Hemmenway's Discourse, 33 Letter to the
Prince of Wales, 20 Gulliver Revived, by Baron Munchanson, 17 Prophetical
Conjectures on the French Revolution, extracted from Archb'p Brown, I. Knox,
Chris. Love, More, etc. etc. 25 Theatrical Songsters, 12 1/^ Friendly Visit to
the House of Mourning, 20

J. WEST HAS ALSO FOR SALE, A Choice Collection OF BOOKS, OF ENGLISH, SCOTCH
and IRISH EDITIONS. Also, Bibles of all Sizes, Testaments, Psalm Books,
Spelling Books, Dictionaries, Singing Books, Account Books, Writing Paper of
all sizes, Quills, Ink Powder, Sealing Wax, Wafers, Pocket Books, Playing
Cards, Pen Knives, Children's Books, Ink Stands of all kinds* Sand Boxes, and
every other article in the Book and Stationary Line, with which Country
Merchants and others may be supplied, Wholesale or Retail, on the most
reasonable terms. A liberal Allowance to th^se who purchase largely.

Social Libraries supplied on as good Terms as at any other Book Store on the
Continent.


