THE YOUNG CHEMIST'S POCKET COMPANION.

THE Young Chemist's Pocket Companion; CONNECTED WITH A Portable Laboratory.
CONTAINING A PHILOSOPHICAL APPARATUS, AND A GREAT NUMBER OF CHEMICAL AGENTS; BY
WHICH ANY PERSON MAY PERFORM AN ENDLESS VARIETY OF AMUSING AND INSTRUCTING
EXPERIMENTS; INTENDED TO PROMOTE THE CULTIVATION OF THE SCIENCE OF CHEMISTRY.

BY JAMES WOODHOUSE, M. D. Professor of Chemistry in the University of
Pennsylvania, etc.

At present every thing that is not denominated Chemistry, is but a small part
of a System of natural knowledge.

PRIESTLEY on Air. Philadelphia: PRINTED BY J. H. OSWALD, NO. 179, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET. 1797.

INTRODUCTION.
THE Portable Chest, connected with this Book, consists of two apartments.

The upper one contains twenty bottles, filled with the following tests: -- 1
Sulphuric acid. 2 Nitric acid. 3 Muriatic acid. 4 Carbonic acid. 5 Oxalic acid.
6 Alkohol of galls. 7 Solution of the carbonate of pot-ash. 8 Solution of
caustic pot-ash. 9 Pot-ash in powder. 10 Solution of the sulphate of iron. 11
Solution of the sulphate of copper. 12 Solution of mercury in the nitric acid.
13 Solution of corrosive sublimate. 14 Solution of the acetate of lead. 15
Solution of arsenic. 16 Solution of the muriated barytes. 17 Sulphate of
magnesia. 18 Lime water. 19 Prussiate of Lime. 20 Prussiate of Pot-ash.


The lower apartment is a Drawer, in which the Philosophical Apparatus is
placed, and a number of agents folded up in paper, as 1 Strips of paper stained
blue by the tincture of litmus. 2 Litmus paper, turned red by an acid. 3 A rag
containing litmus. 4 Paper stained by the blue cabbage. 5 Paper dyed yellow by
turmeric. 6 Turmeric paper, turned brown by an alkali. 7 Paper dyed red, by
Brazil wood. 8 Brazil wood paper, stained purple by an alkali. 9 Zinc in small
pieces. 10 Copper in small pieces. 11 Red lead. 12 Iron filings. 13 Sulphate of
copper. 14 Nitrate of pot-ash. 15 Muriate of ammoniac. 16 Acetate of lead. 17
Carbonate of lime. 18 Sulphur.


The Apparatus consists of 1 Glass siphons. 2 A blow-pipe of tin, copper or
silver. 3 A magnet. 4 An inflammable air pistol. 5 A glass funnel. 6 A measure
for liquids. 7 A pestle and mortar. 8 Scales and weights.


Some difficulty may be experienced by those who commence the study of
Chemistry, in obtaining the different airs over water, but frequent attempts
will render the experimenting on this branch of the science very easy.

The Chests are sold with or without the Apparatus, by William Woodhouse, No.
6, South Front-street, Philadelphia, at which place any article that is
expended may be replaced.

THE Young Chemist's Pocket Companion.
Experiments.
Of Hydrogenous Gas, or inflammable Air.
EXPERIMENT I.
PUT a piece of zinc into a vial, and pour upon it a small quantity of the
sulphuric acid, and no action will take place.

EXPERIMENT II.
Add a quantity of water, equal to eight or ten times the bulk of the sulphuric
acid, to the sulphuric acid and zinc, and a violent commotion will begin,
attended with a high degree of heat, and a discharge of hydrogenous gas.

EXPERIMENT III.
Apply a lighted taper to the mouth of the vial, and an explosion will happen,
or the air will burn with a lambent flame at the mouth of the vessel.

This experiment may be performed upwards of twenty times with the same
materials.

EXPERIMENT IV.
Hold the mouth of the inflammable air pistol over the vial for about half a
minute, shutting up the touch hole with the thumb, and the hydrogenous gas will
rise into it; put in the stopper and apply a lighted taper to the touch hole,
and an explosion will take place.

In these experiments the water is decomposed. Its oxigene calcines the zinc,
while its hydrogene is disengaged; the acid acts upon the calcined metal,
without being altered, forming white vitriol, or sulphate of zinc.

Hydrogenous gas is fatal to animal life, extinguishes flame, will not burn
without the contact of pure air, and explodes when mixed with atmospheric air,
with a loud noise.

Of Oxigenous Gas, called also Pure, Vital, Dephlogisticated, Fire and Empyreal
Air.
EXPERIMENT V.
Put two tea spoons-full of red lead into a vial, and pour upon it a small
quantity of the sulphuric acid, and a high degree of heat will be produced;
connect the end of a glass siphon on which a cork is fixed, to the mouth of the
vial, and dip the other extremity in a large bowl, or small bucket nearly
filled with water, and bubbles of air will pass through the fluid. Fill a small
wide mouthed bottle with water, and hold it over the bubbles, and they will
rise into it and displace the water. When the bubbles cease to come over, apply
a lighted taper to the bottom of the vessel containing the red lead and
sulphuric acid, and the discharge will begin again.

The airs which are produced are the sulphurous and oxigenous. The sulphurous
must be separated from the oxigenous gas, by agitating the two fluids in water,
when the sulphurous air will be absorbed. For the method of obtaining the
gases over water -- see the common books on Chemistry.


EXPERIMENT VI.
Immerse a lighted taper in the oxigenous gas, and it will burn with a vivid
flame.

Oxigenous gas is heavier than atmospheric air, burns with a bright flame, and
is the only air proper for combustion and animal life.

Of Azotic or Nitrogene Gas, -- Mephitic or Phlogisticated Air.
EXPERIMENT VII.
Put some fresh beef into a vial, and pour a small quantity of the nitric acid
upon it; connect a glass siphon to the vial, and proceed in the manner directed
to obtain oxigenous gas. -- Or,

EXPERIMENT VIII.
Expose a mixture, composed of equal parts of iron filings and sulphur,
moistened with water, to a portion of atmospheric air, confined by a glass
vessel over water.

The oxigenous gas of the atmospheric air will be absorbed, and the azotic air
will remain behind.

EXPERIMENT IX.
Immerse a lighted taper in the azotic gas, and it will be extinguished.

Azotic air is improper for respiration or combustion; is lighter than
atmospheric air; plants live and vegetate in it; and it mixes with the other
gases, without combining with them.

Of Alkalis.
Alkalis have an urinous burning taste; turn most blue vegetable substances of
a green color; effervesce with certain acids, and compose neutral salts with
all; form glass when melted with quartzose substances, and render oils miscible
with water.

There are three alkalis.

Pot-ash, or the vegetable fixed alkali, called also the salt of tartar and of
wormwood; soda, mineral or fossil alkali; and ammoniac or the volatile alkali,
alkaline gas, or spirit of hartshorne.

Of Pot-ash.
Pot-ash is generally obtained by making a lie of the ashes of vegetables,
evaporating the water, and calcining the combustible matter, which remains
mixed with the ashes, in a high degree of heat.

It may likewise be obtained very pure, by fusing the nitrate of pot-ash or
salt petre with charcoal, dissolving the substance which remains behind in
water, and filtering it through paper. When pure pot-ash is exposed to the air,
it attracts a large portion of moisture, and is resolved into a liquor called
the oil of tartar per deliquium.

The common pot-ash of the shops contains a large portion of carbonic acid, or
fixed air, which causes it to effervesce upon the addition of an acid.

EXPERIMENT X.
Put some of the solution of the carbonate of pot-ash into a wine glass, and
add a few drops of the sulphuric, nitric or muriatic acid to it, and a
commotion will take place, called an effervescence, which is owing to a
discharge of the carbonic acid, or fixed air.

If the sulphuric acid is used, a sulphate of pot-ash or vitriolated tartar
will be formed; if the nitric acid, nitrate of pot-ash, or common nitre; and if
the muriatic, a muriate of pot-ash or digestive salt of Sylvius.

Pot-ash is rendered caustic by adding a small quantity of quicklime to a
solution of it in water. The carbonic acid of the carbonate of pot-ash, unites
to the quicklime, and forms a carbonate of lime.

EXPERIMENT XI.
Put some of the solution of caustic potash into a wine-glass, and add a few
drops of any of the acids in the Chest to it, and no effervescence will take
place.

Of Soda, Mineral, or Fossil Alkali.
Soda is generally obtained from the ashes of marine plants, by proceeding in
the same manner as in procuring pot-ash.

It may also be made from the muriate of soda or common salt, by adding pot-ash
to a solution of this substance, and evaporating a part of the liquor by means
of heat, when the pure alkali will be obtained in crystals.

The pot-ash unites to the muriatic acid of the common salt, and forms muriate
of pot-ash, which will be held in solution in the supernatant liquor, while the
soda will be set at liberty.

Soda differs from pot-ash; because it is less caustic; does not attract
moisture from the atmosphere, but effloresces in it; crystallizes in rhomboidal
octahedrons; forms different products with the same bases and is more proper
for vitrification.

Of Ammoniac, the Volatile Alkali, or Alkaline Gas.
Ammoniac is generally obtained from the distillation of animal substances.

It may be procured in a very pure state, by distilling equal parts of sifted
quick lime and the muriate of ammoniac or common sal ammoniac together, in a
glass retort, to which a receiver must be connected, holding a portion of
water, correspondent to the weight of the salt employed.

EXPERIMENT XII.
Put a small quantity of sal ammoniac in powder into a wine glass, and it will
have no smell.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
Add a few drops of the solution of pot-ash, or a few grains of lime or pot-ash
moistened with water, to the sal ammoniac, and a smell of alkaline gas will be
produced.

The pot-ash or lime unites to the muriatic acid of the sal ammoniac and forms
a muriate of pot-ash or lime, while the ammoniac or volatile alkali is set at
liberty.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
Hold the glass stopper of the bottle, containing the nitric or muriatic acid,
over the sal ammoniac in the wine glass, and a cloud of white smoke will be
produced.

The nitric or muriatic acid combines with the ammoniac or alkaline gas, and
produces a nitrate or muriate of ammoniac.

Ammoniac is lighter than atmospheric air; has a strong pungent smell; corrodes
the skin, and is fatal to animal life.

The common method of determining the presence of the alkalis, is by the effect
they have of changing the generality of blue vegetable substances to a green
color.

Indigo and litmus are exceptions to this law.

An alkaline salt may also be detected, by paper stained yellow by the tincture
of turmeric or rhubarb, which it changes to a brown color; or by litmus paper
turned red in an acid which will be restored to its original blue color; or by
paper stained red by a decoction of Brazil wood, which will be changed to a
purple color.

EXPERIMENT XV.
Dip a piece of paper, stained by the blue cabbage, or some other vegetable
blue, into a wine glass containing water, and no change will be produced.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
Add some of the solution of pot-ash or soda, or a few drops of ammoniac to the
water, and dip in the blue paper, and it will be turned to a green color.

EXPERIMENT XVII.
Into a wine glass containing some water, dip a piece of the turmeric paper,
and its color will not be changed.

EXPERIMENT XVIII.
Add some of the solution of pot-ash or soda, or a few drops of ammoniac to the
water, and dip the paper into it, and the yellow color will be turned to a
brown.

EXPERIMENT XIX.
Dip a piece of the litmus paper, turned red by an acid, into a wine glass
containing water, and no alteration will take place.

EXPERIMENT XX.
Add to the water some of the solution of pot ash or soda, or a few drops of
ammoniac, and dip the paper into it, and the original blue color will be
restored.

EXPERIMENT XXI.
Dip a piece of paper, turned red by the tincture of Brazil wood, into some
water in a wine glass, and no change will ensue.

EXPERIMENT XXII.
Add some of the solution of pot-ash or of soda, or a few drops of ammoniac to
the water, and dip in the paper, and it will become of a purple color.

Of Acids.
Acids have a sour taste, turn certain blue vegetable substances of a red
color, Indigo is an exception
and effervesce with the mild alkalis. This property of effervescing is not
general, for the carbonic, and almost all the weak acids, cannot be
distinguished in this manner, and the caustic alkalis combine with the acids
without motion.

An acid will likewise change turmeric paper, turned brown by an alkali, to its
original yellow, or Brazil wood paper turned purple by an alkali, to its
pristine red color.

EXPERIMENT XXIII.
Dip a piece of litmus paper, into a wine glass containing some water, and no
change will happen.

EXPERIMENT XXIV.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric, nitric, or muriatic acid to the water; dip
in the paper, and a red color will be produced.

Litmus paper may be made, by dipping the rag containing litmus into water, and
rubbing it over the paper.

EXPERIMENT XXV.
Dip a piece of the turmeric paper, stained brown by an alkali, into a wine
glass containing water, and no change will take place.

EXPERIMENT XXVI.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric, nitric, or muriatic acid to the water, dip
in the paper, and it will be changed to its original yellow, color.

EXPERIMENT XXVII.
Dip a piece of the Brazil wood paper, turned purple by an alkali, into a wine
glass containing water, and no alteration will ensue.

EXPERIMENT XXVIII.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric, nitric, or muriatic acid to the water; dip
in the paper, and it will be changed to its pristine red color.

The acids contained in the chest are, the carbonic, sulphuric, nitric,
muriatic and oxalic.

Of the Carbonic Acid, called also the Cretaceous Acid, Acid of Chalk and Fixed
Air.
EXPERIMENT XXIX.
Put some powdered chalk or limestone into a vial, pour upon it a small
quantity of the sulphuric acid diluted with water; connect a glass siphon to
the vial, and proceed in the manner directed to obtain oxigenous gas.

The sulphuric acid unites to the chalk or limestone, and forms sulphate of
lime, while the carbonic acid is set at liberty.

EXPERIMENT XXX.
Put some powdered limestone or chalk into a tumbler, and pour upon it a small
quantity of the sulphuric acid diluted with water, and immediately immerse a
lighted taper in the tumbler, and it will instantly be extinguished.

The carbonic acid is so much heavier than common atmospheric air, that it may
be poured like water, from one vessel into another; it is improper for
combustion or animal life; forms neutral salts with the alkalis, and is
absorbed by water.

It is used to detect the presence of lime, with which it forms a white
insoluble compound.

EXPERIMENT XXXI.
Pour some limewater into a wine glass, and add a small quantity of the
carbonic acid to it, and a white precipitate will be produced.

The carbonic acid unites to the lime, and forms carbonate of lime.

Of the Sulphuric or Vitriolic Acid, or the Oil of Vitriol.
The sulphuric acid is obtained by burning a mixture, composed of one eighth
part of nitre, and one of sulphur, in a large chamber lined with lead.

A quantity of water is placed on the floor, to absorb the acid vapors.

The nitre yields pure air to the sulphur, by which means it is converted into
the vitriolic acid.

The sulphuric acid is unctuous to the touch; hence it is called the oil of
vitriol. It acts strongly on combustible bodies, and is decomposed by combining
with them.

EXPERIMENT XXXII.
Put half an ounce of water into a vial, and add one dram of sulphuric acid
to it, and a high degree of heat will be produced, which may be felt by
grasping the vial in the hand.

The sulphurous acid gas, or volatile vitriolic acid, is obtained by
decomposing the sulphuric acid, with a combustible body.

EXPERIMENT XXXIII.
Put some sweet oil into a vial, and pour upon it a small quantity of the
sulphuric acid; connect a glass siphon to the vial, and proceed in the manner
directed to obtain oxigenous gas.

EXPERIMENT XXXIV.
Immerse a lighted taper in the sulphurous gas, and it will be extinguished.

EXPERIMENT XXXV.
Agitate the sulphurous gas in water, and dip the litmus paper into it, and it
will be turned of a red color.

Sulphurous acid gas is heavier than atmospheric air; is improper for
respiration or combustion; is absorbed by water, and turns certain blue
vegetable substances of a red color. It is a modification of the sulphuric
acid, containing a less proportion of pure air.

Of Nitric Acid, or Aqua Fortis.
The nitric acid is generally obtained, by pouring one part by weight of
sulphuric acid, upon two parts of nitre in fine powder, and distilling them
together in a glass retort, to which a receiver is adapted.

EXPERIMENT XXXVI.
Put a few grains of powdered nitre into a wine glass, and add a few drops of
the sulphuric acid to it, and the nitre will be decomposed.

The sulphuric acid unites to the pot ash of the nitre, and forms sulphate of
pot ash, while the nitric acid is detached from its alkaline base, and escapes
in the form of fumes.

EXPERIMENT XXXVII.
Hold the glass stopper of the bottle containing the ammoniac, over the surface
of the nitre, after the sulphuric acid is added to it, and thick white clouds
will be formed.

The nitric acid vapor unites to the ammoniac, and forms nitrate of ammoniac.

This acid acts powerfully on all combustible bodies. If it be poured upon
oils, it renders them thick and black, converts them into charcoal, or inflames
them.

EXPERIMENT XXXVIII.
Add about half an ounce of the sulphuric acid, to the same quantity of nitric
acid in a wine glass, fixed to the extremity of a stick, about three feet long.
Pour the mixture suddenly, but at different times, upon half a gill of the oil
of turpentine, or upon half an ounce of the rectified oil of amber, and
inflammation will immediately take place.

The temperature of the weather, has a most powerful influence upon this
experiment. When the atmosphere is moist or cold, it will not always succeed.
When this is the case, it is necessary to give the vessel which contains the
oil, a moderate degree of heat.

EXPERIMENT XXXIX.
Put one dram of lamp-black, or three drachms of charcoal, reduced to a very
fine powder, and dried by the fire, into a clean dry vessel. Pour the nitric
acid upon the coal, in such a manner, that it may trickle down the sides of the
vessel, and in a short time inflammation will take place, and the coal will be
thrown upwards, in the form of a beautiful rocket.

EXPERIMENT XL.
Put a piece of zinc into a wine glass, and add a small quantity of the nitric
acid to it, and a violent action will ensue, accompanied with a discharge of
nitrous gas, which assumes a red color, by combining with the oxigene air of
the atmosphere.

Nitrous air is neither acid nor alkaline; puts out a taper, and is fatal to
animal life.

Of Nitrate of Pot-ash, Nitre or Saltpeter.
Nitre is composed of the nitric acid and pot-ash.

If it is brought into contact, with a combustible body heated red hot, as a
coal, the body will be consumed with great rapidity, in consequence of the
oxigene gas afforded by the nitre.

EXPERIMENT XLI.
Put a live coal upon a shovel, and add some nitre to it, and the coal will
burn in a rapid manner.

In this case, the nitric acid of the nitre, which is composed of oxigenous and
azotic gas, is decomposed; the oxigene unites to the coal, and forms the
carbonic acid; the azotic gas and water of the nitre are dissipated; the
pot-ash remains on the shovel.

Gunpowder is made of nitre, sulphur and charcoal.

EXPERIMENT XLII.
Take seventy five parts by weight of nitre, fifteen and a half of charcoal,
and nine and a half of sulphur. Triturate these ingredients in a mortar, and
add to the powder a lighted coal, and a slow or sudden inflammation will take
place, in proportion to the accuracy of the mixture.

The inflammation of gunpowder, is owing to the rapid decomposition of the
nitre, and the sudden formation of gases.

Fulminating powder is formed of nitre, pot-ash and sulphur.

EXPERIMENT XLIII.
Triturate three parts by weight of nitre, two of pot-ash and one of sulphur
together in a dry mortar; expose about half a dram of this powder on a shovel
to a gentle heat, and soon after the mixture begins to melt, an explosion will
happen.

When fulminating powder is heated, the sulphur unites to the pot-ash of the
nitre, and forms sulphur of pot-ash before detonising. Sulphurated hydrogene
gas is disengaged from the sulphur of pot-ash, and oxigenous gas from the
nitre. These two airs unite, and are inflamed by a part of the sulphur which
kindles by itself. They strike the atmospheric air with such rapidity, that it
resists them in the same manner, as the sides of a gun barrel resists gun
powder.

Of the Muriatic, or Marine Acid, called also the Spirit of Salt.
The muriatic acid is obtained, by distilling one part by weight of sulphuric
acid and two parts of common salt together in a glass retort, to which a
receiver is adapted, containing water, to absorb the acid fumes.

The muriatic acid is lighter than the sulphuric or nitric acids; has a strong
pungent smell; emits white vapors, and precipitates silver from its solution in
the form of a white compound.

EXPERIMENT XLIV.
Put some common salt into a wine glass, and add a few drops of the sulphuric
acid to it, and strong penetrating fumes will rise into the air.

The common salt is composed, of the muriatic acid and soda.

The sulphuric acid unites to the soda, and forms sulphate of soda, or
Glauber's salt, while the muriatic acid is set at liberty.

EXPERIMENT XLV.
Hold the glass stopper of the bottle containing the ammoniac, over the surface
of the common salt, after the sulphuric acid is added to it, and white clouds
will be formed.

The muriatic acid of the salt, unites with the ammoniac, and forms muriate of
ammoniac, or common sal ammoniac.

EXPERIMENT XLVI.
Let fall one drop of the nitric solution of silver, into some rain water in a
wine glass, and add one drop of the muriatic acid to it, and the water will
become white.

The muriatic acid unites to the silver, and forms Luna Cornea.

Rain water must be used, as pump water generally contains the marine acid,
united to some base.

EXPERIMENT XLVII.
Add a few drops of the nitric solution of silver, to a glass of pump water,
and it is probable a white color will be produced, as pump water often contains
the muriatic acid.

Of the Oxalic Acid, or Acid of Sugar.
The oxalic acid is made by oxigenating sugar, with the nitric acid.

EXPERIMENT XLVIII.
Put half an ounce of loaf sugar into a six ounce vial, and pour four ounces of
nitric acid upon it. Set the mixture near the fire and it will boil, and a
great discharge of nitrous gas will be thrown out. When this ceases, pour the
liquor into a common queen's ware saucer; evaporate one half of it by placing
the saucer on live coals; and then put the vessel in a cool place for a few
hours, and crystals of the oxalic acid will be deposited. Separate these
crystals from the liquor which swims above them, and dissolve them in two
ounces of rain water. The supernatant liquor must be again evaporated, and set
in a cool place, and more crystals will be obtained.

It is used like the carbonic acid, to detect the presence of lime.

EXPERIMENT XLIX.
Pour some lime water into a wine glass, and add one drop of the oxalic acid to
it, and a white compound will be formed, which is the oxalate of lime.

Of Lime.
Lime is soluble in seven hundred times its weight of water, has a penetrating
and acrid taste, absorbs water with avidity, and crumbles into powder

EXPERIMENT L.
Put three ounces of quicklime into a pint of water; let them stand together
until the fluid becomes clear, and it will be impregnated with the lime.

Lime water is principally used to detect the presence of the carbonic acid,
with which it forms an insoluble compound.

EXPERIMENT LI.
Pour some lime water into a wine glass, and blow the air from the lungs
through it, by means of the barrel of a quill, for about half a minute, and the
lime water will become turbid.

The carbonic acid of the air discharged from the lungs, unites with the lime,
and forms the carbonate of lime or common chalk.

Of Barytes, or Ponderous Earth.
Barytes is soluble in nine hundred times its weight of water; is precipitated
from its combination with the nitric and muriatic acids by the prussiate of
pot-ash, by which circumstance it is distinguished from the other earths: and
it has the property of precipitating the alkalis from their combination with
acids.

The muriated barytes is used as a test, for detecting the presence of the
sulphuric acid.

EXPERIMENT LII.
Let fall one drop of the solution of muriated barytes, into some water in a
wine glass, to which add one drop of the sulphuric acid, and the ponderous
earth will be precipitated in the form of a white salt.

The sulphuric acid unites to the barytes or ponderous earth, and forms
sulphate of barytes, while the marine acid will be disengaged, and swim in the
supernatant liquor.

Of Magnesia.
Magnesia is a white, friable and spongy earth, is insoluble in water, and
tinges certain blue vegetable substances, of a slight green color.

Sulphate of magnesia, or Epsom salt, is composed of the sulphuric acid and
magnesia.

EXPERIMENT LIII.
Dissolve a few grains of Epsom salt in water, and add to it some of the
solution of pot-ash, and the magnesia will be precipitated of a white color.

The pot-ash unites to the sulphuric acid, and forms sulphate of pot-ash or
vitriolated tartar, while the magnesia is precipitated.

EXPERIMENT LIVE.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric acid, to the precipitated magnesia, and Epsom
salt will be re-composed.

EXPERIMENT LV.
Add some of the solution of pot-ash, and the magnesia will be again
precipitated.

Of Alumine, Pure Clay, or Argillaceous Earth.
When alumine is exposed to heat, it dries, contracts and becomes full of
clefts; combined with the sulphuric acid it forms sulphate of alumine or common
alum.

EXPERIMENT LVI.
Dissolve a few grains of alum in water, to which add some of the solution of
pot-ash, and the alumine will be precipitated in white clouds.

The pot-ash unites to the sulphuric acid of the alum, and forms sulphate of
pot-ash, while the pure clay is precipitated.

EXPERIMENT LVII.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric acid to the precipitated alumine, and alum
will be recomposed.

EXPERIMENT LVIII.
Pour in some of the solution of pot-ash, and the pure clay will be again
precipitated.

Of Zinc.
Zinc is a metallic substance of a blue white color, which may be easily
reduced to powder, if it is first heated, and then pounded in a mortar.

The sulphuric acid diluted with water, and the muriatic acid act powerfully
upon it, producing hydrogenous gas.

The nitric acid attacks it with vehemence, and a large quantity of nitrous gas
is disengaged.

EXPERIMENT LIX.
Put a piece of zinc into a wine glass, and add to it some of the sulphuric
acid diluted with eight or ten times its bulk of water, and a discharge of
hydrogenous gas will take place. When this ceases, pour in some of the solution
of pot-ash, and a white precipitate will be thrown down.

The salt formed by the union of the sulphuric acid and zinc, is the sulphate
of zinc or white vitriol.

When the pot-ash is added, it unites to the sulphuric acid, and forms sulphate
of pot-ash, and the zinc is precipitated.

EXPERIMENT LX.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric acid to the precipitated zinc, and white
vitriol will be recomposed.

EXPERIMENT LXI.
Put a piece of zinc into a wine glass, and add a small quantity of the
muriatic acid to it, and a high degree of heat will be evolved, accompanied
with a discharge of hydrogenous gas.

Of Lead.
Lead is a soft, tenacious and very ponderous metal, which melts in a low
degree of heat.

The acetate of lead, or sugar of lead, is composed of the acetic acid and lead.

This salt is decomposed by the alkalis, and by the oxalic and vitriolic acids.

EXPERIMENT LXII.
Let fall three or four drops of the solution of the acetate of lead, into some
rain water in a wine glass, and then add a small quantity of the solution of
pot-ash, and the lead will fall down of a white color.

The acetic acid unites to the pot-ash, and forms acetate of pot-ash, while the
lead is precipitated.

EXPERIMENT LXIII.
Let fall a few drops of the solution of the acetate of lead, into some water
in a wine glass, and add one drop of the sulphuric or oxalic acid to it, and
the lead will fall down in the form of a white compound.

EXPERIMENT LXIV.
Write upon paper with the solution of sugar of lead, and let the letters dry,
and they will be invisible.

Rub about one dram of sulphur, and as much pot-ash together in a mortar,
until they are intimately mixed. Expose the powder on a shovel to a gentle heat
until it becomes of a brown color, and sulphur of pot-ash will be formed. Put
this into a wine glass, and add to it, a few drops of the sulphuric, nitric or
muriatic acid diluted with water, and sulphurated hydrogene or hepatic gas will
be discharged. Hold the letters written with the solution of the acetate of
lead, over the gas for some time and they will assume a brown color.

EXPERIMENT LXV.
Fill a four ounce vial about two thirds full of rain water, and add to it half
a dram of the acetate of lead. Tie a small piece of zinc to a thread, and
suspend it a little below the surface of the fluid, and in a few hours, a
beautiful metallic moss will be formed.

The acetic acid unites to the zinc, and forms acetate of zinc, while the lead
is precipated in a metallic form.

Of Iron.
Iron is a metal of a white livid color; obedient to the magnet; gives fire
with the flint; is susceptible of a fine polish, and is very difficult of
fusion.

EXPERIMENT LXVI.
Drop some iron filings through the flame of a candle, and the metal will
inflame.

The sulphuric acid will not act upon iron, unless it is diluted with water.

EXPERIMENT LXVII.
Put some iron filings in a vial, and pour upon them a small quantity of the
sulphuric acid, and no action will ensue.

EXPERIMENT LXVIII.
Add a quantity of water, equal to four or five times the bulk of the sulphuric
acid, to the sulphuric acid and iron filings, and a high degree of heat will be
evolved, and a discharge of foetid hydrogenous gas will take place, as may be
proved by applying a lighted taper to the mouth of the vial.

The salt formed by the union of the acid and metal, is sulphate of iron, green
vitriol or copperas.

EXPERIMENT LXIX.
Let fall a few drops of this solution of iron into some water in a wine glass,
and add a small quantity of the solution of potash to it, and the iron will be
precipitated.

EXPERIMENT LXX.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric acid to the precipitated iron, and sulphate
of iron will be recomposed.

Black ink is made by an union of the gallic acid and iron, which form a black
insoluble salt, that is kept suspended in water, by the addition of a gummy
matter.

EXPERIMENT LXXI.
Let fall a few drops of the solution of sulphate of iron, into a wine glass
containing some water, to which add a few drops of the alcohol of galls, and a
black color will be produced.

The gallic acid of the alkohol of galls, unites to the iron, and forms a black
insoluble salt.

EXPERIMENT LXXII.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric, nitric, or muriatic acid, to the
precipitated iron, and it will be redissolved, and a sulphate, nitrate, or
muriate of iron will be formed.

EXPERIMENT LXXIII.
Pour a small quantity of the solution of sulphate of iron, into a wine glass
containing water, and add to it a few drops of the sulphuric, nitric, or
muriatic acid, and no change will take place. Let fall a few drops of the
alcohol of galls into the solution, and there will still be no alteration. Pour
in some of the solution of pot-ash, and the mixture will assume a black color.

The mineral acids prevent the action of the gallic acid on the iron, by having
a superior attraction to the metal. The pot-ash neutralises them, and so
permits the gallic acid to unite with the iron.

EXPERIMENT LXXIV.
Write on paper with the solution of the sulphate of iron, and dry the letters,
and they will be invisible. Dip the end of a feather into the alcohol of galls,
and rub it over the letters, and they will become black.

EXPERIMENT LXXV.
Dip the end of a feather into the sulphuric, nitric, or muriatic acid, diluted
with water, and rub it over the letters, and they will disappear.

Prussian blue is a combination of the prussic acid and iron. The prussiate of
lime is made, by digesting lime water upon this substance.

EXPERIMENT LXXVI.
Put two drachms of the best Prussian blue, in fine powder, into an eight ounce
vial, and fill it up with lime water. Let the mixture stand near the fire, and
in a short time the lime water will be tinged yellow.

EXPERIMENT LXXVII.
Let fall a few drops of the solution of sulphate of iron into some water in a
wine glass, and add to it a small portion of the prussiate of lime, and a blue
color will be produced.

The prussic acid of the prussiate of lime, unites to the iron, and forms a
blue insoluble compound, while the sulphuric acid of the sulphate of iron,
unites to the lime and forms sulphate of lime.

Prussiate of pot-ash, is composed of the prussic acid and pot-ash.

EXPERIMENT LXXVIII.
Put two drachms of the best Prussian blue into a four ounce vial, and add to
it one dram of caustic pot-ash, dissolved in three ounces of water; set the
mixture near the fire, and in a short time the liquor will become of a yellow
color.

The pot-ash unites to the prussic acid, of the prussiate of iron, and forms
prussiate of pot-ash, while the iron is left behind in the form of a brown salt.

This solution contains a portion of iron, which may be set free, by the
addition of an acid.

EXPERIMENT LXXIX.
Add a few drops of the sulphuric, nitric or muriatic acid, to some of the
prussiate of pot-ash in a wine glass, and the iron will be thrown down of a
blue color.

The acids combine with the pot-ash, by which means the prussic acid is
detached from its alkaline base, and permitted to act on the iron, held in
solution in the liquor.

EXPERIMENT LXXX.
Write upon paper, with the solution of the sulphate of iron, as in the seventy
fourth experiment.

EXPERIMENT LXXXI.
Dip the end of a feather in the prussiate of pot-ash, and rub it over the
letters written with the sulphate of iron, and they will become of a blue color.

Of Copper.
Copper is a metal of a red color, elastic and sonorous, which affords a
disagreeable smell by friction.

Sulphate of copper or blue vitriol, is formed of the sulphuric acid and copper.

EXPERIMENT LXXXII.
Dissolve a few grains of the sulphate of copper, in some water in a wine
glass, and add to it a small quantity of ammoniac, and a precipitation will
take place.

The ammoniac unites to the sulphuric acid of the sulphate of copper, and the
copper is precipitated.

EXPERIMENT LXXXIII.
Add some more of the ammoniac, and the precipitated copper will be dissolved,
and form Aqua Sapphirina. By evaporating the liquor, the ammoniate of copper,
or cuprum ammoniacum, would be produced.

The ammoniate of copper is a test, for detecting the presence of arsenic in a
liquid, with which it forms a precipitate of a yellow green color.

EXPERIMENT LXXXIV.
Pour a small quantity of the solution of arsenic, into a wine glass containing
some water, and add to it a few drops of the ammoniate of copper, and a
yellowish green precipitation will take place.

EXPERIMENT LXXXV.
Put a piece of copper into a wine glass, and add a small quantity of the
nitric acid to it, and the copper will be dissolved and form nitrate of copper.

EXPERIMENT LXXXVI.
Let fall a few drops of this nitric solution of copper, into some water in a
wine glass, and add to it a small quantity of the solution of pot-ash, and the
copper will be precipitated.

EXPERIMENT LXXXVII.
Add a few drops of the nitric acid, to the precipitated copper, and nitrate of
copper will be recomposed.

A solution of copper in an acid, may be decomposed by iron.

EXPERIMENT LXXXVIII.
Dissolve ten or twelve grains of the sulphate of copper in half an ounce of
water, and let a polished iron instrument, as a key, be immersed in it for a
few minutes, and the copper will be deposited on the iron in a revived state.

The sulphuric acid of the sulphate of copper, unites to the iron, and forms
green vitriol, while the copper adheres to iron.

Of Mercury.
Mercury differs from the other metals, in retaining a fluid form, at the
common temperature of the atmosphere.

EXPERIMENT LXXXIX.
Put a small quantity of mercury into a wine glass; add some of the nitric acid
to it, and in a short time a violent action will ensue, accompanied with a
discharge of nitrous gas.

The nitric acid unites to the mercury, and forms nitrate of mercury.

EXPERIMENT XC.
Let fall a few drops of the solution of mercury in the nitric acid, into some
rain water in a wine glass, to which add a small quantity of ammoniac, and the
mercury will be precipitated of a dark brown color.

The ammoniac unites to the nitric acid, and forms nitrate of ammoniac, while
the mercury is thrown down in the form of a brown calx, called mercurius
precipitatus cinereus.

EXPERIMENT XCI.
Let fall a few drops of the solution of mercury in the nitric acid, upon a
cent, and rub it over the copper, and the cent will be turned of a silver color.

The nitric acid unites with the copper, and forms nitrate of copper, while the
mercury is deposited upon the copper in its metallic form.

EXPERIMENT XCII.
Add one drop of the solution of mercury in the nitric acid, to a grain of
common salt dissolved in a glass of water, and a muriate of mercury or calomel
will be formed, in consequence of a double elective attraction.

The nitric acid of the nitrate of mercury, unites to the soda of the common
salt, and forms nitrate of soda, while the muriatic acid of the common salt,
joins to the mercury and composes calomel.

Corrosive sublimate is formed, of the oxigenated muriatic acid and mercury.

EXPERIMENT XCIII.
Let fall a few drops of the solution of corrosive sublimate into a glass of
water; add to it some of the solution of pot-ash, and the mercury will fall
down of a brick-dust color.

EXPERIMENT XCIV.
Let fall a few drops of the solution of corrosive sublimate into a glass of
water, and add to it some lime water, and the mercury will be precipitated of a
yellow color.

Of Silver.
Silver is a metal of a white color, ductile and tenacious, and nearly
unalterable by means of fire.

EXPERIMENT XCV.
To make the nitric solution of silver, dissolve one dram of lunar caustic in
two ounces of rain water. -- Or,

EXPERIMENT XCVI.
Put four five penny bits into a wine glass, or wide mouthed vial, and pour
upon them half an ounce of nitric acid diluted with an equal quantity of water.
Let the vial stand near the fire, until the solution is evaporated to dryness;
then add to it two ounces of rain water.

The solution will assume a light green color, in consequence of the alloy of
copper, which silver money contains.

EXPERIMENT XCVII.
Dissolve one grain of common salt in a glass of rain water, and add to it one
drop of the nitric solution of silver, and it will become of a white color.

A double elective attraction takes place; the nitric acid of the nitrate of
silver, unites to the soda of the common salt, and forms nitrate of soda, while
the muriatic acid of the common salt unites to the silver, and forms muriate of
silver, or Luna Cornea, which is precipitated.

EXPERIMENT XCVIII.
Add a small quantity of ammoniace to the Luna Cornea, and it will be
redissolved.

EXPERIMENT XCIX.
Add a few drops of the muriatic acid, or a grain of common salt to the clear
solution, and Luna Cornea will be recomposed.

EXPERIMENT C.
To make alcohol of galls, put one dram of galls in fine powder, into a two
ounce vial, and fill it up with spirit of wine.

Dr. Woodhouse's Lectures on Chemistry. Commence on the first Tuesday in
November of every Year, in the City of Philadelphia, and end on the last Day of
February.
HE possesses a complete CHEMICAL APPARATUS; and during the Course, several
thousand brilliant Experiments are exhibited.

Specimens of the various Earths, Salts, Ores of Metals, etc. are shown to the
Class.

N. B. This Book should be read with some complete System of Chemistry, by
which means an immense number of Experiments may be performed.

The number of Agents can be increased to any extent.

Several of the Articles mentioned, are not contained in the Chest, as the Oil
of Turpentine and Amber, Lampblack, etc. but these substances may be obtained
from any of the Apothecaries.


