STEPHEN BURROUGHS's SERMON, DELIVERED IN Rutland, ON A HAY MOW,
To HIS AUDITORY the Pelhamites, at the time when a mob of them, after having
pursued him to Rutland, in order to apprehend him because he had abruptly
departed and absconded from Pelham, where he had been preaching the gospel;
shut him into a barn, into which he ran for asylum; when he ascended a hay-mow,
which was inaccessible, except in one place, with a weapon of defense in his
hand, with which he kept off his pursuers at pleasure, as mentioned in the
Author's Memoirs, P. 90, 91, and delivered to them the following Sermon, on the
occasion.

THE HAY-MOW SERMON, etc.
IN Those days, the Pelhamites being gathered together, from the east and from
the west, from the north and from the south; Stephen the Burronite, being the
Prophet of Pelham, ascended the hay-mow, and lifted up his voice, saying, "hear
ye the voice of the Lord which cries against the Pelhamites -- for the anger
of the Lord smoaketh with furious indignation against you, for the follies,
which you committed against the Lord, and against his anointed. For verily,
says the Lord, I have given you my prophets, rising up early, and sending
them: But the first Mr. Abecrombe.
you soon rejected: -- The second, Mr. Greyham.
on account of your cruelty, I took to myself: -- The third: Mr. Merrill
you drove away with great wrath, and pursued with great rage, malignity, and
uproar." -- "Then," said the Lord "I will give them a Minister like unto
themselves, full of all deceit, hypocrisy, and duplicity. But, whom, among all
the sons of men, shall I send?" Then came there fourth a lying spirit, and
stood before the Lord, saying, "I will go forth, and be a spirit in the mouth
of Stephen the Burronite." And the Lord said "go" -- Then arose up Stephen the
Burronite, of the tribe of the Puritans, and family of Ishmael, and went forth
to Pelham, sorely oppressing the Pelhamites, taking from them ten shekels of
silver, a mighty fine horse, and changes of raiment, and ran off to Rutland.

Then the Pelhamites were moved with rage, like the moving of the trees of the
forest by a mighty tempest, and gathered themselves together, and pursued their
Prophet down to Rutland. And now, I your prophet and minister, being ascended
on the hay-mow, declare unto you, that I see an angel flying through heaven,
crying "woe! woe! woe! to the Pelhamites. The first woe is past, but behold two
other woes shall come, which will sweep you away with a mighty besom of
destruction." Then arose up Nehemiah the son of Nehemiah, Daniel the son of
John, and John the son of John, who was a trader in potash, and were about to
lay violent hands on the Prophet. Then the Prophet lift up his rod, which he
held in his hand, and smote John, Konkey.
the trader in potash, across the right arm, and broke it asunder, but the rod
breaking and falling out of his hand, he caught up a great millstone, and cast
it on the head of Nehemiah Dr. Hind.
and sunk him to the ground.

This Rutland being a land of hills and valleys, where grows the sycamore
tree, the fir tree, and the shittim wood, by the way side, as thou go unto
DAN, which in the Hebrew is called Abandone, but in Syriac Worcester; it being
the place of a skull: And not that DAN, which is called by Tom Pain and
Philistines, Laish. The Prophet traveling through this land by the way of UR
of the CHALDEANS, sought him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them
into his wallet; lest happily, SYHON king of Heshbon; and OGG king of Bashan,
should come out against him. But it went out all round about the land of Edom,
saying "the BURRONITE is not, but is fled, and gone over the brook Cedron:"
Therefore, they blew a trumpet, saying, "Every man to his tent, O Pelhamites!"
So they all went up from following after the Prophet; but when they came to the
pass of Jourdan, behold, a strong army had taken possession of the ford of the
river! at which the Pelhamites were sore dismayed, and sought by guile to
deceive the army of the Lincolnites; therefore, they say unto the Lincolnites,
"We be strangers from a far country, with old shoes, and clouted on our feet."
Then said the Lincolnites unto the men of Pelham, "say Faith!" Then the
Pelhamites said, " fath," for they could not say faith. Then the Lincolnites
knew them to be Pelhamites, and fell upon them and slew them, so that not one
was left to "piss against the wall." When it was told in Pelham, saying, "our
old men are slain, and our young ones are carried away into captivity, and our
holy places are polluted with the abomination which makes desolate, there was
great lamentation, weeping, and wailing; every family mourned apart, and their
wives apart -- and their mourning was like the mourning of Hadradimmon in the
valley of Megidon;" -- and they said "alas! for the glory is departed from
Pelham; the second woe, which the Prophet foretold is surely come upon us; and
when the third woe shall come who shall be able to stand? -- The beauty of
Pelham is slain upon the high places! is slain! is slain upon East-Hill. The
GRAYS, the Mc. MULLENS, the HINDSES, and the KONKEYS, are fallen upon the dark
mountains of the Shadow of death! Tell it not in Greenwich, publish it not in
Leverett, lest the daughters of the uncircumscribed rejoice: alas, for our
wives and our little ones!" So the hearts of the Pelhamites were troubled, and
they all drew around the altar of ST. PATRIC, and bowed down before the altar,
saying, "O great spirit! how have we offended, that thou have left us to be
destroyed by our enemies! Shall we go up again to fight against the
Lincolnites, and shall we prosper?" But they received no answer, by Urim nor
Thummim, by voices nor dreams; and the Pelhamites were greatly dismayed. Then
said Ahab the Tishbite, "Hear, O Pelhamites! There lives in the wilderness of
Sin, as thou go unto the land of Shinar, a cunning woman, whose name is
GOODY MC. FALL, who has a familiar, and dwells alone, even with her cat: To
this woman let the fathers and leaders of the tribe of Pelham repair, and
peradventure she may tell us what we ought to do." -- Then the chief men of
Pelham, captains of tens, captains of twelves, and captains of twenties, arose
up and disguised themselves in the habits of honest men, and went forth to
Goody Mc. Fall, saying, "Bring us up a spirit," -- And she said "Whom shall I
bring up?" And they say unto her "Bring up Father ABECROMBIE" Then Goody Mc.
Fall laid hold of her instrument of Enchantment, and stamped on the ground, and
then cried out alas! for you have deceived me, for you are Pelhamites, and not
honest men. And they said unto her "fear not." Then the ground was troubled,
and began to move -- and they said unto her, "Whom saw thou?" And she said,
"Abecrombie." Then came there forth old Father Abecrombie; and with a
countenance which made the Pelhamites quake with fear, said, "Why have thou
troubled me, even in my grave?" Then answered the Pelhamites, and said "Because
we are sore troubled: -- We have fallen by the hands of the Lincolnites, and
when we enquired at the altar of our great Prophet, we were not answered by
Urim nor Thummim, by voices nor dreams." -- Then said Abecrombie, "You shall go
out tomorrow against the Lincolnites, and shall fall by their hands, and be
utterly destroyed -- your wives and your little ones shall be led away into
captivity, for your measure of iniquity is full." Then the men of Pelham* fell
all along on the ground, and their hearts sunk within them -- Then fear and
sore dismay spread through all the town of Pelham, and the Pelhamites fled into
the wilderness, and hid themselves in caves and holes of the earth. And lo! it
was told in the army of the Lincolnites, saying, "The Pelhamites have fled.'!
Then arose up the Lincolnites and pursued after the men of Pelham, sorely
discomfiting them, and led many away captive to the city of Dan. Then Benjamin
the Lincolnite blew a trumpet, and all the men left pursuing after the
Pelhamites. And the Pelhamites who were carried away captive to the city of
Dan, besought JAMMY the Bostonian, saying, "We be evil men, dealing in lies and
wickedness; we have sought to destroy the goodness of the land! we dug a pit
and fell therein; we have trusted to St. Patrick to deliver us, but he has
utterly forsaken us; -- therefore, O JAMMY, in thy wrath remember mercy, and we
will leave assembling ourselves together to talk politics, and follow our
occupation of raising potatoes." -- Then JAMMY the Bostonian had compassion on
the Pelhamites.

They then sung the following hymn, after which, the Prophet passed out of
their hands and fled from their sight.

The HYMN.
SAYS Irish Teague I do not know,
From whence came our Nation;
I to St. Patrick's Shrine will go,
And there get information.
Great genius of our Nation, tell,
By whom we are befriended,
For the Irish are so much like hell,
I fear they from thence descended.
At which the grumbling spirit spoke,
Poor Teague, I will befriend thee;
Since now my aid you do invoke,
My help I Will freely lend thee.
Once, on the coast of Gadareen,
As flocks and herds were feeding,
A great heard of two hundred swine,
Which shepherds there were leading,
Were by a Legion then possessed --
Whose minds were bent on slaughter;
And down a hill were headlong pressed,
And perished in the water:
But one old sow a rutting was,
The floods did not destroy her;
The Devil, who provoked to lust,
Was minded to enjoy her.
This spurious effort on the sow,
Produced a copulation;
From this original, I vow,
Proceeds the Irish Nation,
Both natures they do still retain,
Still they are prone to evil;
No wonder falsehood does remain
Where there is both hog and devil.
Thus scattered over Pelham hills,
(A dark and gloomy region;)
A remnant of this herd remains,
Possessed of the swiny leg^on."

