FEMALE PATRIOTISM OR THE DEATH OF JOAN D'ARC: AN HISTORIC PLAY, IN V. ACTS, By
JOHN BURK --

Author of BUNKER HILL -- PRINCE OF SUSA, and other Dramatic Picces.

NEW YORK: Printed by ROBERT M. HURTIN, at the LITERARY PRINTING-OFFICE, No.
29, GOLD-STREET. 1798.

Dramatis Personae.
FRENCH.
(...), Mr. COOPER. C^unt Dun^is, Mr. WILLIAMS^N. (...)* (King of Naples) Mr.
HOGG. (...) of (...), M^. PRIGMORE. M^^senger, Mr. SEYMOUR. And Da^phin, Mr.
MARTIN.
ENGLISH.
Duke of Bedford, Mr. FAWCETT. Bishop Bea^vais, Mr. TYLER. (...) of Suffolk,
Mr. MILLER. Soldiers, Messrs. Lee, Shap^er, Stowell, etc. And Sir John Talbot,
Mr. HALLAM. jun. Mary of Anjou, M^ss WESTRAY. And J^an D'Arc, Mrs. JOHNSON.
DEDICATION.
To that person in Ame^ica who poss^^ses the most amiable (...), the most
refined and engaging manners, the most lofty and ^^^vated sentiment; for such
(...) I know -- with whose friendship I have been blessed and (...), and in
whose esteem if I did (...) yet hold a place -- I should be unhappy -- This
play is dedicated w^^h as pure and fervent a zeal as ever offered sacrifice,

by THE AUTHOR

FEMALE PATRIOTISM, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A Forest.
Enter Chastel and Dauphin. Chaste. BE not cast down my Lord;
Fate has in store for us some ^^ighter hopes,
Which in good time, the genius of this land
Will ripe^ into use.

Dauph. My dearest friend,
How often have I listened to thy hopes!
Day after day, when ills of every kind
Beat like a storm remorseless on my head;
At night, thy honest tongue beguiled my care^*
And with warm fancy's glowing colors drew
The cloudless horizon, the prospect bright;
Just as Aurora when with heaven's own tints
She pencils out the features of young morn,
Adds such a blus^ing radiance to her streaks,
That envious night withdraws her gloomy brow,
And leaves the world to sunshine and to day.

Chaste. Our fate is hard indeed;
(...) will not be so always; long enough,
The fickle dame has sided with our foes:
She now will turn to us, while all her frowns
Will be reserved for our enemies.

Dauph. Think of an empire, wasted by the sword
Of fierce inv^sion; while the rancorous soul
O^ pa^ty par^^^es all within;
O France, how ^^ll'n art thou! over thy rich fields,
Whose sweets and beauties may with Eden vi^,
Roam (...) the famished ^ygers, or ghaunt wolves
The pirate sons of Bri^^in's lawless isle,
While we, the country's ^rue and zealous friends,
Forc^d up and down with (...) intrepid hand
Of honest Fr^^chm^n, scarce subsistence find.

Chaste. This is a (...), my (...), that melts my soul:
O would that ^^^gundy, and (...) Luxembourgh,
And all the trait^rous sons of wild ^ebellion
Were now to hear with me, these feeling words,
That, like me, they might burn with indignation.

Dauph. Speak not of them my friend: they only feel
When tyranny and faction call to arms.

Chaste. My lord, I pray your pardon, if I use
The privilege your goodness has allowed
Of speaking truth; the fault is not in France,
But in the species; man is not the same,
The reasoning, brave, and proudly generous being,
That in Rome's republic awed the world,
Or in the Grecian states exalted man
As high in greatness as our mortal state
Could well admit. In commonwealths alone,
We find this soaring dignity of mind,
That loves the vast and aims at the sublime:
Where now in all this land to save his country,
Could we a Scaevola a Curtius find?

Dauph. You Are right my friend;
In monarchies the king is paramount,
And man is nothing: holding life itself,
(Tenure precarious,) on another's will:
The reasoning being sunk into a slave,
He drops his spirit's agency and moves
A mere machine: But where is the remedy?
Man blind to his own interest every where,
Like the degenerate Jew, calls out for kings,
He hugs his chains and is in love with bondage:
And were I now to lay my scepter down,
TO morrow they would raise another idol,
And bow before it.
But see my lovely princess comes this way,
My friend go visit thou the frontier posts,
And see the sentinels be not remiss;
I Will quickly after.

Chaste. It Is well, my lord.


Exit Chastel M^^^t Dauphin. SCENE II. -- Dauphin and Mary of Arjou.
Dauph. How is it with my lovely fellow soldier;
Is yet thy tender soul grown sick of war,
Or can thou look Bellona in the ^a^e
And keep thy color?

Mary. I have no grief^ if all be well with thee:
My sor^ows ^low not on mine own account,
B^^ a^l for th^e, for thee, I love the camp:
It Is thou have made the hideous front of Mars
F^^ (...) me.

Dauph. O my fair hero^ne;
W^ (...) Mars and Bellona seem
Like (...) and ^^be: from their lo^ks,
R^ (...) drop the hissing snakes,
And (...) rosebuds spring up in their place:
And (...) the trumpet sounds the charge to battle,
I take it for the music of a feast.

Mar^. How sweet^y do thou talk despair away:
I might reply, by saying that th^se wi^ds
Where now the ropes of France do lie encamped,
^eel (...) their world of horrors and their gloom
Their pr^nce's presence: do they not look gay?
Smi^e they not like sweet gardens of delights?
Yes, all mu^t see they smile, or all see not
With Ma^y of Arjou's eyes.

Dauph. Ah, heavenly fair;
It Is all deception, all the charm of love:
They do not smile; they spread a frightful gloom
As far as eye can reach; killing delight,
Friend^y alone to adders and the wolf:
Pushed by the invader's sword, by famine pressed,
In want of every thing, we here retired
As to a tomb to linger out our days.

Mary. Ah, say not so sweet prince;
Why will thou drive the sweet illusion from me:
Ha! you weep: it is true enough, too true --
These wilds a^e black indeed: But come, my lord,
Let us in fancy overtop these wilds
And think of future joys and palaces.

Dauph. O thou bewitching goodness;
With thee, my love, I should incline to hope,
Though ghaunt despair, with death's head, should appear
And show his hungry form: it is thou, my love,
T^^ ^o this cold and humid moss do give
Its d^^ny feel; the wind thou temperest,
And by thy ravishing converse do enchant
As by a powerful spell* adversity.

Mary. Let us, my lord, persist and we shall yet
Be strong enough, too st^ong for all our foes.

Dauph. Would I could think so love;
But under heaven. I can see no means
To better our condition; hope is desperate,
Pent up in woods our slender force does lack
Raim^^t and food* and on their zeal alone
Do hold existence. Enter a messenger.

Mess. My liege* I come the bearer of ill news:
The English troops, by fiery Talbot led,
Have gained our flank: and on the slender works
Like a wild torrent, bursts their headlong rage.

Dauph. Hah! then these robbers envy us these wilds;
How long will heaven wink at such offense:
Be not alarmed my love. Enter second Messenger.

2d. Mess. My lord, the fainting soldiers call for thee;
Sore pressed on every side by hosts of foes,
Indignant they refuse to quit the field.

Dauph. Heroic souls -- they have been tried indeed --
But come, my love, let us our persons show
To the brave followers of our various fates;
Thy eye will rouse their souls to new exertions.

Mary. I am prepared, my lord, to follow thee:
Self is extinguished in me, and the glow
Of patriot ardor chases fear away;
Let Us haste, and place our persons in the van.

Dauph. Thy face will work more wonders than the head
Of dire Medusa; that did freeze the blood
And turned to stone: thine all hearts will warm,
Will wake the soul to pleasures and to love,
And make the fiercest savage bow before thee. Exit.

SCENE III. -- French camp and forest.
Chastel, Dauphin, and Reignier. An alarm; the French are beaten off. Dauph.
Chastel, what have thou now to urge in comfort?
Our camp is forced* and Orleans our last hope,
The last assylum of our ruined fortunes
Is held in close blockade.

Chaste. My lord I know it;
But yet to you and all this Spartan band.
Which through ten thousand perils has preserved
With vestal piety the sacred spark
Of Gallia's rights; to all, I do commend
Exact the same in^repid cast of thought,
Which in prosperity distinguished you:
The warrior's so^l should never feel despair,
Or if it does, it should be the despair
Of fiercest, bloodiest, relentless battle.

Reig. It Is bravely spoken,
But sounds too like a Roman for the times.

Chaste. It sounds like Chastel, who in worst of times
Dares think, and speak, and act the honest man:

Dauph. Reignier, what say you to this doctrine?


Reig. Here it may do;
Where the open air's a court, and cave's a palace,
And lean and ragged chiefs are courtiers:
But in no court, where law and order reign,
Wo^ld such assuming language be allowed.

Chaste. The greater shame on courts:
It only proves there is something rotten in them.

Enter co^nt of Dunois, Dunois. Where Is the prince Dauphin, I have news for him?


Dauph. Count of Dunois, thrice welcome to us.


Dunois. Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appalled*
Has the late overthrow wrought this offense?
Be not dismayed, for succor is at hand:
A holy maid hither with me I bring,
Which by a vision sent to her from heaven,
Ordained is to raise this tedious siege,
And drive the Eng^ish forth the b^unds of France:
The spirit of deep pr^^hecy she has,
Exceeding the nine ^^b^ls of old Rome.
What Is past, and what is to come, she can descry.
Speak, shall I call her? B^lieve my words,
For they are certain and ^nfallible.

Dauph. Go call her in; but first to try her skill,
Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place:
Question her proudly, let thy looks be stern,
By this means shall we find what skill she has.

Enter Pucella. Reig. Fair maid, is it thou will do these wondrous things?


Pucella. Reignier, is it thou that thinks't to deceive me:
Where is the Dauphin? Come, come from behind,
I know thee well, though never seen before:
Be not amazed, there is nothing hid from me.

Chastel. Heavens! What transcendent brightness have we here:
What majesty of mien, what warlike ardor!
And yet what virgin modesty appears!
Does she not look as if she dropped from heaven!

Dauph. Say lovely maid, both who and what thou art,
That like a new discovered (...) appear'st,
Shedding thy rays on this be^ighted land?

Pucella. Da^phin* I am by birth, a shepherd's daughter;
My wit, untrain'd in any kind of art.
Heaven and our gracious Lady has it pleased
To shine on my contemptible estate.
Lo! Whilst I waited on my tender lambs,
And to s^n's parching heat displayed my cheek;
God's mother deigned to appear to me,
And in a vision, fu^l of majesty;
Wil^^d me to leave my ba^^ vocation;
And free my country from calamity.
Her aid she promised and assured success.
In complete glory she revealed herself:
And whereas I was black and swa^th before,
With those clear rays, which she in^^'d on me,
That beauty am I blessed with which yo^ see.

Dauph. Thou have astonished me by thy high terms.


Cha^tel. Not you my Lord alone, but all of us
Do feel our souls enchanted by th^s maid;
She looks and speaks like nothing we have seen.

Pucella. Is it not Chastel speaks;
Chas^el* the Dauphin's friend, and friend of man?

Chastel. Yes, angel fair, it is humble Chaste^ dar^^
To po^t his heart^e^^ praises at thy feet.

Pucella. Art thou that Chast^^,
Who, in defiance of the wintry blasts,
The b^rning s^n, and hosts of murderous foes;
Do piously attend the sad remains
Of murdered freedom, from the polished hau^ts
Of ruffian government; and to the wilds
Reti^'st like Cat^* with parental care,
Fost'ring the feeble spark of Gallia's rights.
D^ll form a^aunt! -- And affectation die --
What need has Joan ^e P^cell' of disguise?
Chastel, long have I in my humble state
Been used to hear the praises of thy worth;
And when almost the tongues of all cried out
Against the loose morals of the Dauphin's court;
They all were loud in praise of honest Chastel.

Chastel. The people over-rate my (...),
If in the license of unbridled rage,
Either in the rout that follows a defeat;
Or in the wild career of victory;
I Have checked the madd'ning transports of the troops,
And taught them to respect the rights of peace;
The praise belongs not to me, but the prince.
But if, by a constant life of services,
I can deserve the honor thou vouchsafest;
If by the sternest practice of the virtues,
And first of a^l, by cherishing the love
Of glory and of country; Chastel's life
Shall be devoted whole, entire to thee.

Pucella. Then take this hand, I choose thee for my Knight
Wear in ^hy hat this verdant branch of la^^el:
We^ (...) ^^^t side by side, and so will dare
That ^^g^ted at our deeds, the God of war,
With his attendant furies shall retire:
As sweeping down the van like thunderbolts,
We ^o^ the conflagrat^on of the sight:
What say you Dauphin, Prince are we prepared
To mar^ (...) relief of Orleans?

Dauph. Great maid, we are ready.


Pucella. Now Britain tremble to thy island's center;
And France, now let an universal smile
Like a bright sunbeam, settle on thy face;
For now her glories end; and thine commence.
Come, let us away, and to the anxious troops
Unfold my sacred mission, that their souls
May catch the glorious impulse. -- To Orleans. -- Exeunt.

SCENE IV. -- Pavillion -- Enter Dauphin, leading in Mary of Anjou. Joan of Arc.
Dauph. You both are virtuous, lovely, wise and young,
And worthy of each other. [They embrace.]

Mary. O wondrous sight! That one so young, so fair,
Should be selected to redeem the land,
By fea^s of arms -- all beauteous maid,
My soul is filled with transport to behold thee,
And longs to imitate thy bright example.

Joan. Princess. I thank, and at first sight I love thee*
For all its favors heaven has heard my thanks,
Be this among the rest: In war, in camps,
Woman to woman is most necessary:
They sooth each oth^r's f^a^s and cares to rest,
By joint support, and mutual confidence;
While their united dignity repels
The bold advances of a^dacious love.
[to Dauph.] My Lord -- Has Chastel yet returned?

Dauph. I have not heard he has.


Mary. Wh^^e has he been?


Dauph. I sent him by (...) lovely maid's desire,
Wit^ (...) d^stance to the B^itish ^amp.

Mary. What if they should d^tai^ -- perhaps destroy him?


J^an. They dare not (...)!
H^ (...) in ^st^ wi^h a (...) ^ons;
A cl^ (...) ^d ^^o' the w^^ld.
Come^ (...) the order of o^r m^^ch:
If still our (...) on war;
That we may (...) upon them.

Dauph. We (...) attend you. Exeunt.


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- English camp before Orleans
Duke of Bedford, and Sir Jo^^ Talb^^. ^h^uting at a distance. B^dford. What
can this shouting mean in Or^eans?
It (...) besieged (...).
F^r (...) use of chearing wine,
And (...) p^^^^ce next to famine,
To break out in such loud and boisterous joy!

Talbot. No less my Lord it does astonish us.
Our faithful spies, wrap^ in the shades of night,
Passed silently beneath the lofty walls
And heard the general sound of exultation:
The music in the streets, by warlike airs,
Recall the love of glory; while the roar
Of numerous ordinance, does wide proclaim
The news of some success.

Bedford. It Is rumor'd, that a courier has escaped
Our vigilance by night, and reached the camp:
Perhaps he brings the news of powerful succor,
But be it as it may, we are prepared. A cry outside.

Enter a troop of soldiers, dragging in Chastel -- The Earl of Suffolk at their
head. Bedford. Whom have we got here Suffolk?


Suffolk. A Gaul, my Lord;
And to appearance of no common note.
We found him on the borders of our camp,
With one attendant; now then his eye
Did pass enquiringly along our lines;
And seemed to look the weaker quarters out:
Thinking my Lord, we might procure from him,
Some useful knowledge of the foe's designs;
I summoned him to come within our lines:
But he, unheeding of my words, passed on;
And frowned in scorn. -- Fearing his escape,
I ventured out with party of the troops,
And after violent and bloody conflict,
Wherein he fought with most determined valor,
We mastered him at length, and his attendant;
And brought him here, to answer to your highness.

Bedford. What have thou, Sir, to plead in thy defense?


Chastel. I will not answer;
Until these blood^ound slaves of thine
Do take their ruffian fingers from my throat.

Bedford Unhand him friends;
We shall find ^eans to (...) this daring spirit:
Who art thou?

Chastel. My name is Chastel, and my country France
Which I do love as dearly as my soul,
And much as I detest you, British wolves,
Who with insatiate fury prey on it:
My principles are, love of liberty,
And hatred and contempt of foul oppression:
War's my possession, and my object, glory:
What would thou more?

Bedford. And wherefore art thou found close to our lines?
And scanning them, as if thou had been sent
To find the proper pla^^s for assault?
The marks of strong suspicion are upon thee:
If thou remov'st them not, thy life shall be
A forfeit to the insulted laws of war.

Chastel. Come hither friend, unfurl this banner straight,
To his attendant. And let thy trumpet tell our business here: Trumpet sounds
Bedford, look on this flag, by Charles sent.
Under the shade of which myself I place Puts himself under it.
In thy despite; now touch me if thou dare!
Charged with a legate's sacred functions,
Thy policy will save me, when thy rage
Had doomed me to the tortures of the damned!

Bedford. Then what the object of thy mission is
Quickly unfold, and take thy self from hence:
For now the profanation of thy tongue
Does with resentment tinge our royal visage:
Speak, licensed rebel!

Chastel. I am no rebel!
It Is not the man who strikes at lawless power,
But the proud tyrant, who does tread on laws,
On honor, wisdom, liberty, and faith,
Who should possess the slain of such a name:
Ne^^ a rebel was, as well as Cataline,
And greatly too, by so much as his crimes
Exceeded those of him and other men:
You, too are rebels, who invade this land,
Because you fight against the general will,
By force of arms, pulling justice down.
Now to my mission. -- Quick convene your host,
And tell them, that the proud avenging heavens
Whose vengeance, by a thousand bloody deeds
Of murder, rapine, sacrilege, and lust
They Have roused to vengeance -- to the Dauphin's camp
Has sent a warlike prophetess in arms,
Whose mission's object is to drive you hence.
Hear this and tremble! -- It Is the word of fate.

Talbot. Hold Gascon --
And do thou think to fright the sons of Britain
By such audacious fictions?

Chaste. By heaven thou dare not question Chastel's faith
In any place but this -- Follow me. Is going

Talbot. Frenchman, I shall not fail. Is going


[Duke of Bedford and Suffolk, stay him.] Bedford. Thou must not go --
Hereafter, thou will have occasions
Enough to punish this presuming G^al:
But now if by thy sword he was to die,
The malice of the foe would call it murder.

Talbot. My lord I am content.


Chaste. And well thou may --
For to this frosty plea, thy life thou owe:
But if thou art not now in fighting mood,
Meet me t'morrow at the Cave of Orleans.

Talbot. Your hour.


Chaste. At the third Hour.


Bedford. It Is well.


Chaste. Hear, few words more before I leave the camp,
The Dauphin gives you three whole days and nights
To quit this land; but if upon the fourth
A single Briton's found upon our coast,
He di^s though he had twenty thousand lives.

[Points to the Trumpet, Trumpet sounds. Exeunt, at different sides.] SCENE II.
-- Cave of Orleans.
Pucella sola kneeling. Pucella. O! Power supreme --
Thou universal soul of universe
Pivot on which do hinge the various sects,
From the desponding Atheist to the Sage,
Whose reasoning soul demonstrates a first cause
Now on thy servant Joan thy glories shed,
Give to this Spear the terrors of thy bolt,
When red with all thy wrath it hissing flies
And rives the mountain oak -- Give me to rouse
The slumbering spirit of this warlike race,
And let my voice
Loud as the trump at judgment day collect
All France to battle.
Enter Talbot with drawn sword. Who art thou
That with intrusive step do force thyself
Upon my meditation.?

Talbot. Think of a name,
Which of all others will disturb thee most,
That name bear I.

Pucella. I value not thy name whatever it be.


Talbot. Thy face shall tell thy tongue it lies --
Talbot's my name.

Pucella. Despised Satellite;
Think thou to fright the championess of France
By this bombastic sounding of a name;
A paltry name, which even a dog might bear --
Talbot -- Talbot -- What Is terrible in this?
I Have spoken it -- yet I live! Great Sir John Talbot;
Destined this day to scare the crows of France,
Not by thy name -- but carcass -- my sword against
Thy name. Draws.

Talbot. My sword against thy sword --
Heaven against hell. They fight.
The contest is unequal --
For thou do fight with more than mortal powers.

He is wounded and retires slowly, fighting. Enter Chastel. Chaste. This is the
place, the Cave of Orleans --
I have appointed Talbot where to meet him;
And now the hour is come, which we did name
To end our fierce contention by the sword:
Thrice holy Cave -- where ever now Hermits passed
In Patriarchal innocence their lives.
Now, for the first time, shall thy holy ways
Be stained with blood; now shall the sounds of war
And accents of defiance strike thy walls,
Which hereto, only echoed to the sighs
Of sorrowing penitents. -- Pucella!
Enter Pucella with drawn sword. My lovely heroine wherefore art thou here;
With bloody sword and thus enchafed too?
Thou look as if the mighty God of battle
Had blown his fiercest anger on thy cheek.

Pucella. As in this cave I made my vows to heaven
With hostile step a Briton burst upon me,

Chastel. His name? [With impatience.]


Pucella. Talbot, he said and vaunted proudly of it.


Chastel. Gracious powers! --
The same I did appoint to fight with here,
Where is he?

Pucella. Wounded he lies within the English camp,
And had been killed, but that a host of foes
Roused by his danger came at once upon me,
Just as my sword uplifted high to strike
Thirsted to stake its fury in his blood.

Chastel. Would I had come a little sooner here
This had not happened then.

Pucella. How! do thou envy this poor deed to me?


Chastel. No, Pucella,
Though thy atchievments mounted on the wing
Of herald fame did soar so dazzling high
That Caesar's deeds and Alexander's too
Compared with them, seemed but the play of boys,
My voice should be the first to sound thy praise,
How should I envy, who would give thee all;
But I do fear this Briton will give out
That I had sent thee here to fight with him
Thus making use of supernatural powers
To keep my^elf from danger.

Pucella. He dare not say so,
Or if he does, (...) s^^ll to his teeth
Tell him it is fal^e and fight him afterward.

Chaste. Thou glorious female
Have thou no fears upon thine account,
Do thou never feel the weakness of thy sex?

Pucella. Chastel I will be frank with thee:
At our first meeting I did scorn ^isguise,
A thousand different passions strike my heart
Which frighted at the conflict they commence,
Knocks at my breast as if it would escape;
Sometimes the weakness of my sex prevails
And I do shudder at the noise of arms;
And often when I have slain some warlike chief
And seen life's current issue from his wound,
My heart seems broken so intense my grief,
And pity issues g^shing from my heart
As if the fund of sorrow was a spring;
Perhaps I say this victim of my sword
Has been some faithful lover whose return
His mistress by the purest vows of love
Does ask of heaven; may hap a favorite child
The prop and solace of his parents age,
And then I think what tears his loss will cause,
What groans, what sorrow and distraction.
O Chast^l it is a dreadful state of things
When tyranny does force the good to battle.

Chaste. Thou first of women,
How all the virtues do unite in thee;
The soft, the mild, the warl^ke, and the grand;
O wa^ it but my lot to call them mine.

Pu^ell^. To say that I admire not thy perfections
The sentiment which shines through thy discourse
The delicate refinements of thy mind
The generous ardor of thy patriotism,
And all the virtues which have marked thee great
Through all the stages of our country's bondage,
Wo^ld be to say (...) had not eyes:
I like thy person and I love ^hy so^l.
But we ^^st not indulge a thought of love,
The very name m^st not (...) h^a^d in France
Until the English be ex^^^l'd from it.

Chaste. Generous noble frankness,
In this confession as in all things else
Thou keep'st thy greatness up, and like an angel
So temperest majesty with condescension
That both are visible though both distinct;
This sword shall never rest until it find
The time prescribed in th^se words of thine,
Until the English be expelled from it.
Come lovely maid, to Orleans be the word,
The famished townsmen throw their hungry eyes
Toward our camp and call on us for bread.

Joan. This night the enemies camp shall give them bread.


Exeunt.. ACT III. --
SCENE I -- A Forest. [Night march.]
Joan of Arc. Chastel, Dauphin. Dunois, Reignier, with the French army, march
across the stage without beat of drum, Pucella holds the consecrated banner in
her hand. Pucella. Halt. They halt.
Now men of France be prudent and be bold,
Be silent as the night which covers you,
Furious as fire* impetuous as the torrent
Which thunders from the mountain to the plain.
After a long nights march we have reached the wood,
Where Britain lies encamped;
Now in your left the s^aling ladders hold,
And in your right hands fr^wning grasp the sword;
Dauphin take thou the charge of the left wing
Whilst Chastel and myself fight on the right.

Dauphin. Let every Frenchman to her words attend,
There Is safety in her counsel.

All. We will obey her.


Pucella. Chastel to thee I do enjoin the charge
Of storming Britain's camp; while I to Orleans
By famine wasted and by tedious seige
Do lead our convoy of provisions.

Chastel. Great maid dispose of Chastel as thou will.


Violent thunder and lightening, the consecrated banner is struck from the hand
of Pucella to the ground -- The soldiers are seized with panic -- Thunder
continues, Pucella preserves all her fortitude surveying their fear with
contempt and indignation. Chastel holds his shield over her head. Dauphin. I
fear that heaven is against our purpose.


Reignier. It has declared its anger and we must
Be more than madmen to dispute its will;
Let us go back.

Dunois. Was not the banner from Pucella's hand
Struck to the Ground. Pucella again resumes the standard.

Chaste. See she again resumes it,
And on her brow serene (...) heavenly confidence:
The lightning of her eye defies the tempest,
But beams reproachful on your dastard fears.

Pucella. Shame on you courtiers,
Did you never hear the thunder roll before
Or see the forked lightening sp^rt itself;
That thus all motionless and in amaze,
With haggard eyes and frighted hair erect,
You stand like dotards prophesying ill^.
This thunder is heaven's signal to attack
The British camp, already half subdued
By its own fears and shrinking from the storm.
Let Us fire this thirsty forest and their camp,
And fall upon them choked with smoke and flame.

Chaste. The thought is great by heaven --
Let Us quick about it.
What say you all?

All. Aye, let us about it quick.


Pucella. Then on to Orleans. Seizes a torch. -- Exit.


SCENE II. -- A camp and forest on fire.
English soldiers run frighted in, pursued by the French. 1 st. Soldier. Which
way shall we run.


2 d. Soldier. No matter where provided we get out of her way.


3 d Soldier. It Is madness and wickedness in our Generals to fight against the
French who are assisted by heaven.


1 st. Soldier. As for me as long as I live I never shall fight against that
holy maid again.


2 d. Soldier. Did you not see how she flew on our regiment? [A shout --
Pucella d'Orleans -- Long live Pucella of Orleans.]


3 d. Soldier. There she is, run, run. Exeunt.


Enter French soldiers pursuing them. Exeunt. Enter Chastel and Pucella,
driving before them Talbot and Bedfo^d. (Exeunt -- fighting.) Enter Dauphin and
Reignier, driving before (...) B^rgundy and S^ffolk. Exeunt* fighting. (Firing
of cannon, ringing of ^ells shouts.) SCENE III. -- Inside (...) Orleans --
Pucella planting the (...) sta^dard on the walls.
Joan D'Arc, Da^phin. Reignier. Chastel* and Dunois. Pucella. Ring all the
bells, and our artiliery
P^al to the heavens our grat^tude.
Cold prayers will not do: clash on your shields
Your reeking swords, and chaunt the hymn of war;
Thus we'll thank heaven.

Chastel. And after t^^e* heaven's lovely instrument.


Dunois. When we thank heaven, then does this warlike maid
Receive our thanks: for is she not of heaven!

Pu^^lla. Forbear my Lords:
Let not your praises tas^e of blasphemy:
I am no more of heaven than yourselves;
Nor inspiration do I feel, beyond
The stretch and compass of the human mind,
Devel^p'd by its own innate exertions,
No visions had I more than one of you:
I saw no sights but all of you did see:
France torn by feuds and foul dissentions;
France desolate beneath a stranger sword.
I saw the fairest kingdom on the earth,
The gallantest and proudest people,
And these my country and my countrymen,
Groan in the bondage of a meaner state.
This only was my inspira^ion:
And was it not enough -- Forbid it heaven,
The tim^ should ev^r be* when France does look
For a more powerful* sacred call than this,
To ro^ze her to r^sistance.

Chastel. I could almost incline me to believe
In transmigra^ion; some mighty hero,
Or rather all the heroes do survive
Within the bosom of this Amazon:
No single soul has merit half enough
To match her high perfections.

Dauph. And had you then indeed no special call,
No order, no communion from the skies?

Joan. No, no^e* my story was a pious fraud,
To raise the fainting co^^age of the land:
If there be fault in it, O God forgive me:
I thought it not a crime* and hope it none.

Dunois. If this be crime, what will be virtue called?


Chastel. By heaven it is virtue of the noblest kind,
Worth of the finest carat, least alloy'd:
Her glory shines in her with tenfold luster,
In that it is all her own, her soul's conception,
The genuine off^pring of her enterprise;
Her soul did by itself become inspired,
And lighting, by the exercise of thought
Within itself, divine enthusiasm
Did straight communicate to all the land.

Joan. My lords, our time is precious,
Now England flies and France is in pursuit.
When Peace invites to pleasures on the lute,
And Mars reclines on his inverted spear,
We can discuss what is virtue and what vice.
The trumpet calls to battle. Let Us away. Exeunt.

SCENE IV. -- English camp.
Duke of Bedford and Bishop of Beuvais. Bedford. What says your grace to this
intrepid maid
Whose valor so outshines the bravest deeds
Of our best warriors.

Beuvais. When I do speak of her I speak in curses;
But for her hateful presence France long since,
With all its haughty chieftains and its prince,
Had low at England's feet for mercy s^^d.

Bedford. She certainly has wrought us much distress.


Beuvais. And will continue^ so to do
Unless some mea^s be found to take her off.

Bedford. Think you she fights with only human powers,
Or has the aid of some familiar spirit^?

Beuvais. It Is (...) we repo^^ among the troops
She has (...) of some mal^ci^us fiend.
Lost they suppo^e h^^ (...) is of heaven:
But she no spirit has but her high soul
To aid her projects.

Bedford. How then has she achieved such mighty deeds,
Being, as she is, a shepherd's daughter.

Beuvais. Within my diocese this maid was born,
And though her father was a peasant swain,
She had a kinsman who was deeply read
In all the learning of the wisest times:
This sage did much affect the young Pucella,
And finding her of quick and ready genius,
From time to time, he did enrich her mind
With precepts good, and high conceptions
Drawn from the Roman and the Grecian bards;
And such effect has this upon the maid,
That she applied the tyranny of Ta^quin
To our invasion: and the stories told
Of Curtius, who ing^lp^'t himself in Rome;
Of Scaevol^, who astonished 'Truria's monarch
Into a peace with Rome; of Brutus, Cato,
To what she might herself acquire in war.

Bedford. Thou speak wonders to me.


Beuvais. It Is even so
Often have I seen her ever she joined the foe,
Collect the wondering peasan^s in a group,
With reasoning most profound and sensible,
Explain their rights and duties in society;
Describe the crimes of tyranny and kings,
And glories which await the pa^^iot's name,
In lang^age ^o sublime and forcible,
That the rule ^h^ong seemed borne above their level,
And I my ^f (...) ha^f incline to join
The D^ (...) st^nda^d.

Bedford. T^ was most strange indeed.


Beuvais W^ c^^not hope to conquer while she lives;
And (...) we will try to take her off.

Bedford. H^w'^ that to be effected?


Beuvais. (...) and he^e.
W^ (...) B^ troops to flight,
And p^^n^^ vi^tory d^^^ (...) ^or France,
To (...) ^he of (...) unclasp
Her shining ma^l, and sh^^^es her awful sword.
From her proud head she takes the sparkling helm
To wipe her glowing forehead: all the while
Heedless of danger* as if the enemy
Had not been ro^ted but exterminate;
Then is the time, if any time there be,
To seize upon her, while her dreadful armor
Lies here and there detached upon the grass.

Bedford. The counsel is most wise.
But does not that hot Frenchman. Chastel,
Attend upon her closely in the fight?

Beuvais. Else where we will draw his attention:
And for this purpose Talbot must step forth
From out the ranks, and challenge him to combat.

Bedford. It Is good, it shall be done; we must not loose a moment. Let your
grace pray For the success of our enterprise. The hour that sees Joan de
Pucella in our hands, shall see his grace of Beuvais archbishop of Paris. Exit.


Beuvais. I thank your highness.
Th^s have the blossoms of my fortune ^scap'd
The withering blast, the cold and ruinous blight,
And the bowed loaded branches of my honors,
Do promise store of fruit. Had I remained
True to the Dauphin, and my country France,
The fame of my excesses and my crimes,
Had ba^r'd a^^ hopes to my pre^^rment,
And my ambition, like a wol^^^^ rage,
Had preyed upon itself. But joined with England,
The weakness of whose cause does not permit
Nicely (...) investigate the lives of men,
I bend ben^ath the weight of gold and honors;
While, in the license of invasion's camp,
My favorite vices have the widest field
And latitude for ind^lgence. To me therefore
The English, not my country's cause* is dear.
Come* then, thou bloody visage fie^d of treason,
That like a night-^ag, brood^d on the breast
O ^^eeping (...)* and to his gang
O^ dark palefac'd conspirators did give
The bowl of human blood, and bad them drink,
Put in my hand thy parricidal dagger:
I must do service for my English friends:
If I take off this fierce heroic maid,
Whose prowess so destroys and withers us,
I on a rock do build the British power,
And I, the architect, may claim reward,
Yea, even to surfeit. Exit.

ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- Procession to Rheims to crown the Dauphin.
The Dauphin and Mary of Anjou, seated in a triumphal car, preceded by a
detachment of the French army, on one side of the car Chastel, on the other the
Maid of Orleans, holding in one hand the consecrated banner, in the other a
drawn sword; a band of musicians; then follow the French army, with the count
of Dunois, Reignier, commanding at proper intervals: After parading on the
stage -- A shout, Long live Pucella de Orleans. Pucella. Hear Frenchmen all;
And let my words prophetic of your joys
From Alps re-echoed to the Pyren^es,
Pass through the land, and in its progress fire
All hearts with freedom. Shout, Hear, hear,
It Is not to crown the Dauphin prince alone
That has impelled my spirit to the wars,
For that were petty circumstance inde^d;
But on the head of every man in France
To place a crown, and thus at once create
A new and mighty order of nobility,
To make all free and equal, all men kings,
Subject to justice and the laws alone:
For this great purpose have I come amongst you.
Shout. Liberty and equality. France is at present governed by a king
Because that meek eyed science just emerg'd
From out the darkness of the middle age,
Where since the fall of liberty in Rome,
She mourned in Gothic chains the fate of man
Is known but to a few within the land
But when a thousand sages join their powers
To pour the blaze of reason on the mind,
The race of kings shall be but simple men;
The human race becomes a race of kings;
This may be called the golden age indeed. Shout.
Then on to Rheims, let us spite these British wolves.
The crowning of the Dauphin will pluck off
The crown from Britain's head. To Rheims --

Exeunt, marching. SCENE II. -- A chamber in Orleans.
Pucella sola. My mission's done!
Orleans is safe and over the better half
Of this rich land the peasant tills the soil
In peace and safety, while the shepherd leads
His flocks to f^ed or with the pipe and song
Renews Arcadia's pleasures in our France.
All this my sword has done; what is yet to do
May be achieved without my farther aid.
Why then remain I longer in this camp.
I feel it is not a place for me; For though
The love of liberty sublimes my soul
And makes me do such things to compass it,
As my soft sex would shrink at; Yet I feel
Those timid, soft, and virgin sentiments
Play on the silken fibers of my heart,
Which speaks me all the woman; let me heaven.
Sooner resign my laurels in an hour
Than loose one single thought that is feminine:
This is the females jewel and of worth
More than a world; this it is which prompts
The modest sigh the timid downcast eye
Which hangs the lids of sympathy with tears,
And with a blush more lovely than the morn
Bepaints the maiden's cheek. My mind does pass
From the false glare of courts and dwells with joy
On the sweet memory of my former life,
My rural cot, my lambs and simple sports,
The grots that I have read in, and the brooks
Beside whose margins I have seen the spring,
Decking the landscape with ten thousand charms:
Dear scenes of childhood I shall join you soon,
Soon shall I wind within your mazy groves,
Soon shall I mix among your a^^^ss swains,
The d^^^ companions of my (...) days.
And help to bear the blus^ing vintage ^^me:
But shall I bring my heart away entire?
No* fa^ the better part remains behind
With Chaste^ in the camp.
Enter Chastel. What news my friend?

Chaste. Good if thou mean the present state of things:
But if thou ask aught of future times,
News of the worst description is abroad;
It Is rumored you are about to leave us soon.

Joan. The time is past when this were evil news;
Now France unwincing peers upon the sun
Like the young eagle: fearless of the foe,
She does refuse not but demands the combat.

Chaste. It Is true dear maid
Our troops are now superior to the foe:
But it is because they combat in thy presence.
Thou art the prop the pillar of our host;
Go thou from us and we again relapse
Into our former vile d^based state:
Stay but a little little longer with us,
Then with heaven's approbation and thy country's,
May thou depart. Do hear to me sweet Joan,
Do not go yet, stay* stay a little longer,
And by the brightness of the sun I swear
In hol^est reverence and in truest faith,
My life and fortunes to devote to thee,
To go with thee wherever thou will and live
The life most pleasing to thee.

Joan. What -- if I put a crook into thy hand,
And bid thee drive the ^po^^ive lambs to fe^d;
Command thee to restrain with pruning knife
The prodigal luxu^^^^^ of the vine,
Or wed its vagrant branches to the elm.
Will thou not frown and say ^^se low born maid
This comes of marrying thee?

Chastel. By goodness no:
But often as I view thy fa^e benign
And drink the seraph music of thy tongue,
With transport will my fixed uplifted eyes
With hermit zeal give praises to the skies,
That they have taken me from the foul intrigues
The hoary cheats of Janus faced courts,
And given me back to nature. Fear not Joan,
Thy virtues and thy beauties be my surety,
Which if I break no Devil half so black
As I by such a perjury.

Joan. Thou have succeeded.
Let Us to the camp and spirit up the troops;
One well fought action gives the war an end,
And drives the Britons to their island back.
To camp to camp and let the cry to arms
With voice of thunder rouse the careless troops
To arms to arms.

Exeunt, hand in hand. SCENE III. -- Forest and camp. (An alarm.)
French drive the British troops off the stage. Enter Beauvais and Talbot with
Suffolk and a party of troops. Beauvais. There sits the maid of Orleans on the
grass,
And at some distance stands the valiant C^astel.
Pointing outside the wings. Now is your time call loudly on his ^ame,
Flourish your sword in proud defiance of him;
That when he leaves his charge to fight with you,
We may come on Pucella from behind.

Talbot. It shall be done though something whispers me
There Is mischief in it.

Beauvais. Fear not I do assure you of success:
But do not call ti^l we are out of sight.
My lord of Suffolk come -- we m^st describe
A circle round this hi^^. Talbot success.

Exeunt, with Soldiers. Talbot calls. What Chastel ^o!
He bears me no -- what Chastel, turn about*
Thou Gascon* (...) of Hyperb^le -- What h^ --
Chastel I say -- he sees me now.
And like the L^^ps (...) eyes with flame
And makes toward (...) -- Talbot (...) thy soul
Stake all its powers on this (...) fight.
Enter Chastel. What would thou have -- By heaven it is Talbot's self:
Thou'r^ kind good sir to point me to the foe
Whom of all others I preferred to meet.

Talbot. This is my answer Gaul -- Defend thyself.


Draws -- they fight and Talbot is slain. Chastel. So perish all the satellites
of kings. A shriek.
A female shriek! -- Good heaven it may be here is.
Far from the camp and unattended too,
I left her seated on the Loire's banks;
Wetting her laurels with the tears of pity
Which over the fate of those destroyed in battle
She shed profuse -- Another shriek! -- You powers (another shriek.)
Protect Pucella till her Chastel comes. Exit.

SCENE IV. -- Inside of Rouen.
Beauvais and Bedford, Beauvais. My lord my lord,
Shall the fell deadly object of our hate
Whose devilish sword has slain our bravest chiefs,
When taken only s^ffer prisonment
The punishment's to ^light for her ^ffence.
Death only could have eq^all'd her demerit,
And lulled our fears to sleep. For while she lives
The enemies belief in her divinity
Will live; they will give out she is immortal;
That her imprisonment is endured by her
But as a short and voluntary s^ffering
To purify and season her to virtue:
A self imposed penance from the which
She may retire at will.

Bedford. All this I know: but where is the remedy.
Even now the populace arraign our sentence,
And scruple not to say instead of bondage
She merited a deathless wreath of laurel.

Beauvais. It does not matter what the people say,
T'morrow they will be of other mind
And swea^ she richly merited her fate.

Bedford. Well s^ppose her dead;
How go we the^ (...) ^he deed?
Have thou devised the motives and the means
Of this procedure?

Beauvais. I have my lord, and deeply as I think
Thou must confess. This Amazon my lord
As thou may hear, is much in love with armor
As Hannibal or Pyrrhus.

Bedford. I Have heard as much, I know her arms did shine
In battle as they had been made of flame.

Beauvais. Not Peleus son with greater transport gazed
On the immortal armor forged in Aetna,
By giant Cyclops -- when his goddess mother
Displayed the speaking wonders to his sight,
Than she upon her arms: they are her pride
And she holds conference with them s'tho they lived;
These arms were taken with her.

Bedford. Well what of this?


Beavais. Can thou not guess?
While yet she sleeps these arms must be laid
Beside her bed so as to catch her eye;
At sight of them she will forget misfortunes,
Fired by the memory of her former glory
She seizes them; all but her dangerous sword,
Which must not be in sight and puts them on.
Then --

Bedford. What then?


Beauvais. Why then we being at hand with many vouchers,
Rush in and finding her with armor on,
Which we shall swear the devil helped her to;
Will for our safety sentence her to die;
As though she had by witchcraft sto^'n the arms,
And wished again to persecute the world
With sorcery and war.

Bedford. Give me thy hand;
It is a well digested sober plan;
Hannibal was but a babe to thee in wiles.
Go holy churchman let this deed be done
That we may sleep in safety.

Beauvais. When time is older by an hour my lord
Believe it done. [ Ex^t -- at different sides.]

SCENE V. -- French Camp.
Enter Dauphin and Dunois. Dauph. Art thou sure of this Dunois?


Dunois. Beyond all doubt my lord,
These eyes did witness her captivity.

Dauph. How! where did it happen?


Dunois. Near to that quarter of the British camp,
Where John of Luxemburgh did hold command,
The Loi^e rolls his silver blood along.
On the soft margin of this stream she sat,
Fatigued with victory and drowned in tears,
Because of those whom bloody visag'd war
Had 'reav'd of life; beside her on the grass
Her armor peice-meal burnt, her helmet here,
And corselet there, and here again her sword,
Beaming and blazing rays too strong for sight,
Like fa^^^ed P^^^ply: from off her lids
The pendent pearls Chastel wiped away,
And sometimes kissed, soothing her troub'lous soul
By patriot arguments enforced by love.
While th^s employed a voice was heard from far
To call on Chastel's name. This voice was Talbot's;
A^rupt he left our championess and ^lew
To where the sound did come from;
There like a Mars armed at all points stood Talbot.
They fought: Talbot is slain; unlucky triumph!
Chastel it cost his love, and France her strength;
For while they fought a well disposed ambush
Led on by Luxemburgh and warlike Suffolk,
Rushed out upon her as she wept in the stream
Unarmed and unprepared.

Dauph. Was not the camp alarmed?


Dunois. It was my lord.
The voice of Chastel crying out to arms,
Did like the thunder pierce it through and through;
Amazed the soldiers ran, they flew to him;
His tongue refusing to discharge its functions,
He beckoned with his sword to follow him;
His eye did like an angry Meteor burn,
And on his brow grief and extremest rage
Sat equal matched. Covered with dust and blood
He urged the pursuit, like to a furious hunter
Whose favorite dog or much esteemed kinsman,
The lioness has torn -- Fruitless speed,
The foe had got too much the start of him,
And lo, desponding faint and sick of life
He now returns and with him the troops.
Drooping and faint and sick of heart as he;
For all right well did love our championess.

Dauph. Let Us to his tent;
Methinks he much debases his high fame,
By loving with such wild and passionate zeal
A simple shepherdess.

Dunois. My lord you much surprise me!
Is not this maiden rich in all the gifts
The brightest queen can boast; Is she not fair,
Chaste as the polar snow the which the sun
Does vainly strive to soften with his smiles;
Does not her mind almost by intuition,
Dev^lope all the mysteries of art;
Is she not brave and to sum all in one,
The Patriot savior of this war worn land;
And have thou not often been heard to say
That virtue only makes nobleness.

Dauph. No more Dunois;
The times do give a license to men's tongues
Which wisdom must restrain. Let Us to his tent. Exit

ACT V. --
SCENE I. -- A Prison.
Pucella discovered sleeping on a wretched truckle bed -- a loaf of bread and a
pitcher of water on a table -- English silently enter and lay her armor near
her and retire -- She awakes and seizes her arms with delight and astonishment.
You splendid partners of Pucella's fame,
Has the Almighty dropped you from the skies,
Or on the wing of Angel are you borne.
To cheer my sight. Takes up the Corslet.
Again this corslet,
Against which my heart did heave as if it would burst
The clasps asunder: on my breast shall shine,
And b^a^^ng fiercely as the torrid sun,
Like to Medusa's Gorgon head shall turn
Britons to stone and wither all their rage.
Takes up the shield. Faithful shield
Which often Pucella guarded from the foe,
As if a saint did watch at every clasp;
Where are those glorious spots of hostile blood,
Which tinged thy boss: when from the burning war
The haughty Talbot, like a wounded boar
Foaming with pain and madness slow retired,
Grinding his teeth; while from his blood-shot eyes
Shame and confusion to be so subdued
Shot balefully -- here is one, and here, and here;
But where is my sword;
Where is the flaming blade which from this hand
Lightened and thundered on the trembling foe
As if it rained a shower of sparkles on them.
Enter the bishop of Beauvais, jailer and guards. Beauvais. Ha trait'ress; at
thy old pranks again?
Still working spells and muttering incantations;
Lay hold on her and bow her stubborn neck
Down to the earth with fet^ers.

(Soldiers advance with caution.) Pucella. Stand off base slaves,
Or by the shade of Brutus I will tear
Your coward so^ls out: am I then so changed,
Is there not left one single ^ay of glory
To strike you to the earth base runaways,
Whom I have often pursued like frighted deer.
And thou vile Monk, (To Beauvais.)
Tra^^or to heaven and to thy country;
What hi^ders from my prison, but I wrench
Some b^^ or bar and da^^ thy skull to shivers!
Justice and France demand it and you die.
She r^shes to the prison windows and wrenches by force an iron bar -- b^^k*
mortar and splinters of wood follow -- Beauvais and soldiers retire with
precipitation -- jailer falls on his knees -- Pucella holds the bar lifted over
him in the attitude of striking. Rise wretch, To the jailer.
Thou barely do thy duty; take thy life
And when the wretched tenants of this mansion
Cry out to thee for mercy; bear in mind
Thyself had died but for it. (Jailer goes off trembling.)

Pucella sola. Now comes the trial of my fortitude,
Now will these butchers tear my tender body,
Now will my enemies with savage joy,
With bloody hands and eyes of murderous gaze
Present themselves to me: O shield me heaven,
Thou guardian of the innocent stand forth
And save me from their fury: ha they come,
There stands the horrid rack to torture me,
There come the executioners: avaunt
Ruffians; take from my sight those cutthroat eyes,
Dare you to kill the championess of France?
Ah Pucella,
Where is the constancy which buoyed thee up
And bore thee through the thunder of the fight,
When all the grander virtues fired thy soul
And forced into thy cheeks such blaze of valor
That f^ar dared not approach thee; but retired
Into the ranks of Britain: it is gone -- it is fled;
And it is but natural it should be gone;
Removed from those I love, and fallen alive
Into the power of my bitterest foes;
No friendly hand to close my dying eyes,
No pitying voice to sooth the pang of torment:
But fiends on every side, and murderers
Glaring with cannibal impatience on me:
The stoutest heart would tremble in such moment.
(kneels.) You gracious powers if with pure intent
I fought ^o rescue France from bondage,
Hear now and exec^te Pucella's (...):
Blow in my soul the fury of the ^yger,
The constancy in suffering of the wolf,
Who ^tter^ not a cry though the fierce dogs
Rend him to pieces; the leopard's fierceness,
And all the horrid properties of rage
Collected from the bosoms of wild beasts:
Encase my heart in steel, and over my face
Breathe such a spirit as will make it calm
Amidst the shocks of agonizi^g pain:
Between it and my body stop all intercourse,
That when Pucel^a feels the pangs of death,
Her visage may not tell i^ to the foe. [rises.]

Enter Duke of Bedford. Earl of Suffolk, Bishop of Beauvais* with guards.
Bedford. If she makes the least resistance hew her to pieces* and do thou holy
bishop stand by with your breviary open in yo^^ hand -- and crucifix, less any
evil spirits come to her assistance -- advance upon her guards -- perdition on
your dastard souls do you stand -- Give me a spear -- snatches a spear from the
next to him -- Pucella takes up the bar -- he keeps at distance.


Pucella. Tyrant advance,
That Sampson like my last achievement
May far o^tshine the actions of my ^^fe.

Bedford. Sorceress attend and ^ear thy sentence read.
Read Beauvais.

Beauvais reads. Thou Joa^ de Pucella, commonly called Joan of Arc or Pucella
of Orlea^s, convicted before us on good and positive evidence of sorcery and
witchcraft; shall be taken to the market place of Rouen. where thou shall be
tied to a stake, thy body burnt, and the ashes thrown into the sea.


Pucella. O Heaven.! [Falls lifeless into the arms of soldiers, and the scene
closes.]


SCENE II. -- French camp.
Tent -- Chastel (...) on the ground. D^^p^in, Chastel* Reignier -- Lords --
Dauph. Accept the only comfort I can give;
Sorrow that sa^^y keeps ^^ce with thy sorrows,
And sympathy which makes thy griefs my own.

Chaste. My (...) and (...) my lords. I thank you much,
Indeed I do no^ m^ (...) you grieve;
The loss was your (...) France's much as mine,
I rather wonder that we do outlive
The death of all our flattering prospects:
We see the glorious temple of our rights
Whose spires encircled by the sun gilt clouds
Enrolled our infant honors in the skies
Ready to tumble down and bury us
Beneath its ruins. Think my lords,
O think upon the treasure we have lost,
Think on her valor, it is lost to us,
Her heavenly confidence it is lost to us,
Her ready genius, cool deliberate mind,
Prompt, but not rash, cauti^us* yet enterprizing;
Think of her angel face, her mild demeanor.
The streams of fire which lightened in her eyes,
When she did lead our troops against the sea;
And think, O think they all are lost to us.

Dauph. With grief and wonder we reflect on them;
She was indeed all thou have said of her.

Chastel. Will thou not try to save her then?


Dauph. I know not how to save her.


Chastel. Have thou not thought on it?


Dauph. I have not.


Ch^s^^l. Not thought on it, not once? It cannot be
The wearing of a crown s^^uld so free^ up
Fair nature's mi^ky workings in the heart.
Not think on her who gave thee life at Orleans,
A crown at (...) and victory every where:
Who dr^ve thy fo^s before, (...) thee,
And shew^d (...) way with (...) fl^wers of hope.
O (...)! O (...) to faith!
False R^ (...),
For who did ever (...) a of (...).

Dauph. (...) all this?


Ch^st^l. Say, (...) an embassy t'the foe,
To (...) about the (...) some of this maid?

Dauph. I have not.


Chas^el. No^ m^a^^st to do^t?


Dauph. M^^^ (...) 'twould (...) become our royal state
To send a sage and (...) embassy.
To bear the (...) of a (...).

Chastel. And why did not your royalty disdain
To be enthroned by this peasant maid?
Why not your royal head refuse the crown
Your hand the scepter spurn when proferr'd by,
When like an angel in the robes of war,
On foot* bareheaded* near your royal car,
She led your glittering cavalcade to Rheims,
Safe through the enemy's confines? Royal Sir,
Resolve these questions.

Dauph. Know thou to whom thou speak?


Chastel. Art thou not he who la^e with cap ^n hand
Did court the favor of the lowest kind?
That strikes with wooden shoe the soi^ of France?
Who woo^d all orders of the state with sm^^es?
Who talked of freedom and the rights of man?
Who eulogiz'd Republics by the hour?

Dauph. Insolent slave! [Draws his sword, is disarmed by the L^^ds.]


Chastel. Tiberius was a Saint e're he was an emperor,
The empire did transform him to a devil.
France hang thy head, a Nero is thy king.

Dunois. Chastel retire.


Chastel. My Lords cast not away your fears on me,
I will not stir, I care not for his anger;
I too am angry and I must be heard;
Chastel is always armed within himself,
For every varying change of Proteus fortune,
This is my safety. (Draws his sword.)
Which if it fail to avenge me on my foes,
Shall yet do justice for me on myself.

Dauph. By your allegiance Lords I do command you,
Take him to execution.

Chastel. Why this is spoken like a royal king.
To execution -- this must sure convince,
At least it is conclusive for it is last,
And we may know the Monarch's logic spent.
When he does give his ultima ratio.

Dunois. Nay then you must retire,
For you do pull your ruin on your head.

Dauph. Take him away --
Are you all leagued against me -- Go, Reignier,
Summon my guard, give the wide camp alarm;
Te^l them* foul traitors meditate to kill
The Lord's anointed -- What guards, ho!

(Stamps with his foot.) Chastel. What guards, ho! (stamps with his foot --
Guards enter.)
Why came you not before.
My faithful ^^hort, dear Praetorian band,
Sweet Ja^^zaries* come, your monarch trembles,
Your Sophy's, Cal^p^'s, royal Sultan's pale,
Because that wicked Chastel tells him truth;
Come, sabre me this Chastel out of hand;
Come slice me off his head.

Dauph. By heaven the villain mocks me;
Give me a sword.

Chastel. Do you not hear? -- bring Hercules a distaff.


Lord. Take him out. (Guards whisper to each other^


Dauph. Why talk you thus apart -- take him away.


Officer. My gracious Lord,
The soldiers with all loyal due respect,
Bid me declare they will not suffer Chastel
The ab^est, dearest general in the land,
The friend and lover of their loved Joan,
The firmest patriot and their truest friend,
To live in bonds, or die a traitors death.

Chastel. Hea^'s thou this, King: blush royalty at this;
Here there is no ingratitude; generous souls,
Worthy to live in the best days of Rome,
I know not how to thank you.
(Enter a citizen of Rouen.) Which in this fair and honorable meeting,
Is count Chastel.

Chastel. What of him -- in me you see that Chastel.


Citizen. Indeed my tidings have a wider import
Than thy particular sphere will comprehend;
All France they do concern.

Chastel. The strength, the interest and the power of France*
Thou see before thee.

Citizen. But thee it most and nearest does concern.


Chastel. I wait to hear it.


Citizen. Then summon all thy courage to thy aid,
Make hard thy heart by thinking on the worst,
The bloodiest, fellest* blackest tidings,
Thy ear can tell thy soul.

Chastel. Well --

Citizen. Suppose the lares of your parents' house
Stained with your parents' ^^ood,
Your general kin slain by the murderer's knife.

Chastel. Death, why do you keep me thus upon the rack,
Out with thy tidings.

Citizen. The sun of France is set:
Fair Virtue's mirror, Beauty's peerless paragon,
Great Freedom's Saint, and Glory's glorious model,
That best epitome of all the virtues,
The beauteous Joan, our Championess is dead.

Chastel. Dead did thou say?


Citizen. Ay, dead, dead, dead.
Oftener than I have breath to tell it thee,
I have died to think on it.

Chastel. O heaven, it was too soon,
Fell Death, thou king, thou ugly tyrant,
Were there not perjured wretches on the earth,
Murderers enough and th^eves of wolfish natures,
Oppressors of the poor* foes of the orphan,
And sore ^^^^^ciers of the weeping widow;
Had not the stroke been better armed at them:
Were there not king^ --

Dunois. Better the altars of the foe had streamed
With choicest blood of twenty thousand French,
Than this one Heroine die.

Chastel. Is this undoubted, is there left no room
For chance to work a blessing.?

Citizen. These eyes that now look on you saw her die;
These eyes beheld her girt around with flames,
Which her^e^y mounting seemed to threaten heaven
With conflagration; She mean while,
Like a pure spirit, 'rayed in robes of flame,
Seemed ready to ascend unto the skies;
Some gentle spirit sat upon her face,
Arming it with patience and benignant smiles,
For when the curling smoke and crackling flames
Pushed by the ingruous breeze, did backward roll,
Her beauteous vi^age, like the radiant sun
Breaking through angry clouds did show itself
Placid, and bright, and undefiled by grief;
O God, there was a sight would arm the land,
From end to end and give the mighty mass
Order, and courage, and enthusiasm,
And drive them on the English.

Dunois. Some great avenger from her ashes rise.
(To the citizen.) Behold good Sir, how dearly she was loved,
The assembly's drowned in tears.

Chastel. What all in tears, and not one briny drop
Will show itself upon my savage lids. --
Does the King weep too?

Dunois. You see he weeps my Lord.


Chastel. And did the English soldiers mourn her fate.


Citizen. They did my Lord, not a dry eye did look
Upon her execution. Bedford except,
And Traitor Beuvais, and two other lords,
Whose Tiger souls did never know remorse.
All wept as if a dear relation died.

Chastel. And why am I so like these bloody Caiti^^s,
That my fierce orbs refuse a single tear:
By heaven* I loved her more (...) all of you,
A hundred thousand eyes could not rain out
So true a sorrow as my bosom feels;
My soul is parched, it burns and is consumed
By all the wasting bitterness of woe.
And yet I cannot weep.

Citizen. My Lord --

Chastel. Be it so, it is well;
The fever of my fury eats them up,
As the hot sun does burn the ex^alations.
Let sorrow go and vengeance take ^s place
Bedford and Beuvais shall shed tears of blood.

Citizen. My Lord,
This sealed paper did the holy maid
Deliver to my hands with strong injunction
To give it none but you. Chastel snatches it and reads.

Chastel. [kisses it.] It is the well known hand -- take it Dunois

I cannot read.

Dunois reads. To Chastel beloved by her above all things, next to her country
and her God, Joan of Arc bids a last farewell. The English have condemned me to
be burnt, horrible death, cruel and sanguinary enemies -- Weep not for me my
friend, my death will be a lasting reproach to my enemies, and will cover me
with glory. I have served France and the Dauphin with the truest and holiest
zeal. -- The indiffer^^^^ of the latter to my situation, proves only, what the
expe^^^^ce of all ages had before confirmed, that there is neither faith,
justice, or gratitude in kings -- You are however conjured by your esteem and
love of me, to sacrifice your resentment to the general good -- my fate will
touch his heart -- He will weep for me -- I forgive him -- unite to chase the
English from France -- Monarchy for some time longer will be the government of
it, but the time will be when every vestige of it will disappear, your country
will one day become a mighty Republic, in the glory and immensity of which all
former governments will be lost. -- A virtuous band of English colonists, whose
love of freedom forced them to imigrate to a vast unknown land beyond the great
waters, shall first throw down the gauntlet to Kings, and overturn the throne
of their tyrant -- France will follow her example: shall overturn all thrones,
and exterminate all tyrants. The nations of the earth will forget their former
antipathies: Even England shall stretch out the arm of friendship to France --
This letter is the substance of a vision, and I almost pronounce it prophecy.
My sufferings will give you courage and resentment -- Farewell.


Enter a Messenger. Mess. The Duke of Bedford's dead.
Haunted both night and day by guilty (...),
And by remorse, it is said, for murdered Joan:
Disease and sickness came so fast upon him
That he had hardly time to say farewell.

Chastel. By heaven I Am sorry for it,
This sword should have let out his caitiff blood.

Dunois. It Is as it should be.
Heaven will not be deprived of its revenge.

Enter second Messenger. 2. Mess. The traitorous prelate Beauvais is no more.
An awful vision robbed him of his reason,
His bloody hand did justice on himself.

Dunois. Another victim of the wrath of God;
You see how heaven combats on our side.
Let the last words of that departed saint
Be fresh upon your minds. Frenchmen unite,
Forswear all priva^e quarrels and dissensions,
And let our solid undivided power
Fall like a mountain on the English ranks.

Chastel. Dunois, thy words as from a lethargy
Arouse my wandering spirits; the fainted maid,
The as^es of whose precious body fly
On the wild winds, perhaps now over our heads
She did forbid diss^^sions.

Dauph. Be witness for me Heaven,
How gladly would I lay my scepter down
To bring her back to life.

Chastel. Indeed? Then I,
Fo^lowing her noble nature, do forgive,
And God forgive thee too. Frenchmen to arms,
Gird on your swords, and put your armor on.
The spirit of the lovely Joan of Arc,
Does hover over the field, and shrieks for vengeance.

THE END.
Thirty lines of the first Act, are taken verbatim from Shakespeare's Henry VI.
-- The substance of the scene was nece^^ary, and the Author was apprehensive of
getting into his sentiments, perhaps his words.


