AN ORATION, DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1798, BEFORE THE GENERAL SOCIETY
OF MECHANICS AND TRADESMEN, THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY, THE TAMMANY SOCIETY OR
COLUMBIAN ORDER, THE NEW YORK COOPER's SOCIETY, AND A NUMEROUS CONCOURSE OF
OTHER CITIZENS.

BY GEO. CLINTON, JUN. Citizen of the State of New York.

Published by order of the Societies.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY M. L. and W. A. DAVIS, NO. 26, MOORE STREET.

1798.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, etc.
Fellow Citizens,
THE commemoration of important events is a laudable practice, co-eval with the
existence of nations. We have convened this day to celebrate an event dear to
the recollection of every genuine American. While the slaves of monarchy
delight in consecrating to festivity the natal days of their tyrants, let free
Americans ever assemble and celebrate with becoming dignity, the anniversary of
that illustrious era which gave them birth as a nation. Let us on this solemn
occasion ever remember the nefarious and insidious plans which were laid to
enslave us; the cruelty and perfidy with which they were endeavored to be
carried into effect; our generous resistance to tyranny, and the various
vicissitudes of our revolutionary war. Let us travel back in imagination to the
scenes of the revolution: Let our hearts pulsate in unison with the different
events of the times: Let us rejoice in our victories and sympathize in our
disasters: Let us glow with indignation at acts of barbarity, treachery and
cowardice; and brighten into pleasure on contemplating deeds of magnanimity,
clemency, courage and fidelity: Let us shed the tributary tear over the graves
of our departed worthies, and indulge in emotions of gratitude for the services
of our surviving patriots; but above all, let us be grateful to the Supreme
Ruler of the Universe, for crowning our virtuous exertions with LIBERTY and
INDEPENDENCE.

IT would be a pleasing and useful task, no less worthy the pen of the
historian, than the declamation of the orator, to pourtray in animated colors,
the rise, progress, and final consequences of the American revolution. But
pleasing and useful as the theme might be, I shall, with the candor and
indulgence of this numerous and respectable assembly, take a different range of
contemplation, and shall, in the first place, consider the advantages gained by
the revolution, and in the second place, the means necessary to preserve and
perpetuate those advantages.

DULY to appreciate the blessings derived from the revolution, let us take a
view of our situation anterior to our independence. We were colonies of the
British monarchy. Our civil institutions were conformable to the government of
the mother country, being a complicated medley of monarchy, aristocracy, and
the shadow of democratic power. In most of the colonies the executive and
judicial officers were appointed by the crown; the upper branch of the
legislature emanated from the same source, and the most numerous branch was
chosen without regard to the first principles of representation. The colonial
executive had a negative on the acts of the legislature. No laws repugnant to
those of England were of validity, and the fiat of the king was essential to
their existence. Without in this place exposing the vices inherent in the
monarchical system, or making any animadversions on the boasted theory of
balances, it must be obvious to the most common capacity, that a colony,
dependent on a foreign power, can neither enjoy the advantages of
self-government, nor control the resources of the country to the interest and
emolument of the community. As colonies of the British empire, we were subject
to the sway of a government separated from us by an ocean of three thousand
miles. It is impossible that a government at such a distance can either be
sufficiently acquainted with or devoted to the interests of colonies, to govern
them with propriety; or in fact that they can be kept in due subordination,
short of a military force. As colonies, the British parliament not only
exercised the right of regulating our commerce and laying impositions and
restrictions on it; but they likewise claimed a right to bind us in all cases
whatsoever. If this declaration were well founded, we were truly the slaves of
an absolute master, and although under his authority we might have enjoyed a
portion of liberty, it would not have proceeded from the nature of the
government, but from the indulgence of the reigning master. A subject of the
gloomy despotism of Turkey may enjoy liberty, but it is the precarious liberty
of a slave. Under the control of a foreign power, imperfectly acquainted with
our concerns, and actuated by different interests; subject to the coercion of a
standing army; to the unlimited imposition of taxes, what were we to expect in
return? Protection. The obligations, say the partisans of British supremacy,
are reciprocal; we protect you, and as the price of that protection we expect
obedience. And how do you protect us? You draw us into the vortex of European
contests; you rush headlong into wars, and because we are annexed to your
empire we experience a common fate. Then our arms must be united in the same
cause; and after having for a trifling consideration plunged us into
hostilities, involved us in debt, retarded the growth and improvement of our
country, and led to the slaughter our most valuable citizens, the expenses of
the war must be drawn from our own coffers by the hands of a parliament in
which we have no voice. This -- this -- is the protection which the mother
country kindly affords her defenseless colonies. Colonies are planted for the
advantages of commerce. When a nation becomes populous, and manufactures to a
great extent, it has been supposed their interest to plant colonies in order to
consume their manufactures, and supply them in exchange with raw materials and
the necessaries of life. It is evident then that the balance of trade will
always be in favor of the mother country; her regulating authority over
commerce being adequate to modify it to her own advantage. The colonies of
America embracing an extent of continent composed of every clime and soil;
perforated with navigable rivers, and abounding in all the necessaries and most
of the luxuries of life, opened a theater of commerce worthy the rapacity of
European nations. This valuable source of wealth did not long escape the
vigilant avarice of Britain. With respect to manufactures, arts and sciences,
it was supposed to be her interest to keep us in a state of infancy; she acted
accordingly. Influenced in her councils by the narrow views of jealousy and
avarice, she cramped, fettered, and restrained our resources, and palsied our
growing greatness. Her tyrannical acts have this day been read you in our
admirable Declaration of Independence. The yoke was too galling; the burden
too heavy to bear. The proud and dignified souls of Americans revolted from
slavery, and by establishing us free and independent states, we have acquired
the following benefits: I. WE have thrown off a corrupt monarchical system, and
acquired the right of self government. II. WE obtained the right of regulating
our commerce, and controling and directing our resources to our own emolument.
And III. WE placed ourselves in a situation to avoid an interference in
European politics.


THAT that government is the best which confers the greatest happiness upon the
greatest number is an undeniable position. The government that combines virtue,
wisdom and power in the most eminent manner, is the best calculated to confer
the greatest happiness. This is the end of all civil institutions; and in order
to attain it, there must be virtue to will, wisdom to plan, and power to
execute. The panegyrists of the English constitution have seized with avidity
the distinction I have made, and have not scrupled to assert that that
government combines these three essential attributes in the most eminent
manner. When it shall be proved that the House of Commons, chosen without
regard to the principles of representation, and under the absolute influence of
the executive, is in the most eminent manner the depository of public virtue:
When it shall be conceded that wisdom is, in a peculiar degree, confined to the
nobility, and that it descends like lands and tenements by hereditary
succession: When it shall be admitted that the power of the nation is most
safely and beneficially lodged in the hands of a monarch with undefined
prerogatives -- then, and not till then, let us yield our assent to such absurd
dogmas. But waving all reflections on the corrupt condition of the British
monarchy, it is impossible that such a government, even in its most perfect
state, should confer the greatest happiness upon the greatest number. The
rights of the least powerful or lower grades of society will necessarily be
disregarded. The cottage will be despoiled to enrich and decorate the palace;
and the humble claims of genius and merit be supplanted by the imposing
splendour of wealth and titles. A Representative Democracy, properly modified
and judiciously organized, is the only government either compatible with the
dignity of man, or calculated to promote his happiness. When the powers of
government are lodged in the whole community, the government is bound by the
strongest ties to advance the felicity of the community; and the community will
be equally engaged in sustaining the authority of the government; because they
compose a single unit, and their interests are precisely the same. That there
may exist interests in a free government, foreign from the general good, it
would be uncandid not to acknowledge, but they are not as necessarily incident
to this institution; not so fatal and permanent as those which grow out of
monarchical establishments. Neither can it be denied that even in monarchical
states the blessings necessarily flowing from the enjoyment of regular liberty,
have in some few instances been dispensed in a liberal degree; proceeding
either from an accidental mildness in the administration, or from a share which
the people have had in the government; but not in so great and ample a manner,
not so free from counterpoising evils, as in republics. Wherever representation
ends, there likewise terminates responsibility: a popular branch in the
legislature does not constitute a free state. So far as the powers of the other
departments extend, so far the people are not self governed and free. Besides,
their perpetuity will erect a standing phalanx of influence which must bear
down all opposition, and irresistably sway the public will.

HAVING emancipated their country from the British monarchy, the United States
established separate constitutions for their internal government, and entered
into articles of confederation and perpetual union, for the management of their
general concerns and the means of general defense. Whilst oppressed by a
foreign war, and cemented by the ties of common danger and the imperious
motives of self preservation, the recommendations of the delegates of the
Union, had all the force and authority of laws; but the return of peace having
dispelled the gloomy clouds that darkened our horizon and lulled us into a
state of security, the articles of confederation were found inadequate to
national objects. The acts of congress being merely advisory, were no longer
respected, and experience dictated the necessity of a more liberal and coercive
system of federal government. A general convention was called; a constitution
proposed, submitted to the people, amply discussed, and finally ratified. The
scene of a people free and enlightened, establishing and ratifying a system of
government, which they had previously considered and approved, exhibited a
spectacle the most dignified that ever appeared on the globe. It was novel and
unexampled, as it was magnificent. Most of the governments of the world are the
offspring of accident, force or fraud. Even the so much celebrated institutions
of Sparta, of Athens, and of Rome, cannot boast a popular origin. Were they
formed by a convention of the people? Were they discussed by the people? Were
they submitted to the people? Were they to stand or fall by the approbation or
rejection of the people? To all these questions the impartial voice of history
answers in the negative. In order to establish their institutions Lycurgus and
Numa had recourse to religious imposture, and Solon appointed only to propose a
system of laws, usurped the powers of legislation. From the era of the
adoption of the federal constitution, we may date the consummation of our
union, and the concentration of those powers of sovereignty in a general head.
Competent under a patriotic administration, to the due regulation of commerce;
the defense of the nation, the perpetuation of our independence, and the
preservation of our rights.

BY dissolving all political connection with Great Britain, we removed
ourselves from the contentions of the old world. Already separated from it by
an immense ocean; respectable in population; powerful in virtue; in a just and
accurate knowledge of our rights, inferior to none, the disunion was
inevitable; independence was the order of Nature. Having no interest in foreign
concerns, further than the rights of humanity are implicated, it is our first
duty to avoid all interference in European politics. Neutrality is the ground
which we should firmly maintain, and although as individuals it is impossible
to suppress our opinions or to stifle our feelings, policy dictates that the
line of national interest should be strictly and inflexibly pursued. It is
almost unnecessary to remark the trivial causes which produce European
quarrels. For fifty years out of the last hundred the English have been
embroiled in wars. The chimerical idea of preserving a balance of power, has
been the ostensible motive of ravaging the finest countries in Europe. Upon
this celebrated topic, a writer, as distinguished for original genius as
perspicuity and accuracy of thought, has the following observations: "The
pretense of the balance of power has, in a multitude of instances, served as a
veil to the intrigue of courts; but it would be easy to show, that the present
independence of the different states of Europe has, in no instance, been
materially supported by the wars undertaken for that purpose."

HAVING taken a cursory view of the advantages derived from the revolution, the
means necessary to preserve them will be the next subject of consideration. The
first and most essential support of republican government is the virtue of the
people. Constitutions may be formed; institutions may be established on the
most liberal, just and philanthropic principles; and all in vain -- if the
morals of the people be corrupt; if self-interest predominate over the love of
country, and vice and licentiousness usurp the place of religion. To arrive at
a just sense of our duties, learning and instruction are necessary -- A free
people will ever be studious of cultivating useful knowledge. Like the soil
which is rendered fertile by its own productions, free countries, the native
soil of the arts and sciences, are cherished and supported by their generative
power. Between virtue and knowledge there is an intimate and necessary
connection. Without their genial influence, representative government cannot
exist. Knowledge is necessary to direct a proper choice of representatives, and
to judge of the conduct of government. The constitution is the chart by which
the political vessel must be directed -- Whether the representatives of the
people pursue the prescriptions of the constitution; whether they conform to
its spirit: To know this, requires the diligent and watchful scrutiny of the
people. Independent of their knowledge and virtue, the constitution is a mere
carte blanch. All free governments are liable to two species of abuse by their
representatives -- either an implied or express infraction of the constitution.
When laws are made, not contradictory to the letter of the constitution, but
repugnant to the general good, the constitution is impliedly violated; because
the general good is the foundation of the social compact. When laws are
enacted, repugnant both to the letter and spirit of the constitution, it is
expressly violated. The remedy for these injuries are either contained in the
constitution itself, which establishes the periodical election of officers, the
judicial department, and punishment by impeachment, or it rests with the people
themselves. If the judiciary possess sufficient virtue, they will never carry
into execution laws expressly repugnant to the constitution, which they are
solemnly pledged to support, and which is paramount to all law. If the people
are driven to the dilemma of vindicating their constitutional rights, their
situation is truly alarming. The most corrupt and wicked administration will
have its devoted partisans: when remonstrances fail, the sword must decide the
contest, and civil war, pregnant with the worst calamities of life, will
convulse the bosom of our country.

FREEDOM of opinion is essential to knowledge and virtue. An unrestrained
communication of sentiment and discussion of public measures is the scourge of
tyrants and the strongest pillar of democracy. A free press would soon destroy
the most gloomy despotisms -- kings tremble before the inquisition of the
people. There is a distinguishing principle of right and wrong in the most
untutored breast, which abhors tyranny and execrates flagitiousness. Let the
mind be enlightened, and the chains of slavery are broken. In this country the
freedom of opinion, both in civil and religious concerns, is happily secured by
the constitution. May the popular indignation and the vengeance of heaven light
upon the unprincipled wretch that shall attempt to infringe so invaluable a
privilege! -- To perpetuate the advantages of the revolution, let us support
our constitutions: May they be the rallying point of all true republicans.
Because objections were made to the federal constitution when it was first
proposed for consideration, let no one be hardy or foolish enough to assert
that those who were then opposed to it would now wish to overthrow it by force
or by fraud. All parties admitted that it was not a perfect system -- that it
needed amendments; and the only material question was, whether they should
precede or follow the adoption. Since the ratification several very important
amendments have been engrafted into the constitution. This has been the means,
we trust, of uniting all parties in its favor. If it be defective, it contains
within itself the power of amendment. The same wisdom which pointed out the
necessity of a more energetic system of federal government than the articles of
confederation, will, it is hoped, produce such alterations in our general
constitution as experience shall dictate to be salutary and expedient. Let us
preserve our union: United, we are powerful and unconquerable -- Divided, we
become the prey of intestine faction and foreign ambition. Let none presume to
assert that our territory is too extensive, our manners too dissimilar, or our
interests too repugnant for a federal government. If the states maintain
authority to manage their internal concerns, the relations of the union are
neither too multifarious, too complicated or arduous for a general government.
A small territory is the seat of faction. When the spirit of discord is
prevalent it pervades every part; infuses its poison into the bosom of
families, and contaminates the whole mass. No portion of the community is
sufficiently dispassionate to support the public good, and the government is
destroyed by a mob or subverted by a tyrant. A government over an extensive
country promises duration, permanence and stability; its views are enlarged as
its territory; local interests affect not the mass of the community; and when
one part becomes disordered, there is sufficient vigor in the others to restore
the health of the political body. Beware of the spirit of party: it may
dissolve your union, dismember your empire, and render you the sport of
ambition, and the cause of your own destruction. Never may it be recorded in
history that the people which combined against despotism, and by their united
energies shook off the yoke of British tyranny, have become a divided and
dismembered nation. Let this great example of national vigor teach you the
advantages of union. Foreign connections are dangerous: Such is the degeneracy
of governments, that treaties are no longer kept than interest warrants: they
are the cobwebs of state, which entangle the weak, and let the powerful escape.
Treaties form foreign connexions, and foreign connections engender war -- an
evil as hostile to the interests of a young and growing country as to the
feelings of benevolence and the cause of humanity. Have, therefore, as little
political connection with foreign nations as possible. The empire of China
exhibits an instance of a great and powerful commercial nation, rich in
manufactures, and celebrated in arts, who have existed, as far as the best
authenticated records testify, free from foreign connections. National debts
should ever be considered as national evils: they are, in their operative
consequences, both unjust, and impolitic, and hostile to the interest of
republics; they load posterity with burdens which have generally been
accumulated by the folly and extravagance of the preceding governments, and
without purchasing a single benefit. They create a baneful spirit of
speculation; they poison the morals of the people; they naturally accumulate,
and will either finally destroy the government, or be fraudulently destroyed by
the government. They add an artificial support to the administration, and by a
species of bribery enlist the monied men of the community on the side the
measures of government, however corrupt or ruinous to the general weal. Look to
Great Britain; see the burdens under which the people groan by means of her
enormous national debt; the sources of taxation exhausted, and her political
existence prolonged by contributions extorted by the menaces of a French
invasion.

THE means of national defense should rest in the body of the people. A well
organized militia is the only safe bulwark of a free people, competent on all
occasions to repel invasion and suppress insurrection. Standing armies are not
only expensive but dangerous to the liberties of the state. In republics every
citizen should be a soldier. No wars are just but those undertaken in
self-defence. A war of self-defence will ever engage the sentiments, the
feelings, and the passions of the people in its support. In all cases in which
a nation have been oppressed and resorted to arms, they have performed
prodigies of valor. The armies of liberty have ever triumphed over the armies
of despotism. Witness, the plains of Marathon, where the Athenians vanquished
the Persians. Witness the struggles of the United Provinces against the whole
force of the Spanish Monarchy. Witness the Cantons of Switzerland. Witness the
atchievrments of our own countrymen in our revolutionary war -- and the
unexampled prowess of French republicans against the confederated powers of
Europe.

Fellow Citizens.

WE have taken a view of the advantages derived from our revolution, and we
have endeavored to point out the means necessary to preserve and perpetuate
them. While you contemplate the rich inheritance which has been acquired by
your own valor and the virtue and prowess of your fathers, let me beseech you
to transmit it unsullied and unimpaired to your posterity; It is a duty which
you owe to yourselves, to your country, and to your God -- Most of the nations
of the world are either engulphed in despotism or convulsed with the calamities
of war. America promised to be the seat of peace -- The asylum of the oppressed
-- The nursery of the arts, and the favorite abode of liberty; Other nations
imitating her example, have thrown off the shackles of despotism and the
amiable disciples of philanthrophy fondly anticipated the final destruction of
tyranny and the reality of those golden days of human happiness and improvement
which have hitherto only existed in the poet's song or prophet's prediction.
But a thick cloud envelopes our horizon -- War, unnaturaral war -- More baneful
than famine or pestilence is ready to burst on our own devoted country -- with
a nation that assisted us in our struggles for independence we are on the brink
of hostilities -- It is not my design to enter into an investigation of the
nature or necessity, or justice of the contest; while you deprecate the dilemma
in which you are involved -- Be ever mindful of your independence, and ever
ready to defend it against every foreign agression, and while you cherish your
independence forget not, my Fellow Citizens, your inestimable rights; Deprived
of Liberty, Independence is a mere name. While you guard against the
encroachments of foreign powers, at the same time guard against the
encroachments of your own government. A state of war, or public danger, has
been always greedily seized to invade the constitutional privileges of the
people. Never, citizens, resign your inestimable rights: Resist the first
appearance of usurpation: crush the monster in his infancy, least he arrive to
gigantic stature and crush you to ruins. While with promptitude and
cheerfulness you obey the constitutional acts of the constituted authorities,
evince to your country and to the world, that you are resolved to LIVE FREE or
DIE.

ODE Composed for the occasion by Margaretta V. Faugeres; The Music performed
by the URAN^^N MUSICAL SOCIETY.
WELCOME morn, whose genial ray,
Ushers in this joyous day;
Memorable day of bliss!
Memorable day of bliss!
When thy pearly beams unfold
In the orient, flushed with gold,
Then let Virtue's gladdening bands,
With warm hearts and union'd hands,
Blooms with plants perennial twine,
Decorating FREEDOM'S shrine.
CHORUS.
Freeborn children of this land,
Let each ardent wish expand;
Hail the hours with sacred glee --
It Is the day of LIBERTY.
Catch a spark of patriot flame
From the favorite son of Fame:
Him his country's promised stay --
Him his country's promised stay --
WASHINGTON, the brave and wise,
Freedom's friend and Virtue's prize.
Let his zeal your breasts elate;
Firm he held the helm of state:
While the brightness you admire,
Emulate the glorious fire.
CHORUS.
Freeborn children, etc,
Nations greet you with applause:
Still sustain your country's cause:
Veterans still her rights revere,
Veterans still her rights revere,
When oppression threats from far
Bravely meet the storm of WAR
Banish discord from your bands,
Interest asks, and Peace commands --
Courage, firmness, unity,
Ever will maintain you free.
CHORUS.
Freeborn children, etc,
Nature's source, whose sovereign nod
Sways creation -- MIGHTY GOD!
Over our council, oh! preside:
Over our council, oh! preside:
THOU can bid the tempest cease;
THOU from war can summon peace;
From the glooms of wild dismay
THOU can call a rapturous day.
Let thy truth our souls pervade;
Let us dwell beneath thy shade.
CHORUS.
So the children of this land
Shall each ardent wish expand:
Hail the hour with sacred glee,
On this day of LIBERTY.

