FRENCH ARROGANCE; OR, "The Cat let out of the Bag;" A POETICAL DIALOGUE
BETWEEN THE ENVOYS OF AMERICA, AND X. Y. Z. AND THE LADY.

PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY PETER PORCUPINE, OPPOSITE CHRIST-CHURCH, AND SOLD
BY THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS. 1798.

[ Price 25 cents.]

[ Copy-Right secured according to Law.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author has thought proper to form this poem into a dialogue, as it
furnished an opportunity of displaying, with more perspicuity, the natural
gasconading arrogance of France, and the just retort and manly independence of
her opponents. He likewise considered the Hudibrastic measure best adapted for
interspersing that requisite burlesque which the subject required: how near he
has come to the celebrated Butler, or whether he has had him at all in view, is
left to the admirers of that author to decide.

FRENCH ARROGANCE, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
QUARRELS arise we know not why,
Yet they exist we cannot deny,
Different in habit and in feature,
Some private, some of public nature.
The ladies jar at every meal,
They think it witty and genteel;
To backbite and to scandalize
Is charming in the fair ones' eyes.
The nymph will quarrel with her swain,
Because she knows 'twill give him pain;
She Is so tenacious of her lover,
He must not look at any other;
Thus are we trammel'd when we court,
And made the butt of woman's sport:
And ask the damsel why she teazes?
Most like she will say, because she pleases,
It is her fancy to perplex him,
The more she loves, the more she will vex him,
Will never desist nor give him quarter,
But keep him always in hot water,
Until she is gained him and his riches,
And then perhaps she will wear the breeches.
The sex, alas! though famed for beauty,
Think contradiction is their duty;
But we must yield and seldom flout them,
Because we cannot live without them.
Yet man is frail as well as woman,
Though it is not always quite so common.
Some think their love cannot be zealous,
If of their wives they are not jealous,
When they most likely are the reason,
For acts of matrimonial treason.
TO avenge an insult to his jewel,
He must of course provoke a duel;
And should he 'scape this bold affray,
And "live to fight another day,"
He only lives to see his spouse
Gallant with others and carouse,
To feel each morn his horns a sprouting,
Which must be pleasant past all doubting.
But these are jars in private station,
A mortal stab to reputation,
A kind of murder in the retail,
Of which there is a lengthy detail.
But public feuds should widely alter,
And no man should by wholesale slaughter.
Men are not mushrooms -- by this light!
Nor can we get an army in a night.
King Solomon the wise, we are told,
Had children even an hundred fold;
But then to account for all these lives,
He had an army formed of wives:
The case is altered now you know,
We dare not even marry two.
This maxim therefore I Will propose,
Before two nations come to blows,
To have a proper explanation,
And cooly weigh the disputation.
AMERICA. MOST potent citizens of France,
Renowned for war, and complaisance,
Renowned for conquest and for glory,
We come to tell a plain and candid story;
To now present you our credentials,
And argue chiefly on essentials;
We therefore hope you will be explicit,
It Is all we ask for and solicit;
Our love for you was always pure,
Which prompts us to this overture;
Peace is our object and our aim,
Against a war we all declaim;
War is the bane of human life,
The child of discord and of strife;
We Have strove to keep it at a distance,
And hope 'twill bear our firm resistance;
At variance we have been it is true,
But trust our friendship will renew;
Our errand here is really meant
A lasting friendship to cement,
To cancel and destroy defection,
And fix a permanent connection;
Which you will approve without a frown,
As men of honor and renown,
As men of "public faith" and trust,
Who Are merciful as well as just.

FRANCE. OF these rare virtues we have a store,
We likewise have a number more,
Which you shall find, ere you leave France,
Or say that Frenchmen cannot dance.
But your ideas are too illusive,
You speak in language too conclusive.
Shall France, possessed of all her power,
Submit to you because you lower;
Foutre diable, 'twill not do,
Such language certainly you will rue;
Suppose, Commissioners all three,
You were to copy after me,
Take Frenchmen's conduct for a sample,
In every thing they are wise and ample;
Observe me therefore very nice,
And hear with patience my advice:
The speech of your great President,
Our nation one and all resent;
He talks to us, the mighty Gauls,
As big as church you call Saint Paul's,
Like Buonaparte the Gallic god,
Who has ten millions at his nod,
And could, if he was firmly bent,
Turn upside down your continent;
Displace your Chieftain or your Head,
Make war and desolation spread;
Reduce your cities to a level,
And send your Congress to the devil;
Destroy your forts of every kind,
And "leave not" even "a wreck behind;"
Drain dry the vast Atlantic Ocean,
And plant disorder and commotion;
Slay all your women and your men,
And march in triumph back again.
Avert the danger of delay,
And save your country whilst you may.
Your haughty speech must be disjointed,
Before you see the Lords anointed;
Start not, messieurs, nor even grumble,
The speech I say must be more humble;
Or else, to save a deal of pother,
Suppose you was to make another,
As thus -- "Renowned and mighty men,
We Have erred, but never will err again;
We once conceived, oh! vain the thought,
Our freedom, which with blood we bought,
Was purchased to the end of time;
That thought we now confess a crime;
No right have we to live at ease,
Unless the great Direct'ry please;
Our lands are yours, nay even our lives,
Our sons and daughters, and our wives;
When France shall send her mighty mission,
Both one and all shall bow submission;
Great Britain's treaty we'll dispel,
And drive those English dogs to h -- ll;
Even Porcupine and all his crew,
His press, his types, his paper too,
His clerks, his 'prentices, and men,
Shall trudge to England's isle again,
Not even a vestige shall you meet
Of him nor his in Second-street.
If after this you're not content,
M'K -- n shall be our President;
And as a luster to the scene,
Our Vice shall be great G -- l-t-ne;
We'll then appoint, for strength and weight,
Shrewd N-ck-l-s, Secret'ry of state;
L -- n, that brilliant fighting star,
Shall be our Secret'ry of War;
And B -- che, your warmest advocate,
We'll dubb the Printer of the State;
With such a groupe, what power can wrench
The victory from the matchless French!
Cerb'rus of old, who watched so well,
And was the centry dog of h -- ll,
Could not more fiercely guard the gates
Than this grand compact would our states;
Their talents cannot, should they be sent,
Ever "stop the wheels of government;"
But smoothly onward they would glance,
Just like the government of France;
And then each member should agree
To wear the cap of liberty,
With strictest orders, when they are made,
To paste a national cockade
Just in the front, to catch the eye
Of strangers when they are passing by.
At every ball our belles should dance
In all the elegance of France;
No fashion like the French can please,
Even from the stocking to chemise;
Our bucks and bloods, wherever they dine,
Shall drink naught else but Gallic wine;
And in their cups shall chaunt and sing --
Long live the French, and d -- n the king;
We mean the king of Britain's land,
Whose fleets and armies you will command;
Then teach those Britons to be free,
And learn John Bull equality."
Now this would be quits apropo,
And you will acknowledge it we know;
Or else you cannot go before 'em,
Nor ever behold their grand sanctorum;
I speak my mind, and speak it clear,
It Is known the French are all sincere.
But we'll proceed without delay,
As I Am in haste and cannot stay:
Money's our next and grand command,
Which you must furnish on demand;
You know we cannot "cut a splash"
Without that article called cash:
Money, Money's the thing you know,
Which makes the man and mare to go;
A little now would answer well,
In fact it is but a bagatelle:
The sum from Holland due to France,
You cannot scruple to advance;
The Dutch are money getting men,
And will return it back again;
They Would send you readily, no doubt,
Large cargoes of their sour-crout;
'Twould sell in market by retailers,
And keep the scurvy from your sailors;
It has not quite so fine a smell,
But never mind that if it will sell.
They Would send you pipes and little toys
To please your pretty girls and boys;
So don't be pushing or severe,
But have some patience with mynheer.
They Will pay you even to a stiver,
Or say that France is no contriver.
Another sum I Would here propound,
I think it is fifty thousand pound,
By way of present, or douceur,
To make your interview more sure.
All locks of whatsoever degree,
Will open with a golden key;
It Is understood -- needs no refining,
That every pocket wants a lining.
Lawyers you know will not agree
To plead a cause without a fee;
And some there are, you may depend on it,
Are fee'd by plaintiff and defendant. Sir Fletcher Norton of England,
positively received a see from both parties -- and was known afterward by the
name of Counselor Double Fee.

Algiers did not your men release,
Before you paid the dollars for a peace.
Can you refuse all gentle France,
And pay these robbers in advance?
Why hesitate and make this fuss
To gain or purchase peace with us?
Pray do not frown and mournful stand,
But sign the terms of Talleyrand,
" And look before you, ere you leap,"s
For as you sow, you're like to reap.

AMERICA. YOUR doctrine's strange we must confess,
It seems a riddle, nothing less;
You cannot certainly be serious,
But must be joking or delirious,
Or else you think us void of sense,
And cannot discern your insolence.
But know ye, sirs, we represent
A people ready to resent;
A nation that can ward a blow,
And hurl defiance on their foe;
Who will in freedom's cause advance,
And fight -- if needful -- mighty France!
The blustering blades who rant and swagger,
And are for drawing sword and dagger,
Are not the heroes they pretend,
But often prove cowards in the end.
Redress for injuries we implore,
For nothing else, we ask no more.
Justice we want, for that we press,
We cannot, will not, take no less;
For war with us you have sometime held,
Which we'll avoid unless compelled.
Our wrongs you know before they are told,
Yet we shall briefly them unfold.
Have not your nation's privateers
Set us together by the ears,
At least endeavored so to do?
This, sirs, is positively true.
Have they not seized, in wanton sport,
Our vessels near their destined port,
And sent them to another part
To practice every plundering art;
Where they have ships and cargoes sold,
And robbed even passengers of gold?
They Have even disgraced our very seamen,
And put in irons honest freemen;
To language base they have added blows,
And used them like inveterate foes.
Can we sit tame without surprise,
And bear such treatment from allies?
Repel such acts whilst life remains,
Or live in bondage and in chains.
Our friends you were some time ago,
But acts like these bespeak a foe.
We thought you honest, fair and kind,
But honesty you have guillotin'd,
And thrown her carcafe and her head
Amongst your butchered, injured dead.
Such deeds will live from age to age,
And stain with blood the historic page;
A race unborn will drop a tear,
When they your cruel actions hear.
We thought you polished and polite,
But there we have proved an oversight.
Your brutal rage has far outdone
The vilest deeds beneath the sun;
You Have ransacked every town and village,
And lived on cruelty and pillage.
Compared to thy most savage reign,
The bloody Nero's was humane.
'T would beggar language to describe
The horrid acts of half your tribe.
Did not your minister G -- n -- t,
Our untaught countrymen beset,
With cringes and insidious smiles,
And all his catalogue of wiles?
Did not he shun our government,
And land elsewhere to circumvent,
To sound the minds and dispositions,
And circulate your d -- d commissions?
Deception was his "ruling star,"
To loose at large "the dogs of war."
But now he is wedded to his charmer,
And turned a penitential farmer;
Repents of every former ravage,
And plants potatoes, leaks and cabbage;
Keeps ducks and chickens, kills his mutton,
And lives as snug as any button;
Conceives Long Island a retreat
Surpassing pageantry and state:
To France he will never more be led,
Because he values much his head.
The speech of our First Magistrate,
You wish to maul and mutilate;
You say it grates upon the ear,
And must be altered, that is clear.
In fact, you say it is not a true one,
And we had better make a new one;
You then hold out a language vile,
And say it is just the very style,
Exact the thing, "quite apropo',"
And we'll acknowledge it you know.
To answer all your paltry stuff,
Would make you strut, parade, and puff,
Augment your nation's natural vanity,
Which nearly borders on insanity.
We will not Adams ever disgrace,
Nor from his speech a word erase;
He spoke what every heart should feel,
And proved his patriotic zeal;
He was the object of our choice,
And echoed forth Columbia's voice.
Be silent therefore on that head,
We will not by the nose be led;
Cat's paws nor tools we'll never be,
But are determined to be free.
Respecting cash, which you demand,
We Have not our treasury at command,
And if we had we'd never agree
To lend a dollar unto thee,
Until you would made a reparation
For every act of depredation.
You talk of Holland very much,
And praise these money making Dutch;
But what is that to us -- if true,
The devil take their sour-crout and you.
No doubt they are very much provoked
To find themselves so strongly yoked;
But if amongst hogs they have chose a stye,
Like hogs, for God-sake, let them lie;
Give them their sour-crout and pipes;
Some gin to keep them from the gripes;
They Will smoke and drink and make a row,
And get as drunk "as David's sow."
Mynheers are hardy plodding fellows,
If you want wind they will blow the bellows*
How you get cash it makes no odds,
We'll not "give sixpence," by the gods!
With what sang froid you ask for money,
We cannot but smile, you are so funny;
You thought, when you proposed this loan,
We'd found the what d' y' call-um stone,
Philosopher's I mean to say,
Which makes pure gold from potter's clay,
As quick as you with truth comply,
Though not so fast as you can lie.
Ere you attempt to ask for more,
You should rub off your ancient score;
You wish to live on depredations,
And tax the people of all nations,
To gormandize on others' spoils,
And reap the harvest of their toils;
To "cut a splash" at our expense,
And laugh to prove our lack of sense;
Your meaning's clear, we have a view of it,
But think we know a trick worth two of it.
If to this pitch you cannot rise,
Without our granting the supplies,
Go live on sallad, mice and frogs,
And fricasee you cats and dogs;
We care not how your nation raves,
" Columbians never will be slaves."

FRANCE. COME, come, messieurs, you must advance,
Consider now the strength of France;
They have your interest in view,
And only act as friends to you.
You Have made a fine elab'rate speech,
Yet seemed to have soared above your reach;
Reflect a little, and beware,
There is no foothold in the air;
Mind that yourselves you don't enthrall,
Perchance you may receive a fall,
A fall perhaps you will deplore,
As you may never rise no more.
France she entreats with eyes brim full;
You Would view the state of poor John Bull;
How he must meet our rage and fury,
And very soon, I do assure you;
Perhaps you know not our intention,
Permit me therefore, just to mention:
England -- that paltry! bit of land,
We mean to conquer and command;
'Twill yield the moment we appear,
We'll petrify the dogs with fear;
Balloons are made, and rafts constructed,
By which our hosts will be conducted;
Through clouds of smoke Balloons will sail,
And drop upon their coast like hail;
Chock full of men they will all appear,
And darken even the very air;
So true they are steered, they will drop with ease,
On whatsoever spot they please;
And some they really do intend,
Shall in the palace yard descend;
Alarm the House of Lords and Commons,
And issue out a general summons;
With which all members shall comply,
Or in an instant they shall die.
Then farewell Anti-gallic glory,
Good by to ye Billy Pit the tory,
Dundas and him this storm shall not weather,
But both shall go to h -- ll together.
Others they will order and arrange,
To light exactly in the exchange;
Confuse the merchants and the jobbers,
And all the speculating robbers,
Who Will fell their stock, if you will believe me,
From tribes of Dan to tribes of Levy;
They Will swear it was by their desire,
And France is Israel's Messiah;
Tune up the psalt'ry, harp and sackbut, As there were no fiddlers in those
days.

And banish those who scrape on catgut;
Open all their windows and their doors,
Embrace French politics and wh -- rs.
They Will bless their happy, happy chance,
That they have met the sons of France.
Our spacious rafts would make you stare,
Some two, and others three miles square.
To view this mighty floating army,
Would quite astonish, and alarm ye.
As thick as hops, or hives of bees,
You Will see them gliding on the seas;
They Are all so frolicksome and skittish,
In hopes to broil and roast the British,
To eat and drink like any glutton,
And cut them up like pork or mutton.
On every raft is fixed a battery,
That would to atoms quickly shatter ye.
Each man, I Am told, you may rely on,
Is near as brave as spitting L -- n;
Whose deeds achieved by wooden sword,
Surpass description, 'pon my word.
These rafts are meant, should ere they meet,
To sink and burn the English fleet;
And after that, the mighty host
Shall land upon the British coast.
As France is matchless at invention,
Another thing I Will beg to mention.
They mean to carve a wooden fish,
Large as a man would really wish,
To hold his powder and his ball,
His gun, accoutrements and all;
Some bread and garlic, and a sausage,
Will serve 'em for so short a passage;
Vast shoals of these are now a making,
For this important undertaking!
They Will dart from every port and quarter,
And swim so nicely through the water,
All armed with fins and massy scales,
Like grampuses or sharks or whales;
And every now and then you know,
They Will raise their snouts to puff and blow.
Quite unsuspected will they swim,
For who'd ever think of such a whim?
No one would doubt but they were fish,
Unless they saw them on a dish,
Which they will prevent by swimming deep,
And keeping watch when ever they sleep.
How France will laugh when looking over,
And see them on the beach at Dover;
And how the country folks will yell,
When every fish shall drop his shell,
And stand erect in full array,
To take their towns, to kill and slay.
Still on the wing for vast contriving,
We Have got machines or bells for diving;
They of two properties partake,
To fink or swim like duck or drake;
When ever they hear a cannon pop,
A cord is pulled and down they drop.
To us the nations all must yield
For arts on water and the field;
Witness, you know, the fate of Venice,
Who were to us like balls at Tennis;
Each Frenchman proved a noted drubber,
Who played and beat them every rubber.
We played the deuce with these Italians,
We took their cows, their mares and stallions,
And put them into requisition,
To serve our craving disposition.
" Remember, how in arms and politics,"
We Have worked the Pope and all his "holy tricks."
The cardinals, the nuns and friars,
Were all let loose to French desires.
Take warning therefore ere too late,
Or else you will share their very fate.
No longer hesitate, we pray,
But grant the loan without delay.

AMERICA. WE know too well your plots and schemes,
And treat them all as idle dreams;
We likewise know your greater half,
Are made to gasconade and laugh;
But laughing, sirs, will never do,
Americans are staunch and true;
True to her friends, yet will not forego
A just resentment to her foe.
Our country's cause, with joy elate,
I think I now anticipate,
And see the Fathers of our soil,
Resolved again to share the toil;
Their sons turn out with manly zeal,
To prop their native common weal;
With shouldered arms and pointed lance,
To dare the menaces of France;
To fight for what their fathers fought,
When they their Independence bought;
To fight the foe of any hue,
Who dare encroach on Freedom's due.
Addresses now I think are sent,
From north to south the Continent,
Composed of patriots in the cause,
Who will support Columbia's laws;
Resolved firm ADAMS to defend,
Before they will any lower bend:
It Is needless any more to press,
We cannot, will not acquiesce*

FRANCE. WELL, well, messieurs, once more we'll try,
And send a Lady by and by;
If she will not do on this occasion,
Farewell finesse and French persuasion.
Adieu, messieurs, we'll send the lady*
To bring you over and persuade ye.

ENTER LADY. MESSIEURS, your most, I Am proud to see
The Envoys of America.
You're from some gay and gallant City,
You look so smart, so very pretty;
Whether from Boston, or Virginia,
'Twould give me happiness to win ye;
The ladies here admire your parts,
And hope to gain Columbian's hearts.
I therefore beg that you will be seated,
For ceremony here is defeated.
We know naught else but mirth and jolity,
And live in freedom and equality.
Thus introduced, I 'll speak my mind,
Which you will perceive, unless you're blind.
Our minister, the famed and grand,
The most sagacious, Talleyrand,
Has through some channel, I am told,
Requested you to furnish gold,
Which you conceive a great affront,
And will not pay, depend upon it*
Now there I think you very wrong,
As 'twill the business much prolong,
And may perhaps a War create,
Which we abhor and really hate.
Our spies are out from south to nor'ard,
And know full well how things go for'ard;
'Twas thought with us, but now decided,
That amongst yourselves you are divided;
Our party's strong, I don't dissemble,
And may, it is likely, make you tremble.
Down with the cash, without such fuss,
And you will again be one of us;
You will not sure yourselves disgrace,
When once a lady's in the case;
For to be candid, frank and free,
The fifty thousand is for me,
To purchase pins to stick my cushion,
That made the gentlemen so pushing:
A sum for pins is very common
With every fashionable woman:
Another thing -- but draw the screen --
I Am the direct'ry's, grand machine;
With me they take a vast delight,
To do their business, day and night;
Don't smile, my dearest! Johnny M-r-h-l;
I now begin to feel quite partial,
To gaze on you and Elbridge G-r -- y,
My eyes I Am sure would never be weary,
Likewise, my charming Charley P-n-k -- y;
You're clever men, the devil sink me!
I love all handsome Plenipos,
Such satisfaction with them goes;
They have most noble generous hearts,
And then of course they are men of parts,
Of sense I mean, and penetration,
And scholars at negotiation.
I Am not ashamed to say, messieurs,
That I Am in love over head and ears;
So now to settle this dispute,
Suppose we one and all salute; --
What! not indulge me with a kiss!
Is all my rhet'rick come to this?
Is this Columbian gallantry?
Oh fie! commissioners, oh fie!
Deny a lady of my figure!
You surely cannot be men of vigor:
But pay the cash, I shall not rue,
I value not your kiss a sous;
Shall leave you all to meditate
On what of course will be your fate,
And go post haste to Talleyrand,
Who soon shall make you understand.
Exit Lady in a passion.
AMERICA. THIS lady's neither more nor less
Than some French cheat, in woman's dress,
Sent here on purpose to delude
Our hearts from moral rectitude;
However, be it as it will,
We Are proof against her nation's skill.

FRANCE. WELL, gentlemen, we are come again,
And hope you're in a better vein;
The lady has, we make no doubt,
Made every thing much plainer out,
The sex are vastly our superiors,
And men must knuckle as inferiors;
The business doubtless, she has done,
You Have only now to sign the loan,
We'll call for paper, pen and ink,
And then sit down to smoke and drink.

AMERICA. NOT quite so hasty, gentlemen,
We want not paper, ink or pen.
The Lady we have heard it is true,
But all her arguments will not do
She Is thrown out every art and lure
About the loan and her douceur,
And laid on flattery so thick,
We thought it would have made us sick.
Though Adam was by woman drawn in,
We'll not be done by Gallic fawning;
Eve was a beauty formed to win,
No wonder Adam gave it in.
Her beauteous limbs! her lovely Face,
Was nature's dignity and grace,
She gave the apple with a grandeur!
No man existing, could withstand her!
Now your sweet lady gave disgust,
For she demanded money first,
The part she played we must deplore,
Was too much like a common wh -- e;
She flew like lightning when she found
She Would lost the fifty thousand pound;
However, sirs, we'll not dispute,
But give an answer to your suit.
Firm as a rock! we'll ever stand,
And scorn the schemes of Talleyrand,
Not France with all her power combined,
Shall shake the purpose of our mind.
Talk not of "faith, of public trust,"
When you're unwilling to be just;
Insult no more, no more intrude,
And let this visit now conclude;
Too long we have borne your galling pride,
It Is now high time we should divide;
Return no more, unless your nation
Will pay for every depredation.
The path great WASHINGTON has trod,
Shall lead Columbians to their GOD;
On this grand base we'll stand or fall,
And hurl defiance on each Gaul.

FINIS.

