OF THE YELLOW FEVER, WHICH PREVAILED IN PHILADELPHIA, AND OTHER PARTS OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, IN THE SUMMER AND AUTUMN OF THE PRESENT YEAR, 1798.

INCLUDING, Tables of the weather, and the daily returns of the sick and dead;
The proceedings of the Board of Health, and Guardians of the Poor. With the
various events of each day, noted at the time of their occurrence; And the
publications which appeared in the different Newspapers, during the continuance
of the Disease, dissections at Boston, etc. etc.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A COLLECTION OF FACTS RESPECTING THE ORIGIN OF THE FEVER.

BY WILLIAM CURRIE, S. C. M. P. Author of "An Historical Account of the
Climates and Diseases of the United States." And of "Observations on the Causes
and Cure of Bilious Fevers." etc. etc.

Another Plague more fierce, arose,
The salutary art was mute!
Fatigued with vain resources, and subdued
With woes resistless, and enfeebling fear,
-- into the hospitable country,
The infected city, poured her hurrying swarms.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN BIOREN, FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE HOUSE,
NO. 41, SOUTH SECOND STREET. 1798.

MEMOIRS.
A Sketch of the Weather, from January to July, 1798.
THE winter, preceding the spring of 1798, was more severely cold, and the cold
continued longer than usual in this winter.

The greatest part of March and April was wet and cold.

From the 4th of May to the 23d, there was no rain, though the wind was
generally N. and N. E. and some days disagreeably cold.

24th May, began to rain, and continued wet and cold to the 31st. The wind then
changed to S. W. and the weather became warm and fair.

From the 5th to the 14th of June there were daily showers, some days heavy,
and one day loud thunder. The ponds became full of water -- the roads deep with
mud. From the 16th to the 19th, unpleasantly cold. From the 19th to the 26th,
sultry, with frequent showers. 27th, cool, Thermometer only 76 at two P. M.
Mark Miller died today, under the care of doctors Wister and Hodge, with
symptoms of the Yellow Fever at Mrs. Reeves's in Gallowhill-street. He had been
much fatigued and debilitated from loading a vessel at Almond-street wharf, a
mile from his lodgings, in the heat of the day, to which he had walked daily
for some time. He had, also, according to the account of Mrs. Reeves, slept on
the bed in which her son had died of the Fever the preceding Autumn. Dr. Hodge
was at this time indisposed with jaundice from a diseased liver.

24th and 30th, fair and pleasant, wind S. E.

The last week of June was remarkably healthy.

A TABLE, Of the Weather in July.
DAY. THERMOMETER. WIND. WEATHER. At 8 A. M. At 2 P. M. A.M. P.M 1 78 84 SW
Light breeze, fair. 2 82 90 SW Light breeze but very oppressive. 3 84 90 SW
Calm and fair till 6 P. M. then smart gust. 4 74 84 W Fair, fresh breeze. From
the 4th to the 23d of this month the mercury seldom rose as high as ^o in the
afternoon, but was generally as low as 76. During this period a considerable
quantity of rain fell. 24 ^5 82 SW Light breeze; fair till evening; a shower in
the night. 25 76 80 SE E Flying clouds; calm. 26 78 82 W SW Flying clouds;
ponds have lowered considerably. 27 82 88 W SW Fair, light breeze; shower last
night. 8 85 91 SW Fair, strong breeze. 9 82 86 W SW Shower A. M. and P. M.
sultry. 30 80 80 NE E Shower A. M. constant rain all P. M. and part of the
night. ^1 72 78 W NW Fresh breeze, fair.

The diseases of children, usually prevalent in July, have been remarkably rare
and mild this year.

Memoirs of the Diseases and Occurrence, in July.
ON the 24th of this month, the City Commissioners issued orders to wash the
gutters and to wet the streets three times a week.

A number of inflammatory complaints occurred during the continuance of the
cool and wet weather.

A ship-carpenter, who lodged at Achison Thompson's, in Water-street, a few
doors below Walnut-street, was attacked with fever on the 26th, which, on the
4th day, showed symptoms of malignity. This man confessed to Dr. Dorsey and
myself, that he had been on board the ship Deborah while she was unshipping her
cargo at Race-street wharf, a few days before his sickness. He was sent down to
the Marine Hospital, and there died on the 3d day of August.


Another of A. Thompson's lodgers, a sailor, died in the night of the 28th,
after a very short indisposition.

Mr. David Jamie, clerk to Mr. Foster, merchant, who lodged at Thompson's, was
attacked with fever in the night of the 31st. Mr. Jamie was sent to the Marine
Hospital while in a state of salivation, with three blisters on him, and
recovered.


A TABLE, Of the Weather in August.
DAY THERMOMETER WIND. WEATHER. At 8 A. M. At 2 P. M. A.M. P.M 1 75 80 Fair. 2
76 82 Fair. 3 76 82 Thick fog, fair, sultry. 4 78 84 SE SW Sultry, cloudy,
heavy shower P. M. and also in the night. 5 78 83 SW W Sultry A. M. fair P. M.
with fresh breeze. 6 78 82 NW W Fair A. M. light shower P. M. 7 78 84 NW W
Fair, fresh breeze, 8 78 86 SW Fair, light breeze. 9 82 89 SW S Fair, light
breeze. 10 82 90 SW S Fair, light breeze. 11 83 89 SE W Fair, light breeze,
thundergust P. M. and frequent showers, with lightning and thunder in the
night. 12 80 82 E SE Cloudy and calm A. M. fair, calm P. M. 13 78 80 E SE Light
breeze, flying clouds, cloudy damp and sultry in the evening. 14 78 82 W SW
Cloudy, calm, oppressive A. M. began to rain at 3 P. M. and continued to rain
heavily and constantly all the evening. 15 77 82 Remarkably clear and
oppressive, rained chief part of the night. 16 Sultry, cloudy; roads deep and
muddy, ponds almost filled with water. 17 Cloudy, showery, sultry, shower with
thunder at 4 P. M. 18 87 87 Sultry, fair. 19 Calm, fair. 20 E SE Cloudy,
sultry, fair P. M. 21 Fair, light breeze, very warm, roads dusty already,
lightning from west in the evening. 22 NW Fair and disagreeably cold in the
evening. 23 78 E Strong breeze, fair. 24 N Strong breeze, fair, very warm. 25
Fair, calm, hot, the night particularly so, lightning from the west. 26 Fair,
light breeze, very warm, roads deep with dust, water low in the ponds, heavy
rain in the night. 27 86 SE Fair, light breeze. 28 Cloudy, showery, cloudy,
cool evening, 29 NW Strong cool breeze, fair. 30 Like yesterday, only stronger
breeze. 31 80 E Fair, light breeze.

DAILY RETURNS Of the number of sick and of the deaths in the City Hospital,
and in the City and Liberties of Philadelphia, including the little village of
Kensington, in the month of August.
THE first cases admitted into the Hospital were on the 8th of August: From the
first of August to this date, the whole of the deaths in the City and
Liberties, amounted to 53 -- viz. 23 adults and 30 children.

HOSPITAL REPORTS. Admit. Cured. Deaths. Rem. in H. Conval. Eloped. TOTAL
DEATHS. From 8th to 9th in the morning. 4 0 1 2 0 1 Total deaths in Hospital,
City, etc. 12. 9th to 10th. 9 0 1 10 0 1 7 including 3 children. 10th to 11th.
11 0 2 19 0 0 16 including 5 children. 11th to 12th. 7 0 6 18 0 1 20 12th to
13th. 9 0 4 23 0 0 17 13th to 14th. 3 0 4 27 5 0 20 including 7 children. From
14th to 15th. in the morning. 6 0 6 22 9 0 27 including 7 children. 15th to
16th. 7 0 2 27 9 0 17 including 4 children. 16th to 17th. 10 2 3 32 7 0 15
including 6 children. 17th to 18th. 3 0 3 32 7 0 18 including 7 children. 18th
to 19th. 9 2 7 32 0 1 24 19th to 20th. 5 1 5 30 12 1 16 20th to 21st. 11 0 3 38
13 0 20 50 New cases reported to the board of health to day, by the physicians
in the city and liberties. 21st to 22d. 38 new cases reported. 11 0 3 46 12 0
31 22d to 23d. 42 new cases reported to the Board. 11 0 0 0 0 0 20 including 7
children. 23d to 24th. 49 new cases by thirty-three Physicians. 10 2 11 54 12 0
25 24th to 25th. 37 new cases by twenty-two Physicians. 8 1 6 55 12 0 25
including 7 children. 25th to 26th. 18 1 7 65 11 0 48 26th to 27th. 111 new
cases for last 48 hours by 23 Physicians. 9 0 10 65 12 0 34 27th to 28th. 60
new cases by 25 Physicians. 8 1 6 65 20 1 36 including 4 children. 28th to
29th. 69 new cases by 25 Physicians. 13 0 8 67 20 1 33 including 3 children.
29th to 30th. 53 new cases by 19 Physicians. 12 4 8 67 20 0 45 including 4
children. 30th to 31st. 81 new cases by 21 Physicians. 18 3 6 77 20 0 31
including 5 children.

Memories of the Fever and Occurrences in August
ALEXANDER PHILIPS next door neighbor to A. Thompson was attacked with fever
accompanied with malignant symptoms on the last of July or first of August;
died under the care of Dr. Griffitts on the 4th inst., being the 4th or 5th day
from the Attack.

Moses Cox at corner of 2d and Spruce, died on the 6th.

John Saunders occupied in the store of Lloyd and Sparks on the wharf a short
distance below Walnut St. attacked on the 3d.

Mr. Samuel Russel clerk to Mr. H. Henderson. Mr. John Lawrence. Mr. Morgan's
son. Stephen Davis, who lodged next door to Philips's. Mr. Rudolph. A
Tobacconist's boy. Mr. Isaac Lloyd, all in the same neighborhood, with several
others whose names I do not recollect, were all taken ill with a fever of a
malignant kind within two or three days of each other.

The unusual number of deaths that occurred in the first week of August,
alarmed the Citizens and became a topic of general conversation.

The case of a man who had worked on board the Ship Deborah, who died of a
fever highly malignant the latter end of July, had been reported by Dr.
Proudfit, but being a solitary case had excited but little apprehension.

On the 5th, Achison Thompson's child was attacked with the fever.

The College of Physicians met on the 6th at which time about 26 cases of the
fever were all that were known to exist in the city, and after conferring
together they unanimously agreed to the following resolutions, which were
immediately communicated to the Board of Health of Philadelphia. -- viz.

"Resolved that the college inform the Board of Health, that a malignant
contageous fever has made its appearance in Water street, between Walnut and
Spruce streets, and in the vicinity thereof: And That the college recommend to
the Board of Health to procure the removal of all the families that are
situated between Walnut and Spruce streets, and the East side of Front and the
River, and to have all the Shipping lying between Walnut and Spruce streets
removed to a proper distance from the City."

In consequence of the communication of the College, the Board of Managers of
the Marine and City Hospitals, published the following recommendation on the
7th.

"Health-Office 7 th August, 1798."
"Whereas the Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals of the port of
Philadelphia; have received information from the College of Physicians that a
malignant contageous fever has made its appearance in Water street between
Walnut and Spruce streets and in the vicinity thereof"; and the reports of Dr.
Samuel Duffield and and T. Park, appointed particularly to examine that part
of the City, specifying the particular cases found therein. -- Therefore,
Resolved, that in order to prevent as much as possible all communication with
that part of the City, that the Health-Officer cause the vessels now lying at
the wharves between Tun Alley and Jesse and Robert Waln's wharf, including the
said wharf to be removed, and that no vessel of any description whatever be
suffered to come to the said wharves, until the farther orders of the Board.

The Board also earnestly recommend to the inhabitants of that part of the City
included between Walnut and Spruce streets, and the East side of Front street
and the River, and also those immediately in the vicinity thereof to remove
without the bounds of the City, and liberties as speedily as possible."

By order of the Board of Managers, WM. JONES, PRESIDENT, Attest, TIMOTHY
PAXSON, Clerk.

THE City Hospital was opened to day the 7th for the reception of the sick, and
Drs. Physic and Cooper appointed to take charge of it.

9th. Boston boasted of its happy state of health the beginning of this month,
but it appears from a paragraph in the Gazette of the United States of the 9th
inst. that a malignant fever had made its appearance there about the 1st of
July, and that 16 persons had died of it from that time to the 4th of August,
at which time there were 10 remaining sick; but that no physician, nurse or
attendant on the sick had taken the Disease.

Published by order of the Select Men and signed by Wm. Cooper T. C.

Number of deaths in the City and Liberties of Philadelphia from the 1st to the
5th inst. 53.

A society consisting of 10 or 12 Practitions, called the Academy of Medicine,
presented the following address to the Board of Managers on the 8th, which was
published in the Philadelphia Gazette of the 9th inst.

"THE ACADEMY OF MEDICINE of Philadelphia, having taken into consideration the
existence of a Malignant Bilious Fever in the city, have conceived it to be
their duty to lay before the Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, the
following facts respecting its origin, and the means of checking its progress.

We have upon inquiry discovered that a case of this fever existed in the city
on the 6th of June, and that several cases of it existed in July, in parts of
the city remote from the river, and wholly unconnected with each other. They
appeared to originate from the putrid exhalations of alleys and gutters, and
docks, and from the stagnating water in the neighborhood of the city. We
derive the late rapid increase of the fever from the foul air of several ships
lately arrived in the port, and from some damaged coffee which arrived in a
brig from Jamaica on the 29 July. In the course of our inquiries into the
origin of the fever, we did not meet with a single fact that could support the
opinion of contagion being imported in the bodies or clothes of sick people in
the ships or vessels which lie between Walnut and Spruce streets, where the
disease has prevailed most. Many respectable modern authorities assert that the
yellow fever is not contagious in the West Indies, and repeated observations
satisfy us that it is rarely so, during the warm weather in the United States.
None of the cases we have as yet seen have propagated it, and we conceive it to
be an error as absurd in its nature as it has been fatal in its operation upon
the city of Philadelphia, that the contagion of a disease should adhere to the
timber of a ship after a sea voyage, and should spread from the timber of the
ship without contact through an extensive neighborhood, and cease to
communicate itself afterward by long and close connection of the sick with
their families and attendants. We lament that this fact, together with many
others, upon the nature and origin of the yellow fever, which were stated in
our letter to the Governor on the 1st of December, 1797, and by him laid before
the legislature of the state, have been treated with total neglect in the
present health law: the distress we felt upon seeing that law is, however, much
alleviated by the reflection that we have not contributed, in any degree, by
supporting an erroneous opinion, to reproduce the present alarming calamity of
our city.

We beg leave to recommend for the purpose of checking the progress of the
fever, an attention to the following directions:

1st. The removal of all the families from those parts of the city where the
disease, from the contamination of the atmosphere, appears chiefly to exist,
and the preventing those parts being visited by the citizens.

2dly. The removal of all ships and putrid articles of commerce from the
wharves and stores of the city.

3dly. The cleaning of the docks, wharves, yards and cellars; also the washing
of the gutters every day, and of the streets and alleys three times a week, by
means of pumps and fire engines.

4thly. The appointment of a sufficient number of physicians to take care of
such of the poor as may be affected with the fever.

5thly. Publicly to advise the citizens to avoid all the usual exciting causes
of fever, such as intemperance, fatigue, excessive heat, the night air, all
violent and debilitating passions of the mind.

6thly. To advise them, in every case of indisposition, however slight in
appearance, to apply immediately for medical aid.

Signed by order of the Acad. of Med. of Philadelphia. PHILIP SING PHYSIC,
President. FRANCIS BOWS SAYRE, Secretary.

August 8.
ONE of the Fellows of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, asserts, that
the College is in possession of unequivocal evidence, that the Malignant Fever,
(which is essentially the same as the Yellow Fever of the West Indies) now
existing in this city, was brought into it by an infected vessel, lately
arrived from the West Indies. The writer of this note has already seen it, in
more than one instance, communicated by contagion, at a considerable distance
from that part of the city where it first made its appearance. The evidence on
which this information is founded will be detailed as soon as health and safety
shall be restored to the city. In the mean time the writer thought it would be
an act of treachery to withhold the above information at a time when attempts
are again making to confound and mislead the public mind.

August 10.

John Saunders and Mrs M'Keever, both treated with occasional bleeding and
salivated by the use of mercury externally as well as internally, are now on
the recovery.

Mr. Samuel Russel and Mr. Lloyd treated in a similar manner, but not being
able to produce salivation are both dangerously ill.

Lauderburn has been bled repeatedly and taken several mercurial purges, and is
recovering.

Mrs. Wall, an elderly lady, was attacked with fever accompanied with lethargic
symptoms. Treated with ven^section cathartics and blisters, is recovering.

10th. Elizabeth May, a mantua maker, employed at Achison Thompson's, where
some of the first cases occurred this season, was attacked with the fever to
day.

A gentleman that had been much in the chamber of Russel, was attacked with the
fever to day.

August 11th.
Only 7 persons were interred yesterday in all the grave yards of the city and
Liberties, a proof that the air of the city cannot be generally contaminated.

The New York papers of yesterday, announce the exemption of that city from the
yellow fever, and assert its remarkable healthfulness at this time.

Messrs. Loyd and Russel, both died last night, being the 6th. day from the
attack with Mr. Loyd, and the 7th. with Mr. Russel.

James Wright, treated with mercury and moderate bleeding, is on the recovery.

August 13th.

Mrs. Rain and her little daughter, have recovered from the fever, by the use
of simple laxatives and bleeding Their symptoms were neither highly
inflammatory nor accompanied with great debility and nervous affections.

Abraham Douglass, a young athletic lad, has recovered after repeated
blood-letting and the use of an amazing quantity of mercury, both externally
and internally.

Captain Hollingquist, sent from a vessel at Market Street wharf to the marine
hospital, died there.

A little girl daughter to John Aitkin, in Second near Pine Street, died to day
on the 4th of her illness, had taken no medicines but castor oil and simple
teas, appears to have caught the disease from an apprentice who had left the
house much indisposed a few days before. The apprentice recovered.


August 13th. ADDRESS OF THE BOARD OF HEALTH.
Health-Office, 13 th August, 1798.
THE Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals have observed with deep
regret the fatal consequences of delay in the applications for medical aid to
persons afflicted with the prevailing malignant fever, and that the removal of
patients to the City Hospital, in many cases, is procrastinated until they are
literally sent there to die.

They recommend, in the most earnest manner, the early removal of patients to
the City Hospital, where, the public may be assured, that every possible
comfort and accommodation will be afforded. -- The public are informed, that
the care of patients, and management of the City Hospital, is committed to
Doctor Physic and Doctor Cooper, who reside constantly there, and whose
professional eminence, it is presumed, will secure a just confidence.

An Apothecary also resides at the Hospital, with an ample store of the best
medicines.

The Board consider this recommendation as of the highest importance, and
entreat the attention of their fellow-citizens.

By order of the Board of Managers, WM. JONES, President. Attest, TIMOTHY
PAXSON, Clerk.

RICHARD ALLEN'S ADVERTISEMENT.
* WHEREAS numbers of the citizens of Philadelphia have left the city and shut
up in their houses their dogs and cats, whose howlings and cries are so
frequent and loud as to disturb the neighborhood in which they are confined.
The subscriber takes the liberty of hinting to the owners of such animals as
remain in this state of confinement and starvation, the propriety of empowering
some friend in town to liberate them as speedily as possible.

RICHARD ALLEN.

Acheson Thompson's child, when apparently in a convalescent state, was taken
to Germantown, treated there for worms, and died.

Miss M. G. Miss M. G. left town on Sunday, returned the Friday following, and
was attacked with fever immediately, and after died being the 6th day from the
time she had been exposed to the contagion from Jas. Wright.
and E. May have both recovered. They were both bled twice, took two mercurial
cathartics, and calomel in small doses, for two days, and had no return of
fever after the 5th.

Polly Wood sent to the Hospital. Died the 6th day from attack.


A boy of the name of Bennet, whom I reported as a Yellow Fever case, turns out
to be a case of the Smallpox; the pustles numerous, but distinct.

He was twice blooded, and purged with calomel and jalap before the eruption
appeared.

Miss Wharton and her mother, who were much with Mrs. Allen, in Front near
Walnut-street, during her illness, are now both ill with the fever.

Mr. Myers, in Front-street, sick today.

First case in Chancery Lane.

First case in Race above Seventh-Street.

Received information from Dr. Keimly today, that he had attended one of the
crew of the Deborah who died under his care about the 1st or 2d of August.

A young man of Mr. Dunaut's, under the care of Doctor Griffitts, is now on the
recovery.

Mr. F. Hamilton not expected to live; had been employed in Mr. Yard's stores
near Walnut-street wharf. Died a few days after.


August 14.
The College of Physicians had a special meeting today -- only 12 members
present.

Mrs. Roberts and two daughters are sick in Christian-street; they know of no
way they could have taken the disease, as they had been in no house where there
was any person sick, nor in any part of the city where the disease was
prevalent; and no person from any sick house, excepting Wm. Douglass's nurse,
had been at their house.

The Mayor of Baltimore boasts of the health of the inhabitants of that city on
the 10th instant, and recommends watering the streets.

ORDERS OF THE BALTIMORE BOARD OF HEALTH.
THE Board of Health taking into consideration the danger that may arise from
cargoes of coffee, hides, etc. being discharged within the limits of the city,
at this season of the year --

Therefore resolved, That all vessels arriving from any of the West India
islands laden with the aforesaid articles, or other produce, that may be liable
to damage or putrefaction, be prohibited by the health officer from coming up
into port; but that the cargo thereof be discharged into another vessel, while
it remains in the river, and the necessary care extended to purify the same,
before it be admitted into the city.

Also resolved, That it be recommended to customhouse officers not to enter any
vessel at the customhouse without a certificate being first produced from the
health-officer, expressive of his approbation of the same, until the Board may
advise to the contrary.

Commis. of Health. William Winchester, Joseph Townsend, Michael Diffenderffer,
John E. Reese, William C. Goldsmith, John Dalrymple, Levin Hall, James B^ays,
Benjamin Thomas,


Baltimore, August 10th, 1798.
The City Hospital is situated on a low flat piece of ground, on the east side
of Schuylkill, with a tract of marshy ground in front.

Of 22 patients admitted into this Hospital, during the first three days, 14
died in the course of a week, and only two have yet been discharged. Doctors
Physic and Cooper, the resident physicians, astonished at this unparalleled
mortality, addressed the following letter to Dr. Rush:

From the American Daily Advertiser.
CITY HOSPITAL, August 12th, 1798. Dear Doctor,
OUR want of success in treating the prevailing disease, makes us anxious to
hear from you, in hopes that you may have added some new and useful remedy to
those heretofore in use. It is true all our patients have been sick at least
two, and some of them nine days previously to their admission. Is there any
mode of relieving these unfortunate people which you can suppose we are
unacquainted with? We recollect your observing that an emetic had been useful
after the disease appeared to be mitigated by bleeding. If you can spare a few
minutes to us on these subjects, you will much oblige your sincere friends, etc.

PHILIP SING PHYSIC. SAMUEL COOPER.


Dr. Benjamin Rush.

THE ANSWER.
My Dear and Worthy Friends,
I AM sorry to discover by your letter, your want of success in the treatment
of our malignant fever at the City Hospital. I do not wonder at it. You seldom
see the disease in its first stage, and when you do, you meet it in an
aggravated state by the motion your patients undergo in being conveyed to the
Hospital.

In answer to your request, I have sat down to inform you of the practice which
I have adopted in our present epidemic. In the treatment of the yellow fever of
last year, I have occasionally lamented the loss of patients after reducing the
pulse by bleeding, and by the liberal use of purging medicines. I have
suspected that death occurred in those cases, from the stagnation of acrid bile
in the gall bladder, or its close adherence to the upper bowels in the manner
described by Doctor Mitchell in his account of the yellow fever in Virginia, in
the year 1741. The slow pulse which occurs about the 4th day, I suspect further
to be the effect of this bile. Its effects in a much more morbid state in the
Jaundice, in reducing the pulse, is well known. Mr. John Hunter says he once
met with an instance in which it fell to 32 strokes in a minute in that
disease. Revolving these facts in my mind, I resolved to try to remove this
bile by exciting an artificial cholera morbus, about the 4th day of the fever.
I was the more disposed to attempt this method of cure, from believing, as I
have done for several years, that a cholera morbus is nothing but the first
grade of bilious fever thrown in upon the bowels, just as the Dysentery and
Diarrhoea are the internal forms of a common bilious or intermitting fever.

I began this mode of treating the fever eight days ago. My solicitude for the
issue of it was very great. Thank God it has succeeded to my wishes, and
thereby lessened in a great degree, the anxiety and distress which accompany
our attendance upon this ferocious disease. The medicines I use for shaking the
gallbladder and bowels and discharging the contents are, tartar emetic,
gamboge, jalap and calomel, combined, or given separately, and in small or
large doses, according to circumstances. Perhaps Turpeth Mineral might be added
to this list of vomiting and purging medicines with advantage. In one case I
gave four grains of tartar emetic, and twenty of calomel. It operated freely
upwards and downwards, and brought away a large quantity of green and black
bile, but without exciting the least cramp or pain in the stomach or bowels. At
the time I gave it, death appeared to be creeping upon my patient. The next day
he was out of danger. The person thus rescued from the grave, was a son of Mr.
Richard Renshaw. Indeed I have not, as yet, lost a single patient to whom I
have given this powerful remedy. In one instance I fear it will fail. It is in
a boy of 16 years of age, to whom I have given near thirty grains of tartar
emetic in the course of a few hours without producing the least evacuation from
his stomach or bowels. I have observed the same increase of strength after its
operation, that we observe after bleeding and purging in the beginning of the
fever.

Vomits are old remedies in the yellow fever of the West Indies. I gave them on
the first day of the disease in the year 1793, and always without success. They
uniformly did harm when given in the beginning of the fever in its worst grade,
in 1797. The reason of this failure in their efficacy, I now perceive was
because they were given before the violent morbid action in the system, was
reduced or moderated by bleeding and purging. After this change is induced in
the disease, they are perfectly safe. The time for exhibiting them should be
regulated by the pulse, and other symptoms. In moderate cases of the fever,
they are as proper in its first stage, as on the 4th day. As there is a
blistering point in all fevers, so there appears to be an emetic point in the
yellow fever It may occur on the second, and it may be protracted to the sixth
or seventh day of the disease. I have not given the medicines I have mentioned
in any case where the patient complained of pain or burning in the stomach, but
I have considered a nausea, and a moderate degree of puking as no obstacle to
it is use, for Dr. Physic has taught me by his dissections, that these symptoms
may exist without the least inflammation in the stomach, and that they have
been absent where the stomach has appeared after death to have been highly
inflamed.

The cure of the fever should not rest upon a single dose of the medicine. I
have given two doses of it in a day in several cases, and have given it in one
case every day for three successive days.

It has often been remarked, that no two epidemics are exactly alike. They vary
not only in different climates, but in the same climate in different years.
They even vary with the changes of the weather in the same season. The fever of
1797 differed in several particulars from the fever of 1793, and the present
epidemic differs materially from both. In many of the cases I have seen, it
exceeds the fever of last year in its malignity. These variations in diseases
call for corresponding changes in our practice.

I have communicated an account of the time and manner of discharging the
contents of the gallbladder and bowels to several of our brethren. I ardently
hope it may be universally successful in their hands.

If any thing new occurs in your practice in the Hospital, do me the favor of
informing me of it.

With best wishes for your health and success in your present arduous
situation, I am your sincere friend,

BENJAMIN RUSH.
August 13th, 1798.
Doctors Physic and Cooper.

August 15th.
John Jervis is appointed by the Board of Health to call on the physicians
every morning, for a return, in writing, of new cases for the last 24 hours.

Three fourths of the inhabitants residing below Chestnut and South streets, and
between Water and Fourth streets, have already deserted the city; and numbers
are moving out of Southwark, the Northern Liberties, and from the little
village of Kensington, which is entirely detached from the city and suburbs.

Mr. Franks Hamilton, a young gentleman employed in Mr. Yards stores, in the
neighborhood of which he died last night.

A young woman called Nancy Robinson, who was in the City Hospital with the
fever last year, is now ill with it again, and ordered to the Hospital by Dr.
Samuel Duffield, who gave me this information this morning.

August 16th.
Was attacked very severely myself with cholera last night, which has left me
extremely debilitated.

August 17th.
Sixty-five patients have now been admitted into the City Hospital, under the
care of Doctors Physic and Cooper.

The disease is making progress in different directions.

Captain Valence died in Shippen-street on the 14th.

August 18th.
The Board of Health have appointed Doctor Francis Sayer and Dr. Jn. Church to
attend the poor sick in the Northern and Southern Liberties; and Doctor Samuel
Duffield consulting physician of the port, to attend the poor sick in the city;
and press them to make early application.

August 19th.
Only two adults and two infants have died in the Almshouse from the 12th to
the 18th instant.

The woman that nursed Abm. Douglass was salivated by rubbing him with
mercurial ointment, and was attacked with the fever while in the salivation. A
similar circumstance happened to Dr. W. Boys last year, while his system was
charged with mercury, on account of a liver complaint, and he had the disease
very severely.

August 20th.
The Select and Common Councils authorize the Mayor to borrow 10,000 dollars,
in anticipation of the taxes of the present year, to be applied to the purposes
of watching and watering the city, and such other objects as the Mayor shall
deem necessary for the general protection of the city during the present
calamity.

The Mayor of Baltimore issues a proclamation, prohibiting all intercourse with
Philadelphia, which is as follows:

STATE OF MARYLAND, City of Baltimore, ss. BY JAMES CALHOUN, Mayor of the City
of Baltimore. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS I have received satisfactory information, that a malignant and mortal
fever now rages in the city of Philadelphia; and there is great reason to
apprehend the said disease may be communicated to this place from the number of
passengers and quantity of baggage and other goods daily brought here from the
said city, especially by the water communication, unless the intercourse be in
some degree restrained:

I HAVE THEREFORE, with the concurrence of the Commissioners of Health, deemed
it incumbent to issue this proclamation, hereby forbidding the entrance into
the city of Baltimore, or within three miles thereof, of all persons
whomsoever, as well as all baggage or other goods, which have come from the
city of Philadelphia, until they shall at least have been fifteen days absent
therefrom: excepting only from this restriction, all such persons or goods as
may have come from the said city of Philadelphia, by land, and shall stop at
Merry's tavern, on the Philadelphia road, and be there examined by doctor
Joseph Way, and obtain his passport of admittance. This proclamation to remain
in force until public information is given to the contrary, of which all
persons concerned are desired to take notice, and govern themselves accordingly.

GIVEN under my hand and the corporate seal of the city of Baltimore, this 18th
day of August, 1798.

JAMES CALHOUN, Mayor of the City of Baltimore.

Letters received yesterday from New York, state that the yellow fever has
appeared in several families in that city, and had occasioned a number of
deaths.

Copy of a letter to the Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, dated
August 20th, 1798.
FOR THE BOARD OF HEALTH.
SINCE my last report, which was on the 15th instant, I have been engaged in
attending three persons, with the malignant fever, out of town, the infection
of which they appear to have received previous to their leaving it. Since my
return to town, I find the woman who nursed Mr. Douglass's son has been
affected with the same disease, though she was salivated from rubbing him with
mercurial ointment, and must have received it from him by contagion, as she had
never been out of the house for six days previous to the attack.

I also know two persons that have taken the disease this year who had it last
year. A young man at the corner of Second and Lombard streets, who lived in the
family of Mr. Cockburn, at the corner of Spruce and Front streets, (who with
his wife and a boy lately died in the same house of the existing fever) and his
brother is now in the disease. There are at this time 10 or 12 persons with it
in the Alleys near Mr. Hunter's, the druggist, in Second-street. Dr. Paschalis
has had five applications since last evening; one, a French jeweller in Second
near Chestnut street, Mr. Valence and sister in Spruce-street, etc. Dr. Church
is attending two fresh cases in the family of Mrs. Roberts, in
Christian-street. You need not be reminded of the cases in Race and Vine
streets, and in Kensington. In short, the disease is rapidly and sensibly
spreading into every part of the city, and can no longer be suppressed till
frost arrives to disarm it of its power. If this be the case, (and that it is,
past events demonstrate) would it not be advisable (I mean not to dictate but
merely to enquire, from motives of pure and, in the present instance,
disinterested humanity) to apprize the citizens which still remain in town, of
their danger, and to furnish them with instructions how to escape its
destructive ravages?

Advice from you, in your collective capacity, would have the virtue of a law,
and would be promptly obeyed. From an individual it would appear presumptious
or at least officious, and instead of having the effect intended, would only
serve to rouse the demon of envy, or provoke the venom of slander. I submit the
matter to your better judgment, and am, with sincere respect, yours, etc.


August 21st.
Mr. T. F. a very promising youth, died some distance from the city today.

August 22d.
Only 12 persons died of the fever at Boston from the 3d to the 16th inst. and
there were only 17 sick at that time. Only 28 have died since the 1st of July
to the 16th.

From the Philadelphia Gazette, of this date.
The present alarming situation of our city, is alas, truly deplorable --
almost in a general state of infection with the disease, to whose virulence,
medicinal skill is lamentably compelled, to acknowledge its inferiority! Former
experience is rendered in a great measure useless by the very material
difference in the nature of the disease -- The most copious bleeding, and the
most violent purgatives have been found ineffectual; and the success that will
attend the new system of emptying the gallbladder, is at least problematical.
With regard to the opinion of the non-contagion of the disorder, I have very
great reason to doubt it. I have known, lately, several instances that could
not be accounted for upon any other principle than that of contagion. The most
striking of the cases I allude to, is, where several of a family, living in a
healthy and uninfected part of the city, took the disorder from a person in the
family, whom they had for several days closely attended; without having
themselves been in any part of the city that could even have been supposed to
be infected. I would caution my fellow-citizens not to trust too implicitly to
this fatal opinion, which has been so industriously propagated. A confidence in
it, in case it should happen to be erroneous, may prove the destruction of
thousands, while by acting under a disbelief of it, and using every possible
precaution, as many lives may be preserved. It is at least doubtful whether it
is or is not contagious, and there being a doubt, I think the wisest course to
be pursued is obvious. I would advise my friends to avoid, as much as possible,
exposing themselves to the night air or morning fogs, nothing tending more
effectually to predispose the body to infection.

Temperate living both in eating and drinking is of as much consequence. Any
thing that enriches the blood -- any thing that has the smallest tendency to
inflammation is most carefully to be avoided. I speak this, my fellow-citizens,
with confidence. Both in '93 and '97 I knew many instances, where people
situated in the very bed of infection, by living with extraordinary temperance,
escaped. The idea entertained by many persons, that generous living, or in
other words, high seasoned food, and a glass of good Madeira, from the best and
most effectual bulwark, is too preposterous and absurd to merit much comment.
Constant experience and the plainest principles of common sense flatly
contradict it. Simple and at the same time, nourishing food, consisting chiefly
of vegetables and ripe fruits, avoiding meats as much as possible, and never
using any but in their simplest state, I would strongly recommend. Violent
exercise, by heating the blood, seldom fails to be succeeded by a violent
attack of the disorder, and is therefore to be guarded against. I shall
conclude my observations, by remarking that cooling drinks prepared with cream
of tartar, tamarinds, lemons, current jelly, or any kinds of acid fruits, are
highly proper both as preventatives and remedies; and that nothing has a better
or more powerful effect in preventing putrid appearances than a constant and
unremitting use of acids.

From the Gazette of the United States.
Mr. FENNO,
IT is an observation founded in truth, that few if any people in the world,
have gone further in works of philanthrophy than the citizens of Philadelphia.
Let him who discredits it, take an impartial survey of the various institutions
erected in this city, for the relief of suffering humanity, many of which are
supported by the voluntary contributions of benevolent individuals, and his
doubts shall vanish -- Yet some further regulations appear to be indispensable
-- there are persons for whom, either the laws have made no provision, or to
whose pitiable condition the hand of mercy, under the laws, has not been
extended.

It is but recently that a poor wretch was suffered to lie and perish in one of
the streets in the Northern Liberties, without the least kind of assistance
having been afforded him: whether the police officers are justly censurable for
a neglect of duty, or otherwise, is not my business to enquire; the fact is,
however, certain. Had his case been duly attended to, this hapless son of
misery might, perhaps, have been rescued from an untimely grave.

In the Pennsylvania Hospital, a person cannot be admitted, but under certain
qualifications; but this institution is liberal in its principles, and in its
practice. It is a point of prudence, and perhaps of necessity, not to receive
into the almshouse, any person having a contagious disorder, it is not
knowingly done -- and, unless the object be afflicted with the prevailing
malady, or suspected to be so, he cannot procure an entrance into the City
Hospital.

A few days since a circumstance occurred which was truly distressing -- A
German, a stranger in the place, applied to be admitted into the Pennsylvania
(...) his case did not come strictly within their cognizance, and he was
refused. He then solicited an entrance into the almshouse, but having the
dysentery, and not being entitled to a place of residence here, he was
unsuccessful. His next application was to captain Allen, health-officer of the
port, but the captain conceiving himself unauthorized to send him to the City
Hospital, the poor wretch was turned away without any hope of relief. What
became of him I know not, but the deep distress, anxiety, and despondency
depicted in his countenance produced a correspondent sentiment of sympathy in
the minds of the bystanders, all of whom seemed to regret his unhappy
condition, though none knew in what manner to grant him the aid he required.

Let us but recall the case of this unfortunate man home to our own bosoms --
diseased, friendless and disconsolate -- situate in a strange country, where he
knew not the countenance of a single human being; incapable of providing for
himself, and unable from illness to leave the city; willing to take refuge even
in an infected hospital, and I am sure there is no man who is not absolutely
callous to the voice of misery, and dead to every thing which bears the stamp
of humanity, who will not approve of some plan being fallen on for the
comfortable accommodation of such of his suffering fellow-men -- A plan for
this laudable purpose is not only very feasible, but of very easy
practicability. I would advise then, that a temporary building be immediately
erected near the City Hospital, into which all diseased persons, willing to go,
should be freely and without ceremony admitted. If, on experiment, they are
found to have the prevailing malady, they should be placed in the hospital; if
otherwise, they should be provided for as circumstances would render humane and
proper. But, as a more permanent and effectual establishment, there should be
attached to the institution of the almshouse, not directly joining it, an
infirmary, into which all persons designed to be accommodated in the
institution, should at first be sent there to undergo an examination of
judicious physicians, and afterward either to be provided for in the
infirmary, or to be otherwise disposed of, as their several cases might
require. Surely there can be no reasonable objection to a plan of this kind --
the expense would be trifling, compared with the magnitude of the object, and
the good which might result from it, would be incalculable. The man who will
set about accomplishing this object, must succeed -- and will doubtless have,
not only the inestimable enjoyment of an approving mind, but the blessing of
many a woe-worn object of wretchedness.

If public institutions will not shelter under their roofs, diseased and
penny-less wretches, can it, or ought it to be expected, that private persons
will? And especially at a time, when the horror attached to the idea of
introducing the yellow fever into their families, produces, in the minds of
most, a species of morbid panic, which paralizes every sentiment of hospitality
toward suspected individuals.

I am not so tenacious of my plan but that I will most cordially support a
better, if one more eligible is proposed by a more happy genius: but this is no
time for temporising, or halting between two opinions; something must be
promptly done; and I now call on my fellow-citizens, in the name of every thing
dear to humanity, not to hesitate, or trifle on the occasion. To the guardians
of the poor, and the managers of the marine and city hospitals, I make the
appeal, and trust it will not be in vain -- They have the power and the means
of accomplishing the object; they are men; they must be possessed of a
fellow-feeling for the unfortunate, and must be convinced of the urgency of the
occasion. To provide for those who cannot provide for themselves, is an
indispensible duty. Let us do all we can, and leave the issue to that all-wise,
and all-controuling Providence, who will bless every honest labor, and who
regards with equal care, the whole family of mankind.

PHILADELPHUS.

Only 2 adults and 2 infants have died in the almshouse from the 12th to the
18th inst. (Signed) JOHN CUMMINGS, Steward.

Twenty persons sick in Boston on the 20th instant. (Phila. Gaz.)

August 25th.
Mr. Douglass's nurse has recovered.

At the very time that disease and death were making rapid strides in New York,
the following boast of its health appeared in the public papers of that city:

New York, August 24 th.
It appears from the declarations of physicians and best informed citizens,
that New York, except as to a few solitary instances, which occur every summer,
is as healthy as it has been known to be for several years past.

We are very far from wishing to boast of our happiness, or make invidious
comparisons with other places, but we can have no objection to see truth
prevail over falsehood, whether it operates favorably or not, to our interest.
Were an epidemic to exist here, and extend itself, it would be equally wrong,
useless and unadvisable to attempt to conceal the fact. -- How long the general
health may continue is not for us to predict -- but we hope that the present
favorable state of the air and the efforts made by our citizens to keep the
city as clean as possible, will continue to be attended with salutary effects.

August 28th.
Tents were erected yesterday near Schuylkill, for the reception of the
indigent and necessitous citizens that choose to leave it -- and are
superintended by a committee from the board of health and guardians of the poor.

Visiting commit, are Peter Mierken -- Isaac Price, James Olden and John
Keihr.

August 29th.
FEVER AT PORTSMOUTH. (N. H.)
In consequence of the prevalence of a fever in that town, a health committee
has been appointed. The following is extracted from their first official report:

"That from the first appearance of the fever, which was about the 20th July,
to 20th August, inclusive, 11 persons have died of that disorder, and no one
since Monday last.

Monday, 1 o'clock P. M. -- No person seized since yesterday; 8 persons only
sick of the fever, 3 of whom are convalescents, and with two others the
symptoms more favorable than yesterday. The town, in other respects, in as
healthy a state as usual."

On the 24th inst. the returns of sick in Boston were 23 -- and 9
convalescents. On the 20th there were only 20 sick in that place.

Mr. Davis, who retired to Norriston to escape the fever, died on the 24th,
being the sixth day from the attack. Had been repeatedly bled and purged with
mercury by Dr. H. for the first three days -- and on the 4th took an emetic
that operated very severely and occasioned great debility, and disposition to
swooning -- Distress of stomach increased in the night, and continued with
unabated violence till the close of life.

Official accounts from Boston state, that the fever there is on the decline.

A writer in the New York Commercial Advertiser advises the inhabitants not to
let another year pass away without the introduction of streams of water into
that city, and adds -- "Your fellow-citizens are now flying into the country,
and perhaps the scenes of 1795 are to be acted over again."

Received information today from Mr. Tarrill, that captain Chase, who lodged
with him at Meldrum's Inn, at the sign of the Ostrich, in the Northern
Liberties, went on board a vessel from Portland, about the 10th or 12th inst.
which lay at Shoemaker's wharf near Vine-street, to see captain Wait, whose
mate was at the time very ill on board, and that captain Chase was taken ill a
few days after his visit, and died.

August 31st.
Baltimore exults in her exemption from the malignant fever this year: "
Baltimore, August 29. The seasonable and copious fall of rain upon and in the
neighborhood of our city, has replenished the atmosphere with oxygene, and
rendered the respirable air elastic and salubrious. We have as yet continued
free from the most distant symptoms of a contagious fever; and should the
weather remain in its present state ten days more, we need not be under the
least apprehension of an epidemic this year. -- How partial is our overruling
Providence, and how grateful ought and should we be for his favors! -- Hapless
Philadelphia -- once the Athens and pride of this Western World; but now, alas!
a scene of misery, a groaning hospital, a deserted, almost solitary monument of
silent grandeur!"

The whole number with fever in Boston on the 31st was 32 -- and only two have
died since the 27th.

Private letters from New York, state that "the west part of that city is as
free from sickness as it was ever known to be at this season of the year. It is
very true that the fever does exist in other parts of the city, but by no means
to that alarming degree which flying reports represent."

A TABLE, Of the Weather in September.
DAY THERMOMETER. WIND. WEATHER. At 8 A. M. At 2 P. M. A.M. P.M. 1 Fair, light
breeze. 2 NE Heavy dew, flying clouds, strong breeze, unpleasantly cold in the
evening, sprinkling rain; heavy rain in the night with high wind and loud and
almost constant thunder and lightning. 3 Overcast, strong breeze, ponds nearly
filled with water. 4 SW W Flying clouds, sultry till noon, cool pleasant P.M.
fair. 5 W Cool, pleasant, fair. 6 W Cool, pleasant, fair. 7 62 68 SW Overcast.
8 62 W Overcast, moist air, fair P. M. cool evening, heavy dew. 9 60 70 W
Hazey, fair P. M. fresh breeze. 10 62 66 W Calm, fair. 11 62 68 Fair, light
breeze. 12 62 72 E Fair, strong breeze. 13 60 70 W SW Fair, fresh breeze. 14 60
70 W Thick fog early A. M. calm. 15 64 80 SW Thick fog, fair, light breeze. 16
66 84 SW S Fog, till 10 A. M. fair P. M. 17 72 84 SW Sultry, fair. 18 76 80 SE
Cloudy, sultry, heavy rain, with thunder about 5 P. M. and several heavy
showers in the course of the night, without thunder. 19 Heavy shower at
daylight, roads deep with mud, all the dirt and filth washed out of the streets
of the city by the rain that fell in torrents last night. 20 68 82 SE Thick fog
and heavy dew, sultry, oppressive, flying clouds. 21 72 74 WSWW Heavy shower
for two hours, P. M. breeze in the evening. 22 62 68 NW Fair, fresh breeze. 23
58 62 N NW Fair, fresh breeze. 24 62 70 NW Fair, strong breeze. 25 50 62 NW
Wind high and stormy, fair, 26 50 61 N W Strong wind, fair, calm evening. 27 52
64 W SW Fair A. M. cloudy and rain P. M. very heavy rain in the night. 28 48 54
N W High and tempestuous all day, flying clouds. 29 40 44 N W Strong and
piercing winds, fair. 30 44 60 N W A light white frost for the first time this
season.

Marine Hospital Returns from 1st of August to 1st of September.

Patients in the Hospital on 1st August, 9.

Admitted since to 1st September, 16.

Died, 8.

Discharged, 8.

Remaining, 9.

DAILY RETURNS Of the sick, and of the deaths in the City Hospital, and in the
City and Liberties, for the month of September.
HOSPITAL REPORTS. Admit. Cured. Deaths. Rem. in H. Conval. Eloped. TOTAL
DEATHS. From 31st of August to the 1st of September. 18 2 12 81 20 0 Total
deaths in Hospital, City, etc. 48. including 5 children. 107 new cases by 20
Physicians. 1st. to 2d. 22 1 7 91 31 0 41 2d. to 3d. 8 5 9 84 25 0 28 130 new
cases for last 48 hours by 19 Physicians. 3d. to 4th. 18 2 8 91 25 0 65
including 11 children. 87 new cases by 17 Physicians. 4th. to 5th. 17 0 10 98
25 0 67 including 6 children. 100 new cases by 19 Physicians. 5th. to 6th. 25 2
4 116 50 0 5^-3 children. 93 new cases by 19 Physicians. 6th. to 7th. 17 3 13
117 25 0 52 including 2 children. 127 new cases reported for the last 24 hours
by 18 Physicians. 7th. to 8th. 14 2 ^ 122 25 0 63 including 3 children. 110 new
cases by 19 Physicians. 8th. to 9th. 16 13 7 120 43 0 73 inc. 12 chapter 9th. to
10th. 11 2 13 115 41 0 74 including 22 children. 10th. to 11th. 14 5 8 117 35 0
73 including 12 children. 91 new cases by 17 Physicians. 11th. to 12th. 15 0 9
122 35 0 71 including 6 children. 105 New cases by 18 Physicians. 12th. to
13th. 16 3 9 125 35 0 57 including 7 children. 85 new cases reported by 20
Physicians. From 13th. to 14th. 10 3 8 112 35 0 62 including 7 children. 92 new
cases reported by 20 physicians. 15th. to 16th. 18 4 7 117 35 0 62 including 5
children. 97 new cases reported by 20 physicians. 15th. to 17th. 27 7 14 121 35
0 128 for last 48 hours. 198 new cases reported by 20 physicians for last 48
hours. 17th. to 18th. 17 0 ^ 131 35 1 57 including 9 children. 105 new cases
reported by 19 physicians. 18th. to 19th. 32 1 9 157 35 2 58 including 8
children. 84 new cases reported by 19 physicians. 19th. to 20th. 20 6 9 154 65
2 69 including 10 children. 72 new cases reported by 20 physicians. 20th. to
21st. 16 0 13 158 65 0 78 including 1^ children. 126 new cases reported by 18
physicians. From 21st. to 22d. 15 1 7 164 65 1 68 including 8 children. 86 new
cases by 18 Ph. 22d. to 23d. 15 26 10 0 0 0 71 23d. to 24th. 18 0 15 145 39 0
63 194 new cases for 48 h. by 18 Physicians. 24th. to 25th. 24 12 8 149 27 0 80
including 6 children. 85 new cases by 14 Ph, 25th. to 26th. 14 6 16 140 21 1 77
including 3 children. 95 new cases by 14 Ph. 26th. to 27th. 13 0 7 146 70 82
including 9 children. 95 new cases by 13 Ph. 27th. to 28th. 13 01 136 57 0 106
including 18 children. 54 new cases by 1 28th. to 29th. 9 4 8 133 53 0 75 67
new cases by ^3 Ph. 29th. to 30th. 10 0 11 0 0 0 85 including 7 children. ^0th.
to 1st. October. 11 22 15 106 31 0 85 110 new cases 13 Ph. Total 474 145 290
106 2 1846

Occurrences in September, etc.
September 1st.
Dr. Cooper, one of the resident physicians of the City Hospital, and Dr.
Sayre, appointed to attend the poor of the Northern Liberties, are both very
ill today, though pronounced in the public papers of yesterday to be on the
recovery.

Dr. Cooper appears to have received the disease by contagion, in the Hospital,
as he had not been in any other part of the city for more than three weeks
before his attack.

The following pathetic address was published in the Philadelphia Gazette of
today, by the Managers the Marine and City Hospitals:

Health-Office, September 1, 1798. FELLOW-CITIZENS,
IMPELLED by the awful progress and unparalleled malignity of the prevailing
fever, we are constrained to address your feelings, as well as your reason, in
order to avert the fatal destruction which, with rapid strides, is pervading
our ill-fated city and suburbs.

The best skill of our physicians, and all the powers of medicine, it must be
acknowledged, have proved unequal in the contest with this devouring poison.

With the most affecting sympathy and anxious solicitude, we have to the best
of our judgments, endeavored to employ, as circumstances appeared to require,
the power and the means entrusted to us, in arresting its progress, and
alleviating its concommitant miseries. We shall continue to employ them with
unremitting zeal; but we have neither the power nor the means to accomplish ALL
THE MEASURES necessary to check its extension, or provide for the pressing
exigencies of the moment. The powers delegated, and appropriations made by law,
to the institutions under our direction, are impotent indeed, when compared to
the magnitude of the occasion.

It remains for our fellow-citizens to attain, by their energy, the ends which
alone can stop its progress and diminish its horrors.

We have, in conjunction with the Guardians of the Poor, caused tents to be
erected on the east bank of the Schuylkill for the accommodation of the
indigent; where near twelve hundred are already provided for, out of the fund
appropriated for the ordinary relief of the poor. This is but a partial
mitigation of the evils which environ thousands who have a claim upon the
philanthropy of those who are in more fortunate circumstances.

The difficulty of procuring a place of refuge, at present, in the country, is
too well known; and the expense attending the removal of a family has
discouraged many from the attempt, who are in circustances to live comfortably
at home.

What remains to be done? Citizens of respectability and influence! come
forward and form yourselves into a committee for the purpose of erecting on the
west bank of the Schuylkill, all the tents that can be collected; let the tents
be floored with boards, and made as comfortable as possible -- If tents cannot
be had, boards in abundance may be procured for the erection of sheds. Admonish
those citizens who have no place of refuge, to take shelter there, particularly
those from the east part of the city, the district of Southwark, and the
Northern Liberties -- in short, ALL who can leave their homes without manifest
injury; except those who are necessary for the protection of the city and
liberties.

The committee should have the general superintendance and regulation of the
tents, and authority to preserve order; contract for certain supplies of bread,
meat, vegetables, wood, etc. at the lowest possible rates. Those who are not in
circumstances to pay, must be supplied by the public bounty.

It is at least an unequal, perhaps an unjust mode of raising money by an
appeal to the humanity of generous individuals; but if on any occasion it may
be justified, the present may be assumed without hesitation.

We call your attention to the actual and undisguised state of our city.
Consider the mortality and rapid increase of the sick at so early a period.
View the list of your physicians, and mark how few are at their posts -- and we
believe you will think with us, that the preservation of health is only to be
attained by flight.

Do not flatter yourselves, fellow-citizens, that this picture is too highly
colored; we speak from conviction, and a knowledge of facts; and doubt not but
that the lives of hundreds, perhaps of thousands, may be preserved by the
adoption of these or similar measures.

By order of the Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals. WILLIAM
JONES, President. Attest, WILLIAM PENROSE, Clerk, p. t.


September 2d.
The Bank of Pennsylvania was opened and robbed to a considerable amount last
night, by some unknown villains, who have made their escape.

Dr. Sayre died this morning, after having been pronounced out of danger --
deceived by the delusive truce which so frequently occurs in this relentless
malady.

The accounts now from almost every quarter of the city, east of
Seventh-street, furnish the most gloomy pictures of disease and death.

Mr. James Conchy's son, a lad of about twelve years old died a few days ago,
in a state of febrile phrenzy (...) one of his daughters was drowned at Almond
street wharf the same day.

September 3d.
It is stated in the Philadelphia Gazette of this day, that upwards of 40,000
people have fled from the city, and taken refuge in the country, from the
ravages of the fever.

Extract of a letter from Wilmington,(Delaware) dated 29th ultimo.
"The fever is now beginning to spread among us; there have been several late
deaths of our inhabitants by it." ( Phila. Gaz. of Sept. 3.)


All accounts agree, that the fever is making rapid progress in New York.

Two men from Philadelphia died yesterday, at Reading, of the fever.

Dr. Monro, in a letter to Mr. M'Lean, dated 3d September, after informing him
of the death of his brother-in-law, Joseph Miller, esquire. mentions, that the
yellow fever had made such progress there, that several of the inhabitants were
moving out.

September 4th.
Mr. Burns was the first person that had the yellow fever in Wilmington, and
he caught it in the city early in August.

The following medical advice, addressed to the citizens of Philadelphia, by
Doctors Rush and Griffitts, was published in the Philadelphia Gazette of the
4th instant:

MEDICAL ADVICE TO THE CITIZENS OF PHILADELPHIA.
The following directions for the prevention and treatment of the prevailing
fever, are affectionately recommended to those citizens of Philadelphia, who
are unable to procure the regular attendance and advice of physicians, by
BENJAMIN RUSH, SAMUEL P. GRIFFITTS. September 3d, 1798.

THE seeds of the disease may exist in the body, for a considerable time,
without doing any harm. It is generally EXCITED by one or more of the following
causes, which of course ought to be carefully avoided, viz: fatigue, a long
walk, standing in the sun, or in a current of air, intemperance in eating and
drinking, costiveness, violent passions, or sudden emotions of the mind, thin
dressed, light bed clothes, and above all, the night air.

It is of consequence for our citizens to know that we have but one fever in
our city at present, and that every febrile indisposition partakes of the
prevailing malignant epidemic. Hundreds have died from mistaking the first
stage of the fever for a common cold. The mistake is a natural one, for it
comes on like a cold, and is frequently excited by cool, or cold air. This
remark is intended to produce applications for medical aid as soon as possible
after feeling the least symptom of indisposition at the present juncture.

In the forming state of the fever when the patient feels slightly indisposed,
and before he is confined to his bed, the following remedies generally check
the disease.

A purge of salts, castor oil, or a dose of jalap and calomel. If these fail of
giving relief, a gentle sweat should be excited in the usual way. If there be
much pain in the head or back, and the pulse be full, or tense, ten or twelve
ounces of blood should be lost, before the use of the sweat, and either before
or after taking the purge. Entire rest from business and exercise of all kinds
will be necessary to give efficacy to the above remedies.

If the existence of the disease were more early, and more generally admitted,
and the remedies which have been recommended, used before the fever was
completely formed, there are the strongest reasons to believe there would be
much less mortality from it.

After the disease is formed, and appears with more or less of the following
symptoms, viz. chills, great heat, headache, a redness in the eyes, sickness
at the stomach, vomiting, pains in the back, limbs and bowels, etc. the
following remedies are proper:

1. The loss of ten or twelve ounces of blood two or three times a day while
the pulse continues to be FULL, or TENSE. -- If the pulse should be SLOWER, and
APPARENTLY WEAKER than natural, it calls for bleeding as much as it does when
it discovers preternatural fullness and tension.

2. The bowels should be purged at the same time with calomel mixed with jalap
or rhubarb in powders or in pills. -- The operation of this purging medicine
should be aided, when practicable, by clysters composed of half an ounce of
glauber salts dissolved in half a pint of warm water with sweet oil, molasses,
and common salt of each a table spoonful, in it.

The bowels should be kept gently open through the whole course of the disease,
by means of the above clysters, and any other gently purging medicine.

3. If the stomach should be sick and oppressed with bile, a vomit of
ipecacuhana, or tartar emetic may be given at any time on the 3d or 4th day of
the disease, provided the pulse has been reduced by previous bleeding and
purging. From five to ten drops of laudanum may be given to compose the stomach
if the vomit should operate more than three or four times.

4. Calomel should be given from the beginning, in doses of from two to five
grains, every two hours, in order to excite a salivation. If the calomel should
purge more than two or three times a day, four or five drops of laudanum may be
given two or three times a day, in order to confine the calomel to the bowels,
and thereby to determine it to the mouth and throat. We have seen no death
where this medicine has produced a salivation.

5. After the pulse is reduced by bleeding and purging if the disease has not
yielded, a profuse sweat should be excited by wrapping the patient up in
blankets, with five or six hot bricks wetted with vinegar applied to different
parts of his body, and giving him at the same time large and repeated draughts
during twenty four hours of HOT camomile or sage tea, HOT lemonade or weak
punch, or any other HOT liquor that is agreeable to him, to drink. This sweat
should be continued for twenty-four hours, 'till the patient is out of danger.

6. Blisters should be applied to the wrists and ankles, in common cases, about
the third or fourth day of the fever, if the pulse be reduced, or the sickness
at stomach is troublesome. If the head be much affected, a blister should be
applied to the neck or to the crown of the head, first cutting off the hair and
shaving it, and if the stomach should be much affected after the third or
fourth day a large blister should be applied to it.

7. In case of delirium with a languid pulse, poultices of raw garlic with a
little mustard should be applied to the feet.

8. Fresh air should be admitted into sick rooms at all times, and cool air in
the beginning of the fever when the skin is hot, and the pulse full and tense.
In this state of the fever, the hands, feet and face should be washed ten or
twelve times a day with cold water. In a cool state of the skin, or when the
body is covered with sweat, cool air and cold water are improper.

9. The body and bed linen of the sick should be frequently changed, and all
offensive matters discharged from them, should be instantly removed.

In cases of great weakness, the patient should not be permitted to rise from
his bed when under the operation of purging physic nor upon any other occasion.

10. The drinks of sick people in the beginning of the fever, should be toast
and water, tamarind water, lemonade, current jelly dissolved in water, apple
water or barley water. In the latter stage of the fever, the drink may be
porter and water, claret and water, milk and water, or comomile tea.

Weak tea and coffee may be taken in the beginning of the fever. In its second
stage the patient may eat bread and milk with roasted apples or soft peaches,
chocolate, sago, tapioca, ripe fruits, weak chicken or veal broth, and a little
boiled chicken.

It will be improper to depend exclusively upon any one of the above remedies.
The combined force of them all is barely sufficient in many cases to overcome
this formidable disease.

P. S. All the above medicines with suitable directions may be had of George
Hunter, No. 114, South Second-street; John J. Malcolm, No.78, South
Second-street; and Robert Stafford, No.36, Market-street.


The prevalence of the fever in New York, accounted for, as follows, in the
Philadelphia Gazette of the 4th instant, under the New York head:

FEVER.
A VERY considerable alarm having taking place among the citizens, and the most
exaggerated reports circulated about the country, of the sickness with which
certain parts of the city are afflicted, we have thought it a duty to make such
enquiries as might enable us to place the matter in a point of view, as near
the truth as possible.

About the beginning of August, in consequence of the foul, unfinished state of
several water-lots, on the East river, between Co^nties and the Old-slip,
upwards of 20 persons were attacked nearly about the same time, with what
appeared to be common colds, some slightly, others more severely; but the
general occurrence of the fact in that neighborhood led to a belief that it
arose from a local cause and threatened something more serious. The foulness of
the lots, and especially two vacant ones, being receptacles of every kind of
filth, was considered as that cause; and in pursuance of official arrangements,
they were immediately covered with wholesome sand: The effect was, a general
restoration of the sick.

In the neighborhood of the New-slip, where the buildings for the most part,
are small, and many of them inhabited by poor people, who live in a crowded
manner, and in situations incapable of proper ventilation, diseases occurred
about the 12th -- a number of persons died -- but at present there appears to
be no great cause of alarm in that quarter.

About the same period, or a little later, two or three persons were seized at
Bruce's wharf with suspicious symptoms, and some deaths have taken place there
and in its vicinity, owing, it is generally thought, to the extremely foul
condition of Bruce and Marston's unfilled lots, bounding on the Eastriver, at
the foot of Pine-street -- the effluvia issuing from them being highly putrid
and offensive. Measures have been taken, and are now in operation, to cover
them with wholesome earth, by which means it is hoped the evil in that quarter,
if it has arisen from this source, may be corrected.

About the 20th, several persons were seized in Cliff-street, nearly in the
same manner as those between Coenties and the Old-slip. At first they generally
considered their complaints to be mere colds taken by sleeping with open
windows in the violently hot weather which then prevailed -- Unfortunately, it
was a more serious case. The patients rapidly grew worse, and several died as
well there as in John, Gold and Rider-streets, and Eden's-Allies, all lying
within the vicinity of Burling-slip sewer. These complaints, on investigation,
were thought to proceed, in part, from the offensive state of that sewer; which
had, for some time, become a receptacle for various species of putrid matter,
and of which the mouth lies nearly opposite John-street, commonly called
Golden-hill-street -- so that, whenever a South or S. E. wind prevailed, it
blew through the sewer, and bore a column of effluvia up John-street, and
through that into Cliff, and the adjacent streets, rendering the atmosphere
intollerably bad. The best informed physicians are of this opinion. The head of
the sewer has since been closed by a valve-door, and a considerable quantity of
quick lime thrown into it, with a view of neutralizing its contents. A similar
door, with the same intention, has been added to the Ferry-street sewer.

Other causes are also alleged, and with great plausibility, at least, if not
certainty.

It is well known that the cessation of our commercial intercourse with the
French Islands, in consequence of their hostile violence, has greatly lessoned
the demand for provisions: of course large quantities of beef remained in many
cellars, particularly among the merchants of Pearl-street. Much of this, from
what is now seen to be an improper mode of packing, as directed by a late law,
has lately become tainted, emitted a very putrid effluvium -- corrupting the
air and contributing its share as a cause of disease. We learn that the
commissioners of the health-office have taken measures to have it all
inspected, and the spoiled removed out of town. Much already has been sent
away, and the remainder is going as fast as possible.

These causes, with the immense fall of rain, and violent heats, experienced in
the course of August, are supposed to have originated the disease which has
spread such panic as to drive many families into the country.

On the most diligent enquiry however, we cannot find out, that any great
subject of alarm exists, except in the neighborhood of the New-slip -- in the
vicinity of Darling-slip-sewer -- and at the foot of Pine-street, at which
places several persons have died.

Individual cases have also occurred in other parts of the town, but, as in
1795, they remain insulated, and without communication to the attendants, as
far as we can discover. These, it is generally thought were taken at one or the
other of the places before mentioned.

An opinion has been avowed by some, that the disease has been imported, or
arose from damaged coffee, thrown out of a ship on Kelley's dock, west of the
New-slip. This, in the present instance, is utterly groundless, and can serve
no purpose but that of delusion. The quantity of refuse-coffee alluded to by
our advocates for imported contagion did not exceed half a peck, and was the
mere sweepings of the hold.

We are informed by a gentleman who has been at the pains to collect a list of
the persons interred in the several burial grounds, that during the last week,
they averaged about 12 per day -- and that previous to Sunday last, there was
no very unusual mortality for the season.

With respect to new cases, enquiry at the best sources, enables us to say they
have very much declined within the last 24 hours, and that the disease yields
more readily to medicine.

How far this statement authorizes the extreme alarm which precipitates so many
citizens out of town, we do not know; but it would at least be advisable that
all who remove should leave their houses, cellars and yards in a cleanly
condition -- that such as remain may not be exposed to the bad effects of their
carelessness and indiscretion.

The system of cleanliness adopted by the commissioners of the health-office,
we are happy to observe, is pursued with increased vigor; and indefatigable
efforts are daily made by that board, to preclude every source of impure air in
the city.

This statement may be depended on -- it is the result of enquiry of the first
authority.

September 4th.
The Banks of North America and Pennsylvania removed this morning to Germantown.

September 4th.
Yesterday morning Mr. John Sitgreaves, mercht. died in Germantown -- a short
time after his removal from the city.

In the city, among others, died, Mr. James Waters, editor of the Weekly
Magazine; capt. George Memminger; Mr. Le Breton; and Dr. F. B. Sayre.

The managers of the Hospitals have appointed Dr. Mease and Dr. Kinlaid, to
attend the sick poor, of the Northern Liberties and the north part of the city;
and Dr. B. Duffield, in conjunction with Dr. Church, to attend the sick poor of
the district of Southwark and southern part of the city. Dr. B. Duffield also
attends at the Tents, near Schuylkill.

The city was drenched with rain last night and this morning, accompanied with
loud explosions of thunder and flashes of lightning.

A committee of the managers of the Hospitals, and a committee of the board of
guardians of the poor, met yesterday, for the purpose of devising measures for
the relief and assistance of persons desirous of moving from the City and
Liberties, during the prevalence of the present malignant fever; when they
agreed upon the following Resolutions, viz:

At a meeting of a committee of the managers of the Marine and City Hospitals,
and a committee of the Board of Guardians of the Poor, for the purpose of
devising means for the relief and assistance of persons desirous of removing
from the city and Liberties, during the prevalence of the present malignant
fever,

Resolved, That a general subscription be solicited on loan, the sums to be
subscribed to be reimbursed out of any fund which the legislature may hereafter
appropriate for the purpose.

Resolved, That Peter Miercken, William Jones, Isaac Price, James Olden and
Jonathan Robeson, be appointed to receive the moneys so raised, to be applied
under the direction of the managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, and the
Guardians of the poor.

Approved by the Board of the Guardians of the Poor.

PETER MIERCKEN, President.
Almshouse, September 3 d, 1798. Approved by the Board of Managers of the
Marine and City Hospitals. WILLIAM JONES, President.
Health-Office, September 4 th, 1798. Attest, WILLIAM PENROSE, Clk. protem.

A number of donations were received at the Tents near Schuylkill, for the use
of the poor, yesterday and today.

Dr. Cooper, one of the resident physicians, also died today.

One of the nurses and the steward are at present sick at the Hospital.

Previous to this date, the Hospital returns were all signed by Doctors Physic
and Cooper, and by James Thompson, steward; published by order of the board of
managers, and signed by William Jones, president.

Doctors Proudfit, Boys, Otto and Pheiffer have all taken the disease.

September 4th.
The following are the names of such of the Board of Health as still continue
to meet and transact business: Wm. Jones, Wm. Penrose, Wm. Linnard, Wm. Dawson,
James Olden, Isaac Price, John Watson, John Inskeep, Timothy Paxson, Joseph
East-burn.

William Allen, Health-Officer; William Nesbitt, Clerk of the Health-Office.

The two last mentioned were in this dangerous office in '93 and '97.

A list of the physicians was also published at the same time; but as there was
a considerable error in it, I have thought proper to omit inserting it.

The Clerk of the Board of Health has taken the disease.

September 5th.
In consequence of public notice, a number of respectable inhabitants of this
city, on the 3d instant, met in Germantown, for the purpose of taking into
consideration the distresses of the sick and poor in the city --

GERMANTOWN, September 3d, 1798.
The citizens of Philadelphia at present residing in and near Germantown, being
deeply affected at the accumulating distresses of their fellow citizens who
remain in the city of Philadelphia, and particularly impressed(from the address
of the Board of Health of the 1st instant, and the resolutions of a committee
of the Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals and the Guardians of
the Poor, dated this day) of the necessity of immediately affording all the
relief in their power, convened this afternoon at the Union School-House, for
the purpose of advancing the objects designated in the address and resolutions
--

The Hon. Thomas Misslin, Esquire. in the Chair, James Gibson, Secretary.


The chairman read to the meeting the address of the Board of Health, as
published in the papers -- and likewise the resolutions of a committee of the
Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, and the Guardians of the Poor.

The chairman then proceeded to mention the extent to which the Board of
Managers and the Guardians of the Poor were authorized by law to provide funds
for defraying the expenses of these establishments, and information being given
by other members of the expenditures and appropriations of these funds already
made, which rendered them inadequate to the demands of the present exigency --
the meeting came to the following resolutions:

Resolved, That a subscription for a loan not exceeding 30,000 dollars, for the
assistance and relief of our suffering fellow-citizens be forth with opened.

That Robert Waln, Richard Hill Morris, General Morgan, Isaac Morris, Richard
Peter's, Robert Smith, Charles Shoemaker, William Rawle, Daniel Smith, Henry
Pratt, Charles Biddle, Samuel W. Fisher, George Latimer, John Wall, Robert
Hare, William Sansom, Robert Ralston and Wm. Buckley, be a committee to procure
subscriptions to the said loan.

That the committee be authorized to borrow of any of the Banks, such sum, not
exceeding the sum now agreed to be raised, as it may be necessary to advance
for the purposes of these resolutions.

That the committee shall appoint one of their number treasurer, to whom each
member shall from time to time pay over his collections, and the treasurer
shall, on receipt thereof, deposit the same in the Bank of Pennsylvania, in an
account to be opened for that purpose, and subject to the drafts of the
managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, and the Guardians of the Poor, after
deducting the amount of any moneys advanced on the credit of the fund.

Resolved, That the secretary cause the proceedings of this meeting to be
published in one or more of the newspapers of the city of Philadelphia. Adj.

Signed by order of the meeting, THOMAS MIFFLIN, Chairman. Attest, JAMES
GIBSON, Secretary.

The market removed today to Broad-street, midway between Delaware and
Schuylkill.

Three of the printing-presses have already stopped on account of the fever,
and most of the printers of books have left the city.

BOSTON, September 7. THE FEVEER.
The selectmen state, that from September 3d to the 5th, there were 3 deaths
only. Remained sick, 20, four of whom were on the recovery.

Yesterday we heard of two new cases.

September 6th.
From a paragraph in the United States Gazette of September 6th, it appears
that there were 17 persons with fever in Portsmouth(N. H.) on the 27th of
August -- 12 of whom were recovering, and only one had died.

Twenty deaths at New York yesterday.

September 7th.
The governor of South Carolina has issued a proclamation, directing that all
vessels from Philadelphia be brought to under the guns of Fort Johnson, and
perform quarentine according to law.

Sick at Boston on the 5th, 20 -- Died since 27th of August -- 3.

Deaths New York on the 5, 21 -- on the 6, 18.

The following paragraph appeared in Mr. Bache's Aurora of today:

"The prevailing disease which afflicts this city has already caused the
suspension of three of our public newspapers, viz: -- Carey's Recorder, the
Gazette of the United States, and the True American. In the office of the
Philadelphia Gazette, the mortality has been deplorable, though that paper by
extraordinary efforts is still published. The office of the American Daily
Advertiser, we understand, has been removed to Germantown, some of the people
having been seized with the cruel malady yesterday. The Aurora Office has
hitherto escaped the afflction -- How long it may continue so, remains in the
hands of Providence, etc."

September 8th.
The whole number sick at Boston on the 8th inst. amounted to 27 -- None have
died since the 5th.

(Gaz. U. S. of Sept. 13.

From the Philadelphia Gazette of today.
Baltimore, September 5th. To the Citizens of Baltimore.
The alarming and distressed situation of our brethren of the city of
Philadelphia, calls loudly for the benevolent assistance of all.

For the purpose of devising ways and means to relieve and comfort, as far as
may be, all such persons as are afflicted by the present sore visitation, a
meeting of the citizens of Baltimore is requested at the courthouse TOMORROW
MORNING, at nine o'clock.

It is not thought necessary to add further on this sublect, referring to the
melancholy and affecting detail, published from the Health-Office at
Philadelphia, on the 1st inst. Sept.


September 7. TOWN-MEETING.
In consequence of the notice yesterday given in the Federal Gazette, a number
of the respectable inhabitants of this city met at the Courthouse, when James
Calhoun, mayor, was appointed chairman, and Joseph Townsend, secretary.

The meeting proceeded to take into consideration the distressed circumstance
of a number of inhabitants of Philadelphia, occasioned by a malignant disorder
raging in that city and suburbs, as being movingly represented by the
communication of the Board of Health of that place, on the 1st inst. and being
desirous to afford some assistance to alleviate their present awful calamity,

Do unanimously resolve, That a subscription be opened by the members of the
City Council in each ward, for the purpose aforesaid, and the money when
received, be paid into the hands of the mayor of the city, to be forwarded by
him to the Board of Health at Philadelphia.

It is also earnestly recommended, that the City Council aforesaid, proceed to
solicit the donations of their fellow-citizens with all possible expedition,
and that the inhabitants manifest a liberal disposition on the occasion.

Ordered,

That the foregoing resolution and recommendation be published in the different
newspapers of this city for information.

JOSEPH TOWNSEND, Sec'ry.
September 7.
September 10th.
The sudden illness of the person employed to collect the account of the daily
funerals, prevented the returns being published in the Philadelphia Gazette of
yesterday and today.

The whole number sick at present with the prevailing fever at Boston is 31 --
Since the last return on the 7th, there have died 5.

( Phila. Gaz. of Sept. 15.)

Deaths at New York, September 10th -- for the last 48 hours -- 34.

(G. U. S.)

Admitted at Bellevue Hospital from the City of New York, and from the
shipping, from the 8th of July to the 8th of September, 109 patients, of whom
there have died within that time, 34.

( Phila. Gaz. of Sept. 11.)

September 11th.
Died this morning, Mr. Benjamin Franklin Bache, printer and proprietor of the
Aurora.

Number of deaths for 48 hours, ending yesterday at noon, exclusive of Hospital
ground, 42 adults and 22 children -- Total 64.

Among the deaths announced in the papers today, is that of Mrs. Hamilton,
relict of the late Alex. Hamilton, esquire.

The following advertisement appeared in the Philadelphia Gazette of today:

NEW ENCAMPMENT.
THE committee who superintend the encampment on Masters' Place, near the Mill
Pond, on the Germantown road, about two miles from the city, respectfully
inform their country friends, that they stand in need of an immediate supply of
vegetables and straw for the use of those distressed citizens who are flying
from the present calamity. The committee with confidence flatter themselves
that the same liberality will be found in the citizens and others, to supply
this encampment, as has been to that on the commons, near Schuylkill, both
having the same laudable objects in view.

Committee. John Inskeep, Jonathan Robeson, Isaac W. Morris.


Camp, Masters' Ground, Sept. 10.

The yellow fever prevails at New London, and is attended with considerable
mortality.

(G. U. S.

Albany pronounced to be remarkably healthy.

(G. U. S.)

Deaths at New York on Sunday the 9th instant, 32 -- do. on the 10th, 34.

September 12th.
The Board of Health published the following address to the citizens on the
12th instant:

Health-Office, September 11, 1798. Fellow-Citizens,
OUR address of the 1st inst. was intended to present to your view the
deplorable state of our city, and to excite into active exertion the
philanthropy and benevolence so eminently characteristic of the citizens of
Pennsylvania. The same generous sentiments which you have displayed has
influenced the worthy and benevolent citizens of Baltimore; who, always alive
to the feelings of humanity, have, it appears by the public papers, agreed to a
subscription for the relief of our distressed fellow-citizens.

We return them all the gratitude and respect to which dispositions so amiable
are entitled; but it becomes our duty publicly to state, that a fund has been
provided for the purpose, upon the principle of a loan in anticipation of the
liberality and justice of our legislature, which precludes the necessity of
donations in money from the humane citizens of our sister states. Contributions
of provisions from our fellow-citizens in the country, as well in New Jersey as
in our own state, have been forwarded for the use of the distressed, with a
liberality which does honor to the donors.

We flatter ourselves that similar donations will be continued by those
generous individuals, who are contiguous to the city, and can with convenience
spare a part of their produce for the relief of suffering humanity.

By order of the Board of Managers, Wm. JONES, President. Attest, TIMOTY
PAXSON, Clerk.


Dr. Harris assured me today, that a girl at his house took the fever two days
after his servant boy who had been frequently along the wharves and among the
vessels, and that a Negro girl that came to his house from Dover, and had been
in no house but his after her arrival, was attacked with the disease three days
after, while attending on the boy and girl.

The whole number sick at Boston on the 7th instant were -- 27.

(Ph. Gaz.)

Mr. Burgess and wife are dead of the malignant fever at their seat on the
Germantown road, about two miles from the city. They had not been in the city
for several weeks themselves, but two of their men had been in with cattle, and
were sick before them. Mrs. Burgess' complaint put on the form of a sarlatina.

September 13th.
Mr. Thomas Pollard, next neighbor to Mr. Burgess, died on the 22d, being the
7th day from attack, which was on the 5th day after his return from Dover. He
had lodged at a tavern on the road where a man had lately died.

Doctors Proudfit, Otto and Pheiffer, have recovered from the fever.

Last night, Mr. James Thompson, of the Indian Queen Inn, Fourth-street,
yielded to the force of the fever.

The fever is spreading rapidly at New York, has insinuated itself into the
high and healthy parts, remote from the docks and flats.

From the Gazette of the United States of the 13th instant. DIRECTIONS How to
escape the Yellow Fever now prevalent in Philadelphia.
Addressed particularly to those citizens whose circumstances will not permit
them to comply with the recommendations of the Managers of the Marine and City
Hospitals.

THE fever which at this time prevails in our unfortunate city and suburbs, is
the very same in kind as that which prevailed in '93 and '97, occasioned by
imported contagion, and was introduced into it for want of efficient
health-laws, and the proper regulation of quarantines; as I propose to make
appear in a future paper.

This contagion however appears, from numerous observations, and the most
authentic facts, to be capable of producing fever, only under particular
circumstances: these circumstances, removed or avoided, the contagion becomes
inactive and harmless.

This fever had not been observed to exist in Philadelphia for more than thirty
years before the year '93 -- and has never been known to exist in the winter
season in this climate; differing in this respect, from those contagious fevers
that are bred in jails, hospitals and prison ships; but perfectly resembling
the plagues which have been introduced at different times into different
maritime towns in Europe from certain parts of Africa, and the Turkish
dominions in Europe bordering upon Asia.

The circumstances which render the contagion of the yellow fever active and
favor its spreading or becoming epidemic, appear to be, hot, rarefied and
stagnant, or confined air, more especially when replete and altered in its
salutary quality by putrid exhalations from dead vegetable and animal
substances. Under the recited circumstances the majority of those who approach
very near to, or come in contact with the sick, so as to receive the
exhalations emitted by the lungs or skin, become in the course of a few days,
most commonly on the fifth or sixth day after such exposure, affected with the
same kind of fever, but as all that approach within the same distance to the
sick do not afterward take the disease though they have received the
contagious particles into their bodies, it implies that their constitutions are
not disposed to favor its operation, that is, that they are possessed of a
power to resist its action or impression, or that the contagion mixing with the
fluids in the stomach, or with those in the arteries passes out again, with
some of the usual excretions.

The circumstances which, in most cases, appear to give effect to the
contagion, so as to produce fever, after it has been received into the
circulation through the medium of the stomach, lungs or skin, appear to be such
as have the power of inducing sudden and great debility in the several
functions of the body, and consequent spasm or constriction of the extreme
vessels, etc.

Among the chief of these, may be reckoned, sudden exposure to cold, after
great fatigue, or after being greatly heated by exercise and exposure to the
scorching rays of the sun.

Intemperance, succeeded by abstinence, frequent blood letting, purging,
fasting, and constant terror or dread of the disease, have all a similar
effect. -- Whereas moderate and refreshing exercise, the temperate use of such
nourishing food as has no tendency to stimulate or inflame, and rather to
preserve the bowels laxative than otherwise, and the temperate use of diluted
fermented liquors, particularly sound bottled porter and claret, have the most
salutary effect in preventing the operation of the contagion, and also of
rendering the disease milder and more manageable by the physician, when it does
attack, than when it occurs in those previously debilitated.

The air in the open streets, I believe, never becomes sufficiently
contaminated by the contagious articles (let the patients be ever so numerous
in the houses) to communicate the disease to any person walking in the middle
of the street, or even on the pavements, when the wind blows from the opposite
side. This is a fact not only confirmed by the observations of the judicious
and accurate Dr. Russel, in his account of a pestilential fever at Aleppo, and
by all the physicians that have published an account of the disease, as it has
appeared in different parts of Europe, but is also established by the events of
last year, and by those of '93.

In the year '93, all the prisoners in the jail of Philadelphia, amounting to
more than 200; the pensioners in the alms house; and the patients in the
Pennsylvania hospital, escaped the disease, owing to the precaution of
preventing the admission of any sick or suspicious person, as well as every
infected article into those places.

All the families, also, that remained in the city, and confined themselves and
their domestics strictly to their own houses, and suffered no sick person, or
any one lately recovered from the disorder, or any material from an infected
house, to come near them; and employed some trusty person to furnish them with
marketing and other necessaries from sources free from infection, escaped the
disease without exception. This was also the case with all the farmers that
attended the market, that cautiously avoided sleeping at, or going into any of
the chambers of the taverns or places where they put up. This could not have
been the case if the whole atmosphere of the city had been tainted, or replete
with noxious exhalations.

By observing the preceding rules and cautions, therefore, those inhabitants
who cannot procure a retreat in the country, may certainly preserve themselves
from taking the fever.

These are consolatory facts, drawn from experienced observers; and they are
facts that may be fitly opposed to the popular notions of contagion, so apt to
affect the imagination in moments of consternation and dismay.

Before I conclude, I think it proper to add, that I have frequently seen
persons, whose office it is to attend the sick, escape the disease in large
airy apartments, without observing any precaution at all; but have seldom
observed this to be the case in small confined places unfavourable for
ventilation, especially where the circumstances of the patient, would not admit
of daily changes of the bed and body linen. Cleanliness, daily changes of
apparel, and free ventilation appear, therefore, to be essential for preventing
the contagious and malignant effects of the fever.

Perhaps if physicians and nurses were studiously to guard against breathing
when near the patient, and were never to swallow their saliva; (by which it is
probable the contagion is more frequently conveyed into the body than by any
other means) were careful to rince their mouths with cold water and vinegar,
brandy and water or wine, and frequently to chew some agreeable aromatic
substance; were never to approach the sick with an empty stomach, and were to
rub half a dram or a dram of mercurial ointment upon their limbs every
night till it occasioned tenderness of the mouth, it would prevent the
contagion from operating, or at least render the disease much more mild and
manageable when it did occur.

As opinions require facts, and not names for their support, I shall conceal
mine under the signature of

MENTOR.

The editor of the Be, at New London, laments the necessity he is under of
suspending the publication his paper, on account of the prevalence of a
malignant disorder in that place.

(G. U. S.)

The following interesting remarks were published in the Philadelphia Gazette
of the 13th instant:

"WE are apt to magnify whatever respects ourselves. It ought not therefore to
be surprising if the papers of our city were full of remarks on the prevailing
fever. The extensive misfortunes that it produces occupying almost exclusively
our attention, our subscribers at a distance would not fail to listen with an
indulgent ear to our tale of distress, and suffer us to fly to the only solace
left us, that of expressing our sorrow. So far, however, have the citizens of
Philadelphia been from indulging themselves in fruitless expressions of regret,
that our papers contain few animadversions, and no discussions, respecting the
disease. They have not omitted to record facts, but every mind has been
suffered without prejudice to form its own deductions. This APPARENT apathy has
risen not from any real indifference or want of feeling, but from a conviction
derived from experience, that in the collision of hostile opinions, humanity is
often lost sight of, and an obstinate adherence to error is generated in its
room. In the year '93 the medical pen was, in most instances, dipped in gall.
The several combatants took their peculiar grounds and disdained, in too many
cases, to save the life of a human being by following any other suggestions,
than their own. They distracted the public mind, and shook all confidence in
medical assistance.

The very reverse of this has been exhibited during the present season. No men
have allied together in support of a favorite theory. The pride of opinion has
existed but in a limited sphere. The practice of one physician has become
assimilated to that of another; and from the best information those
prescriptions appear to be very generally pursued, which are mild, and more
congenial to nature than those remedies, if remedies they may be called, which
too often only rescue us from the disease to inflict upon us one more fatal.

"These ideas will not, at present, be pursued further. The chief design of
these notices is to exhibit the superior malignity of the present disease over
that which prevailed in '93. It is computed that in that year 23,000 citizens
left the city. They formed probably two-fifths of the inhabitants. This year
certainly three-fourths, but more likely five-sixths of the citizens, have
departed. Taking the intermediate number, the result will be that twice the
proportion of citizens remained in Philadelphia in '93 that do this year. Some
allowance, however, is to be made for the increased population. But on the
other hand, when the caution of the citizens is considered, and the
arrangements that were made to resist its influence this year, the last
circumstances will be found to balance the former. Besides it ought to be
remembered, that in a place containing a given population, if an epidemic
rages, its violence is not checked in the exact ratio of the diminution of the
inhabitants, but with much more rapidity. Notwithstanding these circumstances,
the disease continues to rear its head, and to threaten mortality this year
superior to that in '93."

Twenty-seven persons were sick at Boston on the 12th inst. 10 of whom were on
the recovery.

Number of deaths at New York, for the last 24 hours, ending yesterday
afternoon, 44 adults -- 6 children -- total 50, including those at Bellevue
Hospital.

September 14th.
The contrast (says the Philadelphia Gazette of today) between the East and
North part of the city of New York are very striking -- in the latter we behold
crowded streets -- in the former a few solitary individuals, with antiseptics
applied to their noses as they pass along. There are, indeed, but few cases of
the fever South of the Tontine coffee-house, and not many houses shut.

Number of deaths at New York on the 11th -- 32, besides those that died at
Bellevue Hospital.

Five persons have died of the fever at New-Port, (R.I.) which they are
supposed to have taken in N. York.

Jacob Heiltzheimer, esquire. died this morning at his house in Sixth-street.

One of the N. York papers (the Diary) has been suspended on account of the
prevailing fever in that city.

ADDRESS.
" THE Committee are happy in having it in their power to inform those citizens
who are not in a situation to provide for themselves, and are desirous to
remove from the City or Liberties, that they are now prepared to receive from 6
to 700 persons at the encampment, on Masters' place, in the Northern Liberties,
where such persons will be furnished with comfortable apartments and necessary
provisions during the present calamity."

Several valuable donations were received today at the tents.

The health-office has been kept open night and day at the city hall, and every
necessary convenience has been procured by the board for removing the sick and
burying the dead.

BOSTON, September 8th.
MEDICAL.
THE great advantage to be derived to mankind, from an inspection of the bodies
of such as have died of so formidable an epidemic, as the yellow fever, must be
obvious to all. The following cases of dissection may throw some light on the
nature of the disease, as it prevails in this town, and may, we hope, be of
some use, in investigating the treatment best adapted to the purpose of
checking or suppressing its destructive ravages.

The first case was of a man, who died on the 6th day from the seizure, and as
no application was made to a physician, till the first stage of the disease had
nearly expired, the state of the organs may be considered in a great measure as
the natural effect of the disease, undisturbed by art.

In the cavity of the chest, the lungs were remarkably affected -- They
contained an uncommon quantity of dark blood in their vessels, which rendered
them apparently more dense than usual; the vesicles not being distended with
air, and their substance consequently less compressible than usual. -- The
posterior part of both lobes was extremely livid, and in the cavities of the
thorax was contained a large portion of extravasated blood, firmly coagulated,
to the quantity of eight or ten ounces, as nearly as could be estimated.

The pericadium contained as much as two or three ounces of fluid blood. The
heart was of its usual size; but the coronary veins were so distended with
blood, as to exhibit the appearance of a most successful injection. In the
cavity of the abdomen, the part most conspicuously morbid was the liver. --
This organ appeared to be much inflamed both on its unequal and concave surface;
its substance was much indurated, and on cutting, resembled in color, a boiled
liver. The gall bladder was contracted to a very small size, and contained not
more than a quarter of an ounce of a thick, glutinous, and almost inspissated
substance, resembling pith. There were no marks of any considerable quantity of
the bile having been lately contained in the sack, and none of the neighboring
parts had the least tinge that denoted its presence. On cutting through the
ductus communis choledochus, no bile issued from the aperture; the hepatic duct
had also evidently for some time, ceased to transmit its fluid from the liver.
The stomach exhibited an enormous distension of its veins, especially round the
pylorus, and had every mark of great inflammation. The intestines in general,
were in the same state with the stomach; the smaller were considerably
distended, and the larger contracted. The spleen was uncommonly turgid, but in
other respects in its natural state. The peritonaeum on the under side of the
diaphragm, and the pleura on the upper, bore the vestiges of inflammation, but
no other parts of those membranes appeared to have been diseased.

The omentum was considerably thickened, and from the turgescence of its blood
vessels, of a color unusually dark. There were no appearances in the thoracic
or abdominal viscera of suppuration, nor was any degree of foeter perceived to
arise from them; nor was there the least mark of even incipient putrefaction in
any part of the body. It may be proper to remark on this case, that in every
stage of the disease, the discharges from the bowels, were of the color and
consistence of water gruel, excepting a few evacuations of a matter similar to
what is called the black vomit; and that this usually fatal symptom had also
preceded the patient's death on the fourth day of the disease.

The second case. The subject of this dissection was the body of a person, who
died on the 12th day of the attack with symptoms of a mixed kind; a remission
of the disease had taken place at the period usually critical, upon which, on
the 6th day, a delirium ensued, and continued to the moment of fatal
termination.

On opening the cranium, the brain was found to have its vessels astonishingly
destined with blood, an ounce or two of serum was effused between the dura and
pia matter. Under the sagittal future, and by the side of the longitudinal
sinus, where the large veins terminate in that cavity, a lymphatic band, about
an inch wide, extending nearly the whole length of the sinus, was formed by the
coagulable lymph, which had been effused from the blood vessels, by the
violence of the preceding inflammation, and this substance had served as a
medium of adhesion, between the dura and pia matter in that part.

The lungs adhered very firmly to the pleura on the right side, and appeared
posteriorly to have been much inflamed, and in some parts to be indurated in
portions of about the size of a pigeon's egg. The left lobe adhered so firmly
to the pleura, as not to be separated but by tearing the substance of the
lungs, which here appeared extremely diseased, and in a state of actual
suppuration throughout its whole substance. The heart was in its natural state.
The liver was much enlarged, and in a state that denoted a high degree of
inflammation; the unequal surface, of the great lobe near the gall bladder
exhibiting marks of extravasation, as if violently contused. -- The gall
bladder was full of bile, and the ducts pervious.

The stomach was nearly in its natural state, but on the inside, the surface of
the villous coat, was besmeared with a matter, which seemed to be of the same
nature with the black vomit, though nothing of this kind had been ejected in the
course of the disease.

The duoderum, was much inflamed for several inches from its commencement at
the stomach, and the whole tract of the smaller intestines was in the same
state. The urinary bladder was contracted to the size of a pullet's egg, and
its inner coat appeared to have been in a high state of inflammation, the
vessels having been distended to such a degree, as to have suffered a rupture,
and to have effused a quantity of blood into the cavity of this organ.

The state of the lungs in this subject, was probably the consequence, chiefly
of a previous disease, independent of that which proved fatal here. An
affection of the lungs had sometime existed, whilst the subject was in other
respects intolerable health, and in the pursuit of his business; so that a
pulmonary consumption would in all probability, have shortly put a period to
his life, had the disease of which he died, never overtaken him.

The third case. In this instance the disease terminated fatally on the fourth
day.

Upon opening the thorax, the lungs discovered marks of inflammation,
anteriorly, and were extremely gorged with blood, in the posterior part of
their respective lobes.

The liver exhibited marks of inflammation especially on its concave side, and
posterior part; its texture was altered, and of a very dense consistence. The
gall bladder was completely obliterated, its coats having coalesced with the
contiguous parts so as to form with them one confused membranous substance. The
stomach was externally to appearance in a natural state, but its inner coat was
covered with that black colored fluid, denominated the black vomit.

The color in some parts had been much inflamed, as well as part of the omentum
where attached to this intestine.

It is worthy of remark, that in both the cases, where the gall bladder had
been diseased, and ceased to perform its functions; or where the liver had been
rendered incapable of secreting the bile, the body became yellow, before death;
whereas in the other, where the bile was found in due quantity, this
circumstance did not occur.

From the above dissections, which evinced a deficiency of secretion in the
billary organs, the indications of cure seemed to be directed toward a course,
which might obviate the inflammation in general of the organs diseased, and
open the excretory ducts of the liver, that the fluid might resume its course
into the intestines.

It is with the highest degree of pleasure, that we communicate to the public
our hopes that after proper evacuations, the use of calomel may be found to
answer these important purposes. This medicine has been accordingly used with
much success in fifteen patients within eighteen days, all of whom, excepting
one, have recovered; or have past the dangerous period. It has been given not
in the usual doses, for the purpose of an evacuant by the intestines, but in
small doses of one, two or three grains, every hour or two, so as to produce a
salivation as soon as possible; with this view, from one hundred to two hundred
and thirty grains of calomel have been given in the course of two or three
days, commencing the use of it immediately after the first copious evacuations
by bleeding and purging; and in every instance as the salivation came on, the
disease has abated.

Coinciding in sentiment, respecting the use of mercury, so as to produce a
salivation, we with pleasure mention the learned doctor Rush, of Philadelphia.
But the method is more explicitly and highly recommended by James Clark, M. D.
F. R. S. E. in a treatise on the yellow fever, as it appeared in the island of
Dominica, in the years, '93, '94, '95, and '96.

The doctor recommends the free use of mercury, both as a remedy and
preventative -- and says, the officers of the army and navy, who have leisure
and can be prevailed upon, on their arrival in the West Indies, to undergo one
or two courses of mercury, taking a few laxative medicines, after confining
themselves to a moderate use of wine, and living chiefly on vegetables and
fruits for the first two months after their arrival, may rely almost to a
certainty, on escaping the fever.

ISAAC RAND. JOHN WARREN.


September 15th.
Mr. Greenleaf, editor and proprietor of the Argus, died of the prevailing
fever on the 13th. inst. at New York: --

September 16th.
Fenno a patriot, resolved and steady to his trust, whose aim was truth, whose
end the public good; is now no more.

The benevolent Price, indefatigable in the cause of humanity, is also numbered
with the dead.

Health-Office, September 17 th. 1798.
The board received, with sincere sorrow, the information of the decease of
their worthy and much lamented colleague, ISAAC PRICE, who died of the
prevailing fever, on the 15th. inst. -- In him society have to deplore the loss
of a virtuous and humane citizen, who fell a sacrifice to his indefatigable
zeal, in the cause of humanity.

By Order of the Board of Managers, WM. JONES, President. Attest, TIMOTHY
PAXSON, Clerk.


September 17th.
The disease has got into the prison for criminals, one is dead, four more are
sick.

Application has been made to the Governor, for their removal to the Hospital.

In '93, four of the criminals feigned sickness, were sent to the Hospital, and
made their escape in the night.

The Town-Council of New-Port, R. I. has declared, that there has been but
eight persons that have had the yellow fever in that town, all of whom took it
at New York, five of whom are since dead; and that there is no other person
sick with the disorder in that town, or hospital, or on board any vessel in the
harbor. [Phila. Gaz.]

In consequence of the fever having made its appearance in the jail, the
vagrant females and untried criminals have been removed to Morris's buildings.
The male as well as female convicts, are to remain in the jail. The male
convicts amount to about 140 -- and no precaution has yet been taken to
separate the diseased from the sound. The whole number altogether in the jail,
when the fever made its appearance, was about 300, including debtors.

September 18th.
Two physicians began today to prescribe for the sick at the encampment on
Masters' fields. Some of the people have been attacked with symptoms of the
prevailing fever since they came out.

The mayor of Baltimore issued the following proclamation on the 15th,
prohibiting the entrance into that city of all persons from New York,
Philadelphia and Wilmington:

State of Maryland, City of Baltimore, ss.
BY JAMES CALHOUN, Mayor of the city of Baltimore.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS, it has pleased Almighty God, to visit the cities of New York,
Philadelphia, and the borough of Wilmington, in the state of Delaware, with a
malignant and mortal fever, which excites great apprehensions in the minds of
the citizens of Baltimore (who have been blessed with an uncommon degree of
health this season) lest daily communication with those places may introduce
the said disorder into this city, and makes them desirous that all intercouse,
during the present critical period, should be restrained:

I have, therefore, deemed it proper, in conformity with the powers vested in
me by law, to issue this proclamation, hereby forbidding the entrance into the
city of Baltimore, or within three miles thereof, of all persons whomsoever who
have come from the cities of New York or Philadelphia, or from the borough of
Wilmington, in the state of Delaware, and the citizens of Baltimore from having
any communication with them, until they can produce an approved certificate of
their absence from those places at least fifteen days previous thereto,
excepting only such persons as may come into Baltimore, or within three miles
thereof, on or before Tuesday next, the 18th inst. conformably to my
proclamation of the 18th day of August, and the carriers of the mail.

This proclamation to remain in full force until public information is given to
the contrary, of which all persons concerned are to take notice and govern
themselves accordingly.

Given under my hand and the Corporate Seal of the city of Baltimore, this 15th
day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-eight. (L. S.)

JAMES CALHOUN, Mayor of the city of Baltimore. Attested, R. H. MOALE, Register
of the city of Baltimore.
September 15.
Two persons have died in the jail -- one of them a criminal, under sentence of
imprisonment for 14 years.

September 19th.
All the pasture grounds and upland meadows appeared parched up, and the ground
withered and brown, before the rain which fell today. The grass-hoppers are
very numerous, but musketoes are less so than usual at this season of the year
-- the number of flies as usual.

Yesterday the criminals in the jail, taking advantage of the absence of the
jailor, made an attempt to break out by force, but were overpowered by the
bravery of Robert Wharton, esquire. one of the aldermen of the city, and a few
assistants. Two of the criminals were killed before the rest surrendered, If
these unprincipled wretches had succeeded in their attempt, in all probability
the city would have been pillaged and, perhaps, set on fire.

Three men were found dead in a very putrid and offensive condition, yesterday.
The following is taken from the Philadelphia Gazette of yesterday:

A man was found dead the day before yesterday in a house in Front near
Walnut-street, directly opopsite the Green tree pump. The corpse was first
discovered by the very offensive smell which was found to proceed from the
house. From the time that has elapsed, since the family left the house, the
corpse, it is thought, must have been laying there at least a month -- It was
in so high a state of putrefaction, when discovered, that it was removed by
pieces to the coffin, in which it was deposited!

In addition to the above, a man was found in a house in South Water-street,
near Chesnut-street -- it is supposed that he had been dead for three weeks --
it was discovered by a man having occasion to go into the house for some things
which he had left; on opening the door, there was such a stench came out of the
house, that he was obliged to retreat.

A negro man entered the house and found the body of a man almost devoured by
vermin; information was given at the Health-Office, about 4 o'clock in the
afternoon; the people waited till 8 o'clock in the evening and heard nothing
from the Health-Office, two black men were hired for sixteen dollars, to take
the corpse and throw it into the river. Yesterday morning the corpse was seen
floating in the dock.

A man was found dead in a sail-lost, yesterday morning: The people near the
sail-lost, say, that he was well Saturday at noon.

It appears by the public prints, that there were, only 5 persons with the
yellow fever at Portsmouth, on the 10th inst.

The yellow fever has made its appearance in the debtors jail in New York.

The papers mention the deaths of several very respectable people in New York.

September 20th.
A committee was appointed the 12th inst. at Bourdentown, (N. J.) for the
purpose of collecting donations for the necessitous and distressed inhabitants
of Philadelphia.

The following persons are appointed, by the concurring resolutions of the
managers of the board of managers of the Hospitals, and of the Guardians of the
Poor, for the purpose of relieving such of their fellow citizens as are not in
a situation to remove to the encampment, viz: John Kehr, Peter Miercken, A.
Steel, Thomas Allibone, E. Garrigues, Stephen Maxfield, N. A. Smith, Daniel
Doughty, Peter Baker, John Hutchinson, W. Stephenson, John James, Thomas
Savery, Rhea King, Paschal Hollingsworth, and John Teas.

Zepheniah Webster, printer, his wife and son, all died of the fever in the
course of the present week.

A variety of donations have been received every day, for some time past, at
the tents and at the encampment.

I rode through chief part of the city today, and observed very few houses,
west of Eighth-street, shut up; but scarcely one in an hundred open in any
other part, excepting in the northern and southern extremities, where the
disease appears now to be extending its ravages.

There was not a case of fever in any part of Southwark before the death of Mr.
Russel, which was on the 8th of August, and very few on the 20th of August.

Kensington, where the disease appeared early in August, while the ship Deborah
was undergoing repairs there, is nearly deserted.

Nothwithstanding these facts, many persons, whose educations and opportunities
of acquiring knowledge one might think would have taught them better, ascribe
the rise and progress of the disease solely to the impurity of the air of the
city.

September 21st.
The board of managers published in the Philadelphia Gazette of today, a
statement of comparative facts between the mortality at the City Hospital, and
that of the City and Liberties, from the 9th of August to the 19th of
September, inclusive, of which the following is an abstract: Number of cases
reported by the physicians, 2472 Of which have been sent to the Hospital, 535
There have died at the Hospital 276 (which is more than half of all sent there)
Number of patients attended in the City and Liberties, 1937 Total number of
deaths, from Brown's Gazette, 1700 Number of deaths in the City and Liberties,
1424 (which is nearly 3-4 of the number attended there.)

What is the obvious deduction from the preceding facts? Remove the sick
immediately to the Hospital, and the well to the encampments, and the excessive
mortality will of course subside.

(Signed by order of the Board, etc.)

September 21st.
In an advertisement signed by Mr. Saml. Coats, dated the 20th inst. it is
mentioned that one of the nurses is now ill of the yellow fever in the
hospital, which she is supposed to have caught by going into the city for
clothes, about fifteen days since. Excepting the nurse, there has been but one
other person sick in the Hospital of the fever this year, viz: a man that was
admitted as a lunatic the 25th ult. This man was removed to the City Hospital,
and there died in a few days.

On the 17th inst. only 25 persons remained with the malignant fever in Boston.
(Phila. Gaz.)

A subscription is opened in Boston and in Providence, for the relief of the
sufferers in Philadelphia.

Dr. Elihu. Hubbard Smith, one of the proprietors and conductors of the
New York Medical Repository, died of the yellow fever yesterday the 20th inst.
in the 27th year of his age. He died on the 3d day of the disease, the symptoms
of which were, in his case, malignant to a degree almost beyond example.

The number of sick at New London on the 18th inst. were -- 46.

Wilmington (Del.) still continues to be ravaged by the fever. 106 deaths, viz.
99 adults and 7 children, have occurred from the 7th of August to the 20th
instant, inclusive, 9 persons died within 24 hours, ending last Thursday, the
19th inst. Most of the houses in the lower part of the town are deserted.
(Phila. Gaz.)

Similar accounts have been received from the little villages of Chester and
Marcus-Hook, on the river Delaware, between Philadelphia and Wilmington.

It appears from a communication from Dr. Davidson to Dr. Mease, published in
the Medical Repository of New York, that the atmosphere of the West India
Islands, where the fever is so frequently malignant and mortal, contains a
considerably greater proportion of pure air than the atmosphere in any part of
Europe. Hence a strong presumption arises, that the disease does not originate
from impure air, but is the offspring of specific contagion.

Patroles, in conjunction with the ordinary watchmen, whose number has been
doubled, continue to guard the city in the night.

September 24th.
A few of the society of friends met in the city to hold their annual meeting,
but immediately adjourned, on account of the fever, till December next.

All the banks are now removed to Germantown. The assistant cashier of the bank
of United States, Mr. Kuhl, is now with the disease in Germantown.

P. S. He was salivated and recovered.

Most of the clerks of this bank, are either dead, or have been sick.

The following hand bill, without date or signature, was published on the 22nd
or 24th of September, and distributed among the inhabitants still remaining in
the city.

REFLECT BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE!

FELLOW CITZENS, reflect upon your danger before it is too late. One hundred of
us are attacked with the fever every day. One half of that number is daily
carried to the grave. If we remain in town it is probable that the fever will
continue five or six weeks longer, and by that time one half of our number will
have been sick, and one fourth of us will be no more.

How different is the situation of our friends in the country and in the tents.

Two thousand persons in the tents have lost but seventeen in twenty-five days,
while the same number in Philadelphia have loft one hundred and seventy eight.

At the encampments there is great plenty of good food.

In town it is resolved to give nothing to the poor who are able to go.

WHY DO YOU PREFER FAMINE, SICKNESS AND DEATH, TO HEALTH AND PLENTY?

It is not yet too late to remove.

GO BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE!

I rode through several parts of the city today, and have never seen the
streets cleaner and freer from putrid materials or stagnant water, than at
present.

September 25th.
No fresh cases of malignant fever in Newport on the 15th instant; and on the
17th only 3. On the 19th there were only 25 persons sick of the fever in Boston.

The names of the revd. Mr. Hendel, pastor of the German Presbyterian church,
and Hillary Baker, esquire. mayor of the city of Philadelphia, are on the list of
deaths today.

The city appears deserted and disconsolate, and the distressed imagination
paints the fell messenger of death, waving his sable plume over the affrighted
city, and striking with his dread wand the opening tomb.

" Pale shoot the stars across the troubled night,
" The timorous moon withholds her conscious light:
" Shrill scream the famished cats and panting fowls,
" And loud and long the dog of midnight howls."
The ravages of death increase; medicinal aid is sought in vain:

"In promiscuous clusters, lie the dying and the dead,
"Over the friendless bier, no rites are read,
"No requiem chaunted, and no pall outspread.
"One common grave receives the lifeless throng,
"While the black horse, in silence, moves along.
September 26th.
The revd. John Dickins, of the Methodist's Society, died today* and one of
the clergymen of the Roman Catholic Church, a few days since.

September 27th.
It appears from the returns of this day, that the late increased coolness of
the air has increased the list of new cases.

There are now near one thousand persons in the sheds or board tents, in the
encampment in Masters fields, all from the City, Liberties and suburbs.

On Sunday last the 23d inst. the physicians at the encampment prescribed for
32 patients who had different complaints; of these 32, there were only 14 that
had the malignant fever. One of them had been out of the city nine days before
he was attacked with the disease, viz. Hutchinson Thompson, a boy ten years of
age.

Only four fresh cases of fever have occurred at the encampment since the 23d,
though fresh families are daily coming out of the city, and though many of them
have been much exposed to the late rains and damp ground. This furnishes a
strong argument in favor of those who maintain the opinion, that the
prevailing fever is propagated by contagion from the diseased, and not by any
depravity or noxious particles diffused through the atmosphere from putrid
vegetable or dead animal matter. For these breathed the same air as the rest of
the citizens, but none but those that had received the contagion from the
diseased, were affected by causes allowed by every one to be powerfully adapted
to excite the disease into action.

There were only 35 persons with the fever in Boston the 21st inst. (Phila.
Gaz.)

The fever in the jail of Philadelphia has hitherto been confined to the
vagrants and criminals; the east wing has been converted into an hospital, and
every humane and salutary measure adopted for the convenience and cure of the
sick. (Ph. Gaz.)

There were 7 deaths at Wilmington on the 25th inst.

September 28th.
One of the physicians prescribed today at the encampment for 34 patients, one
of which is a decided case of yellow fever, and one suspicious.

Nine are on the recovery.

Five have been sent to the City Hospital.

Hutchinson Thompson died on the 7th day of the disease -- his corpse of a deep
saffron color.

The sister of John Vandgriff, a child, slept in the same bed with her brother
the (...) time of his sickness. The mother also remained in the Hospital with
them, and did not take the disease.

Two of Polly Galagher's little sisters slept in the same bed with her three
nights while she had the fever. The father and mother also slept in the same
tent with her. She died on the 4th day, two hours after admission into the City
Hospital.

Ann Dilmore's child was suckled by her in the tent three days when in the
fever; was given to another woman to nurse, after the death of its mother.

P. S. Not one of these caught the disease.

"New London, Sept. 24th. -- 8 new cases of fever since last report -- 32 now
sick -- 5 dangerous."

Since the great fall of rain on Friday the 21st instant, the complaints have
been greater. (P. G.)

One of the prisoners having died of the fever in the debtors apartment in the
new jail, the remainder have been sent to Norristown.

Boston, Sept. 24th. -- Since the return on the 21st inst. 11 have died and 56
new cases have occurred -- 80 now remain sick, 16 of whom are on the recovery.

Signed, JAMES S. LOVELL, Inspector of Police.

REMARKS, WHICH FOLLOW THE ABOVE.
The above return has excited considerable additional alarm in town and
country. It is certainly melancholy: but we desire to praise Heaven, a smart
north-easterly storm, which we hope and anticipate, will check the march and
dissipate the malignancy of the pestilence, and thoroughly cleanse our
atmosphere, yesterday morning commenced its salutary operation, and terminated
last evening in a strong north-wester. We expect in a few days to congratulate
our friends in the country, on the return of Hygeia to the metropolis; and to
invite their return.

In continuing this melancholy detail, we cannot suppress those painful
emotions, which naturally arise, when contemplating one of the greatest
calamities which ever befell an infant nation. Almost all the seaports of the
United States has, more or less, within these few years, been visited with a
pestilence which threatens to depopulate many of our fairest towns and
villages. To arrest the progress of this destroying angel, has as yet, been
attempted in vain. It appears to defy the science, skill, and intrepidity of
our most eminent physicians -- and to yield to nothing but the frosts of
winter. It seriously behooves every well-wisher to his country, to continue to
search for the cause of the calamity, and, if possible, to remove it.

September 29th.
Died this morning, Mr. Joseph Anthony, a respectable and distinguished
merchant of Philadelphia. He resided in High, near Ninth-street.

The physicians of the encampment prescribed for 32 patients today, not one of
whom had any symptom of the yellow fever -- but the greatest proportion
complained of diarrhoea, catarrh, intermitting fever, or cutaneous eruption.

There are at present at the encampment more than 1300 persons including
children.

Mr. Cooper, town clerk of Boston, states that since the return on the 24th to
the 26th of September, 20 persons have recovered, 7 have died, 44 new cases
have occurred, 97 remaining sick, 20 of whom are on the recovery.

From 26th to 28th, 26 had recovered, 5 died and 12 new cases had occurred, 72
remaining sick, of whom 30 were on the recovery.

Mr. Cooper assures the public, that the above returns are particularly correct.

Dr. Campbell of Woodberry, and Dr. Martin of Chester, both physicians of
eminence, are dead of the prevailing disease,

Provision has been amply made for the more indigent and needy, and for all who
can submit to take shelter at the encampment, or to request supplies from the
guardians of the poor, but the situation of those whose sensibility will not
permit them to have recourse to these resources, must be attended with distress
that may be better conceived than described.

A TABLE, Of the Weather in October.
DAY THERMOMETER. WIND WEATHER. At 8 A.M. At 2 P.M. A.M. P.M. 1 48 66 W W Fair
A. M. P. M. 2 54 68 SW W Fair, very light breeze. 3 55 70 SW W Fair, and calm.
4 56 70 SE W Fair, light breeze. 5 54 66 NE W Fair, light breeze. 6 56 70 NE W
Fair, cloudy. 7 54 60 NE W Steady rain, cloudy all day. 8 52 56 NE NNW Light
rain, cloudy. 9 56 70 SE NW Fair, cloudy, calm. 10 56 68 SE NW Fair. 11 54 60 E
SE Cloudy, fair. 12 54 60 E NE Cloudy, fair and very dark. 13 48 55 E NE
Cloudy, fair, high wind. 14 51 55 NE NE Cloudy, fair, white frost this morning.
15 52 60 W SE Fair, light breeze. 16 52 64 E SE Fair, calm. 17 53 68 E SE Fair,
calm. 18 56 66 E NE Fair, strong breeze. 19 50 52 E NE NE Cloudy, high wind. 20
52 54 E NE Cloudy. 21 54 66 NW W Fair, cloudy, light breeze. 22 56 66 SW W Fog,
fair, calm, cloudy evening. 23 58 54 SW W NW Light rain, cloudy, wind high and
tempestuous. 24 48 56 NW NW Fair, strong breeze. 25 54 68 S SW Fair, calm. 26
54 68 S SW White frost, fair, breeze. 27 56 47 SW W NE Cloudy, rain, heavy
shower for three hours. 28 44 52 NW W NE Flying clouds, heavy, showers for
three hours. 29 36 38 NW W NE Fair high wind, ground covered with frost, and
the gutters and rain casks with thin ice. 30 26 32 NW W NE Fair, high piercing
wind, isicles hang from the rain casks in the city. 31 30 38 NW N NE Flying
clouds, high wind ground covered with snow, some of which continued on the
North side of the houses all day.

DAILY RETURNS Of the sick, and of the deaths in the City Hospital, and in the
City and Liberties, for the month of October.
HOSPITAL REPORTS. Admit. Cured. Deaths. Rem. in H. Conval. Eloped. TOTAL
DEATHS. From 30st of Septem. to the 1st of October. 11 22 15 116 31 0 Total
deaths in Hospital, City, etc. 85. 100 new cases reported for the last 48 hours
by 13 Physicians. 1st. to 2d. 19 0 9 116 31 0 83 39 new cases by 13 Physicians.
2d. to 3d. 16 12 3 117 65 0 49 including 3 children. 41 new cases by 13
Physicians. 3d. to 4th. 8 0 7 118 65 0 46 including 3 children. 22 new cases by
13 Physicians. 4th. to 5th. ^ 16 4 101 49 0 36 including 7 children. 25 new
cases by 13 Physicians. From 5th. to 6th. 9 17 8 85 32 0 38 including 2
children. 18 new cases by 13 Physicians. 6th. to 7th. 8 0 2 0 0 0 25 including
2 children. 7th to 8th. 2 6 2 85 55 0 29 including 3 children. 48 new cases by
15 Physicians for last 48 hours. 8th to 9th. 6 0 3 88 55 0 20 including 3
children. 27 new cases by 18 Physicians. 9th. to 10th. 6 14 2 78 41 0 14
including 1 child. 32 new cases by 15 Physicians. 10th. to 11th. 7 0 3 82 41 0
43 including 6 children. 47 new cases by 16 Physicians. 11th. to 12th. 14 0 8
87 41 0 41 including 7 children. 36 new cases by 16 Physicians. From 12th. to
13th. 9 12 2 82 29 0 27 41 including 4 children. 23 new cases. 13th. to 14th. 8
0 ^ 82 29 0 34 14th. to 15th. 8 0 5 85 45 0 32 48 new cases. 15th. to 16th. 7
12 4 ^6 33 0 25 including 1 child. 22 new cases reported by 15 physicians.
16th. to 17th. 4 0 4 76 33 0 25 including 6 children. 27 new cases. 17th. to
18th. 4 0 3 77 33 0 34 including 4 children. 18th. to 19th. 4 24 5 52 20 0 34
including 4 children. 17 new cases by 15 physicians. 19th. to 20th. 4 0 2 54 20
0 19 including 2 children. 20th. to 21st. 4 0 1 58 20 9 14 21st. to 22d. 3 0 4
57 20 0 20 including 4 children. 26 new cases. From 22d. to 23d. 1 0 4 40 21 0
22 including 2 children. 16 new cases. 23d. to 24th. 5 14 1 44 21 0 17
including 3 children. 10 new cases. 24th. to 25th. 5 0 1 48 21 0 16 inc. 2chapter
25th. to 26th. 2 0 1 49 30 0 20 including 2 children. 12 new cases. 26th. to
27th. 3 12 1 39 18 0 20 inc. 4 chil. 25 new cases. 27th. to 28th. 3 0 3 39 18 0
26 28th. to 29th. 3 7 5 30 11 0 22 inc. 6 chil. 18 new cases for last 48 hours.
29th. to 30th. 3 0 3 30 11 0 15 inc. 3 chil. 8 new cases by 16 Ph. 30th. to
31st. 2 0 3 29 14 0 16 10 new cases. A TABLE, Of Deaths in New York, from the
12th of September to the 1st of October.
DAY. DEATHS. 12 50 including 6 children. 14 37 15 40 16 50 17 45 18 42 19 40
20 40 22 45 23 46 24 48 25 41 26 60 including 6 children. 27 54 28 38 29 49 30
43 TOTAL, 778 A TABLE, Of Deaths in New York, in the Months of October and
November.
OCTOBER. NOVEMBER. DAY. DEATHS. DAY. DEATHS. 1 41 1 15 2 36 2 14 3 36 3 13 4
26 4 12 5 0 5 10 6 23 7 10 8 18 9 11 10 12 11 0 12 22 13 16 14 18 15 24 16 19
17 15 18 0 19 13 20 15 21 9 22 11 23 0 24 7 25 0 26 13 27 13 28 8 29 0 30 0 31
7

October 1st.
A considerable number of cases of pure intermittents have occurred on the high
grounds within two miles of the city; in one family near the encampment on
Masters' place, five of the family have had regular paroxisms and intermissions.

Harrisburgh which was much infested with intermitting and remitting fevers,
and the dysentry formerly in hot summers, has been remarkably healthy the
present summer; owing to the removal of a milldam, which formerly occasioned an
extensive tract of ground near the town to be overflowed.

Two of the criminals in the jail, were discovered undermining the wall of the
east dungeon yesterday.

The jail is now under the care of Peter Helm, who performed such meritorious
services at the hospital in 1793. The former jailor from dread of the fever,
had relinquished his charge.

The American Howard, has also taken up his abode in that dreary mansion of the
lawless votaries of rapine and disorder, for the purpose of employing means to
prevent the disease from spreading there.

Accounts from New York, state that the late northerly and N. W. breeze has had
a favorable effect upon the fever. At Philadelphia the number of new cases are
also reduced though as had been predicted, the mortality was greater upon its
first coming on.

Several persons from the country who were at the friends yearly meeting, in
the city have been attacked with fever since their return home.

October 2nd.
The board of managers have received a draught on the Bank of United States,
for 3,000 dollars for the benefit of the poor of this city, from the mayor of
Baltimore, in part of a subscription making by the inhabitants of that place.

The G. of Octo. 2nd.

Seven deaths at Boston on the 27th. last and 79 sick.

All the pasture grounds appear parched up, and all the springs are become
remarkably low.

The flats along the Schuylkill, and the creeks that empty into the Delaware,
expose more mud to the rays of the sun than usual, and give origin to numerous
cases of intermittents, but there has not been an instance of a case of
malignant or yellow fever appearing any where in the vicinity of the
Schuylkill, as far as I have been able to learn.

"At Marcus-hook, 2 persons from Philadelphia were attacked with the fever, and
died soon after; five of the family with whom they resided, were attacked in
succession and every one died"

October 3d.
The physicians prescribed today at the encampment for 26 persons, with
different complaints; -- only 3 with yellow fever, and these lately from the
city, one of whom was sent to the City Hospital.

Accounts from New York, state that the death of Dr. Tredwell makes the
eleventh physician that has fallen a sacrifice to the prevailing fever in that
city.

Extract of a letter from a respectable character in New York, dated Oct. 1st.
"We hope the disorder in our city is abating, from the number of new cases
being much less for the four last days, than for some time before, although the
number of the inhabitants remain nearly the same. The deaths still about 40.
The disorder is much among the poor, who are unable to procure suitable
nursing. Simple remedies are found most availing. Castor oil and salts, with
injections, are all the medicines, excepting lime water and milk, that are
given by our most skilful and successful physicians. Herb teas, particularly
catmint, are very freely used to occasion perspiration, and where the patient
has an attentive and prudent nurse, they generally under this treatment have
recovered. Eleven persons have been sick in my house, and excepting one, have
all been treated in this way, and all recovered. My sister had calomel, and
suffered more than the others, though her attack was much less severe than
either of them. I could mention other instances, but this may suffice. This
practice is now so generally used, that many instances occur, where the nurses
never call for the aid of a physician, and have much success."


October 4th.
Only 19 persons sick today at the encampment, viz: -- 3 with yellow fever --
rheumatism 1 -- catarrh 1 -- opthalmia 2 -- intermitting fever 4 -- dysentery 2
-- diarrhoea 5 -- hoemorrhoids 1.

In a letter from Dr. Mitchell of Virginia, addressed to Dr. Franklin, it is
asserted, "That blood-letting, upon the first accession of the pain in the
head, frequently prevented the disease from forming, especially when an emetic
was given immediately after, and a sweat raised by diluting acid drinks."

The disease has visibly declined in the city since the late cold weather.

Deaths in New York in the month of August, 133 men, 55 women, and 141
children. Of these, 83 are said to have died of the yellow fever, and 246 of
other diseases -- Total in August, 392.

Deaths in September, 649 men, 353 women, and 148 children; 956 of the fever,
and 194 of other diseases -- Total 1150.

October 1st and 2d, -- 54 men, 19 women, and 4 children; 7^ of the fever, and
6 of other diseases -- Total, 77.

Total deaths since the 1st of August, 836 men, 427 women, and 293 children;
1110 of the fever, and 446 of other diseases -- Total, 1556.

(Porc. Gaz. of Oct. 6.)

The health committee of New London, in their report of the 25th ult. recommend
to the citizens who have moved out, not to return at present, as the number of
new cases last week, has exceeded any preceding week.

Twenty-two persons sick at the encampment; -- only one of whom had any
symptoms resembling the malignant or yellow fever. The complaints are opthalmia
4 -- remitting fever 1 -- intermitting fever 6 -- all with regular cold and hot
stages, succeeded by perfect intermissions; some quotidians, and some tertiant.
-- Spurious pleurisy 2 -- rheumatism 2 -- diarrhoea 1 -- diarrhoea infantum 3
-- dysentery 2.

Dr. Mitchell of Virginia, in a letter written some years since to Dr.
Franklin, asserts, "That the yellow fever has chiefly raged in America in large
families, towns, camps or ships, and has been twice brought into Virginia by
ships of war;" and adds, "It is remarkably contagious, as appears from the
greatest part of a family being affected by it from persons who had taken it in
another place.

"The most effectual remedies were lenient purges and clysters frequently
repeated till a copious diarrhoea and bilious stool ensued; with aqueous and
bland drinks, and occasional bleedings adapted to the indications expressed by
the pulse and pain of head, stomach or intestines. He also assures him, that he
found mild purges and clysters much more effectual than any other remedies so
long as the pain and tenderness of the stomach, and constant propensity to puke
continued, upon receiving any thing into it, without regard to the period or
duration of the disease, though the lowless of the pulse seemed to oppose it."

I have seen several cases this year of persons that had the disease in '93 and
'97, and have seen several instances of reinsection every time that the disease
has appeared in the city since the year '93.

Hannah Norris died at M. Fisher's esquire. several weeks after having recovered
from the first attack in '93. Dr. Pleasants died under similar circumstances in
'97. Mr. Young, Mr. Conoly, Mr. Tailor, Mrs. Lisle, and several others,
recovered after a second attack. This year Drs. Cooper, Mease, and Leib, David
Park, Mrs. Mendenhall, and several others, had the disease that had it before.
Those cases, however, have been very few in comparison of those that have
escaped it, who have once had it.

It appears from Dr. Stark's dissections, that an inflammation of the stomach,
however induced, is attended with the same symptoms as the yellow fever; and
that what is called the black vomit is owing to a mortification of the vellous
coat of the stomach, and blood which has escaped from the dilated vessels and
become putrid.

[See Stark's Clinical and Anatomical Observations.]

It appears from Dr. Crawford's experiments, that the gases or aerial
exhalations, extricated from the flesh of animals, by putrefaction, consist of
animal hepatic air, i. e. hydrogen holding sulphur in solution, with a small
proportion of azotic gas, or air deprived of its ozygene. And the smell of the
breath and of the perspirable matter, in malignant fevers, evidently
demonstrate that they contain animal hepatic, hydrogenous gas, and not super
oxygenated azote, as has been presumed by Dr. S. L. Mitchell, of New York.

In these fevers a viciated secretion takes place, and the excretions occasion
a similar fever when taken into a sound body.

October 6th.
Boston -- Since the return on the 28th inst. to 2d of Oct. 24 new cases have
occurred, and 27 have died -- Sick at present, 58.

Sick at Boston on the 3d inst. -- 27; at New London -- 36.

The Philadelphia Gazette announces the death of four of the public friends
that were in town at the yearly meeting.

More than 100 orphans have been sent to the almshouse, in consequence of the
fever.

There has been no instance yet of the yellow fever being contagious at the
encampment.

A child was born at the encampment in perfect health, and without any
discolouration of the skin, whose mother, Mary Elton, had just recovered from
the yellow fever, by which her skin was rendered of a deep saffron color.

October 9th.
The number of houses open in the city on the 9th instant, from Callowhill
street to South street and from the Delaware to 12th street, is stated in the
Phil. Gaz. to be 1654.

Owing to a succession of severe frosts, the fever lately prevalent in Boston,
is said to have almost entirely disappeared.

(U. S. G.)

It is also stated, that owing to the extraordinary abatement of the fever in
New York, the fugitives are rapidly returning to that city.

Only one person was reported to be sick in Portsmouth (N. H.) on the 5th
instant.

October 11th.
HEALTH-OFFICE.
October 11, 1798.
The Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, felicitate their
fellow-citizens on the rapid decline of the prevailing fever since the 1st
inst. the prosperous state of the City Hospital, and enlivening prospect of a
speedy termination of the calamity, which has overwhelmed our city. None can
more assiduously desire the return of their fellow-citizens in safety, to the
comforts of their own fireside; but they depreciate the consequences of
precipitation, where so much caution and prudence is required.

The apprehension of the Board has been awakened by the too hasty return of
many individuals, who have inconsiderately hazarded their own health and the
public welfare; several of whom, the Board are sorry to add, have been seized
with the fever shortly after their return.

The weather, since the 6th inst. has been extremely unfavourable, and the
number of the sick have considerably increased; which would be augmented by the
accumulation of persons, particularly those from a pure atmosphere. The Board
earnestly solicit public attention to considerations so important; and entreat
the forbearance of their fellow-citizens, until returning health shall invite
them home.

The Board cannot too strongly impress the propriety and necessity of cleansing
and purifying, (previous to the return of the inhabitants), the bedding,
clothing, and houses, in which the disease has existed; for which purpose,
they recommend the liberal use of lime. They also repeat their recommendation
to the commissioners, to have the pumps frequently and copiously worked, as the
water is extremely offensive and unwholesome.

The Board assure their fellow-citizens that whenever the health of the City
and Liberties shall be so restored as to admit of the return of the inhabitants
with safety, not a moment shall be delayed in announcing the glad tidings.

By order of the Board of Managers. WM. JONES, President. Attest, TIMOTHY
PAXON, Clerk.


Still of every hope deprived;
Fatigued with vain resources, and subdued
With woes resistless and enfeebling fear;
Passive they sink beneath the weighty blow
And naught is seen but ghastly views of death.
The Richmond papers state, that one-sixth part of the usual number of the
inhabitants residing at City-point, near Petersburgh, Virginia, have been swept
off in the course of about 20 days; that the fatal malady was spread by the
ship Nestor, of Portland, Capt. Wait, which vessel arrived at City-point from
Philadelphia, on the 24th of August, having thrown four dead hands overboard on
her passage. Being without hands to load with tobacco, negroes were called
upon, and out of eleven thus employed, ten have died.

Almost every case can be traced to this vessel.

Among the victims in the fever at City-point, are William H. Hanson, Deputy
Collector, and Robert Walker Surveyor of that port.

Copy of a letter from Mr. Thomas Lorain, to Mr. John Lorain, Charleston.
Petersburg, August 31st, 1798.
It is probable one of my attendants in the store may soon fall a victim to an
inveterate bilious fever. On Sunday he requested of me leave to go down the
river to see a ship, (for he had never seen one) and as he was a good fellow,
and seldom out, I consented, with a charge of good behavior. With him went a
party of five youths, and having to wait for the flood tide, they did not
return till late in the night. The two succeeding days he was well, but on
Wednesday was taken with an ague, pains in his joints, eyes inflamed, and
vomiting of bile; and after him, the same day, the captain and all but one were
taken sick in the same way. Yesterday the physician bled him twice, and left
him at night in extreme danger. This morning he sends for another physician to
consult the case.

(Signed) THOMAS LORAIN.
"N. B. The consultation is ended, his medicine operated, and they think him
better."




Copy of a letter from Mr. Thomas Lorain, to Mr. Thomas W. Armat, dated
Petersburg, 24th September, 1798. SIR,
It seems difficult to ascertain the rise and progress of this fatal disease;
but the circumstances related are these:

1st. I understand the ship Nestor, in which the suspected infection came, was
from Philadelphia or Boston; but what passage she had, I know not.

2d. It Is reported that three sailors died on board before she reached City
Point.

3d. Before my youth went on board, a negro ashore advised him not to go there,
for people had died in that ship of the fever; and when the captain came ashore
with the boat for them, he refused going; but the captain seriously avered that
the negro was angry with him, and reported this maliciously to the young men,
who at length consented to go.

4th. The ship had nothing in but dirt balast from the town she left, and it
being Sunday, all or chief part of the hands were ashore. The day before, they
had pumped out of her several gallons of fetid bilge water, the scent of which
even then remained unpleasant, for it had been in her some weeks. -- Most of
the hands who pumped it sickened and died, as did several of those who helped
to land the ballast.

5th. Since the youths left the ship, several persons in that neighborhood
have died of the like fever, and Dr. Walker, who visited them while a black
vomiting was on some of them, is now very sick in the house opposite us, but I
hope is recovering.

6th. The youths left the ship at 6 o'clock P. M. and from getting aground
frequently did not return home before midnight. In the day they were exposed to
an hot sun, and at night to an heavy dew.

7th. On the Tuesday of that same week, at 12 o'clock, my lad was taken with an
ague, and before night every one of the party that went in the vessel had an
high fever, but two of the negroes who went to row and avoided the ship,
escaped the fever. -- Many are willing to attribute the disease to the affects
of the sun and dew, and say these negroes kept up perspiration by rowing home,
while the whites lay exposed to the cool dew in an open boat. My youth was bled
on Wednesday morning, but his veins were so small and low, that Dr. Shore could
not let as much blood as he wished, (only a tea cup full) for they approve of
copious bleeding. His complaint was a deadly sickness at the stomach, with
pains in every limb, attended with frequent vomiting of yellow bile. During his
disorder he took a quantity of pills which operated well; injections were
administered; each temple cup'd; stomach and legs blistered; and the last
medicine given was, I believe, an emetic powder. On Saturday he was very
restless, and at night a delirium and stupor came on; thus he remained till
Sunday, when the above emetic was given, soon after which he made some efforts
to vomit, but did not; his eyes began to vibrate exceedingly, and with much
oppression at his breast, he expired. His corpse was not more yellow than usual;
four persons were interred when he was, carried off by fevers, I believe.

The captain (Wilson) of the ship Delight, which lay near the Nestor, and with
whom the youths dined, did not live so long as my lad; but he was a very
intemperate man, even in his sickness, and had been on Monday exposed to wet
and the heat of the sun. He died in town, distracted with the fever and liquor
he drank when he came up. -- The eyes of every one were remarkably glassy,
inflamed, but not red as is generally represented.

This summer I went to the tin factory opposite us, to get some tin which they
kept in a back house; the yard was so excessive filthy, I asked them if they
were hatching the yellow fever? they hoped not; but every creature of them have
had a fever like the above; some had it before the shipping came; and several
about this town have the like fever, but are chiefly on the recovery. One Mr.
Cooper, an English merchant at Blandford, (in this town) died yesterday
morning; and I suppose there are four or five in town sick of the same disease.
Our family physician is just recovering; his head was blistered, and he was
delirious several days. One of the tinners told me he suffered more with it in
one day, than with all the pain and sickness of his whole life, (which was 30
years) and could get no relief till the doctor allowed him to drink cold water
in small draughts at a time. This enabled him to keep his medicine down, which
he could not do before. Our physicians think the disease originates from the
sun, heat, dew, filth, etc. -- probably it does, for no one caught it of my
young man; and had it been the smallpox, I dare say they would have felt the
affects of it. Every dose of medicine I gave him with my own hand, that he
might have a fair chance. I used no preventative, but burnt tar frequently in
the house and sprinkled it fore and aft with vinegar, keeping every window open
day and night. Since writing the above, I understand that two of the Richmond
craft, that had been employed at one of these ships, lost almost every hand on
board; one of them had only a boy left. We have cool nights now, but the middle
of the day is very warm and dry. When our family physician (Dr. Shore)
recovers, you shall know more of this fever. I have been much confined at home;
and as City Point is 12 miles off, and several ships have been there, I cannot
get a satisfactory account of it. I believe several died in one of the ships at
the Cape, but the captain endeavored to conceal it, that it might not prevent
his getting hands. Your friend and servant.

THOMAS LORAIN.


October 12th.
A number of the poor are now employed at the canal, the design of which is to
convey the water of Schuylkill to the city, etc.

The ship Pigou, bound to India, has returned to port, on account of the
sickness among the crew, which attacked them soon after her departure. It is
reported (but for this I cannot vouch) that on her way out, she left a man with
the fever at Port Penn. The inhabitants put him in the woods under a tent.
where he perished for want of assistance.

Twenty-two persons sick in New London on the 9th inst.

On Friday, the 5th inst. died at Germantown, of the prevailing fever, in the
19th year of his age, Mr. John Nicholls, son of Wm. Nicholls, esquire. marshall of
the district of Pennsylvania. Mr. Nicholls had been ill of the fever some weeks
before, in the city, where he was attended by his young friend, Mr. Hillegas.
He had just removed to Germantown, in a state of convalescence. When his friend
was attacked with the disease, gratitude and affection induced him to return
the same friendly and humane office to his suffering friend and benefactor. He
saw his friend expire, closed his eyes, drew in the poison with his grief, and
in a few days after, expired himself.

October 15th.
Several of the criminals in the east-wing of the jail, undermined the wall and
made their escape in the night of the 13th inst.

The following account, delivered me in writing this morning, by C. Marshall,
jun. who resided in the neighborhood, where the facts occurred, (and collected
at my request) incontrovertibly proves, that the yellow fever is not contagious
in the air of cities only, but is sometimes contagious in situations that are
noted for salubrity:

Elizabeth Johnson, about 10 years of age, came from Philadelphia to her
mother's (the widow Johnson) the ^th of August; was taken ill with the fever on
the 10th, and died on the 13th. -- Elizabeth Duy, a near neighbor who had been
several times to visit E. Johnson, was attacked in a similar manner on the 26th
of August, and died on the 30th. -- Mary Hubbs, a near neighbor to E. Duy, and
visited her in her sickness, was taken with fever on the 29th of August, and
died the 3d of September. -- Charles, son of Mary Hubbs, was taken with the
fever the same day, with his mother, and recovered in the course of a week. --
Christ. Duy, husband of Elizabeth, was taken ill on the 16th of September, and
died on the 23d. -- Elizabeth Johnson, mother to the first mentioned Elizabeth,
was taken ill the 21st of September, and died on the 29th. -- Joseph Fisher and
his wife had an apartment at Christ. Duy's. Joseph Fisher's wife took sick soon
after the death of C. Duy, and recovered. -- Joseph Fisher was taken ill on the
22d of September, and died on the 27th. -- The widow Johnson's servant maid was
taken ill about the same time with E. Johnson, and recovered in 8 days.
Elizabeth Star, who lived in Mrs. Johnson's family, was taken ill on the 27th
of September, and died on the 14th of October, though she had been freely
salivated. None of the above had been in the city for several weeks.

October 16th.
Thirty-six patients sick at the encampment today -- most part with light
complaints, such as catarrh and diarrhoea. Only two new cases of malignant
fever have occurred at the encampment for some days. One of these has been ill
eleven days -- had the black vomit ever since the 7th, from the attack -- is at
this instant with scarcely any appearance of life. This woman, whose name is
Makittrick, was attacked five days after a visit to the city -- Takes lime
water and fresh milk. Peter Tryon, the other case of the yellow fever, was
attacked the day after he came to the encampment -- this his 3d day.

From comparing the effects of mercury, in different cases, it appears to me,
now, to be proper to excite salivation in every case where malignant symptoms
are evident at an early period of the fever; but that it is superfluous, if not
injurious, to induce salivation in cases where inflammatory symptoms are
predominant, till these are induced by sufficient blood-letting and purging,
which in the majority of cases so circumstanced, cure the disease without the
aid of any additional remedy. The yellow fever corresponds in this respect with
the variolous fever, or smallpox. In those cases where the eruption appears
with a confluent aspect, accompanied with great debility, oppression, and
uneasiness about the region of the heart, mercury has been long recommended by
several eminent physicians as a more effectual remedy than any other, when
restrained by the addition of opium, from occasioning frequent evacuations by
the bowels. But I believe no one can deem it necessary to employ so violent a
remedy in the distinct and simple form of the disease, when more safe ones will
answer as well.

It was the general practice last year, as well as the present, to give mercury
in all cases indiscriminately, which was certainly injudicious, and in many
cases retarded the cure, especially in cases accompanied with inflammatory
symptoms; but in cases where nervous symptoms predominated from the beginning,
and unaccompanied with severe pain in the head, eyes, or stomach, or with
symptoms of dysentery or gravel, calomel was found more successful when given
in doses of two grains every two hours, and the application of two or three
drachms of strong mercurial ointment to the region of the liver and to
different parts of the body four times in the course of every 24 hours,
restraining the mercury by the addition of a few drops of laudanum,
occasionally, if it occasioned more than one or two evacuations in the course
of the day, till signs of salivation appeared, and no longer; the patient, at
the same time, abstaining from all flesh meats and vinous liquors. The early
and repeated application of blisters, in such cases, were generally beneficial;
but blood-letting did injury.

October 18th.
From the Philadelphia Gazette of this date. A DESCRIPTION Of the ENCAMPMENT at
Masters' place.
THE encampment at Masters' place is an immense work, considering the short
period in which it was executed. Buildings comfortable, convenient, and in
every respect well adapted to the occasion, have been erected in eight or nine
days, sufficient to accommodate 2000 people. Besides those buildings, there
were erected, in the same time, an hospital, a large storehouse and offices, a
bake-house and oven, and five kitchens, each with eight large fire places. This
little town is built on a well chosen spot, and is laid out in regular order
the streets intersecting each other. The rules and regulations, which are
printed and put up in different parts of the encampment, do honor to the heads
and hearts of the committee. The entire prohibition of spiritous liquors,
except in cases of real necessity, is a striking feature in those excellent
rules; in short, they have established a systematical police. -- They punish
slight offenses by withholding the provisions for a reasonable time, and for
those more aggravated, they expel the offender. All intercourse with the city
is cut off (except on special occasions) which is enforced by placing sentinels
at proper distances around the encampment, who do not permit any person to pass
or repass, by night or day, without leave from one of the committee or steward.
Scavengers are also appointed, whose duty it is every morning to remove all the
filth and to throw fresh earth into the necessaries. The people are compelled
to expose their bedding to the sun and air at least three times a week, and to
wash their clothing frequently.

The most scrupulous regard to justice is observed in the distribution of the
provisions, which are of an excellent quality, and served out in abundance. --
The strict decorum that has been so eminently maintained in the encampment,
amongst characters too, some of whom are no doubt very abandoned, demonstrate
the most assiduous attention in the committee as well as superior address.

Official accounts state, that the fever has so far subsided at Boston, as to
render it perfectly safe for the inhabitants to return, and prosecute their
business as usual.

(P. G.)

A letter to the Editor of the Chro. from Phila. mentions, "that in that city
and New York, 21 printers have fallen vactims to the terrible calamity which
has desolated those places. To what cause to attribute this uncommon mortality,
puzzles many -- but in my opinion," adds our correspondent, "it has arisen from
so large a number deeming it their duty to be found at their posts: while most
other professions fled. I know nothing peculiarly attractive of disease in the
materials used in printing-offices -- but as nothing but flight can save, if it
appears at another season, I shall consider it a bounden duty to avoid it."

(Boston Chronicle.)

October 19th.
A comedy was performed on the 5th inst. by Hodgkinson's company, at the
theater Providence, Rhode Island, for the relief of the sufferers by the fever.

Ph. Gaz. of 18th inst.

The most liberal donations are daily presented to the managers of the tents
and the encampments, for the relief of the suffering poor.

October 20th.
On the list of deaths for the 17th inst. is the name of Mrs. Sarah Swartz, in
the 99th year of her age.

October 21st.
A sailor at Marcus-Hook, I am credibly informed, was restored to life when to
all appearance dead, by pouring strong grog into his mouth. He afterward
perfectly recovered.

About 50 persons from different parts of the country, attended the Friends
yearly meeting on the 22nd of September, of these, 17 were soon after attacked
with fever, the majority within five days after leaving the city, where some of
them had remained only one and others two nights; and of the 17 attacked with
fever, 12 died. Among those that died was Warner Mifflin, an influential and
much lamented member of that society.

Warner Mifflin was not taken ill till the 16th day after he left the city. --
Joseph Turner, from the head of Chester, who had been in the city only four
hours, died soon after his return home.

Fifteen sick at the encampment today, chiefly with catarrh, diarrhoea,
intermitting fever, and cutaneous eruptions.

There is not a case of malignant or yellow fever today in the encampment.

Mrs. Makittrick died on the 19th, being the 14th day from the attack Lime
water was given in small and repeated doses mixed wite milk of lipid warmth, to
Mrs. M'Kittrick, without producing any sensible effect, either on the color of
the black matter, or in restraining the vomiting.
.

Tryon also died on the 20th, being the 7th, from the attack. His wife not only
attended in his illness but, in opposition to the most earnest remonstrances,
slept in the same bed with him in the hospital.

October 22d.
If I am not unaccountably deceived, the present prevailing fever, in many
respects, bears a great resemblance to the smallpox. They are both more
malignant in some constitutions than others; they are both less fatal to
children and the generality of women than to men. They are both more fatal to
men addicted to intemperate and voluptuous living; the gross and the corpulent,
than to temperate livers, who are engaged in active occupations.

Hence like small pox, the preparation requisite to render the disease mild and
safe, must vary with the temperament and constitution of each individual.

Where the inflammatory diathesis predominates, which is commonly the case in
children from two to twelve years of age, and to young persons accustomed to
activity in the open air, mercury is not a proper preparative; but in all cases
where the want of vigor is manifest, and a disposition to diseases of
debility, or the nervous type, are evident, mercury, and in such manner as not
to evacuate much, in all probability must be among the first preparatives to be
found in the Materia Medica. In the cure, I am certain it can only be employed
with safety and with efficacy, in cases where the inflammatory diathesis, is
not considerable; or in cases of nervous and septic tendency,

The incautious and too copious employment of mercury has in several instances
been followed by the most deplorable effects. In some cases it has occasioned
not only the loss of teeth, but of part of the jaw bone. In some, a rigid
contraction of the lower jaw -- a gangrene of, and consequent loss of part of
one of the cheeks -- the tonsils and palate -- loss of speech, etc. The
sphacelus and consequent erosions in some cases have been followed by profuse
discharges of blood, which have put a speedy period to the patient's life.
These facts are mentioned to put less experienced physicians upon their guard,
and to prevent them from acting like the Hungarian physicians, mentioned by
Kramer and Lind, who, because they had seen beneficial effects from mercury in
syphilitic ulcers, could not be persuaded that it would not have a similar
affect in cases of scurvy, but gave it to 400 patients and killed them to a man.

October 23d.
From the Columbia Sentinel. PHILADELPHIA: AN ELEGY.
IMPERIAL daughter of the West,
Why thus in widowed weeds recline?
With every gift of nature blessed,
The empire of a World was thine.
Late brighter than the star that beams
When the soft morning carol flows,
Now mournful as the maniac's dreams,
When melancholy veils his woes.
What foe with more than hostile ire
Has thin'd thy city's thronging way!
Bid the sweet breath of youth expire,
And manhood's powerful pulse decay?
No Gothic foe's ferocious band,
Fearful as fate, as death severe;
But the destroying angel's hand,
With hotter rage, with fiercer fear.
I saw thee in thy prime of days,
In glory rich, in beauty fair;
When MORRIS, partner of thy praise,
Sustained thee with a patron's care.
Have hailed that hospitable dome,
Where all the cultured virtues grew;
Fortune and fashion's graceful home,
Warm hearted love, and friendship true.
Columbia's genius veil thy brow,
Guardian of freedom, hither bend --
The prayer of mercy meets thee now --
With healing energy descend.
Chase the hot fiend whose fervid tread,
Consumes the fairest flower that blows;
Bends the sweet lily's bashful head,
And fades the blushes of the rose.
Even now, his omen'd birds of prey,
Through the unpeopling mansions rove;
Drenched is that eye's inspiring ray,
And lost that breezy lip of love.
Yet guard the Friend, who wandering near
Haunts which the loitering Schuylkill laves,
Bestows the tributary tear,
Or fans with sighs the drowsy waves.
And while his mercy-dealing hand
Feeds many a famished child of care;
Wave round his brow thy saving wand,
And breathe thy sweetness through the air.
Till borne on health's elastic wing,
Aloft the rapid whirlwind flies;
The coldest gale of Z^mbla bring,
And brace with frost the dripping skies.
Where shelving to the heated coast,
Along the dusky pile Water-street, intended by the founder of the city to have
been planted with trees. The fever has always made its full appearance in this
spots
ascends;
Some new ALCIDES -- freedom's boast --
His heaven-assisted arm extends.
Beneath his firm-collected blow,
Despoiled, the crashing ruin lies --
The Dryads bring the leaffy bough,
And bid their green plantations rise.
The shapely poplar's tapering form,
The oak its building branches rears;
The elm that braves the cleaving storm,
The fragrant pine's prolific tears.
Each leaf expands its fanning shade,
Beneath whose breeze contagion dies,
The whispering youth and listening maid
Gaze grateful with enchanted eyes.
HE, who the loved Asyum gave,
Even thus, the immortal Founder said --
Low wafted from the heaving grave,
Ah! heed the mandate of the dead.
Yet bid the Neriads bring their urns,
Haste! and the marble fount unclose;
Through streets where Syrian summers burns,
'Till all the cool libation flows.
Cool as the brook that bathes the heath
When noon unfolds his silent hours --
Refreshing as the morning's breath
Adown the cleansing streamlet pours.
From waves the heavenly Venus grew;
Those waves to mortal beauty kind,
The flush of fragrant health renew,
And brace the nerve-enfeebled mind.
IMPERIAL DAUGHTER OF THE WEST;
No rival wins thy wreathe away;
In all the wealth of nature dressed,
Again thy sovereign charms display.
See all thy setting glories rise --
Again thy thronging streets appear;
Thy mart an hundred ports supplies;
Thy harvests feed the circling year.
COLUMBIA.
October 24th.
The committee who superintend the tents on the banks of Schuylkill, request
their female doners will not furnish them with any more clothing for infants
under two years of age, "as their industry and liberality has already enabled
them to clothe the naked, to save the shivering child from perishing, and to
send the infant warm and the mother happy away."

Twenty-one sick persons today at the encampment -- where there are at this
time, 1800 people, including the convalescents lately received from the City
Hospital, viz: Men, 340; women, 564; -- children, 896, including 221 infants at
the breast.

October 26th.
Several persons that have already returned to the city, have taken the fever.

Total number of deaths in Wilmington from August 7th to October 26th,
inclusive, adults, 218 -- children, 22 -- Total, 240.

Borough Hospital report, from August 13th to October 26th, inclusive --
Admitted 88 -- died 41 -- eloped 3 -- discharged, cured, 37 -- remaining in
hospital 7.

Wm. Jackson, who came into the city to the Friend's yearly meeting on the 22d
of September, and left it on Monday morning the 24th, was attacked with fever
on Wednesday the 26th. -- Hannah Lindcy, from the same neighborhood, who came
to and left the city at the same time with William Jackson, was attacked on
Friday the 28th. -- The daughter of Robert Kirkbride, of Bucks county, took the
fever from her father and died.

State of the Weather from 1st to 12th of November.
Snowed all day, and was disagreeably cold the 1st of November, and continued
cold and frosty till the the 6th. From this time to the 12th the days were more
mild, but the nights still continued frosty.

Occurrences. etc. in November.
Table of the number of sick, and of the deaths, from the 1st to the 12th
November.
Number of patients admitted into the City Hospital after the 30th of October.

Five deaths in the hospital, from the 31st of October, to 3d of November.

At the same time, 22 persons remained in the hospital, sixteen of whom were on
the recovery.

The total number of deaths published in the Philadelphia Gazette, from the
1st, to the 6th November, inclusive -- 63.

November 2d.
In consequence of the late favorable state of the weather, the Managers of
the Marine and City Hospitals thought it unnecessary to continue their official
reports any longer, and published the following address to the citizens:

[In communicating the following, to the Public, we experience emotions which
the recollection of our late distressed situation, of those desolating scenes
to which we have been familiarized by experience, will not permit us to
express. We shall therefore join in the general and spontaneous effusions of
gratitude on the occasion -- and add, that in consequence of the favorable
reports from the physicians, the Board of Health do not think it necessary to
continue their official reports from this date -- and that similar motives have
induced the committee to close the City Hospital.]

Health-Office, November 1st, 1798. Fellow-Citizens,
THE period so ardently desired by us all, has at length arrived. Our best
information and judgment corroborated by the opinion of the physicians, we
believe warrants us in announcing to you, the restoration of general health to
our afflicted City and Liberties; and that the citizens may return with safety,
if proper precautions are taken in cleansing and airing the houses, bedding,
and clothing; correcting the exhalations from the privies by the plentiful use
of lime, and working copiously the private as well as public pumps.

In the termination of a painful duty we cannot repress our sentiments of
respectful veneration for the unexampled benevolence and charity which you have
displayed -- the suffering sick, the widow and the fatherless have been
cherished; and hundreds of grateful fellow creatures have been wrested from the
grasp of disease and death, by your bounty. These virtues are a certain pledge
that the objects which you have safely conducted through the tempest of
disease, will not be abandoned to the miseries of an inclement winter.

By order of the Board of Managers, Wm. JONES, President. Attest, TIMOTHY
PAXSON, Clerk.


Deaths in New York from August 1st to November 1st -- Men 1077 -- women 561 --
children 360 -- from the 1st to the 9th, 60, exclusive of those that have died
in the country soon after leaving the city. -- Total 2058.

The malignant fever did not make its appearance in New York for some time
after it had made considerable progress in Philadelphia.

November 3d.
It is stated in one of the New York papers of yesterday, that the late
extraordinary change in the temperature of the air, which has been extremely
cold for the season, since Sunday evening the 28th ult. and the fall of snow
all yesterday afternoon, the fever which has made such dreadful havoc during
the last ten weeks, appears now to have made its final exit. The fugitives may
therefore return to the city without any danger.

Greatest part of the people have moved in from the encampment of Masters'
fields; and all the roads leading to the city are thronged with the returning
citizens, who had taken refuge from the fever in the country.

Those in the tents on Schuylkill will return in a few days.

BILL OF MORTALITY,
Collected for the Philadelphia Gazette, from the 1st of August to the 3d of
November, inclusive.

From the 1st to the 31st of August, inclusive.

In the Burial Grounds of the City and Liberties -- Adults 123 -- children 136
-- Total 359.

In the Burial Ground of the City Hospital -- From the City Hospital 112 --
City and Suburbs 152 -- Total 264 -- Total in August -- 623.

BILL OF MORTALITY,
From the 1st to the 30th of September, inclusive.

In the City Burial Grounds, etc. -- Adults 729 -- children 211 -- Total -- 940.

In City Hospital Ground -- From the Hospital 275 -- City and Suburbs 616 --
Total 891 -- Total in September, -- 1831.

BILL OF MORTALITY,
From the 1st to the 31st of October, inclusive.

In the City Burial Grounds, etc. -- Adults 393 -- children 111 -- Total 504.

In the City Hospital Ground -- From City Hospital 126 -- City and Suburbs 312
-- Total 438 -- Total in October -- 942.

BILL OF MORTALITY,
From the 1st to the 3d of November, inclusive.

In the City Burial Grounds, etc. -- Adults 22 -- children 3 -- Total 25.

In the City Hospital Ground -- From the Hospital 5 -- City and Suburbs 20 --
Total 25 -- Total from the 1st to the 3d of November, inclusive -- 50.

Whole number of deaths from the 1st of August to the 3d of November,
inclusive, -- 3446 -- exclusive of citizens who died in the country, which may
be computed to amount to 300 at least.

COMPARATIVE STATEMENT
Between the year 1793, and the present year.
1793. 1798. Deaths in August, 325. Deaths in August, 623. in Sept. 1442. in
Sept. 1831. in Oct. 1093. in Oct. 942. Nov. 1st to 9th, 118. Nov. 1st to 3d,
50. Number omitted in different grounds 164. Total, 4041. Total, 3446. If to
the above we add 60, which have died since the 3d together with the number
which have died in different parts of the country it will be evident that the
mortality was comparatively much greater this year than in 1793: for in the
year last mentioned, not more than a third part of the inhabitants left the
city; whereas this year 3-4th at least left it.


Total deaths in New York, from the 25th of August to November 3d -- 2058.

Total deaths in Philadelphia from August 1st to November 3d -- 3446.

Do. in Chester -- 50. Do. in Marcus-Hook -- 52. Do. in Wilmington -- 252. Do
at Chew's Landing, N. J. -- 26.
November 15th.
The disease, which began to languish upon the first frosty weather, is now
entirely extinguished. -- Sociability resumes its usual course; the streets,
late desolate and forlorn, are thronged with the face of business and of
enterprise -- The stores, so long closed in gloomy silence, once more display
their inviting goods, and every street resounds with the cheerful voice of
industry. -- Agriculture, with his loaded teems, renews his welcome visits --
Numerous masts again rise in our ports like stately forests -- Even rough
drudgery, as he hews the ponderous stone, or at the car he toils looks gay --
The wharves, also, once more groan beneath the ponderous load of merchandise,
and echo the shouts of sailors as they resign the spreading canvass to the gale
and wave their last adieu.

HAVING in the preceding Memoirs, noted the rise, progress, and fatal effects
of the fever, lately prevalent in this city, and other parts of this country,
(the contagious nature of which is acknowledged by all, excepting a few persons
that are distinguished for nothing but the singularity of their opinions, and a
pertinacious adherence to a tenet, which both by the illustrations of reasoning
and the common sense of their fellow citizens, has been declared absurd and
utenable.) I shall now proceed to state such evidence as has come to my
knowledge, respecting the origin of the disease, the certainty of which is of
the highest importance to the future interest and prosperity of this country in
general, and to Philadelphia in particular.

Certain circumstances having given rise to a suspicion that the contagion
which gave origin to the disease was imported in the ship Deborah, which
arrived at Philadelphia, from Jeremie, and anchored near Race street wharf, on
the 18th of July. I made every enquiry in my power into the subject with a view
of ascertaining the truth.

The death of the Marquis de Rouvray, immediately after her arrival -- of a boy
that belonged to her a few days after, -- of a laboring man that had worked on
board her -- and of Alexander Philips, who had been down to her in a boat,
while she was performing quarantine, and who died on the 5th of August. -- The
sickness of a carpenter on the 26th of July at Achison Thompson's next door to
Philips's, who had been on board the Deborah while unshipping her cargo, -- the
sudden death of a sailor in the same house on the 28th of July, and, the
numerous cases in the neighborhood of Philip's and Thompson's a few days
after, not only increased, but directed the suspicions of all that were
acquainted with these circumstances, to the ship Deborah.

It appears from facts collected by Dr. Daniel De Beneville, and communicated
in writing to Dr. Griffitts, that the first person that had the yellow fever in
Kensington, (to which place the Deborah had removed for the purpose of
undergoing repairs on the 28th. of July), was a lad of the name of Joseph
Streeton, that had been on board of her while she lay in the city -- This lad
was taken sick on the 29th, of July and died the 3d of August.

James Porter, apprentice to Joseph Grice, ship carpenter, next door to
Streeton's, was taken with the fever on the 1st. of August, and died on the
twelfth.

James Ashmore, an apprentice to Wm. Yard, ship carpenter, who had worked on
board the Deborah, while she lay in the city was attacked with the fever, on
the 2d. of August, and died on the fifteenth.

James Kerr, George Adams, and one Simons, all apprentices to Wm. Yard, worked
on board the Deborah, and were all taken sick a few days after James Ashmore,
and all recovered.

Two laboring men, who worked on board the Deborah, were taken sick on the 3d.
of August, one died, the other recovered. Samuel Baker, Dr. De Beneville, his
wife and house keeper, who resided near the wharf where the Deborah lay, were
all attacked with the fever, in the course of a week after her arrival at
Kensington; and before the middle of August the whole neighborhood was
infected.

That the Deborah was an infected vessel, appears evident, from the testimony
of her mate, Mr. John Lewis, the carpenter that was with her, during the whole
voyage, the cook, several seamen, and a passenger of the name of Dickison --
all of whom agree, that she lost seven persons with a fever, on her passage
from Jeremie, to Philadelphia, and five of her crew, while in the port of
Jeremie. -- Mr. Lewis the mate of the Deborah, informed me in presence of two
witnesses that the Deborah had been employed as a transport for the British
troops at St. Domingo, for some time previous to her taking in her cargo, at
Jeremie.

Dr. Wistar, was informed by the cooper; of the deaths on board, and the
carpenter, John Bodin's deposition was taken by the mayor of Burlington.

Captain Yard, himself sometime after his arrival in Philadelphia, in
conversation with a gentleman whose testimony may be relied on, acknowledged
that while the Deborah lay at Jeremie, a very mortal disease was prevalent
there, which the natives called the Malad, de Siam, of which the captain, and
the chief part of the crew of an English ship from Liverpool, died, and the
rest were so terrified that they deserted the ship.

When the Deborah arrived at the Health-Office near the fort, with about an
hundred persons on board including passengers, -- two of the seamen who
appeared to be in a convalescent state, were taken to the Marine Hospital, and
a black woman.

These men Mr. Lewis says, were in the city before the ship.

Atchison Thompson and Mr. Doyle, neighbors to Philips when he was alive,
solemnly declare that Philips brought a man belonging to the Deborah to his
house, before the arrival of the ship. Dr. Griffitts prescribed for one of the
crew of the Deborah at Philips's while he lay ill who had taken lodgings there
24th of July. The physician of port informed the college of physicians, that
one of the crew of the Deborah died at the Marine Hospital; and that two
pilots, that conducted the ^^^al and the Aurora, died there about the same time.


The size and martial appearance of the Deborah, (for she carried several guns)
led a number of young men and boys to visit her; among, others, was a lad of
the name of James Wright, and a young man belonging to Mr. Clemens. The former
lived in Water above Chestnut street, the latter in Third near Walnut street,
one of these was attacked the 30th, the other the 31st of July. The latter died
on the 6th day from the attack, the former recovered.

As the disease appeared about this time in different parts of the city, which
had been uncommonly healthy all the preceding season, it is probable that
others suffered from the like inconsiderate curiosity.

From these as from a focus, it gradually diverged over the whole city.

A Brig from Jamaica, with Coffee, some of which was damaged, arrived at Mr.
Ross's wharf, in the neighborhood where the disease made its first and most
formidable assault, on the 29th of July, but as the disease had made some
progress before that date, there can be no room for suspecting that to have
given origin to it. Besides there are no facts in proof of a fever of a
contagious kind ever having been produced either by damaged vegetables or by
the exhalations from bilge water, as I have sufficiently shown in my
Observations on the Cause and Cure of Bilious Fevers, published last year.

But that the contagion which gives rise to such a fever as the one under
consideration, may be retained in an active state, in the clothing of these
that have been sick or that have died of it, for several weeks if excluded from
fresh air, is well known to those conversant with medical history.

We are informed in the last edition of the works of the late learned Dr. Mead,
that a sack of infected cotton imported into Bermudas in the year 1695. gave
origin to a fever so malignant, that the living scarcely sufficed to bury the
dead. It is also recorded, that the imprisoned seeds of a pestilential fever,
which depopulated Marseilles in the year 1720, made their escape from a
sailor's bundle, lately arrived from the Levant.

The importation of the contagion which gave rise to the plague in London in
the year 1665, and almost depopulated that city in the course of the summer and
autumnal months, is a fact too notorious to expatiate upon. A similar fever,
which destroyed 80,000 of the inhabitants of Moscow and the adjacent villages
in 1771, was introduced by Turkish prisoners, as appears from the account of
Mertins, one of the physicians appointed by the empress to attend the infected.
This fever, like the one with which we have been visited, yielded to the power
of frost. We have the authority of the experienced Lind, that the yellow fever
was introduced into Philadelphia in the year 1741 by a trunk of infected
clothing received from Barbados; and of Dr. Lining, that every time it had
appeared in Charleston, it had been traced to some person or vessel recently
arrived from the West Indies.

The yellow fever which prevailed in New Haven in the year 1794, was traced to
imported contagion, as appears from the statement of Dr. Monson, published in
Webster's collection of papers on bilious fevers. For more examples of the same
kind, I refer to a book which I published last year, entitled, "Observations on
the Causes and Cure of Bilious Fevers."

The introduction of the disease into Chester, Marcus-Hook and Wilmington, soon
after its appearance in Philadelphia, are additional proofs in support of the
opinion that the late fever was derived from imported contagion.

A lad belonging to John Wood, a potter, who had slept two nights on board a
shallop employed in trading to Philadelphia a short time before he was taken
ill, was the first that died of the yellow fever in Chester, and he died on the
31st day of July. -- Another lad that had slept on board the same shallop with
Mr. Wood's lad, was taken ill the same day but recovered in the course of a
week. The one that died had the black vomit, and his corpse became very yellow.

Seven days after the decease of the first mentioned lad, his mother and
brother were both attacked with fever, and the brother was buried 11 days after.

William Siddons, jun. who had set up with the first mentioned lads during
their illness, was taken with the fever on the first of August, and died the
8th. Charles Warrick, who had also visited them, was attacked with fever the
4th of August and died the 9th. Abbey Engle, who lived next door to Siddons,
died the 16th of August. Jesse Bickerton, at whose house Abbey Engle died, was
attacked a few days after her decease, on board his shallop at the Fort, and
died on the 28th of August. After the first of September, the disease spread
into every part of that village, which contained but about 50 families, and
before it ceased, destroyed 50 persons, several of whom were of the first note
in the place; though it was gradually deserted by all, excepting six or seven
families. Of all that were sick at Chester, there were not more than five or
six that recovered.

The disease appears to have been introduced into Marcus-Hook by infected
persons from Philadelphia. The first death was on the 10th of August. -- From
the list kept by R. Riley, esquire. it appears that the funerals at Marcus-Hook
were 21 adults and 6 children, inhabitants; and 24 strangers -- Total -- 52.

Extract of a Letter from Dr. Sayres, dated Marcus Hook, November, 24, 1798.
THE first case of yellow fever, that came under my notice in Marcus Hook, was
on August 2d. 1798. This was a shallop man, who came from Philadelphia, four
days previous to the attack of the Fever -- he died, the 6th. day of the
disease, with the highest symptoms of putrescency. The next five cases of
disease, were persons, who were but a few days from Philadelphia, viz. from two
to eight days. The disease, appeared to increase considerably in this place,
and in Chester, by the 20th. of August; The symptoms on the first attack, were
more strongly marked -- and the proportionate number of deaths, were much
increased by the first of September. The number of cases which came under my
notice from the second day of August, until the 26th. of October, was eighty
two -- Fifty-seven of these, died.

The greater part of those, who were lately from Philadelphia, died between the
second and the sixth day after their attack. The inhabitants of this place and
Chester, who had the disease, and had not been in Philadelphia, recovered in
greater proportion.

The disease appeared, in a number of cases, evidently communicated by
contagion -- in some cases from the sick -- and several cases from the bed
linen, etc. -- Though in a considerable number of cases, which speedily
terminated fatally, I was not able to trace the smallest vestige of contagion,
being previously applied, or received.

Free and copious bleeding was made use of in the first stage with evident
advantage in most cases. We bled in very few instances, with success, after
forty eight hours from the attack of the disease.

The greatest number of successful cases, were, where free bleeding was
instantly used, before the fever had continued many hours; and immediately
followed by a free use of calomel, etc. so as to operate very freely and
copiously upon the alimentary canal, and free sweating afterward. In general,
our cases terminated unfortunately, except we found salutary symptoms appear in
sixty hours from the attack.

Blisters were used freely, after symptoms of high debility took place -- and
in some cases with manifest advantage. In no instance that I saw, was bleeding
successful, after two days and an half -- but when used in a few of such cases,
it appeared evidently to sink the patient and to hasten his death.

We used bark, wine, and a number of the common stimulants, on the first
appearance of debility taking place; but with little success.

Finding the common round, of medicine, prove so ineffectual in the advanced
stage of the disease, I determined to use a different mode of treatment -- in
three cases of adults, two of which had the black vomiting on them, and the
third, was in a gore of putrid blood from the mouth and nose. I forbid
medicine, and directed very cold water and brandy mixed strong, to be given
freely as possible: -- It had the happy effect of checking the puking in the
two cases, when the stomach had rejected every kind of mild drink, etc. and by
continuing that practice, almost so as to produce high intoxication, for two or
three days, those two cases, were recovered almost from a state of death. The
third case, was much benefited apparently for three days -- but, being in a
high putrescent state when I went first to see him, and having lost a very
considerable quantity of blood from the mouth, nose, etc. his ^^se proved
unfortunate on the ninth day.

There was a number of seamen died here, with the disease, though from no
single vessel, (excepting the Ganges) more than two or three.

"We were seldom able to produce ptyalism, before the disease terminated
fatally. In every case where mercury affected the salivary glands at an early
period of the disease, the patient recovered -- and I observed that immediately
after the spitting took place, every favorable symptom of returning health
began to appear."


The editor has been favored with letters from Doctors Tilton and Monro,
giving an account of the time and manner of the introduction of the yellow
fever into Wilmington, from which the following particulars are extracted:

Wilmington, November 13, '98. Dear Sir,
THE first case of yellow fever which happened in Wilmington, this season, was
in the person of one of the inhabitants of the borough, who caught it in
Philadelphia about the 1st of August, sickened on the road home, and died soon
after. The contagion was not communicated from this case. The Philadelphians
flocked in upon us immediately afterward. I visited a young man from
Philadelphia, in the fever, on the 10th of the same month. This man was among
the first, if not the very first, that was sent to our newly instituted
Hospital. The fever became epidemic between the 15th and 20th. -- It commenced
with persons immediately from Philadelphia, as well inhabitants of the borough,
as of the city. Shallop-men and others, who passed from one place to the other,
by water, were the first victims. From these it extended rapidly to the
inhabitants of fixed residence. A ship manned chiefly by French royalists, that
entered our port after the sickness had commenced, was also suspected of
contributing to the evil; but of this I have no evidence. From all the
information that came to my knowledge, every physician of this place, and all
others of correct observation agree, that the disease was imported to us from
Philadelphia, by infected goods and furniture, as well as infected persons. We
suppose the disease to be propagated by contagion, from infected persons,
clothing, vessels, houses, etc. It is remarkable, however, that stronger
exhalations arise from persons affected by this fever, than in other febrile
diseases; and we have reason to believe that many were affected by the
contagion, at a distance from the sick reaching quite across our streets. No
instance of those who sled to the country communicating it to others, has come
to my knowledge within the vicinity of Wilmington. It is said that instances of
this sort have happened at Marcus-Hook and other places; but for these I cannot
vouch.

In another letter I shall be ambitious to make some compensation for your
former valuable favor to me, by a few observations, particularly on the
cholera infantum, that may not be unacceptable to you: for you will admit, that
the Delaware physicians ought to be of authority in bilious disorders.

JAMES TILTON.
"P. S. I have reason to expect, that some account of the yellow fever will be
published, under the patronage of our committee of health. In that case, I will
send you a copy, which will be more to your purpose than any thing I can say."




Dr. Monro's letter of the 19th November, confirms Dr. Tilton's account of the
time (...) manner of the introduction of the disease into Wilmington, and of
its being afterward communicated by the inhabitants of fixed residence, from
one to another.

"A man who had been to the city to rent a house in that part of the city where
the disease occasioned the first alarm, and had been on board an infected
vessel, was taken sick on his return to Wilmington, and died soon after his
arrival there, with symptoms of confirmed yellow fever."

"One half of all the sick that were sent to the tents died." This Dr. Monro
ascribes to the absolute interdection of the use of mercury there. In his
own-practice, no person died after salivation came on, nor did he know of an
instance, under the care of any other physician in that place. This was not
constantly the case in Philadelphia.
"The disease was sensibly checked soon after the cold weather, which occurred
the latter end of September; revived with the returning warm weather, but was
entirely extinguished by the 3rd of November."

It is now known that a lad of the name of Dagget, was attacked with the yellow
fever the 26th of July, on board the schooner John, from Boston, which lay at
Ross and Simpson's wharf, a little way below Walnut-street. Mr. Lloyd and his
clerk had been on board of her a few days before their attack; and a woman and
two of the hands died (according to the report of the master to Dr. Dorsey) on
her outward passage.

An unanswerable argument that the fever did not originate from domestic
causes, is afforded by the exemption of Baltimore, Georgetown, Alexandria,
Norfolk, Wilmington, (N. C.) Charleston, and Savannah.

The disease this year prevailed, and was attended with a degree of mortality
unexampled in this country, (considering the comparative smallness of the
number that remained within the sphere of the contagion) in all the commercial
towns north of Baltitimore; whereas all the commercial towns south of Baltimore
have escaped, Petersburg excepted, and the disease was introduced into
Petersburg by the ship Nestor from Philadelphia.

Is it possible to believe, that the late fever, (which is considered by the
advocates for its domestic origin, to be only a higher grade of the common
bilious fever which appears in low marshy countries every summer and autumn)
could originate and become epidemic on the high, dry and sandy banks of
Kensington? in the paved, clean and open streets of Philadelphia, where every
wind that blows has a free course? on the high and gravelly hills of
Wilmington? on the elevated shores of York, washed on either side by Ocean's
briny waves? and not make its appearance on the flats of Baltimore, or the
putrid fens of Charleston and Savannah, where bile flows in incessant streams;
and where the debilitated inhabitants faint under the insufferable blaze of a
vertical sun?

If the united opinion of a number of men of the first abilities and most
extensive professional knowledge be of authority on the present interesting
question, that of the College of Physicians, presented last year to the
Legislature, ought to be admitted: the substance of which follows. The College
is in possession of still stronger facts and documents in support of their
opinion this year.

"The College is of opinion, that the yellow fever is derived from imported
contagion. For this opinion they assign the following among other reasons: "The
disease in question is essentially different from the fevers that occur in this
climate, and which originate from domestic causes. It also differs essentially
from them in the circumstance of being contagious; a bilious fever originating
from domestic causes having never been to our knowledge contagious in this
climate."

And that the yellow fever, which has committed such deplorable ravages in
different commercial cities of these states, since the year 1793, was not
derived from the exhalations of putrid vegetable substances, which occasion
intermitting, remitting, or bilious fevers, but was of pestilential origin, is
fully established by the facts published in the year 1795, by Dr. Chisholm,
surgeon-general to the Ordinance in the West India Islands, to which valuable
publication the reader is referred.

PRESUMING that the public mind will no longer be held in suspense respecting
the origin of the fatal malady by which the fair prospects, of this, and other
commercial cities, in this country, have been repeatedly blasted; I trust the
legislature, the enlightened guardians of the public welfare, will proceed,
without delay, to establish more effectual rules, than those, at present
existing, to prevent the future return of the awful calamity.

Supineness or an ill judged parsimony on the present interesting occasion,
would force commerce to desert our coasts, and involve the inhabitants of our
cities, in absolute ruin, which would soon be followed by that of agriculture,
for the existence of the one, is necessary to that of the other.

It has lately been proposed by a respectable committee of the inhabitants of
this city, to petition either for an entire interdiction of the West India
trade, during the summer, and autumnal months, or, (if that should be thought
too great a sacrifice), for the establishment of such quarantine rules, as
shall effectually preclude the introduction of the disease.

To effect this desirable purpose, I beg leave to recommend the rules published
in the Gazette of the United States, of the 21st of September, signed, Mentor;
and to prevent it from spreading when introduced, I believe the rules with the
same signature published in the Gaz. of the U. S. of Septr. 25th or 26th, if
strictly complied with, will always be found effectual. Similar rules were put
in practice with the most happy effects, the present year, not only in the
Pennsylvania Hospital, by Mr. Samuel Coats, who resided there, during the
continuance of the fever, and in the Almshouse, by Mr. Cummins, and Dr. James,
where the pensioners and orphans were numerous, but in the prison for convicts,
under the direction of the American Howard, who took his residence in that
dreary and dangerous abode, about the 20th. of September, at which time the
disease had made considerable havoc among those wretched votaries of rapine and
disorder.

The number of male convicts confined in the prison at that time was about 140;
The females were less numerous.

The vagrants and untried criminals had been removed.

The males and females were confined in separate, and distant wings of the
prison.

Eighteen of the male criminls, on account of their late insurrection, were
confined in dungeons; the remainder occupied different apartments on the same
floor.

Several of the men were ill of the fever at that time. The women were all in
health, and continued in that condition during the whole time that the disease
prevailed in the city.

A ward in the East wing was immediately appropriated for the reception of the
sick, who were separated from the sound, and every necessary accommodation
provided for them. These were attended by Dr. Benjamin Duffield. A separate
apartment was provided for the convalescents. More nutritious aliment than they
had been accustomed to, (for they had been allowed for many days only
sufficient food to prevent them from famishing) with a small allowance of
claret, was distributed among those that had hitherto escaped the disease, but
every kind of excess and irregularity discountenanced and prohibited.

A quantity of green wood was removed from the yard, as well as cart loads of
dirt, litter and every putrifiable material that could be discovered; the
obstructed channel opened for the passage of the water; the pavement kept
continually wet and cool, by means of the pump; the vegetables along the wall
cherished; the occupation of stone-sawing carried on; cleanliness was strictly
observed; every Ward constantly ventilated, and the avoiding all intercourse
(this last by the direction of the physician) earnestly enjoined. By these
means the disease was arrested in its progress, and in the course of three
weeks was entirely eradicated.

Let others profit by this example, and merit the benediction of an approving
conscience, sweeter than the plaudits of an admiring world.

FINIS.

