THE ECHO: OR, FEDERAL SONGSTER. BEING A LARGE COLLECTION OF THE MOST
CELEBRATED, MODERN POETICAL WRITINGS, OF DIFFERENT AUTHORS.

FIRST EDITON.

BROOKFIELD: (MASSACHUSETTS,) FROM THE PRESS OF E. MERRIAM and CO. SOLD BY THEM
IN BROOKFIELD, AND BY G. MERRIAM IN WORCESTER.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE favorable reception which works of a poetic nature have m^^ with in
PUBLIC; the salutary effect they have had in softening the brow of care,
exciting hilarity around the festive board and dispersing that unwelcome
visitant melancholy, which so often assails those who confine themselves
entirely to logical studies, has induced the EDITORS to undertake the subjoined
work, which, to render more interesting and instructive, they have selected
with the greatest precaution, from different authors, such pieces as may
without exaggeration, be termed Pernassian Flowers.

THE ECHO.
SONG I. A FEDERAL ODE.
YE Sons of Columbia, unite in the cause
Of Liberty, Justice, Religion and Laws,
Should foes then invade us, to battle we'll hie,
For the God of our fathers will be our Ally.
Should Frenchmen advance, though Europe join France,
Designing our conquest and plunder,
United and free, we ever will be,
And our cannon shall tell them in thunder,
That foes to our freedom we'll ever defy,
Till the Continent sinks, and the ocean is dry.
When Britain assailed us, undaunted we stood,
Defended the land we had purchased with blood,
Our liberty won, and it shall be our boast,
If the old world united should menace our coast,
Should millions invade, in terror arrayed,
And b^ us our freedom surrender,
Our country they would find with bayonets lined,
And WASHINGTON here to defend her,
For foes to our freedom, etc.
We are anxious that peace may continue her reign;
We cherish the virtues which sport in her train.
Our hearts ever melt when the fatherless sigh,
And we shiver at Horror's funeral cry;
But st^ll though we prize that child of the skies,
We'll never like slaves be accosted,
In a war of defense, our means are immense,
And we'll fight till our all is exhausted,
For foes to our freedom, etc.
The Eagle of freedom with rapture behold
Over shadow our land with his plumage of gold;
The floodgates of glory are opened on hign,
And Warren and Mercer descend from the sky,
They came from above with a message of love,
They bid us be firm and decided,
At liberty's call, unite one and all.
For you conquer unless you have divided.
UNITE, and the foes of your freedom, etc.
Americans, seek no occasion for war!
The rude deeds of rapine still ever abhor,
But, if in defense of your rights you should arm.
Let no to^ls discourage, nor danger alarm;
For foes to your peace will ever increase,
If freedom and fame you should barter,
Let those rights be yours, while Creation endures.
For OMNIPOTENCE gave you the CHARTER.
Then foes to our freedom, etc.
SONG. II. THE BOSTON PATRIOTIC SONG.
Written by THOMAS PAIN, A. M.
YE sons of Columbia who bravely have fought,
For those rights, which unstained from your Sires had descended,
May you long taste the blessings your valor has bought,
And your s^ns reap the soil, which their fathers defended.
Mid the reign of mild peace,
May your nation increase,
With the glory of Rome, and the wisdom of Greece:
And never may the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While (...) earth bears a plant, ^r the sea ro^ls its waves.
In a cl^me, whose rich vales feed the marts of the world,
Whose shores are unshaken by Europe's commotion.
The Trident of Commerce should never be hurled,
To incence the legitimate power of the ocean.
But should Pirates invade,
Though in thunder arrayed.
Let your cannon declare the free charter of TRADE.
For never shall, etc.
The fame of our arms, of our laws the mild sway,
And justly ennoble our nation in story,
Till the dark clouds of Faction obscure our young day,
And envellop'd the sun of American glory.
But let Traitors be told.
Who their Country have sold,
And ba^ter'd their God, for his image in gold --
That never shall, etc.
While France her huge limbs bathes recumbent in blood,
And society's base threats with wide dissolution;
May PEACE like the Dove, who returned from the flood
Find an Ark of abode in our mild CONSTITUTION!
But though PEACE is our aim,
Yet the boon we disclaim,
If bought by our Sov'reignty, Justice, or Fame.
For never shall, etc.
It Is the fire of the flint, each American warms;
Let Rome's haughty victors beware of collision!
Let them bring all the vassals of Europe in arm^,
WE ARE A WORLD BY OURSELVES, and d^sdain a division!
While, with patriot pride,
To our laws we are allied,
No foe can subdue us -- no faction divide.
For never shall, etc.
Our mountains are crowned with imperial Oak.
Whose roots, like our Liberty, ages have nourished;
But long ere our nation submits to the yoke,
Not a ^^ee shall be le^t on the field where it ^^ourish'd.
Should invasion impend,
Every grove would descend,
From the hill-tops, they shaded, our shores to defend.
For never shall, etc.
Let our patriots destroy Anarch's pestilent worm,
Lest our Liberty's growth should be checked by corrosion:
Then let clouds thicken round us, we heed not the storm;
Our realm fears no shock, but the earth's own explosion.
Foes assail us in vain,
Though their ^leets bridge the main,
For our altars and laws with our lives we'll maintain;
And never shall, etc.
Should the tempest of war over shadow our land,
Its bolts could never rend Freedom's temple asunder;
For, unm^v'd, at its portal would WASHINGTON stand,
And repu^s^ with his Breast, the assault of the Thunder!
His sword from the sleep
Of its scabbard would leap,
And conduct with its point, every flash to the deep.
For never shall, etc.
Let Fame to the world sound America's voice;
No intrigue can her sons from their government sever;
Her pride is her ADAMS -- his laws are her choice,
And shall flourish, till liberty slumber forever.
Then unite heart and hand,
Like Leonidas' band
And swear by the GOD of the ocean and land.
That never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant, or the sea rolls its waves.
SONG III.
HAIL COLUMBIA! happy land;
Hail ye Heroes! Heaven-born band,
Who fought and bled in freedom's cause,
Who fought and bled in freedom's cause,
And when the storm of war was gone,
Enjoyed the peace your valor won.
Let INDEPENDENCE be our boast,
Ever m^ndful what it cost;
Ever grateful for the pr^ze.
Let its altar reach the skies,
Firm -- united -- let us be,
Rallying round our liberty;
As a band of brothers joined,
Peace and safety we shall find.
IMMORTAL PATRIOTS! rise once more,
Defend your rights, defend your shore:
Let no rude foe with impious hand,
Let no rude foe with impious hand,
Invade the shrine where sacred lies
Of toil and blood the well-earn'd prize.
While offering peace sincere and just,
In Heaven we place a manly trust,
That truth and justice will prevail,
And every scheme of bondage fail.
Firm -- united, etc.
Sound, sound the trump of fame.
Let WASHINGTON's great name,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Let every clime to Freedom, dear,
Listen with a joyful ear.
With equal skill and God-like power,
He governs in the fearful hour
Of horrid war, or guides with ease
The happier times of honest peace.
Firm -- united, etc.
Behold the CHIEF who now commands,
Once more to serve his country frands --
The Rock on which the storm will beat,
The Rock on which the storm will beat,
But armed with virtue, firm and true,
His hopes are fixed on Heaven and You.
When hope was sinking in dismay,
And glooms obscured Columbia's day,
His steady mind from changes free,
Resolved on Death or Liberty.
Firm -- united -- let us be,
Ralying round our liberty:
As a band of brothers joined.
Peace and safety we shall find.
SONG IV.
COME, hail the day, ye sons of mirth,
Which gave your native country birth,
All hail the mportant hour:
Let admiration mark the day,
When Fathers to their sons did say,
Be free, till time's no more!
Columbia's sons have ^ear'd a tree,
The ^oot, the branch, are Liberty,
Expanding far and wide:
Refulgent years, have rolled away,
Since Freedom blessed America --
^^ke those, two thousand glide.
When ^ime released GEORGE WASHINGTON,
Not from affections he had won,
But from the height of ca^e:
He left the reins of government,
To his successor's management,
Quite tired with ^oi^e and war.
O guide, ye gods, this reverend sage,
Until he is down the steep of age,
Then sooth his cares to rest:
Yet, may his virtues live again,
To vind^cate the Rights of Man,
Of which we are possessed.
JOHN ADAMS, with a finished mind*
Columbia's chosen son, inclined
To take the impo^tant chair;
The hero takes the (...), and guides
America, against winds and tides,
To shun degrading war.
But, if to war's terriffic sound,
We must devote fair freedom's ground,
To stain with blood its soil:
Then ROUSE, AMERICANS, and show,
That you can wealth, or life bestow,
Ere FREEDOM meets a foil.
Should Europe's factions once attempt,
TO annihilate our government,
Or tread upon our shore:
Burgoyn'd, Cornwall^^'d, they would be,
Or Arno^d like, this country flee,
Or fall, to rise no more.
Then hail the day, ye sons of mirth,
Which gave your native country birth,
All nail the important hour:
Let admiration mark the day,
When fathers to their sons did say,
Be free, till time's no more!
SONG V.
GOD save the United States,
Free from the worst of fates,
Vile Gallic sway.
May they forever be,
Just, Independent, free,
Liberty's nursery,
Without dismay.
O God, great ADAMS save,
The firm, the good, the brave,
Who now commands.
May every enemy,
Far from his presence flee,
And be dire anarchy,
Crushed by his hands.
Save too great WASHINGTON,
Columbia's dearest son,
To be our shield.
When war's renewed alarms,
Shall call again to arms,
And threatening danger warns
Us to the field.
"O Lord, our God arise,
"Scatter our enemies,
"And make them fall.
"Confound their politics,
"Frustrate their knavish tricks,
"On the our hopes are fixed,
"O save us all."
Let all with one consent,
Unite with Government,
Our rights to guard.
May jarring discord cease,
Our social joys increase,
And smiling Heaven-born peace
Be our Reward.
SONG VI.
SING Yankee Doodle, that fine tune,
Americans delight in;
It suits for peace, it suits for fun,
It suits as well for fighting.
Yankee doodle (mind the tune)
Yankee doodle dandy,
If Frenchmen come with naked bum,
We'll spank 'em hard and handy.
To Ca Ira and Carmagnole,
Direct'ry dance like Neroes; Nero fiddled while Rome was burning.

But Frenchmen's songs, so full of wrongs
Are scorned by Yankee heroes.
Yankee doodle, etc.
The President, with good intent,
Three Envoys sent to Paris,
But cinq Tetes, Pronounced, sank Tate.
would not with 'em treat,
Of honor France so bare is.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Through X. and Y. and madame Sly,
They made demand of money;
For as we are told, the French love gold,
As stinging bees love honey.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Nebuchadnezzar long ago,
Set up a golden image,
Shadrach, Meshach, Abednigo,
Would not fall down in homage.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Just so cinq Tetes, with pride elate,
Of Marshall, Pinckney, Gerry,
Demand that they adore and pay,
The piper to make merry.
Yankee doodle, etc.
That Talleyrand might us tra^pan,
And over the country sound it;
He sent his pill, to Aurora's mill,
And Benny Faction ground it.
Yankee doodle, etc.
But Marshall came, with trump of fame,
And brought the noble answer;
Without a joke he had in soak,
A rod for Talleyrand, Sir.
Yankee doodle, etc.
With fraud do the Directory,
Deal in conceit and evil;
Who Venice sold, for pow'er and gold,
Would sell us to the Devil.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Their 'fernal hugs, may squeeze Dutch bugs,
But we will have no master;
And wh^le the Swiss, Sans i. e. we^ding breeches.
Culottes kiss,
We'll spread a blister plaster.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Americans, then sly to arms,
And learn the way to use 'em;
If each man fights to 'fend his rights,
The French cannot long abu^e 'em^
Yankee doodle, etc.
Bold ADAMS did, in seventy-six,
Our Independence sign, Sir;
And he will not, give up a jot,
Though all the world combine Sir.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Let every man, adopt his plan,
Like brothers stick together;
Then all the threats, of vile cinq Tetes,
Will never weigh a feather.
Yankee doodle. etc.
If we are firm, peace will return,
Sweet peace, the very dandy;
May they that flinch, a single inch,
Never taste the sugar candy.
Yankee doodle (mind the tune)
Yankee doodle dandy,
If Frenchmen come, with naked bu^,
We'll spank 'em hard and handy.
SONG VII. THE FARMER's PATRIOTIC ODE.
Tune -- Vicar of Bray.
FROM the soil our fathers dearly bo't,
No foe their sons shall sever;
The laws, for which our heroes fought,
Shall guard their rights forever.
When foes invade, with heart and hand,
We'll crowd the field of action:
From Gallic weeds* we'll purge our land,
And crush the reptile faction.
Ere Jacobins shall lord it here,
Or we for Frenchmen labor,
The pruning hook shall dart, a spear,
The ploughshare glow, a sabre!
When foes, etc.
Let Gallic's pirates cross the waves,
To ask a contribution;
On land, we'll point them to their graves,
By Sea, the CONSTITUTION.
When foes, etc.
Our swains shall quit their lover's arms,
And WASHINGTON shall lead 'em;
The husband leave domestic charms,
And know no friend, but Freedom.
When foes, etc.
The freeborn child, the tender wife,
Shall brave each sad disaster;
The wol^'s dread yell, the savage knife;
But, spurn a Gallic master.
When foes invade, Columbia's friend:
Shall crowd the field of action,
Back to the waves repel the fiends,
That sow the seeds of faction.
SONG VIII.
TO the standard repair,
Each jolly bold Tar,
Our Country calls loudly to arms*
Teach the bullies of France,
The famed Yankee-dance,
It Is Freedom our bosoms that warms.
Let the beau TALIEY RAND,
With his snuff box in hand,
Ask again a doceur for admission;
Come here Monsieur Frog,
Take a tiff of our grog,
And we'll show you a Yankee commission.
Do you think Gallic Crows,
Can catch us adoze,
While storms are thick gathering aloft;
Pardonnez Monsieur,
Our Liberty's dear,
You Will not find us with sculls quite so soft.
Each day a new ship,
With her anchor atrip,
Is armed, and the Eagle full spread;
If America stoops,
And her sons become dupes,
It must be when her Tars are all dead.
Come each honest soul,
Pass around the full bowl,
To ADAMS our glorious head;
Thank the good Gods above,
Who America love, --
Great WASHINGTON too is not dead!
Mother Cary's foul brood,
Can do you no good,
While such Worthies America lead;
Our Captains are bold,
And despise secret gold,
Our coin, boys, is Iron and Lead.
SONG IX.
Tune -- Lass of Richmond Hill.
HAIL, victorious FREEDOM, hail!
Thy flame illumes the world:
The cause shall evermore prevail --
While DESPOTS down are hurled.
F^ll high the glass,
And let it pass,
Let FREEDOM'S health go round:
From pole to pole
Her thunders ^oll,
And god-^ike voice resounds.
Cheer up COLUMBIA, never dismay --
Bright QUEEN OF GLORY rise;
Rude pirates on the commerce prey --
To arms, thy HERO cries.
He again commands
Thy patriot bands,
With ^erior never dismayed;
But with delight
Defends their right --
Can FREEMEN be afraid?
Sound, sound the trump -- the Chief appears --
Great WASHINGTON commands;
He Is come to ^ooth COLUMBIA's fear^,
And lead her patriot bands,
Now with huzzas
And loud applause
Sound, sound aloud his fame;
At his command
We ready stand
To take the field again.
Now let bold FREEDOM raise her voice,
By Tyrants undismayed;
May all the world, with us rejoice
To see her Flag displayed.
Independent we
Will ever be;
Let haughty EUROPE see,
That while with gore
They drench each shore,
AMERICA IS FREE.
SONG X.
COME all Grenadiers let us join hand in hand,
And swear by our country most truly to stand;
Round the banners of liberty manfully range,
Resolved to preserve it unblemished by change.
And should our proud foes in their insuits persist,
Their arts as their arms we will firmly resist;
For our glorious freedom we drew with our breath
And with it we'll keep it unsullied till death.
Our cause truly noble, and honor our guide,
The defense of our country shall ever be our pride,
Determined her dear Independence to guard,
In her happiness only we'll seek our reward.
For her every labor endured will be sweet,
For her every danger we'll cheerfully meet,
For our glorious, etc.
From our father who gained it, our freedom we hold,
And it never by t^eir sons shall be cowardly sold.
To g^ard it our fortunes shall freely be spent;
But to buy it. COLUMBIA will never give a cent;
T^en let ^t by Frenchmen be well understood,
That if we must purchase, our price is, our BLOOD.
For our glorious, etc.
SONG XI.
ON the green sedgy banks of the sweet winding Tay,
As blithe as the woodlark that carols in May --
I past the gay moments with joy and delight,
For peace cheered the morn and content crowned the night:
Till love taught young hope, my youth to deceive,
What we wish to be true, love bids us believe. --
Wherever I wander over hill, dale, or grove,
Young Sandy will follow with sweet tales of love;
Enraptured he vowed with a kiss and a sigh,
If Jemmy proves cruel, Alas! I must die!
A youth so engaging, with ease might deceive,
What we wish to be true, love bids us believe.
He stole my fond heart, then he left me to mourn,
For peace and contentment which never can return;
From the clown to the beau, the sex are all art,
They complain of the wound but we feel not the smart;
We join in the fraud, and ourselves we deceive,
What we wish to be true, love bids us believe.
SONG XII.
SHEPHERDS I have lost my love,
Have you seen my Anna?
Pride of every shady grove,
Upon the banks of Banna.
I for her my home forsook,
Near you misty mountain,
Left my flock, my pipe, my crook,
Green wood, shade and fountain.
Never shall I see them more,
Until her returning;
All the joys of life are over,
From gladness changed to mourning.
Whither is my charmer flown!
Shepherds tell me whither!
Ah! woe me, perhaps she is gone
Forever and forever.
SONG XIII. DESCRIPTION OF A WOMAN.
Written by a Man.
A WOMAN is like to -- but stay --
What a Woman is like who can say*
There Is no living with or without one --
Love bites like a fly,
Now an ear, now an eye --
Buz, buz, always buzzing about one.
When she is tender and kind,
She is like to my mind,
(And Fanny was so, I remember.)
She Is like to -- Oh dear!
She Is as good very near
As a ripe melting peach in September,
If she laugh and she chat,
Play, joke, and all that,
And with smiles and good humor she meets me,
She Is like a rich dish,
Of ven'lon and fish,
That cries from the table "come eat me."
But she will plague you, and vex you,
Distract and perplex you,
False hearted and ranging,
Unsettled and changing,
What then do you think she is like?
Like a sand? like a rock?
Like a wheel? like a clock?
Aye, like a clock that is always at strike,
Her head's like the island folks tell on,
Which nothing but monkies can dwell on,
Her heart's like a lemon -- so nice,
She carves for each lover a slice:
In truth she is to me,
Like to wind, like the sea,
Whose raging will hearken to no man;
Like a mill,
Like a pill,
Like a fla^l,
Like a whale,
Like an ass,
Like a glass,
Whose image is constant to no man:
Like a flower,
Like a shower,
Like a fly,
Like a pie,
Like a pea,
Like a flea,
Like a thief,
Like -- in brief,
She Is like nothing on earth, but a woman.
SONG XIV. DESCRIPTION OF A MAN.
Written by a Woman.
A MAN, he is like to -- but stay,
To what he is unlike, who can say?
And yet we can scarce do without him;
Love sets in his breast
Like a hen on her nest,
And his chickens are scratching about him.
When he is pleased I am squeezed,
When he is not I am teased,
And I never can tell where to find him;
He is like an old horse,
Worth but little and cross,
And a woman is foolish to mind him.
If he chance to but smile,
And look pleasant a while,
And come chattering round like a chicken --
He is like a gay lark,
But a false hearted spark,
And his feathers are scarcely worth picking.
But when he is vexed,
Confused and perplexed,
Deceitful and vicious,
^a^e, false, and malicious,
He is like -- hard to speak it myself --
He is like to -- alas!
L^ke a snake in the grass,
He is then, only then, like himself.
His head's like a butcher's full shop,
Beef, mutton and pork, or what not:
His heart's like a pail of old swill,
Which the offal contributes to fill:
In short, to a wife,
He is like a case knife,
To cut up my cake or my cheese;
Like a saint when he is civil,
But if not, like the devil;
But will turn to whatever he please:
To a hog, to a dog,
To a hare, to a bear,
Whose cruelty yields to no man;
Like a mouse, like a goose,
Like a mule, like a fool,
Like a lane, like a vane,
Like a leaf, like -- in brief,
He Is like every thing else, but a WOMAN.
SONG XV.
Tune -- Rule Britania.
WHEN Britain with despotic sway,
Would at her feet our freedom lay,
Would at, etc.
We raised the Standard -- to arms, to arms, we cried,
Our patriots fought -- they bled, they di'd.
Independent Columbians, they would be,
Resolved to perish, or be free.
Great WASHINGTON did then command;
He led the bold heroic band,
He led, etc.
They fought and conquered -- Columbia's Sons were free,
Resolved on death or liberty.
Independent Columbians they would be,
Resolved to perish, or be free.
When France her struggle first began
For liberty, the rights of man,
For liberty, etc.
Glowing with ardor -- with ardor in her cause,
We scorned that Kings should give her laws.
Independent -- may Gallia still be free,
They fought at first for liberty.
But France, you now forget your friend,
Our amity is at an end,
Our amity, etc.
You rob our commerce, insultus on our coast,
Divide and conquer, is your boast.
Know proud Frenchmen, united we will be,
Resolved to perish or be free.
Shall we to France a tribute pay,
Or at her feet our freedom lay,
Or at, etc.
Forbid it Heaven Columbia's freemen cry,
We will be free or nobly die.
Know proud Frenchmen, united we will be,
Resolved on death or liberty.
United then with heart and hand,
Our constitution firm shall stand,
Our constitution, etc.
Then raise the standard, let this your motto be;
Our father's fought, and so will we.
Hail Columbians, united we will be,
Like them we'll conquer and be free.
SONG XVI.
AT the sound of the horn,
We rise in the morn,
And waken the woods as we thunder along;
Yoix, yoix, tally-o,
After Reynard we go.
While echo on echo redoubles the song.
Not the steeds of the sun
Our brave coursers outrun,
Over the mound, horse and hound, see us bound in full cry:
Like Phoebus we rise
To the height of the skies,
And, careless of danger, five bars we defy.
We w^k^n the woods, etc.
At eve, Sir, we rush,
And are close at his brush;
Already he dies -- see him panting for breath.
Each feat and defeat
We renew and repeat,
Regardless of life, so we are in at the death.
We waken the woods, etc.
With a bottle at night,
We prolong the delight,
Much Trimbush we praise, and the deeds that were done:
And yoix, tally-o,
The next morning we go,
With Phoebus to end, as we mount with the sun.
SONG XVII.
FAIR liberty! whom heaven gave
But where peculiarly it loves;
And put off all it meant for slave
With orange bo^'rs and citron groves!
The children of the frozen north,
Where nature half her gifts retains,
Are doomed to tame the churl^sh earth,
For tasteless fruits, and tardy grains;
Yet while their weary task they ply,
By thee their fainting souls are cheered!
No stern unfeeling Lord is nigh,
No rods are seen, no chains are heard!
Still as they guide the delving plough,
Or bind pale Autumn's scanty store;
To thee, their manly lives they vow,
To thee, their grateful strains they pour*
SONG XVIII.
THE rose had been washed, just washed in a shower,
That Mary to Anna conveyed;
A plentiful moisture encumbered the flower,
And weighed down its beautiful head.
The cup was all filled, and the leaves were all wet,
And seemed at a fanciful view,
To weep with regret for the buds it had left,
On the flourishing bush where it grew.
I hastily seized it, unfit as it was,
For a nose-gay, so dripping and drowned,
And shaking it rudely -- too rudely, alas!
I snapt it -- it fell to the ground.
"And such" I exclaimed "is the pitiless part,
Some act by the delicate mind,
Regardless of wringing and breaking the heart,
Already to sorrow resigned,
This beautiful rose, had I shaken it less,
Might have bloomed with the owner a while,
And the tear that is wiped with a little address,
May be followed, perhaps, with a smile."
SONG XIX.
HARK, hark, from the woodlands the loud swelling horn
Invites to the sports of the chase,
How ruddy, how bright, and how cheerful the morn,
How healthy and blooming each face.
To the grove with Diana, I Will hasten away,
Nor lose the delights of the morn,
The hounds are all out hark, hark forward, away,
While echo replies to the horn.
Gay health still attends through the sports of the field,
Over mountain and valley we go;
The joy of the chase, health and pleasure ca^ yield,
No wishes beyond it we know.
To the grove, etc.
Our innocent pastimes each virgin may share,
And the censure of envy defy,
While Cupid soon followed by grief and despair,
The blessing of youth would destroy.
To the grove, etc.
SONG XX.
AWAKE from delusion, ye sons of the brave;
"Cries the Genius, that watches our Freedom and Fame;"
Thy virtue no longer from rapine can save,
Since Ga^lia's ^^ght up of discension the flame.
Then to arms ^et's repair,
While ^ur wrongs fill the air.
That France and the world may behold,
That our freedom, our fame,
And our virtuous name,
We prize above friendship and gold.
Away with the veil, which thy charity spread
Over the deeds of a nation, where tyrants preside;
No glory of thine can its influence shed,
On the friends of deception, destruction and pride.
Then, etc.
Arise from thy bowers of contentment and ease,
And gird on the sword of thy vengeance anew,
For in vain would thy wisdom their madness appease,
In vain will thy caution their plottings pursue.
Then, etc.
Deep died with the blood of the valiant and good,
And c^oth'd with deformity, guilt and despair,
In the portal of peace, like demons, they have stood,
And poisoned with venom sweet liberty's air.
Then, etc.
To freedom, to virtue and bliss they pretend,
And vauntingly offer redemption to slaves;
While abroad through the world their assassins they send,
And prove by each law that they glory in knaves.
Then, etc.
Rise, scornful, my sons, from a friendship so base,
And again be the banner of freedom unfurled;
While time on his records Columbia shall place --
The PRIDE, the DELIGHT, and the BOAST of the WORLD.
Then, etc.
SONG XXI.
HOW bright are the joys of the table,
I mean when the cloth is removed?
Our hearts are fast held by a cable,
While round the decanter is should.
The ladies all rise to retire,
We stand up and look very grave:
A bumper then draw round the fire,
Determined like souls to behave.
My servant, he knows I Am a toper,
"Clean glasses, of wine a recruit!"
He brings in a six bottle cooper,
And places it close at my foot.
I gingerly take up a bottle.
The saw-dust I puff from his coat;
The cork out, he sings in the throttle,
But sweeter than Mira his note!
"What gentleman coffee now chooses?"
The compliment comes from the fair;
No gentleman coffee refuses.
But not a man st^rs from his chair.
Though Frenchmen may do so, I bar it,
With British politeness I think;
While Monsieur we thank for his claret,
He never shall teach us to drink.
Gay H^be no^ shows in Apollo,
A struggle '^wixt claret and wit;
For Bacchus insists he shall swallow,
S^x bumpers before he may sit.
Ye fair, why so ill should we treat you,
To part ere the bottle is won?
At supper Apollo shall meet you,
And show you what Bacchus has done.
SONG XXII.
DEAR Kathleen, you no doubt,
Find sl^ep how very swee^ it is;
Dogs bark, and cocks have crow'd out,
You never dream how late it is.
This morning gay,
I post away,
To have with you a bit of play,
On two legs r^d
Along to ^id
Good Morrow to your nightcap.
Last night a little ^o^sy,
With whisky, ale, and c^der,
I asked young Betty Blowzy,
To let me sit beside her,
Her anger rose,
And, sour as fl^es,
The little gipsey cocked her nose;
Yet here I Have rid
Along, to bid
Good m^^row to your nightcap.
"Beneath the honey suckle,
The daisy and the v^^et
Compose so sweet a trackle,
They Would tempt you sure to spoil it,
Sweet Sall and Bell
I Have pleased you well --
But h^ld, I must'nt k^ss and tell,
So here I Have rid
Along, to bid
Good Morrow to your nightcap."
SONG XXIII.
SIMPLICITY! thou favorite child
Of heavenly Nature, chaste and mild;
Sweet gua^d of playful youth:
Thy nakedness ^s thy defense,
Thy silent gest^re eloq^ence;
Thy eloquence is truth.
Ah! say then, who could injure thee,
Nature's loved babe -- S^mplicity?
S^ sweet, so chast^, so mild:
The worst of wretches, who has not
Thy parent's traces long forgot,
Could never hurt it is child.
SONG XXIV.
THE wealthy fool with gold in store,
Will still desire to grow richer,
Give me but these, I ask no more,
My charming girl, my friend and pitcher.
My friend, so rare, my girl, so fair,
With such what mortal can be richer,
Give me but these -- a fig for care,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
From morning sun I Would never grieve,
To toil a hedger or a ditcher,
If that when I come home at eve,
I might enjoy my friend and pitcher,
My friend so rare, etc.
Though fortune ever shuns my door,
I know not what can so bewitch her;
With all my heart -- can I be poor,
With my sweet girl, my friend, and pitcher?
My friend so rare, etc.
SONG XXV.
DISTRESS me with those tears no more,
One kiss, my love, and then adieu;
The last boat destined for the shore
Waits, dearest girl, alone for you.
Soon, soon, before the light winds borne,
Shall I be severed from your fight;
You, left the lonely hours to mourn,
And weep through many a stormy night.
When far along the restless deep,
In trim array the ship shall steer;
Your form remembrance st^ll shall keep,
Your worth, affection still revere:
And with the distance from your eyes,
My love for you shall be increased,
As to the pole the needle lies,
And, farthest off, still varies least.
While round the bowl the cheerful crew
Shall sing of triumphs on the main,
My thought shall fondly turn to you,
Of you alone shall be my strain:
And when we have bowed the leaguing foe,
Revengeful of my country's wrong,
Returning home my heart shall show,
No fiction graced my artless song.
SONG XXVI.
THOUGH prudence may press me,
And duty distress me,
Against inclination, ah! what can they do?
No longer a rover,
His follies are over,
My heart, my fond heart says, my Henry is true,
The be thus as changing,
From sweet to sweet ranging,
A rose should he light on, never wishes to stray*
With raptures possessing,
In one every blessing,
Till torn from her bosom he flies far away.
SONG XXVII.
HOW happy the woman, whose charms
Gain sweet-hearts stuck all in a row!
That if one should desert from her arms,
She still has two strings to her bow.
Should Thomas prove false -- could he rob
My heart of its quiet? Oh no --
For if Thomas is gone there is Bob:
I still have two strings to my bow.
Then it is not so common a thing
Can vex me, I Would have you to know*
Since I have two beaux to my string,
As well as two strings to my bow.
SONG XXVIII.
LORD, what care I for mam, or dad?
Why let them scold and bellow!
For while I live I Would love my lad,
He Is such a charming fellow.
The last fair day, on yonder green,
The youth he danced so well-o
So spruce a lad was never seen,
As my sweet charming fellow.
The fair was over, night was come,
The lad was some what mellow,
Says he, my dear, I Will see you home,
I thanked the charming fellow.
We trudged along, the moon shone bright,
Says he, my sweetest Nell-o,
I Will kiss you here by this good light,
Lord, what a charming fellow.
You rogue, says I, you have stopped my breath!
Ye bells ring out my knell-o;
Again I Would die so sweet a death
With such a charming fellow.
SONG XXIX.
SIR Solomon Simons, when he did wed,
Blushed black as a crow; -- his fair lady did blush light:
The clock struck twelve, they were both tucked in bed;
In the chimney -- a rush light,
A little farthing rush light.
Sir Solomon gave his lady a nudge --
Cries he, "Lady S^mons, there is vastly too much light;"
"Then, Sir Solomon," says she, "to get up you cannot grudge,
And blow out the rush light,
The little farthing rush light,
Fall, lal, lal, lal, la.
And blow out the rush right."
Sir Solomon then, out of bed pops his toes,
And vastly he swore, and very much did curse light;
And then, to the chimney, Sir Solomon he goes,
And he puffed at the rush light,
The little farthing rush light;
But poor Sir Solomon
Cou'd'nt blow out the rush light.
Lady Simons got out, in her night cap, so neat,
And over the carpet she did brush light;
And there she found Sir Solomon, in a heat,
Puffing at the rush light;
The little farthing rush light.
But neither of the two
Could blow out the rush light.
Sir Solomon and Lady, their breath quite gone,
Rang the bell in a rage, determined to crush light.
Half asleep, in his shirt, then up came John,
And he puffed at the rush light,
The little farthing rush light,
But none of the family
Could blow out the rush light.
Cook, coachmen and maids, very near all in bust,
Come, and swore, in their lives, they never met with such light;
And each of the family by turns had a puff
At the little farthing rush light,
The cursed farthing rush light,
But all that they could do
Could'nt blow out the rush light.
The watchman at last, went by crying -- one!
Here, watchman come up, on you we might on worse light;
Then up came the watchman the business it was done,
For he turned down the Rush Light,
The little Farthing Rush Light;
So the business it was done,
For he turned down the Rush Light.
SONG XXX.
TO hear a sweet goldfinch's sonnet,
This morning I put on my bonnet,
But scarce in the meadow -- pies on it,
When the Captain appears in my view;
I felt an odd sort of sensation,
My heart beat in strange palpitation,
I blushed like a pink of carnation,
When says he, my dear, how do you do?
The dickins, says I, here has popp'd him,
I thought to slip by, but I stopped him,
So my very best curt'sy I dropped him;
With an air, then he took off his hat;
He seemed with my person enchanted,
He squeezed my hand -- how my heart panted*
He asked for a kiss, which I granted,
And, pray now, what harm was in that?
Says I, Sir, for what do you take me?
He swore a fine lady he would make me,
No, them him, he would never forsake me,
And then on his knee he stooped down;
His handkerchief, la! smelt so sweetly,
His white teeth he showed so completely,
He managed the matter so neatly,
I never can be kissed by a clown.
SONG XXXI.
HOPE, treacherous meteor, lucid vapor!
Ever flying,
Still belying
The village ^aper --
Wandering pilgrims -- lone, benighted,
The blue falsehood, pleased, descry;
See the cheerful faggot lighted.
Think the social cottage nigh.
Lambent fire, deceive, but harm not;
Pallid gleam, relume, but warm not --
Light no error in my breast,
Sooth my weary soul, but charm not;
Unrelenting,
Unconsenting,
Swearing never to be blessed --
SONG XXXI.
MY mother says, I Am now sixteen,
Must dress -- in the beau monde be seen,
Reply to all the vows of men,
No, no, no.
In sweetest buds there canker lies,
And in the rose sharp thorns arise;
All this she says to make me wise,
And say no.
When Henry the other morning came,
Professed an honest tender flame,
And asked me, if the day I Would name,
I said no.
I told him, mother I Would obey,
And must reply of course with nay;
He sighed, then shall I far away?
I said no.
My speaking tears betrayed my love:
He said, shall Hymen doubt remove,
To church, you will not deny to rove?
I sighed no.
My mother now I have obeyed,
Attended well to what she said,
And will to all -- but him I wed,
Still say no.
SONG XXXII.
A FLAXEN-headed cow-boy, as simple a^ may be,
And next a merry plough-boy I whist'led over the lea:
But now saucy footman, I strut in worsted lace,
And soon I Will be a butler and wag my jolly face.
When steward I Am promoted, I Will snip a tradesman's bill.
My master's coffers empty, my pockets for to fill:
When ^olling in my chariot, so great a man I Will be,
You Will forget the little plough-boy that whistled over the lea.
I Will buy votes at elections, but when I Have made the pelf,
I Will stand poll for parliament, and then vote in myself:
Whatever's good for -- me, Sir, I never will oppose;
When all my ayes are sold off, why then I Will sell my nose.
I Will bawl, harangue and paragraph, with speeches charm the ear,
And when I Am tired on my legs, then I Will sit down a peer,
In court or city honor, so great a man I Will be,
You Will forget the little plough-boy that whistled over the lea.
SONG XXXIII.
AH! Delia, see the fatal hour, farewell my soul's delight,
Oh! how can wretched Damon live thus banished from thy sight.
To my fond heart no rival joys, supply the loss of thee,
Ah! who can tell if thou my dear will ever remember me.
Alone, through unfrequented wilds, with pensive steps I rove,
I ask the rocks, I ask the streams, where dwells my absent love?
The silent eve, the rosy morn, my constant searches see,
Ah I who can tell, etc.
Thus while my restless, wandering thought^^ pursue their soft repose,
Unwearied, may they trace the paths wherever my Delia goes:
Forever Damon shall be there, attendant still on thee,
Ah! who can tell, etc.
Often I review those smiling scenes, each fav'rit^ brook and tree,
Where once I passed those happy hours, those hours I passed with thee:
What painful, fond, memorials rise, at every thing I see;
Ah! who can tell, etc.
Let every rival vot'rist soon their soft address remove,
Nor trace thee in thy new abode, to tempt thy soul to love:
Yet, who can tell what sighing crowds, their tender homage pay;
Ah! who can tell, etc.
Think, Delia think, how deep a wound, thy sweetly pointed dart,
Thy dear remembrance left behind, has pierced a hapless heart,
Think on the fatal, sad adieu, that severs me from thee;
Ah! who can tell, etc.
How can I speak the last farewell, what cares distress my mind.
How can I go to realms of bliss, and leave my love behind.
When angels wing me to the skies. I Would fai^ retun to thee,
(...) who can tell, etc.
SONG XXXIV. The Tempest.
CEASE, rude Boreas, blustering railer!
L^st ye lands-men, all to me;
Messmates, here a brother sailor
Sing the dangers of the sea.
From boundless billows, first in motion,
When the distant whirlwinds rise,
To the tempest (...) ocean,
Where the seas co^^end with skies.
Hark! the boatswain hoarsely bawling --
By toplan sheets and haulyards stand!
Down top gallants, quick be hauling!
Down your stay (...), hand, boys, hand!
Now it freshens, set the braces;
Quick the top-sail sheets let go;
Lu^^, boys, luss, don't make wry faces!
Up your topsails nimbly clew!
Now all you on down beds sporting,
Fondly locked in beauty's arms,
Fresh enjoyments, wanton courting,
Free from all but love's alarms --
Round us r^ats the tempest louder;
Think what fears our minds enthral!
Hard^^ yet, it yet blows ha^dar!
Now again the boatswain calls:
The ^^psail yards point to the wind, boys:
(...) to reef each course:
Let (...) sheets go; don't mind, boys,
Though the weather should be worse.
Fore and aft the sprit-sail yard get;
Reef the mizen; see all clear;
Hands up -- each preventer brace set;
Man the fore-yards; cheer, lads, cheer!
Now the dreadful thunder's roaring!
Peals on peals contending clash!
On our heads fierce rain falls pouring!
In our eyes blue lightnings flash!
One wide water all around us,
All above us, one black sky!
Different deaths at once surround us!
Hark! what means that dreadful cry?
The forem-ast's gone! cries every tongue out,
Over the lee, twelve feet 'bove deck,
A leak beneath the chest tree's sprung out;
Call all hands to clear the wreck*
Quick the land-yards cut to pieces:
Come, my hearts, be stout and bold!
Plumb the well; -- the leak increases!
Four feet water's in the hold!
While over the ship wild waves are beating,
We for wives or children mourn;
Alas! from hence there is no retreating;
Alas! to them there is no return.
Still the leak is gaining on us;
Both chain pumps are chok'd below;
Heaven have mercy here upon us!
For only that can save us now!
Over the lee beam is the land, boys.
Let the guns over board be thrown;
To the pump come every hand, boys;
See, our mizen mast is gone.
The leak we have found; it cannot pour fast;
We Have lightened her a foot or more;
Up, and rig a jury foremast;
She rights, she rights, boys! we are off shore.
Now once more on joys we are thinking.
Since kind Fortune's spared our lives
Come, the can, boys, let us be drinking
To our sweet-hearts, and our wives.
Fill it up, about ship wheel it;
Close the lips a brimmer join.
Where Is the tempest now? who feels it?
None! our danger's drowned in wine!
SONG XXXV.
BANISH sorrow grief and folly,
Thoughts unbend the wrinkling brow;
Hence dull cares and melancholy,
Wine and mirth unite us now.
Bacchus opens all his treasure,
Comus brings us wit and song;
Follow, follow, follow, follow pleasure,
And let us join the jovial song.
Life is short, its but a season;
Time is ever on the wing;
Let Us the present moment seize on,
Who knows what the next may bring^
All my time I now will measure,
All dull care I now despise,
Follow, follow, follow, follow pleasure,
To be happy's to be wise.
Wherefore should we thus perplex us,
Why should we not merry be;
Since there is nothing here to vex us;
Drinking sets our hearts all free.
Let Us have drinking without measure,
Let Us have mirth what time we have;
Follow, follow, follow, follow pleasue,
There Is no drinking in the grave.
SONG XXXVI.
IDELIA's beauties would disclose,
More blooming than the blushing rose,
And sweeter than the spring:
She fa^rest is of all the fair,
To every grove I Will this declare,
Of Beauty's queen I sing.
Aid then my song each smiling muse,
Your melody you cannot refuse,
To celebrate her charms:
Inspire to praise in purest rhyme,
Her -- whose mild beauties are divine,
And all my breast alarms.
Steal silent by, ye murmuring streams.
Let echo swell the render themes,
The themes her praise rehearse;
Her praise shall e're employ my breath,
And naught but all devouring death
Shall end the pleasing verse.
To paint the luster of her eyes,
An azure stolen from the skies,
Would need a Sappho's tongue:
Her shape, her tuneful voice, that thrills
And all the soul with rapture fills,
These must remain unsung
Her gentle, sympathetic heart,
Fond to assuage affliction's smart,
Can drop the crystal tear;
Like gracious Heaven, she wears a smile;
That would the fiercest pains beguile,
And soften rigid care.
Good sense and virtue, hand in hand,
The graces all, a genial band,
Upon her steps attend:
From charms so striking to the sight,
So pregnant with sincere delight,
What can the heart defend?
Her modest worth, no wily art,
Engaged my captivated heart
To cherish fond desires;
'Twas beauty taught me to admire,
But virtue's bloom that did inspire
These firm undying fires.
Supremely blessed in Delia's love,
From her embrace I Would never remove,
Nor ever ^nconstant stray;
But spending life in tranquil ease,
Make it my study how to please,
And blithsome pass each day.
Could we our joys and sorrows share,
Double each bliss, dissolve each care,
'Twould sure transporting prove:
Together glide the sea of life,
Avoid ambition, banish strife,
And seek immortal love.
SONG XXXVII.
THE lark was up, the morn was gray,
The drummers beat a reveille,
Whilst jolly soldiers on the ground,
In peaceful camp slept safe and sound.
All but one poor soldier, who
Naught but love, could ever subdue;
Wandering through a silent grove,
There did vent his plaintive love.
For women are whimsical changeable things,
Their sweets are like bees, they are mingled with stings.
They are not to be got without toil, care and cost,
They are hard ^o be won and as easily lost,
For in searching a fair one, I found to my smart,
I knew not the way, but I lost my own heart.
Ah! hapless, hapless day, when first I saw fair Bid die,
My heart she stole away, my head she turned quite giddy.
The world may laugh and sneer, it is wondrous now to see,
A lover so sincere, a swain admire like m^*
She Is comely tall and slender, she is brigh^^ than the sun;
Her looks are kind and tender, but ah! her heart's like stone.
Too lovely still I found her, and every method tried,
In hopes to win and wound her, but ah! I was denied,
And now all hopes are over, what schemes then can I try,
But like a hapless lover, now lay me down and die.
As on the ground he lay, Minerva came that way,
In armor bright and gay, and thus to him did say,
Arise! soildier arise! and I Will take you by the hand,
And I Will lead you through the land
And I Will give you the command, of a well chosen band.
Arise! soldiers arise! don't be stupid, drive away cupid,
Follow Minerva's wife command,
Soldier go home, go home, never mind your Mistress' scorn;
Slight, slight her again,
For flighted love should slight return*
The soldier then rose from his amo^ous (...),
Hastened away to his duty,
Swore to Minerva a terrible oath,
He Would never think more of her beauty.
Bachelor's bluff, bachelor's bluff,
High for a heart that is rugged and tough.
He that is single can never wear horns,
He that is single is happy,
He that is married must lay upon thorns,
And always go ragged and shabby.
Bachelor's bluff, etc.
He that is single fears not the rout,
Nothing to him can be sweeter,
Having no wife to whimper and pout
And cry, can you leave me dear creature.
Bachelor's bluff, etc.
Ye Belles and ^lirts, so gay and fair,
Say, are not soldiers formed for love;
I Am sure you will find them all sincere,
If you will but kind and constant prove:
But if you slight their passions still;
And tyrannize their wills to prove,
Depend upon it they will all rebel
And will not give a thought to love.
Hold your idle prat'ling tongue,
Little laughing Cupid said,
Have you never heard it sung,
Constancy m^st win the maid.
Then ground your arms, ye sons of war,
Who shine through Britain's happy Isle,
Nor ever quarrel with the fair,
But patient wait to win their smile.
Rule ye fair of Britain's Isle,
We'll patient wait to win your smile.
SONG XXXVIII.
IN storms, when clouds obscure the sky,
And thunders roll, and lightenings fly --
In midst of all these dire alarms,
I think, my Sally, on thy charms.
The troubled main,
The wind and rain,
My ar^^nt passion prove;
Lashed (...) the (...).
Should seas overwhelm,
I Would think on thee, my love!
When rocks appear on every side,
And art is vain the ship to guide;
In varied shapes, when death appears,
The thoughts of thee my bo^om cheers.
The troubled main, etc.
But should the gracious powers be kind --
Dispel the gloom, and still the wind,
And w^ft me to thy arms once more,
Safe to my long lost native shore:
No more the main,
I Would tempt again,
But tender joys improve,
I then with thee,
Should happy be,
And think on naught but love!
SONG XXXIX.
HAIL, Patriots all! This day combine,
Your offering make at Union's shrine.
Too long by parties we have been torn;
Too long degrading insults borne.
Now let us join, the phalanx form.
And firm^^ brave the threatening storm,
Resolve to face each hostile band,
For freedom and this Happy Land.
Can we -- while France with treacherous guile,
Employs the Dagger and the Smile --
To every sense of honor dead,
Forget for what our Father's bled?
No, let us join, etc.
Shall we who planted first the Tree*
Of soul endaring LIBERTY,
With tribute bl^ght the ripening fruit,
Or with concessions blast the root?
No, let us join, etc
This Government, our common choice,
Shall we support with Heart and voice?
Or shall we change its happy means,
For Tyrants, Dungeons. Gu^^lotines?
Come, Patriots, join, the phalanx form,
And firmly brave the threatening storm,
Rosolve to face each hostile band,
For Freedom and this Happy Land.
SONG XL.
FRIENDSHIP to every willing mind
Opens a heavenly treasure;
There may the sons of sorrow find
Sources of real pleasure.
See what employments men pursue,
Then will you own my words are true,
Friendship alone unfolds to view
Sources of real pleasure.
Poor are the joys which fools esteem,
Fading in transitory;
Mirth is as fleeting as a dream,
Or a delusive story;
Luxury leaves a sting behind,
Wounding the body and the mind:
Only in Friendship can we find
Pleasure and solid glory.
Beauty, with all its gaudy shows,
Is but a painted bubble;
Short is the triumph wit bestows,
Full of deceit and trouble;
Fame, like a shadow, flies away,
Titles and dignities decay:
Nothing but Friendship can display
Joys that are free from trouble.
Learning, (that boasted glittering thing)
Scarcely is worth possessing;
Riches, forever on the wing,
Cannot be called a blessing:
Sensual pleasures swell desire,
Just as the fuel feeds the fire:
Friendship can real bliss inspire,
Bliss that is worth possessing.
Happy the man who has a friend
Formed by the God of nature;
Well may he feel and recommend
Friendship for his Creator.
Then as our hands in Friendship join,
So let our social powers combine,
Ruled by a passion most divine,
Friendship with our Creator.
SONG XLI.
SAYS Plato, Why should man be vain?
Since bounteous Heaven has made him great!
Why looks he with insolent disdain
On those undeck'd with wealth and state!
Can splendid robes or beds of down,
Or costly gems that deck the fair?
Can all the glories of a crown,
Give health, or ease the brow of care?
The sceptered king, the burdened slave,
The humble and the haughty die:
The rich, the poor, the base, the brave,
In dust without distinction lie.
Go search the tombs where monarchs rest,
Who once the greatest titles bore:
The wealth and glory they possessed,
And all their honors are no more.
So glides the meteor through the sky,
And spreads a long, a gilded train:
But, when its short lived beauties die,
Dissolves to common air again.
So it is with us, my jovial souls,
Let Friendship reign while here we stay;
Let Us crown our joys with flowing bowls,
When Jove commands we must obey.
SONG XLII.
THE bright God of day, drew westward away,
And the evening was charming and clear;
The swallow remains nimbly sailing over the plains.
And the shadows l^ke giants appear.
In a gay summer bower, when the violet's in the flower,
And zephyrs breathe odors around,
Loved Celia she sat playing on her spinnet,
And she charmed all the grove with the sound.
The gay God of love flew over the grove,
By zephyrs conducted along,
As she touched on the string, he beat time with his wing,
And the echo repeated the song.
Rosy bowers, she sung, while the harmony rung,
And the birds they all fluttering arrive;
The industrious bees, from the flowers on the trees,
Gently humm'd, with their sweets, to the hive.
Ye mortals beware how ye venture too near,
Love doubly is armed to wound,
Your fate you may shun, but you're surely undone,
If you rashly approach near the sound.
SONG XLIII.
A ROSE tree in full bearing,
Had sweet flowers, fair to see
One rose beyond comparing,
For beauty, attracted me;
Though eager once, to win it,
When lovely, blooming, fresh and gay,
I found a canker in it,
And now, throw it far away.
How fine this morning early!
The sun shining fair and bright,
So late I loved you dearly,
Though lost now, each fond delight,
The clouds seem big with showers,
The sun beams no more are seen,
Farewell, ye fleeting hours,
Your falsehood has changed the scene,
When fair Aurora blushes,
And heaven's serene and clear,
The linnets, larks and thrushes,
With music, delight the ear;
When storms begin to gather,
And clouds veil the vaulted skies,
They bid adieu to pleasure,
In silence, their music dies.
So when you was my lover,
I thought you was all divine,
No blemish could discover,
But now, all your vices shine;
I find you are inconstant,
You're false and fickle, as the wind,
I Will think no more upon you,
But banish you from my mind.
As little Cupid played,
The sweet blooming flowers, among,
A be, that lay concealed
Under the leaves, his finger stung;
Tears down his pretty cheeks ran,
He frantic, blowed the smarting wound,
And crying through the grove ran,
Until he his mother found;
Mamma, I Am sorely wounded,
Assist me, or I die with pain,
My anguish is unbounded,
A be stung me, on the plain;
She smilingly, replying,
Said, O my son, how can it be?
That by a be you're dying,
What must she feel, who is stung by thee?
SONG XLIV.
HOW stands the glass around?
For shame, ye take no care, my boys,
How stand the glass around?
Let mirth and wine abound.
The trumpets sound;
The colors they are flying, boys.
To fight, kill, or wound,
May we still be found,
Content with our hard fate, my boys,
On the cold ground.
Why, soldiers, why,
Should we be melancholy, boys?
Why, soldiers, why,
Whose business it is to die!
What sighing fie!
Drown fear, drink on, be jolly boys,
It Is he, you or I!
Cold, hot, wet or dry,
We Are always bound to follow, boys,
And scorn to fly!
It Is but in vain --
I mean not to upbraid ye, boys --
It Is but in vain
For soldiers to complain.
Should next campaign
Send us to him who made us, boys,
We Are free from pain!
But if we remain,
A bottle and kind land-lady boys,
Cure all again.
SONG XLV. The Old Maid's last prayer.
COME all you pretty maidens, some older some younger,
Who all have got sweethearts, but I must stay longer,
Some sixteen, some eighteen, are happily married,
Alas how unequally such things are carried;
A limner, a penman, a tinker, a tailor,
A fiddler, a pedlar, a ploughman, a sailor,
Come gentle, come simple, come foolish, come witty,
Come don't let me die a maid, take me out of pity.
I have a sister Sally, who is younger than I am,
Has so many sweethearts she is forced to deny them.
I never was guilty of denying many,
The lord knows my heart, I Would be thankful for any,
A l^mner, etc.
I have a sister Susan, though ugly ill shapen,
Before she was sixteen years old, she was taken,
Before she was eighteen, a son and a daughter,
And I Am six and thirty and never had an offer,
A limner, etc.
It has often been said, by my father and mother,
That going to one wedding, makes way for another;
If that be the case, I will go without bidding,
And let the world judge, if I don't want a wedding.
A limner, etc.
I never will scold, and I Will never be jealous,
My husband shall have money, to go the alehouse,
While he is there spending, I Will be at home saving,
And leave it to you all, if I an't worth the having.
A limner, etc.
SONG XLVI.
BOTH sexes give ear to my fancy,
While the praise of a woman I sing;
Confined not to Polly, nor Nancy,
But alike from the beggar to king.
When Adam at first was created,
And lord of the universe crowned,
His happiness was not completed,
Because a help meet was not found.
He had all things that were wanting,
Which yield us contentment in life,
Both horses and foxe^, for hunting,
Which many love more than a wife.
A garden, so planted by nature,
Man could not produce in his life,
And yet, the all wise Creator
Saw that he wanted a wife.
Old Adam was cast into slumber,
A rib taken out of his side,
And when he awoke, he with wonder,
Beheld a most beautiful bride;
With transport, he gazed upon her,
His happiness now was complete,
He praised the bountiful doner,
Who thus had provided a mate.
She was not taken out of his head,
To rule and triumph over man,
Nor was taken out of his heel;
To be ruled, and trampled upon:
But she was taken out of his side,
His equal and companion to be,
And thus they both were united,
And man is the top of the tree.
Then let not the fair be despised
By man, for she is part of himself;
Since woman by Adam was prized,
More than the whole world full of wealth;
For man without woman's a beggar;
Although, the whole world he possess,
And the beggar, that has a good wife,
With more than this world he is blessed.
SONG XLVII.
ANY one, who reads the scripture,
without a true Bunyanic rapture,
Will freely own some places in it,
Cannot be fathomed in a minute.
Though God set a man to write it,
He studied all the while to indite it
In such a form as made a sum,
For wrangling ages, yet to come.
Hence, arose fierce goose quill wars,
Which hack religion all to scars;
They lug and tug it, wring and twist it,
To show how one another miss it.
SONG XLVIII.
THERE was once, it was said, when is out of my head,
And where too, yet true is my tale,
That a round bellied viccar, bep^mpled with liquor,
Could stick to no text like good ale.
Tol de roll, de roll, lol lol lol lol.
He one night 'gan to dose; for under the ros^
The parson was then non se ipse:
Non se ipse! -- you will say, What Is that to the lay?
In plain English, the parson was tipsy.
H^s clerk stepping in, with a band bobbi^ chin,
As solemn and stupid as may be;
The vicar he gaped; the clerk hemmed and scraped,
Saying, Please, Sir, to bury a baby.
Now our author supposes, the clerk's name was Moses.
He looked like his master so rosy;
Who blink'd with one eye, with his wig all awry
And hiccup'd -- Pray how is it Mosy?
A child, Sir, is carry 'd, by you to be buried. --
Bury me Moses! no, that will not do. --
Lord, Sir! said the clerk, you are all in the dark;
It Is a child to be buried, not you.
Well, Moses, don't hurry; the infant we'll bury. --
But, master, the corpse cannot stay. --
We^l cannot it? but why? for once, then, we'll try
If a corpse, Moses, can run away.
But Moses replied: -- Sir, the parish will chide,
For keeping them out in cold weather. --
Then Moses, quoth he, go and tell them, from me,
I Will bury them warm, all together.
But, Sir, it rains hard; pray have some regard. --
Regard, Moses! that makes me stay:
For no corpse, young or old, in rain can catch cold;
But, faith, Moses, you and I may.
Moses begged he would be gone, saying, Sir, the rain's done;
Please to rise, and I Will lend you my hand. --
O^! it is hard, quoth the vicar, to leave my good liquor,
And go, where I Am sure I cannot stand,
Then the parson sore troubled, to the churchyard he hobbled,
Lamenting the length of the way:
For, Moses, quoth he, were I a bishop, do you see,
I neither need walk, preach, nor pray.
When he came to the grave, says he -- Moses, a stave.
Lord! where is my tobacco-box hid?
I declare this fast walking prevents me from ta^king;
So Moses, pray give me a qui^.
Then he opened the book, and in it seemed to look,
But over the page only he squinted: --
Says he, Moses, I Am vexed, for I cannot find the text.
The book is so damnably printed.
Good people, let us pray. Life's, alas! but a day;
Nay, some^^mes it is over at noon;
M^n is but a flower* cut down in an hour:
It Is strong ale, Mosy, does it so soon.
Woman of a man born -- no, that is wrong, the leaf's torn:
Upon woman the natural swell is;
The world would g^ow wild, were men got with child:
Moses, you and I might have big bellies!
Neighbors mind what I say, when it is night it is not day,
Though in former times saints could work wonders;
For, cut off your head, in a trice, it is said,
They Would replace it without any blunders.
Come, let us go forth; put the child in the earth;
Dust to dust, Moses, dust is away;
For Moses, I trust we all should be dust,
If we were not to moisten our clay.
So one pot, and then -- the clerk said, Amen* --
And thus we have carried the farce on.
The taste of the times will relish our rhymes,
When the ridicule runs on a parson.
T^^n, Satire, detest Immorality's jest,
Each profane or immodest expression:
But we'll not rude, but drink, as we should,
To the good folks of every profession.
SONG XLIX.
WHEN Delia on the plain appears,
Awed by a tho^sand tender fears,
I would a proach, but dare not move;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
When ever she speaks, my ravished ear
No other voice but here is can hear;
No other wit but here is approve;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
If she some other swain command;
Though I was once his fondest friend,
His instant enemy I prove;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
When she is absent, I no more
Delight in all that pleased before,
The clearest spring, the shadiest grove;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
When fond of power, of beauty vain,
Her net she spread for every swain,
I strove to hate, but vainly strove:
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
SONG L.
'TWAS on the morn of sweet May day,
When nature painted all things gay,
Taught birds to sing and lambs to play,
And gild the meadows rare:
Young Jockey early in the dawn,
Arose, and tript it over the lawn;
His Sunday's coat the youth put on,
For Jenny had vowed away to run
With Jockey to the fair.
For Jenny had vowed, etc.
The cheerful parish bells had rung,
With eager steps he trudged along,
With flowery garlands round him hung,
Which shepherds used to wear:
He tapt the ^indow -- Haste, my dear,
Jenny impatient, cried Who Is there?
It Is I, my love, and no one near;
Step gently down, you have naught to fear,
With Jockey to the fair.
My dad and mamma's fast asleep,
My brother's up, and with the sheep;
And will you still your promise keep,
Which I have heard you swear?
And will you ever constant prove?
I will by all the powers above,
And never deceive my charming dove:
Dispel these doubts, and haste my love,
With Jockey to the fair.
Behold the ring, the shepherd cried
Will Jenny be my charming bride?
Let Cupid be our happy guide,
And Hymen meet us there.
Then Jockey did his vows renew,
He would be constant, would be true:
His word was pledged -- away she flew,
With cowslips tipped with balmy dew,
With Jockey to the fair,
In raptures meet the joyful throng,
Their gay companions blithe and young;
Each join the dance, each join the song.
And hail the happy pair:
In turns there is none so fond (...) they,
They blessed the kind propitious day;
The smiling morn of blooming May,
When lovely Jenny ran away,
With Jockey to the fair.
SONG LI.
A BEAUTEOUS Sterling late I saw,
On lovely Sylvia's hand;
To check its slight, around its leg,
She ties a silken band.
In vain it flutters to be gone;
Confinement is its lot:
In vain it strives to break the band,
But cannot untie the knot.
"Cease, cease, she cried, here you shall feed
"And in my bosom rest,"
No bird that ever winged the air,
Was half ^o much carest.
"If from my hand you should escape,
"You may perchance be shot;
"Then cease to peek it is all in vain;
"You cannot untie the knot."
The bird contented grows at length,
While Sylvia strokes his plumes,
Erects his little crest, and, soon,
His former notes resumes.
From what he would heard the fair one say,
These words by rote he got,
And often repeated, every day,
You cannot untie the knot.
One evening youthful Damon sat,
With Sylvia by his side;
Reward my love, at last, sa^d he,
Tomorrow be my BRIDE.
Her blushes in his favor rose,
Yet she consented not:
For ere she spoke, the Sterling cried,
You cannot untie the knot.
SONG LII.
TRUST not man for he will deceive you;
Treach'ry is his sole intent;
First he will court you, then he will leave you,
Poor, deluded! to lament.
Formed by nature to undo us,
They escape our utmost heed;
Oh! how humble when they woo us,
But how proud, when they succeed.
So the Bird when once deluded,
By the fowler's artful snare;
Pines out life, in cage secluded;
Fair ones, while you're young, beware!
SONG LIII. PARODY ON THE ABOVE.
TRUST not Woman, she will beguile you,
All her smiles are formed by art;
First she will flatter then exile you.
S^ghing with a broken heart!
Formed by nature to pursue us,
They outstrip the fleetest men; --
Ah! how sweet they bill and ^oo, us
But how proud they triumph then!
So the FISH the bail admiring,
On the angler's fatal snare,
Gasps out life, in pangs expiring!
LOVERS, of the hook beware!
SONG LIVE.
SOME women take delight in dress,
And some in cards take pleasure,
While others place their happiness
In heaping hoards of treasure,
In private some delight to kiss,
Their hidden charms unfolding.
But they mistake their sovereign bliss,
There Is no such joy as scolding.
Each morn, as I open my eyes,
I soon disperse all silence,
Before my neighbors can arise,
They hear my clack a mile hence.
When at the board I take my seat,
There Is one continued riot;
I eat, I scold, I scold, I eat,
My clack is never quiet.
Let it be flesh, or fowl, or fish,
Though of my own providing.
I still find fault with every dish,
Still every servant chiding;
Too fat, too lean, too salt too fresh,
I never can be suited,
But give a blast at every dish,
Baked, roasted, boiled or stewed.
Every night when I go to bed,
I surely fall a weeping.
For silence is the thing I dread,
I cannot scold when sleeping.
But then my pains to mitigate,
And drive away all sorrow,
Although to night may be too late,
I Will pay them off tomorrow.
SONG LV.
YE virgins attend,
Believe me your friend,
And with prudence adhere to my plan:
Never let it be said,
There goes an old maid,
But get married as fast as you can.
As soon as you find
Your hearts are inclined,
To beat quick at the sight of a man;
Then choose out a youth
With honor and truth,
And get married as fast as you can.
For age, like a cloud,
Your charms soon will shroud,
And this whimsical life's but a span;
Then maids make your hay,
While Sol darts his ray,
And get married as fast as you can.
The treacherous rake
Will artfully take,
Every method poor girls to trepan;
But baffle their snare,
Make virtue your care,
And get married as fast as you can.
And when Hymen's bands,
Have joined both your hands,
The br^ght flame still continue to fan;
Never harbor the stings
That jealousy brings,
But be constant, and blessed while you can.
SONG LVI.
I DREAMT I saw a piteous sight,
Young Cupid weeping lay,
Until his pretty stars of light,
Had wept themselves away.
Methought I asked him why he wept,
Mere pity led me on:
He deeply sighed and then replied,
Alas! I am undone.
As I beneath you myrtle lay,
Close by Diana's springs,
Amintor stole my bow away,
And pinioned both my wings.
Alas! said I, where is then thy bow,
Wherewith he wounded me?
Thou art a god, and such a blow,
Could come from none but thee.
But if thou will revenged be
On that ambitious swain,
I Will set thy wings at liberty,
And thou shall fly again:
And all the service on my part
That I require of thee,
Is that you would wound Amintor's heart,
And make him die for me.
The silken fetters I unti'd,
And the gay wings displayed,
He mounting gently fanned and cried
Adieu, fond foolish maid!
At that I blushed and angry grew,
I should the god believe;
But walking found my dream too true,
Alas! I was a slave.
SONG LVII.
I SIGH and lament me in vain,
These walls can but echo my moan;
Alas! it increases my pain,
When I think on the days that are gone.
Through the grate of my prison I see,
The birds as they wanton in air:
My heart, how it pants to be free,
My looks they are wild with despair!
Above, though oppressed with my fate,
I burn with contempt for my foes;
Though fortune has altered my state,
She never can subdue me to those.
False women! In all ages to come,
Thy malice detested shall be;
And when we are cold in the tomb,
Some hearts shall still sorrow for me.
Ye roofs, where cold damps and dismay,
With silence and solitude dwell;
How comfortless passes the day!
How sad tolls the evening bell!
The owls from the battlements cry;
Hollow winds seem to murmer around:
O Mary! prepare thee to die!
My blood it runs cold at the sound!
SONG LVIII. FLY YE TRAITORS*
FLY ye traitors from our land,
Fly ye Jacobinic band,
Who join the French and aid their cause;
Who join the French and aid their cause;
And should the storm of war come on,
No doubt you would to their standard run.
The independence which we boast,
By your vile arts was nearly lost;
Each true Columbian will despise
The traitors who the Frenchmen prize.
All their arts employed we see
To destroy our liberty,
Like a band of rascals joined
May they be to hell consigned.
Ye Democrats who strove once more
To make rude foes attack our shore,
Invited over the impious band,
Invited over the impious band,
Encouraged by your artful lies
To wrest from us the rights we prize;
While ye oppose each measure just,
The French in you place all their trust,
That through your influence they will prevail,
But all their wicked schemes shall fail.
All their arts etc.
May public infamy and shame
Forever brand the traitor's name,
Who boasted he should not oppose
The French, should they come here as foes:
While they protect his interest dear,
He turns to them a joyful ear.
With matchless skill he makes his power
Assist his interest every hour;
For while he gains, his heart's at ease;
Though he destroys his country's peace.
All his arts, etc.
While those who league with Talleyrand,
Once more to cheat our country stand;
Ye Democrats on you they call,
Ye Democrats on you they call,
For all the Jacobinic crew
Their hopes had fixed on hell and you;
But now overwhelmed with dire dismay,
Their schemes exposed in open day,
From vile French influence we'll be free,
Nor dread destructive anarchy.
Though all their arts employed should be
To introduce vile anarchy,
The band of rascals soon shall find
Their names to infamy consigned.
SONG LIX.
OF damask cheeks, and snowy neck,
Let other lovers tell:
Within the bosom of my fair,
Superior beauties dwell.
There all the graces of the mind,
In fair assemblage play;
There each endearing virtue shed
Its intellectual ray.
Unbounded sympathy displays,
Each captivating charm!
While friendship pure, and virtuous love,
Her tender bosom warm.
When that fair form shall sink in age,
And all those graces fly,
The beauty of that heavenly mind,
Shall length of years defy. PHILANDER.
SONG LX.
WHY should our joys transform to pain?
Why gentle Hymen's silken chain
A plague of iron prove?
BENDISH, it is strange, the charm that binds
Millions of hands, should leave their minds
At such a loose from love.
In vain I sought the wondrous cause,
Ranged the wide field of nature's laws,
And urged the schools in vain;
Then deep in thought within my breast
My soul retired, and slumber dressed,
A bright instructive scene.
Over the broad lands, and cross the tide,
On Fancy's airy horse I ride,
(Sweet rapture of the mind!)
Till on the banks of Ganges' flood,
In a tall ancient grove I stood
For sacred use designed.
Hard by, a venerable priest,
Risen with his God, the sun, from rest,
Awoke his morning song.
Thrice he conjured the murmuring stream,
The birth of souls was all his theme,
And half divine his tongue.
"He sang the eternal rolling flame,
"That vital mass, that still the same,
"Does all our minds compose;
"But shaped in twice ten thousand frames;
"Thence differing souls, of differing names,
"And jarring tempers, rose.
"The mighty power, that formed the mind,
"One mould for every two designed,
"And blessed the newborn pair:
" This be a match for this: (He said)
"Then down he sent the souls he made,
"To seek them bodies here:
"But parting from their warm abode,
"They lost their fellows on the road,
"And never joined their hands:
"Ah cruel chance, and crossing fates!
"Our eastern souls have dropped their mates,
"On Europe's barbarous lands.
"Happy the youth that finds the bride,
"Whose birth is to his own allied,
"The sweetest joy of life!
"But oh! the crowds of wretched souls,
"Fettered to minds of d^fferent moulds,
"And chained to eternal strife!"
Thus sang the wondrous Indian bard;
My soul with vast attention heard,
While Ganges ceased to flow;
"Sure then, (I cried) might I but see
"That gentle nymph that twined with me,
"I may be happy too.
"Some courteous angel, tell me where,
"What distant lands this unknown fair,
"Or distant seas detain?
"Swift as the wheel of nature rolls
"I Would fly to meet and mingle souls,
"And wear the joyful chain.
SONG LXI.
I THAT once was a ploughman, a sailor am now,
No lark that is aloft in the sky,
Ever fluttered its wings to give speed to the plough,
Was so gay and so careless as I,
But my friend was a Carfindo on board a King's ship,
And he axed me to go to sea for a trip;
And he talked of such things,
As if sailors were Kings;
And so teazing did keep,
That I left my poor plough, to go ploughing the deep;
Where so sweetly the horn,
Called me up in the morn,
Ere I trusted to the Carfindo or the inconstant wind.
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
When so sweetly the horn, etc.
I did not much like to be on board a ship,
When in danger there^s no door to creep out;
I liked the jolly Tars, I liked bumbo and slip,
But I didn't like rocking about.
By and by came a hurricane, I didn't like that,
Next a battle that many a sailor laid flat;
Ah! Why did I roam,
When so happy at home?
I could sow, and could reap,
Ere I left my poor plough, to ploughing the deep.
Where so sweetly the horn, etc.
At length safe I landed, and in a whole skin,
Nor did I make any long stay,
Ere I found by a friend who I ax'd for my kin,
Father dead, and my wife run away,
Ah! who ^ut thyself, cried I, have thou to blame,
Wives loosing their husbands often loose a good name.
Ah! Why did I roam,
When so happy at home?
I could sow, and could reap,
Ere I left my poor plough, and went ploughing the deep.
Where so sweetly the horn, etc.
Why if that be the case said this very same friend,
And you be'nt no more minded to roam;
Ci's a shake by your fist, all your care's at an end,
Dad's alive and your wife's safe at home:
Stark stairing with joy, I leaped out of my skin,
Buss'd my Wife, Mother, Sister, and all of my kin:
Ah! cried I, let them roam,
Who want a good home;
I am well, so I Will keep,
Nor again leave my plough, to go ploughing the deep:
Once more shall the horn, call me up in the morn, etc.
SONG LXII.
HOW imperfect is expression,
Some emotions to impart,
When we mean a soft confession,
And yet seek to hide the heart.
When our bosoms all complying,
With enraptured tumults swell,
And beat, what broken, falt'ring, dying*
Language would, but cannot tell.
Deep confusion, rosy terror,
Quite expressive, paints my check;
Ask no more, behold your error,
Blushes eloquently speak:
What, though silent is my anguish,
Or breathed only to the air:
Mark my eyes, and as they languish,
Read what yours have written there.
O that you could once deceive me!
Once my soul's strong feelings view!
Love has naught more fond, believe me,
Friendship nothing half so true,
From you, I am wild, despairing:
With you, speechless, as I touch,
This is all that bears declaring,
And, perhaps, declares too much.
SONG LXIII.
FOR various porpose serves the fan,
As thus a decent blind,
Between the sticks to peep at man,
Nor yet betray our mind.
Each action has a meaning plain,
Resentment's in the snap;
A flirt expresses strong disdain,
Consent a gentle tap.
All passions will the fan disclose,
All modes of female art,
And to advantage I weekly shows
The hand if not the heart,
It Is folly's scepter, first designed
By love's capricious boy.
Who knows how lightly all mankind,
Are governed by a toy.
SONG LXIV.
JOLLY mortals, fill your glasses,
Noble deeds are done by wine;
Scorn the nymph, and all her graces,
Who'd for love or beauty pine?
Look within the bowl that is flowing,
And a thousand charms you will find,
More than Phillis has, though going
In a moment to be kind.
Alexander hated thinking,
Drank about at council board;
He sub^u'd the world by drinking
More than by his conquering sword.
SONG LXV.
MUSIC, how powerful is thy charm!
That can the fiercest rage disarm,
Calm passion in a human breast,
And lull even jealousy to rest;
With amorous thoughts the soul inspire,
Or kindle up a warlike fire.
So great is music's power.
Amphion, with his tuneful lyre,
Could rocks remove, and stones inspire*
Command a city to arise,
And lofty buildings touch the skies;
While stones, obed^ent to his call,
Harmonious moved, and formed a wall.
Arion, from his vessel cast,
In safety over the seas he past,
For, mounted like the ocean's god,
Upon a Dolphin's back he rode,
Whilst shoals of fishes fl^ck'd around,
Well pleased drank in the charming sound,
Sad Orpheus, through hell's dr^ary coast,
Was seeking for his consort lost,
His music drew the ghosts along,
And sur^es listened to his song;
His song could Charon's rage disarm,
And Pluto and his consort charm.
Inflamed by music soldiers fight,
Inspired by music poets write;
Music can heal the lover's wounds,
And calm fierce rage by gentle sounds;
Philosophy attempts in va^n,
What music can with ease attain.
So great is music's power.
SONG LXVI.
A SAILOR's life's a life of woe,
He works now late, now early;
Now up and down, now to and fro,
What then? he takes it cheerly.
Blessed with a smiling can of grog,
If duty call,
Stand, rise or fall,
To fate's last verge he will jog;
The cadge to weigh,
The sheets belay,
He does it with a wish;
To heave the led,
Or to cat head
The ponderous anchor-fish.
For while the grog goes round,
All sense of danger's drowned,
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, and laugh a little,
And work a little, and swear a little,
And fiddle a little, and foot it a little,
And swig the flowing can.
If howling winds and roaring seas,
Give proof of coming danger,
We view the storm, our hearts at ease,
For Jack's to fear a stranger.
Blessed with the smiling grog we fly
Where now below
We headlong go,
Now rise on mountains high;
Spite of the gale,
We hand the sail,
Or take the needful reef;
Or man the deck,
Or clear some wreck,
To give the ship relief:
Though perils threat around,
All sense of danger drowned,
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, etc.
But yet think not our case is hard,
Though storms at sea thus treat us!
For coming home, (a sweet reward!)
With smiles our sweethearts greet us.
Now too the friendly grog we quaff,
Our amorous toast,
Her we love most,
And gaily sing and laugh;
The sails we furl,
Then for each girl,
The petticoat display;
The deck we clear,
Then three times cheer,
As we their charms survey;
And then the grog goes round,
All sense of danger drowned,
We despise it to a man.
We sing a little, etc.
SONG LXVII.
ATTENTION pray give, while of Hobbies I sing;
For each has his hobby from cobbler to king:
On some favorite hobby we all get a stride,
And when we'er once mounted full gallop we ride.
All on hobbies, All on hobbies, All on hobbies,
Gee up, gee O.
Some hobbies are restive and hard for to govern,
Even just like our wives, they are so cursedly stubborn;
The hobbies of Scolds are their husbands to teaze,
And the hobbies of Lawyers are plenty of fees.
All on hobbies, etc.
The Beaux, those sweet gentlemen's hobbies, good lack!
Is to wear great large poultices tied round the neck;
And they think in the ton and the tippey they are dressed,
If they have breeches that reach from the ancles to chest.
All on hobbies, etc.
The hobbies of Sailors when safe moored in port,
With their wives and their sweethearts to toy and to sport,
When our navy's completed, their hobby shall be
To show the whole world that America's free.
All on hobbies, etc.
The hobbies of Soldiers, in time of great wars,
Are breaches and battles, with blood wounds and scars;
But in peace you will observe that quite different the trade is --
The hobbies of Soldiers in peace, are the ladies.
All on hobbies, etc.
The Ladies, sweet creatures, yes, they now and then
Get astride of their hobbies, ay, just like the men;
With smiles and with simpers beguile us with ease,
And we gallop, trot, amble, even just as they please.
All on hobbies, etc.
The American's hobby has long since been known;
No tyrant or king shall from them have a throne:
Their States are united, and let it be said
Their hobby is WASHINGTON, Peace, and Free Trade.
All on hobbies, etc.
SONG LXVIII.
OUR immortal poet's page
Says, that all the world's a stage,
And that men with all their airs,
Are nothing more than players:
Each using skill and art,
In his turn to tap his part,
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
Enter here,
Exit there,
Stand in view,
Mind your cue,
High down, ho down, derry, deny down,
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
First the infant in the lap,
Mewling, pewling with its pap,
Like a chicken that we truss,
Is swaddled by its nurse,
Who to please the puppet tries,
As it giggles, and it cries.
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
Hush abye,
Wipe an eye,
Kiss pretty,
Such a tetty
High down, ho down, etc.
Then the pretty babe of grace,
With his shining morning fa^^,
And satchel on his back,
To school, alas! must pack;
But like a snail he creeps,
And for bloody Monday weeps.
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
Book mislaid,
Truant played,
Rod in pickle,
Rump to tickle,
High down, etc.
Then the lover next appears,
Sous'd all over head and ears,
Like a lobster on the fire,
Sighing ready to expire;
With a deep hole in his heart,
Through which you may drive a cart,
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
Beauty spurns him;
Passion burns him,
Like a wizard,
Gu^^s and gizzard*
High down, etc.
Then the soldier, ripe for plunder,
Breathing slaughter, blood and thunder;
Like a cat among the mice,
Kicks a dust up in a trice;
And talks of shattered brains,
Scattered liwbs and streaming veins.
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
Fight and fly,
Run and die,
Pop and pelter,
Helter skelter.
High down, etc.
Then the justice in his chair,
With broad and vacant stare;
His wig of formal cut,
And belly like a butt;
Well lined with turtle hash,
Callipee and callipash.
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
Baud and trull,
Pimp or cull,
At his nod,
Go to quod.
High down, etc.
Then the slipper'd pantaloon,
In life's dull afternoon,
With spectacles on nose;
Shrunk shank in youthful hose:
His voice once big and round,
Now whistling in the sound:
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
Body bent,
Vigor spent,
Shaking noddle,
Widdle, waddle,
High down, etc.
At last to end the play,
Second childhood leads the way,
And like sheep that is got the rot,
All our senses go to pot.
So death amongst us pops,
And down the curtain dops.
All to fill up this farcical scene, O.
Then the coffin,
We move off in,
While the bell
Tolls the knell,
Of high, and low down in the cold ground,
All to finish this farcical scene, O.
SONG LXIX.
AS passing by a shady grove,
I heard a linnet sing,
Whose sweetly plaintive voice of love
Proclaimed the cheerful spring.
His pretty accents seemed to flow
As if he knew no pain;
His downy throat he tuned so sweet,
It echoed over the plain.
Ah! happy warbler (I replied)
Contented thus to be;
It Is only harmony and love,
Can be compared to thee.
Thus perched upon the spray you stand,
The monarch of the shade;
And even sip ambrosial sweets,
That glow from every glade.
Did man possess but half thy bliss,
How joyful might he be!
But man was never formed for this,
It Is only joy for the^
Then farewell, pretty bird (I said)
Pursue thy plaintive tale,
And let thy tuneful accents spread
All over the fragrant vale.
SONG LXX.
SWEET Nightingale, best poet of the grove,
The plaintive strain can never belong to thee,
Blessed with the full possession of thy love,
O, lend that strain sweet Nightingale, to me,
It Is mine alas, to mourn my wretched fate,
I love a maid, who all my bosom charms;
Yet spend my days without this lovely mate,
Inhuman fortune keeps her from my arms,
You happy birds by nature's simple laws,
Lead your soft lives sustained by nature's care,
You dwell wherever your roving fancy draws,
Your lovely songs enliven all the al^ --
But we va^n slaves of interest and of pride,
Dare not be blessed lest envious tongues should blame,
Hence, it is in vain, I languish for my bride,
Come mourn with me sweet birds, my helpless flame.
SONG LXXI.
WERE I to choose the greatest bliss,
That ever in love was known,
'T would be the highest of my wish,
To enjoy her heart alone.
Kings might possess their kingdoms free,
And crowns unenvied wear;
And should no rival have of me,
Might I reign monarch there.
Hear, Cynthia, hear the gentle air,
But whisper out my love:
And prove but half so kind at fair,
My sorrow you will remove.
Cynthia, Oh! let us happy be,
Unite our hear^s in love,
I Would change not such felicity
For all the joys above.
SONG LXXII.
CELIA, that I once was blessed,
Is now the torment of my breast:
Since to cu^e me you bereave me
Of the pleasure I possessed.
Cruel creatu^e to deceive me,
First to love and then to leave me*
Cruel creature, etc.
Had you the bliss refused to grant.
I then had never known the want;
But possessing once the blessing,
Is the cause of my complaint.
Once possessing is but tasting,
It Is no bliss that is not lasting,
Once possessing, etc.
Celia now is mine no more,
But I Am hers, and must adore:
Not to leave her will endeavor,
Charms that captived me before.
No unkindness can discover,
Love that is true is love forever.
No unkindness. etc.
SONG LXXIII.
YOU say, Sir, once, a wit Dean Swi^^.
allowed
A woman to be like a cloud;
Accept a Simile, as soon,
Between a woman and the moon;
For, let mankind say what they will,
The sex are heavenly bodies still.
Grant me to mimic human life;
That sun and moon are man and wife;
What ever kind Sol affords to lend her
Is squandered upon midnight splendour;
And when to rest he lays him down,
She Is up and st^r'd at through the town!
From him her beauties close confining,
And only in his absence shining;
Or, else, she looks like fullen tapers*
Or, else, she is fairly in the vapors;
Or owns at once a wife's ambition,
And fully glares in opposition,
Say, are not these a modish pair,
Where each for other feels no care?
Whole days in separate coaches driving,
Whole nights to keep a sunder striving.
But in the dumps in gloomy weather,
And lying once a month together:
In one sole point unlike the case is,
On her own head the horns she places.
SONG LXXIV.
TIME has not thin'd my flowing hair,
Nor bent me with his iron hand
Ah! why so soon the blossom tear,
Ere Autumn yet the fruit demand.
Let me enjoy the cheerful day,
Till many a year has over me rolled;
Pleased let me trifle life away,
And sing of love ere I grow old.
SONG LXXV.
THIS world is a stage,
On which mankind engage,
And each acts his part in a throng;
But all is confusion
Me^e folly's delusion,
And nothing on earth but a song.
The Parson so grave,
Says your souls he can save,
And teach the right way from the wrong;
After piously teaching,
And long winded preaching,
He fobs off his flock with a Song.
The Lawyer he scribbles
In qui^ks and in quibbles,
And moves his melifferous tongue;
'Twixt demur and vacation,
He Will raise expectation,
And sink your estate to a song.
The Doctor he fills
You with bolus and pills,
In assurance that you shall live long;
But, believe me, it is true,
He Is guineas in view,
And his recipes are naught but a Song.
The Surgeon, so bold,
His lancet does hold,
And slashes your bodi^s along;
Small wounds he enlarges,
To fill up his charges,
His art, like the rest, is a song.
The Merchant is bent
On his fifty per cent,
To whom Ledger and Journal belong*
'Compts current in trading
And long bills of lading;
His balance will end in a song.
The Printer descerning
'Twixt ignorance and learning
The difference that truly belongs;
Yet, sure, it is said,
That his logical head,
Is turned by a statesman or Song.
The School master rages,
For want of more wages,
And hurries his scholars along;
He teaches them morals,
And whips those that quarrel,
And silence all day is his Song.
The Farmer he brags
Of what crops he shall have,
Provided the season holds long;
But if drought comes on,
His hopes are all gone,
And his crops may be bought for a Song.
The soldier he prattles
Of sieges and battles,
And actions he never was among;
His preferment and merit,
Are like to his spirit,
And nothing on earth but a Song.
With powder and lace,
And a feminine face,
The fop he goes strutting along;
Just arrived from his travels,
Yet nothing unravels,
But just like a dance or a Song.
The surly old prude,
Complains you are rude,
Though for bliss she so secretly longs;
But take her aside,
And you will manage her pride,
And her virtue bring down to a Song,
The silly Coquette,
Is all in a fret,
In the morning her toilet goes wrong;
All day long she passes,
Consulting her glasses,
And at night dies away like a Song.
I Have often been told,
The Women will scold,
Their good-natured husbands among;
They Will work and they will fret,
And they will scold, and they will sweat,
And at night die away like a Song.
Then let us be jolly,
Drive hence melancholy,
While we are good fellows among;
Let Us fill up our glasses,
Take life as it passes,
And each merry soul sing a Song.
SONG LXXVI.
'TWAS in the flowery month of May,
When Nature blooms on every spray,
And lambkins fondly sport and play,
To grace the sylvan scene;
That pretty Miss first formed the plan,
To leave papa and chiding mam;
In chaise and four with dear footman,
To trip to Gretna Green.
The youth was formed with every grace,
Tall, blooming, gay with lovely face,
Sure never before in worsted lace,
Was such a charmer seen;
The night serene, the coast was clear,
When pretty Miss with loving dear,
Set off with haste, and full career,
To trip to Gretna Green.
The morning come, and plot is blown,
The cage is open and bird is flown,
But whither, is by no one known,
Lud, what a curious scene!
Mamma in fits while ancient prig,
In fury tore his powdered wig,
And with grim passion monstrus big,
Sets off for Gretna Green.
Before old square toes reaches near,
He meets the beau and lovely dear,
Returning back in full career.
From Hymen's flowery scene;
Stop thief, he cries; -- the work i^ done,
My dear papa, we are coming home,
For we have tasted joys that come
From pleasant Gretna Green.
SONG LXXVII.
HOW blessed is the bachelor's life,
Who constantly lives at his ease;
Never plagued by a proud scolding wife,
And no quarrelling children to tease.
He fears not the frowns of the fair;
He scorns the coquette with her art;
For love never fell to his share,
Its pains never tortured his heart.
But wedlock, oh, where are thy joys!
That man ha^ perceived in thy state;
A scene of vexation and noise,
Which thousands have reason to hate.
To me, how detested the cries
Of children round, asking for bread;
Till I see the poor man advertise,
"That his wife has clop'd from his bed."
Yet single, a man may have bliss,
If he has but a grain of content;
Though once if he wed to a Miss,
He will find it too late to repent.
In friendship, and freedom, and ease,
The Bachelor's life rolls away;
For friendship and freedom can please,
When beauty is gone to decay.
Tim Crusty may tell of his pain,
That his years all unhappily roll;
That single he lives but in vain;
I despise his complaints from my soul.
Poor Crusty has whin'd for a bride,
His breeches and stockings to mend;
When his wants might as well be supplied,
If he had but a maid or a friend.
But the wretch who has never a friend,
Should sure never marry a maid;
For this would their wretchedness blend,
And their griefs be by sorrow repaid.
Yea children to add to the gloom,
For mark what some clergymen tell,
That infants receive their sad doom
When they die to the dungeons of hell.
Avaunt! superstitious Divine,
If infants to misery go;
You never shall have children of mine,
To sentence to regions of woe.
If man is accursed from his birth,
And you scarce give him doctrines of peace,
Better send forth a sword on this earth,
And bid population to cease.
To me may no children be born,
Distress and misfortune to share;
But let me relieve the forlorn,
And banish the sight of despair.
The children of sorrow I cheer,
The beggar is often my guest;
They smile and suppress every tear,
Their gratitude sweetens my rest.
It Is thus I dispose of my wealth --
My house is an inn for the poor;
I live in contentment and health,
I am happy, I wish for no more.
While I live I will c^erish content,
And love the old bachelor's life;
So never I Would need to repent,
Nor wish Betty Wrinkle my wife.
SONG LXXVIII.
THE sun sets at night, and the stars shun the day,
But glory remains when their lights fade away;
Begin, ye tormentors, your threats are in vain,
For the son of Almonoak shall scor^ to complain.
Remember the arrows he shot from his bow;
Remember your chiefs by his hatchet laid low:
Why so slow? do you wait 'till I shrink from my pain?
No -- the son of Almonoak shall never complain.
Remember the wood -- where in ambush we lay,
And the scalps which we bore from your nation away:
When the flame rises fast! you will exult in ^ay pain;
But the son of Almonoak shall never complain.
I go to the land where my father is gone;
His ghost shall rejoice in the fame of his son:
Death comes like a friend -- he relieves me from pain;
And thy son, O Almonoak, has scorned to complain.
SONG LXXIX.
THE sails unfurled, the ship umnoor'd,
Her cour^^ to steer -- all hands on board,
Propitiou^ every gale;
Fair Sally on the beach deplores
Her sailor bound to distant shores,
But naught her tears avail.
"Oh! cruel ^ate -- ye Powers above,
"Why thus bereft of him I love!
"Who on the restless deep,
"The boi^^'rous ^ide must (...) brave,
"And meet, per chance, a watery grave,
While I but live to weep."
Twelve months elapsed when he returned,
Her constant heart with rapture burned,
'Twas freed from every care;
And Henry's love, his heart, his soul,
Were true, as needle to the pole,
When absent from his fair.
In wedded bliss they taste delight,
No winds disturb, nor storms affright
The lovely Sally's breast;
For now he makes a firm decree,
No more to tru^^ the raging sea --
With her completely blessed.
SONG LXXX.
HOW happy is the man,
Who has a quiet home;
Who loves to do what good he can,
And hates the demon, Rum.
Whose house contains enough,
For him and all his folks,
Whose wi^e abhors a box of snuff,
And very seldom smokes.
Whose wife knows how to spin,
And loves to use the needle;
Who keeps herself and husband clean*
But never loved a fiddle.
Whose wife is like a tree,
That Is ever green and fair;
That ever in the bloom will be,
And yet will never bear.
Whose wife will rise in season,
Be weather hot or cold;
And always give sufficient reason,
If ever she chance to scold.
This man, while others roam,
Among the sons of strife,
Is always happiest when at home,
In converse with his wife.
SONG LXXXI.
COME, care curing mirth,
From Wit's bower forth,
Bring Humor, your brother, along;
Hospitality's here,
And Harmony near,
To chorus droll Sentiment's song.
In Comedy trim,
Joke, Gesture, and Whim,
With Trios will keep up the ball;
By order of ^aste,
We open the feast
Of Friendship, in Liberty Hall.
Who Will President be?
Unanimity; see
He Is ordered to sit as our host*
My Lord Common Sense,
With pains and expense,
Introduced him to give out the toast,
Though Scandal we hate,
Only good we hold great,
Nor any for title's sake prai^e;
Unworthy that name,
No merit can claim,
But what genealogies raise.
In this Anno Dom. we
Would felicity see,
I Will demonstrate how easy we could,
Change fault finding ^lves
To mending ourselves,
Then things might soon be as they should.
Some wives read their mates
Curtain lecture debates,
And wonder they are not understood;
The Husband's perplexed,
And the Lady is vexed,
'Cause every thing's not as it should.
If pension, or place,
Is the gift of his Grace,
Refusal would be over nice:
Plumb pudding on board,
And pressed by my Lord,
Who would not come in for a slice?
Corruption's the cry,
Opposition runs high,
Yet who can help laughing to see,
Though Faction's so big
Ambo Tory and Whig,
In one part both parties agree?
For the kingdom of man,
Division's the plan,
By the laws of the Cyprian court,
The ladies must yield,
When our standard we wield,
And what we advance they support.
For a bumper I call --
Here Is to the Sovereign of All,
The spring from which all honor flows;
From thence we all came,
So we go to that same,
Here Is to it, and to it, Here goes.
SONG LXXXII. THE FRENCH ^AFT.
AS Neptune in his coral bower,
Passed the other day a vacant hour,
Discoursing with his wench;
Trity, says he, the news above,
Will make you laugh your fill, my love,
At those mad folks, the French.
They fain old England would invade,
But of the means are much afraid,
Though of the project fond;
Amidst their visionary schemes,
They find it difficult it seems,
"To cross the herring pond."
'Twould be an awkward thing to meet,
Half way with Bridport and his f^eet --
"Burnt children dread the fire;"
It Is ten to one, but dire misch^nce,
Would happen to the ships of France,
From one so full of ire:
They therefore thought of some balloon,
A little smaller than the moon,
To fail aloft in air;
But from the scarcity of gas,
Or cash to parchase it -- alas!
The scheme would never bear.
They next proposed, all hands to creep,
Through a long cave beneath the deep,
And undermine our floor;
But tearing mischief over head,
This deep laid scheme no better sped,
Than the other did before.
At length, two men of wondrous craft,
Have orders to construct a Raft,
A wide as Hounflow heath;
From which their army, one and all,
Are sworn to land 'twixt Spring and Fall,
In spite of John Bull's teeth.
Their Cash Subscribers will be paid,
With interest, when the landing's made!
And have it in a lump;
As every man on board the Raft,
Will in his pocket bring a draft,
At sight -- "on Algate pump."
I never heard of such a scheme,
(Says Amphitrite) sure you dream,
They Will all be food for fish:
"They will be so (you jade) I grant,
That Is just what the Directory want,
The very thing they wish."
They then no more will feel dismay,
About their army and its pay,
But banish all their fears;
For when the Raft is overset,
It pays at once the public debt,
And liquidates arrears!
SONG LXXXIII.
I HEARD much talk of Oxford town,
And fain I would go thither.
When ploughing and sowing that was done,
It being gallant weather;
Father he did to it agree,
That Nell and I should go:
But mother cried that we should ride,
So we had dobbin too.
So I goes unto sister Nell,
And bids her make her ready;
And put on all her Zundy close,
As fine as any lady:
It Is a galiant day; the morning's gay:
And likely to he fair;
Therefore make haste, and soon be la^'d,
And I Will go bait the mare.
So up upon the mare we got,
And away we rid together;
And every body as we met,
We asked how far 'twas thither.
Till at the last, when on the top
Of Chisse^don hill we riss,
I somewhat spied, like steeples: and cried,
Zooks, Nell look yonder it is!
So when as nearer to'^ we came,
We zee folks infant thick;
I heard a little bastard zay,
Look here comes country Dick.
Another bastard called me Ralph*
And how is it honest Joan?
And Roger too; how is little Sue,
And all the folks at home.
So we rode on and nothing said,
But looked for an alehouse;
At last we zee a hugeous sign,
As big as any gal^ows;
It was two dogs: So in we rode,
And called for the hostler:
Out came a lusty fellow then,
I warrant he was a wrostler,
Here take this horse, and set'en up,
And ge'n a lock o^ hay;
For we be come to zee the town,
And tarry here all day.
Yes, Sir, he said, and called the maid,
That stood w^thin the entry:
She had ^s into a room as clean
As though we both been gentry.
So we zet down, and bid 'em fetch
A flagon of their beer:
But when it come, Nell shook her head,
And zed 'twas plaguey dear.
Says she to me, If long we stay,
'Twill make us go a begging;
For I am sure it cannot be
So much as old Martin's flaggon.
So we got up, and away we went
To zee the gallant town;
And at the gate we met a man
With a pitiful ragged gown:
For, as for a slave, I do believe
That they wu^ both tore off;
And, instead of a hat, he wore a cap,
'Twas a trencher covered w' cloth.
And as we were going along the town,
I thote I had found a knife;
I stooped down to pick it up,
But was never so shamed in my life.
For the underside was all be -- t
With an arrant Christian's t -- d:
The boys fell a hollowing, An April fool!
But I zed never a word.
As we went through a narrow lane,
One caught fast hold of sister;
He Would parson's close, and he du'dn't know us;
But fain would have kissed her.
He was plaguey fine; but to my mind,
He looked much like a wencher:
I up wi' my stick, and ge'en a lick,
I b'lieve I sl^t his trencher.
Then we went into a fine place,
And there we went to church:
I kneeled down to say my prayers,
And du'dn't think no hurt.
In The midst of the prayers, just up the stairs,
Was bagpipes to my thinking;
And the folks below fell singing too,
As though they would been a drinking.
I du'd'nt like the doings there,
And (...) took my hat;
I du'dn't think they would have done so
In zich a place as that:
But Nell was for staying, till they would quite done playing,
Because she liked the tune;
For she was sure she never did hear
O^d Crunball played at home.
Then we went into a fine garden,
All up n^on a hill:
And just below, a dial did grow,
Much like a wagon wheel:
But bigger by half, which made me laugh,
'Twas like a garden knot:
When the zun ^^one bright, it went as right
As our parson's clock.
Then we went out of that fine place,
And went into another,
Which was vorty times as fine
As any of the other.
Bless me, our John, quite all along
There Is books pil'd up like mows;
Faith, Nell, I wish that mother was here,
If 'twas not for the cows.
And in the middle stood two things
As round as any ball;
They told 'twas the picture of
The world, the zea, and all:
And th^se that (...) how to turn 'em righ^
And how to turn 'em round,
Could tell us what it was a clock
In the world under ground,
And many more things they could tell,
That was almost as strange;
As when the sun should set and rise,
And when the moon should change.
I du'dn't care to stand ^o near,
When all these things I heard;
For I thote in my heart it was the black art,
And I was a little afraid.
The sun being low, then we began
To think of going home;
But one thing more we zaw before
We got quite out of town:
We went apace; for, being in haste,
For fear of being benighted.
Two hugeous men stood strutting within,
And Nell and I was frigh^ed.
Nell had a color as red as a rose,
And dare not go no further.
They had bloody weapons in their hands,
Stood ready there for murder.
So we went back, and took our mare,
And away came troting home:
W^' stories enough to tell father and mother;
And little sister Joan.
SONG LXXXIV.
I AM a blade both free and easy
Not a vulgar country clown;
I will do my best to please ye,
And my name is easy John.
Let the world go as it will
I a^ free and easy still.
Free and easy,
Free and easy,
I am free and easy still.
Ladies, view my person over,
If my lessen right I con;
Search Newcastle, London, Dover,
You Will not find an easier John.
Let the world go, etc.
Now a lady I could fancy,
Aye, but could she fancy me!
I would marry lovely Nancy,
She Is so easy and so free.
Let the world go, etc,
Gentlemen, a brother greets ye,
Happy may you ever be;
And whenever a brother meets you.
May you easy be and free.
Let the world go, etc.
Worthy friends, this blessed occasion
Fills my panting heart with glee;
To possess your approbation,
Makes me happy, easy, free.
Let the world go, etc.
SONG LXXXV.
HAIL, godlike WASHINGTYN!
Fair Freedom's chosen son,
Born to command;
While this great globe shall roll,
Thy deeds from pole to pole,
Shall shake Columbia's soul
With virtuous praise.
Millions unborn to save,
Freedom to worlds he gave,
Liberty's Chief!
Terrific God of War,
Seated in Vict'ry's car,
Fame hails him from afar,
Virginia's boast.
Flowerets of bliss adorn
The bright auspicious morn,
Breathing delight.
Let the loud cannon roar,
Joyful from shore to shore;
Phoebus did never explore,
So happy a day:
Millions unborn to save, etc.
When Freedom's atmosphere,
Clouded with gloomy care
WASHINGTON viewed;
He with heroic pride,
Stem'd dire Oppression's tide.
And made the world deride
Britain's disgrace.
Millions unborn to save, etc
When How with venal bands,
Deluged our pensive lands.
Britain's weak rod!
Fabius by wise delays,
Liberty's cause to raise,
To his immortal praise,
Trenton subdued.
Millions unborn to save, etc,
Fayette, the just and good,
Spil^ Gallia's noble blood
For the distressed:
May this auspicious day,
Gratitude's tribute pay,
And breath a joyous lay.
Sacred to him.
Millions unborn to save. etc.
Let us in rapture sing,
Of Louis the patriot King,
Virtue's support;
Who with unshaken zeal,
Aided our common weal,
And fixed Friendship's seal
To the New World.
Millions unborn to save, etc.
See gallant Rochambeau!
Tyranny's deadly foe,
Liberty's shield*
Victory draws her sword
To capture the warlike Lord,
Whom Parliament adored,
Britannia's pride.
Millions unborn to save, etc.
Now Albion's sons are fled,
Liberty rears her head*
Smiling in scorn.
May her great Hero's name,
Fill the loud trump of Fame,
And ages unborn proclaim,
Great WASHINGTON.
Millions unborn to save, etc.
Next in our theme shall be,
Prince of philosophy,
Franklin the sage:
Who gave to lightning laws,
Taught from effects the cause,
What fire etherial was:
Of Wisdom the Chief.
Millions undorn to save, etc.
The goddess of Peace to come,
Lighting, with downy plume,
On Freedom's shrine;
She from fell Tyranny,
Wrested fair Liberty,
And bid a world be free,
Through WASHINGTON,
Millions unborn to save, etc.
Commerce unfurls her sails,
Wafted by gentle gales,
Over the deep:
And in her smiling train,
Brings in her pleasing gain,
And from the wealthy main,
Hails Freedom's gifts,
Millions unborn to save, etc.
Ambition's storm that blows,
Ruffles not his repose,
Blessed in retreat:
Wisdom persuasive flows,
Virtue refulgent glows,
In speech and act he shows
Friendship and truth:
Millions unborn to save, etc.
Guardian of civil laws,
Savior of Freedom's cause,
WASH^NGTON stands:
May his light spirit fly,
And claim its native sky,
Free from each earthly sigh,
To Heaven ascend.
Millions unborn to save,
Freedom to wor^ds he gave,
Liberty's Chief!
Terrific God of War,
Seated in Vict'ry's car
Fame hails him from afar,
Virginia's boast.
SONG LXXXVI.
CEASE, a while, ye winds to blow,
Cease, awhile, ye streams to flow,
Hushed be every ruder noise,
Methinks, I hear any lover's voice.
There Is the rock, the hill, the tree,
Hark, a voice, methinks it is he:
It Is not he, still night comes on,
O where is my wanderer gone?
Thick, my doubts and fears arise,
Loud, for him, I raise my cries;
Why has he, so long delayed?
Where Is my lovely Wanderer strayed?
Loud I call; I Will make him hear,
It Is my voice, my love, my dear;
The time is past, why this delay?
Wy lovely Wanderer's lost his way*
SONG LXXXVII.
IN infancy our days were blessed,
With peace and liberty;
Our gardens and our fields were dressed
In sweet simplicity!
No hostile foe had we to dread,
No enemy to fear;
But now, alas! those joys are fled,
And danger does appear.
Our seas with the French navy swarms,
Our trade and commerce droop;
They Would our cities rob and leave forlorn;
Shall we to slavery stoop?
"Ah, no! ah, no! you shall be free,"
Liberty's goddess said;
"The French shall strike their flag to thee,
And droop its haughty head."
SONG LXXXVIII.
WHEN fortune does frown,
I Will never be cast down,
Repining wont alter my store;
For a good state of health
Is better than wealth:
And I Will be merry although I am poor.
The soldier delights
In blood, wars and fights,
The sailor too sails the seas over:
But this mind I am in,
I Will keep a full skin;
And I Will be merry although I am poor.
When the sailors drink wine,
Their lovers repine;
The miser is fond of his store;
Give the glutton his dish,
And I what I wish,
And I Will be merry although I am poor.
Let statesmen debate
On the affairs of the State:
Let moralists frown and look sour;
Let the world go as 'twill,
I Will drink to my fill;
And I Will be merry although I am poor.
Wine will discord assuage,
Enliven old age,
Make cheerful and gay at four score:
Give me a full glass.
A complying sweet lass,
And I Will be merry although I am poor.
Ye benevolent souls,
With full flowing ^^wls.
Who cheerfully add to the store*
Give me but one quart,
Just to comfort my heart,
And I Will be merry although I am poor*
And ye drunken sots.
Who ca^^ for your pots,
And ever are ca^^ing for more;
Only just let me drink,
And I Will make you all think,
That I Will be merry although I am poor.
Wine will its vot'ries save
From death and the grave;
When tipsy we fear death no more;
With a full glass in hand,
Firm as Atlas I Will stand;
And I Will be merry although I am poor.
SONG LXXXIX.
AMO, amas,
I love a lass,
As a cedar tall and slender;
Sweet Cowsl^^'s grace
Is her nom'tive case,
And she is of the feminine gender.
Rorum little,
Sunt divorum,
Harum scarum, divo!
Tag rag, merry derry, perriwip and hatband,
Hic, hoc, horum genitivo!
Can I decline,
A nymph divine?
Her voice as a flute is dulcis,
Her oculus bright,
Her manus white,
And soft, when I tacto her pulse is.
Rorum, etc.
Oh! how bella,
My puella;
I Will k^ss her secula seculorum:
If I Have luck, sir,
She Is my uxor,
O dies bene^ictorum!
Rorum, etc.
SONG XC.
COME now, all ye social powers,
Shed your influence over us,
Crown with joy the present hours,
Enliven those before us.
Bring the flask, the music bring,
Joy shall quickly find us,
Drink and dance, and laugh and sing,
And cast dull care behind us.
Friendship, with thy power divine,
Brighten all our features;
What but friendship, love and wine,
Can make us happy creatures.
Bring the flask, etc.
Lov, thy godhead I adore,
Source of generous passion;
But I Will never bow down before
Those idols, wealth and fashion.
Bring the flask, etc.
Why the plague should we be sad,
Whilst on earth we moulder?
Whether merry, grave, or mad,
We every day grow older.
Bring the flask, etc.
SONG XCI.
OH, Cupid forever,
I fear not thy quiver.
Nor do I regard thy brave bow;
Thine arrows cannot hit me,
Nor women out wit me,
I Am free from all sorrow and woe.
I Am free from, etc.
It Is true my sweet Nancy,
A while pleased my fancy;
But yet, she will cruelly frown,
If they will not use freedom,
Then quickly I Will leave them,
I Will leave them to languish alone.
I Will leave them, etc,
Had Nancy proved loyal,
I should have had trial.
Of no other girl in my life;
I often times told her,
Which made her the bolder,
I purposed to make her my wife.
I purposed, etc.
But she being wanton,
Must needs go a ranting,
So easily hushed my heart's flame;
Yet bent on her pleasure,
I left a fair treasure,
I left her to folly and shame.
I left, etc.
That soft tender passion,
So much in the fashion,
Excited my wantoner's art --
Allurements of women,
So soft and so winning,
Yet never could conquer my heart.
Yet never, etc,
SONG XCII.
FROM night till morn I take my glass,
In hopes to forget my Chloe;
But as I take the pleasing draught,
She Is never the less before me.
Ah! no, no, no, wine cannot cure
The pain I endure for my Chloe.
To wine I flew, to ease the pain
Her beauteous charms created;
But wine more firmly bound the chain,
And love would not be cheated.
Ah, no, etc.
SONG XCIII.
THE women all tell me I Am false to my lass;
That I quit my poor Chloe, and stick to my glass:
But to you man of reason, my reasons I Will own;
And if you don't like them, why let them alone.
Although I have left her the truth I Will declare,
I believe she was good, and I Am sure she was fair:
But such goodness and charms in a bumper I see,
That makes it as good and as charming as she.
My Chloe had dimples and smiles I must own;
But though she could smile yet in truth she could frown:
But tell me* ye lovers of liquors divine,
Did you ever see a frown in a bumper of wine?
Her lilies and roses were just in their prime;
Yet lilies and roses are conquered by time;
But in wine from its age such a benefit flows,
That I like it the better the older it grows.
They tell me my love would in time have been cloyed,
And that beauty's insipid when once it is enjoyed;
But in wine, I both time and enjoyment defy,
For the longer I drink the more thirsty am I.
Let murders, and battles, and history prove
The mischiefs that want upon rivals in love;
But in drinking, thank Heaven, no rival conte^^s;
For the more we love liquor, the more we are friends.
She too might have poisoned the joys of my life,
With nurses, and babies, and squalling, and st^ife;
But my wine neither nurses nor babies can bring,
And a big bellied bottle's a mighty good thing,
We shorten our days when with love we engage;
It brings on diseases, and hastens old age:
But wine from grim death can its votaries save,
And keep out the other leg when there is one in the grave.
Perhaps, like her sex ever false to their word,
She had left me -- to got an estate or a lord;
But my bumper, regarding nor titles nor pelf,
Will stand by me when I cannot stand by myself.
Then let my dear Chloe no longer complain,
She Is rid of her lover and I of my pain;
For in wine mighty wine, many comforts I spy --
Should you doubt what I say, take a bumper and try.
SONG XCIV.
WHAT is a poet, Sir? you, Sir,? No, Sir?
It Is this, Sir, I Would have you to know --
Constantly writing, Sir,
And his nails biting, Sir,
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
Now in the garret, Sir -- high, Sir -- high, Sir!
Now in the celler below;
Sunshine and vapor, Sir --
Pen, ink and paper, Sir,
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
His pockets to fill, Sir -- still, Sir -- still, Sir --
His noddle he empties -- O no!
Scribbling and scrawling, Sir,
Starting and bawling, Sir,
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
SONG XCV.
'TWAS at the break of day we spied
The signal to unmoor,
Which sleepless Caroline descried,
Sweet maid, from Gosport shore.
The fresh'ning gale at length arose,
Her heart began to swell,
Nor could cold fear the thought oppose,
Of bidding me farewell!
In open boat, the maid of worth
Soon reached our vessel's side,
Soon too she found her William's birth,
But sought me not to chide: --
Go, she exclaimed -- for fame's a cause
A female should approve;
For who, that is true to honor's laws,
Is ever false to love!
My heart is loyal, scorns to fear,
Nor will it even fail,
Though war's unequal wild career,
Should William's life assail:
Though death against thee exert his sway,
Oh! trust me, but the dart
That wounds thee will find its way
To Caroline's true heart.
Should conquest, in fair form arrayed,
Thy loyal efforts crown,
In G^sport will be found a maid,
That lives for thee alone. --
May girls, with hearts so firm and true
To love and glory's cause,
Meet the reward they have in view,
The meed of free applause.
SONG XCVI.
YE fair, possessed of every charm,
To captivate the will;
Whose smiles can rage itself disarm,
Whose frowns at once can kill.
Say, Will you deign the verse to hear,
Where flattery bears no part;
An honest verse, that flows sincere,
And candid from the heart?
Great is your power; but, greater yet
Mankind it might engage:
If, as ye all can make a net,
Ye all could make a cage.
Each nymph a thousand hearts may take;
For who is to beauty blind?
But to what end a prisoner make,
Unless you have strength to bind?
Attend the council often told,
Too often told in vain,
Learn that best art, the art to hold,
And lock the lover's chain.
Gamesters to little purpose win,
Who lose again as f^st:
Though beauty may the charm begin,
It Is sweetness makes it last,
SONG XCVII.
AT the close of the day, when the Hamlet is still,
And mortals the sweet of forgetfulness prove,
When naught but the torrent is heard on the hill,
And naught but the nightingale's song in the grove:
'Twas thus, by the cave of the mountain afar,
While his harp rung symphonious, a Hermit began:
No more with himself or with nature at war,
He thought as a sage, though he felt as a man.
Ah why, all abandoned to darkness and woe,
Why, alone Philomela, that languishing fall?
For Spring shall return, and a lover bestow,
And sorrow no longer thy bosom enthral.
But, if pity inspire thee, renew the sad lay
Mourn sweetest complainer, man calls thee to mourn;
O soothe him, whose pleasures like thine pass away,
Full quickly they pass -- but they never return.
Now gilding remote, on the verge of the sky,
The moon half distinguished her crescent displays,
But lately I marked, when majestic on high,
She shone, and the planets were lost in her blaze.
Roll on thou fair orb, and with gladness pursue
The path that conducts thee to splendour again,
But man's fading glory what change shall renew!
Ah fool! to exult in a glory so vain!
It Is night, and the landscape is lovely no more;
I mourn, but ye woodlands, I mourn not for you:
For morn is approaching your charms to restore,
Perfumed with fresh fragrance and glit'ring with dew,
Nor yet for the ravage of winter I mourn;
Kind nature the embryo blossom will save:
But when shall spring visit the mouldering urn!
O when shall it dawn on the night of the grave!
'Twas thus by the glare of false science betrayed,
That leads to bewilder and dazzles to blind:
My thoughts wont to roam, from shade onward to shade,
Destruction before me, and sorrow behind.
O pity Great Father of light, then I cried,
Thy creature who fain would not wander from Thee!
Lo humble in dust, I relinquished my pride:
From doubt and from darkness thou only can free.
And darkness and doubt are now flying away
No longer I roam in conjecture forlorn,
So breaks on tho traveller, faint and astray,
The bright and the balmy effulgence morn.
See truth, love and mercy, in triumph descending,
And nature all glowing in Eden's first bloom,
On the cold cheek of death smiles and roses are blending,
And beauty immortal awake from the tomb.
SONG XCVIII.
SAY, Have you seen my Arabell?
The Caledonian maid,
Or heard the youths of Scotland tell,
Where Arabell has strayed?
The damsel is of angel mien,
With sad and downcast eyes;
The Shepherds call her, sorrow's queen,
So pensively she sighs.
But why her sighs so sadly swell,
Or why her tears so flow;
In vain, they press the lovely girl,
The innate cause to know.
E're reason framed her tender mind,
The virgin learned to love,
Compassion taught her to be kind,
Deceit she was above.
And had not War's terrific voice,
Forbid the mutual bands,
E're now, had Sandy been her choice,
And Hymen joined our hands:
But, since the sword of War is sheathed,
And peace resumes her charms,
My every joy is now bequeathed
To Arabella's arms.
SONG XCIX.
TO my muse give attention, and deem it not a mystery,
If we jumble together, music, poetry and history,
The times to display in the reign of Queen Bess, Sir,
Whose name and whose memory posterity may bless, Sir,
Oh the golden days of good Queen Bess!
Merry be the memory of good Queen Bess.
Then we laughed at the bug-bears of Dons and Armadas,
With their gunpowder puffs and their blustering bravadoes;
For we knew how to manage both the musket and the bow, Sir,
And could bring down a Spaniard just as easy as a crow, Sir,
Oh the golden days, etc.
Then our streets were unpav'd, and our houses were thatched, Sir,
Our windows were lett^'d, our doors only latch'd, Sir;
Yet so few were the folks that would plunder or ^ob, Sir,
That the hangman was starving for want of a job, Sir.
Oh the golden days, etc.
Then our ladies with large ruff's tied round about the neck fast,
Would gobble up a pound of beef steaks for their breakfast,
While a close quill'd-up coif their noddle just did fit, Sir,
And they trussed up as tight as a rabbit for the spit, Sir.
Oh the golden days, etc.
Then jerkins and doublets, and yellow worsted hose, Sir,
With a huge pair of whiskers, was the dress of our beaux, Sir;
Strong beer they preferred too to claret or to hock, Sir,
And no poultry they prized like the wing of an ox, Sir,
Oh the golden days, etc.
Good neighborhood then was as plenty too as beef, Sir,
And the poor from the rich never wanted relief, Sir,
While merry went the mill-clack, the shuttle and the plough, Sir,
And honest men could live by the sweat of their brow, Sir,
Oh the golden days, etc.
Then the folks every Sunday went twice, at least, to church, Sir,
And never left the parson nor his sermon in the lurch, Sir;
For they judged that the Sabbath was for people to be good in,
And they thought it Sabbath-breaking, if they dined without a pudding.
Oh the golden days, etc.
Then our great men were good, and our good men were great, Sir,
And the props of the nation were the pillars of the State, Sir,
For the sovereign and the subject one interest Supported,
And our powerful alliance by all powers then was courted.
Oh the golden days, etc.
Thus renowned as they lived all the days of their lives, Sir,
Bright examples of glory to those who survive, Sir;
May we, their descendants, pursue the same ways, Sir,
That King George, like Queen Bess, may have his golden days, Sir,
And may a longer reign of glory and success
Make his name eclipse the fame of good Queen Bess.
SONG C.
HARK! Echo! sweet Echo repeats the loud strain,
The shouting and hooting of chaste Dian's train;
Aurora smiles sweetly, and comes on apace,
The hounds and the horn call us forth to the chase.
Blind Cupid is banished from these happy fields,
His quiver to Dian the wanton now yields;
She blunts all his arrows, his power destroys,
While the virgins all follow her innocent joys.
SONG CI.
NO pastime, no sport can with hunting compare,
Let each lad and each lass to the field then repair;
While health, rosy health, with delight shall keep pace,
And prove there is no joys like the joys of the chase:
When the horn's sprightly notes calls the huntsman away,
Tantivy, tantivy, hark forward, huzza, huzza.
Let fashion and scandal, and cards share the time,
Of your fine London ladies who murder their prime;
Give me the delights that enliven this place,
While echo, re-echo'd, gives joy to the chase.
Hark forward, tantivy, huzza.
Over mountain, over valley, with speed haste away,
No longer our innocent pastime delay:
Aurora to welcome with bright ruddy face,
Let echo, re-echo'd, give joy to the chase.
Hark forward, tantivy, huzza.
SONG CII.
MINERVA in heaven disconsolate mourned.
The loss of her Cook, who Britain adorned;
She shunned the celestials, and solitude sought,
Then wept as she glanced over the actions he wrought.
Surpised at his deeds, she sat pensive, amazed!
When sudden her eyes to a volume were raised;
'Twas fate's mighty mirror the goddess des^ry'd,
Where the glory he gained on its pages were died.
Sensibility smiled, as the records she pressed,
And sighed as in pity these words were expressed:
"Oh! Cook, who till now the world dare explore?
"Who Will venture, my hero, now thou art no more?
"No more, ah! Ow^v^oe, the Cook will appear,
"The friend of mankind, whom you struck "with a spear;
"He came to your succor, proud savages know,
"He came as a friend, whom you slew as a foe." --
She ceased -- when a voice shook the heavens around --
"Minerva forbear -- see the gods have him crowned:"
Be joyful, cried Jove, for the trophies he is won
Have proved him my daughter's legitimate son.
The portals of heaven were opened to her view,
She saw him enthroned in a vesture of blue:
Yes, Britain, she cried in a transport of love,
Cook's honored on earth, and held sacred above.
SONG CIII.
ON that lone bank where Lubin died,
Fair Rosalie, a wretched maid,
Sat weeping over the cruel tide,
Faithful to her Lubin's shade.
Oh! may some kind, some gentle wave,
Waft him to this mournful shore;
These tender hands should make his grave,
And deck his corpse with stow'^^ over.
I Would ever watch his mouldering clay,
And pray for his eternal rest;
When time his form has worn away,
His dust I Would place within my breast,
While thus she mourned her Lubin lost,
And echo to her grief replied;
Lo! at her feet his corpse was toft,
She shrieked -- she clasped him -- sighed, and died.
SONG CIV.
THIS hot pursuit,
With threats to boot,
Have little to alarm me;
So war I wage,
Defy his rage,
And brave whatever may harm me.
He still may swear,
And stamp and stare,
I Will neither fear nor falter;
Whatever may bind,
Against woman's mind,
Will prove a rotten halter.
My mistress flown,
I Will soon be gone: --
Old Crusty swears he will tame her;
For him she loves,
Abroad she roves,
In truth I cannot blame her,
In varied shapes,
Through hair-breadth scapes,
Each way he tries to win her:
She scorns restraint,
And such a saint
Would make even me a sinner.
Some trim disguise,
No doubt she tries --
I Will follow her example:
Of faith, of skill,
And wit at will,
I Will give 'em straight a sample.
So she and I
Will fairly try,
Whose trick or change can blind most.
And since, old Don,
You choose to run,
The devil take the hindmost,
SONG CV.
ADIEU, ye streams that gently flowing,
Murmur through the flowery mead;
Vernal airs that softly blowing.
Rustle through the leafy shade!
Adieu, ye birds whose notes delighting,
Sweetly charm the rural scene;
Beauteous prospects all inviting,
Fields and meadows decked with green!
I could quit you unrepining,
Not a tear should bathe my eye,
Your enjoyments all resigning,
Nor my bosom heave a sigh.
But when cruel fate ordains me
From my lovely fair to part;
Oh! the separation pains me!
Deeply wounds my aching heart.
Falsehood and deceit despising,
O she is fairer than the morn!
When bright Phoebus just arising,
Strews with pearl the dewy lawn.
But her mind in charms surpasses,
Spotless as the solar ray:
While a thousand nameless graces
All around my fair one play.
When with her the sweet enjoyment
Crowns the day with fresh delight;
To chat with her the sweet employment
Gilds with joy the gloomy night.
But by fate compelled to leave her,
From my Julia forced to part;
Oh! the cruel word "forever,"
Wounds afresh my bleeding heart!
SONG CVI.
WHEN Werter fair Charlotte beheld,
As she danced with the nymphs on the green,
He thought every maid she excelled.
And he prai^'d the soft grace of her mien;
But all her accomplishments known,
Gentle Werter began to adore;
He sighs for a heart not her own,
And the joys of poor Werter are over.
Though vows the fair Charlotte engaged,
As a friend gentle Werter was dear,
Her smiles often his sorrows assuag'd,
While pity has dropped a soft tear.
Urged by love, he grew bold, and she cried,
Werter leave me, and see me no more;
He sighed -- he obeyed -- and he died,
Then the sorrows of Werter deplore.
Ye nymphs, let not Cupid deceive,
Under pity's soft garb hide his dart,
Werter's sorrows are laid in the grave,
While pity still wrings Charlotte's heart:
And often over his grave has she cried,
While with flowerets she decked it all over,
He saw me -- he loved -- and he died,
Then the sorrows of Werter deplore.
SONG CVII.
WHEN up to London first I came,
An awkward country booby,
I gaped and sta^'d, and did the same
As every other looby.
With countenance demurely set,
I doff'd my hat to all I met,
With -- "Zir, your humble servant!
Alas! too soon! got a wife;
And, proud of such a blessing,
The joy and business of my life
Was kissing and caressing.
'Twas -- "charmer! sweeting! duck and dove!"
And I, over head and ears in love,
Was Cupid's humble servant.
But when the honey-moon was past,
Adieu to tender speeches!
Ma'am loved quadrille, and lost too fast,
I swore I Would wear the breeches.
I storm in vain, -- restraint she hates:
Adieu, she cries -- the party waits: --
My dear, your humble servant!
SONG CVIII.
POUNDS, shillings, pence and farthings,
I have at my finger's end,
And how to sell, and how to buy,
To borrow or to lend;
But this, since I felt b^^ch at school,
My pate has run upon,
Addition be my golden rule,
Ha! dot and carry one.
At loss and gain a scholar good,
Full early was I taught,
To gain of guineas all I could,
To lose the devil a groa^.
At fractions and divisions when
Hard knocks were laying on,
Subtraction was my practice then,
Ha! dot and carry one.
But words no more I Will numerate,
And thus sum total lies;
Of terms I Will not an acre bate,
Reduction I despise:
And since cockade and roguish eye
Miss Clara's heart has won,
If you're resolved to multiply,
Ha! dot and carry one.
SONG CIX.
TO banish life's troubles, the Grecian old sage
Pressed the fruit of the vintage often into the bowl,
Which made him forget all the cares of old age;
It bloomed in his face, and made happy his soul.
While here we are found,
Put the bumper around,
It Is the liquor of life, that each care can control.
This jovial philosopher taught that the sun
Was thirsty, and often drank deep of the main;
That the planets would tipple away as they run,
The earth wanted moisture, and soaked up the rain.
While here we are found,
Put the bumper around,
It Is the liquor of life, and why should we refrain.
Its virtues are known both in war and in love,
The hero and lever alike it makes bold;
Vexations in life's busy day 'twill remove,
Delightful alike to the young and the old.
While here we are found,
Put the bumper around,
That every ill may by wine be controlled.
SONG CX.
'TWAS near a thicket's calm retreat,
Under a poplar tree,
Maria chose her wretched seat,
To mourn her sorrows free;
Her lovely form was sweet to view,
As dawn at opening day,
But ah, she mourned, her love not true,
And wept her cares away.
The brook flowed gently at her feet,
^n murmurs smooth along;
Her pipe, which once she tuned most sweet,
Had now forgot its song.
No more to charm the vale she tries;
For grief has filled her breast;
Those joys which once she used to pri^e --
But love has robbed her rest.
Poor hapless maid! who can behold
Thy sorrows so severe,
And hear thy love-lorn story told,
Without a falling tear':
Maria, luckless maid! adieu,
Thy sorrows soon must cease,
For Heaven will take a maid so true
To everlasting peace.
SONG CXI.
THE British lion is my sign,
A roaring trade I drive on;
Right English usage -- neat French wine,
A landlady may thrive on.
At table d'hotte, to eat and dring,
Let French ana English mingle,
And while to me you bring the chink,
Faith let the glasses jingle;
Your rhino rattle, come
Men and cattle, come
All to Mrs. Casey;
Of trouble and money,
My j^wel, my honey,
I warrant I Will make you easy.
When dressed and seated in my bar,
Let 'squire, or beau, or belle come,
Let captains kiss me if they da^e,
It Is Sir, you're kindly welcome!
On Shuffle, Cog, and Slip, I wink,
Let Rooke and pigeons mingle,
And if to me they bring the chink,
Faith let the glasses jingle.
Your rhino rattle, come, etc.
Let love fly here on silken wings,
His tricks I still connive at:
The lover who would say soft things,
Shall have a room in private.
On pleasures I am pleased to wink,
So lips in kisses mingle,
For while to me they bring the chink,
Faith let the glasses jingle.
Your rhino rattle, come, etc.
SONG CXII.
BEHOLD this fair goblet -- 'twas carved from the tree,
Which, oh! my sweet Shakespeare, was planted by thee:
As a relick I kiss it, and bow at thy shrine,
What comes from thy hand must be ever divine,
I shall yield to the mulberry tree:
Bad to thee,
Blessed mulberry!
Matchiefs was he
That planted thee,
And thou like him immortal shall be.
Ye trees of the forest, so rampart and high,
Who spread round your branches, whose heads sweep the sky;
Ye curious exotics, whom taste has brought here,
To root out the natives at prices so dear;
All shall yield, etc.
The oak is held royal, in Britain's great boast.
Preserved once, our king, and will always our coast;
Of the, Sir, we make ships -- there are thousands that fight,
But one, only one, like our Shakespeare can write.
All shall yield, etc.
Let Venus delight in her gay myrtle bowr's,
Pomona in fruit trees, and Flora in flowr's,
The garden of Shakespeare all pleasures will suit,
With the sweetest of flowers, and the fairest of fruit.
All shall yield, etc.
With learning and knowledge the well-letter'd birch
Supplies law and physic, and grace for the church;
But law and the gospel in Shakespeare we find,
He gives the best physic for body and mind.
All shall yield, etc.
The fame of the patron gives fame to the tree;
From him and his merits this takes its degree:
Give Phoebus and Bacchus their laurel and vine,
The tree of our Shakespeare is still more divine,
All shall yield, etc.
As the genius of Shakespeare outshines the bright day,
More rapture than wine to the heart can convey;
So the tree which he planted, by making his own,
Has the laurel and bay, and the vine all in one.
All shall yield, etc.
Then each take a relick of this hallowed tree,
From folly and fashion a charm let it be;
Let Us fill to the planter the cup to the brim,
To honor your country, do honor to him.
All shall yield, etc.
SONG CXIII.
WHILST happy in my native land,
I boast my country's charter,
I Will never basely lend my hand,
Her liberties to barter,
The noble mind is not all
By poverty degraded*
It Is guilt alone can make us fall,
And well I am persuaded,
Each freeborn Briton's song should be,
Or give me death or liberty.
Or give me, etc.
Though small the power which fortune grants,
And few the gifts she sends us,
The lordly hireling often wants
That freedom which defends us;
By law se cured from lawless strife,
Our house is our castellum;
Thus blessed with all that is dear in life,
For lucre shall we sell 'em!
No! -- every Britons song should be,
Or give me death or liberty.
Or give me, etc.
SONG CXIV.
THURSDAY in the morn, the nineteenth of May,
Recorded be forever the famous ninety-two!
Brave Russell did discern. by dawn of day,
The lofty sails of France advancing now;
All hands aloft, aloft -- let English valor shine;
Let fly a culverin, a signal for the line:
Let every man supply his gun;
Follow me,
And you will see
That the battle will soon be won.
Tourville on the main triumphant rolled,
To meet the gallant Russell in combat of the deep;
He led a noble train of heroes bold,
To sink the English Admiral and his fleet.
Now every valiant mind to victory does aspire;
The bloody fight's begun, and the sea is all on fire;
And mighty Fate stood looking on;
Whilst a flood,
All of blood,
Filled the scuppers of the Rising Sun.
Sulphur, smoke and fire, disturbing the air,
With thunder and wonder, affright the gallic shore:
The regulated band stood trembling near,
To see their lofty streamers, now no more;
At six o'clock, the Red, the smiling victor led,
To give the second blow -- the fatal overthrow:
Now death and horrow equal reign;
Now they cry,
Run or die:
British calors ride the vanquished main.
See, they fly amazed through rocks and sands;
One danger they grasp at to shun the greater fate;
In vain they cry for aid to weeping lands:
The nymphs and sea gods mourn their loft estate:
Forever more adieu, thou dazzling Rising Sun,
From thy untimely and thy master's fate begun:
Enough, thou mighty god of war!
Now we sing,
Bless the King!
Let us drink to every British tar,
SONG CXV.
WELCOME, welcome, brother debtor,
To this poor but merry place,
Where no bailiff, dun, or setter,
Dare to show his frightful face.
But, kind Sir, as you're a stranger,
Down your garnish you must lay,
Or your coat will be in danger;
You must either strip or pay,
Never repine at your confinement
From your children or your wife:
Wisdom lies in true refinement,
Through the various scenes of life.
Scorn to show the least resentment,
Though beneath the frowns of fate:
Knaves and beggars find contentment.
Fears and cares attend the great.
Though our creditors are spiteful,
And restraint our bodies here,
Use will make a g^^l delightful,
Since there is nothing else to fear,
Every island's but a prison,
Strongly guarded by the sea:
Kings and princes, for that reason,
Prisoners are as well as we.
What was it made great Alexander
Weep at his unfriendly fa^e?
'Twas because he could not wander
Beyond the world's strong prison gate.
The world itself is strongly bounded
By the heavens and stars above:
Why should we then be confounded,
Since there is nothing free but love?
SONG CXVI.
PUSH about the bowl, boys,
Here Is no time for meaner joys;
Push about the bowl, boys,
Here Is no time for thinking;
Let us with hearts and hands unite,
To do ourselves the bumper's right,
The business of this happy night
Consists alone in drinking.
Drain the flowing bowl, boys,
Wisdom at the bottom lies;
Drain the flowing bowl, boys,
Drive away all sorrow:
And thus away reflection rude,
All care was made for solitude,
And we'll be sure should vice intrude,
To bid her, Come to marrow.
He that b^lks a glass, boys,
Half his real bliss destroys;
He that balks a glass, boys,
H^'s a sorry fellow;
For wine with mirth will fill the knave,
And wine will make the coward brave,
And every poor dejected slave
As free as he is mellow.
Give us each a lass, boys,
One who most our minds employs;
Give us each a lass, boys.
Modest and complying;
One whose mind is fond of bliss,
Who loves to wed to woo and kiss,
And cannot see what harm it is
To save a swain from dying.
Here Is to noble selves, boys,
Length of days and lasting joys;
Here Is to noble selves boys,
This toast will bear repe^ting*
When ever we bid this house adieu,
We'll drink to all who is sound and true,
So, Here Is to you, to you, and you,
'Till our next happy meeting.
SONG CXVII.
LET a set of sober asses
Rail against the joys of drinking,
While water, tea,
And milk agree
To set cold brains a thinking.
Power and wealth,
Beauty, health
Wit and mirth in wine are crowned,
Joys abound,
Pleasure's found,
Only where the glass goes round.
The ancient sects on happiness
All differed in opinion;
But wiser rule^
Of modern schools
In wine fix her dominion.
Power and wealth, etc.
Wine gives the lover vigor,
Makes glow the cheek of beauty;
Makes poets write,
And soldiers fight,
And friendship do its duty.
Power and wealth, etc.
Wine was the only Helicon
Whence poets are long lived so;
'Twas no other main
Than brisk champaign,
Whence Venus was derived too.
Power and wealth, etc.
When Heaven in Pandora's box
All kind of ill had sent u^,
In a merry mood
A bottle of good
Was cork'd up to content us.
Power and wealth, etc,
All virtues wine is nurse to,
Of every vice destroyer;
Gives ^ullards wit,
Makes just the cit,
Truth forces from the lawyer,
Power and wealth, etc,
Wine sits our joys a flowing,
Our care and sorrow drowning.
Who rails at the bowl,
Is a Turkin's soul,
And a Christian never should own him,
Power and wealth, etc,
SONG CXVIII.
YE Ch^^stains of Columbia, your forces marshal o^t,
It Is time to make enquiry what these Frenchmen (...) about;
Your flag has been insulted, your commerce has been stopped;
Your citizens are plundered, and into prison popp'd.
Yankee Doodle, mind the tune,
Yenkee Doodle dandee;
If Frenchmen come, with naked bum,
We'll spank 'em hard and handy.
Your ministers degraded, your senate they condemn,
They say no treaties you shall make but what is approved by them:
Will you who fought so bravely, and bled in freedom's cause,
Now tamely sit and suffer France to trample on your laws.
Yankee Doodle, etc.
They say they gave you freedom, and call you all ingrate^:
For by their valor you were made the independent States:
We know they joined Columbia, and called themselves our friends,
As well we know their plan was laid to answer their own ends,
Yankee Doodle, etc.
But let me ask how, when, and where those Frenchmen set you free?
Was it their conquest m^de by land, or victory gained by sea?
When lord Conwall^^ yielded, I will admit their sleet,
By laying off the harbor, prevented his retreat.
Yankee Doodle, etc.
Ye advocates for Frenchmen, what can you more advance,
To prove your independence originates from France?
The Count D'Estang at Georgia was glad to make retreat,
And by a force inferior confessed his own defeat.
Yankee Doodle, etc.
When Burgoyne and his army were forced to own your sway,
The Yankee Boys alone fhar'd the honors of the day.
Should any dare assert that France by victory gained at sea,
Secured your independence and set Columbia free.
Yankee Doodle, etc.
Tell them of Count de Grasse's fall, and quick the charge deny,
Or from the shades old Rodney's ghost will thunder out "you lie."
I say, Columbia's glory, which she this day enjoys,
Was gained by General WASHINGTON, who led the Yankee boys.
Yankee Doodle, etc.
Then, shall your Senate be reproached, your citizens oppressed,
Your ministers degraded, your swords in scabbards rest?
Say, shall your Eagle's wings be ^lipt, your stars' great luster fade,
And shall Columbia's stripes no more with honor be displayed?
Yankee Doodle, etc.
Arise, ye sons of freedom, Columbia's rights maintain,
Brave WASHINGTON you will find prepaid to wield the sword again:
Then raise your standard, draw your sword, prepare the pointed ^ance,
Evince your Constitution shall never be swayed by France,
May wisdom guide your commerce, and justice never cease,
To shield Columbia's glory, till victory brings you PEACE.
Yankee Doodle, etc,
SONG CXIX.
WHEN our great sires this land explored,
A shelter from tyrannic wrong!
Led on by heaven's Almighty Lord,
They sung -- and acted well the song,
Rise, united! dare be freed!
Our sons shall vind^cate the deed.
In vain the region, they would gain,
Was distant, drea^y, undisclos'd,
In vain the Atlantic ^oar'd between,
And ^osts of savages opposed,
They rushed undaunted, Heaven decreed,
Their sons should vindicate the deed.
'Twas freedom led the vet'rans forth,
And manly fortitude to bear,
They toiled they vanquished -- such high worth
Is always Heavens peculiar care;
Their great example still inspires,
Nor dare we act beneath our sires.
It Is ours undaunted to defend
The dear-bought, rich inheritance:
And spite of each invading hand,
We'll fight, bleed, die! in its defense.
Pursue our father's path to fame,
And emulate their glorious flame.
As the proud oak inglorious stands,
'Till storms, and thunder root it fast,
So stood our new, unprac^i^'d bands,
'Till Britain roared her stormy blast:
Then her they vanquished, fierce led on
By Freedom and great WASHINGTON.
Hail godlike hero! born to save!
Never shall thy deathless laurels fade,
But on that b^ow eternal wave,
And consecrate blessed Vernon's shade.
Thy spreading glories still increase,
'Till earth, and time, and nature cease.
Oh! may that spirit on thee shed,
Columbia's truest, noblest fr^end!
On thy successor's honored head,
In copious, double showers descend!
This change to ADAMS be consigned;
Be thou the second of mankind.
So when El^jah, called to heaven,
Up in flaming chariot ro^e,
Elisha took the mantle given,
And rose a prophet -- or a god!
Then shout, great ADAMS! freedom's son!
Immortal heir of WASHINGTON,
SONG CXX.
WHEN Jove was resolved to create the round earth,
He supoenaed the virtues divine!
Young Bacchus then sat the gay chairman of mirth,
And the toast was wit, women, and wine,
The sentiment tickled the ear of each God;
Apollo he winked to the Nine;
And Venus gave Mars, too a fly wanton nod,
When she drank to wit women, and wine.
Great Jove shook his sides, and the cup put around,
While Juno for once looked divine:
These blessings, says he, shall on earth now abound,
And the toast is, wit, women, and wine.
These are joys worthy Gods, which to mortals are given,
Says Momus: Who will not repine?
For what is worth our notice, pray tell me in Heaven,
If men have wit, women, and wine.
This joke you will repent, I Will lay fifty to seven,
Such attractions no power can decline,
Great Jove, by yourself you will soon keep house in Heaven,
For you will follow wit, women, and wine.
You Are right, says great Jove, let us hence to the Earth,
Men and Gods think variety fine;
Who would stay in the clouds, when goodnature and mirth
Are below, with wit, women, and wine?
SONG CXXI. ON THE BIRTH OF GEORGE WASHINGTON.
AS in a grot reclined
Columbia's genius pined,
With grief oppressed,
She wept her favorite land,
Wrung by oppression's hand,
Too feeble to withstand
The direful pest.
Dejected drooped her head --
Thick gloom the scene overspread,
Despotic Night!
'Till pitying Heaven gave ear,
To check the gushing tear,
Bade WASHINGTON appear,
"And all was light."
Against his country's foes
The patriot hero rose.
Auspicious hour!
Clothed with heaven's vengeance, he
Crushed galling Tyranny,
And set his country free
From lawless power.
To hail his Natal day,
Then raise the vocal lay,
With joy sincere;
Be every cheek bedewed
With tears of gratitude,
To him the great, the good,
Whom kings revere!
Great sire of freedom, hail!
Thy virtues shall prevail,
And crush thy foes:
Though demagogues combine,
Envy and malice join,
To tear the wreathes that twine
Thy sacred brows,
Hence! every tongue profane,
Whose sland'rous zeal would stain
Thy spotless fame;
Dazzled by worth so bright,
Let baneful party spite
Forever shun the light,
Overwhelmed with shame.
Thy fame illustrious sage,
Shall last through every age,
Thy deeds have won:
Thy trophies shall remain,
Un^l^ed with a stain,
In freedom's sacred fane,
'Till time is done,
Called by the public voice,
A free and graceful choice,
To guard the states:
Lo! where the sage presides,
True policy abides,
Consummate wisdom guides
The high debates.
He checked the raging tide
Of insurrection's pride,
Bade faction cease!
Collected and sedate,
He rode the car of state,
While dangers lowering fate,
And gave us peace.
But, lo! the chief retires --
No vain ambition fires
His generous breast --
Resigns sublimely great,
His Presidential seat,
And shuns the toils of State
For peace and rest.
To hail his natal day,
Then raise the vocal lay --
Let joy preside;
May Heaven's best gifts descend,
Long happiness attend,
On him the People's friend,
COLUMBIA'S PRIDE.
SONG CXXII.
HAIL Independence, hail,
Bright goddess of the skies!
Behold thy sons unite,
Behold thine altars raise!
Lo, freeborn millions kneel and swear,
Their birthrights to maintain,
Resolved no foreign yoke to bear,
To drag no tyrant's chain.
It Is Freedom's day -- let millions rise,
To freedom's standard fly,
Obey Columbia's call,
UNITE -- LIVE FREE -- OR DIE.
Long has our favored clime,
Beneath indulgent Heaven,
Enjoyed the smiles of peace,
M^d copious blessings given,
Here Independence banners waved,
Triumphantly unfurled;
With laurels crowned, Columbia's rose,
The envy of the world.
It Is freedom's day, etc.
But lo! what gathering clouds
Assail Columbia's shore?
From Gallia's crimsoned cl^^e,
What (...) thunders (...)?
It Is mad Ambition's hydra form
Loud threatening from afar,
That pours abroad the i^pending stor^^,
And (...) the trump of wa^!
It Is freedom's day, etc.
Rise, inju^^^ Freemen, rise!
Out-stretch the indignant arm;
Defend your country's cause,
Nor dread the rude alarm.
Around fair Freedom's altar throng,
Pronounce the firm decree,
Swear to avenge your country's wrong,
Live like your fathers free!
It Is freedom's day, etc.
Hail, Vernon's hoary chief!
Glory's immortal son!
Long may those laurels bloom
Thy matchless valor won;
And may thy grateful country long
Revere thy deathless name,
And with thy well earned praises swell,
The eternal trump of Fame!
It Is freedom's day, etc,
Illustrious ADAMS, hail!
To thee the task is given,
To guard thy country's rights,
And share the smiles of Heaven,
With what an honest patriot pride,
The immortal l^ader glows,
Firm and undaunted as a rock,
To crush Columbia's foes.
It Is freedom's day, etc.
Hail. Independence, hail,
Columbia's proudest boast!
Never shall thy sons forget,
The price thy blessings cost.
Long may our youth undaunted stand,
To stem Oppression's flood;
To guard their country's sacred rights,
And seal it with their blood!
It Is freedom's day, etc,
SONG CXXIII.
COLUMBIA's Bald Eagle displays in his claws,
The arrows of Jove, to confound her proud foes;
While the artful French Bear, with his wide spreading paws,
Would ensnare us by hugs far more fatal than blows.
But his hugs and his blows, we will meet them like men,
And the Eagle shall drive the beast back to his den.
The terrible bear, not yet sated with blood,
Growls around his huge den over the bones of his prey;
Though now gorged to the full, he still howls for more food,
And would lure by his tricks fair Columbia away.
But his tricks and his howls we despise them like men,
And the Eagle shall drive the beast back to his den.
Not a Frog ever shall bribe him to stay his rude sh^cks,
For the Eagle disdains to retreat from his ire:
We will marshal our columns as solid as rocks,
And receive the proud Frenchmen in vollies of fire,
Like true sons of Columbia, we will act still like men*
And her Eagle shall drive the Bear back to his den.
SONG CXXIV.
TO Columbia, who, gladly reclined at her ease,
On Atlantic's broad bosom lay smiling in peace,
Minerva flew hastily, sent from above,
And addressed her this message from thundering Jove:
"Rouse, quickly awake,
"For your freedom's at stake,
"Storms arise, your renowned independence to shake;
"Then lose not a moment, my aid I will lend,
"If your sons will assemble your rights to defend."
Roused Columbia rose up, and indignant declared,
That no nation she would wronged, and no nation she feared;
That she wished not for war, but if war was her fate,
She could meet it with souls independent and great;
Then tell mighty Jove,
That we quickly will prove,
We'll deserve the protection he will send from above*
For never shall the sons of America bend,
But united, their rights and their freedom defend.
Minerva smiled cheerfully as she withdrew,
Enraptured to find her Americans true;
"For (said she) our fly Mercury oft-times reports
"That your sons are divided" -- Columbia retorts:
Tell that vile god of thieves,
His report but deceives,
And we care not what madmen such nonsense believes.
For never shall the sons of America bend,
But united, their rights and their freedom defend.
Jove rejoiced in Columbians this union to see
And swore by old Styx they deserved to be free;
Then assembled the gods, and to all gave consent,
Their assistance if needful in war to present;
Mars arose, shook his armor,
And swore, his old farmer
Should never in his country see ought that could harm her;
For never should the sons of America bend,
But united, their rights and their freedom defend.
Minerva resolved that her Aegis she would lend;
And Apollo declared he their cause would befriend;
Old Vulcan an armor would forge for their aid
More firm than the one for Achilles he made;
Then said he I Will prepare
A compound most rare,
Of courage and union each a full share.
That never can the sons of America bend,
But their rights and their freedom most firmly defend.
Ye sons of Columbia then join hand in hand;
Divided we fall, but united we stand;
It Is ours to determine, it is ours to decree,
That in peace we will live Independent and free.
And should from afar
Break the horrors of war,
We'll always be ready at once to declare,
That never will the sons of America bend,
But united, their rights and their freedom defend,
SONG CXXV.
WHILE discord's bloody flag unfurled,
Over Europe, war his torrent pours,
Rolls vollied thunder round the world,
From Boreal climes to India's shores,
Rise united, Harvard'^ band,
Rise the bulwark of our land,
Shall Gallia's clan our coast invade,
With hellish outrage scourge the main,
Insult our na^ion's neutral trade,
And we not dare our rights maintain?
Rise, etc.
What though Minerva's temple claim,
Our fervid vows at learning's shrine.
We boast the Patriot's glorious flame,
The sons of Freedom and the nine.
Rise, etc.
'Mid the wild desert's gloomy waste,
Our gallant Sires, untaught to yield,
This germ of science whilom placed,
To shade the Muse, the Hero shield.
Rise, etc.
Here nursed by virtue' towers the oak,
Whose lofty branches prop the skies,
Defy the lightning's forceful stroke,
When earthquake whelms, or whirlwind flies.
Rise, etc.
Beneath the shade by wisdom taught,
The arts unfold their virgin charms
And, fired by genius, nervous thought
in triumph grasps his classic arms,
Rise, etc.
To guard this pantheon of the globe,
While peace displays her rainbow vest.
While, leagued with justice, swells the robe,
And great in valor nods the crest.
Rise, etc.
Let freedom's voice round earth proclaim,
Cabal shall never divide our realm,
While time can trumpet GEORGE's fame,
Or ADAMS guide our Union's helm.
Rise, etc.
Should fierce invasion's powers combine*
To guard Columbia, great and free,
Even Bunker, rent by bursting mine,
Would float an Andes over the sea.
SONG CXXVI. THE NEW YORK PATRIOTIC SONG.
Tune -- Washington's March and Yankee Doodle.
POETS may sing of their Helicon streams,
Their Gods and their heroes, are fabulous dreams;
They never sang a line
Half so grand, so divine,
As the glorious toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution boys, and LIBERTY forever.
ADAMS, the man of our choice, guides the helm,
No tempest can harm us, no storm overwhelm;
Our sheet anchor's sure,
And our bark rides secure,
So here is to the toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution boys, and President forever.
A free navigation, commerce and trade:
We'll seek for no foe, of no foe be afraid;
Our frigate's shall ride
Our defense and our pride;
Our tars guard our coast,
And huzza to our toast,
The Federal Constitution, Trade, and Commerce, boys forever.
Montgomery, Warren, still live in our songs,
Like them our young heroes shall spurn at our wrongs,
The world shall admire
The zeal and the fire
Which blaze in the toast,
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution, and its Advocates forever.
When an enemy ^hreats all party shall cease,
We bribe no int^iguers to buy a mean peace,
Columbians will scorn
Friend or foe to suborn,
We'll never stai^ the toast
Which as freemen we boast,
The Federal Constitution and Integrity forever.
Fam^'s trumpet shall swell in WASHINGTON's praise,
And time grant a furlough (...) his days.
May ^ealth weave the thread
Of delight round his head;
No nation can boast
Such a name -- such a toast --
The Federal Const^^ution boys, and WASHINGTON forever.
SONG CXXVII.
SONGS of shepherds in rust^cal roundel^^s,
^orm'd in f^ncy and (...),
(...) to solace young nymphs upon hol^days,
Are too unworthy for wonderful deeds.
Sot^sh Silenus to Phoebus the genius
Was sent by dame Venus, a^ong to prepare
In phrase nicely com'd, and verse quite refined,
How the states divine hunted the hare.
Stars quite tired with part times Olympical,
Stars and planets that beautiful shone,
Could no longer endure that men only should
Revel in pleasures, and they but look on.
Round about horned Lucina they swarmed;
And quickly informed her how minded they were,
Each god and goddess to take human bodies,
As lords and ladies to follow the hare,
Chaste Diana applauded the motion,
And pale Prosepina sat down in her place,
To guide the welkin, and govern the ocean,
While Dian conducted her nephews in chase,
By her example, their fathers to trample,
The earth old and ample, they soon leave the air:
Neptune the water, and wine Liber pa^er,
And Mars the slaughter, to follow the hare,
Young god Cupid was mounted on Pegasus,
Borrowed of the muses with kisses and prayers;
Stern Alcides upon cloudy Caucasus
Mounted a centaur that proudly him bears.
The postilion of the sky, light-heeled Sir Mercury,
Made his swift courser fly fleet as the air;
While tuneful Apollo, the pastime did follow,
To whoop and to hollow, boys after the hare.
Drowned Narcissus, from his metamorphosis
Roused by Echo, new manhood did take.
Snoring Somnus upstarted from Cim'ries:
Before for a thousand years he did not wake.
There was ^ame club-footed Mulciber booted;
And Pan, too, promoted on Corydon's mare.
Aeolus flouted; with mirth Momus shouted;
While wise Pallas pouted, yet followed the hare.
Grave Hymen ushers in lady Astrea.
The humor took hold of Latona the cold.
Ceres the brown, too with bright Cytherea,
And Thetis the wanton, Bellona the bold;
Shamefaced Aurora, with witty Pandora,
And Maria with Flora did company bear;
But Juno was stated too high to be mated,
Although, Sir, she hated not hunting the hare.
Three brown bowls of Olympical nectar
The Troy-born boy now presents on his knee;
Jove to Phoebus now carouses in nectar,
And Phoebus to Hermes, and Hermes to me;
Wherewith infused. I piped and mused,
In language unused their sports to declare,
'Till the vast house of Jove like the bright spheres did move,
Here Is health, then, to all that love hunting the hare,
SONG CXXVIII.
RETURNING home, across the plain,
From market, t'oher day,
A sudden storm of wind and rain
O'ertook me by the way:
With speed I tript^^^ over the ground,
To find some kinder spot,
And from the storm a shelter found,
In Lubin's rural cot.
This swain had long possessed a flame,
But modestly concealed;
Nor 'till those favoring moments came,
His passion ever revealed:
Will you consent, sweet maid, cried he,
To share my humble lot;
Return, my love, and mistress be,
Of Lubin's rural cot.
He spoke so fair it pleased my mind,
I blushing. answered yes;
He swore he would be true and kind,
And sealed it with a kiss:
Next day the wedding ring was bought,
I all my fears forgot;
And blessed the day I shelter sought,
In Lubin's rural cot.
SONG CXXIX.
I HAVE found, my fair, a true love knot,
It Is loose by some disaster,
Come then with me to yonder grot,
And let us tie it faster:
Or shall we to the grove repair,
There is no time to dally,
The church, the priest awaits us there,
Let Us tie the knot my Sally.
Methinks the knot was surely laid,
By Cupid's fond direction,
To prove, my sweet, my charming maid,
The cement of affection;
It Is formed by some immortal hand,
Come, let us leave the valley,
And join in Hymen's silken band,
Let Us tie the knot, my Sally.
No hand can ever the band untie,
When once we are united:
For every guardian saint is by,
When lovers vows are plighted:
The deed recorded is above,
Then let us not sh^lly shally,
Oh, let us haste my charming love
And tie the knot my Sally.
SONG CXXX.
A FEW years ago in the days of my grannam,
(A worthy good woman as ever broke bread,)
What lectures she gave, in the morning began 'em,
Nor ceased till she laid herself down on her bed;
She never declined what she once undertook,
But twisted,
Persisted,
Now flattered,
Now spatter'd,
And always succeeded by hook or by crook.
Said she child, whatever your fate is hereafter,
If married, if single, if old, or if young,
In madness, in sadness, in tears, or in laughter,
But follow my maxims, you cannot do wrong;
Each passion, each temper, I always could brook;
When scolded,
I molded,
When heated,
Retreated,
And managed my matters, by hook or by crook.
Ensnared by her councils. I ventured to marry,
And fancied a wife, by my grand mother's rules,
Might be taught like a spaniel to fetch and to carry,
But soon I found out that we both had been fo^ls;
In vain I showed madam the wonderful book;
I (...) her,
I box'd her,
Bu^ truly,
Unruly,
Wives cannot be governed by hook or by crook.
SONG CXXXI.
GUARDIAN of our nation, stand firm in your station,
While Europe is all in commotion;
We'll let the world see that America's fre
Our flag shall ride safe on the ocean.
Since France does aspire to set us on fire,
And fill our Grand Court with distraction,
Then firm let us be, united and free,
In spite of proud France and of faction.
We'll never have a king, though of ADAMS we'll sing,
And chaunt to our children his story;
We'll let the world see Columbia is free,
And fight for our country and glory.
Our Navy shall ride on the ocean so wide,
With all the proud billows in motion,
No tyrant shall dare his ensigns to rear,
And pirates shall fly from the ocean.
These pira^es of France have dared to advance
To our seas, and the mouths of our harbors;
But Frenchmen shall see our sta^es will be free,
We'll clear all ou^ coasts of such robbers.
Now let us unite to stand for our right,
And protect our commerce from plunder;
These rovers at sea, shall begin now to flee,
When Ganges discharges his thunder,
SONG CXXXII.
SWEET Laura see the fatal hour,
Farewell, my souls delight;
But how shall wretched Henry live,
Thus banished from my fight?
To my fond heart no rival joys
Supply the loss of thee;
But who can tell if thou my dear,
Will ever remember me.
Alone through unfrequented wilds,
With pensive steps I love:
I ask the rocks, I ask the streams,
Where dwells my absent love?
The silent eve, the rosy morn,
My constant search survey,
But who can, etc.
Often I Will review the smiling scene,
Each favorite brook and tree,
When gaily passed the happy hours,
Those hours I Have passed with thee:
What painful fond memorials rise,
From every place I see;
But who can, etc.
SONG CXXXIII.
A SONG, a song, is the cry of mankind,
All know what to singing belongs;
It Is interest governs us all you will find,
And gives us the pitch of our songs.
The miser with riches, who is never content,
Can tell what is right or is wrong.
For he joins in the chorus of twenty per cent,
And owns it a very good song.
Behold next the merchant, the federal lad,
Who hopes that the union is strong,
But says it is money that makes the heart glad,
And hammers away with a song.
The merchant is punctual -- to see himself paid,
And wishes for credit that is long,
Yet strikes up the ditty of commerce and trade,
How quickly he joins in the song.
The lawyer and parson do know very well,
The things that to singing belong,
One fingers the fee, ere a word he can tell,
One "turns off his flock with a song."
And WASHINGTON too, the hero and sage,
To Heaven he carols this song: --
"The blessings which thou to Columbia gave;
"Oh Heaven! I pray thee prolong."
SONG CXXXIV.
DIOGENES* surly and proud,
Who snarl'd at the Macedon youth,
Delighted in wine that was good,
Because in good wine there is truth:
But growing as poor as a Job,
And unable to purchase a flask,
He chose for his mansion a tub,
And lived by the scent of the cask,
And lived by the scent of the cask.
Heraclitus would never deny
A bumper to cherish his heart;
And when he was maudlin, would cry,
Because he had emptied his quart:
Though some were so foolish to think
He wept at men's folly and vice,
'Twas only his custom to drink
Till the liquor run out of his eyes.
Democratus always was glad
To tipple, and cherish his soul;
Would laugh like a man that was mad.
When over a jolly full bowl,
While his cellar with wine was well stored,
His liquor he would merrily quaff;
And, when he was drunk as a lord,
At those that were sober he would laugh.
Copernicus too, like the rest,
Believed there was wisdom in wine;
And knew that a cup of the best
Made reason the brighter to shine:
With wine he replenished his veins,
And made his philosophy reel;
Then fancied the world, as his brains,
Turned round like a chariot wheel.
Aristotle, that master of arts,
Had been but a dunce without wine;
For what we ascribe to his parts,
Is due to the juice of the vine:
His belly, some authors agree,
Was as big as a watering trough;
He therefore leaped into the sea,
Because he would have liquor enough.
When Pyrrho had taken a glass,
He saw that no object appeared;
Exactly the same as it was
Before he had liquor'd his beard;
For things running round in his drink,
While sober he motionless found,
Occasioned the skeptic to think
There was nothing of truth to be found.
Old Plato was reckoned divine,
Who wisely to virtue was prone;
But, had it not been for good wine,
His merit had never been known.
By wine we are generous made;
It furnishes fancy with wings;
Without it, we never should have had
Philosophers, poets, or kings.
SONG CXXXV.
AS musing I ranged in the meads all alone,
A beautiful creature was making her moan;
The tears they were falling full fast from her eyes,
She pierced the air and my heart with her cries.
I gently requested the cause of her moan,
She told me her sweet Serecino was gone;
And in that sad posture she ever would remain,
Unless her dear charmer returned home again.
Perhaps it is some linnet, or blackbird, said I,
Perhaps it is the lark that has soared in the sky:
Come, dry up your tears, and abandon your grief,
I Will bring you another that shall give you relief,
It Is no blackbird, nor linnet, nor sky lark, said she,
But one that is fairer by far, than all three,
My sweet Sen^cino, for whom I now cry,
Is sweeter than all the gay songsters that fly.
Adieu to Prunella, Corinna, likewise,
Whom stars, and whom planets extol to the skies;
Adieu! to the Opera, farewell to the ball!
My charmer has gone, and a fig for you all.
SONG CXXXVI.
MY name's Tippy Bob,
With a watch in each sod,
View me round -- on each side and the top,
I Am sure I Am the thing,
Nay, I wish I may swing,
If I an't now a nice natty crop!
I Am up to each rig,
Of my hat smoke the gig,
Like candles my locks dang^e down:
And look in my rear,
As an ostrich I Am bare,
But the knowingist smart of the town
As I walk through the lobby,
The girls cry out "Bobby!
"Here, Bobby! -- my Biddy Bob!
Now squ^aking, now bawling,
Then pulling and halling,
So smirking and pleasing,
So coaxing and teazing,
I cannot get them out of my nob,
Observe well my shape,
And the fall of my cape,
It Is the thing! It Is the thing! dam'me! an't it?
And this bow round my neck,
Will at least hold a peck,
It may catch some old Dowager! may not it?
Then under this collar
I Have got a large roller,
It Is just like a large German sausage;
And squeezed up so tight,
That, by this good light,
It goes nearly to stop up my passage.
As I walk through the lobbey, etc.
My vesta foot long,
N^ne capes in a throng,
My breeches -- my small clothes I mean,
From my chest to my calf --
Damn the mob, let them laugh,
I dress not by them to be seen!
The strings at my knees,
Like chevaux de freze
My boots to the small of my leg!
My spurs the nonsuch,
No crop can me touch,
I swear I Am at home to a peg.
SONG CXXXVII.
FAIR Kate of Portsmouth loved a ^ar,
Ben Surf, as kind a soul
As ever braved the hottest war,
Or slung the flowing bowl,
Yet, often he would heave a sigh, since fate
Had borne him far from lovely Kate,
For Ben in vain had often strove,
(Would parents but agree)
To wed fair Kate, his only love,
'Ere that he went to sea;
But, ah! in vain, fond hope was over,
He sighed, then left his native shore.
One night as the mid-watch he kept,
A loose to love he gave,
For wh^le his ship mates careless slept,
Plunged in a watery grave --
"The conflict's over, sweet Kate," he cried,
Then sunk in peace, alas! and died.
Thus hope is like the summer gale,
That Is transient as the wind,
Which reefs too soon soft pleasures' sail,
'Ere the wished port we find:
The tidings to fair Kate was brought,
Whose bosom was with anguish fraught.
"And is my love no more?" she cried,
'Then peace adieu, farewell,
This heart to his was ever allied.
And still it shall be true --
I feel my spirit wing its flight -- "
She spoke, and sunk in endless night.
SONG CXXXVIII.
YOU ask why I thus droop my head,
Why pensive and sad I deplore?
All joy from poor Anna is fled,
My William, alas! is no more:
These eyes dim and mournful appear,
Which from his all their luster did borrow;
I must pause over my tale -- drop a tear,
For, alas! it is a story of sorrow.
I stood on the beach, while in view
The bark tossed, that brought him from far;
The rain beat, the winds fiercely blew,
The elements seemed all at wa^:
On a rock (the dire thought bids me weep)
His ship split -- no aid could they borrow;
He immerg'd in the watery deep,
Full, alas! is my story of sorrow.
Distracted! but prayers could I give,
As he dashed the big billows aside,
Hope faintly breathed forth, "he would survive."
But, fatigued, he sunk breathless -- and died:
Deprived of my love, I complain,
I his bride should have been on the morrow,
But I Will plunge in the unfated main,
And cure a heart bursting with sorrow.
SONG CXXXIX.
WELL met, jolly fellows, well met:
By this bowl you're all welcome, I swear:
See where on the table it is set.
And designed for the grave of your care,
From this social convention,
'Twill drive all contention,
Save only who longest can drink;
Then fill up their glasses
And drink to your lasses,
The headache take him that shall shrink.
Do but look at this glass! here boys, hand it around;
Why it sparkles like Phillis's eyes;
But it is better by far, boys; for when her eyes wound,
This balm to the wound will supply;
Then a fig for this thinking:
Fill, fill and be drinking;
Let us drown all our cares and our sorrows:
Come, the toast, boys, the toast!
There Is no time to be lost,
For our cares will return with tomorrow.
SONG CXL.
WHEN beating rains and pinching winds,
At night attack the laboring hinds,
And caused them to retire:
How sweet they pass their time away,
In sober talk and rustic play;
Beside the social fire,
Beside, etc.
There many a plaintive tale is told,
Of those who linger in the cold;
With sighs and groans expire;
The mournful story strikes the ear,
They heave a sigh and drop a tear,
And bless their social fire.
And bless, etc.
The legendary tale comes next,
With many an artful phrase perplexed,
Which well the tongue might tire;
The windows shake, the shutters crack,
Each thinks a ghost behind his back,
And hitches to the fire,
And hitches, etc.
And now perhaps some humble swain,
Who fanned the lover's flame in vain:
With sighs and groans expire:
Relates each st^a^agem he played,
To win the coy d^sdainful maid,
And eyes the social fire,
And eyes, etc.
To this succeeds a j^cund song,
From lungs less musical than strong.
And all to m^rth aspire;
The humble-roof returns the sound,
The soc^al can goes b^^sk^y round;
And brighter burns the fire.
And brighter, etc.
Grant me k^nd Heaven a state like this,
(...) simple ignorance is bliss,
'T^s all that I requ^re:
And ^hen ^o crown the j^ys of life*
I Will s^ek a k^nd indu^gent wise,
To bless the (...) a^ fi^e,
To bless, etc.
SONG CXLI.
A PLAGUE of those musty old lubbers,
Who tell us to fast and to think,
And patient fall in with life's rubbers,
With nothing but water to drink:
A cann of good stuff had they twigg'd it,
Would have set them for pleasure agog.
And spite of the rules,
The rules of the schools,
The old fools would have all of them swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
My father, when last I from Guinea
Returned with a bundance of wealth
Cried -- Jack, never be such a ninny
To drink -- Says I -- here is father, your health.
So I passed round the stuff -- soon he twigg'd it,
And it set the old codger agog,
And he swigg'd, and mother swigg'd,
And sister swigg'd and brother swigg'd,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
One day, when the Chaplain was preaching,
Behind him I curiously slunk,
And, while he our duty was teaching
As how we should never get drunk,
I tip'd him the stuff, and he twigg'd it,
Which soon set his reverence agog.
And he swigg'd, and Nick swigg'd,
And Ben swigg'd, and Dick swigg'd,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
Then trust me there is nothing like drinking
So pleasant on this side the grave;
It keeps the unhappy from thinking,
And makes even more valiant the brave,
For me, from the moment I twigg'd it,
The good stuff has so set me agog,
Sick or well, late or early,
Wind foully or fairly,
I Have constantly swigg'd it,
And dam'me there is nothing like grog.
SONG CXLII.
DEAR Tom ^his brown jug which foams, with mild ale,
In which we will toast the sweet Nan of the vale;
Was once Toby Fillpot a thirsty old soul
As ever drank a bottle or fathomed a bowl:
In Baccus's court 'twas his joy to excel,
And among jolly topers he bore off the bell.
It chanced as in dog days he loll'd at his ease,
In a flower-woven arbor as gay as you please;
With his friend and his pipe puffing sorrow away,
And with royal old stingo was soaking his clay.
His breath-door of life on a sudden was shut,
And he died full as big as a Dorce^shire butt.
His body when long in the ground it had lain,
And time into clay ha^ desolv'd it again!
A potter found out in its covert so snug,
And with part of old Toby he formed this brown jug:
Now sacred to friendship to mirth and mild ale,
Here Is a health to my lovely sweet Nan of the Vale.
SONG CXLIII.
HOW brim full of nothing's the life of a beau,
They Have nothing to think of, for nothing they do,
And nothing to talk of, for nothing they know,
Such, such is the life of a beau,
Such, etc.
For nothing they rise but to draw the fresh air,
Spend the morning in nothing but curling their hair;
And do nothing all day but sigh, saunter and stare,
Such, such is the life of a beau,
Such, etc.
For nothing at night to the playhouse they crowd,
To mind nothing done there they are always too proud,
But to bow and to grin, and to say nothing loud,
Such, such is the life of a beau,
Such, etc.
For nothing they run to assembly and ball,
For nothing at cards a fair partner they call;
For they still must be hasted who are nothing at all,
Such, such is the life of a beau,
Such, etc.
For nothing on Sunday's at church they appear,
They Have nothing to hope for and nothing to fear,
They can be nothing no where, who nothing are here;
Such, such is the life of a beau,
Such, etc.
SONG CXLIV.
SPANKING Jack was so comely, so pleasant, so jolly,
Though wind blew great guns still he would whistle and sing.
Jack loved his friend and was true to his Molly,
And if honor gives greatness was great as a king.
One night as we drove with two reefs in the main-sail,
And the scud came on lowering upon a lee shore,
Jack went up aloft for to hand the top ga'en sail,
A spray washed him off, and we never saw him more!
But grieving's a folly,
Come let u^ be Jolly.
If we have troubles at sea, boys,
We Have pleasures ashore.
Whiffling Tom still of mischief or fun in the middle,
Through life in all weathers at random would jog,
He Would dance and he would sing, and he would play on the fiddle,
And swig with an air his allowance of grog:
Long side of a don in the Terrible Frigate
As yard arm and yard arm we lay off the shore,
In and out whiffling Tom did so caper and jog it,
That his head was shot off, and we never saw him more;
But, etc.
Bonny Ben was to each jolly messmate a brother,
He was manly and honest, good natured, and free,
If ever one tar was more true than another
To his friend and his duty, that sa^lor was he;
One day with the David to heave the kedge anchor,
Ben went in a boat on a bold craggy shore,
He overboard tipped, when a shark and a spanker*
Soon nipt him in two, and we never saw him more!
But, etc.
But what of it all, lads, shall we be down hearted
Because that mayhap we now take our last sup;
Life's cable must one day or other be parted,
And death in fast mooring will bring as all up:
But it is always the way on'^, one scarce finds a brother
Fond as pitch, honest, hearty and true to the core,
But by battle, or storm, or some had thing or other,
He Is popp'd off the hooks, and we never see him more*
But, etc.
SONG CXLV.
HER mouth with a smile,
Devoid of all guile,
Half open to view;
Is the bud of the rose,
In the morning that blows,
Impearl'd with the dew.
More fragrant her breath
Than the flower scented heath,
At the dawning of day:
The hawthorn in bloom,
The lily's perfume,
Or the blossoms of May.
APPENDIX: CONTAINING A VARIETY OF MASONIC SONGS.
SONG I.
NOT the fictions of Greece, nor the dreams of old Rome,
Shall with visions mislead, or with meteors consume;
No Pegasus' wings my short soarings misguide;
Nor raptures detain me on Helicon side,
All clouds now dissolve; from the East beams the day --
Truth rises in glory, and wakens the lay.
The Eagle eyed Muse -- sees the light -- fills the grove
With the song of Free Masons, of Friendship and Love!
Inspired with the theme, the Divinity flies;
And throned on a rainbow -- before her arise
Past, Present and Future -- with splendid array,
In masonic succession, their treasures display.
She views murdered Merit by ruffian hand fall,
And the grave give its dead up, at fellow ship's call!
While the Craft, by their badges, their innocence prove;
And the song of Free Masona is Friendship and love!
From those ages remote, see the Muse speeds her way,
To join in the glories, the Present display,
In freedom and friendship, she sees the true band,
With their splendour and virtues illumine the land.
Religion's pure beam breaks the vapors of night.
And from darkness mysterious, the World gives the light!
While the Lodge here below, as the choirs from above,
Join the song of Free Masons in Friendship and Love.
That the Future might keep, what the Present bestows,
In rapture prophetic the goddess arose,
As she sung through the skies, angels echoed the sound,
And the winds bore the notes to the regions around!
The kind proclamation our song shall retain:
'Twas -- " That Masonry long may its luster mainta^n:
And 'till Time be no more, our Fraternity prove,
That the objects we aim at, are Friendship and Love!"
SONG II.
WHEN my divine Althaea's charms,
No more shall kindle soft alarms,
And the keen lightning of her eye,
Passes unfelt, unneeded by;
When moral Beauty's heavenly form
Shall cease the frozen soul to warm;
When manners thus corrupt we see,
Farewell the sweets of Masonry!
When Science shall withdraw her light,
And Error spread a Gothic night;
When Pity's sacred source is dry,
No pearly drop to melt the eye;
When truth shall hide her blushing head,
And famished Virtue beg her bread;
When manners thus corrupt we see,
Farewell the sweets of Masonry!
But while the fair transport our sight,
And moral beauty's charms delight;
While Science lifts her torch on high,
And pity thaws the melting eye;
While Truth maintains despotic power.
And Virtue charms without a dower;
While manners a thus unstained we see,
All hail the sweets of Masonry!
SONG III.
YE sons of fair Science, impatient to learn,
What Is meant by a Mason you here may discern;
He strengthens the weak, he gives light to the blind,
And the naked he clothes -- is a friend to mankind.
All shall yield to Masonry,
Bend to thee
Blessed Masonry,
Matchless was he who founded thee,
And thou, like him immortal shall be.
He walks on the level of honor and truth,
And spurns the trite passions of folly and youth;
The Compass and square all his frailties reprove,
And his ultimate object is Brotherly Love.
The temple of knowledge he nobly does raise,
Supported by wisdom, and learning its base;
When reared and adorned, strength and beauty unite,
And he views the fair structure with conscious delight.
With fortitude blessed, he is a stranger to fears,
And governed by prudence, he cautiously steers,
Till temperance shows him the port of con^ent,
And justice unasked, gives the sign of consent.
Inspired by his feelings, he bounty imparts,
For charity ranges at large in our hearts;
And an indigent brother relieved from his woes,
Feels a pleasure inferior to him who bestows.
Thus a Mason I Have drawn and exposed to your view,
And truth must acknowledge the figure is true;
Should you members become -- be brothers and friends,
There Is a SECRET remaining, will make you amends.
SONG IV.
WHAT Joys do the Craft on each Mason bestow
(Such rapturous pleasures as Cowans never know)
All equally share the delightful repast,
Whicn time cannot change, but eternal will last.
Hark away! Hark away! Hark away is the word!
To the Lod^e let us repair;
Where echo! Where echo! Where harmony echoes,
And banishes care.
Behold as the Sun in the East does arise,
Our Master the workmen and hirelings employ,
The West and the South their assistance impart,
TO embellish the Fabric and strengthen the Art.
With level and rule we our business prepare,
We work by the Compass and act on the Square,
No murmurs are heard and no discords are known.
Tranquillity reins and ambition has flown.
Let the world make a seoff, we their sneering despise,
Since they know not how much we Free Masonry prize;
In brotherly love let the time social pass,
And mirth and festivity garnish each glass.
Then charge, my dear brethren, a bumper all round,
To the brim fill each glass, let no day light be found;
Here Is a health to all Masons who honor the name,
By walking upright, and observing the same.
Hark away! Hark away! Hark away is the word!
Let us sing and rejoice;
Whilst echo! sweet echo! whilst echo of Masonry
Sounds from each voice!
SONG V.
HOW happy's a Mason whose bosom still flows
With friendship, and ever most cheerfully goes,
The effects of the mysteries lodged in his breast,
Mysteries revered, and by Princes possessed.
Our friends and our bottle we best can enjoy,
No rancor or envy our quiet annoy,
Our plumbline and compass, our square and our tools,
Direct all our actions in virtue's fair rules,
Direct, etc.
To Mars and to Venus we are equally true,
Our hearts can enliven, our arms can subdue;
Let the enemy tell, and the ladies declare,
No class or profession with Masons compare;
To give a fond luster we never need a crest,
Since honor and virtue remain in our breast,
We'll charm the rude world when we clap, langh and sing,
If so happy a Mason, say, who'd be a king?
If so, etc.
SONG VI.
DEAR Brothers of fraternal mind,
Whom virtue, truth and honor bind,
In whom the sons of science find
No sly dissimulation;
Accept a tribute justly due,
From a fond heart, faithful and true,
Accept a tender, sad adieu,
And believe
That I grieve,
Your worthy social band to leave,
Because I am a Mason.
Yet though remote from you I stray,
Where fickle fortune leads the way,
Your memory in my breast shall stay,
While I have respiration:
And let me hold that fond idea,
That you will mind unworthy me,
Whenever you meet in social glee:
Give a toast,
Let me boast
The friendship of your noble host.
I ask it as a Mason.
If ever the Sirens of the age
Has drawn me from your mystic gage,
Pray bl^^ the error from the page
Of rigid observation.
Your kindness on my heart I Will write,
And all unkindness from my sight,
I Will banish to eternal night.
Let us be
Masons free;
Forgive, likewsie forgiven be,
The creed of every Mason.
Your choicest love I often did share,
Your brightest badge did often wear,
Placed in the Oriental chair,
By mystic installation.
And by the emblematic three,
Dispersed the gifts of Masonry*
'Till the meridian hour we see;
Then we may
Wet our clay,
And pass an hour cheerful and gay,
In grateful relaxation.
A listening ear obtain our art,
A silent tongue will never impart
The secrets of a faithful heart,
Whatever the temptation,
Honor and truth will still combine
To dignify the grand design,
And love will through their actions shine.
With a mind
Just and kind,
And all their pleasures are refined,
So happy in a Mason.
Then faith, upheld by reason's voice,
Their hopes foretell enjoyment's choice,
In charity their hearts rejoice
In blessed conciliation.
When unforeseen misfortunes press
The sons and daughters of distress,
With kind fraternal tenderness,
Prompt relief
Soothe their grief,
Of their pleasure it is the chief
To raise a fallen Mason.
Humanity, that virtue bright,
Friendship so lovely to the sight,
Brotherly love their hearts unite,
And bless each friendly action.
No doting sot their mirth shall wound,
No minor knows their rights profound,
No atheist treads the hollowed ground,
No alloy
To their joy;
Pleasures pure, which never cloy
Belongs to every Mason.
May friendship, harmony and love
Your guardians and companions prove,
Till the celestial Lodge above,
Shall be each brother's station:
But death, the level, time the line,
And plumb of justice must combine,
To fit us for that bliss divine,
Then shall we
Happy be;
Toward the East we'll bow the knee
To our Grand Master Mason.
SONG VII.
ADIEU, a heart, warm, fond adieu,
Ye brothers of our mystic tie;
Ye favored and enlightened few,
Companions of my social joy;
Though I to foreign lands must hie,
Pursuing fortunes slippery ba'l:
With melting heart and brimful eye,
I Will mind you still when far awa,
Often have I met your social band,
To spend a cheerful festive night,
Often, honored with supreme command,
Presided over the sons of light;
And by that hieroglyphic bright,
Which none but craftsmen ever saw.
Strong memory on my heart shall write.
Those happy scenes when far awa.
May freedom, harmony and love.
Cement you in the grand design,
Beneath the Omnicient eye above;
The glorious Architect, divine;
That you may keep the ^^ering rule,
Still g^arded by the plummer's law,
'Till o^der bright completely shine,
Shall be my p^ay'r when far awa.
And you farewell, whose merit claim
Just^y that h^ghest badge to wear.
May Heaven (...) your noble name,
To M^s^nry and 'Scotia dear;
A ^ast request permit me then,
When yearly you're assembled a'l,
One round, I ask it with a ^ear;
To him, the friend, that is f^r awa.
And you, kind hearted sisters, fair,
I sing farewell to all your charms,
The impression of your pleasing (...)*
With rapture often my heart did wa^^,
Alas, the social winter's night
No more returns while breath we dra^^,
'Till sisters, brothers, all unite;
In that Grand Lodge that is far awa.
SONG VIII.
HERE social love serenely smiles,
Soft harmony inspires the breast,
(...) the weight of care beguiles,
And lulls each gloomy thought to rest.
Come dove-ey'd peace, thou heavenly guest,
And concord; attribute divine!
Refide within each Mason's breast,
Their hearts with sacred union join.
Thus long ^^^ll stand our noble art,
Hid deep within each faithful breast,
We feel its influence on the heart,
Therefore we say -- probatum est.
SONG IX.
BACCHUS open all thy treasure,
Let sweet music char^^^ the ear;
Love cements us all together,
Sons of Hi^^m welcome h^re.
Vulgar, base and sordid wretches,
May de^ide us, what care we;
Slander write malignant sketches,
By the fruit we know the tree.
Come my brothers, love unites us,
Come let beauty be our toast;
Here Is to her that can delight us,
The charming fair we prize the most.
Let us join our hands together,
May peace and love the cement be;
Charge your glasses, prime together,
Here Is a health to Masons Free.
SONG X.
ASSIST my muse, thy influence bring,
In praise of Masonry I sing;
In flowing notes my voice shall raise
To sing the worthy Mason's praise.
Whose heart is free from envy's (...),
And while he lives will so remain.
Hail oriental splendid light,
And dove-ey'd peace, with beauty bright;
Thy a'l enliv^^ing, strengthening rays,
Does crown our bliss with happy days.
State men and Kings with hand and heart,
Support, adorn our ^oyal Art.
With music sweet, sage, Tubal Cain,
On the deep organ tuned the ^^ain;
Sweet melody inspired his ^ongue,
With lofty note he sweetly sung:
Hail Masonry from Heaven sent,
In thee alone we find content.
Benevolence and mutual love,
Sent by our master from above,
Are pillars of our royal Art,
Engraved on each Mason's heart.
Th^se (...) pillars stand secure,
And shall the date of time endure.
Hail royal Art, from Heaven revealed,
In Mason's heart thou art concealed,
^^wans may seek and kn^ck in vain,
Our ^v'ry keys their arts disdain.
(...) Mason smiles and sees their art,
While pruden^e (...) his fa^thful heart.
SONG XI.
KING Solomon, that wise projector,
in Masonry took great delight;
And (...), that great Architector,
W^ose a^tions shall ever shine bright.
From the heart of a true honest Mason
There Is no^e can the secret remove;
Our maxim, are justice, morality,
Friendship and brotherly love.
Then who would not be a Free Mason,
So happy and social are we;
To all honest men we are Brothers,
And in every Lodge we are free.
We meet like true friends on the level,
And lovingly part on the square;
Alike we respect king and beggar,
Provided they are just and sincere,
We sco^n an ungenerous action,
None can with Free Masons compare;
We love for to live within compass,
By rules that are honest and fair.
Then who, etc.
We exclude all talkative fellows,
That will babble and pra^e past their wit,
They never shall come into our secret,
For they are neither worthy nor fit;
But the person that is well recommended,
And we find him honest and true,
When our lodge is well tyl'd we'll prepare him,
And, like Masons, our work we'll pursue,
Then who, etc.
Success to all accepted Masons,
There Is none can their honor pull down;
For ever since the glorious creation
These great men are held in renown.
When Adam was King of all nations,
He formed a plan with all speed;
And soon made a fit habitation,
For him and his companion Eve.
Then who, etc.
There Is some foolish people reject us,
For which they are highly to blame,
They cannot show any objection,
Or reason for doing the same.
The art's a divine inspiration,
As all honest men will declare.
So here is to all true hearted brothers.
That live within compass and square.
Then who, etc.
Like an arch well cemented together,
Thus firmly united we stand,
And justly support o^e another;
With plumb line and level in hand.
'Till the world it contained by fire,
And judgment is passed on us all;
They never shall come into our secret,
Or we from Free Masonry fall.
Then, etc.
SONG XII.
A MASON's daughter fair and young,
The pride of all the village throng,
Thus to her lover said;
Though Damon I your flame approve,
Your actions praise, your person love,
Yet still I Will live a maid.
None shall untie my virgin zone,
But one to whom the secret's known,
Of famm'd Free Masonry;
In which the great and good combine,
To raise with generous design,
Man to felicity.
The Lodge excludes the fop and f^ol;
The plodding knave and party tool,
That lib^rty would ^ell;
The noble, fa^thful and the brave,
No golden charms can ever deceive,
In slave^y to dwell.
This said, he bowed and went away,
Applied, was made without delay,
Returned to her again;
The f^^r one granted his request;
Co^nnubi^l joys their days have blessed,
And may they ever remain.
To Masons and to Mason's bairns,
And w^men with both wi^ and charms,
That love to lie in Masons arm's.
SONG XIII.
WHEN orient Wisdom beamed seren^,
And pillard Strength arose --
When Beauty tinged the glowing scene,
And Faith her mansion chose --
Exulting bands the Fabric viewed;
Mysterious powers adorned;
And high the Trip^e Union stood,
That gave the Mystic Word.
Pale Envy withered at the sight,
And frowning over the pile,
Called Murder up from the realms of night,
To blast the glorious toil.
With ruffian outrage joined in woe,
They form the leagues abhorred;
And wounded Science felt the blow,
That crushed the Mystic Word.
Concealment, from sequestered cove,
On sable pinions f^ew:
And over the sacriligious grave,
Her ve^l imper^^ous threw.
The associate band in solemn state,
The awful loss deplored;
And wisdom mourned the ruthless fate,
That w^elm'd the Mystic Word.
At length, through Times's expanded sphere,
Fair Science speeds her way;
And warmed by Truth's refulgence clear,
Reflects the kindred ray, --
A second Fabric's towering height,
Proclaims the Sign restored;
From whose foundation -- brought to light,
Is drawn the Mystic Word.
To depths obscure, the favored Trine,
A dreary course engaged --
Till through the Arch, the ray divine,
Illumes the sacred page!
From the wide wonders of this blaze,
Our ancient Sign's restored;
The Royal Arch alone displays,
The long lost Mystic Word.
SONG XIV.
COLUMBIAN'S sons, attend awhile
To one who will the truth impart,
And show that you are in exile
'Till science guides you by our art;
Uncultivated paths you tread,
Unlevel'd, barren, blind^old be,
'Till by a mystery you are led
Into the Light of Masonry.
From chaos this round globe was formed,
A Pedestal for us to be,
A mighty column it adorned,
In just proportion raised were we;
When our Grand Architect above
An Arch soon raised by his decree,
And placed the Sun the arch key-stone,
The whole was formed by Masonry.
It pleased our Sovereign Master then
This glorious fabric to erect:
Upon the square let us, as men,
Never the noble work neglect,
But still in friendship's bonds unite
Unbounded as infinity,
It Is a shure cornerstone fixed right,
And worthy of Free Masonry.
In ancient times before the flood,
And since, in friendship we have adhered;
From pole to pole have firmly stood,
And by all nations been revered.
When rolling years shall cease to move
We from oblivion raised shall be;
Then, since we are met in peace and love,
Let Us sing All hail to Masonry.
MONSIEUR TONSON. -- A Tale
THERE lived, as Fame reports, in days of yore,
At least some fifty years ago, or more;
A pleasant wight on town, 'yclep'd Tom King,
A fellow that was clever at a joke.
Expert in all the arts to teaze and smoke;
In sho^t. for strokes of humor, quite the thing.
To many a jovial club this King was known,
With whom his active wit unrivaled shone;
Choice spirit, grave Free Mason, buck and blood,
Would crowd his stories and bonmots to hear,
And none a disappointment ever could fear;
His humor flowed in such a copious flood.
To him a frolic was a high delight,
A frolic he woold hunt for day and night;
Careless how prudence on the sport might frown,
If ever a pleasant mischief sprang ^o view,
At once over hedge and ditch away he flew;
Nor left the game 'till he had run it down.
One night our hero, ramb'ling with a friend,
Near famed St. Giles's chanced his course to b^nd;
Just at that spot the seven dials light,
'Twas silence all around, and clear the coast,
The watch, as usual, doasing on his post;
And scarce a lamp displayed a twinkling light.
Around this place there lived the numerous clans.
Of honest, plodding, foreign Artizans;
Known at that time by name of Refugees,
The rod of pe^secution from their home,
Compelled the inoffensive race to roam;
And here they lighted, like a swarm of Bees.
Well! our two friends were saunt'ring through the street,
In hopes some food for humor soon to meet;
When in a window near, a light they view,
And though a dim and melancholy ray,
It seemed the prologue to some merry play;
So toward the gloomy dome our hero drew.
Strait at the door he gave a thundering knock,
(The time we may suppose near two o'clock;)
"I Will ask" says King, "if Thompson lodges here,"
"Thompson" cries the other, "who the devil's he,"
"I know not" King replies, "but want to see
"What kind of animal will now appear."
After some time a little Frenchman came,
One hand displayed a rush-light's trembling flame;
The other held a thing they call Culotte,
An old stripped woolen nightcap graced his head,
A tattered waistcoat over one shoulder spread;
Scarce hai^ awake he heaved a yawning note.
Though thus untimely roused, he courteous smiled,
And soon addressed our wag in accents mild;
Bending his head politely to his knee,
"Pray, S^re, vat vant you, dat you come so late?
"I beg your pardom Sare, to make you vate;
"Pray, tell me, Sare, vat your commands vid me?
"Sir, replied King, "I merely thought to know,
"As by your house I chan'd tonight to go;
"But, really, I disturbed your sleep, I fear --
"I say, I thought that you perhaps could tell,
"Among the folks who in this street may dwell;
"If there is a Mr. Thompson lodges here?"
The shivering Frenchman, though not pleased to find,
The business of this unimportant kind;
Too simple to suspect 'twas meant in jeer,
Shrug'd out a sigh that thus his rest should break,
Then with unaltered courtesy, he spoke;
"No Sare, no Monsieur Tonson lodges here."
Our wag begged pardon, and toward home he sped,
While the poor Frenchman crawled again to bed;
But King resolved not thus to drop the jest,
So the next night, with more of whim than grace,
Again he made a visit to the place;
To break once more the poor old Frenchman's rest.
He knocked -- but waited longer than before,
No foot step seemed approaching to the door;
Our Frenchman lay in such a sleep profound,
King with the knocker thundr'd then again,
Firm on his post determined to remain;
And often indeed he made the door resound.
At last King hears him over the passage creep,
Wondering what fiend again disturbed his sleep;
The wag salutes him with a civil leer,
Thus drawling out to heighten the surprise,
(While the poor Frenchman rubbed his heavy eyes;)
"Is there a Mr. Thompson lodges here?"
The Frenchman faulter'd, with a kind of fright,
"Vy, Sare, I Am sure I tell you, Sare, last night;
(And here he labored with a sigh sincere)
"No Monsier Tonson in de varld I know,
"No Monsieur Tonson here -- I toll you so;
"Indeed Sare, de^e no Monsieur Tonson here."
Some more excuses tendered* off King goes,
And the old Frenchman sought once more repose;
The rogue next night pursued his odd career,
'Twas long indeed before the man came nigh,
And then he uttered in a pitious cry,
"Sare, 'pon my soul no Monsieur Tonson here."
Our sportive wight his usual visit paid,
And the next night came forth a prattling maid,
Whose tongue, indeed than any jack went fa^^e^ --
Anxious she strove his errand to enquire:
He said "'it was vain her pret^y tongue to tire,
"He should not stir 'till he had seen her master."
The damsel then began in doleful state,
The Frenchmen's broken (...) to relate,
And begged he would call a^ proper t^me of day:
King told her she must fe^ch her master down,
A chaise was ready, he was leaving town,
But first had much of deep concern to say.
Thus urged, she went the snoring man to call,
And long indeed was she obliged to ball;
Ere she could rouse the torpid lump of clay,
At last he wakes* he rises, and he swears,
But sca^ce^y had he t^tter'd down the stairs,
When King attacked him in the usual way.
The Frenchman now perceived 'twas all in vain
To this tormentor m^^d^y to complain,
And stra^t in rag^ began h^s crest to rear --
"Sare vat the dev^l make you treat me'so?
"Sare, I infor^ you, Sa^e* (...) nights ago,
"Cot tam, I swear no Mons. Tonson here."
True as the night, King went, and heard a strife,
Between the harrass'd Frenchman and his wife;
Which should descend to chase the fiend away,
At length to join their forces they agree,
And strait ^m e^uously they turn the key,
Prepared wi^h mutual fu^y for the fray.
Our hero, with the fi^mness of a rock,
Collected to receive the mighty shock,
U^er^ng the old enquiry, calmly stood!
The name of Thompson raised the storm so high,
He deemed ^t then the safest plan to fly,
With -- 'well, I Will call when you're in gentler mood."
In short our hero, with the same intent,
Full many a night to plague the Frenchman went;
So fond of mischief was this wicked wit:
They threw out water, for the watch they call,
But King expected, still escape them all,
Monsieur at last was forced his house to quit.
It happened that our wag about this time,
On some fair prospect sought the Eastern clime;
Six lingering years were there his tedious lot,
At length content, amid his ripening store,
He treads again on Britain's happy shore,
And his long absence is at once forgot.
To London, with impatient hope he flies,
And the same night, as former freaks arise,
He fain must stroll the well-known haunt to trace,
"Ah! here is the scene of frequent mirth," he said:
"My poor old Frenchman, I suppose is dead;
"Egad! I Will knock, and see who holds his place."
With rapid strokes he makes the mansion roar
And while he eager eyes the opening door,
Lo! who obeys the knocker's rattling peal!
Why even our little Frenchman, strange to say,
He took his old ^bode that very day:
Capricious turn of sportive fortune's wheel!
Without one thought of the relentless foe,
Who, fiend like, haunted him so long ago;
Just in his former trim he now appears;
The waistcoat and the nightcap seemed the ^ame,
With rush-light as before he creeping came,
And King's detested voice astongish'd hears.
As if some hideous spectre struck his sight,
His senses seemed bewildered with affright;
His face, indeed, bespoke a heart full sore,
Then staring, he exclaimed, in rueful strain,
"Begar! here is Mons. Tonson come again."
Away he ran -- and never was heard of more.
SONG XV.
YE dull stupid Mortals, give over your conjectures,
Since Free Masons' secrets you never can obtain;
The Bible and Compass are our directors,
And shall be as long as this world does remain.
Here Friendship inviting here Freedom delighting,
Our moments in innocent mirth we employ:
Come, see, Mason's felicity,
Working and singing with heart full of joy.
No other society that you can mention,
Which has been, is now, or hereafter shall be
However so loudable is its intention,
It cannot compare with divine Masonry.
No envy, no quarrels, can here blast our laurels,
No passion our pleasure can ever annoy:
Come, see, etc.
To aid one another we always are ready,
Our rights and our secrets we carefully guard;
The Lodge to support, we like pillars are steady,
No Babel confusion our work can re^ard.
Ye Mortals come hither, assemble together,
And taste of those pleasures which never can cloy.
Come, see, etc.
We are to the Master forever obedient,
Whenever he calls, to the Lodge we repair;
Experience has taught us, that it is most expedient
To live within Compass, and act on the Square.
Let mutual agreement be Free Masons' cement,
Until the Whole Universe time shall destroy:
Come, see, etc.
SONG XVI.
FREE Masons all,
Attend the call;
It Is by command
You all are warned,
To fill up a bumper and keep it at hand,
To drink to "The Mother of Masons."
Let each give the word to his Brother,
To prove that we love one another;
Let Us fill to the dame
From whom we all come.
And call her "Of Masons the Mother."
The Stewards have laid foundations,
To prove that we love our relations*
By t^asting the Dame
From whom we all came,
We'll call her "The Mother of Masons."
In days of yore
Free Masons bore
A flask of wine,
Of mirth the sign,
And often they filled with the liquor divine,
To drink to "The Mother of Masons."
'Twas on these joyful occasions,
All charged stood firm to their stations,
And toasted the dame, from whom we all came,
Repeating, "The Mother of Masons."
The Stewards, etc,
Be all prepared,
Each motion squared,
And at the nod.
With one accord,
In strictest rotation we'll pass round the word,
Drink, Drink, to "The Mother of Masons."
Have a care, right and left, and make ready,
Be all in your exercise steady;
And fill to the dame
From whom we all came,
And toast her "The Mother of Masons."
The Stewards, etc.
SONG XVII.
WE have no idle prating,
Of either whig or tory,
But each agrees
To live at ease,
And sing or tell a story,
Fill to him,
To the brim,
Let it round the table roll:
The divine
Tells us wine
Cheers the body and the soul.
We Are always men of pleasure,
Despising pride and party:
While knaves and fools
Prescribe us rules,
We are sincere and hearty,
Fill to him, etc.
If an Accepted Mason
Should talk of high or low church;
We'll set him down
A shallow clown,
And understand him no church.
Fill to him, etc.
The world is all in darkness,
About us they conjecture;
But little think,
A song and drink,
Succeeds the Mason's lecture.
Fill to him, etc.
Then landlord bring a hogshead,
And in a corner place it;
Till all rebound
With hollow sound,
Each Mason here will face it.
Fill to him, etc.
SONG XVIII.
COME let us prepare,
We Brothers that are
Assembled on merry occasion:
Let Us be happy and sing,
For Life is a spring
To a Free and an Accepted Mason.
The world is in pain
Our secrets to gain,
And still let them wonder and gaze on;
They never can divine
The word or the sign
Of a Free and an Accepted Mason.
It Is this and it is that,
They cannot tell what,
Nor why the great man of the nation,
Should aprons put on,
And make themselves one
With a Free and an Accepted Mason.
Great Kings, Dukes, and Lords,
Have laid by their swords,
Our mystery to put a good grace on,
And never been ashamed
To hear themselves named
With a Free and an Accepted Mason.
Antiquity's pride,
We have on our side,
To keep up our old reputation;
There Is naught but what is good
To be understood
By a Free and an Acepted Mason.
We Are true and sincere,
And j^st to the Fair;
They Will trust us on any occasion:
No Mortal can more
The Ladies adore,
Than a Free and an Accepted Mason.
Then join hand in hand,
By each Brother firm stand,
Let Us be merry and put a bright face on:
What mortal can boast
So noble a toast
As a Free and an Accepted Mason.
No mortal can b^ast Three times.
So noble a toast Three times.
As a Free and an Accepted Mason. Three times.
SONG XIX.
IN History we are told* how the Lodges of old
Arose in the East, and shone forth like the Sun;
But all must agree, that divine Masonry
Commenced when the glorious creation begun:
With glory div^ne, oh, long may thou shine,
Thou choicest of blessings, derived from above!
Then charge bumpers high, and with shouts rend the sky
To Masonry, Friendship, and Brotherly Love.
With glory divine, etc.
Judea's great King, whose vast praises we sing,
With wisdom contrived, while the temple he plan'd;
The mysterious art ^then took place in each heart.
And Hiram with Solomon went hand i^ hand:
While each royal name was recorded in fame,
Their works, Earth and Heavon did jointly approve;
Then charge bumpers high, and with shouts rend the sky,
To Masonry, Friendship, and Brotherly Love*
While each, etc.
Then Masons were true, and the Craft daily grew;
They lived within Compass, and worked by the Square;
In friendship they dwelt, no ambition they felt,
Their deeds were upright, and their consciences clear;
On this noble plan, Free Masons began,
To help one ^^other they mutually st^ove:
Then c^a^ge bumpers high, and with shouts rend the sky
To Masonry* Friendship, and Brotherly Love,
On this, etc.
These maxims pursue, and your passions s^^due*
And imitate those worthy Masons of yore;
Fix a lodge in each breast, be fair virtue your guest,
Let Wisdom preside, and let truth tile the door.
So shall we arise, to an immortal prize,
In that blissful Lodge, which no time can remove;
Then charge bumpers high, and with shouts rend the sky,
To masonry, Friendship, and Brotherly Love.
So shall, etc,
SONG XX.
ERE God the Universe began,
In one rude heap all matter lay,
Which wild disorder overran,
Nor knew of light one glimmering ray;
While, in darkness over the whole,
Confusion reigned without control,
Then God arose, his thunders hurled,
And bade the Elements arise;
In Air he hung the pendant World,
And over it spread the azure Skies;
Stars in circles caused to run,
And in the center fixed the Sun.
Then man he cell'd ^orth out of dust,
And formed him with a living soul;
All things committed to his trust,
And made him Lord of all, the whole;
But ungrateful unto Heaven
He proved, and was from Eden driven.
From thence proceeded all our woes,
Nor could mankind one comfort share;
Until Free Masons greatly rose,
And formed another Eden here;
Where true pleasure ever reigns,
And native innocence remains.
Here crystal fountains bubbling flow,
Here naught that is vile can enter in:
The tree of knowledge here does grow,
Whose fruit we taste, yet free from Sin;
While sweet Friendship does abound,
And guardian Angels hover round.
SONG XXI.
COME, come, my brethren dear,
Now we are essembled here,
Exalt your voices clear.
With harmony.
There Is none shall be admitted in,
Were he a Lord, a Duke or King,
He Is counted but an empty thing,
Except he is free.
Then let every man take glass in hand,
Drink bumpers to our Master Grand,
As long as he can fit or stand,
With decen^y.
By our arts we prove,
Emblems of mutual love,
Types given from above,
To those who are free.
There Is not a king who fills a throne,
Will ever be ashamed to own,
Those secrets to the world unknown,
But such as we.
Then let, etc.
Now ladies try your arts,
To gain us men of parts,
Who best can charm your hearts,
Because we are free.
Then take us, try us, and you will find
We Are true and loving just and kind,
And taught to please a lady's mind,
By Masonry.
Then let, etc.
Great WASHINGTON, long may he reign,
To curb the pride of foes that is vain,
Long may his conquering sword maintain,
Free Masonry.
Then let, etc.
SONG XXII.
COME, v^ Masons, hither bring
^he tuneful pipe and pleasing string,
Exert each voice,
A (...) rejo^ce,
And make the ^pecious concave ring:
Let your hearts be blithe and gay,
Joy and mirth let all display,
No dull ca^e
Shall enter here,
For this ^s Masons' holiday.
Let your hearts, etc.
Friendship here has fixed her seat,
And Virtue finds a calm retreat,
Go tell the fool,
It Is Wisdom's school,
Where love and honor always meet.
Let your hearts, etc.
Social pleasures here invite,
To fill the soul with sweet delight,
While hand in hand
Our friendly Band
In Love and Harmony unite.
Let our hearts, etc.
May we often assemble here,
And long the Badge of Honor wear,
May joy abound,
And we be found
Forever faithful and sincere.
Let your hearts, etc.
Take the flowing glass in hand,
And drink unto our Master Grand,
Long may he reign,
The Cause maintain,
And Lodges flourish through the Land.
Let your hearts, etc.
SONG XXIII.
LET drunkards boast the power of wine,
And reel from side to side;
Let lovers kneel at Beau^y's shrine,
The sport of female pride:
Be ours the more exalted part,
Ho celebrate the Masons' Art,
And spread its praises wide.
To dens and thickets, dark and rude
For shelter beasts repair;
With sticks and straws the feathered brood
Suspend their nests in air:
And man untaught, as wild as these,
Binds up sad huts with boughs of trees,
And feeds on wretched fare.
But science dawning in his mind,
The quarry he explores;
Industry and the Arts combined,
Improved all Nature's stores:
Thus walls were built, and houses reared,
No storms or tempests now are feared
Within his well framed doors.
When stately palaces arise,
When columns grace the hall,
When towr's and spires salute the skies,
We owe to Masons all:
Nor buildings only do they give,
But teach men how within to live,
And yield to Reason's call.
All party quarrels they detest,
For Virtue and the Arts.
Lodged in each true Free Mason's breast,
Unite and rule the hearts:
By these, while Masons square their minds,
The State no better subjects finds,
None acts more upright parts.
When Bucks and Albions are forgot,
Free Masons will remain;
Mushroons each day, spring up and rot,
While oaks stretch over the plain:
Let others quarrel rant and roar;
Their noisy revels when no more,
Still Masonry shall reign.
Our leathern aprons may compare,
With garters red and blue:
Princes and Kings our Brothers are,
While they our rules pursue:
Then drink success and health to all
The Craft around this earthly ball,
May Brethren still prove true!
SONG XXIV.
UNITE, unite, your vo^ces raise;
Loud, loudly sing Free Mason's praise
Sp^ead far and wide their spotless ^ame,
Bad glory in the sacred name.
Behold, behold, the upright band,
In Virtue's paths go hand in hand;
They shun each ill, they do no wrong,
Strict honor does to them belong.
How just, how just, are all their ways,
Superior far to mortal praise!
Their worth description far exceeds,
For matchless are Free Masons' dends.
Go on, go on, ye just and true,
Still, still the same bright paths pursue;
Tis' admiring world shall on you gaze,
And Friendship's alter ever blaze.
Begone, begone, fly discord hence,
With party rage and insolence:
Sweet peace shall bless this happy band,
And freedom smile throughout the land,
SONG XXV.
HAIL Masonay divine;
Glory of ages shine,
Long may thou reign:
Wherever thy Lodges stand,
May they have great command,
And always grace the land,
Thou art divine!
Great fabrics still arise,
And grace the azure skies*
Great are the schemes:
Thy noble Orders are
Matchless beyond compare;
No Art with thee can share,
Thou art divine!
Hiram, the architect,
Did all the Craft direct
How they should build;
Sol'mon, great Isr'eal's King,
D^d mighty blessings bring,
And left us room to sing,
Hail, royal Art!
END OF THE SONGS.
A COLLECTION OF THE MOST CELEBRATED COTILLIONS AND COUNTRY DANCES.
COTILLIONS.
LE PANTALOON.
ALL round, 1st and 2d couples (opposite) right and left quite round, turn your
partners qu^te round, then balance all four in the middle, chasse 4, back
again, take your partner with both hands, go ^ound to the opposi^e couple the
opposite couples do the same, so every one come to their former places, then
all 8 chasse, back again, every gentlemen balance with his partner, and turn
he^ qu^te round. -- Third and fourth couples do the same figures.

THE COQUETTE.
All round, first couple set to the left couple, then the other couples, chasse
all 4, back again, face to the last couple, and right and left quite round,
face to your p^rtner, chasse only five steps, back again, turn your partner to
her former place; The second couple to the left perform the same figures, and
so the third and fourth couples.

THE CONVENTION. [May be danced with the tune of York Fufiliers.]
All round, first and opposite couples, balance in the middle, set, and turn
contrary partners, and retreat to your places, the other two couples do the
same, chasse all eight and turn the lady to your right quite round, chasse back
to your places and turn the lady to your left, then form two lines long ways
four each side balance, cross hands four, each corners, balance again, and
cross hands back, and come to your former places.

^ERMAN SPA.
All round, the two opposite couples take your partner's hands, and change
places; chasse 4 only five steps, so back again, balance in the middle, set,
half cross hands that you may be in your places* the same couple turn contrary
partners opposite, then turn your own with your right hand half way, balance
with your partner, set, half right and left with the opposite couples, which
brings you to your former places; -- the other two couples do the same.

MISS CHANDLER'S COTILLION.
All round, right and left all eight half round until you meet your partners,
then allemand with your partners until to your former places, chasse all eight,
turn the lady to your right quite round, chasse back again and turn the lady to
your left, then bal^nce with your partner and turn her quite round.

COUNTRY DANCES.
LA BELLE CATHERINE.
BALANCE four, then half right and left -- the same back again, lead down the
middle, up again, and cast off one couple, then six hands round, back again.

THE NEW POMP ROOM.
Cast off two couples, up again, four hands half round at the top, back again,
lead down the middle, up again and cast off one couple, right and left at top.

GRIFFITH'S FANCY.
The first gentleman cross between the second and third ladies, his partner do
the same between the second and third gentlemen, balance six, and set, then
turn your partner half way, four hands cross half round at bottom, back again,
right and left at top.

CONSTANCY.
Cross hands half round at top, back again, lead down the middle, up again, and
cast off one couple, balance six, set and turn your partner quite round, a^ght
and left at top.

LADY BUCKLEY'S WHIM.
Cast off two couples, up again, lead down the middle, up again, the gentleman
stands between the top couple, and his partner between the third couple,
balance all six in the m^ddle, and turn your partner, right and left at top.

THE YOUNG WIDOW.
Four hands across half round at top, back again, lead down the middle, and
turn your partner half way, then up again, and cast off one couple, the first
gentleman stand between the second and third la^ies, so h^s partner between the
second and third gentleman, balance all six* then a^l half way round, first
couple stand st^ll, when the second and third couples bala^ce in the m^ddle,
and half right and left, so every one come to their former places.

THE IMPERIAL.
Balance three couples, change places, back again lead down the m^ddle, up
again, and cast (...) one couple, right and left at top.

ALLEMAND SWISS. [With a new figure.]
Cross four hands at top, half round, back again, cast ^ff one coup^e, set,
balance six, and set, then four hands round at the bottom, back again, right
and left at top.

WHITE COCKADE.
Cast off two couples, up again, lead dow^ the m^d^le, up again, cast off one
couple, cross hands at bottom, half round, back again, right and left at top.

THE GRACES. [With a new and easy Figure for the dancer.]
First and second couples balance at top, the two ladies give both hands and
cross between the first and second gentlemen, changing sides, balance again as
before, and all go to your former places, four hands half round at top, turn
your partner with your right hand, cross hands back again, lead down one
couple, up at top, and cast off and stand between the second and third couples,
then balance (...) six, first couple ple turn partner quite round, right and
left.

FISHER'S MORNPIPE.
Cast off two couples, up aga^n* lead down the mid^le, up again, and cast off
one couple, cross hands at the bottom, right and left at top.

WASHINGTON FOREVER.
Turn your partner with your right hand, set, back again with the left hand,
lead down the middle, up again, cast off one couple, turn corners, chasse with
your partner, back again.

CHARLOTTE M'CARTY.
Cast off one couple, set, the second couple do the same, lead down the middle,
up again, and cast off one couple, six hands round.

THE HUMOR OF BOSTON.
Cast off two couples, back again, four hands round at top, lead down the
middle, up again, and cast off one couple, six hands round.

ALL GOES RIGHT.
Balance six, and change places, so back aga^n, lead down the middle, up again,
cast off one couple, right and left at top.

SEA FLOWER.
Cross four hands, half round, back again, chasse only the first couple, first
gentleman set with second lady, and his partner with the second gentleman,
chasse back again, then turn the second couple, that you may be between the
second and third couples.

BOSTON ASSEMBLY.
Four hands across half round, back again, the same allemand, lead down in the
middle, up again, cast off, six hand half round, back again, right and left.

CONTENTS.
A WOMAN is like to -- but stay Page. 23 A man he is like to -- but stay Page.
25 At the sound of the horn Page. 28 Awake from delusion, ye sons of the brave
Page. 31 A slaxen-headed cow-boy, as simple as may be Page. 43 Ah! Delia, see
the fatal hour farewell my soul's delight Page. 44 A rose tree in full bearing
Page. 58 Any one who reads the scripture Page. 64 A beau^ious sterling late I
saw Page. 70 A sailor's life's a life of woe Page. 85 Attention pray give while
of hobbies I sing Page. 87 As passing by a shady grove Page. 92 As Neptune in
has coral bower Page. 107 Amo, amas Page. 121 At the close of the day when the
Hamlet is still Page. 129 Adieu, ye streams that gently flowing Page. 139 As in
a grot reclined Page. 15^ A few year ago in the days of my grannam Page. ^74 A
song, a song, is the cry of mankind Page. 1^7 As musing I ^ang'd in the meeds
all alone Page. 180 A plague of th^se musty old lubbe^s Page. 187 Assist my
m^se, ^y influence b^^ng Page. 204 Adieu, a heart fond, warm ad^eu Page. 20^ A
Masons' daughter fair and young Page. 207
B
Banish sorrow, grief, and folly Page. 48 Both sexes gives ear to my fancy
Page. 62 Behold this fair goblet -- 'twas carved from the tree Page. 145 Bachus
open all thy treasue Page. 208
C
Come, hail the day, ye sons of mirth Page. 12 Come all Grenadiers, let us join
hand in hand Page. 21 Cease rude Boreas, blustering railer Page. 46 Come all
you pretty maidens, some older, some younger Page. 61 Celia that I once was
blessed Page. 94 Come, care curing mirth Page. 105 Cease a while, ye winds to
blow Page. 118 Come now all ye social Powers Page. 1^2 Columbia's bald Eagle
displays in his claws Page. 164 Columbian's sons attend a while Page. 209 Come,
let us prepare Page. 221 Come come my brethren dear Page. 2^5 Come ye Masons,
hither bring Page. 226
D
Dear Cathleen, you no doubt Page. 34 D^stress me with those teers no more
Page. 36 D^ogenes surly and proud Page. 178 Dear Tom, this brown jug which
foams with wild ale Page. 188 Dear brothers of fraternal minds Page. 199
E
Ere God the universe began Page. 224
F
From the so^l our fathers dearly bo't Page. 17 Fair l^berty whom heaven gave
Page. 29 Friendship to every willing mind Page. 55 Fly ye traitors from our
land Page. 76 For various purpose serves the fan Page. 83 From night till morn
I take my glass Page. 124 Fair Kate of Portsmouth loved a tar Page. 183 Free
Masons all Page. 218
G
God save the United States Page. 13 Guardian of our nation stand firm in your
station Page. 176
H
Hail! Columbia, happy land Page. 10 Hail Victorious freedom hail Page. 20
Hark, hark from the woodlands the loud swelling horn Page. 31 How bright are
the joys of the table ibid How happy the woman whose charms Page. 38 Hope
treacherous meteor lucid vapor Page. 42 Hail, patriots all! this day combine
Page. 54 How stands the glass around Page. 60 How imperfect is expression Page.
82 How blessed is the bachelor's life Page. 100 How happy is the man Page. 104
Hail! Godlike Washington Page. 114 Hark! Echo! sweet echo repearts the loud
strain Page. 134 Hail! Indepe^ce hail Page. 162 Her mouth with a smile Page.
192 How b^imfull of Nothing's the life of a beau Page. 189 How happy's a Mason
whose bosom still flows Page. 1^8 Here social love serenely smiles Page. 280
Hail! Masonry divine Page. 230
I
I Delias beauties would disclose Page. 49 In storms, when clouds obscure the
sky Page. 53 I dreamt I saw a piteous sight Page. 74 I sigh and lament me in
vain Page. 75 I that once was a ploughman a sailor am now Page. 80 I heard much
talk of Oxford town Page. 109 I am a blade both free and easy Page. 113 In
infancy our days were blessed Page. 119 I Have found my fair, a true love knot
Page. 173 In History were told how the Lodges of old Page. 222
J
Jolly mortals fill your glasses Page. 84
K
King Solomon, that wise projector Page. 205
L
Lord, what care I for mam or dad Page. 38 Let a set of sober Asses Page. 152
Let drunkards boast the power of wine Page. 227
M
My mother says I Am now sixteen Page. 42 Music, how powerful are thy charms
Page. 84 Minerva in heaven disconsolate mourned Page. 136 My name's Tippy Bob
Page. 181
N
No pastime no spor can with hunting compare Page. 135 Not the fiction of
Greece, nor the dreams of old Rome Page. 193
O
On the green sedgy banks of the sweet winding tay. Page. 2^ Of damask cheeks
and snowy neck Page. 78 Our immortal poets page Page. 89 Oh, Cupid forever
Page. 123 On that lone bank where Lubin died Page. 137
P
Pounds, shillings, pence and farthings Page. 141 Push about the bowl, boys
Page. 150 Poets may sing of their Helicon streams Page. 169
R
Returning home across the plain Page. 173
S
Sing Yankee Doodle, that fine tune Page. 15 Shepherds I have lost my love
Page. 23 Simplicity! thou favorite child Page. 35 Sir Solomon Simons when he
did wed Page. 39 Says Plato, why should man be vain Page. 56 Some women take
delight in dress Page. 72 Sweet Nightingale best poet of the grove Page. 9^
Say, have you seen my Arabelle Page. 131 Songs of Shepherds in rustical
roundelays Page. 170 Spanking Jack was so comely, so pleasant, so jolly Page.
190
T
To the standard repair Page. 18 The rose had been washed, just washed in a
shower Page. 30 The wealthy fool with gold in store Page. 36 Tho prudence may
press me Page. 37 To hear a goldfinch's sonnet Page. 41 The lark was up, the
morn was gay Page. 51 The bright God of day drew westward away Page. 57 There
was once, it was said, when, is out of my head Page. 64 It Was on the morn of
sweet May day Page. ^^ Trust not man, for he will deceive you Page. 71 Trust not
woman, she will beguile you ibid Time has not thin'd my flowing hair Page. 96
This world is a stage ibid It Was in the flowery month of May Page. 9^ The sun
sets at night, and the stars shun the day Page. 102 The sails unsurl'd the ship
u^moor'd Page. 10^ The women all tell me I Am false to my lass Page. 124 It Was at
the break of day we spied Page. 127 To my mu^e give attention, and deem it not
a mystery Page. 132 This hot (...) Page. 157 To banish life's troubles, the
G^e^ian old sage Page. 142 It Was near a thickets calm re ^eat Page. 143 The
British Lion is my sign Page. 144 Thursday in the morn, the n^neteenth of May
Page. 148 To Columbia who gladly recli^^'d at her (...) Page. 165 There lived
as fame reports in days of y^re Page. 210
U
Unite, unite, your voices raise Page. 229
W
When B^ita^n with (...) sway Page. 27 When (...) on the plain (...) Page. ^^
Why should our (...) transform to pain Page. 7^ Were I (...) choose the
greatest bl^^s Page. 9^ When (...) ^^own Page. 119 What (...)? you Sir? no Sir
Page. ^^6 (...) Page. 1^^ When up to London first I came Page. 141 Whilst happy
in my native land Page. 147 Welcome, welcome, brother debtor Page. 148 When our
great Sires this land explored Page. 156 When love was resolved to create the
round Earth Page. 158 While discord's bloody flag unfurled Page. 167 Well me^,
joll fellows, well met Page. 174 When beating rains and pinching winds Page.
185 What joys do the Craft on eacn Mason bestow Page. 197 When my divine
Althea's charms Page. 195 When orient wisdom beamed serene Page. 208 We have no
idle prating Page. 219
Y
Ye sons of Columbia, unite in the cause Page. 5 Ye sons of Columbia who
bravely have fought Page. 7 Ye virgins attend Page. 73 You say Sir* once a wit
allowed Page. 95 Ye fair possessed of every charm Page. 128 Ye chieftains of
Columbia, your forces marshal out Page. 158 You ask why I thus droop my head
Page. 184 Ye sons of fair science, impatient to learn Page. 195 Ye dull stupid
mortals, give over your conjectures Page. 217
TOASTS AND SENTIMENTS.
LIEUTENANT General WASHINGTON -- the pride, the boast, the father, the
protector of his country. In peace a Senate and in arms a Host.

The President of the United States -- whose Spirit animates his Country --
whose Wisdom foils the intrigues of Corruption, and whose Fortitude leads
Anarchy in triumph.

The American Flag -- may every nation respect its bearers -- may the radiance
of its stars shed a lusty over its friends, but its stripes lacerate the backs
of its enemies.

The American Eagle -- May the plots of disorganiz^^s b^ pierced by his eye,
and their (...) fa^l under his ^allons.

The of^^cers of the Army and Navy of the United States -- May they prove
themselves the (...) descendants of Mars, and may (...) of his estate, be
future fame.

Old times -- old principles, and none of the gipsey jargon of France.

The American Eagle. Under the protecting influence of its fostering wing, we
trust our fate to Heaven -- but, when its offered olive branch is spurned by
the haughty mandate of imperious villains, quickly may the thunderbolts of its
vengeance, be hurled on their devoted heads.

The Congress of the United States -- while genius, eloquence and judgment
preside, as they have done over our national councils, we may with justice
sneer at the bombastic threats of our enemies.

The patriots of America, whose blood was shed at the altar of Liberty. May the
sons never lose the sire of their fathers to preserve those blessings
transmitted to them.

The soldiers of the United States -- may they never want spirit to resent the
injuries done, or insults offered their country, ardor to pursue to victory,
nor mercy to ado^^ their conquests.

The ga^lant Youth of America. -- may they justly appreciate the fair
inheritance transmitted to them by their ancestors.

The Fair Sex -- may their arms prove our sweetest refuge in adversity, and
their smiles the truest antidote to care.

The sentiments of the day -- "Millions for defense, but not a cent for
tribute."

May the volume of beauty never be stained by contaminating fingers.

May the cheerful heart never want agreeable companions.

May virtue shine when every other light is out,

May the smiles of the fair reward the efforts of the brave.

The voyage of life, may it end in the heaven of happiness.

Reason in our actions, religion in our thoughts, and reflection in our
expressions.

Serenity to every breast that beats with philanthropy.

Absalom's end to the fomenters of public mischief.

Community of goods, unity of hearts, nobility of sentimen^s, and truth of
feelings, to the real lovers of the (...).

(...) an air-pump without a passage to breathe through.

^^odness in our thoughts, gentleness in our words, and generosity in our
actions.

All we wish and all we want.

The sweets of sensibility without the bitters.

The pleasure of imagenation realised.

Taste to our pleasure, and pleasure to our taste.

THE END.

