A TRIBUTE TO THE UNITED STATES. A POEM.

BY JOHN DAVIS.

-- Nos haec novimus esse nihil.

MART. New York: Printed By ROBERT M. HURTIN, at the Literary Printing Office,
No. 29 Gold-Sreet. 1798.

A TRIBUTE TO THE UNITED STATES. A POEM.
LONG have I sought, beset with grievous toil,
To gain AMERICA'S applauded soil,
To fly a Land oppressed with bleeding woes
That savage war and tumult only knows;
To feel no more Corruption's growing force,
Of griefs the spring, my Country's baneful curse;
To see no more the pageantry of state,
That kings command and princes can create:
Nor view the potentate with haughty nod,
Exact an homage due alone to GOD.
Joyful I press the ground with FREEDOM blessed,
Where FRANKLIN lived with self-emblazen'd crest,
Where WASHINGTON his grateful Country brought
Calm Independance, Liberty of thought;
Snucck the stern scepter from the Tyant's hand,
And bliss restored to all his native Land.
This Country once in Natures rudest state,
Where no fine feeling did the breast elate,
Where Wedlock's laws no human being blessed,
But babes unfather'd hung upon the breast;
Where War destructive ravaged every plain,
And parent by the child was often slain;
This Country now another aspect wears,
Each gentler virtue now its bosom shares.
Here comely Peace, the nymph of placid mien,
With smiling visage gladdens every scene:
War's brazen trump no more is heard to sound,
No panting coursers shake th'embattled ground,
But Commerce catching each auspicious gale,
To every sky unfurls the swelling sail. This was written in March.

Survey this Country, view its blessings over,
Who would not court its hospitable shore?
Here Independance holds her smiling reign,
Of laws despotic none can here complain:
Freedom, the birthright of the human soul,
None here dispute, and none would here control:
But all a common friend to Freedom's cause,
From Freedom's source derive their noble laws.
Be ever sacred that eventful hour
When fired with England's vile abuse of power,
The peaceful Colonists indignant rose,
To meet oppression and her yoke oppose.
For justice struggling, and for human right,
How many sunk to everlasting night:
Fell, bravely fell, deplored by every eye,
From every breast eliciting the sigh.
Where Quebec's rocks with towering summits rise,
And proudly soaring point toward the skies,
MONTGOMERY, the leader of his train,
Crowned with the laurel, at the siege was slain.
In that sad hour each heart with sorrow bled,
And every Muse dejected hung her head.
Thalia mournful, threw her mask away,
Beat her bare breast, and wept the live-long day.
But yet, lamented shade, the Muse shall save
Thy shining virtues from the clay-cold grave:
Throughout the world where Freedom souths to rest,
Where love of Liberty exalts the breast,
The fame shall live, thy deeds shall grace the page
Of rising poets in some future age;
Even lisping babes be taught thy name to sound,
Their infant hearts exulting with a bound.
But turn, O Muse, where rural scenes invite,
Where Nature's charms can every eye delight.
Lo! Philadelphia rising from the main.
With Sylvan beauties cheers the happy swain.
The Delaware with ample channel laves
The flowery banks that court its silver waves:
Ships from all empires on its bosom roll,
And waft their riches from the furthest pole.
The busy trader hails the cheerful day
That safe conducts the vessel to its bay;
With joyful heart beholds the bark draw near,
At length released from every painful fear.
The vessel over the surface lightly glides,
The rising keel the foaming surge divides;
The cordage cracks, the sails exulting swell,
The waving banner strives its joy to tell.
But, here, O Muse, in pity drop the tear
Over the dead body, over the untimely bier:
To parent, kindred, tune thy plaintive strains,
That felt the Pestilence consume their veins:
Their loss deplore, and raise the pensive sigh
For those who mourn with sorrow streaming eye,
A Father, child, a brother or a friend,
That healing pity once themselves could lend.
If over this scene a retrospect we take,
How every object sorrow does awake.
Here in the solemn stillness of the night,
The bleeding heart wept over the chilling sight
Of victims seized with pestilential blast,
In painful anguish breathing out their last:
In each sad street was heard the dying moan,
And every gale came loaded with a groan.
Here widows weeping over their husbands' bier.
With looks distracted drop the briny tear,
Or rend the air with pity moving strains,
That echo from the walls, the hills, the neigb'ring plains.
There tender mothers act the parent's part,
And mourn their offspring with a bursting heart,
While friendless orphans in the streets are found
That view their parents lifeless on the ground.
Sad was the scene, dejecting was the sight
Of bodies carried by the moon's pale light,
To where the church-yard's satiated cave
At every part displayed the new-made grave!
But turn, O Muse, from scenes of woe and grief,
To themes congenial fly thee for relief.
Soon as the Spring, at Nature's just command,
Her visit pays to this delightful land,
The conscious swain partakes the genial power,
Basks in the breeze, or curls the vernal flower.
Each comely Grace to Music's silver sound,
Leads up the dance, and lightly beats the ground;
Then laugh the vales, the woods their tribute bring,
And to the gales their balmy odours fling.
The crystal stream with softer murmur flows,
And sweetly whispers to the breeze that blows;
The ox no more demands his wonted stall,
But courts the mead, and distant water fall:
The snowy flocks abroad for pasture range,
The joyful shepherd glories in the change.
But when the Summer's blushing tints appear,
To deck with flowers and fruits the ripened year,
When golden harvests crown each fertile field.
And bending boughs their rosy produce yield,
When through the meads the mazy rivers stray,
And dancing sunbeams on the water play,
The husbandman beholds with grateful eye,
His yellow corn fields smile beneath the sky,
Begins the labor, and with careful hand,
Reaps the blessed produce of his fruitful land;
The rustic nymphs and swains in busy throng,
Solace their labors with the woodland song:
Thus through the day the circling hours roll,
And night rewards them with the flowing bowl.
If bards delight in streams and shady grove,
If near the stream the Muse delights to rove,
This smiling land with every charm is blessed,
Its streams yield pleasure, and its bowers rest.
The Bay of Chesapeak its source divides,
And to the West pours out its ample tides,
To where Potowmack curls its silver waves,
And Alexandria's lofty structure laves.
The smiling vessels dancing on the flood,
Of every clime bring home the native good.
The Schuyskill river fertile in its views,
With scenes romantic charms the rural Muse.
That loves to pluck the flowret from its sides,
Through which the stream with wave translucent glides,
The Susquehannah now invites my lay,
Beneath huge mountains pouring forth its way.
Its fragrant banks a fruitful valley shades,
Adorned with woods and wild luxuriant glades:
The rural hamlet, where its arms divide,
Enchants the view, and courts the purple tide.
If any form of government be known,
In which the seeds of equity are sown,
To commonwealths it surely is confined,
A form that suits the dictates of the mind.
In days of yore, when force and strength prevailed,
The weaker by the strong became assailed,
Till power usurped a calm obedience found,
And human rights were trampled on the ground.
Then kings arose with stern and haughty brow,
To wrest submission from the crowd below,
Who having once obeyed the stern decree,
Approached the throne, and bent the suppliant knee.
Oppression then a ready sanction found,
And cast her iron scepter on the ground,
Now growing embers kindled into flame,
And what the father was the son became:
Hence sprang a race of power supreme possessed,
And monarchs, princes, nobles stood confessed.
But since mankind grown bold in Freedom's cause
Have caught the love of self-created laws,
Nations the yoke of slavery have overthrown,
And regal power with triumph now disown.
This rising land, though yet an infant state,
Enjoys the blessings that on empires wait,
Can boast of souls exalted as the earth,
That calls them sons, and smiled upon their birth;
Of men made warriors in their country's cause,
Zealous to frame, and then obey its laws.
See honored WASHINGTON, with lofty soul,
Of manners gentle, yet above control,
Whole armies conquer. Independance find,
The smiling emblem of his noble mind.
Declare, O Muse, how Caesar wild with power,
To ruin hurled in some well destined hour,
Say how does he who came to AFRIC'S shore,
Wept when he found no blood he could spill more,
Of LETHE'S stream the dark oblivion share,
When we to WASHINGTON'S their deeds compare,
Who having once with just and mighty arm,
Found means his foes of terror to disarm,
Retired like CINCINNATUS to his farm.
May then these acts that warm the generous heart,
To times remote their influence impart,
Grace the soft song, adorn the historic page,
And call forth Heroes in each future age.

