ANDRE; A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS: AS PERFORMED BY THE OLD AMERICAN COMPANY,
NEW YORK, MARCH 30, 1798.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED AUTHENTIC DOCUMENTS RESPECTING MAJOR ANDRE; CONSISTING OF
LETTERS TO MISS SEWARD, THE COW CHASE, PROCEEDINGS OF THE COURT MARTIAL, etc.

COPY RIGHT SECURED.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street. -- 1798. --

PREFACE.
MORE than nine years ago the Author made choice of the death of Major Andre as
the subject of a Tragedy, and part of what is now offered to the public was
written at that time. Many circumstances discouraged him from finishing his
Play, and among them must be reckoned a prevailing opinion that recent events
are unfit subjects for tragedy. These discouragements have at length all given
way to his desire of bringing a story on the Stage so eminently fitted, in his
opinion, to excite interest in the breasts of an American audience.

In exhibiting a stage representation of a real transaction, the particulars of
which are fresh in the minds of many of the audience, an author has this
peculiar difficulty to struggle with, that those who know the events expect to
see them all recorded; and any deviation from what they remember to be fact,
appears to them as a fault in the poet; they are disappointed, their
expectations are not fulfilled, and the writer is more or less condemned, not
considering the difference between the poet and the historian, or not knowing
that what is intended to be exhibited is a free poetical picture, not an exact
historical portrait.

Still further difficulties has the Tragedy of Andre to surmount, difficulties
independent of its own demerits, in its way to public favor. The subject
necessarily involves political questions; but the Author presumes that he owes
no apology to any one for having shown himself an American. The friends of
Major Andre (and it appears that all who knew him were his friends) will look
with a jealous eye on the Poem, whose principal incident is the sad catastrophe
which his misconduct, in submitting to be an instrument in a transaction of
treachery and deceit, justly brought upon him: but these friends have no cause
of offense; the Author has adorned the poetical character of Andre with every
virtue; he has made him his Hero; to do which, he was under the necessity of
making him condemn his own conduct, in the one dreadfully unfortunate action of
his life. To show the effects which Major Andre's excellent qualities had upon
the minds of men, the Author has drawn a generous and amiable youth, so blinded
by his love for the accomplished Briton, as to consider his country, and the
great commander of her armies, as in the commission of such horrid injustice,
that he, in the anguish of his soul, disclaims the service. In this it appears,
since the first representation, that the Author has gone near to offend the
veterans of the American army who were present on the first night, and who not
knowing the sequel of the action, felt much disposed to condemn him: but surely
they must remember the diversity of opinion which agitated the minds of men at
that time, on the question of the propriety of putting Andre to death; and when
they add the circumstances of Andre's having saved the life of this youth, and
gained his ardent friendship, they will be inclined to mingle with their
disapprobation, a sentiment of pity, and excuse, perhaps commend, the Poet, who
has represented the action without sanctioning it by his approbation.

As a sequel to the affair of the cockade, the Author has added the following
lines, which the reader is requested to insert, page 55, between the 5th and
15th lines, instead of the lines he will find there, which were printed before
the piece was represented. --

BLAND. Noble McDonald, truth and honor's champion!
Yet think not strange that my intemperance wronged thee:
Good as thou art! for, would thou, can thou, think it?
My tongue, unbridled, has the same offense,
With action violent, and boisterous tone,
Hurled on that glorious man, whose pious labors
Shield from every ill his grateful country!
That man, whom friends to adoration love,
And enemies revere. -- Yes, McDonald,
Even in the presence of the first of men
Did I abjure the service of my country,
And rest my helmet of that glorious badge
Which graces even the brow of Washington.
How shall I see him more! --

McDONALD. Alive himself to every generous impulse,
He has excused the impetuous warmth of youth,
In expectation that thy fiery soul,
Chasten'd by time and reason, will receive
The stamp indelible of godlike virtue.
To me, in trust, he gave this badge disclaimed,
With power, when thou should see thy wrongful error,
From him, to reinstate it in thy helm,
And thee in his high favor. (Gives the cockade.)

BLAND (Takes the cockade and replaces it.) Shall I speak my thoughts of thee
and him*
No: -- let my actions henceforth show what thou
And he have made me. Never shall my helmet
Lack again its proudest, noblest ornament,
Until my country knows the rest of peace,
Or Bland the peace of death! Exit.

This alteration, as well as the whole performance, on the second night, met
the warm approbation of the audience.

To the performers the Author takes this opportunity of returning his thanks
for their exertions in his behalf; perfectly convinced, that on this, as on
former occasions, the members of the Old American Company have anxiously
striven to oblige him.

If this Play is successful, it will be a proof that recent events may be so
managed in tragedy as to command popular attention; if it is unsuccessful, the
question must remain undetermined until some more powerful writer shall again
make the experiment. The Poem is now submitted to the ordeal of closet
examination, with the Author's respectful assurance to every reader, that as it
is not his interest, so it has not been his intention to offend any; but, on
the contrary, to impress, through the medium of a pleasing stage exhibition,
the sublime lessons of Truth and Justice upon the minds of his countrymen.

W. DUNLAP.
New York, April 4 th, 1798.
PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Martin.
A Native Bard, a native scene displays,
And claims your candor for his daring lays:
Daring, so soon, in mimic scenes to show,
What each remembers as a real woe.
Who has forgot when gallant ANDRE died?
A name by Fate to Sorrow's self allied.
Who has forgot, when over the untimely bier,
Contending armies paused, to drop a tear.
Our Poet builds upon a fact tonight;
Yet claims, in building, every Poet's right:
To choose, embellish, lop, or add, or blend,
Fiction with truth, as best may suit his end;
Which, he avows, is pleasure to impart,
And move the passions but to mend the heart.
O, may no party-spirit blast his views,
Or turn to ill the meanings of the Muse:
She sings of wrongs long past, Men as they were,
To instruct, without reproach, the Men that are;
Then judge the Story by the genius shown,
And praise, or damn it, for its worth alone.
CHARACTERS.
General, dress, American staff uniform, blue, faced with buff, large gold
epaulets, cocked hat, with the black and white cockade, indicating the union
with Frence, buff waistcoat and breeches, boots, Mr. Hallam. McDonald, a man of
forty years of age, uniform nearly the same of the first, Mr. Tyler. Seward, a
man of thirty years of age, staff uniform, Mr. Martin. Andre, a man of
twenty-nine years of age, full British uniform after the first scene, Mr.
Hodgkinson. Bland, a youthful but military figure, in the uniform of a Captain
of horse -- dress, a short blue coat, faced with red, and trimmed with gold
lace, two small epaulets, a white waistcoat, leather breeches, boots and spurs;
over the coat, crossing the chest from the right shoulder, a broad buff belt,
to which is suspended a manageable huffar sword; a horseman's helmet on the
head, decorated as usual, and the union cockade affixed, Mr. Cooper. Melville,
a man of middle age, and grave deportment; his dress a Captain's uniform when
on duty; a blue coat, with red facings, gold epaulet, white waistcoat and
breeches, boots and cocked hat, with the union cockade, Mr. Williamson. British
Officer, Mr. Hogg. American Officer, Mr. Miller. Children, Master Stockwell and
Miss Hogg. American Sergeant, Mr. Seymour. American Officers and Soldiers, etc.
Mrs. Bland, Mrs. Melmoth. Honora, Mrs. Johnson.
Scene, the Village of Tappan, Encampment, and adjoining Country. Time, ten
hours.

ANDRE.
ACT FIRST.
SCENE FIRST.
A Wood seen by starlight; an Encampment at a distance appearing between the
trees. Enter MELVILLE. MELVILLE. THE solemn hour, "when night and morning meet,"
Mysterious time, to superstition dear,
And superstition's guides, now passes by;
Deathlike in solitude. The sentinels,
In drowsy tones, from post to post, send on
The signal of the passing hour. "All Is well,"
Sounds through the camp. Alas! all is not well;
Else, why stand I, a man, the friend of man,
At midnight's depth, decked in this murderous guise,
The habiliment of death, the badge of dire,
Necessitous coercion. It Is not well.
-- In vain the enlightened friends of suffering man
Point out, of war, the folly, guilt, and madness.
Still, age succeeds to age, and war to war;
And man, the murderer, marshalls out his hosts
In all the gaiety of festive pomp,
To spread around him death and desolation.
How long! how long! --
-- Methinks I hear the tread of feet this way.
My meditating mood may work me woe. (Draws.)
Stand, whosoe'er thou art. Answer. Who Is there?

Enter BLAND. BLAND. A friend.


MELVILLE. Advance and give the countersign.


BLAND. Hudson.


MELVILLE. What, Bland!


BLAND. Melville, my friend, you here?


MELVILLE. And well, my brave young friend. But why do you,
At this dead hour of night, approach the camp,
On foot, and thus alone?

BLAND. I have but now
Dismounted; and, from you sequestered cot,
Whose lonely taper through the crannied wall
Sheds its faint beams, and twinkles midst the trees,
Have I, adventurous, grop'd my darksome way.
My servant, and my horses, spent with toil,
There wait till morn.

MELVILLE. Why waited not yourself?


BLAND. Anxious to know the truth of those reports
Which, from the many mouths of busy Fame,
Still, as I passed, struck varying on my ear,
Each making the other void. Nor does delay
The color of my hasteful business suit.
I bring dispatches for our great Commander.
And hasted hither with design to wait
His rising, or awake him with the sun.

MELVILLE. You will not need the last, for the blessed sun
Never rises on his slumbers; by the dawn
We see him mounted gaily in the field,
Or find him wrapped in meditation deep*
Planning the welfare of our war-worn land.

BLAND. Prosper, kind heaven* and recompense his cares.


MELVILLE. You're from the South, if I presume aright?


BLAND. I am; and, Melville, I am fraught with news.
The South teems with events; convulsing ones:
The Briton, there, plays at no mimic war:
With gallant face he moves, and gallantly is met.
Brave spirits, roused by glory, throng our camp;
The hardy hunter, skilled to fell the deer,
Or start the sluggish bear from covert rude;
And not a clown that comes, but from his youth
Is trained to pour from far the leaden death,
To climb the steep, to struggle with the stream,
To labor firmly under scorching skies,
And bear, unshrinking, winter's roughest blast.
This, and that heaven-inspir'd enthusiasm
Which ever animates the patriot's breast,
Shall far outweigh the lack of discipline.

MELVILLE. Justice is ours; what shall prevail against her?


BLAND. But as I past along, many strange tales,
And monstrous rumors, have my ears assailed:
That Arnold had proved false; but he was taken,
And hung, or to be hung -- I know not what.
Another told, that all our army, with their
Much loved Chief, sold and betrayed, were captur'd.
But, as I nearer drew, at yonder cot,
'Twas said, that Arnold, traitor like, had fled;
And that a Briton, tried and proved a spy,
Was, on this day, as such, to suffer death.

MELVILLE. As you drew near, plain truth advanced to meet you.
It Is even as you heard, my brave young friend.
Never had people on a single throw
More interest at stake; when he, who held
For us the die, proved false and played us foul.
But for a circumstance of that nice kind,
Of cause so microscopic, that the tongues
Of inattentive men call it the effect
Of chance, we must have lost the glorious game.

BLAND. Blessed, blessed be heaven! whatever was the cause!


MELVILLE. The blow ere this had fallen that would have bruised
The tender plant which we have striven to rear,
Crushed to the dust, no more to bless this soil.

BLAND. What warded off the blow?


MELVILLE. The brave young man, who this day dies, was seized
Within our bounds, in rustic garb disguised.
He offered bribes to tempt the band that seized him;
But the rough farmer, for his country armed,
That soil defending which his ploughshare turned,
Those laws, his father chose, and he approved,
Cannot, as mercenary soldiers may,
Be bribed to sell the public-weal for gold.

BLAND. It Is well. Just Heaven! O grant that thus may fall
All those who seek to bring this land to woe!
All those, who, or by open force, or dark
And secret machinations, seek to shake
The Tree of Liberty, or stop its growth,
In any soil where thou have pleased to plant it.

MELVILLE. Yet not a heart but pities and would save him;
For all confirm that he is brave and virtuous;
Known, but 'till now, the darling child of Honor.

BLAND (Contemptuously.) And how is called this -- honorable spy?


MELVILLE. Andre's his name.


BLAND (Much agitated.) Andre!


MELVILLE. Aye, Major Andre.


BLAND. Andre!! -- O no, my friend, you're sure deceived --
I Will pawn my life, my ever sacred fame,
My General's favor, or a soldier's honor,
That gallant Andre never yet put on
The guise of falsehood. O, it cannot be!

MELVILLE. How might I be deceived? I Have heard him, seen him,
And what I tell, I tell from well-prov'd knowledge;
No second talebearer, who heard the news.

BLAND. Pardon me, Melville. O, that well-known name,
So linked with circumstances infamous! --
My friend must pardon me. Thou will not blame
When I shall tell what cause I have to love him:
What cause to think him nothing more the pupil
Of Honor stern, than sweet Humanity.
Rememberest thou, when covered over with wounds,
And left upon the field, I fell the prey
Of Britain? To a loathsome prison-ship
Confined, soon had I sunk, victim of death,
A death of aggravated miseries;
But, by benevolence urged, this best of men,
This gallant youth, then favored, high in power,
Sought out the pit obscene of foul disease,
Where I, and many a suffering soldier lay,
And, like an angel, seeking good for man,
Restored us light, and partial liberty.
Me he marked out his own. He nursed and cured,
He loved and made his friend. I lived by him,
And in my heart he lived, 'till, when exchanged,
Duty and honor called me from my friend. --
Judge how my heart is tortured. -- Gracious heaven!
Thus, thus to meet him on the brink of death --
A death so infamous! Heaven grant my prayer. (Kneels.)
That I may save him, O, inspire my heart
With thoughts, my tongue with words that move to pity!
(Rises) Quick, Melville, show me where my Andre lies.

MELVILLE. Good wishes go with you.


BLAND. I Will save my friend! Exeunt.


SCENE, the Encampment, by starlight.
Enter the GENERAL, McDONALD, and SEWARD. GENERAL. It Is well. Each sentinel
upon his post
Stands firm, and meets me at the bayonet's point*
While in his tent the weary soldier lies,
The sweet reward of wholesome toil enjoying*
Resting secure as erst within his cot
He careless slept, his rural labor over;
Ere Britons dared to violate those laws,
Those boasted laws by which themselves are governed,
And strove to make their fellow subjects slaves.

SEWARD. They know to whom they owe their present safety.


GENERAL. I hope they know that to themselves they owe it:
To that good discipline which they observe,
The discipline of men to order trained,
Who know its value, and in whom it is virtue:
To that prompt hardihood with which they meet
Or toil or danger, poverty or death.
Mankind who know not whence that spirit springs,
Which holds at bay all Britain's boasted power,
Gaze on their deeds astonished. See the youth
Start from his plough, and straightway play the hero;
Unmurmuring bear such toils as veterans shun;
Rest all content upon the dampsome earth;
Follow undaunted to the deathful charge;
Or, when occasion asks, lead to the breach,
Fearless of all the unusual din of war,
His former peaceful mates. O patriotism!
Thou wondrous principle of god-like action!
Wherever liberty is found, there reigns
The love of country. Now the self-same spirit
Which filled the breast of great Leonidas,
Swells in the hearts of thousands on these plains,
Thousands who never heard the hero's tale.
It Is this alone which saves thee, O my country!
And, till that spirit flies these western shores,
No power on earth shall crush thee!

SEWARD. It Is wondrous!
The men of other climes from this shall see
How easy it is to shake oppression off;
How all resistless is an union'd people:
And hence, from our success, (which, by my soul,
I feel as much secured, as though our foes
Were now within their floating prisons housed,
And their proud prows all pointing to the east)
Shall other nations break their galling fetters,
And reassume the dignity of man.

McDONALD. Are other nations in that happy state,
That, having broke Coercion's iron yoke,
They can submit to Order's gentle voice,
And walk on earth self-ruled? I much do fear it.
As to ourselves, in truth, I nothing see,
In all the wondrous deeds which we perform,
But plain effects from causes full as plain.
Rises not man for ever against oppression?
It is the law of life; he cannot avoid it.
But when the love of property unites
With sense of injuries past, and dread of future,
Is it then wonderful, that he should brave
A lesser evil to avoid a greater?

GENERAL (Sportively.) It Is hard, quite hard, we may not please ourselves,
By our great deeds ascribing to our virtue.

SEWARD. McDonald never spares to lash our pride.


McDONALD. In truth I know of naught to make you proud.
I think there is none within the camp that draws
With better will his sword than does McDonald.
I have a home to guard. My son is -- butchered --

SEWARD. Have thou no nobler motives for thy arms
Than love of property, and thirst of vengeance?

McDONALD. Yes, my good Seward, and yet nothing wondrous.
I love this country for the sake of man.
My parents, and I thank them, crossed the seas,
And made me native of fair Nature's world,
With room to grow and thrive in. I have thriven*
And feel my mind unshackled, free, expanding,
Grasping, with ken unbounded, mighty thoughts,
At which, if chance my mother had, good dame,
In Scotia, our revered parent soil,
Given me to see the day, I should have shrunk
Affrighted. Now, I see in this new world
A resting spot for man, if he can stand
Firm in his place, while Europe howls around him,
And all unsettled as the thoughts of vice,
Each nation in its turn threats him with feeble malice.
One trial, now, we prove; and I have met it.

GENERAL. And met it like a man, my brave McDonald.


McDONALD. I hope so; and I hope my every act
Has been the offspring of deliberate judgment;
Yet, feeling second's reason's cool resolves.
O! I could hate, if I did not more pity,
These bands of mercenary Europeans,
So wanting in the common sense of nature,
As, without shame, to sell themselves for pelf,
To aid the cause of darkness, murder man --
Without inquiry murder, and yet call
Their trade the trade of honor -- high-soul'd honor --
Yet honor shall accord in act with falsehood.
O that proud man should ever descend to play
The tempter's part, and lure men to their ruin!
Deceit and honor badly pair together.

SEWARD. You have much show of reason; yet, methinks
What you suggest of one, whom fickle Fortune,
In her changeling mood, has hurled, unpitying,
From her topmost height to lowest misery,
Tastes not of charity. Andre I mean.

McDONALD. I mean him too; sunk by misdeed, not fortune.
Fortune and chance, O, most convenient words!
Man runs the wild career of blind ambition,
Plunges in vice, takes falsehood for his buoy,
And when he feels the waves of ruin over him,
Curses, in "good set terms," poor Lady Fortune.

GENERAL (Sportively to Seward.) His mood is all untoward; let us leave him.
Though he may think that he is bound to rail,
We are not bound to hear him. (To McDonald.) Grant you that?

McDONALD. O, freely, freely! you I never rail on.


GENERAL. No thanks for that; you have courtesy for office.


McDONALD. You slander me.


GENERAL. Slander that would not wound.
Worthy McDonald, though it suits full well
The virtuous man to frown on all misdeeds;
Yet ever keep in mind that man is frail;
His tide of passions struggling still with Reason's
Fair and favorable gale, and adverse
Driving his unstable Bark, upon the
Rocks of error. Should he sink thus shipwrecked,
Sure it is not Virtue's voice that triumphs
In his ruin. I must seek rest. Adieu.
Exeunt General and Seward.
McDONALD. Both good and great thou art: first among men:
By nature, or by early habit, graced
With that blessed quality which gives due force
To every faculty, and keeps the mind
In healthful equipoise, ready for action;
Invaluable temperance -- by all
To be acquired, yet scarcely known to any. Exit*

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT SECOND.
SCENE, a Prison.
ANDRE discovered, in a pensive posture, sitting at a table; a book by him and
candles: his dress neglected, his hair disheveiled: he rises and comes forward.
ANDRE. KIND heaven be thanked for that I stand alone
In this sad hour of life's brief pilgrimage!
Single in misery; no one else involving,
In grief, in shame, and ruin. It Is my comfort.
Thou, my thrice honored sire, in peace went down
Unto the tomb, nor knew to blush, nor knew
A pang for me! And thou, revered matron,
Could bless thy child, and yield thy breath in peace!
No wife shall weep, no child lament, my loss.
Thus may I consolation find in what
Was once my woe. I little thought to joy
In not possessing, as I erst possessed,
Thy love, Honora! Andre's death, perhaps,
May cause a cloud pass over thy lovely face;
The pearly tear may steal from either eye;
For thou may feel a transient pang, nor wrong
A husband's rights: more than a transient pang
O may thou never feel! The morn draws nigh
To light me to my shame. Frail nature shrinks. --
And is death then so fearful? I have braved
Him, fearless, in the field, and steeled my breast
Against his thousand horrors; but his cool,
His sure approach, requires a fortitude
Which naught but conscious rectitude can give.

(Retires, and sits leaning.) Enter BLAND, unperceived by ANDRE. BLAND. And is
that Andre! O how changed! Alas!
Where is that martial fire, that generous warmth,
Which glowed his manly countenance throughout,
And gave to every look, to every act,
The tone of high chivalrous animation? --
Andre, my friend! look up.

ANDRE. Who calls me friend?


BLAND. Young Arthur Bland.


ANDRE (Rising.) That name sounds like a friend's.
(With emotion.) I have inquired for thee -- wished much to see thee --
I prithee take no note of these fool's tears --
My heart was full -- and seeing thee --

BLAND (Embracing him.) O, Andre! --
I have but now arrived from the south --
Nor heard -- till now -- of this -- I cannot speak.
Is this a place? -- O, thus to find my friend!

ANDRE. Still do thou call me friend? I, who dared act
Against my reason, my declared opinion;
Against my conscience, and a soldier's fame?
Often in the generous heat of glowing youth,
Often have I said how fully I despised
All bribery base, all treacherous tricks in war:
Rather my blood should bathe these hostile shores,
And have it said "he died a gallant soldier,"
Than with my country's gold encourage treason,
And thereby purchase gratitude and fame*

BLAND. Still may thou say it, for thy heart's the same.

ANDRE. Still is my heart the same: still may I say it:
But now my deeds will rise against my words;
And should I dare to talk of honest truth,
Frank undissembling probity and faith,
Memory would crimson over my burning cheek,
And actions retrospected choke the tale.
Still is my heart the same. But there has past
A day, an hour -- which never can be recalled!
Unhappy man! though all thy life pass pure;
Marked by benevolence thy every deed;
The out-spread map, which shows the way thou'st trod,
Without one devious track, or doubtful line;
It all avails thee naught, if in one hour,
One hapless hour, thy feet are led astray; --
Thy happy deeds, all blotted from remembrance;
Canceled the record of thy former good.
Is it not hard, my friend? Is 't not unjust?

BLAND. Not every record canceled -- O, there are hearts,
Where Virtue's image, when it is once engraved,
Can never know erasure.

ANDRE. Generous Bland!
(Takes his hand) The hour draws nigh which ends my life's sad story.
I should be firm --

BLAND. By heaven thou shall not die!
Thou do not sure deserve it. Betrayed, perhaps --
Condemned without due circumstance made known?
Thou did not mean to tempt our officers?
Betray our yeoman soldiers to destruction?
Silent. Nay, then 'twas from a duteous wish
To serve the cause thou wast in honor bound --

ANDRE. Kind is my Bland, who to his generous heart,
Still finds excuses for his erring friend.
Attentive hear and judge me. --
Pleased with the honors daily shower'd upon me,
I glowed with martial heat, my name to raise
Above the vulgar herd, who live to die,
And die to be forgotten. Thus I stood,
When, avarice or ambition Arnold tempted,
His country, fame, and honor to betray;
Linking his name to infamy eternal.
In confidence it was to me proposed,
To plan with him the means which should ensure
Thy country's downfall. Nothing then I saw
But confidential favor in the service,
My country's glory, and my mounting fame;
Forgot my former purity of thought,
And high-ton'd honor's scruples disregarded.

BLAND. It was thy duty so to serve thy country.


ANDRE. Nay, nay; be cautious ever to admit
That duty can beget dissimulation.
On ground, unoccupied by either part,
Neutral esteemed, I landed, and was met.
But ere my conference was with Arnold closed,
The day began to dawn: I then was told
That 'till the night I must my safety seek
In close concealment. Within your posts conveyed,
I found myself involved in unthought dangers.
Night came. I sought the vessel which had borne
Me to the fatal spot; but she was gone.
Retreat that way cut off, again I sought
Concealment with the traitors of your army.
Arnold now granted passes, and I doff'd
My martial garb, and put on cursed disguise!
Thus in a peasant's form I passed your posts;
And when, as I conceived, my danger over,
Was stopped and seized by some returning scouts.
So did ambition lead me, step by step,
To treat with traitors, and encourage treason;
And then, bewildered in the guilty scene,
To quit my martial designating badges,
Deny my name, and sink into the spy.

BLAND. Thou did no more than was a soldier's duty,
To serve the part on which he drew his sword.
Thou shall not die for this. Straight will I fly --
I surely shall prevail --

ANDRE. It is in vain.
All has been tried. Each friendly argument --

BLAND. All has not yet been tried. The powerful voice
Of friendship, in thy cause, has not been heard.
My General favors me, and loves my father --
My gallant father! would that he were here!
But he, perhaps, now wants an Andre's care,
To cheer his hours -- perhaps now languishes
Amidst those horrors whence thou sav'd'st his son!
The present moment claims my thought. Andre --
I fly to save thee! --

ANDRE. Bland, it is in vain.
But, hold -- there is a service thou may do me.

BLAND. Speak it.

ANDRE. O, think, and as a soldier think,
How I must die -- The manner of my death --
Like the base ruffian, or the midnight thief,
Taken in the act of stealing from the poor,
To be turned off the felon's -- murderer's cart,
A mid-air spectacle to gaping clowns: --
To run a short, an envied course of glory,
And end it on a gibbet. --

BLAND. Damnation!!


ANDRE. Such is my doom. O! have the manner changed,
And of mere death I Will think not. Do thou think --?
Perhaps thou can gain that --?

BLAND (Almost in a phrenzy.) Thou shall not die!


ANDRE. Let me, O! let me die a soldier's death,
While friendly clouds of smoke shroud from all eyes
My last convulsive pangs, and I Am content.

BLAND (With increasing emotion.) Thou shall not die! Curse on the laws of war!
--
If worth like thine must thus be sacrificed,
To policy so cruel and unjust,
I will forswear my country and her service:
I Will hie me to the Briton, and with fire,
And sword, and every instrument of death
Or devastation, join in the work of war!
What, shall worth weigh for naught? I will avenge thee!

ANDRE. Hold, hold, my friend; thy country's woes are full.
What! would thou make me cause another traitor?
No more of this; and, if I die, believe me,
Thy country for my death incurs no blame.
Restrain thy ardour -- but ceaselessly entreat,
That Andre may at least die as he lived,
A soldier.

BLAND. By heaven thou shall not die! --

(Bland rushes off: Andre looks after him with an expression of love and
gratitude, then retires up the stage. Scene closes.) SCENE, the General's
Quarters.
Enter McDONALD and SEWARD, in conversation. McDONALD (Coming forward.) Three
thousand miles the Atlantic wave rolls on,
Which bathed Columbia's shores, ere, on the strand
Of Europe, or of Afric, their continents,
Or sea-girt isles, it chafes. --

SEWARD. O! would to heaven,
That in midway between these severed worlds,
Rose barriers, all impassable to man,
Cutting off intercourse, till either side
Had lost all memory of the other.

McDONALD. What spur now goads thy warm imagination?


SEWARD. Then might, perhaps, one land on earth be found,
Free from the extremes of poverty and riches;
Where never a sceptered tyrant should be known,
Or tyrant lordling, curses of creation; --
Where the faint shrieks of woe-exhausted age,
Raving, in feeble madness, over the corse
Of a polluted daughter, stained by lust
Of viand-pamper'd luxury, might never be heard; --
Where the blasted form of much abused
Beauty, by villainy seduced, by knowledge
All unguarded, might never be viewed, flitting
Obscene, 'tween lamp and lamp, in the midnight street
Of all defiling city; where the child --

McDONALD. Hold! Shroud thy raven imagination!
Torture not me with images so cursed!

SEWARD. Soon shall our foes, inglorious, fly these shores.
Peace shall again return. Then Europe's ports
Shall pour a herd upon us, far more fell
Than those, her mercenary sons, who, now,
Threaten our sore chastisement.

McDONALD. Prophet of ill,
From Europe shall enriching commerce flow,
And many an ill attendant; but from thence
Shall likewise flow blessed Science. Europe's knowledge,
By sharp experience bought, we should appropriate;
Striving thus to leap from that simplicity,
With ignorance cursed, to that simplicity,
By knowledge blessed; unknown the gulf between.

SEWARD. Mere theoretic dreaming!


McDONALD. Blessed wisdom
Seems, from out the chaos of the social world,
Where good and ill, in strange commixture, float,
To rise, by strong necessity, impelled;
Starting, like Love divine, from womb of Night,
Illuming all, to order all reducing;
And showing, by its bright and noontide blaze,
That happiness alone proceeds from justice.

SEWARD. Dreams, dreams! Man can know naught but ill on earth.


McDONALD. I Will to my bed, for I have watched all night;
And may my sleep give pleasing repetition
Of these my waking dreams! Virtue's incentives. Exit.

SEWARD. Folly's chimeras rather: guides to error.


Enter BLAND, preceded by a SERGEANT. SERGEANT. Pacquets for the General. Exit.


BLAND. Seward, my friend!


SEWARD. Captain! I Am glad to see the hue of health.
Sit on a visage from the sallow south.

BLAND. The lustihood of youth has yet defied
The parching sun, and chilling dew of even.
The General -- Seward --?

SEWARD. I will lead you to him.


BLAND. Seward, I must make bold. Leave us together,
When occasion offers. 'Twill be friendly.

SEWARD. I will not cross your purpose. Exeunt.


SCENE, a Chamber.
Enter Mrs. BLAND. Mrs. BLAND. Yes, ever be this day a festival
In my domestic calender. This morn
Will see my husband free. Even now, perhaps,
Ere yet Aurora flies the eastern hills,
Shunning the sultry sun, my Bland embarks.
Already, on the Hudson's dancing wave,
He chides the sluggish rowers, or supplicates
For gales propitious: that his eager arms
May clasp his wife, may bless his little ones.
O! how the tide of joy makes my heart bound,
Glowing with high and ardent expectation!

Enter two CHILDREN. 1st. CHILD. Here we are, Mama, up, and dressed already.


Mrs. BLAND. And why were ye so early?


1st. CHILD. Why, did not you tell us that Papa was to be home today?


Mrs. BLAND. I said, perhaps.


2d. CHILD. (Disappointed.) Perhaps!


1st. CHILD. I don't like perhaps's.


2d. CHILD. No, nor I neither; nor "may be so's."


Mrs. BLAND. We make not certainties, my pretty loves;
I do not like "perhaps's" more than you do.

2d. CHILD. O! don't say so, Mama, for I Am sure I hardly ever ask you any thing
but you answer me with "may be so," -- "perhaps," -- or "very likely." --
"Mama, shall I go to the camp tomorrow, and see the General?" "May be so, my
dear." Hang "may be so," say I.


Mrs. BLAND. Well said, Sir Pertness.


1st. CHILD. But I am sure, Mama, you said, that, today, Papa would have his
liberty.


Mrs. BLAND. So, your dear father, by his letters, told me.


2d. CHILD. Why, then, I am sure he will be here today. When he can come to
us, I Am sure he will not stay among those strange Englishmen and Hessians. I
often wished that I had wings to fly, for then I would soon be with him.


Mrs. BLAND. Dear boy!


Enter SERVANT, and gives a letter to Mrs. BLAND. SERVANT. An express, Madam,
from New York to Headquarters, in passing, delivered this.


2d. CHILD. Papa's coming home today, John.


Exeunt Servant and Children. Mrs. BLAND. What fears assail me! O! I did not
want
A letter now! (She reads in great agitation, exclaiming, while her eyes are
fixed on the paper,)
My husband! doomed to die! Retaliation!
(She looks forward with wildness, consternation, and horror.) To die, if Andre
dies! He dies today! --
My husband to be murdered! And today!
Today, if Andre dies! Retaliation!
O cursed contrivance! -- Madness relieve me!
Burst, burst, my brain! -- Yet -- Andre is not dead:
My husband lives. (Looks at the letter.) "One man has power."
I fly to save the father of my children!

Rushes out. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT THIRD.
SCENE, the General's Quarters.
The GENERAL and BLAND come forward. GENERAL. (Papers in his hand.) CAPTAIN,
you are noted here with honorable
Praises. Depend upon that countenance
From me, which you have proved yourself so richly
Meriting. Both for your father's virtues,
And your own, your country owes you honor --
The sole return the poor can make for service.

BLAND. If from my country ought I Have merited,
Or gained the approbation of her champion,
At any other time, I should not dare,
Presumptuously, to show my sense of it;
But now, my tongue, all shameless, dares to name
The boon, the precious recompense, I wish,
Which, granted, pays all service, past or future,
O'erpays the utmost I can ever atchieve.

GENERAL. Brief, my young friend, briefly, your purpose.


BLAND. If I have done my duty as a soldier;
If I have braved all dangers for my country;
If my brave father has deserved ought;
Call all to mind -- and cancel all -- but grant
My one request -- mine, and humanity's.

GENERAL. Be less profuse of words, and name your wish;
If fit, its fitness is the best assurance
That not in vain you sue; but, if unjust,
Thy merits, nor the merits of thy race,
Cannot its nature alter, nor my mind,
From its determined opposition, change.

BLAND. You hold the fate of my most loved of friends;
As gallant soldier as ever faced a foe,
Blessed with each polished gift of social life,
And every virtue of humanity.
To me, a savior from the pit of death,
To me, and many more my countrymen.
Oh! could my words pourtray him what he is;
Bring to your mind the blessings of his deeds,
While through the fever-heated, loathsome holds,
Of floating hulks, dungeons obscene, where never
The dewy breeze of morn, or evening's coolness,
Breathed on our parching skins, he passed along,
Diffusing blessings; still his power exerting,
To alleviate the woes which ruthless war,
Perhaps, through dire necessity, heaped on us;
Surely, the scene would move you to forget
His late intent -- (though only serving then,
As duty prompted,) -- and turn the rigor
Of War's iron law from him, the best of men,
Meant only for the worst.

GENERAL. Captain, no more.


BLAND. If Andre lives, the prisoner finds a friend;
Else helpless and forlorn --
All men will bless the act, and bless thee for it.

GENERAL. Think thou thy country would not curse the man,
Who, by a clemency ill-timed, ill-judg'd,
Encouraged treason? That pride encouraged,
Which, by denying us the rights of nations,
Has caused those ills which thou have now portrayed!
Our prisoners, brave and generous peasantry,
As rebels have been treated, not as men.
It Is mine, brave yeomen, to assert your rights;
It Is mine to teach the foe, that, though arrayed
In rude simplicity, ye, yet, are men,
And rank among the foremost. Often their scouts,
The very refuse of the English arms,
Unquestioned, have our countrymen consigned
To death, when captur'd, mocking their agonies.

BLAND. Curse them! (Checking himself) Yet let not censure fall on Andre.
O, there are Englishmen as brave, as good,
As ever land on earth might call its own;
And gallant Andre is among the best!

GENERAL. Since they have hurled war on us, we must show
That by the laws of war we will abide;
And have the power to bring their acts for trial,
To that tribunal, eminent amongst men,
Erected, by the policy of nations,
To stem the flood of ills, which else fell war
Would pour, uncheck'd, upon the sickening world,
Sweeping away all trace of civil life.

BLAND. To pardon him would not encourage ill.
His case is singular; his station high;
His qualities admired; his virtues loved.

GENERAL. No more, my good young friend: it is in vain.
The men entrusted with thy country's rights
Have weighed, attentive, every circumstance.
An individual's virtue is, by them,
As highly prized as it can be by thee.
I know the virtues of this man, and love them.
But the destiny of millions, millions
Yet unborn, depends upon the rigor
Of this moment. The haughty Briton laughs
To scorn our armies and our councils. Mercy,
Humanity, call loudly, that we make
Our now despised power be felt, vindictive.
Millions demand the death of this young man.
My injured country, he his forfeit life
Must yield, to shield thy lacerated breast
From torture. (To Bland) Thy merits are not overlooked.
Promotion shall immediately attend thee.

BLAND (With contemptuous irony.) Pardon me, Sir, I never shall deserve it.
(With increasing heat.) The country that forgets to reverence virtue;
That makes no difference 'twixt the sordid wretch,
Who, for reward, risks treason's penalty,
And him unfortunate, whose duteous service
Is, by mere accident, so changed in form,
As to assume guilt's semblance, I serve not:
Scorn to serve. I have a soldier's honor,
But it is in union with a freeman's judgment,
And when I act, both prompt. Thus from my helm
I tear, what once I proudly thought, the badge
Of virtuous fellowship. (Tears the cockade from his helmet.) My sword I keep.
(Puts on his helmet.)
Would, Andre, thou had never put thine off!
Then had thou through opposers' hearts made way
To liberty, or bravely pierced thine own! Exit.

GENERAL. Rash, headstrong, maddening boy!
Had not this action past without a witness,
Duty would ask that thou should rue thy folly --
But, for the motive, be the deed forgotten. Exit.

SCENE, a Village.
At a distance some tents. In front muskets, drums, and other indications of
soldiers' quarters. Enter Mrs. BLAND and CHILDREN, attended by MELVILLE.
MELVILLE. The General's doors to you are ever open.
But why, my worthy friend, this agitation?
Our Colonel, your husband --

Mrs. BLAND (In tears, gives him the letter.) Read, Melville.


1st. CHILD. Do not cry, Mama, for I Am sure if Papa said he would come home
today he will come yet: for he always does what he says he will.


Mrs. BLAND. He cannot come, dear love; they will not let him.


2d. CHILD. Why, then they told him lies; O, fie upon them!


MELVILLE (Returning the letter.) Fear nothing, Madam, it is an empty threat:
A trick of policy. They dare not do it.

Mrs. BLAND. Alas! alas! what dares not power to do?
What art of reasoning, or what magic words,
Can still the storm of fears these lines have raised?
The wife's, the mother's fears? Ye innocents,
Unconscious on the brink of what a perilous
Precipice ye stand, unknowing that today
Ye are cast down the gulf, poor babes, ye weep
From sympathy. Children of sorrow, nursed,
Nurtured, 'midst camps and arms; unknowing man,
But as man's fell destroyer; must ye now,
To crown your piteous fate, be fatherless?
O, lead me, lead me to him! Let me kneel,
Let these, my children, kneel, 'till Andre pardoned,
Ensures to me a husband, them a father.

MELVILLE. Madam, duty forbids further attendance.
I am on guard today. But see your son.
To him I leave your guidance. Good wishes
Prosper you! Exit Melville.

Enter BLAND. Mrs. BLAND. My Arthur, O, my Arthur!


BLAND. My mother! (Embracing her.)


Mrs. BLAND. My son, I have been wishing
For you -- (Bursts into tears, unable to proceed.)

BLAND. But whence this grief, these tears, my mother?
Why are these little cheeks bedewed with sorrow?
(He kisses the children, who exclaim, Brother, brother!) Have I done aught to
cause a mother's sadness?

Mrs. BLAND. No, my brave boy! I often have feared, but never
Sorrow'd for thee.

BLAND. High praise! -- Then bless me, Madam;
For I have passed through many a bustling scene
Since I have seen a father or a mother.

Mrs. BLAND. Bless thee, my boy! O bless him, bless him, heaven!
Render him worthy to support these babes!
So soon, perhaps, all fatherless -- dependant. --

BLAND. What mean thou, Madam? Why these tears?


Mrs. BLAND. Thy father --

BLAND. A prisoner of war -- I long have known it --
But made so without blemish to his honor,
And soon exchanged, returns unto his friends,
To guard these little ones, and point and lead,
To virtue and to glory.

Mrs. BLAND. Never, never!
His life, a sacrifice to Andre's manes,
Must soon be offered. Even now, endungeon'd,
Like a vile felon, on the earth he lies,
His death expecting. Andre's execution
Gives signal for the murder of thy father --
Andre now dies!! --

BLAND (Despairingly.) My father and my friend!!


Mrs. BLAND. There is but one on earth can save my husband --
But one can pardon Andre.

BLAND. Haste, my mother!
Thou will prevail. Take with thee in each hand
An unoffending child of him thou weep'st.
Save -- save them both! This way -- haste -- lean on me.

Exeunt. SCENE, the General's Quarters.
Enter the GENERAL and McDONALD. GENERAL. Here have I intimation from the foe,
That still they deem the spy we have condemned,
Merely a captive; by the laws of arms
From death protected; and retaliation,
As they term it, threaten, if we our purpose hold.
Bland is the victim they have singled out,
Hoping his threatened death will Andre save.

McDONALD. If I were Bland I boldly might advise
My General how to act. Free, and in safety,
I will now suppose my counsel needless.

Enter an AMERICAN OFFICER. OFFICER. Another flag has from the foe arrived,
And craves admittance.

GENERAL. Conduct it hither. Exit Officer.
Let us, unwearied hear, unbiased judge,
Whatever against our martial court's decision,
Our enemies can bring.

Enter BRITISH OFFICER, conducted by the AMERICAN OFFICER. GENERAL. You are
welcome, Sir.
What further says Sir Henry?

BRITISH OFFICER. This from him.
He calls on you to think what weighty woes
You now are busy bringing on your country.
He bids me say, that, if your sentence reach
The prisoner's life (prisoner of arms he deems him,
And no spy), on him alone it falls not.
He bids me loud proclaim it, and declare,
If this brave officer, by cruel mockery
Of war's stern law, and justice' feigned pretense,
Be murdered; the sequel of our strife, bloody,
Unsparing and remorseless, you will make.
Think of the many captives in our power.
Already one is marked; for Andre marked; --
And when his death, unparalled in war,
The signal gives, then Colonel Bland must die.

GENERAL. It Is well, Sir; bear this message in return.
Sir Henry Clinton knows the laws of arms:
He is a soldier, and, I think, a brave one.
The prisoners he retains he must account for.
Perhaps the reckoning's near. I, likewise, am
A soldier; entrusted by my country.
What I shall judge most for that country's good,
That shall I do. When doubtful, I consult
My country's friends; never her enemies.
In Andre's case there are no doubts: it is clear:
Sir Henry Clinton knows it.

BRITISH OFFICER. Weigh consequences.


GENERAL. In strict regard to consequence I act;
And much should doubt to call that action right,
However specious, whose apparent end
Was misery to man. That brave officer
Whose death you threaten, for himself drew not
His sword -- his country's wrongs arous'd his mind;
Her good alone his aim; and if his fall
Can further fire that country to resistance,
He will, with smiles, yield up his glorious life,
And count his death a gain; and though Columbians
Will lament his fall, they will lament in blood.

(General walks up the stage.) McDONALD. Hear this! hear this, mankind!


BRITISH OFFICER. Thus am I answered?


Enter a SERGEANT with a letter. SERGEANT. Express from Colonel Bland. Delivers
it and exit.


GENERAL. With your permission. (Opens it.)


BRITISH OFFICER. Your pleasure, Sir. It may my mission further.


McDONALD. O, Bland! my countryman, surely I know thee!


GENERAL. It Is short: I will put form aside, and read it.

(Reads.) "Excuse me, my Commander, for having a moment doubted your virtue:
but you love me. If you waver, let this confirm you. My wife and children, to
you and my country. Do your duty."

Report this to your General.


BRITISH OFFICER. I shall, Sir.


Bows, and exit with American Officer. GENERAL. O, Bland! my countryman! Exit
with emotion.


McDONALD. Triumph of virtue!
Like him and thee, still be Americans.
Then, though all-powerful Europe league against us,
And pour in arms her legions on our shores;
Who is so dull would doubt their shameful flight?
Who doubt our safety, and our glorious triumph?

SCENE, the Prison.
Enter BLAND. BLAND. Lingering, I come to crush the bud of hope
My breath has, flattering, to existence warmed.
Hard is the task to friendship! hard to say,
To the loved object there remains no hope,
No consolation for thee; thou must die;
The worst of deaths; no circumstance abated.

Enter ANDRE -- In his uniform, and dressed. ANDRE. Is there that state on
earth which friendship cannot cheer?


BLAND. Little I bring to cheer thee, Andre!


ANDRE. I understand. It Is well. 'Twill soon be past.
Yet* 'twas not much I asked. A soldier's death.
A trifling change of form.

BLAND. Of that I spoke not.
By vehemence of passion hurried on,
I pleaded for thy precious life alone;
The which denied, my indignation barred
All further parley. But strong solicitation
Now is urged to gain the wished for favor.

ANDRE. What is 't o'clock?


BLAND. It Is past the stroke of nine.


ANDRE. Why, then it is almost over. But to be hung --
Is there no way to escape that infamy?
What then is infamy? -- no matter -- no matter.

BLAND. Our General has received another flag.


ANDRE. Soliciting for me?


BLAND. On thy behalf.


ANDRE. I have been ever favored.


BLAND. Threat'nings, now;
No more solicitations. Harsh, indeed,
The import of the message: harsh, indeed.

ANDRE. I am sorry for it. Would that I were dead,
And all was well with those I leave behind.

BLAND. Such a threat! Is it not enough, just heaven,
That I must lose this man? Yet there was left
One for my soul to rest on. But, to know
That the same blow deprives them both of life --

ANDRE. What mean thou, Bland? Surely my General
Threats not retaliation! In vengeance,
Dooms not some better man to die for me?

BLAND. The best of men.


ANDRE. Thou have a father, captive --
I dare not ask --

BLAND. That father dies for thee.


ANDRE. Gracious heaven! how woes are heaped upon me!
What! cannot one, so trifling in life's scene,
Fall, without drawing such a ponderous ruin?
Leave me, my friend, awhile -- I yet have life --
A little space of life -- let me exert it
To prevent injustice: -- From death to save
Thy father, thee to save from utter desolation.

BLAND. What mean thou, Andre?


ANDRE. Seek thou the messenger
Who brought this threat. I will my last entreaty
Send by him. My General, sure, will grant it.

BLAND. To the last thyself! Exit.


ANDRE. If, at this moment,
When the pangs of death already touch me,
Firmly my mind against injustice strives,
And the last impulse to my vital powers
Is given by anxious wishes to redeem
My fellow men from pain; surely my end,
However accomplished, is not infamous. Exit.

ACT FOURTH.
SCENE, the Encampment.
Enter McDONALD and BLAND. BLAND. IT does in truth appear, that as a spy --
Detested word! -- brave Andre must be viewed.
His sentence he confesses strictly just.
Yet sure a deed of mercy, from thy hand,
Could never lead to ill. By such an act,
The stern and blood-stained brow of War
Would be disarmed of half its gorgon horrors;
More humanized customs be induced;
And all the race of civilized man
Be blessed in the example. Be it thy suit:
'Twill well become thy character and station.

McDONALD. Trust me, young friend, I am alone the judge
Of what becomes my character and station:
And having judged that this young Briton's death,
Even 'though attended by thy father's murder,
Is necessary, in these times accursed,
When every thought of man is tinged with blood.
I will not stir my finger to redeem them.
Nay, much I wonder, Bland, having so often
The reasons for this necessary rigor
Enforced upon thee, thou will still persist
In vain solicitations. Imitate
Thy father!

BLAND. My father knew not Andre.
I know his value; owe to him my life;
And, gratitude, that first, that best of virtues, --
Without the which man sinks beneath the brute, --
Binds me in ties indissoluble to him.

McDONALD. That man-created virtue blinds thy reason.
Man owes to man all love; when exercised,
He does no more than duty. Gratitude,
That selfish rule of action, which commands
That we our preference make of men,
Not for their worth, but that they did us service,
Misleading reason, casting in the way
Of justice stumbling blocks, cannot be virtue.

BLAND. Detested sophistry! -- 'Twas Andre saved me!


McDONALD. He saved thy life, and thou art grateful for it.
How self intrudes delusive on man's thoughts!
He saved thy life, yet strove to damn thy country;
Doomed millions to the haughty Briton's yoke;
The best, and foremost in the cause of virtue,
To death, by sword, by prison, or the halter:
His sacrifice now stands the only bar
Between the wanton cruelties of war,
And our much-suffering soldiers: yet, when weighed
With gratitude, for that he saved thy life,
These things prove gossamer, and balance air: --
Perversion monstrous of man's moral sense!

BLAND. Rather perversion monstrous of all good,
Is thy accursed, detestable opinion.
Cold-blooded reasoners, such as thee, would blast
All warm affection; asunder sever
Every social tie of humanized man.
Cursed be thy sophisms! cunningly contrived
The callous coldness of thy heart to cover,
And screen thee from the brave man's detestation.

McDONALD. Boy, boy!


BLAND. Thou know that Andre's not a spy

McDONALD. I know him one. Thou have acknowledged it.


BLAND. Thou lie!


McDONALD. Shame on thy ruffian tongue! how passion
Mars thee! I pity thee! Thou can not harm,
By words intemperate, a virtuous man.
I pity thee! for passion sometimes sways
My older frame, through former uncheck'd habit:
But when I see the havoc which it makes
In others, I can shun the snare accursed,
And nothing feel but pity.

BLAND (Indignantly.) Pity me! (Approaches him, and speaks in an under voice.)
Thou can be cool, yet, trust me, passion sways thee.
Fear does not warm the blood, yet it is a passion.
Have thou no feeling? I have called thee liar!

McDONALD. If thou could make me one, I then might grieve.


BLAND. Thy coolness goes to freezing: you are a coward.


McDONALD. Thou know thou tell a falsehood.


BLAND. Thou shall know
None with impunity speaks thus of me.
That to rouse thy courage. (Touches him gently, with his open hand, in
crossing him. McDonald looks at him unmoved.)
Do thou not yet feel?

McDONALD. For thee I feel. And though another's acts,
Cast no dishonor on the worthy man,
I still feel for thy father. Yet, remember,
I may not, happily, ever be thus guarded,
I may not always the distinction make,
However just, between the blow intended
To provoke, and one that is meant to injure.

BLAND. Have thou no sense of honor?


McDONALD. Truly, yes:
For I am honor's votary. Honor, with me,
Is worth: it is truth; it is virtue; it is a thing,
So high pre-eminent, that a boy's breath,
Or brute's, or madman's blow, can never reach it.
My honor is so much, so truly mine,
That none has power to wound it, save myself.

BLAND. I will proclaim thee through the camp a coward.


McDONALD. Think better of it! Proclaim not thine own shame.


BLAND. I Will brand thee -- Damnation! Exit.


McDONALD. O, passion, passion!
A man who values fame, far more than life;
A brave young man; in many things a good;
Utters vile falsehood; adds injury to insult;
Striving with blood to seal such foul injustice;
And all from impulse of unbridled feeling. -- (Pause.)
Here comes the mother of this headstrong boy,
Severely racked -- What shall allay her torture?
For common consolation, here, is insult.

Enter Mrs. BLAND and CHILDREN. Mrs. BLAND. O, my good friend!


McDONALD (Taking her hand.) I know thy cause of sorrow.
Art thou now from our Commander?

Mrs. BLAND (Drying her tears, and assuming dignity.) I am.
But vain is my entreaty. All unmoved
He hears my words, he sees my desperate sorrow.
Fain would I blame his conduct -- but I cannot.
Strictly examined, with intent to mark
The error which so fatal proves to me,
My scrutiny but ends in admiration.
Thus when the prophet from the Hills of Moab,
Looked down upon the chosen race of heaven,
With fell intent to curse; ere yet he spoke,
Truth all resistless, emanation bright
From great Adonai, filled his froward mind,
And changed the curses of his heart to blessings.

McDONALD. Thou payest high praise to virtue. Whither now? --

Mrs. BLAND. I still must hover round this spot, until
My doom is known.

McDONALD. Then to my quarters, lady,
There shall my mate give comfort and refreshment:
One of your sex can best your sorrows soothe. Exeunt.

SCENE, the Prison.
Enter BLAND. BLAND. Wherever I look cold desolation meets me.
My father -- Andre -- and self-condemnation!
Why seek I Andre now? Am I a man,
To soothe the sorrows of a suffering friend?
The weathercock of passion! fool inebriate!
Who could with ruffian hand strive to provoke
Hoar wisdom to intemperance! who could lie!
Aye, swagger, lie, and brag! -- Liar! Damnation!!
O let me steal away and hide my head,
Nor view a man, condemned to harshest death,
Whose words and actions, when by mine compared,
Show white as innocence, and bright as truth.
I now would shun him; but that his shortened
Thread of life, gives me no line to play with.
He comes, with smiles, and all the air of triumph;
While I am sinking with remorse and shame:
Yet he is doomed to death, and I am free!

Enter ANDRE. ANDRE. Welcome, my Bland! Cheerly, a welcome hither!
I feel assurance that my last request
Will not be slighted. Safely thy father
Shall return to thee. (Holding out a paper.) See what employment
For a dying man. Take thou these verses;
And, after my decease, send them to her
Whose name is woven in them; whose image,
Has controlled my destiny. Such tokens
Are rather out of date. Fashions
There are in love as in all else; they change
As variously. A gallant Knight, erewhile,
Of Coeur de Lion's day, would, dying, send
His heart home to its mistress; degenerate
Soldier I, send but some blotted paper.

BLAND. If It would not damp thy present cheerfulness,
I would require the meaning of thy words.
I never till now did hear of Andre's mistress.

ANDRE. Mine is a story of that common kind,
So often told, with scanty variation,
That the palled ear loathes the repeated tale.
Each young romancer chooses for his theme
The woes of youthful hearts, by the cold hand
Of frosty Age, armed with parental power,
Asunder torn. But I long since have ceased
To mourn; well satisfied that she I love,
Happy in holy union with another,
Shares not my wayward fortunes. Nor would I
Now these tokens send, remembrance to awaken,
But that I know her happy: and the happy
Can think on misery and share it not.

BLAND (Agitated.) Some one approaches.


ANDRE. Why, it is near the time.
But tell me, Bland, say -- is the manner changed?

BLAND. I hope it -- but I yet have no assurance.


ANDRE. Well, well!


HONORA (Without) I must see him.


ANDRE. Who Is voice was that?
My senses? -- Do I dream --? (Leans on Bland.)

Enter HONORA. HONORA. Where is he?


ANDRE. It Is she!!


(Starts from Bland and advances toward Honora; she rushes into his arms.)
HONORA. It is enough! He lives, and I shall save him.


(She faints in the arms of Andre.) ANDRE. She sinks -- assist me, Bland! O
save her, save her!
(Places her in a chair, and looks tenderly on her.) Yet why should she awake
from that sweet sleep!
Why should she open her eyes -- (wildly) -- to see me hung!
What does she here? Stand off -- (tenderly) -- and let her die.
How pale she looks! how worn that tender frame! --
She has known sorrow! Who could injure her?

BLAND. She revives -- Andre -- soft, bend her forward.


(Andre kneels and supports her.) HONORA. Andre --!


ANDRE. Loved excellence!


HONORA. Yes, it is Andre!

(Rises and looks at him.) No more deceived by visionary forms,
By him supported -- (Leans on him.)

ANDRE. Why is this?
Thou do look pale, Honora -- sick and wan --
Languid thy fainting limbs --

HONORA. All will be well.
But was it kind to leave me as thou did --?
So rashly to desert thy vow-link'd wife? --

ANDRE. When made another's both by vows and laws --

HONORA (Quitting his support.) What meanest thou?


ANDRE. Did thou not marry him?


HONORA. Marry!


ANDRE. Did thou not give thy hand away
From me?

HONORA. O, never, never!


ANDRE. Not married?


HONORA. To none but thee, and but in will to thee.


ANDRE. O, blind, blind wretch! -- Thy father told me --

HONORA. Thou wast deceived. They hurried me away,
Spreading false rumors to remove thy love --
(Tenderly) Thou did too soon believe them.

ANDRE. Thy father --
How could I but believe Honora's father?
And he did tell me so. I reverenced age,
Yet knew, age was not virtue. I believed
His snowy locks, and yet they did deceive me!
I have destroyed myself and thee! -- Alas!
Ill-fated maid! why did thou not forget me?
Have thou rude seas and hostile shores explored
For this? To see my death? Witness my shame?

HONORA. I come to bless thee, Andre; and shall do it.
I bear such offers from thy kind Commander,
As must prevail to save thee. Thus the daughter
May repair the ills her cruel sire inflicted.
My father, dying, gave me cause to think
That arts were used to drive thee from thy home;
But what those arts I knew not. An heiress left,
Of years mature, with power and liberty,
I straight resolved to seek thee over the seas.
A long-known friend who came to join her lord,
Yielded protection and loved fellowship. --
Indeed, when I did hear of thy estate
It almost killed me: -- I was weak before --

ANDRE. It Is I have murdered thee! --

HONORA. All shall be well.
Thy General heard of me, and instant formed
The plan of this my visit. I am strong,
Compared with what I was. Hope strengthens me*
Nay, even solicitude supports me now:
And when thou shall be safe, thou will support me.

ANDRE. Support thee! -- O heaven! What! -- And must I die?
Die! -- and leave her thus -- suffering -- unprotected! --

Enter MELVILLE and GUARD. MELVILLE. I am sorry that my duty should require
Service, at which my heart revolts; but, Sir,
Our soldiers wait in arms. All is prepared --

HONORA. To death! -- Impossible! -- Has my delay,
Then, murdered him? -- A momentary respite --

MELVILLE. Lady, I have no power.


BLAND. Melville, my friend,
This lady bears dispatches of high import,
Touching this business: -- should they arrive too late --

HONORA. For pity's sake, and heaven's, conduct me to him;
And wait the issue of our conference.
O, 'twould be murder of the blackest dye,
Sin execrable, not to break thy orders --
Inhuman, thou art not.

MELVILLE. Lady, thou say true;
For rather would I lose my rank in arms,
And stand cashiered for lack of discipline,
Than, gain amongst military men all praise,
Wanting the touch of sweet humanity.

HONORA. Thou grantest my request.


MELVILLE. Lady, I do.
Retire! (Soldiers go out.)

BLAND. I know not what excuse, to martial men,
Thou can advance for this; but to thy heart
Thou will need none, good Melville.

ANDRE. O, Honora!

HONORA. Cheer up, I feel assured. Hope wings my flight,
To bring thee tidings of much joy to come.

Exit Honora, with Bland and Melville. ANDRE. Eternal blessings on thee,
matchless woman! --
If death now comes, he finds the veriest coward
That ever he dealt withal. I cannot think
Of dying. Void of fortitude, each thought
Clings to the world -- the world that holds Honora!

Exit. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT FIFTH.
SCENE, the Encampment.
Enter BLAND. BLAND. SUSPENSE -- uncertainty -- man's bane and solace!
How racking now to me! My mother comes.
Forgive me, O, my father! if in this war,
This wasting conflict of my wildering passions,
Memory of th^^ holds here a second place!
M^Donald comes with her. I would not meet him:
Yet I will do it. Summon up some courage --
Confess my fault, and gain, if not his love,
At least the approbation of my judgment.

Enter Mrs. BLAND and CHILDREN, with McDONALD. BLAND. Say, Madam, is there no
change of counsel,
Or new determination?

Mrs. BLAND. Naught new, my son.
The tale of misery is told unheard.
The widow's and the orphan's sighs
Fly up, unnoted by the eye of man,
And mingle, undistinguished, with the winds.
My friend (to M^Donald) attend thy duties. I must away.

2d. CHILD. You need not cry, Mama, the General will do it I am sure; for I saw
him cry. He turned away his head from you, but I saw it.


Mrs. BLAND. Poor thing! come let us home and weep. Alas!
I can no more, for war has made men rocks.

Exeunt Mrs. Bland and Children. BLAND. Colonel, I used thee ill this morning.


McDONALD. No!
Thyself thou used'st most vilely, I remember.

BLAND. Myself sustained the injury, most true;
But the intent of what I said and did
Was ill to thee alone: I Am sorry for it.
See thou these blushes? They proceed from warmth
As honest as the heart of man ever felt; --
But not with shame unmingled, while I force
This tongue, debased, to own, it slandered thee,
And uttered -- I could curse it -- uttered falsehood.
However misled by passion, still my mind
Retains that sense of honest rectitude
Which makes the memory of an evil deed
A troublesome companion. I was wrong.

McDONALD. Why now this glads me; for thou now art right.
O may thy tongue, henceforward, utter naught
But Truth's sweet precepts, in fair Virtue's cause!
Give me thy hand. (Takes his hand.) Never may it grasp a sword,
But in defense of justice.

BLAND. Yet, erewhile,
A few short hours scarce past, when this vile hand
Attempted on thee insult; and was raised
Against thy honor; ready to be raised
Against thy life. If this my deep remorse --

McDONALD. No more, no more. It Is past. Remember it
But as thou would the action of another,
By thy enlightened judgment much condemned;
And serving as a beacon in the storms
Thy passions yet may raise. Remorse is vice:
Guard thee against its influence debasing.
Say to thyself, "I am not what I was;
I am not now the instrument of vice;
I Am changed; I am a man; Virtue's firm friend;
Severed for ever from my former self;
No link, but in remembrance salutary."

BLAND. How all men tower above me!


McDONALD. Nay, not so.
Above what once thou wast, some few do rise;
None above what thou art.

BLAND. It shall be so.


McDONALD. It is so.

BLAND. Then to prove it.
For I must yet a trial undergo,
That will require a consciousness of virtue. Exit.

McDONALD. O what a temper does in man reside!
How capable of yet unthought perfection! Exit.

SCENE, the General's Quarters.
Enter GENERAL and SEWARD. GENERAL. Ask her, my friend, to send by thee her
pacquets. Exit Sew.
O, what keen struggles must I undergo!
Unblessed estate! to have the power to pardon;
The court's stern sentence to remit; -- give life; --
Feel the strong wish to use such blessed power;
Yet know that circumstances strong as fate
Forbid to obey the impulse. O, I feel
That man should never shed the blood of man.

Enter SEWARD. SEWARD. Naught can the lovely suitor satisfy,
But conference with thee, and much I fear
Refusal would cause madness.

GENERAL. Yet to admit,
To hear, be tortured, and refuse at last --

SEWARD. Sure never man such spectacle of sorrow
Saw before. Motionless the rough-hewn soldiers
Silent view her, or walk aside and weep.

GENERAL (After a pause.) Admit her (Seward goes out). O for the art, the
precious art,
To reconcile the sufferer to his sorrows!

HONORA rushes in, and throws herself wildly on her knees before him; he
endeavors to raise her. HONORA. Nay, nay, here is my place, or here, or lower,
Unless thou grant'st his life. All forms away!
Thus will I clasp thy knees, thus cling to thee. --
I am his wife -- it is I have ruined him --
O save him! Give him to me! Let us cross
The mighty seas, far, far -- never to offend again. --

(The General turns away, and hides his eyes with his hand.) Enter SEWARD and
an OFFICER. GENERAL. Seward, support her -- my heart is torn in twain.

(Honora, as if exhausted, suffers herself to be raised, and leans on Seward.)
OFFICER* This moment, Sir, a messenger arrived
With well confirmed and mournful information,
That gallant Hastings, by the lawless scouts
Of Britain taken, after cruel mockery
With show of trial and of condemnation,
On the next tree was hung.

HONORA (Wildly.) O, it is false!


GENERAL. Why, why, my country, did I hesitate! Exit.


(Honora sinks, faints, and is borne off by Seward and Officer.) SCENE, the
Prison.
ANDRE, meeting BLAND. ANDRE. How speeds Honora? (Pause.) Art thou silent,
Bland?
Why, then I know my task. The mind of man,
If not by vice debased, debilitated,
Or by disease of body quite unton'd,
Has over its thoughts a power -- energy divine!
Of fortitude the source and every virtue --
A godlike power, which even over circumstance
Its sov'reignty exerts. Now, from my thoughts,
Honora! Yet she is left alone -- exposed --

BLAND. O, Andre, spurn me, strike me to the earth;
For what a wretch am I, in Andre's mind,
That he can think he leaves his love alone,
And I retaining life!

ANDRE. Forgive me, Bland,
My thoughts glanced not on thee. Imagination
Pictured only, then, her orphan state, helpless;
Her weak and grief-exhausted frame. Alas!
This blow will kill her!

BLAND (Kneeling.) Here do I myself
Devote, my fortune consecrate, to thee,
To thy remembrance, and Honora's service! --

ANDRE. Enough! Let me not see her more -- nor think of her --
Farewell! farewell, sweet image! Now for death.

BLAND. Yet that thou should the felon's fate fulfill --
Damnation! my blood boils. Indignation
Makes the current of my life course wildly
Through its round, and maddens each emotion.

ANDRE. Come, come, it matters not.


BLAND. I do remember,
When a boy, at school, in our allotted tasks,
We, by our puny acts, strove to pourtray
The giant thoughts of Otway. I was Pierre. --
O, thou art Pierre's reality! a soldier,
On whose manly brow sits fortitude enamored!
A Mars, abhorring vice, yet doomed to die
A death of infamy; thy corse exposed
To vulgar gaze -- halter'd -- distorted -- Oh!!
(Pauses, and then adds in a low hollow voice) Pierre had a friend to save him
from such shame --
And so have thou.

ANDRE. No more, as thou do love me.


BLAND. I have a sword, and arm, that never failed me.


ANDRE. Bland, such an act would justly thee involve,
And leave that helpless one thou sworest to guard,
Exposed to every ill. O! think not of it.

BLAND. If thou will not my aid -- take it thyself.


(Draws and offers his sword.) ANDRE. No, men will say that cowardice did urge
me.
In my mind's weakness, I did wish to shun
That mode of death which error represented
Infamous: now let me rise superior;
And with a fortitude too true to start
From mere appearances, show your country,
That she, in me, destroys a man who might
Have lived to virtue.

BLAND (Sheathing his sword.) I will not think more of it*
I was again the sport of erring passion.

ANDRE. Go thou and guide Honora from this spot.


HONORA (Entering.) Who shall oppose his wife? I will have way!
They, cruel, would have kept me from thee, Andre.
Say, am I not thy wife? Will thou deny me?
Indeed I am not dressed in bridal trim.
But I have traveled far: -- rough was the road --
Rugged and rough -- that must excuse my dress.
(Seeing Andre's distress) Thou art not glad to see me.

ANDRE. Break my heart!


HONORA. Indeed, I feel not much in spirits. I wept but now.


Enter MELVILLE and GUARD. BLAND (To Melville.) Say nothing.


ANDRE. I am ready.


HONORA (Seeing the Guard.) Are they here?
Here again! -- The same -- but they shall not harm me --
I am with thee, my Andre -- I am safe --
And thou art safe with me. Is it not so?

(Clinging to him.) Enter Mrs. BLAND. Mrs. BLAND. Where is this lovely victim?


BLAND. Thanks, my mother.


Mrs. BLAND. McDonald sent me hither. My woes are past.
Thy father, by the foe released, already
Is in safety. This be forgotten now;
And every thought be turned to this sad scene.
Come, lady, home with me.

HONORA. Go home with thee?
Art thou my Andre's mother? We will home
And rest, for thou art weary -- very weary.

(Leans on Mrs. Bland.) Andre retires to the Guard, and goes off with them,
looking on her to the last, and with an action of extreme tenderness takes
leave of her. Melville and Bland accompany him. HONORA. Now we will go. Come
love! Where is he?
All gone! -- I do remember -- I awake --
They have him. Murder! Help! O, save him! save him!

(Honora attempts to follow, but falls. Mrs. Bland kneels to assist her. Scene
closes.) SCENE, the Encampment.
Procession to the execution of ANDRE. First enter Pioneers -- Detachment of
Infantry -- Military Band of Music -- Infantry. The Music having passed off,
enter ANDRE between MELVILLE and AMERICAN OFFICER; they sorrowful, he
cheerfully conversing as he passes over the stage. ANDRE. It may in me be
merely prejudice,
The effect of young-opinion deep engraved
Upon the tender mind by care parental;
But I must think your country has mistook
Her interests. Believe me, but for this I should
Not willingly have drawn a sword against her.
(They bow their heads in silence.) Opinion must, nay ought, to sway our
actions;
Therefore --

Having crossed the stage, he goes out as still conversing with them. Another
detachment of Infantry, with muffled and craped drums, close the procession: as
soon as they are off -- SCENE draws and discovers the distant view of the
Encampment.
Procession enters in the same order as before, proceeds up the stage, and goes
off on the opposite side. Enter Mc DONALD, leading BLAND, who looks wildly
back. BLAND. I dare not thee resist. Yet why, O why
Thus hurry me away --? --

McDONALD. Would thou behold --

BLAND. O, name it not!


Mc DONALD. Or would thou, by thy looks
And gestures wild, o'erthrow that manly calmness
Which, or assumed or felt, so well becomes thy friend?

BLAND. What means that cannon's sound?


Mc DONALD (After a pause.) Signal of death
Appointed. Andre, thy friend, is now no more!

BLAND. Farewell, farewell, brave spirit! O, let my countrymen,
Henceforward, when the cruelties of war
Arise in their remembrance; when their ready
Speech would pour forth torrents in their foe's dispraise,
Think on this act accursed, and lock complaint in silence.

(Bland throws himself on the earth.) Mc DONALD. Such are the dictates of the
heart, not head.
O may the children of Columbia still
Be taught by every teacher of mankind,
Each circumstance of calculative gain,
Or wounded pride, which prompted our oppressors:
May every child be taught to lisp the tale:
And may, in times to come, no foreign force,
No European influence, tempt to mistate,
Or awe the tongue of eloquence to silence.
Still may our children's children deep abhor
The motives, doubly deep detest the actors;
Ever remembering, that the race who plan'd,
Who acquiesced, or did the deeds abhorred,
Has passed from off the earth; and, in its stead,
Stand men who challenge love or detestation
But from their proper, individual deeds.
Never let memory of the sire's offense
Descend upon the son. Curtain drops.

AUTHENTIC DOCUMENTS RELATIVE TO MAJOR ANDRE.
Presuming that the readers of the foregoing Drama would be gratified by an
account of the Hero, divested of all ornament, and separated from poetic
fiction, I have collected every thing relative to him which has been made
public, and shall state it in the fullest and most simple manner, according to
the natural order of time.

LETTERS
Addressed to Miss SEWARD by Major ANDRE, when he was a youth of eighteen.
Clapton, October 3, 1769.
FROM their agreeable excursion to Shrewsbury my friends are by this time
returned to their beloved Lichfield. Once again have they beheld those
fortunate spires, the constant witnesses of all their pains and pleasures. I
can well conceive the emotions of joy which their first appearance, from the
neighboring hills, excites after absence; -- they seem to welcome you home,
and invite you to reiterate those hours of happiness, of which they are a
species of monument. I shall have an eternal love and reverence for them. Never
shall I forget the joy that danced in HONORA'S eyes, when she first showed them
to me from the Needwood Forest, on our return with you from Buxton to
Lichfield. I remember she called them the Ladies of the Valley -- their
lightness and elegance deserve the title. Oh! how I loved them from that
instant! My enthusiasm concerning them is carried farther even than yours and
HONORA'S, for every object that has a pyramidal form, recalls them to my
recollection, with a sensation, that brings the tear of pleasure into my eyes.

How happy must you have been at Shrewsbury! only that you tell me, alas! that
dear HONORA was not so well as you wished during your stay there. -- I always
hope the best. My impatient spirit rejects every obtruding idea, which I have
not fortitude to support -- Doctor Darwin's skill, and your tender care, will
remove that sad pain in her side, which makes writing troublesome and injurious
to her; which robs her poor Cher Jean A name of kindness, by which Mr. Andre
was often called by his mother and sisters, and generally adopted by the
persons mentioned in these letters.
of those precious pages, with which he flatters himself, she would otherwise
have indulged him.

So, your happiness at Shrewsbury scorned to be indebted to public amusements
-- five virgins -- united in the soft bonds of friendship! -- How I should have
liked to have made the sixth! -- But you surprise me by such an absolute
exclusion of the Beaux -- I certainly thought that when five wise virgins were
watching at midnight, it must have been in expectation of the bridegroom's
coming. We are at this instant five virgins, writing round the same table -- my
three sisters, Mr. Ewer, and myself. I beg no reflections injurious to the
honor of poor Cher Jean. My mother is gone to pay a visit, and has left us in
possession of the old coach; but as for nags, we can boast of only two
long-tails, and my sisters say they are sorry cattle, being no other than my
friend Ewer and myself, who, to say truth, have enormous pig-tails.

My dear Boissier is come to town; he has brought a little of the soldier with
him; but he is the same honest, warm, intelligent friend I always found him. He
sacrifices the town diversions, since I will not partake of them.

We are jealous of your correspondents, who are so numerous -- yet, write to
the Andres often, my dear JULIA, for who are they that will value your letters
quite as much as we value them? -- The least scrap of a letter will be received
with the greatest joy -- write, therefore, though it were only to give us the
comfort of having a piece of paper which has recently passed through your hands
-- HONORA will put in a little postscript, were it only to tell me that she is
my very sincere friend, who will neither give me love nor comfort -- Very
short, indeed, HONORA, was thy last postscript! -- But I am too presumptuous; I
will not scratch out, but I unsay -- from the little there was I received more
joy than I deserve. This Cher Jean is an impertinent fellow, but he will grow
discreet in time -- you must consider him as a poor novice of eighteen, who,
for all the sins he may commit, is sufficiently punished in the single evil of
being 120 miles from Lichfield.

My mother and sisters will go to Putney in a few days, to stay some time -- We
none of us like Clapton -- I need not care, for I am all day long in town; but
it is avoiding Scylla to fall into Charybdis. You paint to me the pleasant vale
of Stow in the richest autumnal coloring: In return I must tell you, that my
zephyrs are wafted through cracks in the wainscot; for murmuring streams I have
dirty kennels; for bleating flocks, grunting pigs; and squalling cats for birds
that incessantly warble -- I have said something of this sort in my letter to
Miss Spearman, and am twing'd with the idea of these epistles being confronted,
and that I shall recall to your memory the fat knight's love letters to Mrs.
Ford and Mrs. Page.

JULIA, perhaps thou fanciest I am merry -- Alas! But I do not wish to make you
as doleful as myself; and besides, when I would express the tender feelings of
my soul, I have no language which does them any justice; if I had, I should
regret that you could not have it fresher, and that whatever one communicates
by letter must go such a round-about way, before it reaches one's
correspondent; from the writer's heart through his head, arm, hand, pen, ink,
paper, over many a weary hill and dale, to the eye, head, and heart of the
reader. I have often regretted our not possessing a sort of faculty which
should enable our sensations, remarks, etc. to arise from their source in a
sort of exhalation, and fall upon our paper in words and phrases properly
adapted to express them, without passing through an imagination whose
operations so often fail to second those of the heart. Then what a metamorphose
should we see in people's style! How eloquent those who are truly attached! How
stupid they who falsely profess affection! Perhaps the former had never been
able to express half their regard; while the latter, by their flowers of
rhetoric, had made us believe a thousand times more than they ever felt; but
this is whimsical moralizing.

My sisters' Penserosos were dispersed on their arrival in town, by the joy of
seeing Louisa and their dear little brother Billy again, our kind and excellent
uncle Giradot, and uncle Lewis Andre. I was glad to see them; but they
complained, not without reason, of the gloom upon my countenance: Billy wept
for joy that we were returned, while poor Cher Jean was ready to weep for
sorrow. Louisa is grown still handsomer since we left her. Our sisters, Mary
and Anne, knowing your partiality to beauty, are afraid that when they shall
introduce her to you, she will put their noses out of joint. Billy is not old
enough for me to be afraid of in the rival way, else I should keep him aloof,
for his heart is formed of those affectionate materials, so dear to the
ingenuous taste of JULIA and her HONORA.

I sympathize in your resentment against the Canonical Dons, who stumpify the
heads of those good green people, The trees in the Cathedral walk in Lichfield.
beneath whose friendly shade so many of your happiest hours have glided away;
but they defy them; let them stumpify as much as they please; time will repair
the mischief; their verdant arms will again extend, and invite you to their
shelter.

The evenings grow very long; I hope your conversation round the fire will
sometimes fall on the Andres; it will be a great comfort that they are
remembered. We chink our glasses to your healths at every meal; here is to our
Lichfieldian friends, says Nanny; -- Oh -- ho, says Mary; with all my soul,
says I; alons, cries my mother; and the draught seems nectar. The libation made
us begin our uncloying theme, and so beguile the gloomy evening.

Mr. and Mrs. Seward will accept my most affectionate respects -- My male
friend at Lichfield will join in your conversation on the Andres. Among the
numerous good qualities he is possessed of, he certainly has gratitude, and
then he cannot forget those who so sincerely love and esteem him; I, in
particular, shall always recall with pleasure the happy hours I have passed in
his company; my friendship for him, and for your family, has diffused itself,
like the precious ointment from Aaron's beard, on every thing which surrounds
you; therefore I beg you would give my amities to the whole town. Persuade
HONORA to forgive the length and ardour of the enclosed, and believe me truly,

Your affectionate and faithful friend, J. ANDRE.

LETTER II.
London, October 19, 1769.
FROM the midst of books, papers, bills, and other implements of gain, let me
lift up my drowsy head a while, to converse with dear JULIA. And first, as I
know she has a fervent wish to see me a quill-driver, I must tell her, that I
begin, as most people are wont to do, to look upon my future profession with
great partiality. I no longer see it in so disadvantageous a light. Instead of
figuring a merchant as a middle aged man, with a bob wig, a rough beard, in
snuff colored clothes, grasping a guinea in his red hand; I conceive a comely
young man, with a tolerable pig-tail, wielding a pen with all the noble
fierceness of the Duke of Marlborough brandishing a truncheon upon a sign post,
surrounded with types and emblems, and canopied with cornucopiaes that
disembogue their stores upon his head; Mercuries reclined upon bales of goods;
Genii playing with pens, ink and paper; while, in perspective, his gorgeous
vessels "launched on the bosom of the silver Thames," are wafting to distant
lands the produce of this commercial nation. Thus all the mercantile glories
crowd on my fancy, emblazoned in the most refulgent coloring of an ardent
imagination -- Borne on her soaring pinions, I wing my flight to the time when
Heaven shall have crowned my labors with success and opulence. I see sumptuous
palaces rising to receive me. I see orphans and widows, and painters, fiddlers,
and poets, and builders, protected and encouraged; and when the fabric is
pretty near finished by my shattered pericranium, I cast my eyes around, and
find John Andre, by a small coal fire, in a gloomy compting-house in Warnford
court, nothing so little as what he has been making himself, and in all
probability never to be much more than he is at present. But oh! my dear
HONORA! it is for thy sake only I wish for wealth. You say she was somewhat
better at the time you wrote last. I must flatter myself that she will soon be
without any remains of this threatening disease.

It is seven o'clock; you and HONORA, with two or three more select friends,
are now probably encircling your dressing room fireplace. What would I not
give to enlarge that circle! The idea of a clean hearth, and a snug circle
round it, formed by a few sincere friends, transports me. You seem combined
together against the inclemency of the weather, the hurry, bustle, ceremony,
censoriousness, and envy of the world. The purity, the warmth, the kindling
influence of fire, to all for whom it is kindled, is a good emblem of the
friendship of such amiable minds as JULIA'S and her HONORA'S. Since I cannot be
there in reality, pray imagine me with you; admit me to your conversations;
think how I wish for the blessing of joining them! and be persuaded that I take
part in all your pleasures, in the dear hope, that ever it be very long, your
blazing hearth will burn again for me. Pray keep me a place; let the poker,
tongs, or shovel represent me; but you have Dutch tiles, which are infinitely
better; so let Moses, or Aaron, or Balaam's ass, be my representative.

But time calls me to Clapton. I quit you abruptly till tomorrow: when, if I
do not tear the nonsense I have been writing, I may perhaps increase its
quantity. Signora Cynthia is in clouded majesty. Silvered with her beams I am
about to jog to Clapton upon my own stumps; musing as I homeward plod my way.
Ah! need I name the subject of my contemplation!

Thursday.

I had a sweet walk home last night, and found the Claptonians, with their fair
guest, a Miss Mourgue, very well. My sisters send their amities, and will write
in a few days.

This morning I returned to town. It has been the finest day imaginable. A
solemn mildness was diffused throughout the blue horizon; its light was clear
and distinct, rather than dazzling; the serene beams of the autumnal sun,
gilded hills, variegated woods, glittering spires, ruminating herds, bounding
flocks, all combined to enchant the eyes, expand the heart, and "chase all
sorrow but despair." In the midst of such a scene, no lesser grief can prevent
our sympathy with nature -- A calmness, a benevolent disposition seizes us with
sweet insinuating power. The very brute creation seem sensible of these
beauties; there is a species of mild cheerfulness in the face of a lamb, which
I have but indifferently expressed in a corner of my paper; and a demure
contented look in an ox, which, in the fear of expressing still worse, I leave
unattempted.

Business calls me away. I must dispatch my letter. Yet, what does it contain?
No matter, you like any thing better than news. Indeed, you never told me so,
but I have an intuitive knowledge upon the subject, from the sympathy which I
have constantly perceived in the taste of JULIA and Cher Jean. What is it to
you or me,

If here in the city we have nothing but riot,
If the Spitalfield weavers cannot be kept quiet.
If the weather is fine, or the streets should be dirty,
Or if Mr. Dick Wilson died aged of thirty?
But, if I was to hearken to the versifying grumbling I feel within me, I
should fill my paper, and not have room left to entreat that you would plead my
cause to HONORA more eloquently than the enclosed letter has the power of
doing. Apropos of verses, you desire me to recollect my random description of
the engaging appearance of the charming Mrs. --. Here it is at your service --

Then rustling and bustling the lady comes down,
With a flaming red face, and a broad yellow gown,
And a hobbling out-of-breath gait, and a frown.
This little French cousin of ours, Delarisee, was my sister Mary's play-fellow
at Paris. His sprightliness engages my sisters extremely. Doubtless they talk
much of him to you in their letters.

How sorry I am to bid you adieu! Oh let me not be forgot by the friends most
dear to you at Lichfield! Lichfield! Ah! of what magic letters is that little
word composed! How graceful it looks when it is written! Let nobody talk to me
of its original meaning. "The field of blood!" Oh! no such thing! It is the
field of joy! "The beautiful city, that lifts up her fair head in the valley,
and says, I am, and there is none beside me!" Who says she is vain? JULIA will
not say so -- nor yet HONORA; and least of all their devoted

JOHN ANDRE.

LETTER III.
Clapton, November 1, 1769.
MY ears still ring with the sounds of oh Jack! oh Jack* How do the dear
Lichfieldians? -- What do they say? -- What are they about? -- What did you do
while you were with them? -- Have patience, said I, good people; and began my
story, which they devoured with as much joyful avidity as Adam did Gabriel's
tidings of heaven. -- My mother and sisters are all very well, and delighted
with their little Frenchman, who is a very agreeable lad.

Surely you applaud the fortitude with which I left you! Did I not come off
with flying colors? -- It was a great effort; for, alas! this recreant heart
did not second the smiling courage of the countenance; nor is it yet as it
ought to be, from the hopes it may reasonably entertain of seeing you all again
ever the winter's dreary hours are past. -- JULIA, my dear JULIA, gild them
with tidings of our beloved HONORA! -- Oh that you may be enabled to tell me
that she regains her health, and her charming vivacity! Your sympathizing heart
partakes all the joys and pains of your friends. -- Never can I forget its kind
offices, which were of such moment to my peace! -- Mine is formed for
friendship; and I am blessed in being able to place so well the purest passion of
an ingenuous mind! -- How am I honored in Mr. and Mrs. Seward's attachment to
me! -- Charming were the anticipations which beguiled the long tracts of hill,
and dale, and plain, that divide London from Lichfield! -- With what delight my
eager eyes drank their first view of the dear spires! -- What rapture did I not
feel on entering your gates! in flying up the hall steps! in rushing into the
dining room! in meeting the gladdened eyes of dear JULIA and her enchanting
friend! -- That instant convinced me of the truth of Rousseau's observation,
"That there are moments worth ages." Shall not those moments return? Ah JULIA!
the cold hand of absence is heavy upon the heart of your poor Cher Jean -- he
is forced to hammer into it perpetually every consoling argument that the magic
wand of hope can conjure up, viz. that every moment of industrious absence
advances his journey, you know whither. -- I may sometimes make excursions to
Lichfield, and bask in the light of my HONORA'S eyes! -- Sustain me hope!
nothing on my part shall be wanting which may induce thee to fulfill thy
blossoming promises.

The happy, social circle, JULIA, HONORA, Miss S -- n, Miss B -- n, her
brother, Mr. S -- e, Mr. R -- n, etc. etc. are now, perhaps, enlivening your
dressing room, the dear blue region, as HONORA calls it, with the sensible
observation, the tasteful criticism, or the elegant song; dreading the iron
tongue of the nine o'clock bell, which disperses the beings whom friendship and
kindred virtues had drawn together. -- My imagination attaches itself to all,
even the inanimate objects which surround HONORA and her JULIA; that have
beheld their graces and virtues expand and ripen; my dear HONORA'S, from their
infant bud.

The sleepy Claptonian train are gone to bed, somewhat wearied with their
excursion to Enfield, whither they have this day carried their little
Frenchman; so great a favorite, the parting was quite tragical. I walked hither
from town, as usual, tonight -- no hour of the twenty-four is so precious to
me as that devoted to this solitary walk. -- Oh, my friend! I am far from
possessing the patient frame of mind which I so continually invoke! -- Why is
Lichfield an hundred and twenty miles from me? -- There is no moderation in the
distance! Fifty or sixty miles had been a great deal too much; but then there
would have been less opposition from authority to my frequent visits. -- I
conjure you supply the want of these blessings by frequent letters. I must not,
will not ask them of HONORA, since the use of the pen is forbid to her
declining health. I will content myself, as usual, with a postscript from her
in your epistles. -- My sisters are charmed with the packet which arrived
yesterday, and which they will answer soon.

As yet I have said nothing of our journey. We met an entertaining Irish
gentleman at Dunchurch, and being fellow sufferers in cold and hunger, joined
interests, ordered four horses, and stuffed three in a chaise. -- It is not to
you I need apologize for talking in raptures of an higler, whom we met on our
road. His cart had passed us, and was at a considerable distance, when looking
back, he perceived that our chaise had stopped, and that the driver seemed
mending something. He ran up to him, and with a face full of honest anxiety,
pity, good nature, and every sweet affection under heaven, asked him if he
wanted any thing; that he had plenty of nails, ropes, etc. in his cart -- That
wretch of a postilion made no other reply than, "We want nothing, master." From
the same impulse, the good Irishman, Mr. Till, and myself, thrust our heads
instantly out of the chaise, and tried to recompense to the honest creature the
surly reply, by every kind and grateful acknowledgment, and by forcing upon him
a little pecuniary tribute. My benevolence will be the warmer, while I live,
for the treasured remembrance of this higler's countenance.

I know you interest yourself in my destiny -- I have now completely subdued my
aversion to the profession of a merchant, and hope in time to acquire an
inclination for it. -- Yet, God forbid I should ever love what I am to make the
object of my attention! -- that vile trash, which I care not for, but only as
it may be the future means of procuring the blessing of my soul -- Thus all my
mercantile calculations go to the tune of dear HONORA. -- When an impertinent
consciousness whispers in my ear, that I am not of the right stuff for a
merchant, I draw my HONORA'S picture from my bosom, and the sight of that dear
talisman so inspires my industry, that no toil appears oppressive.

The poetic task you set me is in a sad method -- My head and heart are too
full of other matters to be engrossed by a draggle-tailed wench of the
Heliconian puddle.

I am going to try my interest in Parliament -- How you stare! -- It is to
procure a frank. -- Be so good to give the enclosed to HONORA -- it will speak
to her -- and do you say every thing that is kind of me to every other
distinguished friend of the dressing room circle -- encourage them in their
obliging desire of scribbling in your letters; but do not let them take
HONORA'S corner of the sheet.

Adieu! -- May you all possess that cheerfulness denied to your Cher Jean. I
fear it hurts my mother to see my musing moods; but I can neither help nor
overcome them. The near hopes of another excursion to Lichfield could alone
disperse every gloomy vapor of my imagination.

Again, and yet again, adieu!

J. ANDRE.

WE find annexed to Miss SEWARD'S Monody on Major Andre this note: --

Miss HONORA S --, to whom Mr. Andre's attachment was of such singular
constancy, died, in a consumption, a few months before he suffered death at
Tappan. She had married another gentleman four years after her engagement with
Mr. Andre had been dissolved by parental authority.

By another note we are informed, that, on receiving the tidings of HONORA'S
marriage, Mr. Andre quitted his profession as a merchant, and joined the
British army in America.

Another note has these words: --

A letter from Major Andre to one of his friends, written a few years ago,
contained the following sentence: -- I have been taken prisoner by the
Americans, and stripped of every thing except the picture of HONORA, which I
concealed in my mouth. Preserving that, I yet think myself fortunate.

In the year 1780 Major Andre amused himself and his friends by writing the
following little Poem, called the Cow Chase; and Mr. James Rivington, at that
time printer to his Britannic Majesty in New York, says, that the poet gave him
the last Canto the day before he left town on the fatal expedition, and that it
appeared in the Royal Gazette the morning of the day Andre was taken. The last
stanza has been called prophetic; and the puerile idea has been entertained by
many, and even adopted by Miss Seward, that this trifling performance
influenced the Court Martial in their decision on the trial of its author!
THE COW CHASE.
CANTO I.
TO drive the kine one summer's morn,
The tanner took his way;
The calf shall rue that is unborn
The jumbling of that day.
And Wayne descending steers shall know,
And tauntingly deride,
And call to mind in every low
The tanning of his hide.
Yet Bergen cows still ruminate
Unconscious in the stall,
What mighty means were used to get
And loose them after all.
For many heroes bold and brave
From New-Bridge and Tapaan,
And those that drink Passaick's wave,
And those that eat soupaan;
And sons of distant Delaware,
And still remoter Shannon.
And Major Lee, with horses rare,
And Proctor with his cannon:
All wondrous proud in arms they came;
What hero could refuse,
To tread the rugged path to fame,
Who had a pair of shoes?
At six the host with sweating buff,
Arrived at freedom's pole;
When Wayne, who thought he would time enough,
Thus speechified the whole:
"O ye whom glory does unite,
Who freedom's cause espouse,
Whether the wing that is doomed to fight,
Or that to drive the cows!
Ere yet you tempt your further way,
Or into action come,
Hear, soldiers, what I have to say,
And take a pint of rum.
Intemp'rate valor then will string
Each nervous arm the better;
So all the land shall IO sing,
And read the Gen'ral's letter.
Know that some paltry refugees
Whom I Have a mind to fight,
Are playing h -- l amongst the trees,
That grow on yonder height.
Their fort and block-houses we'll level,
And deal a horrid slaughter;
We'll drive the scoundrels to the devil,
* * * * * * * * * * *
I, under cover of the attack,
Whilst you are all at blows,
From English Neighb'rood and Tinack
Will drive away the cows.
For well you know the latter is
The serious operation;
And fighting with the refugees
Is only demonstration."
His daring words from all the crowd
Such great applause did gain,
That every man declared aloud
For serious work with Wayne.
Then from the cask of rum once more
They took a heady jill,
When one and all they loudly swore
They Would fight upon the hill.
But here -- the Muse has not a strain
Befitting such great deeds;
Huzza, they cried, huzza for Wayne
* * * * * * * * * * * *
CANTO II.
NEAR his meridian pomp the sun
Had journey'd from the horizon,
When fierce the dusky tribe moved on,
Of heroes drunk as poison.
The sounds confused of boasting oaths,
Re-echoed through the wood;
Some vowed to sleep in dead men's clothes
And some to swim in blood.
At Irvine's nod 'twas fine to see
The left prepare to fight,
The while the drovers, Wayne and Lee,
Drew off upon the right.
Which Irvine 'twas, Fame don't relate,
Nor can the Muse assist her,
Whether 'twas he that cocks a hat,
Or he that * * * * * *
For greatly one was signalized,
That fought at Chesnut-Hill;
And Canada immortalized
The vender of the pill.
Yet the attendance upon Proctor,
They both might have to boast of;
For there was business for the doctor,
And hats to be disposed of.
Let none uncandidly infer,
That Stirling wanted spunk;
The self-made peer had sure been there,
But that the peer was drunk.
But turn we to the Hudson's banks,
Where stood the modest train,
With purpose firm, though slender ranks,
Nor cared a pin for Wayne.
For them the unrelenting hand
Of rebel fury drove,
And tore from every genial band,
Of friendship and of love.
And some within a dungeon's gloom,
By mock tribunals laid;
Had waited long a cruel doom,
Impending over their heads.
Here one bewails a brother's fate,
There one a sire demands,
Cut off, alas! before their date,
By ignominious hands.
And silvered grandsires here appeared,
In deep distress serene,
Of reverend manners, that declared
The better days they would seen.
Oh cursed rebellion! these are thine,
Thine are these tales of woe;
Shall at thy dire insatiate shrine
Blood never cease to flow?
And now the foe began to lead
His forces to the attack;
Balls whistling unto balls succeed,
And make the block-house crack.
No shot could pass if you will take
The Gen'ral's word for true;
But it is a d -- ble mistake,
For every shot went through.
The firmer as the rebels pressed,
The loyal heroes stand;
Virtue had nerv'd each honest breast,
And industry each hand.
"In Vide Lee's trial.
valor's phrenzy, Hamilton
"Rode like a soldier big,
"And secretary Harrison,
"With pen stuck in his wig."
"But least their chieftain Washington,
"Should mourn them in the mumps,
"The fate of Withrington to shun,
"They fought behind the stumps."
But ah, Thadaeus Posset, why
Should thy poor soul elope?
And why should Titus Hooper die,
Ah die -- without a rope?
Apostate Murphy, thou to whom
Fair Shela never was cruel,
In death shall hear her mourn thy doom,
Auch would you die my jewel?
Thee Nathan Pumpkin I lament,
Of melancholy fate,
The gray goose stolen as he went,
In his heart's blood was wet.
Now as the fight was further fought,
And balls began to thicken,
The fray assumed, the Generals thought,
The color of a licking.
Yet undismayed the chiefs command,
And, to redeem the day,
Cry, SOLDIERS CHARGE! they hear, they stand,
They turn, and run away.
CANTO III.
NOT all delights the bloody spear,
Or horrid din of battle,
There are, I Am sure, who'd like to hear,
A word about the cattle.
The chief whom we beheld of late,
Near Schralenberg haranguing,
At Yan Van Poop's, unconscious (...),
Of Irvine's hearty banging.
Whilst valiant Lee, with courage wild,
Most bravely did oppose
The tears of woman and of child,
Who begged he would leave the cows.
But Wayne, of sympathising heart,
Required a relief,
Not all the blessings could impart
Of battle or of beef;
For now a prey to female charms,
His soul took more delight in
A lovely A deity of the woods.
Hamadryad's arms,
Than cow driving or fighting:
A nymph, the refugees had drove,
Far from her native tree,
Just happened to be on the move,
When up came Wayne and Lee.
She in mad Anthony's fierce eye,
The hero saw portrayed;
And all in tears she took him by
-- The bridle of his jade.
Hear, said the nymph, O great commander!
No human lamentations;
The trees you see them cutting yonder,
Are all my near relations.
And I, forlorn! implore thine aid,
To free the sacred grove;
So shall thy prowess be repaid
With an Immortal's love.
Now some, to prove she was a Goddess,
Said this enchanting fair
Had late retired fore the bodies, A cant appellation given amongst the
soldiery to the corpse that has the honor to guard his Majesty's person.

In all the pomp of war.
That drums and merry fifes had played
To honor her retreat,
And Cunningham himself conveyed
The lady through the street.
Great Wayne, by soft compassion swayed,
To no inquiry stoops,
But takes the fair afflicted maid
Right into Yan Van Poop's.
So Roman Anthony, they say,
Disgraced the imperial banner,
And for a gypsy lost the day,
Like Anthony the tanner.
* * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * *
When drums and colors, cow and calf,
Came down the road amain.
All in a cloud of dust were seen
The sheep, the horse, the goat,
The gentle heifer, ass obscene,
The yearling and the shoat.
And pack-horses with fowls came by,
Befeather'd on each side,
Like Pegasus, the horse that I
And other poets ride.
Sublime upon his stirrups rose
The mighty Lee behind,
And drove the terror-smitten cows
Like chaff before the wind.
But sudden see the woods above
Pour down another corpse;
All helter skelter in a drove,
Like that I sung before.
Irvine and terror in the van
Came flying all abroad;
And cannon, colors, horse and man,
Ran tumbling to the road.
Still as he fled, 'twas Irvine's cry,
And his example too,
"Run on, my merry men all -- For why?
The shot will not go through."
Five refugees ('it is true) were found
Stiff on the block-house floor,
But then it is thought the shot went round,
And in at the back door.
As when too kennels in the street,
Swelled with a recent rain,
In gushing streams together meet,
And seek the neighboring drain:
So met these dung-born tribes in one,
As swift in their career;
And so to New-Bridge they ran on, --
But all the cows got clear.
Poor parson --, all in wonder,
Saw the returning train,
And mourned to Wayne the lack of plunder
For them to steal again.
For 'twas his right to seize the spoil, and
To share with each commander,
As he had done at Staten-Island,
With frost-bit Alexander. Lord Stirling before mentioned.

In his dismay the frantic priest
Began to grow prophetic,
You Would swore, to see his laboring breast,
He Would taken an emetic.
I view a future day, said he,
Brighter than this day dark is,
And you shall see what you shall see,
Ha! ha! one pretty Marquis;
And he shall come to Paules-hook,
And great achievements think on;
And make a bow, and take a look,
Like satan over Lincoln.
And all the land around shall glory
To see the Frenchmen caper,
And pretty Susan tell the story
In the next Chatham paper.
This solemn prophecy, of course,
Gave all much consolation,
Except to Wayne, who lost his horse
Upon the great occasion.
His horse that carried all his prog,
His military speeches,
His corn-stalk whisky for his grog,
Blue stockings, and brown breeches.
And now I Have closed my epic strain,
I tremble as I show it,
Lest this same warrior-drover, Wayne,
Should ever catch the poet.
TRIAL OF MAJOR JOHN ANDRE.
Extracts of Letters from General WASHINGTON to the President of Congress.
Robinson's House, in the Highlands, Sept. 26, 1780. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform Congress, that I arrived here yesterday about
twelve o'clock, on my return from Hartford. Some hours previous to my arrival,
Major General Arnold went from his quarters, which were this place, and, as it
was supposed, over the river to the garrison at West-Point, whither I proceeded
myself, in order to visit the post* I found General Arnold had not been there
during the day; and, on my return to his quarters, he was still absent. In the
mean time, a packet had arrived from Lieut. Colonel Jameson, announcing the
capture of a John Anderson, who was endeavoring to go to New York, with
several interesting and important papers, all in the handwriting of General
Arnold. This was also accompanied with a letter from the prisoner, avowing
himself to be Major John Andre, Adjutant-General to the British army, relating
the manner of his capture, and endeavoring to show that he did not come under
the description of a spy. From these several circumstances, and information
that the General seemed to be thrown into some degree of agitation, on
receiving a letter a little time before he went from his quarters, I was led to
conclude immediately that he had heard of Major Andre's captivity, and that he
would, if possible, escape to the enemy; and accordingly took such measures as
appeared the most probable to apprehend him. But he had embarked in a barge,
and proceeded down the river, under a flag, to the Vulture ship of war, which
lay at some miles below Stony and Verplanck's Points. He wrote me a letter
after he got on board. -- Major Andre is not yet arrived, but I hope he is
secure, and that he will be here today. I have been, and am taking
precautions, which I trust will prove effectual, to prevent the important
consequences which this conduct, on the part of General Arnold, was intended to
produce. I do not know the party that took Major Andre, but it is said that it
consisted only of a few militia, who acted in such a manner upon the occasion,
as does them the highest honor, and proves them to be men of great virtue. As
soon as I know their names, I shall take pleasure in transmitting them to
Congress.

Paramus, October 7, 1780. SIR,
I have the honor to enclose Congress a copy of the proceedings of a Board of
General Officers in the case of Major Andre, Adjutant-General to the British
army. This officer was executed, in pursuance of the opinion of the Board, on
Monday, the 2d instant, at twelve o'clock, at our late camp, at Tappan. Besides
the proceedings, I transmit copies of sundry letters respecting the matter,
which are all that passed on the subject, not included in the proceedings.

I have now the pleasure to communicate the names of the three persons who
captured Major Andre, and who refused to release him, notwithstanding the most
earnest importunities and assurances of a liberal reward on his part. Their
names are, John Paulding, David Williams, and Isaac Van Were.

Proceedings of a Board of General Officers, held by order of his Excellency
General WASHINGTON, Commander in Chief of the Army of the United States of
America, respecting Major ANDRE, Adjutant-General of the British Army,
September the 29th, 1780, at Tappan, in the State of New York.
PRESENT.
Major General Green, President. Major General Lord Stirling, Major General St.
Clair, Major General the Marquis la Fayette, Major General How, Major General
the Baron de Steuben, Brigadier-General Parsons, Brigadier-General Clinton,
Brigadier-General Knox, Brigadier-General Glover, Brigadier-General Patterson,
Brigadier-General Hand, Brigadier-General Huntington, Brigadier-General Stark,
John Lawrence, Judge-Advocate-General.
MAJOR ANDRE, Adjutant-General to the British army, was brought before the
Board, and the following letter from General Washington to the Board, dated
Headquarters, Tappan, September 29, 1780, was laid before them, and read.

GENTLEMEN,
Major Andre, Adjutant-General to the British army, will be brought before you
for your examination. He came within our lines in the night, on an interview
with Major General Arnold, and in an assumed character, and was taken within
our lines, in a disguised habit, with a pass under a feigned name, and with the
enclosed papers concealed upon him. After a careful examination, you will be
pleased, as speedily as possible, to report a precise state of his case,
together with your opinion of the light in which he ought to be considered, and
the punishment that ought to be inflicted. The Judge-Advocate will attend to
assist in the examination, who has sundry other papers, relative to this
matter, which he will lay before the Board.

I have the honor to be, gentlemen, Your most obedient and humble servant, G.
WASHINGTON.
The Board of General Officers convened at Tappan.




The names of the officers composing the Board were read to Major Andre, and on
his being asked whether he confessed the matters contained in the letter from
his Excellency General Washington to the Board, or denied them, he said, "in
addition to his letter to General Washington, dated Salem, the 24th September,
1780," which was read to the Board, and acknowledged by Major Andre to have
been written by him, which letter is as follows: Salem, September 24, 1780. SIR,
WHAT I have as yet said concerning myself, was in the justifiable attempt to
be extricated; I am too little accustomed to duplicity to have succeeded.

I beg your Excellency will be persuaded that no alteration in the temper of my
mind, or apprehension for my safety, induces me to take the step of addressing
you, but that it is to secure myself from an imputation of having assumed a
mean character, for treacherous purposes or self-interest -- A conduct
incompatible with the principles that actuated me, as well as with my condition
in life.

It is to vindicate my fame that I speak, and not to solicit security.

The person in your possession is Major John Andre, Adjutant-General to the
British army.

The influence of one commander in the army of his adversary, is an advantage
taken in war. A correspondence for this purpose I held; as confidential (in the
present instance) with his Excellency Sir Henry Clinton.

To favor it, I agreed to meet upon ground not within posts of either army, a
person who was to give me intelligence: I came up in the Vulture man of war,
for this effect, and was fetched, by a boat from the shore, to the beach: Being
there, I was told that the approach of day would prevent my return, and that I
must be concealed until the next night. I was in my regimentals, and had fairly
risked my person.

Against my stipulation, my intention, and without my knowledge before hand, I
was conducted within one of your posts. Your Excellency may conceive my
sensation on this occasion, and will imagine how much more I must have been
affected, by a refusal to reconduct me back the next night, as I had been
brought. Thus become a prisoner, I had to concert my escape. I quitted my
uniform, was passed another way in the night without the American posts to
neutral ground, and informed I was beyond all armed parties, and left to press
for New York. I was taken at Tarry-Town by some volunteers.

Thus, as I have had the honor to relate, was I betrayed (being
Adjutant-General of the British army) into the vile condition of an enemy in
disguise within your posts.

Having avowed myself a British officer, I have nothing to reveal but what
relates to myself, which is true on the honor of an officer and a gentleman.

The request I have to make your Excellency, and I am conscious I address
myself well, is, that in any rigor policy may dictate, a decency of conduct
toward me may mark, that though unfortunate, I am branded with nothing
dishonorable, as no motive could be mine but the service of my King, and as I
was involuntarily an impostor.

Another request is, that I may be permitted to write an open letter to Sir
Henry Clinton, and another to a friend for clothes and linen.

I take the liberty to mention the condition of some gentlemen at Charleston,
who being either on parole or under protection, were engaged in a conspiracy
against us. Though their situation is not similar, they are objects who may be
set in exchange for me, or are persons whom the treatment I receive might
affect.

It is no less, Sir, in a confidence in the generosity of your mind, than on
account of your superior station, that I have chosen to importune you with this
letter.

I have the honor to be, with great respect, Sir, Your Excellency's most
obedient, and most humble servant, JOHN ANDRE, Adjutant-General.
His Excellency General Washington, etc. etc. etc.






That he came on shore from the Vulture sloop of war, in the night of the
twenty-first of September instant, somewhere under the Haverstraw Mountain:
That the boat he came on shore in carried no flag; and that he had on a surtout
coat over his regimentals, and that he wore his surtout coat when he was taken:
That he met General Arnold on the shore, and had an interview with him there.
He also said, that when he left the Vulture sloop of war, it was understood
that he was to return that night; but it was then doubted, and if he could not
return, he was promised to be concealed on shore in a place of safety, until
the next night, when he was to return in the same manner he came on shore; and
when the next day came, he was solicitous to get back, and made inquiries in
the course of the day how he should return, when he was informed he could not
return that way, and he must take the route he did afterward. He also said,
that the first notice he had of his being within any of our posts, was, being
challenged by the sentry, which was the first night he was on shore. He also
said, that the evening of the twenty-second of September instant, he passed
King's-Ferry, between our posts of Stony and Verplanck's Points, in the dress
he is at present in, and which he said was not his regimentals, and which dress
he procured, after he landed from the Vulture, and when he was within our post;
and that he was proceeding to New York, but was taken on his way at Tarry-Town,
as he has mentioned in his letter, on Saturday the twenty-third of September
instant, about nine o'clock in the morning.

The following papers were laid before the Board and shown to Major Andre, who
confessed to the Board, that they were found on him when he was taken, and said
they were concealed in his boot, except the pass: --

A pass from General Arnold to John Anderson, which name Major Andre
acknowledged he assumed.

Artillery orders, September 5, 1780.

Estimate of the force at West-Point and its dependencies, September, 1780.

Estimate of men to man the works at West-Point, etc.

Return of ordnance at West-Point, September, 1780.

Remarks on works at West-Point.

Copy of a state of matters laid before a council of war, by his Excellency
General Washington, held the 6th of September, 1780.

A letter signed John Anderson, dated September 7, 1780, to Colonel Sheldon,
Lest it should be supposed that Col. Sheldon, to whom the above letter is
addressed, was privy to the plot carrying on by General Arnold, it is to be
observed, that the letter was found among Arnold's papers, and had been
transmitted by Colonel Sheldon, who, it appears from a letter of the 9th of
September to Arnold, which enclosed it, had never heard of John Anderson
before. Arnold, in his answer on the 10th, acknowledged he had not communicated
it to him, though he had informed him that he expected a person would come from
New York, for the purpose of bringing him intelligence.
was also laid before the Board, and shown to Major Andre, which he
acknowledged to have been written by him, and is as follows: SIR, New York, the
7 th Sept. 1780.
I AM told my name is made known to you, and that I may hope your indulgence in
permitting me to meet a friend near your out-posts. I will endeavor to obtain
permission to go out with a flag, which will be sent to Dobb's Ferry on Monday
next, the 11th, at twelve o'clock, when I shall be happy to meet Mr. G --. It
appears by the same letter, that Arnold had written to Mr. Anderson under the
signature of Gustavus. His words are "I was obliged to write with great caution
to him, my letter was signed Gustavus, to prevent any discovery, in case it
fell into the hands of the enemy."
Should I not be allowed to go, the officer who is to command the escort,
between whom and myself no distinction need be made, can speak on the affair.

Let me entreat you, Sir, to favor a matter so interesting to the parties
concerned, and which is of so private a nature, that the public on neither side
can be injured by it.

I shall be happy on my part in doing any act of kindness to you, in a family
or property concern of a similar nature

I trust I shall not be detained, but should any old grudge be a cause for it,
I shall rather ^^k that, than neglect the business in question, or assume a
mysterious character to carry on an innocent affair, and, as friends have
advised, get to your lines by stealth. I am, Sir, with all regard.

Your most obedient humble servant, JOHN ANDERSON.
Col. Sheldon.






Major Andre observed that this letter could be of no force in the case in
question, as it was written in New York, when he was under the orders of
General Clinton; but that it tended to prove that it was not his intention to
come within our lines.

The Board having interrogated Major Andre about his conception of his coming
on shore under the sanction of a flag, he said, that it was impossible for him
to suppose he came on shore under that sanction; and added, that if he came on
shore under that sanction, he certainly might have returned under it.

Major Andre having acknowledged the preceding facts* and being asked whether
he had any thing to say respecting them, answered, he left them to operate with
the Board.

The examination of Major Andre being concluded, he was remanded into custody.

The following letters were laid before the Board, and read: -- Benedict
Arnold's letter to General Washington, dated September 25, 1780; Colonel
Robinson's letter to General Washington, dated September 25, 1780; and General
Clinton's letter, dated 26th Semptember, 1780, (enclosing a letter of the same
date from Benedict Arnold) to General Washington.

SIR, On board the Vulture, Sept. 25, 1780.
THE heart which is conscious of its own rectitude, cannot attempt to palliate
a step which the world may censure as wrong; I have ever acted from a principle
of love to my country, since the commencement of the present unhappy contest
between Great Britain and the colonies; the same principle of love to my
country actuates my present conduct, however it may appear inconsistent to the
world, who very seldom judge right of any man's actions.

I have no favor to ask for myself. I have too often experienced the
ingratitude of my country to attempt it; but from the known humanity of your
Excellency, I am induced to ask your protection for Mrs. Arnold, from every
insult and injury that the mistaken vengeance of my country may expose her to.
It ought to fall only on me; she is as good and as innocent as an angel, and is
incapable of doing wrong. I beg she may be permitted to return to her friends
in Philadelphia, or to come to me, as she may choose: from your Excellency I
have no fears on her account, but she may suffer from the mistaken fury of the
country.

I have to request that the enclosed letter may be delivered to Mrs. Arnold,
and she permitted to write to me.

I have also to ask that my clothes and baggage, which are of little
consequence, may be sent to me; if required, their value shall be paid for in
money.

I have the honor to be, with great regard and esteem. Your Excellency's most
obedient humble servant, B. ARNOLD.
His Excellency General Washington.


N. B. In justice to the gentlemen of my family, Colonel Varick and Major
Franks, I think myself in honor bound to declare, that they, as well as Joshua
Smith, Esquire. (who I know is suspected) are totally ignorant of any transactions
of mine, that they had reason to believe were injurious to the public.




SIR, Vulture, off Sinsinck, Sept. 25, 1780.
I AM this moment informed that Major Andre, Adjutant-General of his Majesty's
army in America, is detained as a prisoner by the army under your command: it
is, therefore, incumbent on me to inform you of the manner of his falling into
your hands. He went up with a flag at the request of General Arnold, on public
business with him, and had his permit to return by land to New York. Under
these circumstances Major Andre cannot be ^^^^ined by you, without the greatest
violation of flags, and contrary to the custom and usage of all nations; and*
as I imagine you will see this matter in the same point of view as I do, I must
desire that you will order him to be set at liberty, and allowed to return
immediately. Every step Major Andre took was by the advice and direction of
General Arnold, even that of taking a feigned name, and of course not liable to
censure for it.

I am, Sir, not forgetting former acquaintance, Your very humble servant, BEV.
ROBINSON, Col. Loyal Americans.
His Excellency General Washington.




SIR, New York, Sept. 26, 1780.
BEING informed that the King's Adjutant-General in America has been stopped
under Major General Arnold's passports, and is detained a prisoner in your
Excellency's army, I have the honor to inform you, Sir, that I permitted Major
Andre to go to Major General Arnold, at the particular request of that general
officer. You will perceive, Sir, by the enclosed paper, that a flag of truce
was sent to receive Major Andre, and passports granted for his return: I
therefore can have no doubt but your Excellency will immediately direct, that
this officer has permission to return to my orders at New York.

I have the honor to be, your Excellency's most obedient and most humble
servant. H. CLINTON.
His Excellency General Washington.




SIR, New York. Sept. 26, 1780.
IN answer to your Excellency's message, respecting your Adjutant-General,
Major Andre, and desiring my idea of the reasons why he is detained, being
under my passports, I have the honor to inform you, Sir, that I apprehend a few
hours must return Major Andre to your Excellency's orders, as that officer is
assuredly under the protection of a flag of truce sent by me to him, for the
purpose of a conversation which I requested to hold with him relating to
myself, and which I wished to communicate through that officer to your
Excellency.

I commanded at the time at West-Point, had an undoubted right to send my flag
of truce for Major Andre, who came to me under that protection, and having held
my conversation with him, I delivered him confidential papers in my own
handwriting, to deliver to your Excellency. Thinking it much properer he
should return by land, I directed him to make use of the feigned name of John
Anderson, under which he had, by my direction, come on shore, and gave him my
passports to go to the White Plains, on his way to New York. This officer
cannot therefore fail of being immediately sent to New York, as he was invited
to a conversation with me, for which I sent him a flag of truce, and finally
gave him passports for his safe return to your Excellency; all which I had then
a right to do, being in the actual service of America, under the orders of
General Washington, and commanding general at West-Point and its dependencies.

I have the honor to be, your Excellency's most obedient and very humble
servant, B. ARNOLD.
His Excellency Sir Henry Clinton.




The Board having considered the letter from his Excellency General Washington
respecting Major Andre, Adjutant-General to the British army, the confession of
Major Andre, and the papers produced to them, REPORT to his Excellency the
Commander in Chief, the following facts, which appear to them relative to Major
Andre.

First, That he came on shore from the Vulture sloop of war, in the night of
the twenty-first of September instant, on an interview with General Arnold, in
a private and secret manner.

Secondly, That he changed his dress within our lines, and under a feigned
name, and in a disguised habit, passed our works at Stony and Verplanck's
Points, the evening of the twenty-second of September instant, and was taken
the morning of the twenty-third of September instant, at Tarry-Town, in a
disguised habit, being then on his way to New York; and when taken, he had in
his possession several papers, which contained intelligence for the enemy.

The Board having maturely considered these facts, DO ALSO REPORT to his
Excellency General Washington, that Major Andre, Adjutant-General to the
British army, ought to be considered as a Spy from the enemy, and that
agreeable to the law and usage of nations, it is their opinion, he ought to
suffer death.

Nathaniel Green, Major General, President. Stirling, Major General. Ar. St.
Clair, Major General. La Fayette, Major General. R. How, Major General.
Steuben, Major General. Samuel H. Parsons, Brigadier-General. James Clinton,
Brigadier-General. H. Knox, Brigadier-General of Artillery. John Glover,
Brigadier-General. John Patterson, Brigadier-General. Edward Hand,
Brigadier-General. J. Huntington, Brigadier-General. John Stark,
Brigadier-General. John Lawrence, Judge-Advocate-General.
APPENDIX.
Copy of a Letter from Major Andre, Adjutant-General, to Sir Henry Clinton, K.
B. etc. etc.
SIR, Tappan, Sept. 29, 1780.
YOUR Excellency is doubtless already apprized of the manner in which I was
taken, and possibly of the serious light in which my conduct is considered, and
the rigorous determination that is impending.

Under these circumstances, I have obtained General Washington's permission to
send you this letter; the object of which is, to remove from your breast any
suspicion, that I could imagine I was bound by your Excellency's orders to
expose myself to what has happened. The events of coming within an enemy's
posts, and of changing my dress, which led me to my present situation, were
contrary to my own intentions, as they were to your orders; and the circuitous
route, which I took to return, was imposed (perhaps unavoidably) without
alternative upon me.

I am perfectly tranquil in mind, and prepared for any fate to which an honest
zeal for my King's service may have devoted me.

In addressing myself to your Excellency on this occasion, the force of all my
obligations to you, and of the attachment and gratitude I bear you, recurs to
me. With all the warmth of my heart, I give you thanks for your Excellency's
profuse kindness to me; and I send you the most earnest wishes for your
welfare, which a faithful, affectionate, and respectful attendant can frame.

I have a mother and three sisters, to whom the value of my commission would be
an object, as the loss of Grenada has much affected their income. It is
needless to be more explicit on this subject; I am persuaded of your
Excellency's goodness.

I receive the greatest attention from his Excellency General Washington, and
from every person under whose charge I happen to be placed.

I have the honor to be, With the most respectful attachment, Your Excellency's
most obedient, and most humble servant, JOHN ANDRE, Adjutant-General.
(Addressed) His Excellency Genesis Sir Henry Clinton, K. B. etc. etc. etc.



Copy of a Letter from his Excellency General Washington, to his Excellency Sir
Henry Clinton.
SIR, Headquarters, Sept. 30, 1780.
IN answer to your Excellency's letter of the 26th instant, which I had the
honor to receive, I am to inform you, that Major Andre was taken under such
circumstances as would have justified the most summary proceedings against him.
I determined, however, to refer his case to the examination and decision of a
Board of General Officers, who have reported, on his free and voluntary
confession and letters, "That he came on shore from the Vulture sloop of war,
in the night of the twenty-first of September instant," etc. etc. as in the
report of the Board of General Officers.

From these proceedings, it is evident Major Andre was employed in the
execution of measures very foreign to the objects of flags of truce, and such
as they were never meant to authorize or countenance in the most distant
degree; and this gentleman confessed, with the greatest candor, in the course
of his examination, "That it was impossible for him to suppose he came on shore
under the sanction of a flag."

I have the honor to be your Excellency's Most obedient and most humble
servant, G. WASHINGTON.
(Addressed) His Excellency Sir Henry Clinton.



In this letter, Major Andre's of the 29th of September to Sir Henry Clinton
was transmitted.
SIR, New York, 29 th Sept. 1780.
PERSUADED that you are inclined rather to promote than prevent the civilities
and acts of humanity, which the rules of war permit between civilized nations,
I find no difficulty in representing to you, that several letters and messages
sent from hence have been disregarded, are unanswered, and the flags of truce
that carried them, detained. As I have ever treated all flags of truce with
civility and respect, I have a right to hope, that you will order my complaint
to be immediately redressed.

Major Andre, who visited an officer commanding in a district at his own
desire, and acted in every circumstance agreeable to his direction, I find is
detained a prisoner; my friendship for him leads me to fear he may suffer some
inconvenience for want of necessaries; I wish to be allowed to send him a few,
and shall take it as a favor if you will be pleased to permit his servant to
deliver them. In Sir Henry Clinton's absence, it becomes a part of my (...)
make this representation and request.

I am, Sir, your Excellency's Most obedient humble servant, JAMES ROBERTSON,
Lieutenant General.
His Excellency General Washington.



SIR, Tappan, Sept. 30, 1780.
I HAVE just received your letter of the 29th. Any delay which may have
attended your flags, has proceeded from accident and the peculiar circumstances
of the occasion, not from intentional neglect or violation. The letter that
admitted of an answer, has received one as early as it could be given with
propriety, transmitted by a flag this morning. As to messages, I am uninformed
of any that have been sent.

The necessaries for Major Andre will be delivered to him, agreeable to your
request.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble servant, G. WASHINGTON.
His Excellency Lieut. Genesis Robertson, New York.



SIR, New York, Sept. 30, 1780.
FROM your Excellency's letter of this date, I am persuaded the Board of
General Officers* to whom you referred the case of Major Andre, cannot have
been rightly informed of all the circumstances on which a judgment ought to be
formed. I think it of the highest moment to humanity, that your Excellency
should be perfectly apprized of the state of this matter, before you proceed to
put that judgment in execution.

For this reason, I send his Excellency Lieutenant General Robertson, and two
other gentlemen, to give you a true state of facts, and to declare to you my
sentiments and resolutions. They will set out tomorrow, as early as the wind
and tide will permit, and wait near Dobb's Ferry for your permission and safe
conduct, to meet your Excellency, or such persons as you may appoint, to
converse with them on this subject.

I have the honor to be your Excellency's Most obedient and most humble
servant, H. CLINTON.
P. S. The Hon. Andrew Elliot, Esquire. Lieutenant Governor, and the Hon. William
Smith, Chief Justice of this province, will attend his Excellency
Lieutenant General Robertson.

H. C.
His Excellency General Washington.





Lieut. General Robertson, Mr. Elliot, and Mr. Smith, came up in a flag vessel
to Dobb's Ferry, agreeable to the above letter. The two last were not suffered
to land. General Robertson was permitted to come on shore, and was met by
Major General Green, who verbally reported that General Robertson mentioned to
him in substance what is contained in his letter of the 2d of October to
General Washington.
SIR, New York, October 1, 1780.
I TAKE this opportunity to inform your Excellency, that I consider myself no
longer acting under the commission of Congress: Their last to me being among my
papers at West-Point, you, Sir, will make such use of it as you think proper.

At the same time, I beg leave to assure your Excellency, that my attachment to
the true interest of my country is invariable, and that I am actuated by the
same principle which has ever been the governing rule of my conduct, in this
unhappy contest.

I have the honor to be, very respectfully, Your Excellency's most obedient
humble servant, B. ARNOLD.
His Excellency General Washington.



Greyhound Schooner, Flag of Truce. Dobb's Ferry, Oct. 2, 1780. SIR,
A NOTE I have from General Green, leaves me in doubt if his memory had served
him to relate to you, with exactness, the substance of the conversation that
had passed between him and myself, on the subject of Major Andre. In an affair
of so much consequence to my friend, to the two armies, and humanity, I would
leave no possibility of a misunderstanding, and therefore take the liberty to
put in writing the substance of what I said to General Green.

I offered to prove, by the evidence of Colonel Robinson, and the officers of
the Vulture, that Major Andre went on shore at General Arnold's desire, in a
boat sent for him with a flag of truce; that he not only came ashore with the
knowledge, and under the protection of the general who commanded in the
district, but that he took no step, while on shore, but by the direction of
General Arnold, as will appear by the enclosed letter from him to your
Excellency. Under these circumstances I could not, and hoped you would not,
consider Major Andre as a spy, for any improper phrase in his letter to you.

The facts he relates correspond with the evidence I offer; but he admits a
conclusion that does not follow. The change of clothes and name was ordered by
General Arnold, under whose direction he necessarily was, while within his
command. As General Green and I did not agree in opinion, I wished that
disinterested gentlemen of knowledge of the law of war and nations, might he
asked their opinion on the subject, and mentioned Monsieur Knyphausen and
General Rochambault.

I related that a Captain Robinson had been delivered to Sir Henry Clinton as a
spy, and undoubtedly was such; but that it being signified to him that you were
desirous that this man should be exchanged, he had ordered him to be exchanged.

I wished that an intercourse of such civilities as the rules of war admit of,
might take off many of its horrors. I admitted that Major Andre had a great
share of Sir Henry Clinton's esteem, and that he would be infinitely obliged by
his liberation; and that if he was permitted to return with me, I would engage
to have any person you would be pleased to name, set at liberty.

I added, that Sir Henry Clinton had never put to death any person for a breach
of the rules of war, though he had, and now has, many in his power. Under the
present circumstances, much good may arise from humanity, much ill from the
want of it. If that could give any weight, I beg leave to add, that your
favorable treatment of Major Andre will be a favor I should ever be intent to
return to any you hold dear.

My memory does not retain with the exactness I could wish, the words of the
letter which General Green showed me from Major Andre to your Excellency. For
Sir Henry Clinton's satisfaction, I beg you will order a copy of it to be sent
to me at New York.

I have the honor to be your Excellency's Most obedient, and most humble
servant, JAMES ROBERTSON.
His Excellency General Washington.



SIR, New York, October 1, 1780.
THE polite attention shown by your Excellency and the gentlemen of your family
to Mrs. Arnold, when in distress, demands my grateful acknowledgment and
thanks, which I beg leave to present.

From your Excellency's letter to Sir Henry Clinton, I find a board of general
officers have given it as their opinion, that Major Andre comes under the
description of a spy. My good opinion of the candor and justice of those
gentlemen leads me to believe, that if they had been made fully acquainted with
every circumstance respecting Major Andre* that they would by no means have
considered him in the ^ight of a spy, or even of a prisoner. In justice to him,
I think it my duty to declare, that he came from on board the Vulture at my
particular request, by a flag sent on purpose for him by Joshua Smith, Esquire. who
had permission to go to Dobb's Ferry, to carry letters, and for other purposes
not mentioned, and to return. This was done as a blind to the spy boats. Mr.
Smith at the same time had my private instructions to go on board the Vulture,
and bring on shore Colonel Robinson, or Mr. John Anderson, which was the name I
had requested Major Andre to assume: at the same time I desired Mr. Smith to
inform him that he should have my protection, and a safe passport to return in
the same boat, as soon as our business was completed. As several accidents
intervened to prevent his being sent on board, I gave him my passport to return
by land. Major Andre came on shore in his uniform (without disguise), which,
with much reluctance, at my particular and pressing instance, he exchanged for
another coat. I furnished him with a horse and saddle, and pointed out the
route by which he was to return. And, as commanding officer in the department,
I had an undoubted right to transact all these matters, which, if wrong, Major
Andre ought by no means to suffer for them.

But if, after this just and candid representation of Major Andre's case, the
board of general officers adhere to their former opinion, I shall suppose it
dictated by passion and resentment; and if that gentleman should suffer the
severity of their sentence, I shall think myself bound, by every tie of duty
and honor, to retaliate on such unhappy persons of your army as may fall within
my power, that the respect due (...) flags, and to the law of nations, may be
better understood and observed.

I have further to observe, that forty of the principal inhabitants of
South Carolina have justly forfeited their lives, which have hitherto been
spared by the clemency of his Excellency Sir Henry Clinton, who cannot in
justice extend his mercy to them any longer, if Major Andre suffers; which, in
all probability, will open a scene of blood at which humanity will revolt.

Suffer me to entreat your Excellency for your own and the honor of humanity,
and the love you have of justice, that you suffer not an unjust sentence to
touch the life of Major Andre.

But if this warning should be disregarded, and he suffer, I call heaven and
earth to witness, that your Excellency will be justly answerable for the
torrent of blood that may be spilt in consequence.

I have the honor to be, with due respect, Your Excellency's most obedient, and
very humble servant, B. ARNOLD.
His Excellency General Washington.



SIR, Tappan, October 1, 1780.
BUOYED above the terror of death, by the consciousness of a life devoted to
honorable pursuits, and stained with no action that can give me remorse, I
trust that the request I make to your Excellency at this serious period, and
which is to soften my last moments, will not be rejected.

Sympathy toward a soldier will surely induce your Excellency and a military
tribunal, to adapt the mode of my death to the feelings of a man of honor.

Let me hope, Sir, that if aught in my character impresses you with esteem
toward me, if aught in my misfortunes marks me as the victim of policy and not
of resentment, I shall experience the operation of these feelings in your
breast, by being informed that I am not to die on a gibbet.

I have the honor to be your Excellency's Most obedient, and most humble
servant, JOHN ANDRE. Adj. Genesis to the British army.
His Excellency General Washington.



The time which elapsed between the capture of Major Andre, which was on the
morning of the 23d of September, and his execution, which did not take place
till twelve o'clock on the second of October; the mode of trying him; his
letter to Sir Henry Clinton, K. B. on the 29th of September, in which he said,
"I receive the greatest attention from his Excellency General Washington, and
from every person under whose charge I happen to be placed;" not to mention
many other acknowledgments which he made of the good treatment he received;
must evince that the proceedings against him were not guided by passion or
resentment. The practice and usage of war were against his request, and made
the indulgence he solicited, circumstanced as he was, inadmissible.

Published by Order of Congress, CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

EXTRACT from a LETTER which appeared in the Pennsylvania Gazette, dated
October 25, 1780. The Author supposed to be Colonel HAMILTON, Aid-de-Camp to
General WASHINGTON.
NEVER, perhaps, did a man suffer death with more justice, or deserve it less.
The first step he took after his capture was to write a letter to General
Washington, conceived in terms of dignity without insolence, and apology
without meanness. The scope of it was to vindicate himself from the imputation
of having assumed a mean character, for treacherous or interested purposes;
that, contrary to his intention, which was to meet a person for intelligence,
on neutral ground, he had been betrayed within our posts, and forced into the
vile condition of an enemy in disguise; soliciting only, that to whatever
rigor policy might devote him, a decency of treatment might be observed due to
a person who, though unfortunate, had been guilty of nothing dishonorable. His
request was granted in its full extent; for, in the whole progress of the
affair, he was treated with the most scrupulous delicacy. When brought before
the Board of Officers, he met with every mark of indulgence, and was required
to answer no interrogatory which could embarrass his feelings. On his part,
while he carefully concealed every thing that might involve others, he frankly
confessed all the facts relative to himself; and, upon his confession, without
the trouble of examining a witness, the Board made their report. The members of
it were not more impressed with the candor and modest firmness, mixed with a
becoming sensibility, which he displayed, than he was penetrated with their
liberality and politeness. He acknowledged the generosity of the behavior
toward him in every respect, but particularly in this, in the strongest terms
of manly gratitude. In a conversation with a gentleman who visited him after
his trial, he said, he flattered himself he had never been illiberal; but if
there were any remains of prejudice in his mind, his present experience must
obliterate them.

In one of the visits I made to him (and I saw him several times during his
confinement) he begged me to be the bearer of a request to the General, for
permission to send an open letter to Sir Henry Clinton. "I foresee my fate,"
said he, "and though I pretend not to play the hero, or to be indifferent about
life, yet I am reconciled to whatever may happen, conscious that misfortune,
not guilt, will have brought it upon me. There is only one thing that disturbs
my tranquillity. Sir Henry Clinton has been too good to me; he has been lavish
of his kindness. I am bound to him by too many obligations, and love him too
well, to bear the thought that he should reproach himself, or that others
should reproach him, on a supposition that I had conceived myself obliged by
his instructions to run the risk I did. I would not for the world leave a sting
in his mind that should embitter his future days." He could scarce finish the
sentence, bursting into tears in spite of his efforts to suppress them, and
with difficulty collected himself enough afterward to add, "I wish to be
permitted to assure him I did not act under this impression, but submitted to a
necessity imposed upon me, as contrary to my own inclination as to his orders."
-- His request was readily complied with, and he wrote the letter annexed, with
which I dare say you will be as much pleased as I am, both for the diction and
sentiment.

When his sentence was announced to him, he remarked, that since it was his lot
to die, as there was a choice in the mode, which would make material difference
to his feelings, he would be happy, if it were possible to be indulged with a
professional death. He made a second application by letter, in concise but
persuasive terms. It was thought this indulgence, being incompatible with the
customs of war; could not be granted; and it was therefore determined in both
cases to evade an answer, to spare him the sensations which a certain knowledge
of the intended mode would inflict.

When he was led out to the place of execution, as he went along, he bowed
familiarly to all those with whom he had been acquainted in his confinement. A
smile of complacency expressed the serene fortitude of his mind. Arrived at the
fatal spot, he asked, with emotion, "Must I then die in this manner?" He was
told it had been unavoidable. "I am reconciled to my fate," said he, "but not
to the mode." Soon, however, recollecting himself, he added, "It will be but a
momentary pang;" and, springing upon the cart, performed the last offices to
himself, with a composure that excited the admiration, and melted the hearts of
the beholders. Upon being told the final moment was at hand, and asked if he
had any thing to say, he answered, "Nothing, but to request you will witness to
the world that I die like a brave man." Among the extraordinary circumstances
that attended him, in the midst of his enemies, he died universally esteemed,
and universally regretted.

There was something singularly interesting in the character and fortunes of
Andre. To an excellent understanding, well improved by education and travel, he
united a peculiar elegance of mind and manners, and the advantage of a pleasing
person. It is said he possessed a pretty taste for the fine arts, and had
himself attained some proficiency in poetry, music and painting. His knowledge
appeared without ostentation, and embellished by a diffidence that rarely
accompanies so many talents and accomplishments, which left you to suppose more
than appeared. His sentiments were elevated, and inspired esteem; they had a
softness that conciliated affection. His elocution was handsome; his address
easy, polite, and insinuating. By his merit he had acquired the confidence of
his General, and was making a rapid progress in military rank and reputation.
But in the height of his career, flushed with new hopes from the execution of a
project, the most beneficial to his party that could be devised, he is at once
precipitated from the summit of prosperity, sees all the expectations of his
ambition blasted, and himself ruined.

The character I have given of him is drawn partly from what I saw of him
myself, and partly from information. I am aware that a man of real merit is
never seen in so favorable a light, as through the medium of adversity. The
clouds that surround him are so many shadows that set off his good qualities.
Misfortune cuts down little vanities, that, in prosperous times, serve as so
many spots in his virtues, and gives a tone of humility that makes his worth
more amiable. His spectators, who enjoyed a happier lot, are less prone to
detract from its true envy; and are more disposed by compassion to give him the
credit he deserves, and perhaps ever to magnify it.

I speak not of Andre's conduct in this affair as a philosopher, but as a man
of the world. The authorized maxims and practices of war are the sators of
human nature. They countenance almost every species of seduction as well as
violence; and the general who can make most traitors in the army of his
adversary, is frequently most applauded. On this scale we acquit Andre, while
we could not but condemn him if we were to exemine his conduct by the sober
rules of philosophy and moral rectitude.

THE END.
THE FOLLOWING PLAYS, Written by the Author of Andre, Are for sale at the
Book-stores of Gain and Ten Eyck, T. Allen, T. and J. Swords, and J. Fellows,
THE ARCHERS, OR MOUNTAINEERS OF SWITZERLAND: AN OPERA IN THREE ACTS.

As performed by the Old American Company in New York.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A BRIEF HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF SWITZERLAND, From the
Dissolution of the Roman Empire to the final Establishment of the Helvetic
Confederacy, by the Battle of Sempach.

TELL TRUTH AND SHAME THE DEVIL: A COMEDY, IN TWO ACTS.

As performed by the Old American Company in New York.

T. and J. Swords have for sale, at their Book-store and Printing-office, No.
99 Pearl-street, AN ASSORTMENT OF BOOKS, STATIONARY, JEWELRY, PLATED WARE,
etc. etc.

AND A NUMBER OF ELEGANT PRINTS.


