AN ORATION, FOR THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1798; DELIVERED IN THE MEETING HOUSE, IN
THE VICINITY OF DARTMOUTH-COLLEGE, AT HANOVER, IN NEWHAMPSHIRE, AT THE REQUEST
OF THE INHABITANTS OF SAID HANOVER, AND THE ADJACENT TOWNS, WHO ASSEMBLED THERE
FOR THE CELEBRATION OF THE 22d ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, AND
PUBLISHED BY THEIR DESIRE.

By JOSIAH DUNHAM, A. M.

O Fortunatos, nimium, sua si bona (...)!. -- VIRGIL
-- Americanos!
Hail, Independence, hail! heaven's next best gift,
To that of life and an immortal soul!
The life of life! -- THOMPSON.
PRINTED AT HANOVER, NEWHAMPSHIRE, BY BENJAMIN TRUE.

DUNHAM's ORATION.
HAIL, INDEPENDENCE! fair daughter of heaven, hail! Welcome, thrice welcome, to
the temple of thy Votaries! This is thy natal day; -- the anniversary of thy
glorious birth. Sacred be its memory to every son of liberty! May thine altars
this day smoke with the purest incense; and may one genial spark of thy
hallowed fire, animate every bosom, from ST. LAWRENCE to the MEXIC gulf!
Sacred be the memory of this day to every true AMERICAN; sacred and dear be its
memory to YOU, illustrious Patriots! Men! Brethren! and Fathers!

Two and twenty years have this day elapsed, since FREEDOM, descending from her
native skies, established her residence in this western world. Often had she
appeared to the rude children of Humanity, in the e^st; long had she struggled,
with tyrants and usurpers, despots, and demagogues: but, like NOAH's returning
dove, she found no rest for the sole of her foot, till, rejected, persecuted,
exiled, and forlorn, she sought an asylum in the wilds of America. And, even
here, at first, the celestial Stranger, like the blessed AUTHOR of our holy
religion, upon his first entrance into the world, found but few followers and
disciples. Her votaries, like his, were not the dependents of tyrannic pride,
or courtly favor; but her empire, growing like his, and extending with years,
will, one day, become wide as the world and durable as time.

Man, in a pure state of Nature, is the equal of man. Free and uncontrolled, he
knows no slave but the brute; he owns no lord, but his God. That liberty and
equality are the natural heritage of man, uncon^^^^ed by social compact, is the
proper creed of every freeman. But, that the full enjoyment of these rights,
(...) considered, is requisite in society, in order to produce the greatest
possible individual happiness, is, by no means, admissible. It is a utopean
idea, the chimera of enthusiasts, the bane of anarchists, and the fantom of
fools. Nature has implanted, in the bosom of all her sons, a love of freedom;
but, inseparable from this love of freedom, we also find, a universal thirst of
domination. Hence we discover, in combinations for society, a mutual jealousy
and ambition, which naturally tend to an encroachment on the rights of others.
Hence arise the necessity of government and subordination; and hence the
necessity of surrendering to community a part of our natural rights and
privileges, in order to ensure the protection and enjoyment of the rest.

How far individual rights and privileges are to be sacrificed for the public
good; that is, how far natural liberty must be surrendered, and how far
retained, so as to secure the citizen from lawless depredation, on the one
hand, and from tyrannic sway, on the other, has been a subject of long
discussion. This is the great question in politics. A want of this grand
desideratum, has proved the Scylla and Charybdis, so dreadfully fatal to
political mariners. National liberty has ever been, either shipwrecked upon the
rock of despotism, or fatally ingulphed in the vortex of licentiousness.

Mankind, terrified into submission by a rod of iron, have ever bowed the neck
to the yoke of tyranny, or have been flattered and betrayed, by the blasphemous
mockery of designing villains; who, like CROMWELL or ROBERSPIERE, with the
sacred name of liberty, on their tongues, have been, unsuspectedly, rivetting
the chains of galling slavery.

The balance of power, in the great scale of nations, has, long since, been
weighed with mathematical precision, and, by political calculators, accurately
known; but the balance, or proper medium, between tyranny and licentiousness,
has been but little studied, and much less understood. The weight has always
been preponderating toward one or the other of the two extremes. Incessant has
been the struggle between right and prerogative, from the days of NIMROD, to
the present period; till the earth has become enriched with human slaughter,
and the whole eastern continent, one great field of blood.

The short existence of the ancient republics of the east, was undoubtedly
owing, in a great degree, to a want of this balance of authority; which can be,
no way, produced, but by throwing such a quantum of power, into the different
brances or departments of government, as will, by the operation of proper
checks, secure the public weal, and, at the same time, preserve the liberty of
individuals.

It cannot be denied, that a pure democracy is often attended with evils,
which, in their consequences, are more unhappy for the people, than a
monarchical despotism. A despot may be wise and virtuous; the nation may then
be flourishing and the people happy. But a democracy is a thousand headed
monster, which, looking different ways, must have different objects; and, while
an union of interests, is attempted, and the public weal contemplated, parties
spring up, like hydras, on every side, the state becomes tottering and weak,
intestine commotions are fomented, foreign influence prevails, and the great
body of the people fall a certain prey, to the intrigues of the wicked, and
designs of the ambitious. Thus, from the zenith of natural liberty, they are
suddenly plunged into the fathomless depths of slavery and wretchedness. Hence
the necessity of energy and stability in government. Hence the necessity of
guarding equally against the evils of licentiousness, and the grasp of tyranny.
These are the two grand enemies of civil liberty; and the perfection of human
government consists in its being so constituted and constructed, as to preclude
the one, without introducing the other; adapted to the purpose of giving the
most perfect security for the enjoyment of life and property, with the greatest
possible degree of personal liberty and rational freedom. This can never
happen, but in a mixed, a representative, and an elective government. First, it
must be mixed; that is, it must partake, in a certain degree, of the nature of a
monarchy, of an aristocracy, and of a democracy. These three simple
governments, being thus blended in one, will naturally operate as a mutual
check upon each other; and, if properly balanced, produce such a temperament,
as will counterpoise any attempt at encroachment, or usurpation. Secondly, it
must be representative -- so that every order and class of men may be entitled
to their proper share of weight and influence in the government, or they can
never be said to enjoy equal rights and privileges. They must be heard, either
by themselves or their proxies; in short, they must be represented. Lastly, it
must be elective, else, how can it be free? Yes, it must be elective, and every
citizen must have a voice in the election. For, till virtues and talents become
hereditary, the idea of hereditary succession, in a free government, is
chimerical and absurd. If we cast our eyes over the vast map of nations, we
shall find, that those people have enjoyed the most political glory and
individual happiness, where the model of their government has most nearly
approximated this point of perfection.

Government seems, originally, to have been of the patriarchal kind; and this
government being despotic, it is easy to conceive, that a number of families,
or tribes, united under one common leader, would still preserve the same tone
of despotism. So long as nations remain in a state of barbarism, and the
ambition of their chief, instead of being confined within the narrow circle of
pride and self-enjoyment, is extended to the good and happiness of his
subjects, so long, perhaps, this government may be best adapted to the genius,
manners, and customs of the people. But when monarchies become large and
wealthy, their leaders proud, rapacious, voluptuous, and indolent; the people
poor, oppressed, effeminate, and wretched; then it is, that the wise and
enlightened will seek a reform; then it is, that the restless and ambitious
will attempt revolutions; then it is, that the hapless monarch, like the late
unfortunate LEWIS of France, must expiate the crime of being born to a throne,
by the axe of the nation, or the dagger of the assassin.

From the corruptions of monarchy and the evils of Despotism, originated
experiments in the opposite extreme. Released from the snackles of slavery men
naturally vibrate into the excess of licentiousness. Hence the origin of
Democracy or popular governments. These again being found equally remote from
true rational liberty, government has been in a constant state of fluctuation;
vibrating more or less, according to the variation of manners, customs, and
education from one extreme toward the other, for three thousand years. Hence
the idea, before suggested, of a mixed government, which, if rightly balanced,
embraces the true interests of society, and gives every individual citizen his
true weight and importance, in the great scale of social existence.

Many of the present European governments, growing out of the ruins of the old
feudal system, partake, in a greater or less degree, of this mixed form. Of this
kind was the ancient Spartan government, given by the great LYCURGUS, under
which that republic so long subsisted and so eminently flourished. Of all the
moderns, none seem to have had so perfect an idea of rational liberty,
connected with a firm, efficient, and stable government, though it still retains
the monarchical form, as our venerable forefathers, the people of England. But
even there, is not, humanity shocked, with the hideous deformity of her
political features? Does she not appear, in an insolent and effeminate dotage,
with Corruption on her right hand, and Oppression on her left; with the
frightful ghosts of Public Credit, and National Glory* before her eyes, and
Ruin at her heels? Where, then, shall we look for true national liberty, and
individual happiness? Shall we find it in impoverished Holland? -- Among the
petty tyrants of Germany? -- Among the effeminate, vanquished, and plundered
slaves of Italy? -- Shall we find it with the unlettered Greek, or the stupid
Turk? -- Among the martialled hosts of the Prussian Despot? -- In the
uncivilized woods of annihilated Poland? -- In the barbarous and benighted
region of inhospitable Russia? -- Shall we find it under the absolute sway of
Denmark or Sweden? -- Shall we find it in the fire and faggots of Portugal and
Spain? -- Shall we traverse the Alps, and seek it on the mountains of the now
divided and ruined Swiss? -- Or, shall we not rather fly to France? To
regenerated France -- the boasted soil of Liberty -- the grave of tyrants --
the great cemetery of despotism and superstition? -- Alas! it is not there! --

Where then, ah, where shall man seek an asylum, from the chill hand of penury,
and the iron grasp of tyranny? Should he fly to the north, and tread the
eternal snows of Greenland, it is not there! -- Should be fly to the south, mid
Afric's sable tribes, her barren wastes, and burning sands, it is not there! --
Or, should be, on the beams of the morning, transport himself to the remotest
corners of Asia, even there he would not find it; neither with the wild
wandering Arab, nor the cold shivering Tartar; neither on the banks of the
Euphrates, in the wilds of Indostan, nor among the countless vassals of
despotic China! O Liberty! O Humanity! Fair Liberty! have thou fled forever?
Blessed Humanity! have thou forsaken thy offspring? Is Liberty then not a
reality? Is it but an empty name? The sport of tyrants? The dream of
enthusiasts and false philosophers? -- No -- it is a REALITY! -- and (blessed
be GOD) it is. REALIZED in AMERICA -- it is REALIZED by US! -- Here liberty
reigns, here the rights of man are understood, here they are respected and
enjoyed! Here it is that we find a mixed, republican government, the most
perfect in its nature, ever exhibited to the world. It is a government, which
embraces all the true interests of society; it embraces the public weal and the
private good. It ensures, as far as human governments can do it, the peaceable
and uninterrupted enjoyment of life, liberty, and property. If it be found to
be still imperfect, it only proves it not to have been given by divine
inspiration. Our constitution has concentred in it all the experience of ages;
all the wisdom of the world. It is energetic without leading to tyranny; it is
free without running to licentiousness. It provides equally against the lawless
stride of usurpation, and the wild torrent of a giddy faction. It may truly be
called the brightest constellation in the political firmament. It is the basis
of our national glory, the sacred Palladium of our rights and privileges, of
our liberty and independence! Under such a government, such an excellent
constitution, what dreams of national grandeur, are too extravagant to be
realised? In such a county, of such vast extent, of such extreme fertility, so
diversified by climate, so infinitely variegated by hills and valleys, rivers
and lakes, that it seems an extensive Eden, one day to become the mart of
nations, the emporium of the world.

"O fortunatos, nimium, sua si bona norint."
-- AMERICANOS! --
Happy, happy Americans! Thrice happy, could you but know, could you but
realize, what happiness is yours!

Were it possible to enhance your idea of the value and importance of your
liberties, it could be, only, by reminding you of the price you paid for their
purchase. American Independence was first proclaimed amid the din of arms and
the groans of our dying brethren; its charter was engraven on the tablet of our
country's bosom, by the point of the sword: It was written and sealed by our
fathers' blood!

Go to the tombs of WARREN, of MONTGOMERY, of WOOSTER, of MERCER, of NASH, of
DE CALBE! Consult their monuments: They will tell you, in language louder than
the thunders of heaven, the worth of your birthrights.

Needless will it be, at this time, to state to you the origin of that cruel
and unnatural war, which cut the tender ligaments of national connection, which
severed the heartstrings of consanguinity, between Columbia and her mother
Britain. The memory of the fatal cause is too deeply impressed on every
American bosom, ever to be obliterated by the ravages of time. Yes, we were an
infant nation, but just arisen from the cradle of parental care; with true
filial affection and respect, we paid due submission to parental authority. But
when the affection of the mother became converted to the avarice of a
courtezan, we were wounded, we were stung to the heart! Yet, like a dutiful and
aggrieved child, we looked up to Britain, with tears of humility, for
protection and mercy. Instead of the mild whispers of peace, or the soft
soothings of maternal love, we were answered with the blazing of cannon and the
thunders of war. We were then weak; but we soon waxed strong -- for GOD was on
our side! In short, when oppressed, we remonstrated; when opposed, we resisted;
when fought, we conquered. Our fathers drew the sword of justice, they burst
the bands of slavery, and UNITED COLUMBIA was enrolled on the list of the
empires of the world.

Are there any in this assembly, whose infant years will not carry them back to
the direful scene of the American war, or to the joyful period of its glorious
issue? Are there any, whose ears have not been alarmed with the trump of
battle, whose souls have not been petrified, with the horrid shrieks, the
writhing tortures, the agonizing groans, of dying men. Are there any? -- Go to
the war-worn Soldier -- he will point you out the burning spires of Charleston;
He will present to your imagination, amid clouds of smoke and dust, the
en^^msoned field of B^sk^rhill. He will show you Fairfield in flames, Danbury
in ruins, Newlondon in ashes, and (...) in blood! He will take you to the field
of B^nning^^n; he will show you where his limbs were lopt away in battle, and,
with a tear in his eye, he will point you where his brother fell! He will lead
you to the dreadful plains of Monmouth, he will point you to the rising mound,
the awful cemetery of undistinguished heroes, whose blood had drenched the
soil. There he will show you the wretched mourner, bonding in tears, over the
hallowed spot, where some darling friend, or hapless lover, lies entombed in
the arms of glory. Or, to show you scenes still more affecting, he will take
you to Port Griswold: He will there show you an unfortunate garrison of the
bravest heroes, the flower of the place, suddenly collected; fathers, brothers,
and sons, resolutely defending their dearest rights, sacrificing their lives
for their wives and children, till bravery itself could do no more, then, after
throwing down their arms, barbarously butchered in cold blood; their valiant
commander, the immortal ^EDYARD, inhumanly stabbed with his own sword; and a
whole town left peopled, at once, with shrieking widows, distracted mothers,
and weeping orphans. He will show you -- but I forbear -- the theme is too
affecting!

Thus it is, Men and Brethren! thus it is, that we have escaped from the iron
chains of European bondage, to the full enjoyment of our dear-bought rights' to
peace and plenty, to liberty and independence. Thus it is, through war and
carnage, we have at length reached this American Canaan, a land, literally,
flowing with milk and honey; the goodly heritage; the promised land of our
fathers, who drove out the heathen before them, and pitched their tents on this
side (...) mighty (...), which separates us from the political wilderness of
the (...) world. Our MOSES was WASHINGTON, who conducted us hither, through a
Red Sea of blood: who, under GOD, stood our sheltering cloud by day, and our
pillar of fire by night. He it was, who, seated us beneath the shadow of the
peaceful olive, who, " converted our swords into plow-shares, and our spears
into pruning-books." He it was, who gave us to eat of the trees of liberty, in
this political paradise; whose forbidden fruit consists of the loaves and
fishes of American Traitors, and French Jacobins, which, whosoever eats, merits
literal death and perdition! America seems to have been the favorite clime of
heaven, where the GOD of nature has profusely scattered his richest bounties;
where the grand manager of the universal theater, may exhibit, in the closing
scene of the great drama of time, the perfection of humanity.

But hark! I am awaked from this happy reverie, this elysian trance, by the
blazing of cities, the roaring of cannon, the din of arms, and the groans of
death! -- Hah! whence these sounds of war, these tyrant threats, these daring
outrages, these unparallelled insults, against the peace, the dignity, the
safety, the honor, and independence, of our national union?

Shall Columbia bow the knee to tyrants? shall her sons pay tribute to France?
shall they submit their necks to the cruel yoke of Gallic despotism? Already
has that imperious, that unprincipled nation, extended her empire round half
the globe. She has crossed the Rhine, she has traversed the Pyrennees, she has
subjected the Alps, she has covered the Mediterranean, she has ascended the
Hellespont, she has humbled Germany, silenced Prussia, and astonished Europe!
She now crosses the ocean, plunders our commerce, insults our nation, abuses
our government, violates our treaties, robs, murders, and enslaves our
citizens! Good GOD! where is the spirit of '76? Where are our fathers who led
the way to freedom? Alas! the still, small voice of their blood cries to us
from the ground. And shall we, their offspring, want valor to defend our title
to the legacy they left us? Shall we be fraternized like Holland? awed like
Spain? plundered, like Italy? butchered, like Switzerland? annihilated, like
Venice? Shall we become the prey and the sport of pretended patriots? Pretended
patriots! who would sell their country, as JUDAS sold his master, for thirty
pieces of silver! Shall our lands be despoiled, our fields laid waste, our
houses burnt, our property plundered, our families carried captive, our wives
-- God forbid! -- No, Americans, no! Let us scorn to be slaves! Let us rouse at
once; unite and be free! Let us unsheath the sword of vengeance; let us prove
ourselves the legitimate offspring of our ancestors; let us prove ourselves
worthy of the heritage they gave us. Else, in vain they have fought, in vain
they have bled! Let us, this day, kneel at the altar of Liberty, and swear
eternal fealty to national Independence! Let us swear to maintain our liberties
entire, and to transmit them inviolate to posterity, or to die in their
defense! In short, let us, like the great lawgiver of Sparta, enjoin upon
ourselves, and exact from posterity, an eternal obligation, never to forsake
the constitution of our country, till our venerable fathers, who signed and
sealed it with their blood, shall arise from their tombs, (...) absolve us from
the tie, by giving us a CHARTER TO BE SLAVES!

A PATRIOTIC ODE, FOR JULY 4th, 1798, -- TUNE -- DAUPHINE.
I.
HAIL INDEPENDENCE, hail,
Bright Goddess of the skies!
Behold thy sons unite,
Behold thine altars rise!
Lo, freeborn millions kneel and swear,
Their birthrights to maintain,
Resolved no foreign yoke to bear,
To drag no tyrant's chain.
CHORUS.
It Is freedom's day -- let millions rise,
To freedom's standard fly:
Obey Columbia's call,
UNITE -- LIVE FREE -- OR DIE!
II.
Long has our favored clime,
Beneath indulgent heaven,
Enjoyed the smiles of Peace,
Mid copious blessings given.
Here INDEPENDENCE' banners waved,
Triumphantly unfurled;
With laurels crowned, Columbia rose,
The wonder of the world.
It Is Freedom's day, etc.
III.
But lo! what gathering clouds
Assail Columbia's shore?
From Gallia's crimsoned clime,
What hellish thunders roar?
It Is mad Ambition's hydra form
Loud theatening from afar,
That pours abroad the impending storm,
The direful din of war!
It Is Freedom's day, etc.
IV.
Rise, injured Freemen, rise!
Out-stretch the indignant arm;
Defend your country's cause,
Nor dread the rude alarm.
Around fair Freedom's altar throng,
Pronounce the firm decree, --
Swear (...) your country's wrong,
Live, like your fathers, free!
It Is Freedom's day, etc.
V.
Hail, Vernon's's hoary chief!
Glory's immortal son!
Long may those laurels bloom
Thy matchless valor won;
And may thy grateful country long
Revere thy deathless name,
And with thy well-earn'd praises swell
The eternal trump of Fame!
It Is Freedom's day, etc.
VI.
Illustrious ADAMS, hail*
It Is thine to guard, unstained,
Thy country's glorious boon,
Which WASHINGTON obtained.
With what an honest patriot pride
The god-like Statesman glows!
Firm and undaunted, as a rock,
To crush Columbia's foes.
It Is Freedom's day, etc.
VII
Hail, INDEPENDENCE, hail,
Columbia's proudest boast!
Never shall thy sons forget,
The price thy blessings cost.
Long may our Youth undaunted stand,
To stem Oppression's stood;
To guard their Country's sacred rights,
And seal them with their blood.
It Is Freedom's day, let millions rise,
To Freedom's altar fly,
Obey COLUMBIA's call,
UNITE -- LIVE FREE -- OR DIE.
DEDICATION.
TO THE VIRTUOUS, ENLIGHTENED, AND INDEPENDENT YEOMANRY, OF THE STATE OF
NEWHAMPSHIRE; WHO STAND AN IMMOVABLE PILLAR, IN SUPPORT OF THE FEDERAL UNION,
AND A WALL OF FIRE AGAINST A FOREIGN FOE: THIS SHEET IS CHEERFULLY DEDICATED,
BY AN ARDENT FRIEND OF THEIR LIBERTIES AND HAPPINESS, THE AUTHOR.


