A CAUTION; OR, REFLECTIONS ON THE PRESENT CONTEST BETWEEN FRANCE AND
GREAT BRITAIN.

Printed by BENJ. FRANKLIN BACHE, No. 112. Market-street. M,DCCXCVIII.

A CAUTION, etc.
THESE States are at present exposed to very threatening dangers. Whether
France has been justly provoked by the conduct of the late President and his
successor, or by the temper that placed the last in his station, will not now
be enquired. The fact is, that France is provoked. What the consequences of her
resentment may be, demands our most serious consideration.

She still believes, that a great body of American citizens, regards her and
the cause in which she is engaged, with the warmest affection. She believes
rightly: But it is possible, and probable too -- that a single maneuver of our
constituted authorities may convince her, that the nation is hostile to her and
her cause; and this conviction may instantly snap the thread, by which a naked
sword is suspended over our head.

SOME MANEUVER OF THIS KIND IS MEDITATED: But, a hope is entertained, that
even the obstinacy attendant upon littleness of genius, so dull in
distinguishing between wisdom and passions, the rashness of short-sighted
policy, the mouth-filling selfishness of office-seeking orators, and the
blinding vanity of youthful frivolists, that fiddles in declamations amidst the
flames of their country, will at length give way to dictates of PRUDENCE, if
not of patriotism.

"The film removed" -- "the seat of mental sight" may then perhaps distinctly
discern the important objects that claim instant attention --

"And, IT HAS MUCH TO SEE."

France and Freedom, attacked by combined Europe, are triumphant. Other
controversies are settled; and the war that lately spread so wide, is
contracted, with dispositions apparently ir^^concileable, to a dreadful
struggle between the Republic and ^re^^^ Bri^^^.

The Executive Directory have proclaimed their resolution to "CONQUER" Britain,
and are preparing the means for carrying that resolution into effect.

To the accomplishment of this design, the Republic is stimulated by three of
the most exciting motives, that ever agitated the mind of a people. First -- to
humble a rival, that for many centuries has been formidable and hurtful; and in
the revolution, has been the principal instigator and supporter of the
coalition, that aimed destruction at her territorial integrity and national
liberty; and therefore, in her account is justly chargeable with all the French
blood that has been shed, and all the French treasure that has been expended.

Secondly -- to obtain compensation for the injuries that have been sustained.
The vast debts incurred by the Republic, and due to their meritorious armies
and other deserving creditiors, must be paid, and EITHER BY FRANC OR BRITAIN.

Thirdly -- to extinguisn the British domination over the oceans; thus to
become the deliverers of mankind from an oppressive despotism on that element,
and then by an enlightened and humane policy, to promote permanent peace, and a
friendly intercourse amongst nations, and build their fame and happiness, on
the solid foundations of benefactions to the human race. -- There is reason to
believe, that their philanthropy means to extend effectual relief, to those
outcasts of modern mercies, the weeping -- bleeding children of India and
Africa.

When I lay the Definitive Treaty between the Republic and the Emperor on a
map, and trace out the ceded countries, the acquisition of the Venitian Islands
below the Gulf of Lodr^^^; seems to announce a great plan.

It is said that straw^ show how the wind sets; and so, small things sometimes
indicate grand designs.

Corf^^^, the ancient Corcyra, and itself in former ages a great naval power,
li^^ near to E^irus, and a little to the northward of the Bay of Ambra^^^,
where, thirty-one years before the commencement of our Era, the contest between
(...) and (...) for the Roman Empire, was decided by the battle of A^^i^a^.

San M^ura, formerly L^^calia, then a p^^insula, though new an Island, almost
a^joins the Continent, not far from the m^uth of the same Bay.

In like manner, Cephal^ni^ and Za^^^th^^ lie, one to the northward, and the
other to the southward of the famous Sircas C^^irthianus, since called the Gulf
of L^fan^^ where the Christians in the year 1571, give the irrecoverable blow
to the T^^^ navy.

Between Cephalenis and the main is Ithaca, the beloved seat of the renowned
Ulysses, and the delightful theme of the admirable Homer.

Cerigo, anciently Cythera, is situated to the southward of Pel^ponnesus,
opposite to the Bay of Laconia, into which the River Eurotas, after passing the
celebrated Lacademon, empties its once-inviolable waters.

These Islands therefore, not to mention others, have a commanding position
with respect to GREECE.

The scenes illustrated by the brightest splendors of human genius, and
signalized by memorable changes in human affairs, seem to be peculiarly suited
to the temper and destination of the Republic.

When we consider the impressions that must be made on FRENCH MINDS by seeing
the birth place of heroes and sages, the unequalled cultivatrix of Science and
Arts, the undaunted asserter, though encompassed by hostile despots, of the
Rights of Man, and the cradle of Republicanism, groaning under barbaric
ignorance and insolence, can we suppose, that France will be satisfied, unless
she communicates the blessings she enjoys, to that country, from which through
the long la^se ^f ages and the ceaseless contention of eve^^s, she has received
THE SACRED TRAIN OF THOUGHT, that h^s wrought out her own amazing deliverance.

No If the Port shall give any cause of just offense, or, surrounded by
enemies that have more than once shaken its Empire to the foundations* shall
make some convenient, perhap-^alt^^^y compact with the Republic, she will bid
Athens, Sparta, Tretis and C^^^^th, ^^th all their lovely sisterhood, rise from
the ^shes in which t^^y (...) now lying, invite the Muses to revisit H^^^, and
p^rh^^^ form other S^^ratises and other Plates to (...) the sub^^^ ^^^^trines
of "THE BEAUTIFUL AND GOOD, on the (...) of the (...).

Nor whith (...) be the ^^mits of her generous labors. The in^^^^ of the (...)
that gem the bosom of the Aeg^^^ (...) ^^^^ed by their beneficent liberators,
will experience a ^^^^ity of civil cov^^^ (...) congenial to their soil and
climate.

The trade of the (...) will exclusively belong to ^rance and the (...).

By c^^^^ting in the c^s^ of a war, that the Emperor may take (...) of (...)
and B^ma with the neighboring coasts of (...) the cou^^^^ heretofore G^^^^,,
might be soon emancipated from the y^ke of slavery. S^^^s and Mountains would
(...), (...) were, their boundaries. The Fren^^ (...) would (...) in ^^^^ing
th^^^ country (...) a gr^^^r height of true glory, than any people upon earth
ever attained.

Instead of imitating the Roman policy, of settling colonies among conquered
nations, to enforce their subjection, France more generously and more wisely,
waves her enfranchising hand over their heads, and with the voice of power and
humanity bids them rise up FREE STATES. THE FRIEND OF MANKIND, she bestows
Liberty upon them; and in return asks only their amity. She is their political
parent; and if ever they fail in rendering to her the filial duty they owe her,
well will they deserve to sink again into their former abject condition.

How much farther the triumphs of benevolence may extend, it is not difficult
to foresee. A short well-improved passage from the head of the Mediterranean to
the head of the Red Sea, may open a facility of communication with the East
Indies, by a rout about one third as long as that by the Cape of Good Hope.

Let any one recollect the wonderful grandeur and wealth to which, the
Arabians, the first traders by sea to the East, the Phoenicians, the Jews, and
the Egyptians, and in more modern times, the Gen^^se and the Venitians, rose,
by the profits of their traffic, carried on by every one of these nations, in
the very course here alluded to, and it will be evident, that the Republic,
^specially having a good understanding with the neighboring Arabians, easily
attainable by communicating to them a portion of former benefits, may amply
partake of the incomputable advantages ever flowing from that inexhaustible
source.

Russia, hereditarily hostile to France, and lately JEALOUS OF HER BENIGNANT
POLICY, has openly aimed at the navigation of the Mediterranean through the
Bespherus, and at more than that navigation. She is to be anticipated.

The Commerce of France may be more extensive, more beneficial, and more firmly
fixed, than that of any state that ever existed. If she shall fully imbibe the
spirit of her fortunes, more like the sun than her emblemati^ts ever thought,
she will rise to onlighten, warm, and bless the ^^rth.

What power upon the Globe can prevent this exaltation? None, but the British
maritime dominion. France then, to the utmost exertion of all her
hitherto-irresistable energies, will strike at that dominion.

"True!" it will be said: "But, what will her utmost exertion signify, against
the vast superiority of British Fleets? It is granted, that her land force is
greater than that of Britain; but, it is impossible, that she can transport an
army sufficient to make much impression on that kingdom."

If we count upon this supp^^^^ed impossibility as a cert^^nty, (...) direct
our conduct by such a persuasion, we may fall into a fatal deception. We cannot
be too CAUTIOUS in our calculations upon that subject.

Some persons indeed among us, speak of the naval power of Britain as
invincible, and in a manner as everlasting. But these ebulitions seem to be
suggested by passion, peculiar interests, and particular predilections, that
have latterly introduced a great deal of fanciful speculations in polities, and
concerning measures that involve our best welfare.

These speculations, like some of other kinds, after amusing the adventurers
with golden prospects for months or years, bring upon them heavy
responsibilities, before the maturation of their alchymistical materials can be
completed. We see enough already, to be convinced, that the whole projection is
vanishing into air -- "into thin air".

In contemplating HOW France can invade Britain, it is apprehended, that the
true question is not -- Whether the former, with the assistance of Spain and
Holland, will be able send out such Fleets, as by successive engagements will
acquire the dominion of the ocean -- but, whether in existing circumstances,
France will be able to send into Britain, across the narrow sea that separates
them, such an army as will absolutely prescribe the terms of peace.

However, let us make some reflections on the first question.

When Rome and Carthage were contending for Empire, if not for safety, Rome had
no ships of war, and did not know how to build them. Carthage had been for ages
mistress of the seas. After all her losses in the two preceding contests,
Catha^e, at the beginning of her last fatal war, alone contained seven (...)
inhabitants, and ruled over three bunished cities. How enormous must he power
have been at the commencement of the second or Hann^balie war? What then must
have been the undaunted courage of Rome. that dared to encounter this power?
And want her pros and policy. that (...), she adhered to it, with such
insuperable patience, that after losing seven bazdrea men of war, the at last
prevailed.


In the conclusion, after many battles by sea, and a war of more than twenty
years continuance, the Romans were conquerors at sea, as well as at land. The
resources of the two parties were much nearer to an equality, than those of
France and Britain now are.

The predecessor of Alfred the great, "lest his subjects and successors in the
most dangerous and distressful circumstances". The afflicted nation seemed
likely to perish: and that truly great Prince was obliged for some time to
conceal himself from his enemies in deep retirement. At length he left his
retreat, and had many conflicts with the Danes, who covered as it were the
neighboring seas with their fleets, and were continually and cruelly
harrassing England with invasions. The King was very sensible of the
disadvantages his subjects labored under, for want of a sufficient fleet to
meet their enemies at sea, and prevent their landing, and was very desirous of
supplying that defect.

"But (says a judicious historian) there is nothing in the world more
difficult, than to restore a naval power when it is fallen into decay, in a
country where there is little trade, to furnish ships, and to be a nursery for
seamen; and in the face of enemies who are masters of the sea. To an ordinary
genius, this must appear impracticable. What admiration then is justly due to
that extraordinary Prince, who not only attempted, but accomplished that
difficult undertaking; who raised a mighty naval power almost out of nothing,
revived foreign trade, and wrested the dominion of the seas out of the hands of
the insulting Danes? This was the great Alfred, who presents himself in so many
amiable points of view, to one who studies the Anglo-Saxon history, that it is
impossible not to contract the fondest and most enthusiastic admiration of his
character." Henry's Hist. of Pritain, II. 403-40^.


In another place the historian takes notice, that " Alfred, to oppose the
Danish Fleets, commanded ships to be built of a new construction. They were of
about twice the length of the former, and much more lofty; which made them much
swifter sailers, more steady in the water, and not so apt to roll. Some of
these new vessels had sixty oars, and some even more."

If we compare the French with either of the before mentioned powers, it will
be found, that they will have much less difficulty to contend with, for
obtaining the dominion of the seas, than the Romans or Anglo-Saxons had.

Let us now turn our attention to the second question.

The first reflection that offers itself to consideration on this head, is the
prodigious disproportion of population and native strength between France and
Britain, not to insist on the momentous addition to that disproportion by the
allies of France, two of the greatest maritime powers in Europe, excited as
they must be to the most ardent cooperation with her, by the vast pledges they
have dependant on the issue, and by the proofs she has given in her late
negociations, that she contends for their interacts as pertinaciously as for
her own -- while Britain is left alone.

The next reflection that presents itself, is the relative situation of the two
countries.

From Breast directly opposite to Cornwall and Ireland, to the Texel opposite to
Norfolk and Suffolk, France has these intermediate ports, well adapted for
fitting out large armaments -- Cherburgh, Havre, Saint Vallori, with the river
Boulogne, and Ostend. Which of these places, and how many of them, or what
others, will afford the best points for making their "dreadful notes of
preparation", the skill and ingenuity of the French will determine upon
principles as indisputable as geometrical axioms or mathematical
demonstrations. Certain it is, that as to all of them, the winds that may be
favorable to the enterprises of France, will be adverse to her enemy. The
British history abounds with instances of this kind; and not winds only may
conspire to render plans of invasion successful.

When Allectus, the successor of the famous Carauscius reigned in Britain, he
was master of the seas. The Roman Emperor Constantius, resolved to recover
Britain, and accordingly collected a very large fleet at Boulogne. Now in
passing, to avoid an enemy too strong for them, was the only difficulty. A
modern English historian says -- "The ROMANS, under the cover of a thick fog,
escaped the fleet of Allectus; and convinced the BRITONS, that a superiority of
naval strength will not always protect their country from a foreign invasion."
Gibb. Hist II. 106.


On the first of November 1688, William Prince of Orange and soon afterward
King of England, sailed from Holland with a fleet of fifty men of war, twenty
five frigates, and as many fireships, and near four hundred other vessels. In
less than two days he was between Dover and Calais.

The fleet of James the second, consisting of sixty one men of war, of which
thirty eight were of the line of battle, lay at the Gunfleet near the Thames,
to intercept the Dutch: but, the Dutch passed the Gunfleet in a very hazy day,
while the winds were extremely unfavourable to the English fleet. The Dutch
very deliberately coasted along all the southern parts of England, from its
eastern point the North Foreland at the mouth of the Channel, to within a few
miles of its westernmost County. Yet, after all the protraction of this voyage,
the whole army of horse and foot was on shore, at Torbay in Devonshire, before
the end of the fourth day from its beginning. "The wind prevented Lord
Dartmouth," entirely devoted to James's cause, "who was come in sight of the
Dutch fleet, from attacking it, and obliged him to go into Portsmouth." Rapin's
Hist. of England, XII. 140-145.


In a few days afterward, the BRITISH REVOLUTION was completed.

When William surnamed the Conqueror, then only Duke of Normandy, designed the
invasion of England and the dethronement of King Ha^^^d, "he sailed from the
harbor of Saint Vallori at the mouth of the river S^mme, with a great fleet
and gallant army, on the 28th o^ September 1066, and the day after arrived at
Pevens^y in Sussex," -- "on the 14th day of October following, the decisive
battle of Hastings was fought," -- "and on the next Christmas day, he was
crowned King of England in Westminster Abbey, with all the usual ceremonies, by
Aldred Archbishop of York." Henry's Hist. of Britain III. 1 -- 6.


" William the second, to suppress an insurrection in one of his continental
provinces, embarked, though it blew a furious storm, and landed next m^^ning at
Barfleur," about forty miles from the Isle of Wight. Ibid 33


" Henry the second embarked at Barfleur, on the 8th of July, and landed that
evening at Southampton, bringing with him the two queens." Ibid 103.


Afterward, " Henry hearing of the danger of his Norman Capital, and having
settled his affairs in England, embarked at Pertsmouth, August 7th, with his
Brabasons, and a thousand Welsh, whom he had taken into his pay," -- "and
landed next day at Barfleur". Ibid 10^.


Several other instances of such expeditions made with equal quickness, might
be enumerated. In reality the Channel is only a large ferry.

The motives, by which France is impelled to an invasion of Britain, are of the
most imperious nature. They will bring into requisition not only all her
ability and all her diligence, but -- all her genius and all her knowledge.

The British confess, that the French are perfect masters of naval
architecture. If they shall not be able to collect, as soon as they wish, a
sufficient number of men of war, to protect an army in its passage, probably
they will supply that deficiency, by building such ^lo^ting fortresses as the
world has never yet seen: for, their actions in other resp^cks, have
transcended all former examples of human archievement.

The prize at which they now aim, is in their eyes too inestimable to be
abandoned. The greatness of obstacles and sufferings will enhance its value. It
is in their opinion, consecrated by the blood of their fellow-citizens that has
been poured out in the cause. They will not think any thing that has been
gained, is commensurate to their rights or interests. To leave Britain reigning
on any element, will in their estimation be ingratitude to their brethren who
are no more, and treason against their posterity. The old Roman denunciation,
"DELINDA EST CARTHAGO," rings from the Rhine to the Pyrennees, and from the
Mediterranean to the Ocean.

Surely, it is within the bounds of probability, that wooden fortresses may be
constructed, mounting such artillery as no first-rate can oppose with success.
Unincumbered with masts sails and other rigging, and therefore drawing less
water, and capable of carrying more artillery, a sufficient celerity may be
given to their motion, if towed by galleys driven forward with the united force
of sails and oars, especially if it be considered, that for several months in
every year, the Channel is very smooth. It is likely, that Alfred's ships of "a
new construction" before mentioned, were as extraordinary in his age, as such
fortresses would be now.

A knowledge of all nautical circumstances, will enable the planners of
invasion, to calculate exactly the time that will be required for the arrival
of the armament on the opposite shore. Proper persons raised up in baloons, and
furnished with the best glasses, may discern every vessel within sight to a
vast distance. The possibility and quantity of any resistance by them, can then
be precisely ascertained. If intelligence from places more remote is wanted,
telegraphs can dart it, with any requisite velocity.

Plutarch, in his life of Demetrius Poliorcetes, says -- "His great
divertisement was in building galleys, and inventing engines of war; and having
naturally a genius addicted to mechanics, he did not apply it to making useless
toys, after the humor of some other princes, who spent their vacant hours in
painting, music, or turning, etc." -- "But, the mechanic inventions of
Demetrius, though designed for use and service, had something noble and
magnificent withal; and the wonderful contrivance of them was so uncommon,
that one might easily read the character of a great mind and extraordinary
genius in the artifice. They were such, as by their structure bespoke
themselves the product of a sovereign engineer, insomuch that they did not less
surprise his friends with their stupendous magnificence, than they astonished
his enemies by their (...). It is no less remarkable than true, what is (...)
of (...), that the very enemies against whom they were to be employed for their
destruction, could not forbear running to gaze with admiration upon his galleys
of five and six ranges of oars, as they passed near their coasts; and the
inhabitants of those cities that were to be besieged and stormed by those
terrible engines, thronged to the walls which they were about to batter, to
behold those (...) machines" -- "Even Lysimachus, of all the kings of his time
the greatest enemy of Demetrius, coming to raise the siege of S^^os in Cilicia,
sent to desire to see his galleys and engines, which Demetrius readily granted.
Lysimachus having gratified his curiosity by a full view of them, struck at
once with fear and admiration, quitted the place, and his design of relieving
the besieged city."

The contemplation of such facts as have been mentioned, should teach, it is
presumed, not to be over-confident, in deciding upon the enterprises of great
minds, animated by the strongest excitements, and supported by a prodigious
accumulation of power, in a rapid progression of aggrandizement.

Our disquisitions concerning the final event of the contest between France and
Great Britain, can have no influence upon that contest; but, a just regard for
our own peace and welfare, calls upon us to reflect, that the event MAY BE
disastrous to the last.

January 25, 1798.
ODE, ON THE FRENCH REVOLUTION.
I
BY circling Time in order rolled
The Years begin -- long since foretold,
OLD FRAUD, and CRUELTY, and HATE
Look at the signs -- and dread their fate.
Oppression's guilty chiefs alarmed
Their hordes in impious union armed,
Freedom's brave sons in chains to bind,
And blast the hopes of human kind.
II.
Their country's banners then unfurled,
To combat for a suffering world
Those sons the hostile legions sought --
Let Alps and Plains tell how they fought*
Not Salamis, The four batties, by which the Liberty of Greece was established.
and Marathon,
Mycale, and Platea won,
For the resplendent Grecian name
A title to a fairer fame. This piece was imperfectly published in newspapers
in January 1797.

III.
Go on! Go on! heroic bands,
And publish to the listening lands
The worth of equal rights and laws --
The cause of FRANCE is FREEDOM'S cause.
Soon shall the branchy olive join
The laurels that your swords entwine,
And well shall teach the blended meeds --
PLACE IS ASSURED BY GENEROUS DIEDS.
IV.
The prize of valor greatly won,
And half the work of glory done;
Thy milder virtues, FRANCE, employ,
The sources of the purest joy.
Let the delighted earth behold,
These virtues all their charms unfold;
And T^OU, the first of nations, be
HUMANE, and JUST, and (...), and GREAT

