JOURNAL, OF THE CAPTIVITY AND SUFFERINGS OF JOHN FOSSE; SEVERAL YEARS A
PRISONER AT ALGIERS: TOGETHER WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF THE TREATMENT OF CHRISTIAN
SLAVES WHEN SICK: -- AND OBSERVATIONS ON THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE
ALGERINES.

O Slavery! thou friend of hell's recess!
Profuse of woes, -- and pregnant with distress!
Eternal horrors, in thy presence reign,
And meagre Famine leads thy doleful train,
To each cursed load subjection adds more weight,
And pain is doubled in the vassal's fate,
Over Nature's sprightly face, thou spread'st a gloom,
And to the grave, do every pleasure doom.
SECOND EDITION.

Published According to Act of Congress.

NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED BY ANGIER MARCH, MIDDLE-STREET.

PREFACE.
THE success which my former narrative met with, which was merely an extract
from a Journal kept for my own amusement, has induced me to lay before the
public a more copious detail of that work.

Various errors in the former edition are in this corrected, -- and large
additions made, with such improvements as must render the work more extensively
useful, as well as entertaining to readers of all classes. I have been more
particular in the Geographical description of the several places, in this
edition than I was in the last, particularly of Algiers and Oran.

The importance as well as utility of having a work of this kind generally
disseminated through the United States, must be apparent to every thinking
person. The suffering of our fellow-citizens, in Algiers were great indeed!
They ought not to be too easily forgotten.

Every step to avoid a repetition of them will undoubtedly be pursued. But
should, at any future period, from causes not seen, more Americans be doomed to
wear the galling chain, (God grant that period may never arrive) a knowledge of
the habits, manners, and customs of the place, may not be unserviceable.

From the tender and feeling soul, a perusal of the following pages, must call
forth the tear of sympathy. The hardships -- the sufferings -- the agonizing
tortures, which our fellow-citizens had to endure, while groaning under all the
horrors of Mohammedan vassalage, of Algerine tyranny, must call into action
every tender sigh! and virgin drops of pity embalm the memory of those whose
fate it was to sink under the weight of their accumulated woes. -- Alas!
they are gone --

Nor heed they, more with anguish and with pain,
The goad terrific -- or the galling chain.
Some of my descriptions of the treatment of the Captives may appear rather
wire-drawn, but then my readers ought to be informed that these merciless
Barbarians are taught by their religion to treat the Christian Captives with
unexampled cruelty, and that in so doing they do God service! Hence to expect
pity or commiseration from those sons of Ishmael would be as absurd, as to
expect a shrubery from the burning deserts, or cooling streams from the parched
plains of Arabia.

All the poor, forlorn, miserable Captive has to do, is to resign himself up to
his fate, and in silence wait the event.

As the following is the production of one whose literary advantages have been
but small and whose opportunities of improvement have been limited, he humbly
hopes, the humane and candid reader will pass over such errors as may not have
been discovered: And further hopes that their patronage may be afforded to the
juvenile efforts of one, who for a long time, had to suffer the galling chains
of Slavery.

As some may inquire what opportunities could be obtained for writing a journal
under such severe captivity; I would here observe that I wrote in the night,
while in the Bagnio or prison, after our daily labor was over, the principal
events of the day, merely to amuse and relieve my mind from the dismal
reflections which naturally occurred -- that I could have no inducement to
exaggerate our sufferings not supposing my narrative would ever be seen here --
these circumstances being known, I flatter myself the facts herein stated will
not often be called in question. --

But should the truth of any thing stated in the following pages be called in
question, ample testimony can be procured in support of every thing here
advanced, from those of my unfortunate fellow captives whose veracity is known
and unquestionable.

Sincerely wishing that none of my fellow-citizens may ever be so unhappy as to
experience the miseries of Algerine slavery, I again commend the following
pages, to their candor and patronage.

JOHN FOSSE.

A JOURNAL, etc.
CHAPTER Is It. Containing my departure from Newburyport, arrival at Baltimore,
departure from thence, Capture by the Algerines, treatment received from them.
-- The common labor and usage of the Christian Captives.
ON Saturday the 27th of July 1793, I sailed from Newburyport in the State of
Massachusetts, in the capacity of a Mariner, on board the Brig Polly, belonging
to the above mentioned place, Samuel E. Bayley, Master, bound to Baltimore, in
the State of Maryland, expecting to take freight from thence for the Island of
Tobago.

On Tuesday the 6th of August, we were brought too by a French privateer, and
permitted immediately to proceed on our voyage. Being then in sight of the
Capes of Virginia, we took on board a Pilot and stood in for the Chesapeak.

Wednesday the 7th of August, we entered the Capes and were 'till Saturday the
10th, before we arrived at Baltimore; and found, on our arrival, that the
freight, which Capt. Bayley expected, was embarked and sailed on board another
vessel. Nothing particular happened, until Monday the 19th when we were ordered
by the Captain to discharge the ballast, and were informed by him that he had
agreed to take a freight for Cadiz.

Thursday the 29th, Paul Noyes, one of our mariners, was attacked with a severe
fever, and continued on board until Monday, the 9th of September, when he was
carried on shore, and put under the care of a woman, well qualified for
attending sick people. I understand he died in a few days after our departure.
-- Tuesday the 10th we sailed from Baltimore, bound to Cadiz; and on Friday the
13th we left sight of the Capes of Virginia. Nothing of any great moment
occurred, until Thursday the 24th of October, when we fell in with and spoke
two Brigs from Elsinore, bound to Barcelona. On Friday, the 25th, early in the
morning we saw the same Brigs about two miles to windward, standing on their
larboard tack, with the wind about E. N. E.

We got our breakfast, and ate it in the greatest jollity, not apprehending any
danger nigh, expecting to reach the port of destination within 48 hours; As we
judged ourselves to be about 35 leagues westward of Cape St. Vincent. But what
a fatal day was this! How visionary our hopes! Our sprightly looks, and
cheerful congratulations, and anticipations of reaching the port of our
destination was soon turned into the most gloomy despair. Little did we think
in the morning when we arose with nothing before us but Liberty and content,
that before the Sun should reach his meridian altitude, we should be slaves to
merciless Barbarians. This however, was the case, For at 9 A. M. we saw a
strange sail bearing about E. N. E. and standing directly for the two Danish
Brigs. We then discovered (with a prospect Glass) that she had boarded them;
and that she had the English Flag displayed at her peak. We then supposed her
to be an English Privateer. She soon dismissed them, and bore down upon us. By
this time we could see that she was a Brig; and discerned by the cut of her
sails, that she was not an English vessel, although she had still the English
slag flying; we then supposed her to be a French Privateer, hoisting the
English flag to deceive their enemy. We immediately clued down topgallant
sails, and hove too in order to wait 'till she came along side. When she came
near enough to make us hear, she hailed us in English, asked from whence we
came, and where bound; which was immediately answered by Capt. Bayley. The man
who hailed us, was dressed in the Christian habit, and was the only person we
could yet see on her deck; By this time, the Brig was under our stern; we then
saw several men jump upon her poop, to hall aft the main sheet, and saw by
their dress and long beards that they were Moors, or Algerines. Our feelings at
this unwelcome sight, are more easily imagined than described. What dreadful
perturbations! to escape was impossible; weapons of defense, we had none, we
must therefore resign ourselves to the mercy of piratical sea-rovers. She then
hove too under our lee, when we heard a most terrible shouting, clapping of
hands, huzzaing etc. -- And saw a great number of men rise up with their heads
above the gunnel, dressed in the Turkish habit like them we saw on the poop.
They immediately hoisted out a large launch, and about one hundred of the
pirates jumped on board, all armed; some with Scymitres and Pistols, others
with pikes, spears, lances, knives, etc. They manned about 20 oars and rowed
along side. As soon as they came on board our vessel, they made signs for us
all to go forward, assuring us in several languages, that if we did not obey
their commands, they would immediately massacre us all. They then went below
into the cabin, steerage, and every place where they could get below deck, and
broke open all the Trunks, and Chests, there were on board, and plundered all
our bedding, clothing, books, Charts, Quadrants, and every moveable article,
that did not consist of the Cargo, or furniture. They then came on deck, like a
parcel of ravenous wolves and stripped the clothes off our backs, all except a
shirt and pair of drawers, (myself being left with no shirt at all.) The next
day an old Turk, with an air of kindness, gave me an old shirt without sleeves,
blaming those who had taken mine from me. It was soothing to find a spark of
humanity in my barbarous masters, who had but the day before mancipated and
stripped us. This was the only Mohammedan I ever met with, in whom I had the
least reason to suppose the smallest spark of humanity was kindled.

They having chosen a sufficient number of the Algerines to take command of the
prize, they ordered us all into the launch; and when they were all embarked,
they rowed along side their own vessel, and ordered us on board. We embarked
accordingly, and were conducted by some of the sea rovers to the door of the
poop, at which place we were received by a negro man, who conducted us into the
cabin: when we entered the cabin, we saw the commander of the pirates, sitting
upon a matt on the cabin floor; who, with the help of an interpreter, asked us
many questions concerning the vessel and cargo, the places of our nativity, and
many others, as void of sense as he was of Philanthrophy who asked them. He
then informed us that he was an Algerine, that his vessel belonged to Algiers,
that her name was Babazera, and his name Raise Hudga Mahomet Salamia, and we
were his prisoners; and must immediately experience the most abject slavery, on
our arrival at Algiers, which we soon found to be true. Our embarrassments were
still greater, when we found that they were Algerines, (for before we supposed
them to be Moors) knowing that the Algerines used the most severity toward
christian captives, of any state in all Barbary. He then informed us that
Charles Logie, Esquire. British Consul at Algiers, had negociated with the Dey for
a truce with the Portuguese, for the term of twelve months, and before that
time would expire, they would have a firm peace, and the Algerines could cruise
in the Atlantic when they thought proper. He then told us we must do our duty
as seamen on board his vessel; we told him we had no clothes, his people having
taken every thing away from us except what he saw on our backs, which was not
sufficient for us to stand the deck with. He answered in very abusive words,
that we might think ourselves well used, that they did not take them. And he
would teach us to work naked, adding "now you are slaves and must be treated as
such, and do not think that you will be treated worse than you really deserve,
for your bigotry and superstition, in believing in a man who was crucified by
the Jews, and disregarding the true doctrine of God's last and greatest
prophet, Mahomet." He then ordered us immediately to our duty. When we came out
of the cabin, we saw the Polly just making sail, and standing after us, and
that night we lost sight of her, and saw her no more until our arrival at
Algiers.

About sunset they brought us a dish of oil, olives, vinegar and some bread,
and told us to eat heartily while we were on board, for after our arrival at
Algiers, we should not be allowed such dainties. Although we were very hungry,
we could eat but very little, considering the situation we were in, and not
being used to such diet.

When we sat down to eat, we were accompanied by three Dutchmen, whom we had
not scen before. On asking them the particulars of their being on board, they
informed us that they sailed from Amsterdam, bound to Malaga, three weeks
before, on board the ship Hope belonging to New York, commanded by John
Burnham, and had been captured by an Algerine frigate, within ten leagues of
Gibraltar. And the frigate having taken several vessels, and having a great
number of Christian captives on board, the Capt. of the frigate being fearful
lest they should make an attempt to rise upon the vessel, had distributed them
on board the other Corsairs, which had not taken any prizes. After we had
finished our supper they divided us (12 in number) into two watches and ordered
us to stand the deck, in our respective watches. It fell to my lot to have the
first watch below, and as we went down they ordered us into the sail-room to
sleep, and showed us the door. We were obliged to creep in, upon our hands and
knees, and stow ourselves upon the sails, in the best manner we could. We
endeavored to get a little sleep, but could not, as our minds were filled with
horror, and dreadful apprehensions of the fate we might experience, and
expecting additional severity on our arrival at Algiers. We lay in this unhappy
condition, bemoaning our hapless fate, until we supposed it to be past
midnight, and could not conceive the reason that the watch was not relieved, as
is customary among Americans and English. And being strangers to their manner
of relieving the watch, supposed we had (innocently) neglected our duty; this
made us very uneasy, fearing the watch had been relieved, and we not knowing
it, they would inflict some corporal punishment, I then proposed to my fellow
sufferers, that I would go on deck, in order to know whether they had called
the watch or not; but they advised me not to go, adding, that if the watch was
not called, they might treat me very ill for appearing on deck in the night,
when my duty did not call me there, we then determined to wait 'till we were
called, and to bear patiently our punishment if they inflicted any. We waited
in this suspense for near an hour longer, when I resolved to go on deck by
myself, and know the issue: With this resolution, I crept upon my hands and
knees to the sail room door, and on my appearance at the door, a Turk came to
me, armed with a Scymitar and a pair of Pistols, and made me to understand by
signs, that he wanted to know where I was going, I answered him in the same
manner, made him understand that necessity called me on deck. He then conducted
me to the hatchway, and spoke to some person on the deck, in his own language,
which I could not understand, and pointing with his singer, I found that I had
permission to go up. I accordingly went on deck, and was received by another
Turk, armed in the same manner, he asked me, in the French language, if I
wished to go in the head, which I answered in the affirmative: as I understood
some French, and could hold a tolerable discourse with him, I asked him if the
watch was called, which he answered in the negative, and on asking him if it
was not past twelve o'clock, he told me it was past two.

On enquiring the manner of their standing a watch, he informed me that they
kept ten hours for one watch; and that it commenced at 8 o'clock in the evening
and continued until 6 in the morning; then relieved and kept till 4 in the
afternoon, and their dog-watch was from 4 in the afternoon till 8, having only
three watches in 24 hours. I then went below and informed my fellow sufferers
of what had paned, which gave them great satisfaction to think we had not
committed an innocent offense, as before we feared we had done. We were happy
in being freed from the terrors of punishment. We then made ourselves as easy
and comfortable as we could, considering the deplorable situation we were in.
But could not sleep any the remainder of the night, for by this time the
vermin, such as lice, bugs and fleas, had found their way to our apartment, and
in such quantities that it seemed as if we were entirely covered with those
unwelcome guests. However, we passed the remainder of the night, in condoling
our miserable condition, and rubbing those vermin from our bodies, in the best
manner we could. At 6, A. M. we were surprised by three heavy knocks from the
deck, and with such force, that it seemed as if they endeavored to knock the
deck to pieces, and not hearing any thing said, we could not imagine the
meaning: We lay a few minutes, and were then called by a Turk, ordered on deck
and informed, that that was their way of calling the watch. This office is
generally performed by the boatswain, or one of his mates, in the following
manner: A large block is laid on the deck near the hatchway, and struck upon
with a very large beetle, which makes such a horrid noise, as nearly sufficient
to stun the brain of a strong headed person, and this was the cause of our
surprise before mentioned. This being Saturday the 26th of October. We passed
the rock of Gibraltar on Monday the 28th and nothing of any consequence
happened on our passage to Algiers; spoke several vessels, but none proved to
be their enemies. We having a very fresh breeze from the westward, we arrived
at Algiers on Friday the first of November.

After they had brought their vessel to an anchor in the roads, they hoisted
out their boats and ordered us to embark, and to lay ourselves down in the
bottom of the boat: Having obeyed their commands, we were rowed on shore, and
landed, amidst the shouts and huzzas of thousands of malicious barbarians. We
were conducted to the Dey's palace by a guard, and as we passed through the
streets, our ears were stunned with shouts, clapping of hands and other
acclamations of joy from the inhabitants; thanking God for their great success
and victories over so many Christian dogs and unbelievers, the appellation they
generally give to all Christians. On our arrival at the gates of the Palace, we
were received by another Guard, and conducted before the Dey, who after taking
a view of us, told us he had sent several to our government, entreating them to
negociate with him for a peace, and had never received any satisfactory answer
from them: That he was determined never to make a peace with the United States,
in his reign, as they had so often neglected his requests, and treated him with
disdain, adding "now I have got you, you christian dogs, you shall eat stones."
He then picked out four boys to wait upon himself in the palace, as follows,
Benjamin Church, Benjamin Ober, Charles Smith and John Ramsey, and then ordered
the rest of us to be conducted to the prison Bili^^. When we arrived there, we
found several other Americans, who landed a little before us, and they informed
us that the Corsairs had captured ten sail of American vessels, and their
captains and crews were chiefly in the same prison.

One weeks extremity may teach us more,
Than long prosperity had done before:
Death is forgotten in our easy state,
But troubles mind us of our final fate.
The doing ill, affects us not with fears,
But suffering ill, brings sorrow woe and tears.
After condoling our hapless fate, for a confiderable time; a French priest
came to us and enquired, if any among us understood the French language, and
was answered in the affirmative. After conversing sometime with the person who
spoke French, he left us, and told us he should return in a few minutes. --
About half an hour afterward he returned, and two Moors with him, who brought
two baskets full of white bread, and he gave each man a loaf, weighing nearly a
pound, which was a very delicious meal for us, we having eaten nothing during
the day, it now being about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. He likewise informed us
that it was a custom among those sons, of rapine and plunder, not to allow the
slaves any kind of food on the first day of their landing, except one small
loaf of bread at night -- And what we then received, he gave us, out of his own
pocket, and said if he was able, his charity would further extend. We thanked
our kind benefactor, and he then took his leave of us. We then walked from one
part of the Bagnio to another, not knowing in what part we might be allowed to
remain. We wandered in this manner, bemoaning our deplorable situation, 'till
about 5 o'clock, when we saw (according to the best our judgment) about 600 men
enter the Bagnio, all appearing to be in a more miserable condition than
ourselves, with wretched habits, dejected countenances, and chains on their
legs, every part of them bespeaking unutterable distress. I enquired of the
prison-keeper, who those people were, and of what crimes they had been guilty,
that they were loaded with such heavy chains. I was answered, that they were
christian slaves, had been captured in the same manner as myself, seeking an
honest livelihood: A few minutes afterward, we heard a man shouting out in a
most terrible manner, and not understanding his language, made it sound more
terrible. We were immediately informed by a man who understood the English
Language, that all us (Americans) must appear in the third gallery. We made all
haste up we possibly could, and as we entered the gallery we passed one at a
time through a narrow door, on one side of which stood a task-master, and on
the other side a Christian slave. The former had a large stick in his hand, and
the latter a book, in which was written the names of all the christian captives
in that prison. The christian asked each man his name, and then wrote it in the
book, and as we passed, the Turk gave each man a small bundle. On examining it,
we found it contained a blanket, a capoot (which is a sort of jacket with a
head) a waistcoat, made something like a frock, to draw over the head, it not
being open at the belly, a shirt, with neither collar or wristbands, a pair of
trowsers, made somewhat like a woman's petticoat, (with this difference,) the
bottom being sewed up, and two holes to put the legs through and a pair of
slippers. There was neither button, or button-hole on the whole suit. Such a
suit excepting the blanket, of which they never get but one, is given to each
captive once a year. The day they receive this suit is on Friday ensuing
Christmas. Soon after we received the above mentioned bundle, we were again
called into the third gallery, and passed in the same manner as before, and
having our names called separately by the clerk, we passed the task-master, and
received each man a small loaf of very black, sour bread weighing about three
ounces and a half, which we ate, although it was not so delicious as the bread
we received from the French Priest. -- Having finished our supper, we lay down
upon the stone floor, and went to sleep, and made ourselves as comfortable, as
we could, having neither bed, nor bedding, except the blanket before mentioned;
but being very much fatigued, we slept tolerably well until about 3 o'clock,
when were alarmed with a terrible shouting, as before, and were all ordered to
go down into the lower part of the prison. -- When we arrived there, they put a
chain on each man's leg, reaching up to the shoulder, and weighing about 25, or
30lb. this was our first nights lodging in this doleful mansion of horror and
despair. This done, it now being daybreak -- Saturday the 2d of November, we
were all driven out of the Bagnio, and from thence to the Marine, where I
experienced the hardest days work, I ever underwent before. -- The dreadful
clanking of the chains, was the most terrible noise I ever heard. And never
during my whole captivity did I feel such horrors of mind, as on this dreadful
morning.

How long will heaven restrain its bursting ire,
Nor rain blue tempests of devouring fire?
How long shall widows weep their sons in vain,
The prop of years in slavery's iron chains?
How long the lovesick maid, unheeded, rove
The sounding shore, and call her absent love;
With wasting tears and sighs his lot bewail,
And seem to see him in each coming sail?
How long the merchant turn his failing eyes,
In desperation, on the seas and skies,
And ask his captur'd ships, his ravished goods,
With frantic ravings, of the heavens and floods?
How long, Columbians dear! will ye complain
Of these cursed insults on the open main?
In timid sloth, shall injured brav'ry sleep?
Awake! awake! avengers of the deep!
Revenge! revenge! the voice of nature cries:
Awake to glory, and to vengence rise!
To arms! to arms! ye bold indignant bands!
It Is heaven inspires; it is GOD himself commands.
Save human nature from such deadly harms,
By force of reason, or by force of Arms.
Then let us firm, though solitary, stand,
The sword, and olive branch in either hand:
An equal peace propose with reason's voice,
Or rush to Arms, if Arms should be their choice.
As it is not in my power to write the particulars of each day of my captivity,
(which would be too tedious to my readers,) I only intend to give you a short
narrative of some of the most particular occurrences, which happened while I
was in this abject slavery, and the common labor, and usage of the slaves,
which is as follows.

At day break, in the morning, the prison-keeper calls all the slaves out to go
to work; at the door of the Bagnio, they are met by the Guardians or
taskmasters (who have their orders from the Guardian Bachi; he is the master
of all the slaves that belong to the regency) they are then conducted to
whatever place he has directed. The greatest part of their work, is blowing
rocks in the mountains. While some are drilling the holes, others are digging
the earth from off those rocks, which are under it, and others carrying away
the dirt in baskets. When the rocks are blown, they take such as will answer
their purpose: (Rocks less than 20 Tons weight, will not serve.) -- Many are
hauled by the slaves, two miles distance, which weigh 40 tons. They roll them
to the bottom of the mountain, where is a convenient place to put them on a
sled. Here they are left until Friday, (which is the Mohammedan Sabbath, on
which day all the Christian slaves belonging to the Regency, are driven out to
haul them to the Quay, which is about two miles from the place where they are
loaded. -- In order to haul these rocks, they place them upon a sled made of
large square timber, and after being sufficiently secured with ropes, they put
about six or seven hundred men to each sled, who haul it with ropes about seven
inches in circumference, and as the road is all paved with large flat stones,
they make some progress in the business. When rising an ascent, should the
number who are at one sled, not be able to haul it up, they are assisted by the
rest. By this means, they are enabled to haul three, or four rocks in a day,
upon each sled. From this Quay, they are taken on board a Puntoon (which is a
large flat bottomed kind of vessel) and discharged at the back of the mole,
with the help of wheels. These rocks are laid there in order to break off the
sea, that the mole may not wash away; which must have a continual supply, for
every gale of wind that comes washes them into deep water. After a gale they
have as much need of them as they had the first hour after the mole was built.
So we may conclude this is a work that will never be finished. On Friday when
the slaves, are going to work in the mountains, they pass out through the gates
of the city, about day break in the morning, and arrive at the bottom of the
mountain, sometime before sunrise. -- On their arrival there, they are divided
by the taskmasters, into different gangs, each gang has one sled. They must
haul as many in a day as the taskmasters think proper, and are treated with
additional rigor and severity on this day. For the drivers being anxious to
have as many hauled as possible, (because the number they haul must be reported
to the Dey,) -- they are continully beating the slaves with their sticks, and
goading them with its end, in which is a small spear, not unlike an ox-goad,
among our farmers.

If any one chance to faint, and fall down with fatigue, they generally beat
them until they are able to rise again.

At night when they are done hauling, all hands are called together, and have
their names called by the clerk, and every one must pass the Guardian Bachi, as
his name is called. -- After they are done calling, and find that none are
missing, they are driven by the taskmasters into the city, then left to go to
the Bagnio by themselves, and must appear there within half an hour after they
enter the gates of the city.

The roll is called every night in the prison, a few minutes before the gates
are locked. -- If any one neglects his call, he is immediately put into irons,
hands and feet, then chained to a pillar, where he must remain until the next
morning. Then the irons are taken from his feet, and he is driven before a
task-master, to the marine, and the Viguilhadge, (who is the minister of the
marine) orders what punishment he thinksproper, which is immediately inflicted
by the taskmasters.

He commonly orders 150, or 200 Bastinadoes.

The manner of inflicting this punishment is as follows: The person is laid
upon his face, with his hands in irons behind him, and his legs lashed together
with a rope. -- One taskmaster holds down his head and another his legs, while
two others inflict the punishment upon his breech, with sticks some what larger
than an ox-goad. After he has received one half his punishment in this manner,
they lash his ancles to a pole, and two Turks lift the pole up, and hold it in
such a manner, as brings the soles of his feet upward, and the remainder of his
punishment, he receives upon the soles of his feet. Then he is released from
his bands, and obliged to go directly to work among the rest of his
fellow-slaves. On other days of the week only a part of the slaves work in the
mountains, and the others in the marine, those in the marine, are again divided
into different companies, each company have different kinds of employ. Some are
employed in careening the corsairs, and sitting them for sea. At other times
they are stripping them and hauling them up. Others are discharging their
prizes, cleaning the harbor, and bringing those large rocks, before mentioned
to the mole and every article that is transported from one part of the marine
to another, or from the marine to the city, or from the city to the marine, or
elsewhere, must be carried by the slaves, with poles, upon their shoulders. For
the streets are so narrow, that no kind of a carriage is used here, not even a
wheelbarrow. In many streets it is difficult for one man to pass another.

When their prizes are discharged, their cargo must be all carried into the
city, and stowed in magazines, so that some part of the slaves are constantly
carrying hogsheads of sugar, pipes of wine, casks of nails, cannon, etc.

They work from day break in the morning, until a certain hour in the
afternoon, which they call Laza, which is just half an hour before sunset,
summer and winter. At which time they hoist a white flag upon the Mosques to
denote that it is the hour of prayer, it being contrary to their religion to
have a bell sound among them.

On Fridays they hoist a green flag, this being a favorite color of Mahomet.
All the slaves at this hour are ordered to leave work, except when they are
fitting the corsairs for sea in a hurry. Oftentimes when this is the case they
are obliged to work all night, and go up to the gate, called Babazia, which is
the marine gate, and before they can pass, they are searched by the
taskmasters, to prevent their stealing any thing from the Regency; if they are
found with any thing, except a few chips, they do not escape punishment.

I have known a slave receive an hundred bastinadoes for being found with three
board nails.

Having related the daily labors of the slaves, I now proceed to give you an
account of the provisions they are allowed to subsist on, to enable them to
perform this laborious slavery, and the clothing they have allowed to keep
them from the cold rains and the scorching rays of the sun.

About eight o'clock in the morning they are called by one of the taskmasters
from their work to take breakfast. Which they receive in the following order.
When they are called they all leave their work, and go near some sacks of
bread. As they pass by, they are counted by one of the drivers, while another
gives each man a loaf of bread: And to every eighth man he gives a wooden bowl
with about a pint of vinegar, in this manner they pass until all have received
their allowance. -- They then sit down upon the ground to eat, and are commonly
called to work in about ten minutes, and are seldom allowed more than 12. The
same ceremony is passed at 12 o'clock, when they receive the same allowance. At
night when the roll is called they receive another loaf of bread, but no
vinegar.

This is all the provision they have allowed them from the Regency. But
oftentimes when they are at work on board the corsairs, the steward will give
them a little sweet oil, and sometimes some olives, this they count a feast.
These loaves of bread weigh about three ounces and an half. I have weighed
several and never found one to exceed three ounces and eleven drachms. So what
bread each man has allowed him for a day, will not exceed eleven ounces, and it
is so sour, that a person must be almost starving before he can eat it. -- The
reason of its being so sour is their mixing the dough three days before it is
baked.

To make this bread they sift the bran of wheat, after the flour and middlings
are taken out.

Perhaps you may think what I have already related could not be augmented, with
additional severity, but alas, this is not all. The Bagnio in which the slaves
sleep, is built with several galleries, one above another; in each gallery are
several small rooms, in them the slaves sleep. For the use of these rooms they
must pay a certain sum of money every moon to the Guardian Bachi, or sleep in
the open Bagnio, where they have nothing but the firmament to cover them. On
the evening after the moon changes, the keeper of the Bagnio, calls out for all
hands to pay for their rooms. If any one who has slept in a room during the
moon, has not procured the money, and cannot pay it down, his hands are put
into irons behind him, and his legs chained to a pillar every night, until the
money is paid. They are released in the morning to go to their work and are
chained again at night. Those miserable objects are commonly relieved by the
rest of their fellow sufferers.

Some of the slaves are allowed a small pittance from their country, which
enables them to pay this demand. Others are mechanics and work at their trades
in the night, to procure this sum; others get it by theft, though they often
hazard their lives by so doing; and many are obliged to sleep every night upon
the cold stones, with nothing but the heavens to cover them, for want of money
to pay this tribute.

In the Bagnio, where the slaves sleep, is a kind of museum, belonging to the
Dey; which contains a great number of Animals of prey. They are confined with
chains in different apartments from where the slaves sleep. -- And are
maintained by them; with Bullock's and Sheeps heads; this money must be paid
every moon when they pay for the rooms they sleep in.

There is still another demand as unreasonable as any of the former. After
their Ramadan, which is a fast that continues a whole moon during which time
they cannot eat, drink, smoke, or even wet their lips while the sun is above
the horizon, (what they do eat, is in the night) they have a great feast, which
continues two days, on the evening previous to the feast, each slave must carry
2 fowls to the task-master; as a present; and a certain number of sheep, is
given them, for which each slave must pay his proportionable part. During those
two days, the slaves are locked in the Bagnio, and are allowed no kind of
subsistence from the Regency except one small loaf of bread which I mentioned
before, and this they receive each night when the roll is called. The drivers,
on the first morning of the feast, give each slave a loaf of good white bread,
weighing about half a pound, for which they had received two fowls from each
slave the evening before.

In this deplorable situation, were upwards of 1,200 Christian captives,
dragging out a miserable existence, with the woeful appellation of slave
preying upon their mind when I left Algiers.

The clothing which is allowed them for a year, is such a suit as was
contained in the bundle which I explained in a former part of this book, they
receive it the first Friday after Christmas, as before observed. The first
Friday in January, when it begins on Friday excepted, then the second, all the
captives belonging to the Regency, are obliged to go about seven miles into the
country, and gather reeds, and carry them to the Dey's garden, for Beans, Peace,
etc. to run upon, and this is a very tedious day's work.

At this season of the year the rains fall in abundance in that country, which
renders the walking very disagreeable as we do not follow the road, but are
obliged to cross fields, and meadows. The distance those reeds are carried is
about eight miles.

We go out at the easternmost gate of the city called Babazoone, and it is near
7 miles from this gate to the place where they are gathered, and from thence
they must be carried to the Dey's garden, which is near a mile westward of the
gate called (...), which is the west gate of the city. This day's work they
tell us (by way (...)) is to pay for our (...) of clothes which we received a
week before, and which by this time is generally half worn out.

CHAPTER II. The punishments which are common for Christian Captives, for
different offenses: For Mahometans and Jews, having committed similar crimes,
together with some entertaining stories of the punishments inflicted on the
Christian slaves, Mahometans, Jews and Renegadoes, which occurred (to my
knowledge) during my Captivity, and some accidents which happened.
THE punishments most common for small offenses, are bastinadoes, of which I
shall say but very little, having already related the manner of inflicting
them; I shall however relate in the course of this chapter, a few instances of
people being bastinadoed for very small offenses or rather no offense at all.

In the month of October '93, which was before I had the misfortune of being an
eye witness, but of which I had a verbal account, 14 slaves of different
nations, made an attempt to run away with a boat, but were finally overtaken
after they were several leagues at sea, and brought (...) to Algiers.

When they were landed, and carried before the Dey, he ordered the steersman,
and bowman to be beheaded, and the rest to receive five hundred bastinadoes
each, to have a chain of 50 weight fastened to each man's leg for life, and a
wooden block of about 70lb. to the end of that, which they were obliged to
carry upon their shoulder when they walked to do their work. When they are at
work they lay the block down, and can only work within the length of their
chain. When they have occasion to go further, they must carry the block, to the
place where the work calls them.

Those of them who were living when I left Algiers, which was the 13th July,
'96, were still in this miserable situation.

They have different punishments for capital offenses, sometimes they are
burned, or rather roasted alive. At other times they are impaled. This is done
by placing the criminal upon a sharp iron stake, and thrusting it up the
posteriors, by his back bone until it appears at the back of his neck.

For being found in company with a Mohammedan woman he is beheaded, and the
woman is put into a sack and carried about a mile at sea, and thrown overboard,
with a sufficient quantity of rocks, or a bomb, to sink her. For suspicion of
being with one, the slave is castrated, and the woman bastinadoed.

A slave for murder of another slave is immediately beheaded. But for murder of
a Mohammedan he is cast off from the walls of the city, upon iron hooks, which
are fastened into the wall about half way down. -- These catch by any part of
the body that happens to strike them, and sometimes they hang in this manner in
the most exquisite agonies for several days together before they expire. But
should the part that catches, not be strong enough to hold them (for sometimes
this is the case, and the flesh tears out) they fall to the bottom of the wall
and are dashed to pieces upon sharp stones, placed there for this purpose.

If a slave endeavors to make his escape and is brought back, they are nailed
to a gallows, by one hand and the opposite foot, and in this they expire in the
most undescribable torture. But this method is not always practiced for
desertion, for sometimes they are only bastinadoed, at other times they are
beheaded. I never knew an instance of the former, during my captivity; though I
have been an eye witness to the latter several times.

A slave for speaking disrespectfully of the Mohammedan Religion, is imposed or
burnt -- For striking a Turk he is executed in the same manner.

On the 16th of April, 1794, as all hands were at work in the mountains, Joseph
Keith, and Peter Barry, being very much fatigued, they went to a spring of
water about fifty yards distant, from where the rest of the slaves were at
work, and after having drank some water they felt faint, and sat down upon the
grass. The Guardian Bachi, observing them, sent two taskmasters, and brought
them to him, and ordered them one hundred bastinadoes each, which was inflicted
without hesitation. This was for being about five minutes absent from their
work, and this at a time when they ought to have been attended by a physician
-- Many instances of this kind I have witnessed. Particularly on the 14th of
August, '94, when a slave received three hundred bastinadoes for no greater
offense, than pulling six hairs cut of a horse's tail, which belonged to one of
the great men of the Regency.

In the month of November, 1794, as the slaves, were returning from work, and
passing through the gate Babazia, (where they are searched by the taskmasters)
one of them being found with three board nails in his pocket, was carried
before the Viguilhadge, who commanded him to be punished with an hundred
bastinadoes, his indictment run as follows: -- "you unbelieving Christian dog,
what occasion could you have for these nails, unless you intended to open some
lock and steal."

In the month of Nov. 1795, one of the Oran slaves, These are people who (...),
while it was in pos session (...) the Spaniards, of which placed shall (...)
description (...).
having grown desperate, was drinking wine one evening in the Bagnio, and
making some noise: one of the Guards These (...), are slaves who are ordered by
the Guardian (...) to keep peace (...) of the slaves in the (...) power to
(...) when he is (...).
beat him without mercy. The slave drew a knife and stabbed him to the heart,
and he fell instantly dead. The rest of the Guards commanded the slaves to
endeavor to secure him, In attempting this, he killed one slave and wounded
three more. He was then taken, secured while morning and then beheaded.

Another circumstance of this kind happened in March, 1796, one of these Oran
slaves having been informed, that the money for the redemption of the
Spaniards, who deserted from that place, was lodged in the hands of a Spanish
priest, resident at Algiers, and that he had neglected their liberation; the
slave went to the priest, and asked if he had money for the redemption of the
Spaniards. Being answered in the negative, he drew a knife, and stabbed the
priest in fourteen different places, and left him to all appearance dead.
However, the priest recovered. The slave then went to the House of the Spanish
consul, intending to kill him, and finding he was at his garden, he went to the
Bagnio, where he killed a Christian slave, with whom he had had some dispute
before. -- He then threw down his knife and delivered himself up, and was
beheaded the same evening.

In the month of July 1795, a Mohammedan woman was found sitting among some
bushes, at a small distance from where some slaves were at work, the person who
found her, asked her several question concerning the business she had there,
(...) satisfactory (...) Cadi (who (...)) and this being deemed a breach of
their religion, she being found sitting so near the christians, it was supposed
she was waiting 'till some of them could find an opportunity of going to her.

As he was going with her he met a slave, who had been sent by one of the
taskmasters to bring a jug of water from an adjacent spring. The slave asked
what crime the woman was guilty of, that he was dragging her along in such a
manner, with her hands tied behind her. He was answered she had been sitting
among some bushes waiting for the embraces of some Christian. The slave having
some humanity, knowing she would be punished for suspicion if she was carried
before the Cadi, and being confident these wretches are in general easily
bribed, he offered three sequins which was all the money he was master of, for
her release. The villain not being as easily bribed as the slave supposed,
answered, "you are the Christian dog whose embraces she has been seeking," and
calling a Turk to his assistance, who was at a small distance from them, they
dragged the two poor innocent victims before the Cadi, and they not being
allowed to speak in their own defense, the cause was laid before the judge in
words to this purpose, "we found these two persons out side the gate Babazoone,
among some bushes in actual embraces." The Cadi then ordered the man to be
carried before the Dey's palace, and there be beheaded, and the woman to be
sewed up in a sack, with a bomb shell at her feet, to be carried one mile at
sea, and thrown overboard. A few minutes after this sentence was passed, and
they were ordered to their respective places of execution, the Cadi was
credibly informed that they had not been found together as it had been reported
to him. He then ordered them both to be bastinadoed for suspicion. This message
arrived at the Dey's Palace just when the Novagi, (who is one of the Dey's
corpse of guard) was drawing his Scymitre to deprive an innocent Christian of
life. The poor slave however, received five hundred bastinadoes, which disabled
him in such a manner, that he was unable to speak for near forty eight hours,
and was not capable of walking for upwards of two months afterward.

While they were preparing to inflict his punishment, he was incessantly
beseeching them, to execute the former sentence and exclaiming, "Oh! that the
Cadi had not been undeceived, that I might have died at one blow, and escaped
these tortures." But alas, the messenger arrived too late for the poor woman,
for she was cast into her watery grave a few minutes before the message arrived.

About four days afterward, she was found upon the seashore, disengaged from
the sack and bomb-shell, looking nearly as fresh as when she was alive.

She was then taken and interred, near the place where she washed on shore, and
has a large marble monument built over her remains.

They now pray at her monument as a saint; and say if she had not been innocent
she could not have disengaged herself from the sack and bomb-shell. But the
poor Christian, (though these bigoted superstitious beings were convinced of
the innocence of both these unhappy sufferers) never received any redress. They
would often deride him in this manner, "you was the occasion of an innocent
woman's death."

I was an eye witness of these inhuman scenes of diabolical barbarity, which
will never be effaced from my memory.

We meet with such events in the annals of Algiers, as almost makes us doubt
the veracity of the most authentic history. Had I not been an eye witness, of
these, and the like scenes of inhuman cruelty, I should scarcely have believed
that such tartareous barbarity, had ever been committed by the inhabitants of
this globe, and by beings of the same species with ourselves.

While we are viewing the history of Barbary, and acquainting ourselves with
the infernal tortures, these godless wretches inflict on their own species,
whom chance has unluckily thrown into their power, "we are apt to think we are
perusing the records of hell." View of (...), by DR. MOOR, Letter 16th.


A Turk for offenses capital, is strangled in the following manner. The
criminal is confined, with his back against a wall, in which are two holes,
directly opposite the back of his neck, through these holes is reaved a rope,
with the two ends on the opposite side, from where the criminal is, and the
bite or double of the rope coming about the criminals neck. Then the two ends
are knotted together, and the executioner puts a stick in between the rope and
wall. Then turning the stick round (as the sea phrase is) like a Spanish
windlass, which twisting the two parts of the rope together brings it tight
about the criminal's neck, and he is soon dispatched.

The executioner does not see the criminal while performing his office. This is
accounted the most honorable death, for persons who are executed. And beheading
the most ignominious.

A Turk for offenses not capital, is commonly bastinadoed. A Moor or Arab, for
enormous crimes, are sometimes cast upon the hooks; and at other times, hanged
or beheaded. For small crimes they are enslaved, (condemned to share the fate
of christian captives) for a certain term of time.

For theft, they sometimes have the right hand cut off, and hung about the neck
-- Then the criminal is set upon an ass, and led through the city; with his
face toward the asses tail, and has sometimes to wear his hand, hung by a
string about his neck, as he passes through the city, for several years.

A Jew for different offenses has various punishments; similar to those of the
Christian slaves, and with not less severity.

Such is the gross indignation the Mahometans, bear toward the Jewish religion,
that a Turk may with impunity, (if he flees to a Marabout Mosque, or pay a
small penalty,) murder ten of them. If he kills the eleventh, he is then
strangled, no Mosque or penalty will excuse him: Nothing will save his life,
except he is pardoned by the Dey, whose word is absolute. A slave may with the
same impunity, beat and abuse them, in the streets as he passes. While the poor
Israelites are not allowed to lift their hand in their own defense, on penalty
of having it cut off. All the consolation they will have, in such cases, from
the Mahometans, is encouragement for the slaves, to continue their abuse.

I have known fifty in one day, to receive five hundred bastinadoes each, for
being found with a red sash about their waists. As they are not allowed to wear
any color except black.

A Renegado has the same punishments as a Turk. If any Renegado, after
embracing the Mohammedan religion; deviates from its principles, the most
ignominious death immediately follows.

I once knew an instance of this, during my captivity, which was in the month
of February 1795, when a French merchant ship arrived at Algiers. One of the
crew (through a mistaken zeal,) expressed an inclination of embracing the
Mohammedan religion. He was accordingly circumcised, and made as they express it
a true believer. On his renouncing the Christian religion, for that of Mahomet,
the principal men in the city, made him a present of 5,000 Algerine Sequins. A
current Gold Coin in Algiers, the value of which is one Dollar and Eighty Cents.
He had not continued above 4 months, in this benighted superstition; before
his conscience smote him, and he repented of his folly, for having abandoned
the true worship of Jesus Christ, and having embraced that of the imposter
Mahomet.

Behold him now with a conscience stung with remorse; his sleepless nights are
spent in meditating a possibility of his escape.

His livid countenance, haggard form, and gloomy aspect, denote some weighty
remorse is preying upon his mind.

About the first of July 1795, two English frigates anchored in the bay. The
same night he abandoned his riches, stripped himself naked and endeavored to
swim to one of them, but was perceived by the centinals on board a guard boat,
which was placed between the frigates, and the shore, to prevent any slave
making his escape. They rowed after him and brought him back. They kept him
confined on board the boat while morning, then carried him before the Dey, who
ordered him to be beheaded immediately.

Thus ended the existence of a wretch who was born a Christian, and had
exchanged the true religion for Mahometanism.

In the month of May '94, as all hands were at work, dragging those large rocks
before related to the quay, one of the slaves a Neapolitan happened to fall
down, being near the sled, before it could be stopped, he was entirely crushed
to pieces.

The taskmasters apparently rejoiced at the accident, and with smiling
countenances, ordered two slaves to gather the remains of his body in a basket,
and bury them at the Christian burial ground, ordering the rest to go on with
the rock, not giving them time to enquire what accident had happened. But
telling them a christian dog was gone to his own country. And many of them did
not know what had happened for sometime afterward.

Another singular accident happened, about four months afterward. As we were
hauling rocks in the same manner, a Corsican slave accidentally fell down, and
the sled went over his legs and knees, taking them both off, just above the
joint of the knees, his legs and feet being crushed in such a manner, that it
was impossible to distinguish one part from another. His father and six
brothers who were also slaves, were witnesses of this dreadful accident. The
father, his seven sons, and five grand sons, having been captured altogether on
board one vessel, about fifteen days before this accident happened.

As the unfortunate Christian did not expire immediately, he was sent to the
hospital, where he remained two days in the most exquisite agony. The king of
terrors then put a period to his existence.

When any such accident happens among the slaves, it is immediately reported to
the Dey. On hearing this, his obdurate heart was a little softened, and he gave
permission that the father might attend his son, in the hospital, while he
lived.

This melancholy event, deprived a father of his son, six unhappy men of a
brother, three children of a father, and a woman of her husband. In addition to
the horrors of slavery, these miserable relatives were left to bemoan the
untimely death of the unfortunate sufferer.

On the 16th of November, '94, about forty slaves were employed in carrying
some pieces of old timber from an ancient building (which had formerly been a
shelter for their gun boats on shore, time had now reduced it to ruins) to
where was building a powder magazine. --

Among these ruins were many venomous insects; and a slave having a piece of
timber upon his moulder, was stung by a Tarantula, (...).
on his left cheek: this being about three o'clock in the afternoon, he was
obliged to work 'till night. His head having by this time swelled to a very
large size. After work, he was sent to the hospital, where he expired the next
day, in the greatest agony. When he died, his head measured four feet and one
inch in circumference.

Another Captive shared a similar fate, a few weeks afterward.

Having recited in this Chapter, the punishments which are most commonly
practiced on offenders of all denominations, and some accidents. I shall
endeavor in the next to give a short description of the City and country of
Algiers.

CHAPTER III. A short description of the Territory of Algiers -- of the City --
their manners, customs and Religion, -- manners and customs of the country
people -- description of Oran -- Commerce -- Articles of Commerce -- Mode of
the Dey's Collecting his Tribute of the Country people -- Dress of the Country
People -- Ceremony of Marriage -- singular method of do. in keeping their
clothes dry, etc, etc.
ALGIERS is a Country which derives its name from its Metropolis, and extends
four hundred and eighty miles in length from east to west, along the northern
coast of Africa, (this part of Africa is called Barbary.) Its greatest breadth
from North to South, is three hundred and twenty miles.

At the distance of about one hundred miles from the sea coast, it becomes a
barren desert, almost entirely uninhabited by either man or beast.

Algiers is situated between 32 and 37 degrees of north latitude, corresponding
to that of the United States, from Virginia to Carolina, inclusive. It is
bounded on the north, by the Mediterranean sea; on the South, by Mount Atlas;
on the east, by the country of Tunis; and on the West, by Morocco: It is
separated from that empire by the river Mulvia.

The principal rivers, which water the territory of Algiers, rise in
Mount-Atlas, running by a northerly direction into the Mediterranean sea; they
are seven in number. None of them has a long course, or even is navigable; or
at least none of them are made use of in navigation. It is however supposed
that some of them might be made use of, for this purpose, were the inhabitants
of a more intelligent and industrious character: for some of them are of a
tolerable depth, and would admit large flat-bottomed boats to pass with the
greatest ease, for the purpose of conveying their produce to the sea shore.

Such is the gross ignorance of the natives of this country, in whatever
concerns domestic improvements, that there is not a single bridge over any of
their rivers. Although nature has formed them in such a commodious situation,
that bridges might easily be constructed in many different places. Ferry-boats
are entirely unknown among them. When they are to be crossed, the traveller
has oftentimes to wander several miles in search of a ford.

If a heavy rain happens to fall, he is sometimes forced to wait several days,
before the river has returned to its natural depth.

This country consists of eighteen provinces, which are commanded by Beys, who
are subordinate to the Dey. The Beys of the provinces of Mascara, Titeli, and
Constanina, are obliged to send and carry their tribute to Algiers once every
six months: They are obliged to appear before the Dey with the tribute annually
themselves. Six months after their departure from the Dey, they send the
tribute by a Galief, he is a Secretary to the Bey or Governor.

The Bey's of other provinces bring their tribute once every two years. They
being at such a distance from the city, is the occasion of its not being
demanded oftener.

The climate in this country is remarkably delightful. The air is pure and
serene. The soil is covered with almost a perpetual verdure. Extreme heat is
not common. In winter it is seldom cold enough to freeze. I have been informed,
that it has been known to freeze here, at the depth of two or three inches.

I once saw a little frost, during my residence there, but not any ice or snow.

This description applies to the lands on the seacoast; for as you advance
into the country the land becomes more barren. Indeed a considerable part of
the back country is a savage desert, abounding with Lions, Tigers, Leopard's,
Jackall's, Buffaloe's wild Boar's Porcupine's, etc. And it must be
acknowledged, that these animals are not the least amiable inhabitants of this
country.

There are few towns at present in these states of any consequence, though when
successively under the dominion of Carthage, and Rome, they abounded with many
populous cities, and to have a residence here was considered as the highest
state of luxury.

The produce of their soil formed the magazines which formerly supplied all
Italy and a great part of the Roman Empire, with corn, wine and oil. Though the
lands are ill cultivated through the oppression and barbarity of the
government, yet they are still fertile: dates, figs, raisins, almonds, apples,
pears, cherries, plumbs, citrons, lemons, oranges, pomegranets, with plenty of
herbs and roots.

Excellent hemp and flax grow on the plains. In short, the country abounds with
all that can add to the pleasure of life.

Algiers produces salt petre; lead and iron have been found here. Neither the
Elephant nor Rhinoceros are found in Barbary -- but their deserts abound with
Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Hyaenas and monstrous serpents. Their horses were
formerly very valuable, and though it equal to the Arabian; but they are now
decayed; yet some very fine (...) are imported into England. Dromedaries,
(...), mules, and Rumrahs, a most serviceable creature, begot by an ass upon a
cow, are their (...) of burden; but from the services of the Camel, they derive
the greatest advantages. This useful quadruped enables the African to perform
his long and toilsome journies across that continent. -- The Camel is
therefore, emphatically called, the Ship of the Desert. He seems to have been
created for this very trade, endued with parts and qualities adapted to the
office he is employed to discharge.

The driest thistle, and the barest thorn, furnish food for this useful animal;
and even these, to save time, he eats, while advancing on his journey, without
stopping, or occasioning a moments delay. As he has to cross immense deserts,
where no water is found, and countries not moistened by the dew of heaven -- he
is endowed with the power at one watering place, to lay in a store with which
he supplies himself for thirty days. To contain this enormous quantity of
fluid, nature has formed large cisterns within him, from which once filled, he
draws at pleasure, the quantity he wants, and pours into his stomach with the
same effect as if he then drew from a spring; and with this he travels,
patiently and vigorously, all day long, carrying a prodigious load, through
countries infected with poison winds, and glowing with parching, and never
cooling sands.

Their cows are but small, and barren of milk. Their sheep yield indifferent
fleeces, but are very large, as are their goats.

Bears, porcupines, foxes, apes, hares, rabbits, ferrits, weasels, moles,
cameleons, and all kinds of reptiles are found here.

The Cameleon possesses the qualities of changing its color, and exists on air.

I have kept one in an earthen jug, six months. Their age seldom exceeds
eighteen months. -- Their form somewhat resembles a lizard.

Partridges and quails, eagles, hawks, and all kinds of wild fowl, are found on
the coast, and the smaller birds, the Capsa Sparrow, is remarkable for its
beauty, and the sweetness of its note, which is thought to exceed that of any
other bird: but it cannot live out of its own climate. The seas abound with the
most delicious fish of every kind.

The city of Algiers lies in lat, 36, 50, North and in long. 2 47, East, over
against the Island of Minorca, three hundred and eighty miles westward of
Tunis. It stands on a bay of the Mediterranean sea. It is built upon the side
of a very high hill, with so great an ascent, that the houses rising gradually
one above another from the sea shore, it forms an amphitheatre, The city
appears beautiful at a distance when approaching from the sea. A person on
first sight of it at a distance would suppose it to be a snow bank. This is
occasioned by the houses being white-washed on the out side. The city is of a
quadrangular form, and is near three miles in circumference, encompassed with
two walls about twenty five feet distant from each other, and in some places an
hundred feet in height. The outward wall is defended by upwards of three
hundred brass cannon, and out side that is a deep entrenchment forty feet wide,
over which are built bridges at the gates of the city. In the intermediate
space between the walls, are magazines for public stores. The mole of the
harbor is about five hundred paces in length, extending from the continent to
a ledge of rocks, where there are three castles, with large batteries of brass
guns. These castles are known by the names of Fenella, Cordalaras, and
Sardenia. On the former is a very excellent light house, from which the castle
derives its name Fenelle, signifying (in Arabec,) a light.

This mole was begun and finished in the reign of Hayradin. He commenced its
foundation in the year 1536, at this time, it is reported, he had thirty
thousand Christian slaves in his possession. These he obliged to work without
intermission for three years, in which the work was finished; and he had now a
convenient harbor for the safety of his ships, capable of containing between
thirty and forty large vessels; he also built several strong forts, and erected
a number of batteries, on many places that might favor the landing of an
enemy. Several of the latter were destroyed in the expedition of Charles 5th in
the year 1541. All the remaining ones have received great improvements, since,
and some new batteries erected as occasion required. He also built the castle
(...).

The city is computed to contain one hundred and twenty thousand inhabitants.
The fortifications are extensive and strong. There are said to be fifteen
thousand houses, which are all built entirely with stone and lime, and are all
flat roofed, they are commonly built round an oblong square, with a paved court
in the center. Around this court is a triple range of Galleries, one above
another which are supported by pillars. The principal buildings are the Dey's
palace, a hospital for Christian slaves, and several large mosques. The former
stands near the center of the city, is very large but not magnificent.

The hospital for Christian slaves, stands in the principal street of the town.
Is somewhat commodious, and tolerably well attended. -- This hospital was
erected as a deed of charity by the king of Spain, for the benefit of Christian
slaves, in the year --, and is still maintained by the Spanish government.

When a slave is found so sick that he is incapable of doing any kind of work,
they then permit him to go into this hospital, where he is suffered to remain
until they suppose he is able to work again; while he remains here he is very
well used by the Doctors and Priests. -- They generally allow three or four of
the former, and eight or ten of the latter to attend it.

The Doctors prescribe the medicine, which is to be given to the patient, and
the priest's prepare, and administers it.

While a slave is sick in this place, he is no manner of expense to the
Regency, he being maintained with victuals, drink, medicine, and attendance by
the Spaniards. It is the duty of a particular taskmaster, to visit the hospital
every morning, in order to take a view of the slaves, and to pass his opinion
upon them, or any particular one of them, concerning their, or his, ableness to
perform the duty assigned the slaves in general, and if he finds any one whom
he thinks (by his countenance, or any other circumstance,) able to perform any
kind of work, the forlorn son of wretchedness, is driven out from the hospital,
to perform his task, among the rest of his fellow sufferers, and the Doctors
are not even asked whether they think he is able or not. And often times they
are driven out in this-manner, to work, and are obliged to return to the
hospital again, within a short time after their departure and often expire in a
few hours after their return. Cruelties of this nature are very common in this
horrible place, and the untimely death of a Christian, is nothing more thought
of, by the inhabitants, than the death of one of their domestic animals.

A particular instance of this nature happened on the 30th January, 1796. The
unhappy sufferer being an American, I have thought it worthy remark.

When Scipio Jackson, (a blackman belonging to New York,) had been for some
time very low with the cholic, so that his life had been despaired of for
several days by the Doctors; he was now recovering, to all appearance, very
fast; and was so far recovered as to be able to walk the room but the day
before his untimely death. He had just risen from his bed, on the said morning,
when the taskmaster, who was known by the name of Salamoone, entered the
hospital, who on perceiving him walk, pronounced him able to work, and ordered
him to the marine, to perform his daily labor. He told the taskmaster, he was
not able to walk to the marine, and much less capable of performing his
destined labor if he was there; at which the merciless villain, gave him
several severe strokes with his stick saying "if you are not able, I will make
you able," and with that drove him to the marine. The Doctors used their utmost
endeavors to dissuade him from it; and begged that he might be allowed to
remain a few days longer; all their persuasions, and reasoning were to no
purpose, the wretch would not hearken to any thing they said, but drove the
poor man before him, to work. He accordingly with great difficulty arrived at
the marine, where he did his work in the best manner his feeble condition would
allow, for about half an hour, and being exhausted he fell down upon the ground
insensible. Upon this he was again sent to the hospital, where he expired at
two o'clock in the afternoon, and was in his grave before sunset.

This alone is sufficient to ascertain the depth of the wretchedness of
Christians, whom fortune has unhappily thrown into the hands of those
detestable piratical barbarians. In former days, the Christian captives when
dead, were not allowed to be interred, but were carried out about half a Mile
to the eastward of the city, and precipitated down the banks into the sea. This
manner of disposing of the dead bodies of Christians, was practiced by the
Algerines until about the beginning of the seventeenth century. At this time,
a Roman Catholic priest, who was making a tour through Barbary, happened to be
in Algiers, and the Plague raging very severe in the city, of course a great
number of slaves died, and were cast into the sea, this dreadful spectacle,
moved the heart of the humane Priest who possessing an independent fortune,
purchased at an exorbitant price, It is reported that is cost him 90,000
dollars.
about one acre of land for a burial place for christians.

The day he paid the money for this piece of ground, the plague broke out in
his groin, which put a period to his existence in seventeen hours, consequently
he was the first who was interred on this piece of land, and perhaps the first
Christian that had been buried in the territory of Algiers since it was
inhabited by Mahometans, as they formerly cast all of this denomination into
the sea, who paid the last debt of nature near the seashore. Those who died in
the country, were suffered to remain above ground.

The author flatters himself that a description of this piece of land will not
be unacceptable to his readers, he therefore presents a short and authentic
account of it to their perusal. -- It lies about half a mile westward of the
city, where is a piece of low land or meadow, this is dyked in with a mound to
prevent the sea from washing in, and destroying the produce of the land. The
burial ground is between this mound and the sea, consequently, in a heavy gale
of wind, the violence of the waves washes the dead bodies out of their graves,
into the ocean, as the place is nothing more than a sandy beach, and the corpse
are seldom buried more than one foot under the sand.

According to the records of the nation, upwards of 98,000 Christians have
already been buried here, and scarcely any marks of a burial ground is to be
discovered, more than the great quantities of human bones which are to be seen
laying upon the beach. They keep four slaves whom age has rendered incapable of
any other employment, to bury their deceased companions, as it is contrary to
the religion of Mahomet, for one of that denomination, to touch the dead body
of a christian.

With respect to the burial of their own dead, the Mahometans discover a degree
of delicacy of which Christians have no conception. Nothing is more common, in
our Church yards, and surely nothing is more completely shocking, than to see
graves broken up, a second time before the person has returned to its original
dust; and the remains of the dead are tossed about with very little ceremony.
This wretched violation of decency arises from the orthordox desire of being
buried in holy ground; a practice which has no doubt been encouraged by the
parties concerned, for the purpose of exacting high prices for the land.

Nothing would appear more ridiculous, among the professors of the Mohammedan
Religion, than to see their graves opened, at any distance of time, or upon any
pretense whatever. They would regard this as an act of the most barbarous
sacrilege. Hence the burial ground of Algiers, or any large city of this
profession, are very extensive, it is reported that some of the burial places,
in the neighborhood of large cities, are nine, or ten miles in extent.

By this we may see that some useful lesson is to be learned, from almost every
nation in the world.

The Mosques are fine buildings, though they make no great appearance at a
distance. They are 65 in number, ten of which are very large, which are called,
Marabout Masks, by reason of having a Marabout or hermit buried in them. --
These they account holy places, and an asylum for all kinds of vices.

A Turk having committed any crime whatever, is pardoned if he can get into one
of them before he is taken into custody. Their religion teaches them to pardon
a Mohammedan, if he flees to those Marabout or Saints, who are buried in those
mosques, for protection, let his offense be ever so capital.

Christian slaves are also pardoned, having committed small offenses, if they
can get into one of them before he is taken, he will have an additional chain
upon his leg and a block at its end.

A Jew having been apprehended inside the door of one of them, would be
immediately burned or crucified. So the poor Israelites have no protection for
their crimes, and must submit to the absolute word of a despotic prince.

When a Mohammedan, who has committed a crime, has taken the Marabout, it is
immediately reported to the Muftie, and he reports it to the Dey, who sends a
string of beads by the Muftie to the keeper of the Mosque, and the criminal
then comes out. Though he might come out before if he pleases, but should he
leave the Mosque, before the Muftie comes with the beads, he would be liable to
the same punishment he was before he had taken the Marabout. The presence of
the Muftie and the beads denote his pardon. The Muftie then returns with the
beads, to the Dey, and they are laid up until some other similar occasion. At
the gates of the Dey's palace, there is a chain which is fastened at the top of
the gates and at night the lower end is fastened down with a pad lock. Any
slave who has committed an offense, and can get hold of this chain before he is
taken, it serves the same purpose as the Marabout Mosque. If a slave has been
cheated by any Turk, Cologie, Moor, Arab, Renegado, or Jew, and he takes hold
of this chain, and says he wants justice, one of the principal officers of the
Dey's corpse of guards goes to him and asks the particulars of his being
wronged, and who the person is that has wronged him, and justice is immediately
done him. But should he give a wrong account, and it be proved that he has not
told the truth, he is immediately bastinadoed. If it is a Jew who is complained
of, and he is found guilty, he must make the slave reparation and is
bastinadoed.

This city contains a great number of hot bathes, which are large, and
handsomely paved with marble; people of every denomination whatever are allowed
to go into them and bathe, on paying double the sum which is paid by a Turk. If
a stranger happens to go in, they generally extort eight or ten fold.

The men spend a great part of their time in bathing, smoking, and drinking
coffee.

Their religion obliges them to bathe four times a day, but many of them do it
much oftener, for their own pleasure. There are also several bathes for the use
of women, who are not allowed to bathe only in the afternoon. -- Those among
them who are able have these conveniences in their own houses, that their women
may not go out.

Few white women walk the streets, except prostitutes, and those far advanced
in years, and when these do they are obliged to be veiled. The principal street
extends from the east gate of the city, to the west, is somewhat wide and
magnificent. The rest are all very narrow incommodious and dirty, which renders
it very difficult for passengers.

There are several tolerable edifices without the walls of the city, which add
to the beauty of the environs.

Among these are a variety of Turkish sepulchers, and monuments. Six of these
monuments stand in a circular figure; they were erected to the memory of six
Deys, who were in the course of one day, successively elected and murdered.

Algiers had formerly no other water than rain. A Moor, who had been driven out
of Spain, constructed two aqueducts; by which it was soon supplied with
abundance of excellent water from the adjacent mountains. They have since
constructed several others on the same plan as the two former. The country
round this city is exceeding fertile; gardens, groves, and country seats are
very numerous.

The Algerines are unacquainted with the art of pruning, and grafting trees..

At Meireija, which is about twelve miles from this city, are three hot bathes,
which are natural curiosities. The principal one is 12 feet square and three
feet eight inches deep. The water is quite hot, and when it has filled the
largest basin, it runs through into a smaller one, where the sews bathe, as
they are not permitted to use the same bath with the Mahometans. These hot
fountains are conjectured to proceed from the great quantities of sulphre,
nitre, and other inflamable substances in the bowels of the earth.

The people of the city of Algiers, in general speak a compound of Arabec,
Moresco, and the remains of the ancient Phenecian languages: but in the country
they speak the proper Arabec tongue. The inhabitants of all denominations in
the city for the most part, understand the Lingua Franca. This is a kind of a
dialect, which without being the proper language of any country whatever, has a
kind of universal currency all over the Mediterranean, as the channel of
information for people who cannot understand each other through any medium but
this,

The public business of the nation, and the records are transacted in the
Turkish tongue. The men by their laws and religion, are allowed to have four
wives (if they are able to purchase them) but they generally content themselves
with two or three.

The husband never sees his wise before marriage, but accepts her upon the
description of her father. If she has no father, the nearest male relative
performs this office. By this we may suppose he has generally a very partial
account.

When the match is agreed upon, and the man has paid the father for the
daughter (for in this country every man is obliged to buy his wife from her
parents,) the bridegroom sends a present of fruit and sweet meats, and
entertains her relations with a feast, and musical entertainments.

Eight days previous to the marriage, the bride is dressed in her richest
apparel, and attended by four women; no one being allowed to speak to her
except her parents, and her four female attendants. At the expiration of which
time, the bridegroom is (for the first time) conducted into the presence of his
wife, by the four women above mentioned, who are all veiled.

These women after having seen a certificate from her parents, or nearest
surviving relative, lead the man by his hands, to where the bride is sitting;
when he is before her, she rises from her seat, and kisses his hands and feet.
-- This is a token of obedience and honor to her husband. He then retires to
his own house; and the bride is set on horseback and led to his dwelling. They
are then pronounced husband and wife, by the four women, of whom I have been
speaking. After she is safe delivered to her husband, the females, who were
invited to the nuptial feast, assemble themselves, and walk through the
streets, and at the several corners they pronounce the bands, to the public, by
shouting out all together, as loud as they can, and with such strong shrill
voices that they my be heard two miles.

In the city of Algiers, the men wear large turbans, having their heads closely
shaved, and for the most part wear their beard -- some only wear their whiskers.

Their longest jackets, which have sleeves, they wear next their shirt, and
then a vest over that, always taking care to have the shortest garment outside.
Their shirts are made with neither collar nor wristbands, their breeches
something like a woman's petticoat reaching down to their knees. Stockings are
entirely unknown among them; they always go with their legs bare. Their shoes
have square toes with no heels.

People of any denomination whatever, (except the Jews) are allowed to dress in
this habit. No person is allowed to dress in green; this color they hold
sacred it being a favorite color of Mahomet. A sherief, who they say is
descended from Mahomet, is known by a green turban. The Jews are obliged to
dress entirely in black, and wear shoes without any quarters.

People of condition, sometimes wear buskins. They never move their turban, but
pull off their slippers, when they attend religious duties, or the person of
their sovereign.

They are very fond of striped or fancied silk. The chief furniture of their
houses consists of Carpets and matrasses, on which they sit and lie. They are
prohibited Gold and Silver vessels. Several families generally live in one
house; I have known thirty Jew families to live under one roof.

The women dress, with a sort of cap upon their heads, of either Gold, Silver,
Brass, Pewter, or Tin, according as their fortune will afford; and wear short
jackets, and long trowsers. After they are married, they are obliged to have
white trowsers, but before they wear a sort of calico; they are obliged to wear
a veil when they go out of their houses, though very few are allowed to go out
at all.

They mark their forehead, chin, and nose, with india ink, and stripe the backs
of their hands, and fingers with black, and color their finger nails red.

The present inhabitants of the territory of Algiers are composed of many
different nations. The Turks, are the first people among them, and have all the
government and power in their own hands, and no man can hold any post of great
distinction among them except he is a real Turk.

The Cologlies, are next the Turks in power. These are persons born of a
Moorish mother, the Father being a Turk. The Arabs, who trace their descent
from the disciples of Mahomet, who formerly subdued Algiers. -- Moors or
Morescoes, who were driven out of Spain about the end of the sixteenth century.
Renegadoes, Levantines, Jews, and Christian slaves, with a crowd formed of the
posterity of all these different people, make the rest of the population.

The Cologlies, Moors, and Arabs, are the most numerous inhabitants of the city
and towns. They compose the great body of the inhabitants. The latter of these
are thieves and murderers by profession. Travelers who are led to their
country, through motives of curiosity or devotion, are struck with terror on
approaching the Deserts.

These robbers traverse the country in considerable troops, on horse back: They
assault and plunder the Caravans.

So late as the year 1750, a body of 50,000 Arabians attacked a caravan of
Merchants, coming from Mecca, killed 60,000 persons, and plundered it of every
thing valuable, though escorted by a Turkish army.

But it may reasonably be supposed, that amid such a variety of different
races, immense numbers cannot be said to belong to any particular tribe or
nation whatever.

As to the nature of the inhabitants, they are mostly of a lazy idle
disposition, and cursed with all the vices of mankind; mistrustful to the last
degree, false, jealous, and the very picture of ignorance! They style
themselves, Musselmon, or true believers; yet there is no confidence to be put
in their word, upon any occasion whatever, except when they promise to do you
an injury, in which promise they seldom fail, and on which you may safely rely.
They are often famed by Spanish historians for men of gallantry, but I could
never think they are inclined that way, but believe them nearly to equal the
Spaniards in cowardice. They are but indifferent soldiers, the greatest part of
their skill consists in the management of a horse, and it must be confessed,
they manage these animals with a great deal of dexterity. They abominate the
very name of and cultivate the most inveterate hatred against Christians, and
are continually like ravenous wolves seeking means to destroy them.

Mahomet has taught them in his alcoran, (or koran, for the two names appear to
be synonymous) that all of his faith who are slain fighting against the
Christians, immediately enter into Paradise in triumph: he even tells them
their horses, if they die in battle, are translated into heaven; for they hope
to have the pleasure of riding there as well as on earth.

They believe the women have no souls, and are only formed for propagation;
they are therefore not allowed to enter their mosques, because they esteem them
incapable of being received into heaven: Yet the women say their prayers
secretly at home.

The men have usually a string of beads in their hands, like the Roman
Catholics; and for every bead they have a short prayer, which, as they repeat,
they let drop through their fingers. Their prayers consist only in the
different attributes of God, as, "God is good, -- God is great -- God is
infinite -- God is merciful, etc." -- The commanders of those wretches only
differ from their subjects, in a larger propensity of their ill qualities, with
the addition of a degree of cruelty and avarice.

All foreigners are allowed the free use of their religion; but the established
religion in Barbary is Mahometanism. Many of the subjects of Morocco follow the
tenets of the Hamed, a modern sectary, and an enemy to the ancient doctrines of
the Califs. All of them have much respect for Idiots -- whose protection in
some cases, screens offenders from punishment, for notorious crimes.

In the main, however, the Moors of Barbary, as the inhabitants of these states
are now promiscuously called, (because the Saracens first entered Europe from
Mauritania, the country of the Moors) have adopted the very worst parts of the
Mohammedan Religion, and seem to have retained as much of it as countenances all
their vices. The men commit the most unnatural crimes with impunity.

Every one is amazed to find these people so submissive and patient under so
excessive and cruel a tyranny: But they should understand, (bating their want
of power) that they are taught to believe, if they fall by the hand of their
king, whom they call Xerif, or Sherief, (which signifies Mahomet's successor)
they immediately go up to heaven; and those who would not willingly be sent to
Heaven before their time, must be very particular how they conduct themselves.

But still we may derive some useful lessons from these Barbarians. The
Algerines and other Mahometans would regard it as the vilest act of
prodigality, to see the least morsel of food wasted; they would expect to be
visited with famine, should they suffer such wastefulness, as is practiced in
many families in this country. Soon after my arrival at Algiers, as I was
returning from my labor at night, and passing by a shop, a Turk, who was
sitting upon the shop window ordered me to stop, and pointing to the ground,
told me to take up a small crumb of bread, which lay upon the pavement,
accordingly I took it up and ate it; which the Turk perceiving, he gave me a
cake weighing nearly half a pound, and told me, if I had not ate the small
crumb, he should not have given me the loaf. This was the greatest deed of
charity, I ever knew from a Mohammedan, during my residence in this wretched
place.

Algiers retains the title of a kingdom; it is however a military republic,
though it certainly can reflect no luster on that species of government, The
national ordinances run in these words: "We, the great, and small members of
the mighty and invincible militia of Algiers." The Dey is elected by the
soldiery. He seldom secures his office without tumult and bloodshed; and he
often falls by the dagger of an assassin. This sovereign, may, with peculiar
propriety, adopt the expression of one of the heroes of Ossian:

Where battle's raged, lo! I was born,
'T was there I drew my breath!
And blood must mark my lonely steps
Down to the gates of death.
The manner in which his authority is exercised, corresponds with that by which
it was obtained. The Dey has a corpse of guards; a very necessary, though
perhaps a fruitless precaution; as any private soldier who has the courage to
assassinate him, stands an equal chance of becoming his successor. An
experiment of this description has been made, since the beginning of the
present century, when six private soldiers entered into a conspiracy to murder
the Dey of one of the Barbary states. They entered his palace, and gave him a
mortal wound, by thrusting a scymetre into his side, in the midst of a crowd of
people. He fell down and expired, exclaiming; "Has nobody the courage to kill a
villain?" One of the conspirators, instantly ascended the vacant throne, and
brandishing his naked scymitre, declared that he would do justice to all! while
his five associates, were endeavoring to enforce the title of their new
sovereign, and none present seemed to give themselves any concern about what
had happened. He had not remained above ten minutes in this situation, when an
old soldier unobserved took aim with a musket or blunderbuss, and shot him
dead. Upon this, the five others were immediately dispatched by the people
present. Such scenes as these do not unfrequently occur in tyrannic countries;
and ought to teach both rulers and ruled in this happy country justly to
appreciate the blessings of liberty and good government. The very spot now
inhabited by these merciless Barbarians, whose very breath seems to dry up
every thing noble, great or good, was once the seat of Liberty and scientific
improvements. But cities, towns, all, all are gone, and hardly left a wreck
behind to point the traveller where they stood.

Here mighty Carthage once her thunders hurled
Against Rome, then mistress of the eastern world.
Here dwelt her Chiefs -- in history renowned,
Here Hannibal with laurels once was crowned --
Here science flourished -- here the arts were known.
Here wisdom reigned, and here her empire shone!
'Till savage Turks overspread the wide domain,
And savage ignorance darkened every plain,
Spread far and wide like Etna's liquid flame,
And scarce have left posterity their name.
The Day is an absolute monarch: the next: man to him in dignity and power, is
the Haznagi. The Aga is next to the Haznagi, and the Hodge de Cabellos, is next
to him -- The next is the Petti Mell -- The Aga de Bastione, is the fifth man
in office. This is the high Sheriff, he enjoys his post but two moons, and then
retires with a pension. The other officers of importance are, a Secretary of
State, twenty four Chiah Bassas, or Colonels subordinate to the Aga, about two
hundred senior Raises, or Captains, and about four hundred Zuta Raises, or
Lieutenants.

The Muftie, the Cadi, and the grand Marabout, are known by the largeness of
their turbans. The former is the high Priest. The second is the Supreme Judge
in ecclesiastical causes. The latter is the chief of an order of Saints or
Hermits. These hermits, are people, who wander from one part of the country to
another, and live upon alms, after the manner of the wandering Jews, (or shoe
maker,) of Jerusalem. They were formerly looked upon with disdain and treated
with derision. But since the prophesy of Yusef (who was one of these Hermits)
concerning the destruction of the Spaniards (which was the expedition of
Charles the 5th, in the year 1541,) they have been accounted Saints. Such is
the gross ignorance and superstition of these people, that when one of these
Hermits happens to pass by any person who is halt, or blind, they will
endeavor to touch his garment with their fingers; then rub their fingers upon
the part affected, thinking the Hermit has power to make them whole.

The inhabitants of Algiers live very meanly and abstemious, although their
country plentifully produces the conveniences and luxuries of life, and all
kinds of provisions are very cheap. I have purchased a quarter of Beef here
weighing 70 lb. for three Arbia booche's; but the common price is about five. A
dozen of eggs are commonly sold for a mazoone and a half, and all other
provisions are as cheap in proportion. But to give the reader a more explicit
idea of the value of these coins, I have presented them with the following
table, of all the coins current in Algiers.

Gold Coin. Dols. Cts. A Sultani, or Sequin, 1 80 Mahaboob, 1 35 Nooz Sultani,
90 Nooz Mahaboob, 68 Arba Sultani, 45

Silver Coin.
Riele Booche, 60 Nooz Booche, 30 Arbia Booche, 15 Timinee Booche, 7 Mazoone, 2

They have but one copper coin, this they call drahame segaria, 1160 of which
make a dollar.

The chief of their diet is bread, oil, olives, vinegar and Sallad. They very
seldom eat any meat. When they do, one pound is sufficient for six or eight
people, and this they think extravagant. They profess not to drink any
spirituous liquors, and if any one is seen intoxicated, he is no more accounted
a true Mohammedan. Many of them will however drink to excess, when they are out
of sight of any others of their religion. Many instances of this kind I have
seen; particularly one Mustafa, an Algerine, would often go into the Bagnio,
and purchase wine from the slaves, at double price, which they had bought for
their own use, and sit down and drink among them. One evening as I went in
after returning from my labor, I saw Mustafa drinking wine, and eating pork
sausages. I asked him if he knew what he was eating, he answered in great rage,
uz coot sanzafida unta main schelim, una main arfshi, which in English is,
"Hold your tongue you unbeliever, if you do not tell me, I shall not know."

They bury their dead in the following manner. The corpse is washed in water,
then sewed up in a winding sheet, put upon a bear, and carried to the grave,
where they are buried in a sitting posture. No females are allowed to follow
any corpse whatever. Any Mohammedan who dies with the plague, is carried to the
grave as fast as the bearers can run. All the followers sing while they are
going. They imagine all Mahometans who die with this disorder are called by the
Supreme Being, and are happy to all eternity. But people of any other religion,
who die with it, they suppose are damned. At each end of the grave they place a
small earthen pot, containing about half a pint, which the keep filled with
water, presuming that their friends, if not happy, will be relieved or
comforted with their drink. -- They also plant pease and beans on the graves of
their friends, and lay fragrant bushes on them, for the comfort and support of
their departed relatives. The old women also every friday morning repair to the
mansions of the dead, to carry such provisions as bread, beans, peace, and
plumbs. These they expect their friends if unhappy, will receive; if they are
happy, they are willing the cats should partake the repast. These animals crowd
the grave yards in hundreds.

The present Dey of Algiers, is between sixty and seventy years of age -- is a
thick well built man, with his white beard covering his breast. He is of a
light complexion. Does not appear to be much decayed by the weight of years,
which have rolled over his head. He is of a very malicious disposition; and,
often (when he is in a rage) commands deeds of inhumanity to be committed, of
which it is said he repents afterward.

His family consists of himself, wife, and one daughter. His wife and daughter
have a separate palace, at a little distance from that of the Deys; and have a
great number of female Christian slaves to serve them. The Dey visits them
every Thursday evening, abides with his wife the night, and returns to his own
palace on Friday morning.

The Dey, has also a number of male Christian captives, to wait upon him. One
cooks his victuals, another sets his table, waits upon him while eating --
makes his bed -- and sees that all things in his apartment are kept clean. The
others do any kind of work that is necessary. He keeps no Seraglio, as is
generally reported; he has but one wife, and sleeps with her, but once a week.

When the Dey eats, he has a table about 4 inches high, on which is set several
different dishes, with neither plates, knives or forks, they eat only with
spoons, their victuals being cut small before it is set upon the table; and
they can touch their victuals only with their right hand. They sit always on
the floor, (which has a mat or carpet upon it) as chairs are entirely unknown
among them. The common people only differ from the Dey, by having no table
whatever; their dishes being set upon the floor.

The Turks are a well built robust people, their complexion not unlike
Americans, though somewhat larger in statue, but their dress, and long beards,
make them appear more like monsters than human beings. The Cologlies are
somewhat less in stature than the Turks, and are of a more tawney complexion.
The Moors or Morescoes, are generally a tall thin, spare set of people, not
much inclining to fat, and of a very dark complexion, much like the Indians in
north America. The Arabs, or Arabians, are of a much darker complexion than the
Moors, being darker than the Mulattoes. They are much less in stature than the
Moors, being the smallest people I ever saw; very few arrive at the height of
five feet, and are generally near of a size. These people compose the greater
part of the Pisaras, or porters in the city. As they are not allowed to trade
in any mercantile line, nor even to learn any mechanic art, they are obliged to
be drudges to their superiors, to gain the hard earned morsel on which they
subsist.

The Algerines maintain about six thousand five hundred foot, consisting of
Turks, Cologlies, or the sons of Soldiers: About one thousand of them do
garrison duty, and part of them are employed in fomenting differences among the
neighboring Arab princes. Besides these, the Dey can bring two thousand Moorish
horse, into the field. Those troops are under excellent discipline.

Of their learning, or learned men, little can be said.

The Turks profess the greatest contempt for Learning. Greece which was the
native country of genius, arts and sciences, produces at present, beside Turks,
numerous bands of Christian Bishops, priests and Monks, who, in general, are as
ignorant as the Turks themselves. The education of a Turk seldom extends
further than to the reading the Turkish language, and the Koran, and writing a
common letter. Some of them understand astronomy, so far as to calculate the
time of an eclipse; but these are comparatively few, and regarded as
extraordinary persons. Of literature in modern Turkey, a curious specimen was
printed in the year 1769, at Vienna. The Book, which is a French translation,
is entitled, "A treatise upon Tactics, or an artificial method for the
discipline of troops; a work printed and published at Constantinople, by
Ibrahim Effendi, officer Mutte ferrika of the Ottoman Port. The original
appeared in 1730, and was intended as an experiment for the establishment of a
Turkish press. The Turks are said, upon a superficial comparison, to have
preferred the use of manuscripts, and the design for want of encouragement was
laid aside. The preface of Ibrahim begins thus: "In the name of the most
Climent and merciful God, praises, thanks and benedictions be to the sovereign
master of the empires and kingdoms of the heavens and earth; to the master of
Glory and omnipotance, God most high and most holy, who is the principal and
the source of all order and symmetry in the universe, whose supreme will rules
the affairs of the sons of Adam, and whose decrees, direct all the actions of
men." In this book the writer censures his countrymen, for their negligence as
to the acquisition of modern discipline. To the curious, an extract from this
work may not be altogether unentertaining: -- "In former ages," says the
writer, "when the Christians made less use of cannon, muskets, and grenades,
and when the principal arms of war, were sabres, the Mussulmen, superior to all
nations, in the management of these weapons, made a progress so rapid, that the
christians scattered upon the face of the earth, astonished at their victories
and daring no more to oppose themselves to the irresistible force, remained
during some time in the greatest consternation. In the end, invoking heaven and
earth, to find some remedy to their distresses and exploring every resource
without knowing on what side to turn themselves, they made a last effort to
invent an expedition proper to repair their losses. At first they were
unanimously desirous to perfect the use of cannon, of muskets, and other arms.
Afterward, seeing, that the assistance of these was still too weak to support
the impetuous attacks of the musselmen, and in particular those of the Ottoman
armies, they made new attempts, and labored, all in concert, to oppose
themselves to this fatal destiny, and to find some means of resistance. At
last, after many consultations and conferrences, the unanimous result of their
deliberations was, that after having given a better form to their artillery,
and their Arsenals, it would be necessary to find some means of subjecting
their unfortunate troops, by certain rules, to a constant and firm discipline,
so that the soldiers restrained in a perfect order, finding no opportunity of
flying, and of deserting their ranks, nor time enough to think of danger and to
terrify themselves with the thoughts of instant death, might persist, in spite
of their inclination, in their ranks, seeing themselves indispensably forced to
it. -- Afterward they thought that it was necessary to give more consistency
to their lines, ranged in order of battle, and to invent new discipline, to
render them more firm, immovable, and capable of supporting the thundering
shock (...) the musselmen, and resisting their (...), which for some time,
being (...) object of their attention, they have, at last, by their
indefatigable application, arrived so far as to reduce the rules and principles
of tactics to a particular art, and to treat them methodically in books
composed upon the military science."

The greatest part of their commerce, is with the Sweeds, Danes, Dutch, French,
Spaniards, Raguseans and English. The commodities they trade in, are Wheat,
Barley, Oil, Olives, Figs, Raisins, Wax, Honey, Silks, Almonds, Dates, Wool,
Leather of different colors, which is commonly called, Morocco Leather, Horses,
Mules, etc. Their Manufactures are chiefly Silks, and Woolen Carpets. In
return, the Europeans furnish them with timber, artillery, gunpowder, and
whatever they want either in their public or private capacity. No nations are
fond of trading with these sons of plunder, owing to their capricious
despotism, and the villainy of their Individuals.

Having given a short account of the manners and customs of the people in the
city; I now proceed to give a short sketch, of those in the country.

The people in the country, have no houses, but live in tents, and remove from
one place to another, as they want pasture for their herds and flocks, or as
any other accidental circumstance may happen to make it necessary.

The excellence of the climate renders this simple way of living tolerable,
though the tents of these people are mean, their utensils of little value, and
their lodging filthy. The family and their domestic animals lie promiscuously
in the tents together, except the dogs, which are left on the outside as
guards. They raise considerable numbers of bees and silkworms. They subsist
chiefly on fruit, rice and bread. Wine and Sprituous liquors, are almost
entirely unknown among them. The Dey demands from them a tribute, which is
procured by the Beys and carried to Algiers. The manner of gathering this
tribute is as follows: The Dey informs the Bey what sum must be paid, for the
ensuing year, in the province which he commands or governs. The Bey then goes
at the head of a large body of cavalry to collect it. And many of them on
hearing of his approach retire to inaccessible places in the mountains, until
the troops are withdrawn, in order to evade the payment. If any of those who do
not abscond, should make the least equivocation he takes from them whatever he
please. Should they make any resistance, or even intimate that they are
dissatisfied with his proceedings, he cuts off their heads and sends them in
triumph to the Dey. And after it has been carried twice from the Deys palace,
to the gate Babazoone, and exposed to public view, they then bury it. Those
Beys seldom are in office more than two or three years, for by this time they
have enriched themselves to such a degree (by plundering and robbing) that the
Dey or Divan invents some crime against them, for which they are soon executed,
and all their property is brought to the city and deposited in the treasury.

Should any of those who retire to the mountains, to evade the payment of the
tribute be apprehended, they are put to the most ignominious death, and all
their property is taken for the benefit of the public.

The dress of the men, is only a coarse woolen cloth wrapped round the
shoulders, which falls down as far as their ancles, with a cap of the same
cloth, and a twisted woolled turban over that. The women pay some more
attention to ornament themselves with dress. They are dressed with a long
woollen cloth, not unlike that of the men's, with a great number of pewter, and
brass broaches fixed upon it, about the shoulders, arms, and breast. They adorn
their heads, with several of these broaches fixed in their hair, and a braided
woollen string passed several times round their heads, which is filled with
several different kinds of flowers. The huram, or apartment of the Turkish
women is not only impenetrable, but must not be regarded on the outside with
any degree of attention. To approach them when abroad will give offense; and in
the town, if they cannot be avoided, it is the custom to turn to the wall and
stand still, without looking toward them while they pass. The Turkish women
claim an exemption from their confinement on one day only in the week, when
they visit their relations, and are seen going in companies to the bathes, or
setting in the burying grounds on the graves of their friends their children,
husband, or parents. They are then enwrapped and beclothed in such a manner,
that it is impossible to discern whether they are young or old, handsome or
ugly. Their heads, as low as the eyebrows are covered with white linen, and
also their faces beneath; the prominency of the nose and mouth giving them
nearly the visage of mummies. -- They draw a veil of black gauze over their
eyes the moment a man or boy comes in view. -- They wear short loose boots of
leather, red or yellow, with a large sheet over their common garments, and
appear very bulky. They use various arts to heighten their beauty -- such as
decorating their hair with small bits of silver gilded, resembling a violin in
shape, and woven in at regular distances. Their method of coloring the lashes
of the eye is somewhat curious. They throw incense of gum of Laudanum on some
coals of fire, intercept the smoke which ascends in a plate, and collect the
soot. They close one of their eyes, take the two lashes between the finger, and
thumb of the left hand, pulling them forward, and then thrusting in at the
external corner a bodkin, which has been immersed in the soot, and extracting
it again, the particles before adhering to it remain within, and is presently
ranged round the organ, serving as a soil to its luster, besides contributing,
as they say to its health, and increasing its apparent magnitude.

The children are suffered to go naked till 8 or 9 years of age. The Sheck, or
chief of a tribe, is known by a linen garment instead of a woollen, and a
linen turban, he also wears a pair of shoes, made of dressed leather.

The common sort of people seldom wear any shoes at all, and when they do, they
are made of undressed leather, with hair on the outside. These people are
commonly called Arabs; their customs, language and religion bear a strict
affinity with those of Arabia. -- When a young man would marry, he drives a
number of cattle to the tent where the parents of his mistress reside. The
bride is then set on horse back, and led to the tent of her lover, amidst the
shouts and huzzas of a multitude of young people, who have been invited to the
nuptial feast. When she arrives at the tent where the young man resides, a
mixture of milk, and honey is given her to drink, and a song is sung suitable
to the occasion. She then alights and receives a stick from her husband, which
she thrusts into the ground, and holding her right hand upon its end, she
repeats some words to the following effect:

"As this stick is fastened in the ground,
So to my husband, I am bound,
As naught but violence can it remove,
So naught but death can force me from his love."
She then drives his flock to water, and back again, to show her willingness to
perform any duty that he may assign her. These previous ceremonies being
settled, all the company set down by the tent, and the evening concludes with
the greatest jollity. They feast upon Dates, Almonds, Raisins, Olives, and Oil,
and drink Sherbot, which is water, having run through Raisins, somewhat like
making lie of ashes. -- Subsequent to the marriage, the wife is veiled and
never stirs from the tent of her parents, for the space of a whole moon, and no
one can see her, except her parents, during this time. These are the
ceremonies, which I have been informed by the Algerines are customary in
celebrating a marriage, among those savage tribes of Barbary, but I never had
an opportunity of viewing one of them.

The economy of these people, to keep their clothes dry in a storm, is worthy
the attention of the reader, I have therefore presented the following anecdote
to their perusal. One day as I was at work about two miles from the city, there
arose a very heavy shower of rain, and for my part I would willingly have got
under some tree, or something else, if I had been allowed so to do to shelter
myself from the tempest. But just before the rain began, I observed five of the
natives at a small distance driving some mules, loaded with coals, toward the
city, who, on perceiving the rain was approaching, very calmly stopped their
beasts, and began to undress themselves. This excited my curiosity to know what
they were going about. And as I was digging with a hoe, having my back toward
them, I immediately turned myself about and kept at my work with my face the
other way, in order to observe their proceedings, without neglecting my labor,
which if I did, I was sure would bring the bloody scourge of the unrelenting
task-master upon my back. I therefore kept steady about my work, and looking at
them as often as I dared, observed they stripped themselves with a great deal
of precipitation; then making their clothes up in a bundle they took each one
a rock about the bigness of a water pail, and laying the bundle upon the rock,
they covered* it with their bodies having their hands and feet upon the ground;
all their care was to keep their clothes secure from the wet, while their
naked bodies were exposed to the fury of the weather. When it had done raining
they took their clothes in their hands, and drove on their mules a few steps,
till they came to some bushes, then taking up some dry leaves that lay under
them, and had been kept from the wet by the shelter which the bushes afforded,
they wiped each other nearly dry, then dressed themselves and went on. If a
person was seen to do so in this country, he would be counted a fool or a
madman; however I must confess I thought them something in the right; for after
the storm is over, be it ever so violent, they have dry clothes on their backs
to pursue their journey with. This being the first time I ever saw this
singular method used, if excited some astonishment, but it being so often
practiced, it soon became natural. The people in the city, will commonly pull
off their shoes, when the streets are muddy and walk barefooted, to preserve
their shoes from being damaged. I am informed that those who travel on horse
back or on other beasts, have a bag, covered with an oil-cloth, in which they
thrust their clothes in stormy weather, and ride stark naked. Allowing this to
be customary among the soldiers, as it probably is, I fancy, if an army of them
should be met in a storm, in this country, it would create a terrible fright,
and perhaps do as much execution to an ignorant body, as their offensive arms,
and oblige them to seek for safety in their heels.

These wretches have their heads close shaved, all except one small lock on the
top, which they never cut off; they being taught by the Alcoran, that Mahomet
is to draw them up to their imaginary Paradise by that small look of hair. They
never shave their faces at all, but suffer their beards and mustachoes to grow
long, in the length and largeness of which, they take a particular pride; and
he that has a very large beard, they allow to be a wise man. They are as
strict, as to their religion, as the people are in the towns and cities, they
rise carry and late to prayers; but only like children, do it because they are
ordered so to do by the Mufti, who is the high priest of their religion: And to
him in ecclesiastical matters they pay the most implicit obedience and
resignation.

"The beaten path of ignorance they tread."

In a former page I promised my readers, a further description of Oran, which I
shall now endeavor to perform.

Oran is situated about eighty leagues west of Algiers; is a mile and an half
in circumference. It lies partly on a plain and partly on the ascent of a hill,
and is well fortified. As the Spanish coasts and Merchant ships, had suffered
much from the corsairs of this port, Ferdinand, King of Spain, determined to
attempt its reduction. Accordingly he transported into Africa, an army under
the command of his prime minister, Cardinal Ximense. -- The wonted good fortune
of this officer did not, at this juncture desert him. He had maintained a
correspondence with some of the people of Oran; and when the Moors sallied out
to attack the Spaniards, their perfidious countrymen shut the gates against
them. Ximense killed four thousand of the barbarians, and set at liberty
sixteen thousand Christian slaves. -- The Algerines, during near two hundred
years made frequent but unsuccessful attempts to recover it. In 1708, they
retook it. In June, 1732, a Spanish army was landed not far from Oran. The
Turkish troops and the inhabitants were seized with a panic, and abandoned
their fortifications without any resistance. The Moors not long after attacked
it with great fury, but were finally repulsed, with much slaughter. The
Spaniards continued in quiet possession of it until the year 1791, when the
Algerines went with a strong force against it, under the command of Alli Bey of
Mascara. After a siege of several days, they withdrew their troops, having
received much damage. -- In 1792, the Dey of Algiers, and the King of Spain
having agreed upon terms, very adventageous to the former, Oran was given up to
the Algerines, and is still in their possession. During the sixty years, the
Spaniards had this place in their possession; their soldiers kept continually
deserting. The Algerines used the greatest economy to prevent those at Oran,
from knowing how the deserters fared. By this means they were daily adding to
their number of slaves, as the soldiers supposed they would be at liberty, if
they deserted to their enemy. But contrary to every law of humanity, as soon as
they were in the hands of the Algerines, they were made slaves, and deprived of
the little liberty they enjoyed while under the Banner, of his Catholic Majesty.

In this situation, were about five hundred of them, when I left Algiers. The
King of Spain it cannot be reasonably expected, will pay a sum of money to
ransom people who deserted from his service, and by that means involved
themselves in this predicament, therefore they have no hopes of relief till
death. There is a story that the Dey, in one of his letters to the King of
Spain, desired to know if he intended to redeem those slaves from Oran. To
which the King replied, that, if the Dey would salt them in barrels, he would
purchase them at the price of salted beef.

CHAPTER IV. Origin of the present government of Algiers -- Hoyradin and Horuc
commence pirates -- increase their strength -- their names become dreadful --
The older brother (called Barbarassa) invited by the King of Algiers to assist
him against the Spaniards -- (...) marches to Algiers with 5,000 men -- murders
the King, and assumes the power -- Expedition of Charles 5th against him --
Barbarossa, vanquished and slain -- His brother likewise called Barbarossa
assumes the Scepter -- puts his dominions under the grand seignior -- who
assists him -- appointed Admiral of the Turkish Fleet -- appointed Vice Roy of
Algiers -- lays the foundation of the Mole -- appointed Bashaw of the Empire --
Hasson Aga appointed Bashaw of Algiers -- who ravages Spain, Italy, and the
ecclesiastical States -- Charles 5th attempts the destruction of Algiers with a
powerful sleet and army -- is defeated with great loss, and returns to
Carthagena -- Saleb Raise, successor to Hassan, attacks (...) -- dies of the
plague -- Hassan Corso elected in his stead -- is displaced by the Port, and a
new Bashaw from Constantinople arrives -- he is refused admittance -- enters by
treachery: and Corso, by his orders, is thrown from the walls -- Tekelli
murdered by Yusef, who is chosen in his stead -- dies of the plague -- Hassan,
(son of Hayradin Barbarosse) chosen in his stead -- Spaniards attack Mortosan,
and are defeated -- Hassan sent prisoners to Constantenople is cleared-Achmet
appointed a new Bashaw he dies -- Hassan sent a third time Bashaw of Algiers --
attacks Marsalquivir -- raises the siege, and again recalled to Constantinople
-- Mahomet, his successor, incorporates the Janissaries and Levantine Turks --
Juan Gascon, a Spaniard forms a design of destroying the Algerine navy -- is
unsuccessful, taken and executed -- Ochali, succeeds Mahomet -- and subdues
(...) -- Algerines send a deputation to the Port, complain of the rapacity of
the Bashaws, and request liberty to choose their own Dey -- The Port agrees --
and the Divan elects a Dey, etc. -- Spaniards make an attempt upon Algiers, but
fail -- The Moors expelled from Spain -- French attack Algiers with 52 sail;
defeat their fleet and take two of their Corsairs -- English send a fleet
against them, but do nothing -- Cologlies seize on the Citadel, but are
overcome by the Turks and Renegadoes -- Algerines throw off their dependence on
the Port -- Louis 13th builds a fort on their coast -- French fleet arrive at
Algiers, demand the French Captives; the Dey refuses, and the French Admiral
carries off the Turkish Vice Roy, and his Cadi -- Algerines retaliate on
Puglia, ravage the neighboring coasts, and scour the Adriatic -- Venetians
alarmed and send Admiral Capello against them -- attacks and defeats the
Algerine squadron, under Pinchinin -- Venetians pay the Port 50,000 dollars by
way of atonement -- Louis 14th sends a fleet under Du Quense, against Algiers
-- bombards the City and returns to Toulon -- Algerines retaliate on Provence
-- ravage and bring off a great number of Captives -- Louis sends another
armament under Du Quense -- arrives bombards the town, demolishish the Dey's
Palace, and several other public edifices -- demands the French captives, and
receives 142 with a promise of the rest -- Du Quense, demands (...) the French
Captives with the effects they had (...) taken -- also their Admiral Mezamorto,
and (...), as hostages -- The Dey embarrassed, and Mezamorto charges him with
cowardice -- raises an insurrection among the Soldiers -- the Dey massacred --
Mezamorto succeeds him, breaks the truce with the French, and recommences
hostilities -- causes all the French in the city to be massacred -- Du Quense
reduces Algiers to a heap of ruins and retires -- Algerines sue for peace of
France, and obtain it -- enter into a peace with England -- Spaniards, under
O'Reilley attack Algiers, are unsuccessful, and retire with great loss.
HAVING mentioned the expedition of Charles the V. in some of the former pages,
I presume a brief account of the destruction of that armament, would not be
disapproved of by the readers of this small volume. Previous to the beginning
of the sixteenth century, Algiers had experienced a variety of revolutions, in
the form of its government, which does not come within the line of this short
sketch to discribe. But there happened, a very sudden revolution about that
time, which has made their history worthy of more attention, as it was the
means of rendering the States of Barbary very formidable to the Europeans. Two
sons of a potter in the Isle of Lesbos, Lesbos, to (...) -- an island of the
Archipelago, in Asiatic Turkey, 64 miles N. W. of Smyrna, in Asia Minor; it is
54 miles long, 30 broad, abounding in Corn, Wine, Figs and Oil. This island is
celebrated for having been the residence of various eminent characters. --
(...), who charmed the Dolphins with his music, was a native of this island; as
were also, Pittacus, one of the 7 wise men of Greece: and Sappho, the (...)
celebrated (...). Aristotle, Strabo, Homer, recommended its wines; the first of
whom, and Epicurus read lectures here.
who were known by the names of Hayradin, and Horuc, being prompted by a
restless and enterprising spirit, forsook the profession of their father, went
immediately to sea, and joined a gang of pirates, who made some of the ports of
Barbary, the places of their rendezvous. They soon distinguished themselves by
the activity of their unparrelleled villianies, and in a short time they became
masters of a small brigantine, mounting 14 six pounders by means of which, they
supported their infamous and cruel piracies, with such great success, that in a
few years they had under their command a fleet of twelve galleys, and many
other vessels of less force. Horuc, (the elder brother, who was afterward
called Barbarossa, by reason of the red color of his beard,) was Admiral of
this fleet, and Hayradin the younger brother, was second in command. By their
predatory conduct, their names soon became dreadful, and infamous from the
Straits of Gibraltar to those of the Dardanelles.

Two famous castles defending the gulf of Lapanto, and the narrow straight
called the Hellespont, which is here two miles over, and the key as it were to
Constantinople; the one on the side of Europe, and the other on that of Asia.
The former was anciently called Sestos, and the latter Abidos. In 1656, the
Venetians passed through with their fleets between these forts, and drove that
of the Turks on shore. Here all vessels coming from the Archipelago are
examined. Not far from hence namely off Lapanto, the Venetians gained a
considerable victory over the Turkish fleet.

As their power increased, their ambitious views extended with a still greater
rapidity; for while they were acting as pirates, and robbers, they arrogated
the ideas, and acquired the talents of, Conquerers. The prizes which they took
on the coasts of Spain, France, and Italy, they often carried into the ports of
Barbary. The situation of these harbors being so very commodious for the
security of their Corsairs; and to add to this convenience, their vicinity to
the greatest commercial ports at that time in Christendom, raised an ambitious
desire in the breast of those infamous pirates, for an establishment in that
country. For accomplishing this project, an opportunity soon presented itself,
which the brothers, did not suffer to pass unimproved. The King of Algiers, at
this time, who was called Eutemi, having made several unsuccessful attempts to
gain possession of a fort. which was built not far from his capital, by the
Spanish Governors of Oran, applied to Barbarossa for assistance. The villain as
may be supposed gladly accepted the proposal, and left the fleet under the
command of his brother Hayradin. He then marched with five thousand men to
Algiers, and was received with all the honors due to the commander in chief of
such an army, by the Algerines, who supposed him come to their assistance, not
having the least suspicion of his base designs. His ambitious desires of
becoming great among the inhabitants of that part of the globe, had now an
opportunity of being put in execution, and every thing seemed to promise him
success. This great force had given him the command of the City, and indeed
every thing seemed to favor the perpetration of his diabolical plot. He
therefore murdered secretly the monarch, who had solicited his assistance. and
whom he had come to assist, and proclaimed himself king in his stead. He
established the authority which he had usurped, by arts suited to the genius of
the people whom he had to govern; for his liberality to those who favored his
promotion, was without bounds, and to those whom he had any reason to mistrust,
that wished to oppose his authority his cruelties were no less unbounded. With
his fleets, which resembled the armaments of a great monarch, rather than the
squadrons of a pirate, he continued to infest the coasts of Spain and Italy,
for by this time he had increased the number of his corsairs to upwards of 50
armed vessels. The repeated and cruel devastations of his corsairs upon those
coasts, obliged Charles the Vth, about the beginning of his reign, to furnish
the Marquis de Comares, who was then Governor of Oran, with a sufficient number
of troops to attack him. That officer executed his commission with such spirit
and resolution, that the forces of Babarossa were vanquished in several
encounters, and he himself was shut up in Tremesen, where he remained blockaded
for several months, and was at last fortunately slain, as he was attempting to
make his escape. His brother Hayradin, who was likewise known by the name of
Barbarossa, assumed the Algerine scepter. For some time he carried on his naval
robberies with the utmost vigor, and on the continent of Africa, he even
extended his conquests. But perceiving at length that the Moors and Arabs never
submitted to his despotic mandates, but with the utmost reluctance, and being
apprehensive least his continual depredations would one day draw upon him the
arms of the Christians, he put his dominions under the protection of the grand
Seignior, from whom he received a sufficient body of Turkish soldiers, for his
security against his foreign as well as domestic enemies.

The infamy, (or, as Doctor Robertson see proper to call it, the same) of his
exploits daily increased, till at length Solomon, approving of his conduct
offered him the command of the Turkish fleet; and on the other hand, Hayradin,
justly dreading the fatal consequences, which might arise from the tyranny of
his officers over the Algerines, solicited the protection of the grand
seignior. This was immediately granted, and Hayradin himself appointed Bashaw,
or vice roy of Algiers; by the means of which he received such numerous
reinforcements from Turkey, that the unhappy Algerines durst not make the least
complaint, and were now under the woeful necessity of resigning their persons,
and property to the will of this despotic prince. Exclusive of those Turks who
were sent him by the grand seignior as soldiers, such numbers flocked to him,
voluntarily, that he was not only capable in a considerable degree of annoying
the Christians with his corsairs at sea, but also of keeping the Moors, and
Arabs in subjection at home. About this time he began the foundation of the
mole, which I have before described. Hayradin had by this time rendered himself
dreaded not only by the Arabs, and Moors, but also by the maritime christian
powers, especially by the Spaniards. The vice roy sailed not to acquaint the
Grand Seignior with his success, who being much pleased with his proceedings,
furnished him with a fresh suppy of money, by means of which he was enabled to
build those sorts and batteries before mentioned. The Sultan, in the mean time,
either out of a sense of the services of Hayradin, or perhaps being jealous
least he should make himself independent, or more probably, both, to prevent
the one, and reward the other, raised him to the important dignity of Bashaw of
the empire, and to succeed him as Bashaw of Algiers, he appointed, a Sardinian
renegado, who was known by the name of Hassan Aga, or General Hassan the word
Aga in Arabec signifying a general.

This new Bashaw immediately on taking possession of his new government, began
to pursue his ravages, on the coasts of Spain, and Italy with greater fury than
(...) any of his predecessors had done, he even extended them to the
ecclesiastical state, and other parts of Italy did not escape his rapine. These
proceedings greatly alarmed, Pope Paul 3d who exhorted the emperor Charles 5th
to send a powerful fleet to suppress those diabolical repeated piracies: and
least something might be wanting to render this daring enterprise successful,
his holiness published a bull, wherein a plenary absolution of sins, and the
crown of martyrdom, were promised to all those who fell in battle or were made
slaves. The emperor, needed no incitement on his part* he therefore set sail at
the head of a powerful fleet, which consisted of one hundred and twenty three
large ships, and twenty galleys of different sizes, having on board thirty
thousand well diciplined troops, with an immense quantity of arms and
ammunition. The reduction of Algiers was so apparently inevitable at this time,
that many of the young nobility, and gentlemen attended this expedition as
volunteers, and among these were many knights of Malta, remarkable for their
valor against the enemies of Christianity. Many ladies of birth and character
attended Charles; A vast number of the officers and soldiers, took their wives
and children with them, intending to settle in Barbary, after the conquest was
finished.

About the beginning of October, A. D. 1541, they arrived off the harbor. The
sight of such a prodigious armament threw the Algerines into the utmost
consternation as their city was surrounded only by a wall, with scarce any out
works, and their whole garrison consisted of only eight hundred Turks, and six
thousand Moors, who were chiefly without fire arms, and poorly disciplined and
accoutred; the rest of their forces being dispersed in different provinces of
the kingdom, to levy the usual tribute on the Arabs and Moors. The Spaniards
landed their forces without any opposition whatever, and immediately built a
large fort on a hill about a mile to the eastward of the city, under the cannon
of which they encamped. The city at this time being dependant on one spring for
its water, which was one mile from the walls and the Spaniards, having diverted
its course, they were now reduced to the utmost distress. Hassan received a
summons from Charles, to surrender at discretion, on pain of being put to the
sword with all his garrison if he refused. The herald was ordered to extol the
vast power of the emperor, both by sea and land, and to exhort him to return to
the Christian religion. To this Hassan replied, that he must be a madman, who
would pretend to advise an enemy, and that the person advised, would act still
more madly should he take counsel of such an adviser. He was, however upon the
point of surrendering the city, when he received intelligence, that the forces
belonging to the western government were in full march toward the place; upon
which it was determined to defend it, to the utmost. In the mean time, Charles
being resolved upon a general assault, kept up a cannonade without
intermission, upon the town, which from the weak defense made by the garrison,
he looked upon as already in his possession. But while the Divan were
deliberating on the most proper means of obtaining an honorable capitulation,
a mad prophet, attended by a multitude of people, entered the assembly, and
foretold the destruction of the Spaniards before the end of the moon, exhorting
the inhabitants to hold out till that time. This prediction was soon
accomplished in a very surprising and unexpected manner; for on the 28th of
October 1541, a dreadful storm of rain, hail and wind, arose from the
northward, attended with violent shocks of earthquakes, and a dismal and
universal darkness both by sea and land; so that the sun, moon, and elements,
seemed to combine together for the destruction of the Spaniards. Eighty six
ships, and fifteen galleys, were destroyed in that one night, with all their
crews, and military stores, and the Algerines say in less than half an hour, by
which the army on shore was deprived of all means of subsistence. Their camp
also, which spread itself along the plain, under cover of the cannon of their
fort, was laid quite under water by the dreadful torrents which descended from
the neighboring hills. Many of the troops were cut to pieces by the Moors, and
Arabs by trying to remove into some better situation; while several galleys,
and other vessels, endeavoring to gain some neighboring creeks along the
coast, were immediately plundered, and their crews massacred by the
inhabitants. Next morning; Charles, to his utmost astonishment, beheld the sea
covered with the fragments of his ships, and the bodies of men, horses, and
other creatures swimming upon the waves, the sight of which so disheartened
him, that abandoning his tents, artillery, and all his heavy baggage, to the
enemy, he marched at the head of his army in the greatest precipitation and
disorder toward Cape Mallabux, in order to re-embark, on board those vessels,
which had out-weathered the storm. But Hassan, was not an idle spectator all
this while, for he had so narrowly watched the motion of the Spaniards, that he
allowed them just time enough to get to the shore, when he sallied out and
attacked them with the greatest fury, in the midst of their hurry to get into
the ships. The Spaniards, however made an obstinate resistance, and a very
bloody carnage continued for about two hours, when they were overpowered, and
obliged to retreat to their boats, the whole number of which was not capable of
carrying one quarter of them. Hassan pursued them to their boats, and killed a
vast number, and brought away a still greater number of captives; after which
he returned in triumph to Algiers. The prophet Yusef, who had foretold the
destruction of the Spaniards, was soon after this declared the deliverer of his
country, and had a considerable gratuity decreed him, with the liberty of
exercising his prophetic functions unmolested. It was not long however, before
a strong opposition was made against him, by some of the interpreters of the
law, by remonstrating to the Dey, how ridiculous and scandalous, it was to
their nation, to ascribe its deliverance to a poor fortuneteller, which had
been obtained by the fervent prayers of an eminent saint of their own
profession. The Bashaw, and his Divan, seemed, out of policy, to give way to
this last notion; yet the impression which the prediction of Yusef, and its
accomplishments had made upon the minds of the common people, proved too strong
to eradicated; since which the spirit of divination and conjuring, has got into
such credit among them, that not only their great statesmen, but their priests,
and santoons, have applied themselves to that study, and dignified it with the
name of the Revelations of Mahomet.

The Spaniards had scarcely reached their ships, when a second storm attacked
them, in which a vast vast number more of them perished. One vessel in
particular, with seven hundred soldiers, and three hundred seamen on board,
sunk, in the presence of Charles, without a possibility of saving one man. At
length with great difficulty the survivors reached the port of Bujeyah, a small
port on the coast of Barbary, which lies about thirty five leagues to the
eastward of Algiers, and was at this time possessed by Spain. They remained
here only till the sixteenth of November, and then set sail for Carthagena, (in
Spain,) at which place they arrived on the 25th of the same Month. Upwards of
one hundred and twenty ships and galleys, were lost, in this unfortunate
expedition, with above three hundred officers, and eight thousand soldiers,
besides mariners, exclusive of those destroyed by the enemy on their
re-embarkation, or perished in the last storm, and those who were made slaves.
The number of prisoners was now so great, that some of them were sold, by the
Algerines, by way of contempt, for an Onion per head!

The Spaniards were never able to annoy the Algerines, in any considerable
degree, after this time. In the year 1555, Salab Baise, successor to Hassan,
attacked the city of Bujeyah, and soon made himself master of it, though not
without an obstinate resistance from the Spaniards, and great slaughter on both
sides. Salab Baise now augmented the number of Christian slaves, to thirty one
thousand. The next year, this commander's ambition being raised with the
success he met at Bujeyah, he set out upon a new expedition, supposed to be
against Oran, but was scarce got out of the city, when he was attacked with the
plague which made its appearance in his groin, and fortunately carried him off,
in twenty four hours. The plague at this time raging very violently in the
city, and among the troops, the soldiery immediately elected a Corsican
renegado, HassanCorso, in his stead, in order to execute the intended
expedition against Oran. He accepted the Bashawship with much difficulty,
dispatching a messenger at the same time to acquaint the port, with what had
happened, and marched his army against Oran, they had scarcely commenced their
hostilities against that place, when orders were received from the port,
expressly forbiding Hassan-Corso to begin the siege; or, if it was begun
enjoining him immediately to raise it, which he did accordingly. This officer
had enjoyed his dignity but four months, when a new Bashaw, Tekelli, arrived
from Constantinople, as his successor. The Algerines resolved not to admit him;
but by the treachery of the Levantine soldiers, he at last entered. He
immediately ordered Corso, to be thrown upon the hooks which are fastened in
the walls of city, one of which catching him by the ribs of his side, he hung
in this horrid agony, three days before he expired. Tekelli, was inhumanly
murdered shortly after, under the cupola of a saint, by Yusef Calabres, a
favorite renegade, of Hassan-Corso. The murderer was immediately chosen in his
stead, but died of the plague, six days after his election. Yusef's successor,
was Hassan, the son of Hayradin, Barbarossa. Not long after, the Spaniards
undertook an expedition against Mostagan under the command of the court
D'Alcandela, but were utterly defeated, the commander slain, and twelve
thousand men taken prisoners. Hassan having disobliged his subjects, they sent
him in irons to Constantinople, and two Turkish officers supplied his place.
Hassan was cleared, but Achmet was appointed a new Bashaw. -- Immediately upon
his arrival at Algiers, he sent the two deputy-Bashaws to Constantinople. where
they were beheaded. Achmet died in four months after; and Hassan was sent a
third time Viceroy to Algiers, Soon after his arrival he engaged in the seige
of Marsalquiver, (a town of Algiers, situate on the Barbary coast of Africa,
lying opposite to Oran,) which at this time, was possessed by the Spaniards;
and situated at a small distance from Oran. He planted the Ottoman standard
several times upon the walls, which the Spaniards as often dislodged; and
Hassan was finally obliged to raise the seige, after great slaughter on both
sides.

In the year 1567, Hassan was again recalled to Constantinople. His successor,
Mahomet, incorporated the Janisaries and Levantine Turks together. Thus he put
an end to their dissentions, and the foundation of the Algerine independency on
the port, was now laid. He erected several fortifications which he intended to
render impregnable.

About this time, one Juan Gascon, an intrepid Spaniard, formed a design of
destroying the whole piratic navy, as they lay in the bay, by setting them on
fire in the night. He was furnished by Philip the 2d, with vessels, fireworks,
and mariners, for the execntion of his plan. He failed for Algiers in the
beginning of October, when the greatest part of the Corsairs lay at anchor in
the bay; and advanced near enough to view them, undiscovered. He accordingly,
unperceived by any, came to the mole, and dispatched his men, with their
fireworks but these being so badly mixed, that they could not be kindled.
Gascon now finding himself discovered, and in the utmost danger got his ships
under way with all possible haste, and stood to sea; but was pursued,
overtaken, and brought back a prisoner. Mahomet immediately caused a gibbet to
be erected on the spot where Gascon landed, and hung him by the feet upon a
hook, with his commission tied to his toes. He had been suspended in this
situation, but a short time, when the captain who made him prisoner, and
several other officers, interceeded so strongly in his behalf, that he was
taken down, and put under the care of a christian surgeon. A few days after, it
being reported that it was the common talk and belief in Spain, that the
Algerines durst not hurt a hair of Guscon's head, he was carried to the top of
the execution wall, and thrown down. In his fall a hook catched him by the
belly, which tore out, so he fell to the bottom and was dashed to pieces.

Mahomet was succeeded by Ochali, a renegado, who subdued the kingdom of Tunis.
It remained subject to the bashaw of Algiers until the year 1586, a Bashaw of
Tunis, was then appointed by the grand Seignior.

Algiers continued to be governed by the Turkish Vice Roys or Bashaws, till the
beginning of the seventeenth century. The Turkish Janisaries, and Militia
becoming powerful enough at last, to suppress the tyrannic sway of these
Bashaws a deputation of some of their chief members was sent to Constantinople
to complain of their rapacity. They represented to the ministry, how much more
honorable it would be for the grand Seignior to permit them to choose their own
Dey, or Governor, from among themselves, whose interest it would be to see that
the revenue of the country was rightly applied in keeping up its forces
complete, and in supplying all other exigencies of the state, without any
further trouble or expense to the port, than that of allowing them his
protection. The Divan elected a Dey from among themselves. A new set of laws
was compiled, and they made several regulations, for the better support of this
new government. The subsequent altercations that frequently happened between
the Bashaws and Deys, the one for endeavoring to recover their former power,
and the other to curtail it, caused such frequent complaints and discontents at
the Ottoman court, as made them sometimes repent of their compliance.

The Spaniards made another attempt upon Algiers, in the year 1601, but by
contrary winds their fleet was driven back, so that this time they came off
without loss. Such numbers of Moors, being expelled from Spain in the year
1609, that they flocked to Algiers in abundance; and many of them being able
sailors, they undoubtedly contributed to make the Algerine fleet so formidable
as it soon became. The Moors are descended from the Saracens, who at the end of
the 7th Century, possessed themselves of the finest kingdoms of Asia and Africa
and not content with the immense region that formerly composed great part of
the Assyrian Persian, Macedonian, and Roman Empires, crossed the Mediterranean
ravaged Spain, and established themselves in its southern provinces. They were
superior to all their contemporaries in arts and arms, and held possession of
the throne nearly 300 years. Learning flourished in Spain, while the rest of
Europe was buried in Ignorance and barbarity. A series of civil wars continued
to depopulate Spain until about the year 1492, when all the Kingdoms of Spain
(Portugal excepted) were united by the marriage of Ferdinand, King of Arragon,
and Isabella, the heiress, and afterward King of Castile. They took Grenada,
and in the beginning of the 17th century, the Moors and Jews who would not
become Converts to the christian faith, were to the number of one hundred and
seventy thousand families, driven out of Spain. This depopulation of Spain of
Laborers, Manufacturers and Seamen, added greatly to the internal growth and
strength of Algiers, as well as to the increase of its navy.
In 1616, their naval force consisted of forty large ships, beside Xebecs,
row-galley's etc. their Admiral ship at this time was upwards of five hundred
tons burden. Their fleet was divided into two squadrons, one of eighteen sail,
was stationed off the port of Malaga; and the other off the Cape Santa Maria,
between Lisbon and Seville; both of which annoyed Christian ships and plundered
both English and French, with whom they pretended to be in friendship, as well
as Spaniards and Portuguese with whom they were at war.

The Algerines were now become formidable to the European powers. The Spaniards
who were most exposed to danger, solicited the assistance of England, the Pope
and other states. The French however were the first who dared to show their
resentment at the perfidious behavior of these miscreants; and in the year
1617, M. Beauleau was sent against them with a fleet of fifty men of war. He
defeated their fleet, and took two of their vessels. Their Admiral sunk his own
ship rather than fall into the hands of the enemy. The English sent a squadron
of men of war against Algiers in the year 1620, but they returned without doing
or sustaining any material damage. The Algerines daily becoming more insolent
and daring, openly defied all the European powers, the Dutch only excepted, to
whom, in 1625 they sent a proposal, that if they would sit out twenty sail of
ships in the following year, upon any service against the Spaniards, the
corsairs would join them with sixty sail. In 1626, the Cologlies seized on the
Citadel, and nearly accomplished their design, of making themselves masters of
the city. The Turks and Renegadoes, attacked them with great fury, and defeated
them with terrible slaughter. Vast numbers were beheaded, and their heads
thrown in heaps upon the walls of the city. -- The Algerines, and other state
of Barbary, threw off their dependence on the port, in the year 1623. Sultan
Amurath 4th, had been obliged to make a truce with the Emperor Ferdinand 2d;
for the term of twenty five years, and as this put a stop to the piratical
trade of the Algerines, they resolved, that whoever desired to be at peace with
them, must, separately apply to their own government. They made prizes of
several merchant ships, belonging to the powers at peace with the port. At
Scanderoon A town of A siatic Turkey, situate on the coast of Asia Minor. It is
the port to on of Aleppo, with which the English and Dutch carry on a
considerable trade.
they seized a Dutch ship, and polacre; in this port they even ventured on
shore, the Turkish aga and inhabitants had abandoned the town on their
approach, they therefore plundered all the magazines and ware houses, and set
them on fire. About this time Louis 13th, undertook to built a fort on their
coast, instead of one formerly built at the Marsilians, and which had been
demolished. This, after much difficulty, he accomplished; and it was called the
Bastion of France; but the situation being found inconvenient, the French
purchased the port of La Call, and obtained liberty to trade with the Arabs
and Moors. In the mean time, the Ottoman court, was so much embarrassed with a
Persian war, that they had no leisure to check the Algerine piracies. The
Vizier, and other courtiers, took this opportunity to compound matters with the
Algerines, and to get a share of the prizes, which were very considerable. A
severe reprimand accompined with threats, was sent them, merely for sake of
form. They replied, that "they deserved to be indulged in these depredations,
as they were the only bulwark against the Christian powers, and in particular,
against the Spaniards, the sworn enemies to the Moslem name" they added, that
"if they should pay a punctilious regard to all who could purchase liberty to
trade with the Ottoman empire, they "would have nothing to do but set sire to
their shipping, and turn camel-drivers."

The Algerines prosecuted their piracies with impunity, to the terror and
disgrace of Christendom, till the year 1652; when a French fleet being driven
to Algiers accidentally, the admiral thought proper to demand a release of all
the Captives belonging to his nation indiscriminately, which the Dey refusing
to comply with the Frenchman without any further ceremony carried off the
Turkish viceroy, and his Cadi or Judge, who were just arrived from the port,
with all their equipage and retinue. By way of reprisal the Algerines surprised
the Bastion of France, already mentioned, and carried off six hundred
inhabitants, with all their effects. Sixteen galleys and galliots were sitted
out soon after by the Algerines, under the command of Alli Penchinin. The chief
design of this armament was against the treasure of Loretto in Italy; but being
prevented by contrary winds from obtaining their desire, they made a descent on
Puglia in the kingdom of Naples; where the whole territory of Necotra, suffered
by their ravages, and a vast number of captives were carried to Algiers. They
then steered toward Dalmatia, and scoured the Adriatic, loading themselves
with immense treasure. Such ravages greatly alarmed the Venetians, who
immediately sent admiral Capello, with twenty eight sail of ships against them,
with express orders to burn, sink or take, every Barbary corsair he might meet
with, either at sea, or in the Ottoman harbors, agreeable to their late treaty
with the Port. The Raise Bashaw being at sea at this time with a Turkish fleet,
in order to drive the Maltese and Florentine cruisers from the Archipelago, and
being informed that the Algerine squadron was very near, sent express orders to
the Algerine admiral to come to his assistance. Pinchinin readily complied and
set sail; but on his way, he fell in with Capello, who chased him to Valona, a
sea port belonging to the Turkish empire; but the Turkish governor refusing to
turn out the pirates, according to the articles of peace between the Ottoman
court and Venice, Capello, was obliged to content himself with watching their
motion, for a considerable time. At length Pinchinin ventured out, and a
desperate engagement ensued, which continued for about four hours, with the
most determined obstinacy on both sides, at last Pinchinin fled, and was
pursued by Capello; but the pirates ships sailing faster than their enemy, they
made their escape. Five of the Algerine ships being disabled they fell into the
hands of the Venetians. In this action the pirates lost, in killed, one
thousand five hundred men, Turks, and Christian slaves, and one thousand six
hundred galley slaves set at liberty by Capello. The pirates, after this
defeat, returned to Valona, where they were again watched by the Venetians, but
the latter had not been long at his old station, before a letter was sent him
from his court, desiring him not to make any farther attempts at that time,
lest it might be the occasion of a rupture with the Port. Capello being forced
to submit; he resolved to take his leave of them in such a manner, as he though it
they deserved; observing how their tents and equipage were drawn along the
shore, he kept firing among them, while some ships were dispatched to attack
their squadron. They towed out sixteen of the pirates galleys, with all their
cannon and stores. A ball from one of the Venetian galleys having struck a
Turkish mosque, the whole action was considered as an insult upon the grand
Seignior. To conceal this orders were given to Capello to sink all the ships he
had taken from the Algerines, except the Admiral; which was to be laid up at
Venice as a trophy. Capello received a severe reprimand from his court, and the
Venetians were obliged to pay to the port, five hundred thousand ducats, by
way of atonement. The news of this defeat, filled Algiers, with rage and
confusion. They immediately applied to the port, for an order, that the
Venetians who were settled in the Levant, (the east part of the Mediterranean
sea,) should make their loss good. But the grand seignior refused to comply
with this, and left them to repair their losses in the best manner they could.
The pirates however soon recovered their former strength, being able at the end
of two years to send a fleet of sixty five sail to sea.

The Algerines having committed such grievous outrages on the coasts of
Provence and Languedoc, that Louis the 14th, was provoked in the year 1682, to
send a very, large sleet against them, under the command of the Manquis du
Quesne, vice Admiral of Prance. He arrived off Algiers in August, and gave the
City such a furious bombarding and cannonading, that in a short time, it was
greatly damaged, and the great Mosque battered down. The wind shifting on a
sudden obliged du Quesne to return to Toulon. The Algerines by way of reprisal,
sent a number of Corsairs to Provence where they committed the most dreadful
outrages, bringing away a vast number of captives; upon which Louis ordered
another armament, against them the next year. Du Quesne anchored before Algiers
in May 1683, where he was joined by the Marquis d'Affranville with five more
ships, it being resolved to bombard the town next morning, they accordingly
commenced the action in the morning, and threw one hundred bombs into it, which
did terrible execution, while the Algerines discharged several hundreds of
cannon against the assailants without doing any material damage. On the
following night great numbers of bombs were again thrown into the city, which
nearly demolished the Dey's palace, and several great edifices; some vessels
were sunk in the harbor and several batteries dismounted.

The Dey and soldiery being greatly alarmed at the terrible havoc, sued for
peace. -- As a preliminary, the French demanded all christian captives who had
been taken under the French flag, which was immediately granted, and one
hundred and forty two persons were directly given up, with a promise of sending
on board the rest as soon as they could be brought from the different parts of
the country. Du Quesne sent his commissary general and one of his engineers
into the town; with express orders to insist upon the surrender of all French
captives without exception, together with all the effects which they had taken
from the French; and that their Admiral Mezomorto, and Raise Alli, one of their
captains, should be given as hostages. The Dey being embarrassed with this last
demand, he assembled the Divan, and acquainted them with it. This threw
Mezomorto into a violent passion; he told the assembly, that the ruin of
Algiers, was occasioned by the cowardice of those who had the helm; that for
his part, he would never consent to deliver up any thing which they had taken
from the French. He immediately acquainted the soldiery with those new demands,
and of what had passed in the assembly; which so exasperated them, that they
massacred the Dey that very night, and the next day chose Mezomorto in his
stead. This being done, all the articles of peace which had been made were
destroyed, and hostilities renewed with greater fury than ever. Du Quesne now
kept pouring in such volleys of bombs, that the greatest part of the city was
almost reduced to ruins, in less than three days; the numbers of slain were so
great that their blood run in rivulets along the streets. Mezomorto was unmoved
by all these disasters, but had rather grown desperate and furious, he sought
only how to wreak his revenge on the enemy. He caused all the French in the
city to be inhumanely massacred, and not contented with this, he ordered their
Consul to be fastened alive to the mouth of a mortar, from which he was shot
away against their navy. Du Quesne was so exasperated, with this piece of
barbarity that he did not leave Algiers till he had utterly destroyed all their
fortifications, and shipping; and had reduced the city to a heap of ruins. --
The Algerines soon after this, sent an embassy into France, begging in the most
abject terms for peace; which Louis readily granted. This bombardment so far
humbled the Algerines, that they condescended to enter into a treaty with
England which took place in the year 1686. With a concise account of the
expedition of the Spaniards in 1775, I shall close this chapter.

On the 23d or June, 1775, a sleet consisting of six ships of the line, twelve
frigates, and thirty three other armed vessels set sail from Carthagena, in
Spain, to attack Algiers. The troops which were on board amounted to twenty
four thousand four hundred and forty seven men, including calvalry, infantry,
marines, and six hundred deserters destined to serve as workmen. They were
commanded by the count O'Reilly, a personal favorite of the late king of
Spain. For the land service they had an hundred and seventy six pieces of
artillery, mortars, and howitzers, with a sufficient quantity of military
stores. They anchored in the bay of Algiers, on the 30th of June, and 1st of
July. Next day a council was held, and the troops were ordered to hold
themselves in readiness to disembark on the ensuing morning by day break. But
as the succeeding night was windy, and a swell had set in from the North, their
orders were countermanded. -- From this day, to the sixth, there were frequent
councils, violent debates and nothing done. A quarrel broke out between
O'Reilly and the Marquis de Roman, a Spanish majorgeneral, who was killed in
the subsequent action. On the sixth, the principal officers were again
assembled, to receive their ultimate instructions. O'Reilly warned the army,
that the custom of the Algerines, was, to pretend a most violent attack, and to
fly with precipitation, on the smallest resistance, that they might draw the
enemy into an ambuscade. He cautioned the troops not to break their ranks, as
nothing but the force of discipline could secure them against so active an
enemy. The very error which they committed, and the snare into which they were
betrayed, was pointed out of them, by O'Reilly. The army was directed (on their
landing) to gain some heights, which were supposed requisite to ensure success
against Algiers. In the afternoon of the same day some ships of war were
ordered to fire against three batteries a little to the eastward of the city.
This commission was executed with so much laudable attention to the personal
safety of the assailants, that their shot did not reach the shore, those of one
seventy four gun ship excepted, and not one of those struck either of the
batteries. This dreadful Spanish attack ceased about sunset. Between eight and
nine thousand men were put on board the boats the next morning at day break in
order for landing. They advanced under the protection of their ships very near
the coast. Not a person appeared to oppose them; but lest they might be
attacked, and for their own safety they returned on board the transports at
seven o'clock in the morning. Not a single shot was fired on either side during
this whole day. On the 8th at day break, the ships were stationed to batter the
different forts to the right and lest of the place of disembarkation, eight
thousand troops were put on board the boats; which formed in six colums. The
place of landing was about a league to the eastward of the city. Sixty or
seventy thousand Barbarians, of whom the greatest part were cavalry, came in
sight, but did not attempt to oppose the landing of the Spaniards. The troops
advanced into a close country, which the Algerines had occupied in small
parties. The light infantry and grenadiers of the Spaniards were soon repulsed,
and the whole body fell into confusion. In a very short time they fled, leaving
behind them a great number of killed and wounded. Part of a second body of
troops, who were just landed, added to the general confusion. A third body had
cast up an entrenchment on shore, for the protection of the army. The Africans
attacked it, but were driven back, with great laughter on both sides. The
Algemines attacked them a second time, driving before them vast numbers of
camels which served to shield them in some measure from the balls of the
Spaniards. They advanced in this manner within a short distance of the Spanish
forces, when a sharp engagement took place which continued about half an hour,
the Spaniards were then put to flight, leaving behind them fifteen pieces of
cannon, three howitzers, and all their dead and wounded, the latter were all
put to the sword, and the head of every Spaniard, whether dead or alive,) was
struck off -- The Dey having offered a reward of ten Sequins for each head that
should be brought him. The Spanish accounts allow their loss to be no more than
five hundred and seventy one men killed. The Algerines state the loss of the
Spaniards, to be nine thousand five hundred and seven, and their own at about
one thousand two hundred. This latter statement is perhaps nigher the truth
than the former, by reason of the Algerines being screened in a consierable
degree from the fire of their enemy, by the camels, whom they drove in front.
The real amount of the loss on either side is very difficult to determine, but
one circumstance is evident, that the bones of several thousand Spaniards are
laying above ground to this day, in the valley where they were slain, they not
being allowed a burial by the Algerines.

CHAPTER VI. Occurrences during my captivity -- A Courier arrives from Alicant,
sent by Col. Humphreys -- The Dey refuses to treat with him, or to release the
American slaves -- A prize arrives, and proves to be the brig Minerva, of
New York, Joseph, Ingraham, master -- Receive a valuable allowance from the
United States, by way of the Sweedish Consul -- Several Americans attacked with
the small pox -- City alarmed with the plague -- carries off several Americans
-- A Dutch admiral arrives, effects a peace with the Regency, and ransoms all
the Dutch captives, in their possession -- Algerines capture 200 Corsicans,
they are redeemed -- letter from American Captives to Col. Humphreys -- his
answer -- Reports favorable to peace -- Messrs. Humphreys and Donaldson arrive
at Gibralter -- The latter arrives at Alicant -- sends a courier for, and
obtains permission to come to Algiers to conclude a peace with the Dey. -- Mr.
Donaldson arrives at Algiers, concludes a peace -- Release of the captives not
to take place until the ransom money is paid -- prisoners minds agitated with
hope, fear and suspense -- Joel Barlow arrives as Consul General of the United
States, for the city and kingdom of Algiers -- The Ransom money procured and
paid -- The captives leave Algiers.
NOTHING of any great moment happened after the second of November 1793, (to
which date I have already given an account) until the eleventh, when a courier
arrived from Alicant, in Spain, sent by Col. Humphreys, the Ambassador from the
United States for Algiers, to obtain the Deys permission for him to come to
Algiers, and make a peace with the regency. The Dey answered, that "he would
not receive him, either to make peace nor to redeem the American Slaves, that
he had been soliciting the American government, to send an ambassador to make a
peace with the Regency for three years before successively, that they had
treated his propositions with neglect and indifference; that as he had a truce
with the Dutch and Portuguese; and had captured ten sail of American vessels,
and had a fair prospect of capturing many more, he would not make a peace with
them -- that he made the truce with Portugal, for the purpose of having the
straits open for his vessels to cruize in the Atlantic, for capturing American
vessels -- that he could not be at peace with all nations at once."

At this dreadful news, we despaired of ever tasting the sweets of liberty
again. Here we expected to end our days in the most laborious slavery, pregnant
with unutterable distress, in whose presence reigns eternal horrors, and meagre
famine leads its doleful train; where subjection adds to the weight of each
cursed load, and the pain of the vassal is doubled, it spreads a gloom over the
sprightly face of nature, and dooms every pleasure to the grave. Behold here
the humane benevolent man; the respectable citizen, and affectionate parent --
he who vindicated the sacred cause of liberty, and adorned society by
inflexible honor. Behold him cruelly rent from the embraces of a beloved wife
-- from the arms of his infants -- from every object beneath the circling rays
of the sun, that could afford a gleam of momentary joy, and consigned to chains
and misery! See him groaning under the burden imposed on him; and still bearing
a heavier weight within. He silently wipes away the involuntary tear which
rolls down his emaciated cheek, and struggles to suppress the rising sigh.
Follow him when evening approaches, into his destined dungeon. Observe the
settled melancholy which preys upon his haggared countenance -- Restless and
forlorn, when he lays himself down to sleep, thought presents to his tortured
imagination the happy moments of love and liberty! He now gives free scope to
his grief, and bewails his cruel destiny, the briny torrent gushes unrestrained
from his eyes, and moistens the stones on which his emacitated body is
stretched. -- He exclaims, "O! happy, thrice happy days of former prosperity --
my eyes behold no more the ineffable smiles of friendship or the endearing face
of love! All nature is a vale of horror -- a howling waste, and life has become
a burden. Oh! my dear children -- my dear wife, those former happy days are
gone forever." Overwhelmed with heart rending anguish, the stupor of
insensibility affords him a momentary alleviation.

On the 29th, a prize arrived, and she proved to be the brig Minerva of New
York, loaded with wine, oil, fruit and marble, commanded by Joseph Ingraham,
from Leghorn, bound to America. She was captured by the Algerines, on the 25th,
within seven or eight miles of Cape St. Sebastian. When the captors arrived
they brought the crew of the said brig. Seven more were now added to our number
to participate in our distress, and partake with us the horrors of unspeakable
slavery, and bemoan the loss of the blessing of liberty, draging out an
unwelcome existence of a slave, on Barbary's hostile coast, and to be
persecuted by the hands of merciless Mahometans, confined in dark and
unwholesome dungeons, and loaded with galling irons, whose unrelenting
taskmaster raises the bloody scourge, and exalts the engine of inhuman
barbarity. Vain and fruitless are our incessant supplications, our cries are
lost in air, and resignation is our only antidote. Our accumulated wretchedness
far surpasses the power of description, bereft of every dawn of consolation,
filled with excruciating woe, we tremble, faint, and sink under the pressure of
affliction. The most striking portrait, though exhibited by the pencil of a
Hogarth, however affecting to the imagination, fal's infinitely short of the
reality.

On the 23d of December, we were informed by Mr. Skjolderbrand, the Sweedish
Consul, that we were allowed a valuable supply from the United States; and that
he had that day received orders and money, to pay each captain, belonging to
the United States of America, eight Spanish dollars per month; each mate, six,
and all the rest three dollars each. Our country also furnished us with a
sufficient quantity of clothing, decent and comfortable. This was happy news
for us; for from the time of our being captured, to this day, we had been
dragging out a miserable existence, scarce worth possessing, with no kind of
subsistence except bread and vinegar, and water to drink. This generosity of
the United S. to us their enslaved countrymen was of inestimable value. It was
more precious for being unexpected. No nation of Christendom had ever done the
like for their subjects in our situation.

The Republican government of the United States have set an example of humanity
to all the governments of the world. Our relief was matter of admiration to
merciless Barbarians. They viewed the American character from this time in the
most exalted light. They exclaimed, that, "Though we were slaves we were
gentlemen," that "the American people must be the best in the world to be so
humane and generous to their countrymen in slavery." The goodness of my country
I shall never forget. Our money would now enable us to purchase some kind of
provision, that we might have something to eat at night, when we went to the
Bagnio, that gloomy mansion of horror and despair. But these avaricious sons of
rapine and plunder, would endeavor to extort this little relief out of our
hands; and as they were not allowed to take it by force, they would endeavor
to get it by fraud. For when we were in the Bagnio, and wished to buy any kind
of provision, (as we were not allowed to go out after we had entered) these
fraudulent wretches, would gladly go and purchase them for us (on condition of
being well paid for their trouble) and they would tell us they gave double what
they really did give. In this manner they cheated us out of one half our money.
This supply was allowed us until the day of our liberation, with the addition
of three quarters of a dollar per Month, for the seamen, the officers being
allowed the same they were at first, with no addition.

Soon after receiving the above mentioned supply, and a letter from Col. David
Humphreys, informing the American Captains of his arrangments, they wrote him
the following letter..

Algiers, 29 th December, 1793.
WE the subscribers, in behalf of ourselves, and brother-sufferers, at present
captives, in this city of human misery, return you our sincere thanks, for your
communications of the 29th ult. and for the provision you have been pleased to
allow us, in order to alleviate somewhat our sufferings in our present
situation.

We have drawn up and signed two petitions one to the Senate, and the other to
the House of Representatives, and we shall esteem it, among the many favors you
have rendered us, that you will please to forward these petitions to their
respective address, so that no time may be lost, but that they may be laid
before the Representatives of our country, hoping that the United States, will
fully provide funds for extricating us from captivity, and restore us to our
Country, families, friends, and connections.

We have perused with sentiments of satisfaction and approbation, your memorial
to the Regency of Algiers, and have to observe, that its contents fully
coincide with our sentiments on this business, which we trust, in the Almighty
God, will terminate to the honor and interest of our common country,
notwithstanding the insinuations, of those in this quarter to the prejudice of
the United States.

We trust, and hope, that the United States will adopt such effectual plans, in
order to prevent any more of our brethren, sharing our unhappy fate, which
unavoidably must happen if some speedy and decisive means are not immediately
put in execution; as we understand the Portuguese truce, with this regency was
agreed on for one year.

What damps our spirits in some degree, is, that we are informed, that the
plague, that fatal and tremendous disorder, has given its awful alarm in the
country adjacent. And as your unfortunate countrymen are confined during the
night time, in the slave prisons, with six hundred captives of other nations,
in each prison, from our crowded situation, we must be exposed to this
contagious disorder; which necessitates the subscribers, to entreat you, sir,
that in this case, those our friends, and of influence in this Regency, will be
authorized by you, and our honored countrymen, Mr. Carmichael, and Mr. Short,
to have a house taken for the residence of the American masters and mates, and,
if possible, the mariners, to shield them from the threatening storm of
mortality and danger.

We make no doubt, but in case of the Almighty's wrath, visiting this city of
iniquity, but the Dey and Regency, would acquiese to the proposed plan of
humanity, which would be establishing an example for the general welfare of
mankind -- and would to posterity be recorded to the immortal honor of the
United States.

At the same time, honored sir, and friend, be you assured, for your
consolation, that we the American captives, in this city of bondage, will bear
our sufferings with fortitude and resignation, as becoming a race of men
endowed with superior souls in adversity.

We are much indebted to Mr. Skjoldebrand and brother, his Swedish Majesty's
agents, in this city, for their humanity, and attention to the American
captives; and feel ourselves particularly obliged to you for recommending us to
the good offices of Consuls, Skjoldebrand, and Mace, whom you mention to us as
friends.

With sentiments of gratitude and the most profound respect, we remain,

Honored Sir, your most obedient most humble servants. Signed by the Captains,
in behalf of ourselves, and brother-sufferers.


To DAVID HUMPHREYS, ESQUIRE.

About the first of February 1794, a courier arrived from Alicant and brought
the following answer.

Madrid, January 12 th 1794.
I HAVE been favored by the receipt of your joint letter, dated the 29th of
December, and, as I am about to set out immediately for Lisbon, I shall be able
to do little more than assure you that your memorials to Senate and House of
Representatives of the United States shall be forwarded to them in the earliest
and safest manner, possible. Having communicated to Messrs. Carmichael, and
Short, your apprehension that the plague may again be introduced to Algiers,
from the adjacent countries, where it is already said to prevail; we have not
hesitated to concur with you in sentiment, that in case of that dreadful event,
it might be useful for you to have a house hired in the country; in order to
endeavor, by all human precautions, to prevent your falling victims to that
terrible disorder. Where upon Mr. Robert Montgomery, Consul of the United
States, at Alicant, has been empowered, in case that dreadful event should
should happen, to furnish sufficient money to pay for the hire of a house, in
the manner and for the purpose you propose. This provisional arrangement to
continue in force, until Mr. Montgomery shall receive ulterior instructions
from the Government of the United States, for continuing or suspending the same.

I entreat you will be persuaded, my dear and unfortunate countrymen, that I
receive with great satisfaction the marks of your approbation, of the honest,
but ineffectual efforts I have made in your favor. Would to heaven, they had
been as successful, as they were disinterested and sincere.

I have only to repeat, that you may at all times, and on all occasions, count
upon the sympathetic regard,

and esteem of your real friend, and affectionate fellow citizen. D. HUMPHREYS.


P. S. Though I have repeatedly remarked, that it may perhaps, (for particular
reasons) be inexpedient for me to keep up a regular correspondence with you:
yet it is proper I should add, that I shall always be glad to hear from you;
and that it may be particularly interesting to the government of our country,
to receive at the earliest possible period, all intelligence of importance. I
shall therefore always be ready to communicate such intelligence, until some
nearer, and better channel of communication can be established.

This letter was accompanied by another from Mr. Montgomery, authorizing the
Swedish Consul, to make the beforementioned proposal to the Dey, and to offer
payment to the Regency, for the time of all Americans, that the Dey would be
pleased to let go, to any garden, or house, to reside until this dreadful storm
of mortality should be over.

Accordingly when the plague spread its alarm in the city, Mr. Skjoldebrand
went to the Dey with this proposal, to which the execrable son of Ishmael
replied in words to this purpose, "Does the American Government suppose, I am
going to do my work myself, when I have so many slaves; or do they think to
make an Ass of me, by hiring my slaves, to live in idleness. No while they have
life, they shall work, and if they die with the plague, it will be my loss, not
theirs!"

About the first of February, 1794, several Americans were attacked with the
small pox. Of this epidemical disease, four of my countrymen died in the course
of the month, as follows, Samuel Milborne, chief mate of the ship Minerva,
belonging to Philadelphia, Richard Wood, mate of the brig Olive Branch of
Portsmouth (N. H.) John Mott, mariner, of the former vessel, and Thomas
Furnace, Cabin boy, of the latter. A short time after, the city was alarmed
with the plague. This fatal and contagious, disorder, carried off many
Americans, whom I shall name, in the list of Americans, (captured by the
Algerines) in the latter part of this book. About the last of april, a Dutch
Admiral arrived in the bay, with four sail of the line, and two frigates, and
in a few days effected a peace with the Regency. He ransomed all the Dutch
captives, which the Algerines, had in their possession. It being an old custom
among the Algerines, when they make a peace with any Christian nation, to
oblige that nation to ransom the Dey's chief servant, and the sweeper of his
palace, should they be of a different nation, from the captives liberated. --
Accordingly, when the Dutch ransomed their captives, they also ransomed one
Philip Sloan, an American, who was captured in the year '75 on board the Ship
Dolphin of Philadelphia; commanded by Richard O'Brien, he being at this time
the sweeper of the palace.

In the month of September, '94, the Algerines captured two hundred and one
Corsicans. The manner of capturing them was somewhat singular. The Corsicans,
while they were under the government of France, had license from the Dey of
Algiers, to fish for Coral on the coast of Africa, from the bay of Bona, to the
Island Gallette. They having now surrendered the Island of Corsica Corsica lies
between the gulf of Genoa, and the Island, of Sardinia -- (...) for its noble
stand against the Genoese, and after wards against the French for its
liberties. The celebrated Paoli, who so nobly signalized himself, in defense of
his country, in its (...) for Independence, before and after it was sold to the
French King, is now exerting his endeavors to shake off the subjection of the
Island to the French Republic.
to the English, they supposed they still enjoyed the same privelege. --
Accordingly they equipped about 30 boats for this purpose. They sailed under
the convoy of an armed brig. Having been a few days upon the coast, a French
cruising frigate captured their convoy, and several, of their boats. The rest
sought refuge in the harbor of Bona. The Alcaid, (or Mayor of the town) not
knowing their flag, (which is a white field with a Moors head in the center,)
and thinking this too delicious a morsel to pass unnoticed, consined them all
in the Mortimore or dungeon, and secured their boats. He then sent and informed
the Dey of Algiers, what he had done, asking his orders concerning them. The
Dey being always willing to catch at every opportunity of plundering, and
thinking this too valuable a gem to escape his predatory rapine, he commanded
them all to be brought to Algiers, and made slaves, which was accordingly done.
They remained in captivity until the month of March '96. And were then ransomed
by the English, at the rate of 1,200, dollars each: And the English made the
following addition to their former Treaty. The Algerines may carry their prizes
into Corsica, and sell them publicly. Every month a packet shall carry letters
from and to Corsica, to and from Algiers. The English shall take nothing which
they find on board the Algerine vessels, and if any difficulties, shall arise,
the Dey shall decide upon it. The Dey (for the stipulated sum of 1,200 dollars
each) grants liberty to all slaves now in his possession who were born in the
Island of Corsica, and permits the Corsicans to fish for Coral upon the coasts
of Barbary.

On the 24th of April '95, we had the satisfaction of being deprived of the
most Tyrannic guardian, or task-master, we ever had during my captivity. He was
know by the name of Sherief. This cruel villain never appeared to be be in his
element, except when he was cruelly punishing some Christian captives. On the
day before mentioned; he with another taskmaster being sent with twenty slaves,
to remove a pile of boards, which was in a magazine, upon the walls of the
city, and he having beat several slaves, unmercifully without any provocation;
an American exclaimed (in the English language, which the Turk did not
understand,) "God grant you may die, the first time you offer to abuse another
man." A few minutes afterward, as a slave was going upon some plank, which was
laid from the first wall to the second, having his load upon his back. Sherief
thinking he did not proceed as fast as he might, ran and endeavoring to strike
him, missed his stroke; his stick gave him such a sudden jirk, that he fell
from the planks, between the walls, and was dashed to pieces. -- Thus ended the
days of a godless wretch, apparently in a moment, swept away by the devout
breath of a suffering Christian; to the great joy and satisfaction of all the
slaves belonging to the regency.

On the 28th of August, an English privateer Xebec, belonging to Gibralter was
cruising on the coast, off Oran, and being in want of provisions sent her boat
on shore, to purchase some; As soon as the boat landed, the barbarians demanded
of the officer, his passport for the vessel, and being told it was on board,
they sent off a boat, and very politely invited the Captain, to enter the port,
with his vessel, and purchase, what he stood in need of. He accordingly went in
and brought his vessel to an anchor. No sooner was this done than they demanded
of him, his passport, which was immediately produced. On examining it, they
found it was for a square rigged vessel, and his privateer being a Xebec, it
excited suspicion. They therefore, confined the captain and crew, and sent them
in irons to Algiers. The Dey on seeing the passport, declared the vessel and
crew to be Genoese, with false papers, he accordingly condemned them as such.
They remained eight months, in captivity, and were then liberated by the
British government.

We heard many encouraging reports, during our captivity, but none proved to be
fact, until the month of July 1795, when a vessel arrived from Gibralter, and
brought us the joyful news, that David Humphreys, Esquire. and Joseph Donaldson,
Jun. Esquire. had arrived at that place, from America, a few days previous to her
sailing, and that Mr. Donaldson was destined for Algiers, to effect a peace
between the Regency, and the United States of America. -- This news was
confirmed about the tenth of August, when a Spanish courier arrived from
Alicant, with a letter from Mr. Donaldson, (who was then at that place)
directed to the Dey of Algiers, the contents of which was to obtain the Dey's
permission for him to come and conclude a peace between the two nations. The
Dey at this time being very anxious, to have an American Ambassador come, and
negociate with him for a peace, and the redemption of the captives, and wishing
to have affairs amicably settled between him and the United States, he
chartered a Ragusean polacre, and sent her to Alicant, to bring Mr. Donaldson
to Algiers. She sailed on the eleventh of August, and when she had been
fourteen or sixteen days absent, and not hearing any thing from her, our
spirits were very much damped, fearing some mishap had befallen her; as eight
or ten days is sufficient to perform this voyage with a common chance of winds.
We however, feared the worst and hoped for the best, until the joyful day at
last arrived. Thursday, the 3d of September, 1795, the wind being about W. b.
S. at nine A. M. saw a sail from the marine bearing N. b. W. standing directly
for the harbor. At eleven, A. M. we could discern that she had a white flag at
her foretop-gallant-mast head, the American flag at the main, and the Ragusean
flag over her stern. -- This being a flag of truce, and denoting the American
ambassador was on board. Such transports is were raised in our hearts at this
moment (with the anticipation of approaching Liberty) are conceivable, but far
transcends the power of description. At 3 P. M. she being within one mile of
the mole, the harbourmaster went on board with permission from the Dey, for Mr.
Donaldson to land when he though it proper. At 4 he landed, and was conducted by
some of the chief men of the place, to a very elegant house, which the Dey had
provided for him, previous to his arrival.

It now being too late for him to see the Dey that night, he was obliged to
refer the negotiation till Saturday. Friday the 4th being the Mohammedan
Sabbath, he could not do any kind of business with the Dey. The suspense, the
hope, fear, and agitation we suffered this day, may be conceived, but not
described. An ambassador to redeem us had arrived. What would be his success we
knew not -- a whole day was passing away and nothing done. Never was there a
longer, more tedious day in the annals of slavery -- Again we must repair to
our mansion of misery, and in suspense wear out a night of sleepless anxiety.

Saturday, the 5th about 11 A. M. Mr. Donaldson was invited into the Dey's
presence. -- Accordingly he went and about twelve o'clock a peace was
concluded. The American flag was then hoisted on board the Ragusean polacre,
and the banner of the United States was saluted from the castles of Fenelle and
Cordalares, with the thunders of twenty one cannon. Sounds more ravishing never
vibrated in the air; our hearts hearts were joy. We imagined ourselves already
free men. In idea, our chains were falling off, and our taskmasters no longer
at liberty to torture us. In imagination we were already traversing the ocean;
hailing our native shore; embracing our parents, our children and our wives.
This delirium of joy was of short duration; like a dazzling meteor in a dark
night, which blazes for a moment, making succeeding darkness more dreadful; our
enchanting hopes left us to despondency, horrible beyond description. In about
five hours we were informed that the cup of our sufferings was not yet drained;
-- that we could not be released till our ransom was paid! Never was there a
more sudden or affecting change in the countenances and conversations of men.
Instead of sprightly looks, cheerful congratulations and sanguine anticipations
of finished bliss; there was nothing but faces of sadness and the most gloomy
silence, interrupted only with sounds of complaint, or sighs of despair. "Not
released till our ransom is paid!" How long, said we, may our country neglect
us? How many fatalities befall our redemption on its passage! How many
disappointments may yet occur! How long may our chains and torments be
continued!

After we had done work that evening and retired to our gloomy Bagnio; I was
informed, by the Dey's Christian Clerk, that myself, Abiel Willis, and Thomas
Billings, must immediately repair to the ambassador's house! he accordingly
procured permission from the keeper of the prison, to let us pass out. On our
arrival at Mr. Donaldson's house, he informed us that the Dey had granted him
three captives, as servants to him, and that he was under an obligation to pay
a certain sum to the Regency for our labor, that he was likewise responsible
for our good behavior, and hoped we should behave ourselves accordingly. We
remained with him and Mr. Barlow, in the capacity of servants., from this day,
until the day of our liberation. This was a great favor, conferred on us, for
now we were exempted from the labor and torture of these execrable task
masters, but still we were slaves. Disguise thyself as thou will, still,
slavery, thou art a bitter draught.

On Friday the 11th, Captain O'Brien, was liberated by Mr. Donaldson, and
dispatched by him from Algiers, on board a Spanish vessel, with dispatches for
Mr. Humphreys, who was at this time in Lisbon. We had information, about five
weeks afterward, that Capt O'Brien arrived at Malaga, after a passage of seven
days, and that he took passage from thence for Lisbon, by land. This again
revived our hopes, and every vessel that appeared in sight, we conjectured, was
bringing the money for our redemption. But what perturbations we suffered,
during this period, is far beyond my powers of description. Month after month,
was passing away, and vessel after vessel arriving, but no tidings of our
manumission. In this most gloomy situation we worried out four long months, an
had almost despaired of ever being released, and were beginning to believe that
all we had heard or seen, was a phantom, intended only to illure our hopes, and
then leave us in immense embarrassments, as an Ignis satuus does the heedless
traveller. About the middle of January 1796, Mr. Donaldson informed us, that he
had received letters from Mr. Humphreys, and expected the money for our
redemption would be in Algiers, within ten or twelve days. This in some measure
alleviated our drooping spirits; however, we were still fearful, least the Dey
should take umbrage at such long delays, and order Mr. Donaldson away, break
the truce, and recommence hostilities. Should this happen we knew our awful
destiny, which would be to spend our days in slavery.

In this suspense we continued until the middle of March, and no money arrived,
when (O! horrible tidings) we understood that the Dey had got impatient with
the delay of the money, and had ordered Mr. Donaldson to leave the place, and
declared he would send out his corsairs and bring in every American vessel they
met with, and that he would never make a peace with the United States, during
his reign. Now again we were despondent, and not without a reason. Consider
reader, what must have been our feelings at this time. For me to attempt, to
describe them, would be endeavoring to effect an impossibility. I therefore
leave the reader to judge from his own breast, what terrible convulsions must
have been raised in ours, at this dilemma; after so many enchanting hopes, had
appeared, that we should be left to this despondency.

On the 21st of March, a brig arrived in the bay, with the American colors
over her stern, and she proved to be the Sally of Philadelphia, commanded by --
March, from Marseilles. She brought as a passenger Joel Barlow, Esquire. Consul
General of the United States of America, for the city and kingdom of Algiers.
The Dey gave him liberty to land, as a private gentlemen, but not to perform
the functions of his office. This worthy gentleman, whose compassionate
services for his distressed countrymen, can never be estimated too highly, nor
praised too much, gave us all the encouragement he could; assuring us, he would
never quit Algiers, and leave us in slavery. While we were in this suspense, we
received the following letter from Col. David Humphreys, Esquire. who likewise
faithfully did for us all that could be done.

Copy, Lisbon, Feb. 16, 1796. My dear Fellow-Citizens,
THE object of this letter is to assure you, that you are neither forgotten or
neglected by your country. I have written to his Excellency the Dey, by this
conveyance, stating truly the inevitable obstacles which have retarded the
completion of our arrangements with the Regency until this period; and which
may, perhaps, still protract the delay for a considerable time to come. I have
also written explanatory letters, in a copious manner, on the subject, to
Messrs. Barlow (who I hope will soon be in Algiers) Donaldson, Cathcart, etc.

Impossibilities cannot be effected; But whatever is in its nature practicable,
will be done in your behalf.

Let me therefore, my dear Countrymen, once more (and God grant it may be the
last time, I may have occasion to do it;) exhort you to be of good courage, to
exert all your fortitude, to have a little more patience, to hope always for
the best, and to be persuaded that every thing is doing and shall be done,
which the nature of the circumstances will admit, for your relief.

In all events, be assured of my persevering efforts in your favor, and of the
sincere attachments and regard, with which I shall ever remain,

My Dear Countrymen, Your obedient humble servant D. Humphreys.


A few days afterward, Mr. Barlow, (through the intercession of the Sweedish
Consul, and some of the principal officers of the Regency, who had great
influence with the Dey.) obtained permission to see this despotic Algerine
prince; with whom he made new arrangements, and obtained a further indulgence
of three months to procure the money in. Our hopes were again revived with
these new negociations, and we meditated a possibility of his obtaining it,
before the time specified should expire.

About the first of April, Mr. Donaldson sailed from Algiers destined for
Leghorn, on board a Venetian ship, and we were informed that his mission, was
to procure the money for our redemption. At the time of his departure, the
Plague that fatal epidemical disorder, had spread its alarm in the country
adjacent. And which soon made its appearance (for the second time, during my
captivity) in the city, and which put a period to the existence of many of my
fellow-countrymen, See the list of Vessels and Crews captured by the Algorines.
when they were expecting every day to be called free men.

The long and tedious days passed, as they had done before, with the
expectation of Liberty, in every coming sail. But (O! horrible to relate) at
length the time specified was expired and no money had arrived, and we expected
every moment to hear the awful sentence, of Slavery for life, passed upon us.
-- What else could we expect or even hope from a ferocious absolute Monarch,
like Hassan Bashaw, The Dey of Algines.
one of the genuine children of Ishmael, whose "hands was against every man,
and every man's hand against him." But instead of the terrible sentence of
continued slavery, the next sound which echoed in our ears, was the joyful
news, of approaching Liberty. For (the ever be praised) Mr. Barlow, on seeing
the time, wherein the money was to be produced, was already passed, and neither
tidings, nor money appeared, and being fearful least the Dey, should be again
exasperated with its delay, he used his utmost efforts to procure it in
Algiers. He accordingly abtained a promise from Mr. Machio Baccri, (who was a
Jew belonging to the Regency) that he would advance him, one hundred and eighty
thousand dollars, in the course of three of four days, which was just the sum
required for the Redemption of the American captives. The Dey (on being
informed of this by Mr. Barlow) at first refused to let us go, because the
money to pay for the peace had not arrived, however he at last consented to
take it, and set us at liberty. On the 5th of July, we were informed by a
letter from Mr. Barlow that we might expect to be at liberty within three or
four days. But advised us not to put too much dependence, for says he, "the
heart of your Pharaoh may be again hardened." He however assured us that he had
no doubt but we should be free men within three days: for as the Dey had agreed
to accept the money, it should be paid as soon as it could be counted. This
filled our hearts with joy, and we imagined ourselves the happiest people in
the world. For a long period we had been suffering the most inhuman slavery;
loaded with almost an insupportable weight of chains, and were now expecting to
enjoy Liberty; the greatest blessing human beings ever possessed. And our
expectations at this time were not visionary nor unfounded, as had so often
been the case with us before, for it proved to be a happy reality. What a
joyful night was this. We passed it with praises to our kind deliverer. And
sanguine anticipations of ensuing freedom. Our stoney floors on which we laid,
were apparently softer than beds of down. The chains on our legs were seemingly
of on weight. Our cruel taskmasters now looked on us, with smiling
countenances, and congratulated us, on our good fortune, in the following
singular manner: "Sanzafidas droak imche il blaedic, ila kelp ou Romi." Which
in English is thus, "you unbelievers, now your are going to the country of
Christian dogs."

On the 10th at day break in the morning, all hands were called as usual. And a
few minutes before the time, that the doors are opened for the slaves to go out
to work; we were notified by the Bagnio-keeper, that all the people taken under
the American flag must stay in the Bagnio, and hold themselves in readiness to
go to the Dey's palace, and receive our tiscaras, or pass-ports from the Dey;
and that we should be embarked the next morning. However it so happened, that
the Dey could not attend, to give us our tiscaras that night, though he
received the money. This long and tedious night was spent, in anxious
expectation of hearing the sweet sound of Liberty echo in our ears, on the
approaching morning. And O! glorious event, this was the ultimate night we ever
spent, in that gloomy dungeon, that horrible mansion of wretchedness and misery.

On the 11th we were again notified by the Bagnio Keeper, that we must be ready
to go to the Dey's palace, for our passport. A short time after the slaves of
other nations had gone out to work we were all called out of the Bagnio, into
the street, where we were received by the Dey's chief clerk, who conducted us
to the palace, and there each man received his tiscara from the Dey. The
sweeper of the palace at this time, being a Venetian, he was liberated
according to custom. At 9 o'clock, A. M. we all embarked on board a ship,
belonging to Mr. Machio Baccri. This vessel had formerly been an English
transport (the Bridget of London) had been captured by the French Republicans,
and brought into Algiers, and there condemned. On board of this ship were also
forty eight Neapolitans, who had been ransomed a few days before us. Oh! what a
glorious sight, now could we behold the stripes and stars flying with honor,
where they had so often been hoisted with contempt. Every tongue was uttering,
long live the humane benevolent Barlow. -- O! Happy day, O! Happy day.

While we (Americans) were enjoying the fruits of this happy event, there was
nothing to be heard, from the slaves of other nations, but the most bitter
curses heaped upon their governments, and Sovereigns. They being chiefly of the
Roman Catholic Religion, are taught, that they are the only true Christians,
and having now seen the Dutch, and Americans liberated, and they neglected, it
exasperated them to such a degree, that they would exclaim in the most violent
language against their Priests, Sovereigns, and religion. "Why," said they,
"are we, who are true Christians, unnoticed, by our country and suffered to
remain here in slavery, while the Protestants, (who are no more than
degenerated christians) are daily emancipated, and are not suffered to wear the
yoke of slavery." They would say to each other, "Behold what examples of
humanity, are now set by the Protestants, and how little they are noticed by
the Roman Catholic governments." These and similar expressions, were in the
mouths of every slave, whom we left behind.

In fond embraces strained, the captive clings,
And feels within unutterable things.
See now the widow finds her darling son;
See in each others arms the lovers run,
With joy tumultuous their swollen bosoms glow,
And one short moment pays for years of woe!
When grateful sports, and festal songs proclaim
Their joys domestic, and their distant fame.
On the 12th we received the provision on board, and got the ship ready for
sea. On this day Joseph Rogers, belonging to Salisbury, on Merimack river, paid
the great debt of nature. He was attacked with the plague on the 10th and
remained in the hospital on shore.

On the 13th at 5 A. M. we got under way and stood to sea, at 7 A. M. we found
a Neopolitan below sick with the plague, we then tacked and stood into the bay
again, and made signals for the harbor master to come on board. He boarded us
at nine and took the sick man on shore; we then tacked and stood to sea again
with a fresh breeze from the eastward, destined for Leghorn. At 4 P. M. to our
great joy and satisfaction, we lost sight of the Barbary shore.

On the 14th, another Neapolitan was attacked with the plague, and died on the
16th. On the 15th, Captain Samuel E. Baily, was attacked with the plague.
Finding the plague beginning to rage on board the ship, we directed our course
for Marseilles, (...) the second city of Provence in France. It is large, and
was very (...) for the revolution. Is said to have been built 500 years before
the birth of Christ. It stands on a fine bay of the Mediterranean. Is said
(...) contain 100,000 souls, is well fortified and has a secure capacious
harbor of an oblong form, where the Royal galleys were formerly stationed, but
will not admit large men of (...). It has an accademy and (...) -- Is large
arsenal was formerly richly provided for all kinds of store (...) the Royal
galleys, and the armory, was said to contain arms for (...) men, It was nearly
(...) by the plague in 1720, (...).
this being the nearest port in the Mediterranean, wherein we should be
permitted to perform quarantine, with this contagious disorder on board. On the
17th Capt. Bailey died, whom we committed to his watery grave in as decent a
manner as our present situation would admit. On the 20th, we arrived at
Marseilles. On the 22d, all hands, except twelve, who remained on board to take
care of the ship, went on shore to the Lazaretto, where we performed a
quarantime of eighty Days, and nothing particular happened during our residence
here. We were supplied with provisions by the American Consul.

On the 7th of October, we were visited early in the morning, by several
Doctors, who finding us all in good health, ordered us to be smoaked at the
smoke house, and then gave us Praddick. At 9, A. M. we were conducted by a
company of the city guards to the house of Stephen Catherlan, Jun. Esquire. Vice
Consul of the United States of America for the city of Marseilles; he provided
lodging and provisions for us all.

On the 8th, I shipped myself in the capacity of first mate on board the ship
Fortune of Philadelphia, commanded by Michael Smith. This is the ship which
brought us from Algiers, and during our quarantine, she was purchased by Mr.
Donaldson, who gave her the name of Fortune, he being at this time in Leghorn.
On the 13th of November, a Sweedish ship sailed from Marscilles, bound to
Philadelphia, and carried as passengers all the Americans, (late prisoners in
Algiers) except those who tarried on board the Fortune.

On the 17th November we sailed from Marseilles, bound to Bona, (in the state
of Algiers) where we arrived after a passage of twenty days, which brought it
to the 7th of December. -- Bona is supposed to be the same place with the
ancient Hippo, a sea port, built by the ancients. It was formerly the
metropolis of the province of Bona. It lies on a bay of the Mediterranean sea,
in lat. 36, 45 N. and 7, 53 east long. about two hundred and eighty miles to
the eastward of the city of Algiers, and about fifty seven miles S. W. from the
Island Gallette. -- Near Bona, is La Callee, which is at present occuped by the
French, who pay an annual tribute to the Dey of Algiers for the privilege of
the coral fishery. In this place is a French factory, where the Moors and Arabs
dispose of their produce. Bona is about two miles in circumference; it was
formerly a magnificent city, but at present is a town of very little
importance, and of slender population. It is depended by a fortress, and a
garrison of Turks, and what is sufficient to ascertain the depth of its
wretchedness, (as well as in all other parts of the territory) is, that a Turk
is the most respectable character among them. In this part of the world,
elegant architecture, has for many years, been utterly forgotten or despised.
The buildings are therefore very mean, and are exposed to the incursions of the
Arabs -- The name of these people is used in a very indeterminate manner.
Although Algiers is at a very long distance from Arabia, yet as this part of
Africa was formerly subdued by the Arabians, under the banner of Mahomet, the
name is still applied to a race of dark complectioned, independent Barbarians,
who spread about the country in devious routs, unite the double profession of a
shepherd and a robber. Bona is computed to contain about nine thousand
inhabitants, who are composed of the posterity of many different nations. It
has their mosques, which are somewhat larger than the other buildings, though
these are by no means magnificent. It is commanded by an Alcaid who pays an
annual tribute to the Dey of Algiers, in wheat, butter, honey, and oil. The
former grandeur of this city, is now only to be traced in the remains, and
ruins of an ancient monastery. Near the river Sef Gomar, and not far from
Constantina The capital of a province of the same name in Algiers.
is an ancient and noble bridge; which is built across a valley. This bridge
has five arches, and extends from one mountain to another. There is not the
least appearance of any river ever having been under it, and it is supposed it
was built mereto gratify the curiosity of some ancient prince, or king who
commanded in those parts in former days, but no history gives any account of
its founder. Near this is a very large subterraneous aqueduct, which terminates
in a cascade. It is reported that state criminals are sometimes precipitated
down this place, and are dashed to pieces upon the rocks at the bottom.

On the 21st of December we began to take on board our cargo, and finished
loading on the 15th of January '97, and sailed for Marseiles on the 17th.

On the 24th, being in lat. 37, 26, N. and long 6, 56, E. was boarded by his
Britannic Majesty's ship Pallas, treated politely and permitted to proceed on
our voyage.

February 5th, at 6, A. M. Marseilles light house bore N. N. E. about nine
leagues distant, wind N. N. W. we were standing in for the land, on our
larboard tack, and soon discovered two ships between us and the land standing
directly for us, we continued on our course till we came within hail of them,
who ordered us to heave too, which being done, they boarded us, and enquired
from whence we came, and where bound, and informed us, that, they were his
Britannic Majesty's ships, Inconstant and Blanch. Captain Smith, was then
ordered to go on board the Inconstant, with his papers, which he accordingly
did, and after a strict examination they manned our ship, from the Inconstant,
and took Captain Smith, the second mate, and all our seamen, on board the
frigate, and kept them upon prisoners allowance. Being left on board the
Fortune, I did not want for provisions, and was treated very politely by the
prize-master and crew. We were then ordered for adjudication, to Porto Ferrajo,
in the tin the Island of Elba. On the 15th in the morning we saw the Islands of
Corsica, Gorgona and Elba and having a fresh breeze from the westward, we
anchored in Porto Ferrajo, at 5, P. M.

On the 16th we were all sent on shore, not even being allowed to remain on
board the or frigate, except we would enter into his Britannic Majesty's
service. This was done by the British commander, in order to reduce us to
necessity, as all (...) of provisions were very high here and knowing we could
not subsist long without money, he expected we should be glad to accept his
proposals, but finding none of us would enter, he impressed George Tilley on
board the Inconstant, under pretense of his being an Englishman; -- on the 19th
Richard Hales, Matthew Johnson, and William Lackey entered on board the Union,
a British transport. The rest of us being determined not to enter in the
British service, we procured a passage for Leghorn. Having been robbed of the
greatest part of our clothes and all our money by the captors, we found it very
difficult to subsist until the vessel was ready to sail, as one meal of
victuals could not be purchased here for less than eighty cents.

The Island of Elba lies in the Mediterranean sea, about twelve leagues, W. S.
W. from Piombino a small port in the kingdom of Naples, it lies in forty two
degrees and forty eight minutes, north latitude, and nine degrees, and fifty
minutes east longitude. The western part of it is governed by the Grand Duke of
Tuscany, and the eastern part by the king of Naples. It has several small
ports, but its capital is Porto Ferrajo. This place is very strongly fortified,
and a large garrison of soldiers are continually kept here by the Grand Duke.
-- To this place he sends the chief of the malefactors, who are condemned to
slavery, and keeps them constantly employed in fortifying the place, and
cleaning the harbor. Those who are condemned for life, are dressed entirely in
yellow, and those for a certain specified time, are obliged to wear all red.
This is the mark by which they may be distinguished. They are kept constantly
chained, and draw the same allowance of provisions as the Tuscan soldiers. The
fight of such a number of miserable wretches, doomed to perpetual slavery, was
really affecting.

The galley-slave with horror struck my soul,
As tears indignant, down his bosom stole;
He, in the brewing storms and chilling cold,
Saw many seasons change and moons grow old,
Sad in the northern blast aloud be mean'd,
And often cursed his chains and often groaned.
With folded arms, and proud retorting eye,
Por'd over a waste of sea, and frowning sky;
And then, despairing, tempts the dangerous leap,
To search for freedom in the spacious deep;
Fain would he go -- but direst woes remain,
The galling oar, and life-unfetterr'd chain.
When the French took possession of Leghorn, which is the capital seaport of
Tuscany, and obliged the English to flee, the latter by way of retaliation,
took possession of Porto Ferrajo, into which place they carried, and condemned
their prizes at this time, but returned it to the Grand Duke about the
beginning of May, '97. We sailed for Leghorn on the 23d, and arrived on the
24th, and were kept in quarantine until the 5th of March, on which day Captain
Smith arrived from Porto Ferrajo. The reason of our being put into quarantine
at this time was on account of our having come from Barbary, as there is a law
among all Christian nations, who border on the Mediterranean; -- that when any
vessel arrives in their ports, the commander of such vessel must show his bill
of health, and affirm that his vessel has not been boarded by any vessel of war
or any vessel whatever, having come from Barbary, before he can get permission
to go on shore. If his vessel has been boarded by any of the above mentioned
vessels, or his last port was one of those of Barbary, he and his vessel are
obliged to ride a quarantine. And as the last port we sailed from, in the
Fortune, was Bona, before we were taken by the English, we were liable to this
quarantine, but the English commander, on his arrival at Porto Ferrajo, went
immediately on shore without having obtained permission, in consequence of
which the whole Island was put into quarantine, and any boat, vessel, or
person, going from this Island while it was under this restriction, were
obliged to perform their quarantine in the port where they arrived.

On the 10th, Captain Smith sailed from Marseilles, on board a polacre
belonging to Genoa, taking with him all the remainder of the Fortune's crew,
except myself and Moses Brown: Brown, at this time being sick in the hospital,
was not able to proceed; but soon after recovered his health and went to
Marseilles by land; from whence he took passage for Philadelphia, on board a
brig belonging to that place. On the 15th Mr. Donaldson, (who was the American
Ambassador at this time in the Mediterranean) informed me that he was going to
Porto Ferrajo, and wished to have me accompany him, as his chief business was,
to endeavor to recover the ship Fortune. I accordingly waited till he was
ready to go. On the 19th Mr. Donaldson told me he should be ready to go the
next morning, and desired that I would take a boat, and five men, (which he had
procured) and proceed to Piombino a small port in the dominions of the King of
Naples, and there wait his arrival, as he intended to go to that place by land,
in order to settle some business, at Pisa, (...) was once a flourishing city in
Italy, but is now so poorly inhabited, that the grass grows in several of the
streets. It was subdued by the Florentines in 1406, since which it has been on
the decline. In the 11th Century its inhabitants were reckoned at about
150,000, but at present hardly amount to 16,000. The Knights of St. Stephen, an
order instituted by the great Cosino Je Medicis, reside here. In the
Churchyard is an ancient inscription, being an order to this City, that upon
the notice of (...) death they should wear mourning for a year, and abstain
from all diversions. In this city is the famous hanging tower.
and Lucea, both of which lay in his way to Piombino. Accordingly the next
morning, which was the 20th I sailed, and having a fresh breeze from the N. W.
I arrived at Barato, the same evening. On the 21st I sailed from Barato, and
arrived at Piombino the same afternoon. Mr. Donaldson arrived on the 22d, and
we sailed for Porto Ferrajo, early the next morning, where we arrived the same
evening, the distance being but twelve leagues. On the 24th, we sailed again
for Leghorn; the next day, the wind being contrary, and blowing a very fresh
breeze we deemed it not safe to continue at sea in an open boat, and therefore
run into St. Vincenchi, a small town in Tuscany. On the 26th, the wind being in
our favor, we sailed at 4 A. M. and arrived at Leghorn at 6 o'clock, in the
afternoon. My whole time was now employed, in seeking for a passage to my
native country, and having nothing to depend on for my subsistence, but the few
clothes, which the English had been pleased to let me keep, as they did not
think them worth taking from me; the greatest part of which I was obliged to
sell to purchase me something to eat. My case was now become truly distressing,
and how long it would remain so, I knew not, for as the French had possession
of the place, all business was entirely stagnated, except privateering, and
where to go, to better myself I was at a loss, as I was informed every day by
the packets which arrived, that no American vessels, were in any of the ports
of Italy.

While waiting for a passage I will endeavor to give the Reader a short
description of Leghorn. This city is the ancient Portus Liburnus, belonging to
the Grand Duke of Tuscany is not remarkably large, but is regularly built, and
is in the modern taste. It is well fortified. It contains about 40,000
inhabitants 20,000 of whom are Jews. The most of the trade passes through their
hands. It is a free port, which makes the trade here very considerable,
consequently a great resort for Merchants of all nations. It has a secure
harbor but is apt to be choked up, so that the Grand Duke's slaves are
employed in clearing it. The Marshes about the place are filled with the sand
which they take out of the harbor, by which means the city is rendered more
healthful than usual. Foreigners pay only a piastres, or scuds, for a bale of
goods of what bulk or quality soever it be, yet the quantity of Merchandise
imported is so large, that this small duty is no small revenue to the Duke. But
the inland duties are very high, nothing passing in or out of Leghorn by land,
but the inhabitants pay large taxes. For the convenience of navigation, there
is a lighthouse lanthorn, with 30 lamps, erected on a rock without the harbor.
And on the shore a lazaretto, where suspected persons, or goods, must perform
quarantine. Here all nations, and even the Mahometans, have free access, and
may settle. The Jews live in a particular part of the city, have a handsome
synagogue, and though subject to very heavy imposts, are in a thriving
condition.

I remained in this situation until the 1st of April, when I had information of
a Danish brig, (then laying in the harbor) being bound to America, I
immediately went on board, and asked the Captain where he was bound, he told me
to Boston, I asked him if he would give me a passage for my work, he said he
had men enough, and could not give any one a passage; but if I would pay him an
hundred dollars he would carry me, to this proposal I readily objected, as I
was not the owner of that number of pence; at last he told me if I would do a
seaman's duty, on the passage, and give him an obligation to pay him forty
dollars on our arrival, he would take me on board. I told him I would give him
an answer at twelve o'clock. I then went on shore, and as I was walking up the
mole, I met a gentleman who asked me what countryman I was? I told him I was an
American. He then asked me several questions, and enquired if I belonged to any
vessel in the harbor, and after having received my answers, he told me he had
chartered a Ragusean polacre, and intended to send her to Philadelphia, and
that if I would go in her, I should have a passage, which I readily accepted,
and returned him my sincere thanks; -- he then told me I might embark the next
day, which I accordingly did.

At twelve o'clock, I went according to my promise, on board the Dane, and
informed him that I had got a passage to America on board the polacre, at which
he appeared to be much dissatisfied, and offered me a passage for my work, but
I told him I had engaged to go in the other vessel, and intended to fulfill my
promise, we then parted, and I left him much displeased, at my not accepting
his last offer. At the same time that he told me he had men enough, he wanted
one man to make up his ship's company, and was obliged to hire one next day;
but knowing my situation, and thinking I should be glad to work and pay both,
for my passage, he endeavored to take this advantage.

On the 2d of April I embarked in the quality of a passenger, on board the
Madona del rosario esan vineenzo feraro of Ragusa, which was the polacre before
mentioned, bound to Philadelphia. We sailed on the 4th, and on the 11th, was
taken by a Spanish privateer and carried into Barcelona, was cleared on the
12th and sailed again, and on the 20th was captured by a French privateer, and
carried into Almeria, treated politely and cleared on the 22d, and sailed. On
the 29th, the wind having been contrary for several days, we run into Malaga,
where we waited for a fair wind until the 21st of May. We then sailed, and on
the 22d was boarded by his Britannic Majesty's ship Petterel, treated very well
and permitted to proceed on our voyage.

On the 23d, at 6, A. M. was boarded by two Spanish privateers, (Gibraltar then
bearing W. N. W. about three leagues distant) and carried into Ceuta, a small
port on the coast of Barbary, at present occupied by the Spaniards, and having
struck one of the privateersmen with a sword, and wounded him on the arm, was
put into a dungeon, ironed hands and feet, where I was kept about an hour and
an half, and then let out. The vessel was cleared the same evening, and we
sailed for Philadelphia.

On the 28th, being in lat. 31. 54. N. and long. 17. 25. W. was boarded by a
Spanish privateer, of 14 guns, and robbed of a quantity of provisions, and the
greatest part of our clothes, and then permitted to proceed. On the 1st of
July was boarded by his Britanic Majesty's ship Woolwich, mounting fifty guns.
This ship had taken twenty five sail of American vessels under her convoy, from
the Islands of Grenada, and Antigua, and had left them the day before she fell
in with us. After having examined our papers, they permitted us to proceed on
our voyage. Being very short of provisions, we endeavored to get some from on
board the Woolwich, but could not be supplied, she being as short as ourselves.
-- On the 24th, latt. 38. 20. N. and long. 74. 10. W. spoke the brig Jefferson,
from St. Croix bound to Philadelphia, from whom we got a supply of provisions,
having been about forty days upon less than one biscuit per day, with nothing
else except oil, and wine.

On the 25th, at 4 A. M. saw Cape May bearing W. b. N. about 6 leagues distant.
At 11 took on board a pilot, and stood in for the land, wind N. W. on the 28th
arrived at Philadelphia, where I had the happiness of meeting several persons,
who had been companions in my misery at Algiers, I also met with Moses Brown,
whom I left at Leghorn. I remained here (being indisposed) until the 11th of
August. I then sailed in the quality of a passenger on board the schooner Jay,
belonging to Edgartown (on the Island of Martha's Vineyard) commanded by David
Smith, bound to Boston, where we arrived on the 17th. On the 23d I took passage
for Newburyport, and arrived the same evening, where I had the inexpressible
happiness of being restored to my friends, and native place, after an absence
of four years and one month, and after having endured the severest of
hardships. Thus out of nine persons who left Baltimore on board the Brig Polly,
sour only returned, as follows: Michael Smith, Benjamin Edwards, Moses Brown,
and myself, the rest all died with the plague.

A list of American vessels, and their Crews, captured by the Algerines, in
July, 1785, and October and November 1793.
Ship Do^phia of Philadelphia, captured July 30th, 1785.

Those with this mark a annexed died in Algiers.

Richard O'Brien, Master, Andrew Montgomery, Mate, Philip Sloan, Peleg Lorain,
a James Hull. Charles Caldwell, John Robertson, William Patterson, a Peter
Smith, a Robert Mc'Gennis, a John Dorin, a William Thasing, a Jacobus Tessener,
a Edward O'Riley, a Capt. Zach. Coffin, passenger, a.

Schooner Maria of Boston, Captured July 25th, 1793.

Isaac Stephens, Master, Alexander Forsyth Mate, James L. Catheart, George
Smith, James Harnet, a Thomas Greg, ^illings.

Ship President of Philadelphia, captured 23 October, 1793. William Penrose,
Master, Peter Barry, Mate, Nicholo Francisco, Super-Cargo, James Allen, 2d
Mate, Nicholas Box, Mariner, a John Thomas, John Higdar, a John (...), a John
Dix, a Henry Pillon, a Anthony Russ^l, a Isaac Brooks, a.

Brig George of New-Port (R. I.) captured October 11th, '93.

James Tailor, Master, William Prior, Mate, a Stanton Huzard, Gideon Brown,
George Tilley, Abraham Flagg, Benjamin Church, Richard Witton, a.

Schooner Jay, of Gloucester, captured October '93.

Samuel Calder, Master, John Walker, Mate, John Edwards, Walter Gibbins,
Abraham Simmonds, a Thomas Manning, Benjamin Ober.

Ship Minerva of Philadelphia, captured October 18, '93.

John M'Shane, Master, a Samuel Millborne, 1st Mate, a John M'Farland, John
Sutton, Jean Fogereaux, Abel Willis, Charles Smith, Thomas Burton, William
Grafton, Joseph Deitz, Thomas Burgess, Giovani Romeo, Bar^atami Gazona, Vincent
Romes, Juan Segrane, Joseph Rogers, a John Mott, a.

Brig Jane of Haverhill, captured October 11 1793.

Moses Morss, Master, Edward Harwood, Mate, James Peace, Samuel Hendrick, Thomas
Fry, Those. Ximense, Abraham Burril, John Ramsey, a.

Ship Thomas of Boston, captured, October, 1793.

Timothy Newman, Master, George Wells, Mate, Richard Harris, Rosmus Morton,
John Woodman, Benjamin Bishop, Barney Mc'Laughton, Peter Lamer, William Dunbar,
Antonio Salamer.

Brig Polly, of Newburyport, captured October 25, '93.

Samuel E. Bayley, Master, a Michael smith, 1st. Mate, Benjamin Edwards, 2d.
Mate, John Fosse, Moses Brown, Walbert H. Poel, a Thomas Stafford, a Enoch Rust,
a Nicholas Hartford, a.

Ship Hope of New York, captured October 8, 1793.

John Burnham, master, Wm. Dixon, 1st mate, Peter Ingram, 2d do. James Byrne,
James Fox, Benjamin Lunt, Peter Bandie, Harmon Oldstick, Christian Hannes, John
P. Peterson, Jacob Skoomaker, Cornelius Tondroton, Martin Duart, Cornelius
Westerdunk, Peter Vantorn, Jno. F. R:-card, Peter C. Bryer, Jno. F. Kickner.

Brig Olive Branch of Portsmouth, N. H. captured 11th Oct. 1793.

Wm. Furnace, master, Richard Wood, mate, a Nathaniel Keen, Daniel Fall, John
Earl, George Backanan, Thomas Furnace, a.

Schr. Dispatch of Petersburg, Virg. captured in October, 1793.

Wm. Wallace, master, a Joseph Keith, mate, aPeter Page, James Hughes, Daniel
Collings, a George Osborne.

Brig Minerva of New. York, captured November 23, '93.

Joseph Ingraham, master, Edward Smith, mate, John Cooper. John (...), Philip
New, Charles Polley, Scippio Jackson, a.

A treaty of Peace and Amity, concluded this present day Timas 21st of the Luna
Safia, year of the Hegira 1210. Corresponding with Saturday, 5th September,
1795, between Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Algiers, his Divan and subjects, and George
Washington President of the United States of America, and Citizens of said
United States.
Article 1st. FROM the date of the present treaty, there shall subsist a firm
and sincere peace and amity between the President and citizens of the United
States of North America, and Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Algiers, his Divan and
subjects; the vessels and subjects of both nations reciprocally treating each
other with civility, honor and respect.

Art. 2. All vessels belonging to the citizens of the United States of North
America, shall be permitted to enter different ports of the Regency, to trade
with our subjects, or any other persons residing within our jurisdiction, on
paying the usual duties at our custom house that is paid by all nations at
peace with this Regency; observing that all goods disembarked and not sold here
shall be permitted to be reimbarked without paying any duty whatever, either
for disembarking or embarking. All naval and military stores, such as
gunpowder, lead, iron, plank, sulphur, timber for building, tar, pitch, rosin,
turpentine, and any other goods denominated naval and military stores, shall be
permitted to be sold in this Regency, without paying any duties whatever at the
custom house of this Regency.

Art 3. The vessels of both nations shall pass each other without any
impediment or molestation, and all goods, money, or passengers of whatever
nation may be on board of the vessels of either party shall be considered as
inviolable, and shall be allowed to pass unmolested.

Art 4. All ships of war belonging to this Regency on meeting with merchant
vessels belonging to the citizens of the U. S. shall be allowed to visit them
with two persons only beside the Rowers, these two only permitted to go on
board said vessel without obtaining express leave from the commander of said
vessel, who shall compare the passport, and immediately permit said vessel to
proceed on her voyage unmolested. All ships of war belonging to the United
States of North America, on meeting with an Algerine cruiser, and shall have
seen her passport and certificate from the Consul of the United States, of
North America, resident in this regency, shall be permitted to proceed on her
cruise unmolested; no passport to be issued to any ships but such as are
absolutely the property of citizens of the United States; and eighteen months
shall be the term allowed for furnishing the ships of the United States with
passports.

Art. 5th. No commander of any cruiser belonging to this Regency, shall be
allowed to take any persons, of whatever nation or denonomination, out of any
vessel belonging to the United States of North America, in order to examine
them, or under pretense of making them confess any thing desired; neither shall
they inflict any corporal punishment, or any way else molest them.

Art. 6th. If any vessel belonging to the United States of North America, shall
be stranded on the coast of this Regency, they shall receive every possible
assistance from the subjects of this Regency; all goods saved from the wreck
shall be permitted to reimbark on board of any other vessel, without paying any
duties at the custom house.

Art. 7th. The Algerines are not, on any pretense whatever, to give or sell any
vessel of war to any nation at war with the United S. of North America, or any
vessel capable of cruising to the detriment of the commerce of said United
States.

Art. 8. Any citizen of the United States of North America, having bought any
prize condemned by the Algerines shall not be again captured by the cruisers of
the Regency then at sea, although they have no passport; certificates from the
Consul being deemed sufficient until such a time as they can procure such
passport.

Art. 9th. If any of the Barbary states at war with the United States of North
America, shall capture any American vessel and bring her into any of the ports
of this Regency, they shall not be permitted to sell her, but shall depart the
port on procuring the requisite supplies of provision.

Art. 10th. Any vessel belonging to the United States of North America, when at
war with any other nation, shall be permitted to send their prizes into the
ports of the Regency, have leave to dispose of them without paying any duties
on sale thereof. All vessels wanting provisions or refreshments, shall be
permitted to buy them at market price.

Art. 11th. All ships of war belonging to the United States of North America,
on anchoring in the ports of the Regency, shall receive the usual present of
provisions and refreshments -- gratis. Should any of the slaves of this Regency
make their escape on board said vessels, they shall be immediately returned; No
excuse shall be made that they have hid themselves amongst the people and
cannot be found, or any other equivocation.

Art. 12th. No citizen of the United States of North America shall be obliged
to redeem any slave against his will, even should he be his brother; neither
shall the owner of a slave be forced to sell him against his will; but all such
agreements must be made by consent of parties. Should any American citizen be
taken on board an enemy ship, by the cruizers of this Regency, having a regular
passport, specifying they are citizens of the United States, they shall be
immediately set at liberty. On the contrary, they having no passport, they and
their property shall be considered lawful prize; as this Regency know their
friends by their passports.

Art. 13. Should any of the citizens of the United States of North America, die
within the limits of this Regency, the Dey and his subjects shall not interfere
with the property of the deceased; but it shall be under the immediate
direction of the consul; unless otherwise disposed of by will. Should there be
no consul, the effects shall be deposited in the hands of some person worthy of
trust, until the party shall appear who has a right to demand them; when they
shall render an account of property. Neither shall the Dey or Divar give
hindrance in the execution of any will that may appear.

Art. 14. No citizen of the United States of North America, shall be obliged to
purchase any goods against his will; but on the contrary, shall be allowed to
purchase whatever if pleases him. The consul of the United State of North
America, or any other citizen, shall not be amenable for debt contracted by any
one of their own nation; unless previously they have give a written obligation
so to do. Should the Dey want to freight any American vessel that may be in the
Regency or Turkey, said vessel not being engaged: in consequence of the
friendship subsisting between the two nations, he expects to have the
preference given him on his paying the same freight offered by any other nation.

Art. 15. Any disputes or suits at law, that may take place between the Regency
and the citizens of the United States of North America, shall be decided by the
Dey in person, and no other. Any disputes that may arise between the citizens
of the United States shall be decided by the consul; as they are in such cases
not subject to the laws of this Regency.

ART. 16. Should any citizen of the United States of North America, kill, wound
or strike a subject of this Regency, he shall be punished in the same manner as
a Turk, and not with more severity. Should any citizen of the United States of
North America, in the above predicament, escape prison, the Consul shall not
become answerable for him.

ART. 17. The consul of the United States of North America, shall have every
personal security given him and his household: He shall have liberty to
exercise his religion in his own house. All slaves of the same religion shall
not be impeded in going to said Consul's house, at hours of prayer. The consul
shall have liberty and personal security given him to travel whenever he
pleases within the Regency: He shall have free license to go on board any
vessel lying in our roads, whenever he shall think fit. The Consul shall have
leave to appoint his own Drogaman and Broker.

ART. 18. Should a war break out between the two nations, the Consul of the
United States of North America, and all Citizens of said States, shall have
leave to embark themselves and property unmolested, on board of what vessel and
vessels they shall think proper.

ART. 19. Should the cruisers of Algiers capture any vessel having citizens of
the United States of North America on board, they having papers to prove they
are really so, they and their property shall be immediately discharged. And
should the vessels of the United States capture any vessels of nations at war
with them, having subjects of this Regency on board, they shall be treated in
like manner.

ART. 20. On a vessel of war belonging to the United States of North America
anchoring in our ports, the consul is to inform the Dey of her arrival; and she
shall be saluted with twenty-one guns; which she is to return in the same
quantity or number. And the Dey will send fresh provisions on board, as is
customary, gratis.

ART. 21. The consul of the United States of North America shall not be
required to pay duty for any thing from a foreign country for the use of his
house and family.

ART. 22. Should any disturbance take place between the citizens of the United
States and the subjects of this Regency, or break any article of this treaty,
war shall not be declared immediately; but every thing shall be searched into
regularly: the party injured shall be made reparation.

On the 21st of the Luna of Safia, 1210. corresponding with the 5th of
September, 1795, Joseph Donaldson, jun. on the part of the United States of
North America, agreed with Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Algiers, to keep the articles
contained in this treaty sacred and invioable; which we the Dey and Divan
promise to observe, on consideration of the United S. paying annually the value
of twelve thousand Algerine sequins in marine stores. Should the United S.
forward a larger quantity the overplus shall be paid for in money, by the Dey
and Regency. Any vessel that may be captured from the date of this treaty of
peace and amity, shall immediately be delivered up on her arrival in Algiers.

Signed, VISAR HASSAN BASHAW, Seal of Algiers, stamped at the foot of the
original Treaty. in Arabic. JOSEPH DONALDSON, Jun.


A true and authentic statement of the prime cost of the PEACE with Algiers,
concluded September 5th, 1795, between, Joseph Donaldson Esquire.and Hassan Bashaw,
Dey of Algiers.
Dollars. To be paid to the Dey, 180,000 The Dey's Family, 60,000 The Treasury,
10,000 The Hasnagi, or Prime Minister, 8000 Redemption of 100 captives, 180,000
The Aga, or geueral commandant, 8,000 The Hodge de Cabelles (or inspector of
the Dey's stable,) 7,000 The Viguelhadge, de la Marina (minister of Marine,)
7,000 Cidi Aldrahaman, (the Dey's wife's Brother) 3,000 The Hodges de la Divan,
(clerk of the Divan,) 12,000 Two Moorish Hodges (Clerks) 3,000 Two Cantadores
(Dey's musicians) 2,000 The Dey's Drogerman, (messenger) 1,000 The Dey's
Viguelhadge, (overseer of the palace) 2,000 The Hodges de la port, (Clerks of
the palace,) 1,000 Two Cooks, 2,000 The Hasnidal, (the Dey's Treasurer,) 1,000
The Chouxes, (Constables) 1,500 The Pettimell, (Administrator on the estates of
deceased persons,) 1,500 The Novagies, (the Dey's life guard) 1,000 The Casaba,
(the old palace,) 2,500 The Officers of the Marine, 3,000 The Hodge of the
Rappa, (Clerk of the Dey's wheat,) 1,000 495,500 Expenses allowed, 117,000
Whole amount to be paid in Cash, 612,500

MARITIME STORES, To be brought to the Regency in all 1796.
500 Barrels of Gunpowder, was at Mr. Donaldson's request, changed for the
following articles: -- 200 Barrels of Rosin. 10 Cables, of 10 and 11 inches. 10
Spars, of 90 feet length, and 32 inches diameter. 10 do. for yards, 80 feet
length, and 20 inches diameter. 10 Tons of white Ropeyarn.
N. B. Should the value of the above mentioned articles, not amount to 75,000
dollars, the remainder is to be brought in white Ropeyarns.

The following articles was agreed to be paid exclusive of the powder.
50 Tons of Pig Lead. 10 Iron guns, twenty-four pounders, with carriages
complete. 20,000 Cannon Balls, from twenty four to six pounders. 5,000 Double
headed, do. do. 10 Cables, thirteen inches. 25 Tons Cordage, of different
sizes. 200 Bolts of Canvas. 200 Barrels of Tar. 10 Barrels of Pitch. 10 Spars
for masts, ninety feet long, thirty six inches diameter. 1,500 Pine Plank,
forty four feet long, six inches thick. 1,500 Oak, do. do. do. 200 Pieces of
pine Scantling. 2,000 Musket Barrels. 100 Spars for yards, eighty feet long,
twenty inches diameter.
It was likewise agreed to pay the value of 12,000 Algerine sequins annually,
(...) naval and military stores. Wednesday the 10th, 5,000 double headed shot
were abated for 5000 single do. from twenty four to six pounders.

Copy of a Certificate, which is given to the Algerine Corsairs, by the
American Consul.
JOEL BARLOW, Agent and Consul General of the United States of America, for the
City and Kingdom of Algiers, to all whom it may concern, Greeting.

WHEREAS, RAISE MUSTAFA of said City, being bound on a cruise on board a Frigate
of this place, mounting 28 guns, has requested of me my passport, to be used by
him as occasion may offer, Therefore, in consequence of the peace and amity
subsisting between the said United States, and this City and Kingdom, I have
granted to him the same, and hereby request and require all citizens of the
said United States, to suffer the said Raise Mustafa, with the said Frigate, and
all persons under his command, freely to pass without any seizure, hindrance or
molestation; to give him assistance in case of need, and to use him with that
courtesy which is due to the good friends of the said United States. But all
masters of Merchant ships are advised not to suffer their ships to be visited
by them, otherwise than by producing their proper papers, and to allow no more
than one boat to approach them, and two persons only to come on board their
ships. According to the articles of Peace between the said United States and
this City and Kingdom.

Given under my hand and seal of the Consulate of the United States at Algiers,
this 15th day of May in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety six.

JOEL BARLOW.

Translation and Copy of the Truce with Tunis.
IN the name of the most merciful God. -- WE in the name of God, under our
hands we give unto the American Ambassador, a Truce with our Regency, for the
U. S. of N. A. Until he receives Intelligence from America, for which we allow
him the term of eight months by our special order, unto Hamida Bashaw. I Vizar
Hassan Bashaw Dey of the City and Regency of Algiers, Desire that he may
recommend all the Rais's, at present commanding Vessels under his command and
jurisdiction, Not to Damage, Plunder, OF impede, any American Vessels until
the time herein specified, shall be accomplished or completed; and they
receive our second order. Given under my hand by order of Hassan Bashaw Dey of
the City and Regency of Algiers, on the 26th of the Luna Rabalia Scham, in the
year of the Hegira 1210, which corresponds with the 8th of Nov. 1795.

Signed HODGE ALLI VIGEL, or charge of the affairs and Agent for the Regency of
Algiers at Tunis.

THE ALGERINE SLAVES, A POEM.

BY A CITIZEN OF NEWBURYPORT,

"O give me LIBERTY!
"For were even Paradise itself my prison,
"Still I should long to leap the crystal walls."
NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED BY ANGIER MARCH, MIDDLE-STREET.

1798.

TO the late unfortunate sufferers in Algiers in particular, and to the Friends
of Humanity in general, the following Lines are respectfully inscribed,

by their Friend, and humble servant, THE AUTHOR.
Newburyport, Sept. 1798.
THE ALGERINE SLAVES, A POEM.
ASSIST my muse, assist the Captive's lay,
To sing that awful, that distressing day;
When 'twas our hap, -- so ordered cruel fate,
To bow obedient to those sons of hate,
Those Turkish rovers, robbers of the main,
And wear the galling, peace-destroying chain:
To bear the scoffs, the cruel taunts of those
True sons of Ishmael, and to feast on woes.
To taste the sour crumb -- sad poisonous fare,
And lieu of rest, find anguish and despair.
Such was our hapless, such our cruel state,
And such the tale the captive does relate.
OUR native coast we'd left with all that glee,
Known only to those lads who live on sea;
Who sail adventurous over the briny main,
A competence through life's sad vale to gain.
Whose strong-nerv'd hearts all dangers brave,
The mountain-sea -- the curling wave --
Whom deathfulbillows never were knownt' appal
The swell tremendous, or the thundering squall.
We'd shaped our course for Cadiz, for 'twas there
Our Bark was bound, nor heeded danger near;
Swift through the foaming waves she makes her way,
And gales propitious mark each coming day.
Our days we spend in pastime, and in play,
While cheering songs beguile the hours away;
And tales of humor dressed in sailor style,
The lonesome hours of gloomy night beguile.
As near St. Vincent's Cape we made our way,
(While every heart was jovial, light and gay.)
Expecting soon to reach our destined port,
Thence quick return, and with our friends resort;
But sad reverse -- we soon descried a sail,
Of form uncommon with a favored gale,
After two Brigs -- these we had spoke before,
For Barcelona bound, from Elsinore,
With keenest eyes each sailor viewed her well,
But who, or what she was, no one could tell.
She quit the Brigs and having ours in view,
Made sail for us -- Now how or what to do,
No one on board could tell, no one devise --
To fly was vain -- 'twas therefore deemed most wise.
Our sails to clue, and patiently to wait,
Her near approach, and our (yet unknown) fate.
Quick through the liquid waves she made her way,
So eagles haste when in pursuit of prey,
With wide-spread canvass, and inflated sail,
She soon approached and quickly gave us hail?
When this we heard, (in language like our own)
A beam of hope in every countenance shown!
But on her near approach, the vision fled;
Our eyes beheld with wonder, and with dread,
Those tawney moors, whose dress and bearded hue
Soon spoke the place from whence the infernal crew.
Judge ye, who have known, or ye who have yet to know,
What it is to drink the bitter cup of woe;
What must our feelings be at this sad sight,
What anxious boding, what extreme affright,
For 'twas not death, that we had now to fear,
But slavery dreadful sounded in each ear!
Now shouting huzzas and such mingled noise,
On board the corsair speak their extreme joys,
Their launch they fill -- and armed with sword and spear,
Quick rush on board, nor had they ought to fear,
For arms we'd none, our crew but nine in all,
And dire submission now their only all.
Now scenes of villainy pervade each part,
And sighs of anguish fill each captive heart.
When having robbed and plundered over and over,
Each every atom of the vessels store,
Stripped off our clothes -- these sons of prlde
Put us on board the launch, and row 'long side
Their Bark; where, by the Turkish hoard
With acclamations we are received on board,
We Are then conducted to the Cabin door,
Where perched in state, upon the cabin floor,
Sat their great Chief, whose name, they say
Was, Raise Hudga Mahomet Salamia!
With all the pomp and unaffected pride
Of a true Turk, and ignorance beside,
He told us whence he was, his vessel's name,
And what was ours to expect when there we came,
Slavery, more abject that the mind can trace,
The pen pourtray -- or human though it embrace,
But then, said he, "ye Dogs, mean while,
"See that on board my bark ye work and toil,
"Enjoy our fare -- for better it is, and more
"Than what you will get, when once you're put on shore."
Our sorrows now in quick succession roll,
And horrors dismal shroud each captive soul.
In vain we hope, in vain we view the wind,
Or "cast one longing, lingering look behind."
Our country's gone where freedom's gentle reign
Spreads peace and joy over every happy plain.
Where blessed religion, sister of the soul,
Lends her kind aid, and happifies the whole.
Gone -- yes, forever gone, and we, no more
Shall hail, Columbia, thy blissful shore,
But spend, in hated slavery, spend our days,
Nor once more feel fair freedom's happier rays.
Such were the tho'ts which in succession roll
'Cross the forlorn, the abject captive's soul,
While through the foaming waves with steady gale,
For Algiers' port we hastened every sail.
That nest of pirate-thieves -- for O! 'twas there
We were to taste new scenes of deep despair!
To tell our sufferings here, would be in vain,
That they were great each captive will maintain,
And passing great; but small indeed to those
We had to feel when landed midst our foes.
Arrived and landed on the Barb'ry shore,
Our ears were stunned with shoutings and uproar;
With thanks to God, for victories obtained,
Over Christian-dogs, who the true faith disdained.
The strand was filled with thousands, barbarous crew,
A few dejected prisoners to view!
When brought before the Dey, that hoary Chief
Gave us our orders -- this was some relief;
For now our fate was fixed, 'twas clear and plain
The goad terrific, and the galling chain!
To toil by day -- to suffer want and pain,
And all the horrors which the Slaves pertain.
Then having viewed us man by man;
And seemed each feature to minutely scan,
The bearded chief thus spoke our captive train,
Now even deprived the priv'lege to complain.
" I long have sought, ye dogs, with anxious zeal,
" Peace with the United States to seal;
" But all my efforts have indeed been vain,
" Therefore you will not of being slaves complain. --
" And now I Have got you in my power I swear,
" Ye Christian Dogs, that stones shall be your fare."
Then to the Bagnio -- the prison where
The fated slaves at night must all repair,
And stretched upon a sorry floor of stone,
Their dismal fate in dismal groans bemoan,
Like sheep, we are drove, and there sad though it, to remain
Till our Task-master bids us rise again,
And scenes of woe succeed to scences of pain.
Within the Bagnio's horrid walls, 'twas there
Sat meagre famine, and keen eyed despair;
Pale, ghastly forms, (urus'd to drudge and toil)
In pensive muse filled every lane and aisle,
An awful silence reigned -- 'till in despair,
A captive thus to Heaven addressed his prayer:
Thou God of mercy, hear, O hear my prayer;
Thou heeds the Raven's cry -- be mine thy care.
Stretch out thine arm -- thine own right arm make bare,
And make these wretches tremble while they hear.
Ye sons of Ishmael, how long shall ye remain
The scourge of Christians, robbers of the main?
How long, ye vile, ye worse than savage crew,
Must all the world bow down and stoop to you?
Columbia's God! unsheath thy glitt'ringsword,
Ride on and conquer -- speak, O speak the word;
O let a Captive's prayer for once invoke
Thy slumbering justice to direct the stroke,
On proud Algiers, who seer as in scorn to say,
I sit alone, and make the world obey.
Send quick destruction on this cursed land,
This more than vile, this worse than murderous band.
No more let human captives bear the insulting chain,
No more of woes unparralle'd complain,
It Is thine, O God! -- thine is the power,
And thine to accomplish at the appointed hour!
Then shall thy wrath in vengefulbolts be hurled
On proud Algiers! the terror of the world;
Thy city prove a heath, a barren plain,
And naught of all thy grandeur shall remain,
But heaps of stones, where owls may brood,
To point the trav'ler where thy glory stood.
Now various days call various modes of toil,
And goading tyrants urge us on the while,
Sometimes the rock tremenduous we roll
For several miles, and place it on the mole;
Or chained like Oxen, place them on the sled,
Then drag, and place them in their watery bed.
At other times, we are destined to toil
And clear their ships of their ill-gotten spoil.
To lug the contents from their famed marine,
And place or stow them in each magazine.
And often their coarsers clean -- their sails repair,
And fit them for their depredat'ry war.
And should the captive dare one moment steal
The Bastinadoe he is sure to feel.
A sorry morsel, made of coarsest bran,
Three times a day was given to every man,
With Vinegar -- and this was all our fare,
Could ever sufferings with ours compare?
From morn to night 'twas ours to bear the load
Of toil, and sweat, or feel the vengeful goad.
Thus days of anguish in succession roll,
And hope, even hope, scarce glimmers in the soul.
A glimmering ray would sometimes intervene,
Then die away and darken all the scene.
Our years roll on like wave succeeding wave
And as they find so leave us each a slave.
When how shall words sufficiently express
The joy tumultuous which our bosoms press,
When our dear country took an active part
Our chains to break, and raise each sinking heart.
O! how melodious it was to hear
The sounds of Freedom vibrate on the ear,
Not more reviving to the thirsty soul
Is the cool stream where limpid waters roll,
Than were those sounds, which tidings bore,
"Columbia we should see once more!"
Once more our friends, our country view,
And each again his usual trade pursue.
Which bade each slave anticipate the day,
When sweet fruition should his toils repay;
And virgin tears attend each virgin kiss,
And scenes of woe be lost in scenes of bliss.
To send such worthies to our help and aid,
Was nobly done -- the debt can never be paid,
Humphrey's and Barlow, chiefs, whose fame
Shall bloom, when lesser heroes want a name.
Whose patriot-souls as far 'bove meanness rise
As are the eastern from the western skies.
Nor did they stop -- though posed on every side,
Till peace was made. Till Turkish pride
Stooped to salute our flag, Never did the ear
Sounds more reviving, more majestic hear,
Than we are those thunders, three times seven,
Each seemed as it were the voice of Heaven.
But scenes of joy like meteors in the air,
Too often alas, add darkness to despair!
The treaty's made; but then wer'e doomed to stay
Until our country does the ransom pay.
When will it come? what may not intervene?
The Dey grow vexed, and slavery end the scene.
Thus months again roll on -- no ransom near,
And thus were doomed to live. 'twixt hope and fear.
When the Grim Chief, impatient grown,
Orders the Consul Barlow, to be gone.
O! who can tell, what pencil can pourtray
Our heart-sunk anguish, and our keen dismay?
All we could dream was slav'ry's galling chain,
Till death should end our misery and our pain!
So the 'lorn wretch, thrown in the foaming wave,
Tries every art the element to brave,
Exerts each nerve -- his brawny arms display,
As towered the shore he makes his rapid way;
Still presses on -- nor seems to heed the stream,
Buoyed up by Hope's all-cheering, soothing beam,
Till just arrived, and near the craggy steep,
He fainting, sinks in Death's eternal sleep!
At length the ransom's paid, and free once more,
We bid adieu to Barb'ry's cruel shore;
That cursed shore where slav'ry's galling chain
Clanks dismal to the dying captives pain.
Where scenes of anguish grow in every hour,
Poison each spring, and every morsel sour,
Where sleep's sweet poppies rarely lend the aid,
To ease the captive when to rest he is laid;
But horrid fancies fill each haggard soul,
And mignight terrors in succession roll.
Where hopes bright taper rarely spreads a gleam
And Slavery dries up each refreshing stream
But ever we close the scene, the pensive strain
Is due our Brethren fated to remain:
Whose lot it was (so Heaven saw sit) no more,
Their friends to see, on land or Freedom's shore.
Farewell dear shades! in scenes of woe allied!
No more ye groan beneath tyrannic pride;
No more ye feel the goad -- the galling chain,
Nor of your hard, hard sat complain!
Freedom is yours. Death lent his friendly aid,
Your chains are broken, and your ransom's paid.
(...) happy souls, in Regions free as air,
Ye treatise and feast on joys beyond compare.
O great reward! to you to now belongs,
Instead of sighs, to sing triumphant songs,
Instead of anguish and of keen despair,
(Which once was yours to feel, was yours to bear)
What joys celestial now your bosoms move,
It Is rapture all -- it is ecstasy and love!
No more ye dread the Bagnio's horrid wall,
No more the captives groans your breasts appall,
But free as air in Paradise above,
Where saints and angels in succession move,
With heaven key'd notes, ye join in rapturous lay,
Angelic anthems to the Prince of Day.
Your Brethren freed, may envy now your state, --
Your state of Bliss, -- how great, how passing great,
And wish the time, when freed from every care,
Their souls may join you, and your raptures share.
But scenes of woe enough -- turn we awhile
Around and see fair Freedom smile;
A slave no more! no more of woes complain
The scene demands a more enlivened strain.
Once more arrived -- and on our native shore,
The tide of bliss repays us over and over:
See the kind wife, no longer doomed to sigh,
With joy tumultuous to her husband fly.
Kens every part, his every feature trace,
And faints, enraptured, in his kind embrace.
The aged parent, hoary-headed sage,
Seems now to feel renewal of his age;
His son -- his long lost son, he views again,
From slavery free, from famine and from pain!
The lonely fair, whom tenderest feelings move,
Now runs, impatient, to her long lost love,
With quickened pulse, into his arms she springs,
And feels and tastes unutterable things.
Sure scenes like these repay the Captive's toil,
And all his former griefs beguile.
Amazed, on either side, he casts his eyes,
New scenes of joy enkindle new surprise.
It Is now he sees his country's glorious rise
Her towering grandeur mount the etherial skies,
"Than virgin fairer, on her bridal morn,
Whom all the graces, all the loves adorn.
Here, planters find a ceaseless source of charms,
In clearing fields and adding farms to farms.
It Is Independence prompts their daily toil,
And calls forth beauties from the distant soil;
Here hamlets grow, here Europe's pilgrims come
From vassal'd woes, to find a quiet home,
Let other climes, of other produce boast,
Let Gold, let Diamonds grow on India's coasts.
Let flaming suns, from arid plains exhale
The spicy adours of Arabia's gale;
Let fragrant shrubs that bloom in regions calm --
Perfumes expiring, bleed ambrosial balm;
Let Olive's flourish in Hesperia's soil,
Anana's ripen in each tropic isle;
Let Gallia gladden in her clust'ring vines,
Let Spain exult in her peruvian mines,
Let plains of Barb'ry boast the generous stead
Far famed for beauty, strength and matchless speed,"
Be thine the boast -- Columbia, thine the soil,
Where freedom reigns, and all the virtues smile.
It Is now he tastes what thousands rarely know,
The balmy sweets, which from fair Freedom flow;
Looks round the world; and then enraptured cries,
It Is thine Columbia! daughter of the skies,
Thine, thine the land, where freedom's gentle reign
Demands the poets and the Captive's strain.
JUVENIS.

