A SERMON DELIVERED AT HOPKINTON, BEFORE THE Hon. General Court OF THE STATE OF
NEW HAMPSHIRE, AT THE ANNUAL ELECTION, HOLDEN ON THE FIRST WEDNESDAY IN JUNE,
1798.

BY ROBERT GRAY, A. B. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN DOVER.

Dover, PRINTED BY SAMUEL BRAGG, JUN. FOR THE GENERAL COURT.

STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE. In the House of Representatives, June 7th, 1798.
VOTED, THAT MR. CRAWFORD, MR. GILMAN, and Mr. D. EMERSON, be a Committee on
the part of this House, to join such of the Hon. SENATE, as they may appoint to
wait on the REV. MR. GRAY, and present him with the thanks of the Legislature
for his ingenious and patriotic discourse delivered this day before them, and
desire of him the favor of a Copy for the press. --

Sent up for Concurrence, JOHN PRENTICE, Speaker.
In Senate, June 8th, 1798. Read and Concurred. Mr. HALE, Appointed, NATHANIEL
PARKER, Deputy Secretary. A True Copy, ATTEST, NATHANIEL PARKER, Deputy
Secretary.
AN ELECTION SERMON.
GENESIS XIIth CHAPTER, 2d. VERSE. AND I WILL MAKE OF THEE A GREAT NATION.
THE passage now read contains a part of that promise, which God made to
Abraham, when he commanded him to depart from his country and from his kindred
and from his father's house, and to sojourn in a strange land. To induce him to
comply with this command of heaven, he is assured that he shall become a great
nation, and shall be raised to distinguished heights of honor, happiness and
renown. I will make of thee a great nation, says Jehovah, and I will bless
thee, and make thy name great; and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless
them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee. This promise we find
fulfilled in the nation of the Jews. From small beginning they rose to national
greatness and happiness. They were for a long period, a great, happy and
flourishing people. Under the protection of divine providence, they were secure
against the invasion of enemies. God suffered no man to do them harm. He
frequently appeared for their protection and deliverance, in times of danger
and calamity. He gave them a land flowing with milk and honey and indulged them
with all those temporal delights, which are necessary to comfort, pleasure and
satisfaction. God chose them for his peculiar people and distinguished them
from all the nations of the earth, in regard to religious privileges. He made
them acquainted with his perfections and instructed them in their duty. Unto
them pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the service
of God, and the promises.

THUS was the promise fulfilled. God made of Abraham a great nation.

IN the sequel of this discourse, I shall endeavor, as the words before us will
naturally lead me, to show what is necessary to render a nation great,
according to the sense of our text.

THE requisites of national greatness are many and various. In one discourse it
will not be expected that I should notice them all. To make some general
observations upon the subject is all that can reasonably be required.

THAT a nation may become great, prosperous and happy it is necessary that they
form into society and establish a constitution of civil government, that shall
be best adapted to the general good. What form of government is the best and
most eligible has been disputed in all civilized nations, by men of knowledge
and penetration. "Some have been pleased with a monarchical form, others have
chosen an aristocratical; while others, have given the preference to a more
popular mode of government."

THE interests, manners, customs and prejudices of mankind are so variable,
that it is very difficult to determine what frame of government will be most
promotive of the good of any people. But I think we may safely affirm that to
be the best constitution, which abridges the liberties of a people no further,
than is necessary to their safety, prosperity and political happiness. Under
such a constitution, persons are safe in their interest, honor and property.
Authority, when exercised contrary to the general and important end of
government, may be remanded and return into the hands of the people. But the
greatness and happiness of a nation depend as much, if not more, on a wise and
faithful administration, than on any particular form of government.

THAT a people may experience the happy effects of a wise and good
administration of government, it is necessary that their rulers be men of
knowledge, integrity and religion. It is very evident, that men, who are
invested with the legislative authority, ought to have some acquaintance with
mankind, with history and with the various modes of administration in different
nations. But, especially, it is incumbent on civil rulers to be well acquainted
with the constitution of the state in which they live. Without this knowledge
they must be liable to many errors; and while they intend to do essential
service to the community, they may be pursuing measures, which tend directly to
destroy its happiness. We pretend not that it is necessary civil rulers should
be persons of collegiate education. But they ought, at least, to be men of good
understanding, that have a competent knowledge of the rights of mankind, and
the nature of government. Ignorant men, men destitute of these qualifications,
will, if raised to places of power and trust, be a curse, instead of a blessing
to the community. They will be little more than mean instruments in the hands
of men of crafty intrigue. A few individuals, in this case, will govern the
state and a great part of the public lose the benefit of an equal
representation. That persons, who are elected officers of government, ought to
be men of knowledge and good understanding, we are taught not only by
experience, but by revelation. The Jews were commanded "to take wise men, and
understanding, and known among their tribes, and to make them rulers over
them." On the other hand, it was considered as a great and heavy judgment, when
weak and ignorant men were raised to stations of power and authority. "Woe unto
thee, O land, when thy king is a child."

SOLOMON, when called to sit upon the throne of his father David, prayed that
God would give him a wise and understanding heart, that he might be able to
judge so great a people.

IF the greatest degrees of political knowledge are not an essential
qualification in a ruler, yet he is unfit to be placed at the head of public
affairs, who is of inferior abilities, who is unacquainted with the
constitution of the State in which he lives, and who knows not what it is to
act right; for he is very liable to abuse his power, and to encroach upon the
rights and privileges of the people.

"IN free governments, one observes, men are apt to feel, much quicker, than in
those of a different form. To touch their liberties, is to touch the apple of
their eye, every attempt alarms them, and makes them jealous of further
designs, and sometimes throws them into the hands of factious demagogues, who
are enemies to all government, and are ever watching opportunities to embarrass
public measures and to introduce anarchy and confusion. Where so much,
therefore, depends, and where the danger of acting wrong is likely to produce
such mischievous effects in the community, rulers ought to know very well what
it is to act right; where power ends and liberty begins. The more difficult it
is to settle this point, so much the more wisdom, knowledge and prudence do
rulers need, and so much the more cautious should they be in their political
conduct.

ANOTHER indispensable qualification in rulers is integrity. The prosperity of
society is in their hands, and the greater their wisdom and knowledge are, the
more capable they are of destroying the interest of the community.

IF we have any knowledge of the history of nations, we cannot be ignorant of
the unhappy and ruinous effects of raising to stations of power and trust men
of no integrity, of base and corrupt minds, of low art and intrigue. The most
fatal evils in society have originated from this cause. -- How many nations,
which once enjoyed the blessings of freedom and equal liberty, have either
suffered national annihilation, or been reduced to the most abject slavery by
men of this description? Indeed, where has the nation existed, that has been,
for a long period, free and happy, while dishonest and unfaithful men were at
the head of its public affairs? It cannot be named. But history furnishes us
with an account of many states and empires, which have been involved in the
greatest miseries, and finally were destroyed by means of corrupt and wicked
rulers.

THE republic of Sparta, which flourished for almost seven hundred years, and
bid defiance to the world, was at last thrown from the height of political
glory and happiness into the abyss of misery and slavery by unprincipled and
intriguing men.

THE ruin of the famous republic of Rome originated from the same cause. While
the reins of government were in the hands of upright and faithful men, she
flourished and was mistress of the world; but when persons of the opposite
character were placed at the helm of state, she lost her happiness, sunk into
disgrace, and became a slave.

PERFECTLY agreeable to the dictates of reason, is that observation, "that
nothing will so surely, so rapidly bring on the dissolution of society and the
loss of the liberties of the people, as want of integrity in rulers."

THE divine oracles, which give us the best instructions how to secure our
present, as well as future happiness, inform us that "rulers must be just men,
fearers of God, haters of covetousness. That, they shake their hands from
holding bribes, because a gift blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverteth
the words of the righteous."

REASON and revelation, then concur in support of this truth, that integrity in
civil rulers is an essential qualification, and that they only will be
ministers of God for good to the people, who are men of integrity, uprightness
and honesty.

WE proceed to observe, that religion is an important qualification in civil
rulers. This finishes their character. This renders them acceptable to God, and
makes them blessings to society.

RELIGION is necessary to the honor, usefulness and happiness of all moral
agents; but religion is peculiarly requisite for civil rulers. It adds a
dignity to their character, commands the esteem and veneration of the
community, and makes them, what they ought to be, blessings to society. Of such
importance is religion in civil rulers, that without it the best genius and the
greatest knowledge would endanger the welfare of the State, rather than promote
the interest and happiness of the public. Men of enlightened minds and corrupt
hearts, men of knowledge, but void of piety and the fear of God, are very
unsuitable persons to be entrusted with the affairs and concerns of a republic.
Persons, who fear not God and obey not the gospe of his son will not regard
man, nor consult the interest and well being of civil society any further, than
what is necessary to their own aggrandizement and the accomplishment of their
own private views.

BUT that a nation may become great, it is not only necessary, that they have
wise upright and pious rulers, but the people also must submit to lawful
authority and equitable laws. The doctrine of non resistance and passive
obedience, we reject with abhorrence. A people cannot, in justice be obligated
to submit to oppressive and tyrannical laws. When laws are unjust, not well
adapted to the circumstances of the community, and when a compliance with them
would be attended with effects injurious to the public, the people have a right
first to remonstrate and then refuse submission. But this right belongs only to
the majority, the ruling body of the State, and not to any minority. If this
principle be not established, all civil order is in danger of being brought to
an end. When persons enter into society and combine in civil government, they
oblige themselves to submit to the laws of the State, and it is trifling with
society and government to refuse submission. It is relasping into a state of
nature and subverting the very constitution and basis of society. Obedience to
civil authority is absolutely necessary to the very being of a community, and
every one is an enemy to his country, who refuses submission to its laws.

BUT it is of equal importance to national greatness, that laws wisely enacted
and well adapted, be faithfully executed. Laws are not only necessary to the
good order and prosperity of a community, but they must also be executed.
Without this, they are perfectly useless. Persons, who disobey the laws of the
community, ought to be noticed and brought to justice.

IN every State officers are elected and authorized to detect and bring to
punishment offenders, and every officer is highly criminal, who neglects this
his political duty, who connives at and passes by breaches of law; for by this
neglect he violates his promise and injures the community. He is an enemy to
the State, and ought to be deprived of his authority and commission. Unless the
laws of a community are put in force and the executive authority is exercised,
the legislature will become contemptible and the State lose the advantages of
civil society. Laws will never be obeyed without sanctions, and persons will
never be deterred from violating them, unless criminals be punished. Therefore,
no act of disobedience ought to be countenanced, when the interest of the
community is threatened. Conniving at one act of disobedience will open the way
for another, and finally, all violations of law may pass unpunished, confusion
and every evil work may enter society, and property, and even life itself
become very insecure.

BENEVOLENCE or public spirit, an attachment to the body politic and the
general good, in opposition to partial views, is requisite to national
greatness. The grand political object, the good of the whole, ought to be kept
in view and animate and direct the conduct of every individual. Persons,
however, in promoting the interest of society are not bound to sacrifice all
private views, and to act wholly from public motives. Self-preservation is the
first law of nature, and to have regard to our own individual happiness is
perfectly consistent with a true love to our country. Every member of civil
society may always seek to promote his own interest, when it is not attended
with injury to the community. But when by any act of this kind the interest of
the community suffers, such act becomes unlawful and the author of it is
governed by unjustifiable motives. A selfish spirit in civil society is
destructive both of private and public interest, and were this spirit
universally to prevail, society would be subverted from its basis, private
interest would be the pursuit of all and the public good engage the attention
of none.

ANOTHER essential requisite of national greatness is domestic peace and
concord. The happiness of civil society very much depends upon its unity. A
people may be numerous and wealthy, they may be favored with a good form of
government and with wise, upright and religious rulers; yet if domestic
contentions and quarrels prevail among them, their prospects of national glory
and happiness must be very gloomy. Their national strength will be continually
decreasing, their wealth consuming, and they, in time, must fall a prey to
their enemies. History and experience abundantly confirm the truth of our
savior's assertion "a kingdom divided against itself cannot stand." A people
when united may probably stand against the attacks of their enemies, but when
they are divided among themselves, when strife and contentions are prevalent,
they must fall. One great cause of the subvertion of the Jewish state and
government was division. They were, it is true, obliged to contend with a
powerful enemy. But they might have withstood the attack of the Romans and
become victorious, if in heart and measures they had been united. The Jewish
history furnishes us with an account of that most horrible destruction, which
the Roman army made of this unhappily divided people. Every one's sword was
turned against his fellow; and they made but a feeble and short resistance.
They were soon brought to desolation. Their cities were ravaged and consumed by
fire, and their government was wholly subverted. The like divisions are
generally productive of similar effects. Contentions in society are much to be
dreaded and studiously avoided. They, when kindled, are like fire, they
increase their own flame; where they will terminate and what will be their
effects, none can determine. They must injure, and they may issue in the
dissolution of Society.

BUT let me observe further, that a spirit of industry among the members of a
community is requisite to national greatness.

EVERY excellent and mental accomplishment is the result of enquiry and
application. By diligence only can arts and sciences be carried to perfection;
and industry is the means, by which the necessaries, conveniences, and
accommodations of life are obtained. Reason and experience teach us that
industry is conducive to national glory and prosperity. It is this that leads
to honor, to wealth, to wisdom, and to that bravery and magnanimity, which are
essentially necessary to political happiness; and defense against the invasion
of enemies. But idleness is the parent of poverty, cowardice, weakness,
ignorance, and every evil that infests human society. It is industry, that
supports rulers and subjects, that supplies the wants of the needy and fills
the garners of the wealthy, that keeps in motion the wheels of government and
supports society. "There cannot be a flourishing people without industry,
whatever other advantages they may enjoy; for without this the benefits of
nature must be, in a great measure, lost and the blessings of providence thrown
away. There are flourishing nations in the world, that wholly owe their power
and prosperity, next to the blessing of heaven, to their being remarkably
industrious, which has raised and advanced them in spite of many great
obstacles and discouraging difficulties, that stood in their way; and there are
other nations which, notwithstanding many and great national advantages, have
never distinguished themselves for want of taking the pains necessary thereto:
Their sloth has kept them down and buried them in obscurity, they have fallen a
sacrifice to their inactivity." "The hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but
the slothful shall be under tribute."

But we proceed to observe, that a proper attention to the means of education
and knowledge is necessary to national greatness. Knowledge is requisite to the
practice of every private and public virtue. A disposition to do well, without
knowing how to perform, can be but of little use. In the early ages of the
world the civil state of mankind was much more imperfect, than it is at this
more enlightened period. Mankind were imperfectly acquainted with the rights of
human nature. The arts and sciences were little cultivated. The principles of
benevolence and sociability lay dormant, for want of exercise and improvement.
The minds of men were barbarous and their manners unsocial. In this state of
ignorance they were capable of forming at best, only small combinations, and a
few families constituted a nation.

They were destitute of that knowledge, which is necessary to forming extensive
empires, and supporting them in opposition to the influence of faction. This
mode of living was not much preferable to that, which is practiced in a state
of nature. Their uncultivated minds would not admit of their becoming wealthy
and powerful; and their genius was exerted mostly to destroy those who opposed
them. But by attending to the means of knowledge mankind have made the most
valuable improvements. They have enlarged their ideas of living and becoming
great and honorable. The rights of human nature are better understood, and the
advantages arising from cultivating the arts and sciences have been sensibly
felt. If we may judge of the improvements possible to be made by nations, from
the improvements in past ages, we may reasonably suppose that knowledge may so
hereafter increase, as to put an end to most of the evils that grow out of
civil combinations and governments, and unite all the nations of the earth in
bonds of perpetual peace and love.

" Then nation shall no more against nation rise,
" Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,
" Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered over,
" The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
" But useless lances into scythes shall bend,
" And the broad salchion in a plowshare end.
WE may further observe, that a free and extensive commerce is necessary to
national greatness.

IT is a rare thing that one country or kingdom will afford its inhabitants all
the necessaries, conveniences and ornaments of life. Different soils are
composed of different properties, and are calculated for different production.
One country, therefore, must be dependent on others for its productions by way
of commerce; and this may be done without injury to any, but, on the contrary,
with great advantage to all.

ALTHOUGH there are few countries, perhaps none that produces every thing
necessary to aggrandize a nation, yet it may produce many things, that are, in
a degree superfluous and may be exchanged for other commodities more necessary,
useful and ornamental. In this way the wants of one country may be supplied by
the superfluities of another. The ^^tions of the earth, in the present age of
the world, have much greater advantages in point of commerce, than the nations,
that existed a few centuries before them.

THEY had then made but small improvements in the art of navigation* which is
necessary to a large, commodious and profitable commerce with distant
countries. But the nations of the earth have now made such improvement in the
art of navigation as enables them to carry on the business of commerce with
ease, dispatch and general success.

BUT we may observe, that martial power is requisite to national greatness. In
the present imperfect state of things, no nation is to expect to be always
exempt from the unjust attacks of foreign enemies. Small occasions are often
productive of discord and warlike contentions. A nation ought, therefore, ever
to be in a capacity to act with vigor in its own defense.

THEY ought to be well acquainted with the arts of war; and to put their
country in a proper posture of defense by sea and land. They ought to maintain
finances, amply answering to the pecuniary exigences of the State; to answer
with fidelity and dispatch the just demands of those, who risque their lives in
the defense of their country. This is absolutely necessary to national honor
and safety.

WE observe further, that if a people would be great and happy, they must be
careful of their civil rights and privileges. The subjects of a republican
government must to secure their liberties and perpetuate their happiness be
attentive to their political rights, and with prudence and caution discharge
their duty at free and popular elections. It is not difficult, many times, for
men of crafty intrigue to obtain offices of importance, and to prevent the
operation of the best civil constitution and laws. Bribery and an undue
influence in elections may have this effect. A free and unbiassed election is
the grand bulwark of natural and civil liberty. And when a people give their
suffrages in favor of crafty, ignorant and unprincipled men, they are destitute
of that love to their country, which is necessary to secure the continuance of
its liberties and independence. They do not consider, that when the wicked,
unskilful and intriguing bear rule, the liberties of the subjects are in danger
and the people have reason to mourn; and that when the righteous, men of
knowledge, integrity and religion are in authority, these liberties are secure
and the people may rejoice. It cannot be denied, that some persons, who have
lived under a free and popular government, have discovered great depravity of
soul by trifling with their civil privileges and selling their birthright for a
mess of pottage, or a more contemptible compensation. But all, who are true
friends to their country, will reject with abhorrence the idea of bribery in
elections or giving their votes in favor of any men for public offices, but
persons of wisdom, integrity and religion. They will weep, that there should be
the least reason to fear that their fellow citizens will ever become regardless
of their right of elections, or indifferent to the qualifications of the
persons, whom they elect for their civil rulers; that offices of trust, honor
and profit should become venal, and that the ignorant, shameless and
irreligious should be as fair and eligible candidates as the wise, modest and
virtuous. They will detest the man who attempts to buy their vote, or seeks to
obtain the honors of his country by any other means, than that of merit.

WE observe once more, that religion is absolutely necessary to national
greatness and prosperity.

RELIGION is the basis of public, as well as private happiness. A body politic
cannot have a prosperous subsistence, without the practice of virtue.
"Godliness is profitable to all things." It is this that exalts a nation;
"but sin is the reproach of any people." According as virtue or vice prevail,
so will a people prosper or decay. Vice and iniquity are the grand instruments
of destruction in every political constitution. They generally have the
operation and effect of natural causes. But righteousness is productive of
opposite effects. It insures the protection and blessing of the great Governor
of the universe. It is the only durable basis of good government, of good laws,
of mutual confidence, and prosperity. Where this prevails a people will not
fail to rise to the highest degrees of national glory and felicity. The pillars
of their constitution will be as durable as the hills and their happiness as
lasting as time.

No man, therefore, can better evidence his love for his country, than by
endeavoring, in his proper sphere, to prevent the contagious spread of vice,
or to promote the influence of morality and religion. "Contemptible is that
man's pretended love to his country who with an ostentatious zeal for her
credit, her finances, or civil establishments, entirely disregards that which
is the basis of the whole.

HE is like the man who is careful to repair and adorn some less essential
parts of a building, whilst he suffers the foundation to be undermined, which
failing the whole tumbles into ruins."

THE truth of these observations is confirmed by the universal history of
mankind.

THE Jews, we are assured by history, were a happy and flourishing people,
while they were governed by principles of piety and virtue. While they were
willing and obedient they ate the good of the land. Israel then dwelt in
safety; the fountain of Jacob was upon a land of corn and wine; his heavens
dropped down dew; the Lord was the shield of his help, and the sword of his
excellency. But, when the Jews became abandoned to vice, when irreligion
prevailed among them, the Lord forsook them; and their glory and happiness
departed. They became an easy prey to their enemies. They were carried into
captivity, and final destruction was the fate of their policy, church and state.

To the same cause the corruption, of morals and principles, may be traced the
complete ruin of the republics of Athens and Rome.

As long as temperance, frugality, chastity, and other virtues were national,
and spread among them, they flourished and increased; but when impiety and
profaneness, luxury and debauchery formed their public character and manners
their empire immediately began to decline and decay. Their national glory
continued to decrease 'till it was entirely lost, their constitution was wholly
subverted, and those, who survived the destruction of their government were
left to groan under the rod of cruel and barbarous tyrants. A corruption of
manners and numerous crimes, says a writer, made greater havoc in the city of
Rome, than the mightiest armies could have done, and in that manner avenged the
conquered globe.

THESE are some of the evil effects of irreligion and immorality, with respect
to the well being of civil society. May Americans take warning and avoid the
rocks, upon which so many thousands have been dashed in pieces.

FROM the preceding observations, may not the people of America felicitate
themselves, and entertain the most pleasing hopes of their future national
greatness? We possess at present many of the advantages which prepare the way
for national importance. The climate of the United States is favorable to
health and population. Our situation is neither within the torrid or frigid
zone, but the temperate. Whilst we are warned by winds stretching over a large
extent of country from the equator, the heat is tempered by cooling breezes
from the sea and more northern climes. We are also favored with a country
fertile in its soil. There are but few countries suited to every production;
nor can we suppose this is the case with America. But its productions are
sufficient to supply the wants and many of the luxuries of human life; and to
furnish ample materials for commerce. Diligence and economy in the common
class of people is one portrait in our national character. Improvements in the
arts and sciences are increasing, and knowledge is progressing. The several
States have not only civil constitutions founded on equal rights, but they are
combined in one general federation under a national constitution of government,
which serves to unite the wisdom, the wealth and the power of the whole, for
the improvement, the defense and aggrandizement of the nation. We have the
power of appointing our governors, senators, legislators, and magistrates, our
laws are made and executed by persons elected by, and from among ourselves.

WE are also favored with the most exalted religious privileges and liberties.
We have a revelation from heaven, containing the most excellent system of
doctrines and precepts, and the most weighty motives to piety and virtue. We
enjoy without molestation the rights of conscience, every one may judge for
himself in matters of faith, and may choose such mode of worship as his reason
and conscience may dictate.

THESE are national advantages and blessings, which we have received of God and
which we hold under the protection of his good providence. But our long
enjoying them ultimately depends on a reasonable and religious improvement of
them.

A republican government essentially depends on public virtue. Where there is a
general want of virtue in the people and administrators of government, it
becomes feeble and contemptible; and must soon be dissolved. Whether there be
sufficient virtue in the people and administrators of the government in these
United States long to maintain it, in its present form, time and experience
only can ascertain.

WE as a people have enjoyed a great degree of political happiness for many
years. But our future prospects of national happiness are not so flattering as
what they have been in time past. The republic of France has been, and still is
attempting to interrupt our prosperity. Proud, imperious and envious Britain
has attempted the same; but she has promised us reparation, and has ceased to
insult us. France continues her abuses and greatly annoys our happiness, and
instead of discovering the least disposition to make us satisfaction,
insultingly demands money, money from us to reward her for the infamous
treatment, which she has offered to America. It is not necessary to remind you
of the depredations which have, for some years past, been made upon our
commerce by European nations. I presume they are fresh in your memories. But, I
would call your attention to that which is both our duty and happiness, to love
and defend our country. We are not Europeans, but Americans. Let us prove
ourselves to be worthy of the name by discovering a strong and firm attachment
to the honor and happiness of our nation.

IT ought to be our prayer that those, who are at the head of our government,
may have wisdom from above to direct; and it is a matter of the greatest
importance that we be united among ourselves, and be reconciled to the
administrations of our national government; and cheerfully unite our strength
to support our independence, our rights and liberties against the invasion of a
foreign enemy.

IT is said, that France befriended us in our contest with Britain, and that we
are indebted to her for our salvation. It is not my design to enter into the
political disputes of the present day; but I will venture to assert we cannot
be under obligations to resign our liberties to any nation, whether she may
have been a friend or a foe. It is our duty to defend our liberties and support
our independence against the assaults of all enemies. We ought to lay aside all
prejudices and contentions, and in heart and measures be united. On this
depends our national strength, security and honor. "United we stand, but
divided we fall." Let us then guard against that party spirit, which has so
much prevailed in our land, as to tarnish our glory and injure our happiness.
It is said, that this spirit of late has considerably abated. If this be a
truth, we ought heartily to rejoice, and to exert ourselves in expelling it
wholly from among us. We ought to use our utmost endeavors to prevent
contentions and promote concord. To stimulate us to the most laudable exertions
of this kind, let us keep in mind, that nothing can have a greater tendency to
bring on the dissolution of our republic and make us the sport of foreign
nations, than division among ourselves. Division is the bane of society.

THOSE jarring aims and interfering interests, which are produced by it, must
occasion stops among the wheels of government, embarrass public measures, and
greatly annoy the happiness of a people. "Where strife is there is confusion
and every evil work."

IF ever our republic is destroyed and we lose our liberties and independence,
it must be by being divided against ourselves. Such is our distance from the
powerful nations of the world, and so great is our national strength, and
wealth, that we can be brought to ruin only by that intestine strife, which
preys upon our vitals and cuts the sinews of our government. If then we have
any regard to our own happiness or true love to our country, let us manifest
it, by putting an end to our unhappy divisions and following after the things,
which make for peace.

LET us cease to exasperate each other with virulent words, or the reproachful
term of Jacobin or Tory. Let us cultivate brotherly love and strive to be good
citizens and true Americans. Let us discover our patriotism by being well
affected toward our constitution, and by encouraging and assisting the
administrators of our government. Let no strife be known among us, except who
shall be most active and zealous in promoting the honor, safety and happiness
of our nation.

I congratulate my fellow citizens of this State in the choice, which they have
made of a chief magistrate. We rejoice, that we behold at the head of our
government, a Gentleman, in whom wisdom, integrity and religion are united, who
has had, for many years, the decided voice of his country in his favor, and has
rendered essential services to the community. Whose christian, moral and
political character must endear him to every enlightened and virtuous mind.

THE honorable Council, the honorable Senate, and Representatives will accept
of that respect which is due to their character and important station.

FROM the past experience, which we have had a wise and faithful administration
of government in this State, we now trust with our civil Fathers, every thing
dear in civil and social life. We flatter ourselves, they will be ministers of
God for good to this people, and in heart and measures unite to promote the
best interest of their constituents. It is a day of anxious expectation, of
trouble and perplexity, but wisdom is profitable to direct. May this
respectable body "acknowledge God in all their ways, and may he direct their
steps." --

LET us all acknowledge the being and providence of God, and be submissive to
the government of the great disposer of events and the governor of the
universe. How far the divine Being by his influence interposes in the affairs
of states and empires is not easy to determine. Reason and revelation, however,
lead us to suppose, that the rise, continuance, and fall of empires is under
his wise and supreme direction. The nations of the world, therefore, in their
political conduct ought to depend on him for direction. They ought to cultivate
the principles of piety and virtue that (...) may secure his favor and obtain
his blessing.

ESPECIALLY, the principles of public virtue ought to be exercised and
improved. National existence essentially depends on this. This has ever been
the case, in the rise and advancement, and in the decline and subversion of
states and empires. On this a good constitution depends. It is this that leads
the way to frugality, diligence and economy, obedience to wholesome laws and
regulations, to union, benevolence and peace.

BUT above all let us attend to the things, that relate to our happiness beyond
the confines of time. Let us cultivate the habits of piety and virtue, that we
may become subjects of that kingdom of righteousness and peace, which will
survive every change, and continue after all the kingdoms of this world expire
in the dissolution of nature.

AMEN.

