FRONTISPIECE.


FABLES IN MONOSYLLABLES BY Mrs. TEACHWELL, TO WHICH ARE ADDED MORALS IN
DIALOGUES BETWEEN A MOTHER and CHILDREN.

Si la nature done au cerveau d'un enfant, cette souplesse qui le rend propre
a recevoir toutes sorts d'impressions; c'est pour que toutes les idees qu'il
peut concevoir, and qui lui sont utiles, toutes celles qui se rapportent a son
bonheur, and doivent l'eclaire run jour sur ses devoirs, s'y tracent de bonne
heure en caracteres ineffacables. ROUSSEAU. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS
DOBSON, AT THE STONE HOUSE No. 41, SOUTH SECOND STREET.

1798.

DEDICATION.
To Miss M --.
MY DEAR GIRL,
YOU are now at the same age as my boy was, when I wrote this book for him.

I hear that you take pains to learn what is fit for you, that you read well
for your age, and do in all things as your dear mam-ma bids you.

If you be so good, we shall all love you.

If you go on to take pains to learn to read well, I will send you more books,
and they shall have nice prints in them, such as I know you will like. I love
to please a good child.

I give you this as a mark of my love, and am,

My dear, Your Friend.

PREFACE.
FABLES are generally pleasing to children. Since they are so; were it not more
advisable to supply them with such as afford lessons suited to their age; than
to waste our time in debating whether or no Fable-writing be the most desirable
mode of instruction?

IF I were asked the question, I should answer in the negative.

BUT let us consider that every book the little boy meets with at school, will
present to him Fables, which he will seize with avidity as novelties: Fables,
the morals of which are calculated to give an improper bias to his mind; had we
not then better indulge him (whilst in the nursery) with a few that convey
simple Morals adapted to the duties of childhood? I think so; or I had not
written these.

Rousseau's remarks upon Fables, as making a part of the Library for Children,
However mistaken, however detestable, many notions of Rousseau's may be; there
are useful maxims to be gleaned from his work respecting children. I wish the
wheat were separated from the chaff.
seem to me just: most of his objections militate strongly against all the
Fables I ever met with. If I did not hope that these are exempted from his
charges I would not offer them to the public, still less would I have presented
them to the dear little ones for whom they were written.

THERE must always remain one accusation against Fables, namely, Falsehood; but
surely it is easily explained to the children, that it is but their own usual
favorite sport of, "making believe," as they call feigning visits, trading,
etc. etc. with no design to deceive; yet, to guard against the shadow of evil,
I have been explicit on that point in some of the dialogues; lest the little
books should fall into the hands of any poor friendless child, and lessen his
regard to truth. Now I mention the dialogues, I confess that I am prepared for
ridicule, should any but a tender mother open my volumes.

I WEAVE nets for insects; and if I suit my toils to my game am I to be
derided? Who but stoops with satisfaction to lead an infant by the hand: Who
but delights to adapt her steps to its short and unequal paces? And shall we be
less tender, less indulgent to the unformed mind?

A JUDICIOUS mother condescends to prattle with her children; to mingle in
their sports; thus she infuses ideas in their tender minds, whilst she engages
their affections; yet without relinquishing parental authority.

No office is mean which concerns the health ( corporeal or mental) of the
rising generation.

WHY then do I make apologies for my infantine dialogues!

DOES it proceed from pride? apprehensive of jests from those who are not aware
of their use?

Folly!

THOSE who are engaged in educating an infant, will accept them with
satisfaction; those who are not, (nor ever were) will despise them, and all
that can be said in their excuse.

NULL de nous n'est assez philosophe pour savoire se mettre a la place d'un
enfant. YET those who are mothers must strive to do it; and defy the derision
of such as -- "never had a child."

TO MY LITTLE READERS.
You have been good, else your mam-ma would not have bought a new book for you.

I will tell you a tale. Mas-ter Brother-ton was a good child.

When he was three years old, he would bring his book, and learn to read.

He spelt the words thus, b-r-e-a-d -- bread, and so on.

He was apt, and fond of his book.

One day I met with some nice, clear, large print let-ters; and I cut them out,
and stuck them on card; then laid them thus, c-a-t -- cat, d-o-g -- dog; and he
said the words at sight.

Was not this nice?

Then it came in my mind to print with a pen for him; so I made tales of the
dog, and the cat, and such short words -- Should you not jump for joy? -- He
did.

I should have sent these to make a book for you, to learn to read in; but
there is one now with a name too long for you to read (Imperial Spelling-Book:)
it is full of prints, and tales in short words; so that it must be joy of a boy
or girl to learn to read in it.

I wish I had met with such a book three or four years since: I spent a great
deal of time, for want of such an one.

You all love a book, and are fond of prints.

One day I bought a book of Fa-bles full of prints; but I found it was all in
verse: it was sad stuff: I could not bear the Fa-bles nor the Mo-rals.

William (that was the sweet boy's name) had a great mind to know what the Hen
said, and what the Ape did; yet he was so good, that he would not ask the maids
to read to him; (as he knew that I did not like the book) but would look at the
prints, and talk of them, and not seem to wish to read.

As he was so good (if you be good you will be sure to meet with things to
please you) I wrote some Fa-bles in print, with my pen, to suit the prints.

I told him that I should not have done this, if he had not been so good.

Guess how full of joy he was! I think I hear you say, "I wish I could see
them!"

Now that is what I am in hopes you may.

"And will there be prints?"

That I can not tell: I think there will. But if there should not; yet you will
be glad to have the book; you will know that there would have been some, if it
had been right.

You must learn to take things as you find them -- to take with thanks what is
meant to please you; though it may not be quite what you wish.

I wish my book may have prints, as I know it will give you the more joy; I am
glad to please a good child.

This was wrote to teach you to be good.

If you be good your friends will love you.

If you be good, God will bless you.

FABLES, etc.
DIALOGUE.
LADY. CAN Ants speak?


BOY. No Aunt.


LADY. Can Flies talk?


BOY. No Aunt.


LADY. Why then does this book talk of what they say?


BOY. I do not know, Aunt.


LADY. I will tell you then, my dear, I write in the way that I think will
please a child. -- You love to read of a Fox, a Hen, or a dog; do you not?


BOY. Yes I do, Aunt.


LADY. These are all to please and teach you. There is one of the Boys and the
Frogs.


BOY. Pray may I see it?


LADY. I will find it for you. -- There is the print -- look at it. Now we will
read.


FABLE I.
The BOYS and FROG.


SOME Boys took up stones to pelt a Frog; and thus it said:

"Boys! why do you pelt us? we do not hurt you, nor wish to do it.

"You should do as you would be done by.

"Would you like to have a stone thrown at you?

"Hurt no; one but be kind and good to all.

"Think what you do; we Frogs can feel as well as you Boys. We live in this
pond, and do no harm: be good, and leave us here in peace."

DIALOGUE.
LADY. HOW is this? Can Frogs speak?


BOY. They can croak, and make a noise, but they can not speak; can they, Aunt?


LADY. No, my dear; but this man says for the Frog, what we may think the poor
thing would say, if it could speak.


BOY. Why Aunt?


LADY. To teach you, my dear. I hope you would not hurt or vex the things which
you meet with. If you do as you wish to be done by, you will be a good boy; and
we shall all love you.


BOY. I wish Jack, and Ned, and George, to be kind to me: I wish them to let me
see their things, and play with them.


LADY. Then you know what you should do to please Jack, and to please --


BOY. O, yes! Aunt. I should lend them my toys and books, and what is sit for
them to have; and I will do so.


LADY. Good child!


BOY. I love to see them full of joy, and smile, and jump. I love that they
should go out; and I love to go out too, when there is room for me in the
coach; or when I may ride.


LADY. You can not all go at one time: you must take your turns. But if each of
them feel joy at the sight of your joy* and you do the same at theirs; then you
know all of you are glad at once.


BOY. Shall we read the next? -- What is it? -- O dear! it is the Ant and Fly.
Pray let me read that.


FABLE II.
The ANT and FLY.


ONE hot day an Ant and a Fly met.

FLY. How you toil all day!


ANT. And you play all day!


FLY. I do not love to work.


ANT. We Ants do. We work hard to get food, and to make a fit place to lodge in.


FLY. We Flies frisk in the sun: we sing,

"Let Us be gay; whilst we may!


ANT. I lose my time; -- pray let me pass.


FABLE III.
The FAWN and VINE.


DO as you are bid at all times, though you think you are not seen. Think of
the Fawn. -- It had been well for her if she had done so.

FABLE. A MAN put a Fawn in a yard and said to her.

"You may eat the grass, and the weeds; but be sure not to bite this vine."


FAWN. "I will not hurt a leaf."

Then the Man went out and shut the gate.

When the Fawn saw that he was gone, she said,

"Well! he will not see me now, so I will pick a few leaves, so that they will
not be mist."

When she took hold to bite, a dry leaf or two fell off, and made a noise.

Then a dog who was near to keep the Vine safe, ran to see what it was.


DOG. O! I have got you!


FAWN. Do not hurt me! -- I was put in here.


DOG. You were; but you have not done as you were bid to do; so I may eat you.


FAWN. O, me! I wish I had done as I was bid.


FABLE IV.
The APE and CAT.


AN Ape loves to do what he has seen done.

You love to do what you have seen done.

But you are good; and do not do all that you see done, or wish to do; but wait
for leave.

An Ape is like a child; but a good child is not like an Ape.

You love to please the dog; and love to see the cat glad; you run to the cook
and beg for milk to give her; you would not hurt poor Puss.

FABLE. AN Ape had seen the maids roast nuts; and he had eat some, and thought
they were nice.

So the first time he had some nuts, he had a great mind to roast them too.

He made a fire in the yard, it would have made you laugh to see him fetch his
sticks, and his straw, and then set fire to them with a match.

Then he threw in his nuts, and stood to watch them.

Bounce! goes one: Pug gave a skip, and went to take it out; but he found it
too hot for his hands.

"What can be done?" said he, "I do not care to go in for the tongs. -- O!
there is the Cat! -- Puss! how do you do? -- Will you eat a nut?

"I thank you," said the Cat, as she came to him.

"You must help me to get them out, if you please," said the Ape; and took the
poor Cat in his arms: in vain did she cry out; but by good luck, the man of the
house saw him, and said:

"Hold, Pug! -- you may do as you like with your own paws, -- they are of no
use but to play tricks with. -- My Cat makes use of here is, to catch the mice
and rats, which would rob me of my corn, my bread, and my cheese." --

Pug took a look at the Man; then he cast his eye at the nuts; then he gave a
grin; still he held the Cat.

Then the man said to him:

"Let my Cat go -- Spare her paws, and use your own; them I can well spare --
but I beg you to set Puss out of your arms now; -- or I will come and drub you
well with this staff!"


FABLE V.
The FOX and the CROW.


A CROW had got a piece of flesh: a Fox who saw it, knew he could not reach to
get it from her, as she sat on a tree; and she would be too wise to come down,
as she knew he was a thief. So he thought a while then said:

"What a fine bird! plumes as black as jet, which shine so bright in the Sun
that I can scarce look at them -- Can you sing? -- If your voice" -- He would
have said more, but the Crow was so vain as to set out a scream, and off ran
the Fox with the meat which fell out of her beak.

FABLE VI.
The DOG and the SHADOW.


A DOG had got a piece of flesh, -- as he went home he had to cross a small
stream -- the sun shone bright, and he saw him-self and the meat so plain, that
he thought it was a dog with some more meat; and went to snatch at it; but
dropped the piece he had in his jaws, and a pike swam off with it; whilst he gave
a great howl, and said, "I am well served, I stole the piece of flesh, and ran
off with it; and now that I was got near home to eat it, I thought to grasp at
more, and so have lost all."

FABLE VII.
The TWO COCKS.


AN old Cock took his son out to show him how to get his food -- "Look," said
he, "this is corn, fit for us to eat -- so is this -- and this -- and that is a
crumb, you may eat that."The son saw a jew-el -- "How fine this is!" said he --
"It is fine to look at," said the old one, "but of no use to us, it is not good
to eat."

SON. I know it must be good, it looks so nice.


OLD COCK. You must not eat it -- it will kill you if you do.


SON. I will try it; I will eat part.


OLD COCK. Take care!


SON. It is hard, but see how nice it looks, if I turn it to the sun.


OLD COCK. I have seen it all the day, but I care not for it; do not peek at it.


SON. Once more, just to taste. -- Oh! I die -- I was a fool not to mind what
you said to me.


FABLE VIII.
The OLD APE and her YOUNG CUBS.


AN Ape who had two Cubs, saw a Dog. She said to her-self, "What can I do? --
My Cubs can not run so fast as the Dog; and if I take them both on my back, I
can not get from him with them. I will take one at a time -- So do you come now
-- you stay by this bush till I come back for you."

CUB. I dare not stay.


APE. The Dog will not see you here.


CUB. I must go too.


APE. I tell you that you may lie safe here -- but here comes the Dog, hide!
hide!


CUB. I will go --

Then the Cub gave a great jump to get on her back; but mist his hold, and fell
down; and the Dog came and ate him up as he lay.

"Ah!" said he, "if I had done as I was bid, I had been safe."


FABLE IX.
The FOX and the CRAB.


DO what those who are old tell you is best for you to do.

FABLE. A CRAB said to her sons, "Come, we will walk; but do not go far from
me, lest you come to some harm."

"I will not," said one.

"Well," said one, "I do not know why we may not go as far as we like: I will
not stay near: I can take care of myself, and so I will go -- I do not know how
far."

A Fox who was by, said to her Cub, "You may be sure to get that Crab with
ease; for the son who will not mind what is said to him, can not come to good;
but must fall a prey to the first who tries to hurt him. -- Go: he will make
you a good meal."


FABLE X.
The DOG and BEES.


A DOG went to rob a hive. An old Be came out, and said to him:

"Friend! it will be best for you to go home -- we will not let you rob us."

"I will do as I like," "said the Dog; and he would list the hive up; and try
to lick out of the combs.

Then the same Be said:

"Do not strive to get our food; for your own sake do not."

The Dog just got a taste; and it was so sweet and nice, that he was deaf to
all that could be said to him.

In vain did the Be call -- "Why will you force us to sting you?

"We do not wish to hurt you.

"Get from hence whilst you are well. -- Go, go, get you gone.

"If you leave off now, and run from hence; we will not harm you.

"But if you stay, and will be so bold, we must all join to sting you for your
fault."

Then came out a throng of Bees and stung him to death.

FABLE XI.
The HORSE and the STAG.


A STAG is fierce and strong; but is in fear of a Horse, when a man is on it.
We think that a Stag, in a wild state would be too much for a Horse.

But a Horse, by the help of a man, is more than a match for a Stag.

Thus may a child, be too much for a bad man.

A child, who minds all that is said to him, by those who are old, and who know
what is best for him; that child, I say, is wise by the help of his friends.

Though a child can not judge: a child may do as he is bid, by those who can.

There have been bad men who would rob a child of his clothes. -- Now a boy is
no match for a man in strength.

But a boy who does not go out of his bounds, but keeps where he has leave to
be; does not come in the way of those sort of men.

Thus you see, that a good boy is too hard for a bad man.

For the man can not catch him to strip him, as long as he stays where he is
told to stay.

FABLE XII.
The FOX and the HEN.


A FOX saw a Hen in a coop: he knew he could not get at her there -- so he
thought he would try to make her come out.

"What a fine day!" said he, "sure you will not sit there till night?"

HEN. Yes, I shall.


FOX. And why?


HEN. I am put here by those who best know what is fit for me.


FOX. But you will not be so dull to stay: you have scarce air to breathe.


HEN. Those who put me here, take care I shall have what air I want; and give
me good food and drink; and as they mean I should stay here, I will not stir
from hence.


FOX. What! not to take a walk with a friend?


HEN. He can not be a friend, who would have me do what I am bid not to do.


FABLE XIII.
The GOOD KID.


ONE day a Goat said to her Kid,

"My dear, I must leave you; but if you mind what I say, you will be safe."

"I will," said the Kid. "Pray what am I to do?"

GOAT. If you hear a knock, take care to look out -- be sure do not go to the
door, till you have seen who it is that knocks.

As soon as the Goat was gone, the Kid shut the door, and said, "Now I will do
as I am bid; though I do not know why I am told to do so."

She soon heard a knock; and a voice like the Goat's said,

"My dear, make haste! let me in! the wolf! the wolf!"

The Kid ran to the door, and took hold of the look -- in a fright for the Goat
-- "But stay," "said she, "I am to look out first."

She did so -- and what do you think she saw?

A great wolf! who thought to cheat her, and get her to let him in -- and then
he would have made a meal of her.

The Kid was wife to do as she was bid -- else she had seen the Goat no more.

Think what joy it was to her to tell the Goat this tale, when she came back!

Think how the Goat did kiss her! -- how fond she was of her! as she was so
good.


FABLE XIV.
The LARKS.


A LARK had a nest in a field of Corn.

When the corn was ripe, she kept watch all day near the gate.

When she lest the nest, she said, "When I come back, tell me all which you
have heard, or seen whilst I was gone."

And now you shall hear some talk they had in the nest -- young things love to
prate.

FIRST BIRD. I can not think why we must tell all we hear or see?


SECOND BIRD. That our mo-ther may judge how long we can be safe here.


FIRST BIRD. I can judge -- I shall do as I like.


SECOND BIRD. I shall do as I am bid; and then I shall be safe.


THIRD BIRD. What will hurt us?


SECOND BIRD. The men who come to mow the corn, may cut off our heads.


THIRD BIRD. Let us go now -- I dare not stay.


SECOND BIRD. We shall be told when we ought to go.

Then came the old bird, and said, in a low voice:


MOTHER. Creep to the hedge -- make no noise.


THIRD BIRD. I dare nor stir -- the men will get me.


FIRST BIRD. I shall fly: what are my wings for?


SECOND BIRD. I shall creep since I am bid to creep.

Up flew the pert young bird -- and was shot.

The good one did as she was bid -- and got safe to the next field.

The bird who staid in the nest -- had his head cut off with the scythe.

So there was an end of those who would not do as they were bid.

The pert one, who thought he could judge best, and he who would not trust to
the care of his mo-ther, they both came to a bad end.

The good young Lark flew up to the skies with her mo-ther.


CHILD. I will not fear to stay where I am told I shall be safe. -- And I will
not do what I am told may hurt me. And I will not say, why am I bid to do so?
-- I shall think of these Larks.


FABLE XV.
The FOX and GRAPES.


A FOX went out one day to seek for prey.

He saw some nice Grapes: they were so ripe, and black, that he could not go
from the vine; but stood all day to look at them.

In the mean time, a fine fat hen slipped past.

A cock crept by at his rump; and got safe to his perch.

A duck stole past; and went to the place where she was to sleep.

A fat goose past close by; and made no noise.

Thus the Fox mist the good meal which he might have got; and went to his den
at night, with no food at all.

If he had been wise, he would not have stood to wish, and long in vain.

No -- he would have gone from the vine, to seek for such food as he could
reach.

The Fox was a fool to feel such a mind to what he could not have -- Do you not
think he was?

CHILD. Yes, sure.

Then be not you like him:

But take what you are to have -- and be glad.


FABLE XVI.
The BOY and the WOLF.


THIS Boy had the care of some sheep.

You know a Wolf will kill sheep -- aye -- and eat them too.

The boy knew, that if he should want help, the men who were near would come to
him.

You will find that he was a bad Boy.

For he would call out,

"The Wolf! the Wolf! O me! the Wolf will eat up all my sheep!"

Then the kind men ran to help him -- one with a stick -- one with a stone, or
a staff -- each with what he could snatch up, to kill the Wolf.

And when they came -- what do you think? -- there was no Wolf -- but the Boy
would stand and laugh, as if he should split his throat.

At last the Wolf did come -- then the boy ran --

"O dear! -- the Wolf is here -- pray come and help me -- help! -- help! -- or
I shall lose all my sheep and lambs -- there he goes -- I can not keep him out
of the fold."

But the men said to him, "Go! go! we will not stir -- we know you too well --
it is all false -- we know there is no Wolf -- we will not be made such fools
now!"

So the Wolf took all the sheep and lambs, one at a time; whilst the Boy could
get no help -- No one thought he told the truth, as he had told lies.

In vain did he call, to those whom he had made sport with in such a way:

"O! whilst you live, tell truth!

FABLE XVII.
The VAIN JAY.


AT the time of the year when birds moult, a Jay past through a farm yard where
pea fowls were kept.

"Ah!" said she, "here is a fine plume! -- and here is one! and here!

"I will put them all on."

She did so -- and it would have made you laugh, to see her strut round the
yard, with her long train hung at her rump.

At night the fowls came home to roost, one took a look -- one said; "Who is
this? Who can this be?" said one.

At last an old sly fowl gave a pluck at the tail and off came a part. --

Then they all gave a twitch at it; till she was stripped, and brought to shame
-- for she lost her own plumes, as well as what she stole; and was left bare.

Claim not what is not your due,

If you do -- you may lose what you have a right to --

Think of the vain Jay.

END of the FABLES.
Fables in Monosyllables.
INDEX.
1. THE Boys and Frog, 17 2. The Ant and Fly, 21 3. The Fawn and Vine, 23 4.
The Ape and Cat, 26 5. The Fox and the Crow, 29 6. The Dog and Shadow, 31 7.
The Two Cocks, 32 8. The Old Ape and her Young Cubs, 35 9. The Fox and the
Crab, 37 10. The Dog and Bees, 39 11. The Horse and the Stag, 41 12. The Fox
and the Hen, 43 13. The Good Kid, 45 14. The Larks, 48 15. The Fox and Grapes,
52 16. The Boy and the Wolf, 55 17. The Vain Jay, 58
FRONTISPIECE.


MORALS TO A SET OF FABLES, BY Mrs. TEACHWELL.

THE MORALS IN DIALOGUES BETWEEN A MOTHER AND CHILDREN. IN TWO SETS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE HOUSE No. 41, SOUTH
SECOND STREET.

1798.

DEDICATION.
TO Mrs. M --.
MY DEAR,
IF you measure my affection by the size of the volume which I dedicate to you,
your judgment will be very erroneous. But I do not apprehend that you will do
that. --

You will be aware, that I consider the age of your dear little folk; and
address to you, what is suited to them.

I have great pleasure in the prospect of my little volumes supplying them with
some amusement; and affording you some assistance in the "delightful task" in
which you are engaged.

May God prosper you in it! so that your children's children may prove a
comfort and an honor to you!

So wishes -- so prays,

My dear, Your Affectionate Friend.

PREFACE.
I HAVE remarked -- (but who has not felt?) that the pleasure of a Fable, is
damped to a child, by the tedious unintelligible Moral which is to follow.

A Moral, against which, perhaps, the complaint already urged, is much the
smallest that might be alleged.

Perhaps the natural inference from it is such, that a child may be the worse
for it all his life.

Perhaps it tends to teach him to be deceitful, treacherous, covetous -- but
the slightest injury which I should apprehend, is a satiety and disgust at the
idea of a Moral.

Therefore, having written a few Fables from whence unexceptionable Morals may
be drawn, I chose to make the little folk themselves seem to discover them --
indeed, I took care they should be sufficiently obvious for them to do it --
and the frequent repetition appeared to me to be of use, as it would enable the
child really to make the remarks which I put in his mouth, as well as inculcate
more strongly the notions which I wished to infuse.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEN Mrs Teach well wrote these Fables and Morals in the year 1779, she wrote
them for the use of her own family.

Now they are offered to the public, perhaps it may be proper to premise, that
there is another set of Fables adapted to the same prints -- written for the
use of an elder child -- who is made to converse upon the subject (in the
latter part of this little volume) by the name of George: the second set of
Morals going by the name of George's Morals.

Mrs. Teachwell is apprehensive that she shall be blamed for raising George's
language above nature, when his early youth is considered -- therefore she
explains her motive --

She chose to send him to his Dictionary for an explanation of words --
thinking it an excellent exercise for him -- Those parents who want leisure or
patience to direct such an exercise can explain the words; and so make trial of
the little reader's memory.

William was then three and a half: George five years of age.

WILLIAM's MORALS; OR, SET I.
PAR-LOUR. Chil-dren em ploy-ed. MAM-MA. WIL-LI-AM, do you know what a Fa-ble
is?


The child is supposed to be turning over the book of Fables, and remarking as
he looks at the Cuts.
WIL-LI-AM. No, mam-ma.


MAM-MA. Can Apes speak?


WIL-LI-AM. No, mam-ma.


MAM-MA. Why do these Fa-bles talk of Dogs, and Apes speak-ing?


WIL-LI-AM. I do not know, mam-ma.


MAM-MA. Be-cause they are FA-BLES.


WIL-LI-AM. Pray, mam-ma, what are Fables?


MAM-MA. I will tell you.

Fa-bles are sto-ries writ-ten to teach chil-dren what they should do; by
showing them what may hap-pen to them if they do not act as they ought to do.
If the sto-ries were of Boys and Girls who had not done as they were bid, and
had suf-fer-ed some harm, we do not call them Fa-bles. There is a sto-ry of a
boy who was bid not to go near a horse, and he did go near him; and the horse
kick-ed him: that was not a Fa-ble, but a Tale. Now the sto-ry of the good Kid,
who o-bey-ed her mother; and so was safe: and the o-ther of the naugh-ty Kid,
who did not mind the or-ders which the Goat left, to keep her se-cure from the
Wolf; but was so dis-o-be-di-ent as to o-pen the door without look-ing out at
the win-dow first; and as she did so was ea-ten by the Wolf -- they are
Fa-bles; for they are not true; nor can they be true of Kids -- but it is
cer-tain, that Chil-dren, if they do not o-bey their pa-rents and elders, will
come to harm for their dis-o-be-di-ence. And these Fa-bles are written to show
them what mis-chief of-ten happens to those who do dis-o-bey or-ders.


WIL-LI-AM. Why do they talk of what the Goats and Kids say; as they can no
speak?


MAM-MA. They write in the way which they think will please a child -- you love
to read of the crea-tures, do you not?


WIL-LI-AM. Yes, mam-ma. -- If you please, mam-ma, I like to read of the Fox
and the Crabs.


MAM-MA. Then look in your book of Fa-bles -- where is the index? -- see the
ninth Fa-ble page the thirty-seventh. "Do what those who are old tell you is
best for you to do."


MAM-MA. That is put be-fore the Fa-ble to tell you that you should learn
o-be-di-ence. -- Here, you see, the Fox knew it would be ea-sy to get that
young one, who was so sil-ly as to think him-self as wise as his pa-rent.


MAM-MA. Here is the Fawn who ^it the Vine when she was left a-lone. Children
must do as they have been bid-den, though they are out of sight? for it is as
bad to dis-o-bey your friends in their ab-sence as when they are pre-sent. In
all things do the same when they are not by, as you know they would have you,
if you were with them. Do you re-mem-ber that you had some bread and but-ter
of-fer-ed to you once at Buck-h^m?


WIL-LI-AM. Yes, mam-ma; and I said, No, I thank you, I may not eat but-ter".


MAM-MA. And your aunt heard of it --


WIL-LI-AM. And prais-ed me, and gave me a cake.


WIL-LI-AM. The young Cock would peck at the jew-el.




MAM-MA. Yes; and it kill-ed him. He should have be-liev-ed his fa-ther.


WIL-LI-AM. So should the Ape, mam-ma, have be-liev-ed that she was safe where
her mother would have put her. -- Mothers take care of their young.




WIL-LI-AM. Why did the Fox try to per-suade the Hen to come out of the coop?


MAM-MA. That he might eat her -- she was wise to keep where she was bid.


WIL-LI-AM. Mam-ma! why do they all teach us to do as we are bid?




MAM-MA. Be-cause a child who does as he is bid in all things, can not be a
naugh-ty child. O-be-di-ence is the du-ty of a child.


WIL-LI-AM. What is ad-vis-ing, pray mam-ma?


MAM-MA. When you are old-er, a-ny per-son but your pa-rents, will per-haps,
in-stead of bid-ding, say, you had bet-ter do so, or so -- and sometimes give
a rea-son.


WIL-LI-AM. Mam-ma! what was the dog, who would med-dle with the hive, though a
Be bade him not?




MAM-MA. Ob-sti-nate; so he de-serv-ed to die.


WIL-LI-AM. What should I learn from the Boys and the Frog?




MAM-MA. To hurt no crea-ture. God made them all -- and made them to be hap-py.


WIL-LI-AM. What should I learn from the Dog and the Sha-dow?




MAM-MA. Not to de-prive an-o-ther of a-ny thing; but to be con-tent.


WIL-LI-AM. Here is the Ant and the Fly.


MAM-MA. That Fa-ble is to teach you, that it is bet-ter to work, than to do
no-thing but play.




WIL-LI-AM. Mam-ma! the Fox got the meat from the Crow -- should he?


MAM-MA. The Fox was a thief; but if the Crow had not been so sil-ly as to
think herself a-ble to sing, she might have kept her meat.


GEORGE's MORALS; OR SET II.
PAR-LOUR. Chil-dren em-ploy-ed MAM-MA. GEORGE!


GEORGE. Mam-ma!


MAM-MA. You know that each Fa-ble has a Moral?


GEORGE. Yes, mam-ma.


MAM-MA. I want to try if you can find them -- What do you learn from the Horse
and Stag?




GEORGE. That wis-dom is much bet-ter than strength.


MAM-MA. Ve-ry well!


MAM-MA. And what from the Ant and Fly?


GEORGE. That in-dus-try is bet-ter than i-dle-ness. -- So-lo-mon com-mends the
Ant.




MAM-MA. Tell me as you look at them.


GEORGE. The Fawn who was kil-led for trans-gress-ing the com-mands of the man
in his ab-sence.


GEORGE. The good young Crab, who was willing to sub-mit to the re-stric-ti-ons
which his mo-ther should please to lay on him, would find se-cu-ri-ty in his
o-be-di-ence -- but the con-ceit-ed young one, who was so con-fi-dent of his
own wis-dom. -- Mam-ma! did the Fox get him?




MAM-MA. I should not doubt but he did -- Self-suf-fi-ci-en-cy in a child must
lead to ru-in.


GEORGE. Mam-ma! -- I do not know what to make of the Ape and the cat -- I am
di-vert-ed with it; but I do not know-the Mo-ral. There was no dis-o-be-di-ence
pu-nish-ed -- Pray tell me.


MAM-MA. The Ape thought to ex-pose the poor Cat to an in-con-ve-ni-ence for
his ac-com-mo-da-ti-on -- and you see the man (form-ing a ju-di-ci-ous
judg-ment between the real ser-vi-ces of that use-ful a-ni-mal the Cat, and the
mere laugh-a-ble pranks of the Ape) in-ter-po-ses, to save the more va-lu-a-ble
part of his fa-mi-ly from in-ju-ry; with a threat of severe pu-nish-ment to the
Ape, if he did not de-sist from at-tempt-ing such an in-sult on a creature of
su-pe-ri-or me-rit, though en-du-ed with less strength than him-self.


GEORGE. I thank you, mam-ma.


GEORGE. How ve-ry fool-ish was the young Ape who would not be-lieve her-self
safe where her mo-ther would have put her!


MAM-MA. How stub-born, to per-sist in ac-com-pa-ny-ing her con-tra-ry to her
in-junc-ti-on! I would have you ne-ver see the print, but you should con-sider
with thank-ful-ness, the con-stant watch-ful care of a pa-rent -- the
con-fi-dence, and im-pli-cit o-be-di-ence due from a child, as the on-ly mark
of gra-ti-tude in his pow-er.


GEORGE. I am glad the o-ther Ape was safe -- he must be a comfort to his
mo-ther, as he was o-be-di-ent.


MAM-MA. You think right-ly, my dear: That dis-po-si-ti-on in a child is an
in-ex-pres-sible com-fort to an af-fec-ti-on-ate pa-rent; be-cause it is the
best ear-nest of fu-ture good con-duct. We have great rea-son to hope, that an
ob-ser-vant gen-tle boy will prove a wor-thy man. I am ve-ry much pleas-ed to
find you both so well vers-ed in the Mo-rals of your Fa-bles -- now a-muse
your-selves.


GEORGE. I will show Bar-tle the print. -- Bar-tle! see here is the Ape and her
Cubs.


BAR-TLE. Is one a-sleep on the ground?




GEORGE. No, he is fal-len off his mo-ther's back, and has hurt him-self so
much that he can not stir; and that Dog is come to eat him up.


BAR-TLE. I am sor-ry.


GEORGE. But he was naugh-ty else the Dog could not have caught him -- You
shall read the Fa-ble if Wil-li-am will be so good to lend us his book, -- Ask
him.


BAR-TLE. Pray, bro-ther, will you lend us your book of Fa-bles?


WIL-LI-AM. Here it is.


BAR-TLE. I thank you.


WIL-LI-AM. Then I can read in George's book. I will seek for that Fa-ble,
which I have been read-ing in my own, in short words. -- The Pea-cocks and the
Jay.


WIL-LI-AM. Here it is. -- Mam-ma! I do not quite under-stand the Mo-ral.




MAM-MA. It it a les-son to teach you to a-void the sil-ly va-ni-ty of
as-sum-ing what you have no just claim to; at the pe-ril of be-ing de-priv-ed
of what is re-ally your own; as this sil-ly bird lost her own fea-thers with
those which she had bor-row-ed.


WIL-LI-AM. Mam-ma! I do not love the Fox -- he is so sly! and al-ways try-ing
to do mis-chief.



The Hen was wise -- how can a child be wise? -- you told me that to be wise,
was to judge right-ly -- can a child judge right-ly?


MAM-MA. My dear boy! the wis-dom of a child con-sists in submit-ting to be
di-rect-ed by his pa-rents.


MAM-MA. The Hen was somewhat in the si-tua-ti-on of a Boy at school, urg-ed
by a wick-ed school-fel-low to break the rules, or stray be-yond the bounds
which are ap-point-ed. Much dis-cre-ti-on, in judg-ing of what is pro-per, is
not to be ex-pect-ed from a lit-tle boy; but he may have the mo-des-ty of this
Hen, to keep him from pre-tend-ing to judge -- he may show his pru-dence, by
o-bey-ing the in-junc-ti-ons of his su-pe-ri-ors in age and wis-dom; with a
full as-su-rance that they are founded on rea-son, though he is not able to
ac-ccount ex-act-ly for them. He may con-clude (as the Hen in the Fable does)
that he can not be his friend who would per-suade him to break any law of the
place whi-ther his pa-rents have sent him; and so de-cline lis-ten-ing to his
per-sua-si-ons. -- Jenny! do you at-tend as you sit at your work?


JEN-NY. Yes, mam-ma, I lis-ten to all you say.


MAM-MA. You great boys at that ta-ble!


JOHN. Mam-ma! I have laid a-side my pen this half hour, and been all
at-ten-ti-on to you.


MAM-MA. Ned!


ED-WARD. I lose no-thing.


MAM-MA. O-be-di-ence is what I have been en-dea-vour-ing to in-cul-cate; or to
impress on your minds by fre-quent ad-mo-ni-ti-ons. O-BE-DI-ENCE is the whole
of our du-ty. God him-self says in the Ho-ly Scrip-tures, "Children o-bey your
pa-rents." When you are ar-riv-ed at years of dis-cre-ti-on, you be-come
sub-ject to the laws of the na-ti-on -- the same God or-dains that we should
"be sub-ject to higher pow-ers." And ul-ti-mate-ly in obey-ing those a-bove us
we

O-BEY GOD.

May he bless you all, my dear Children; and by mak-ing you good, secure your
hap-pi-ness in this world, and the next!


END of the MORALS.
MORALS to FABLES; BY Mrs. TEACHWELL.
INDEX.
WILLIAM's MORALS.
FOX and Crab, 15 Fawn and Vine, 16 Cocks, 17 Ape and Cubs, 18 Fox and Hen, 19
Dog and Be, 20 Boys and Frog, 21 Dog and Shadow, 22 Ant and Fly, 23
GEORGE's MORALS.
Horse and Stag, 25 Ant and Fly, 26 Fawn and Vine, 27 Fox and Crab, 27 Ape and
Cat, 28 Ape and Cubs, 31 Peacocks and Jay, 33 Fox and Hen, 34
THE END.

