GALATEA, A PASTORAL ROMANCE; IMITATED FROM CERVANTES, BY M. DE FLORIAN.
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH. TO WHICH IS ADDED, AMELIA, OR THE FAITHLESS BRITON;
AMELIA, OR MALEVOLENCE DEFEATED; AND, MISS SEWARD'S MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.
EMBELLISHED WITH ENGRAVINGS.

BOSTON: PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY W. SPOTSWOOD, AND C. P. WAYNE. 1798.

THE LIFE OF CERVANTES.
MIGUEL DE CERVANTES SAAVEDRA, whose writings have thrown a luster over Spain,
amused Europe, and corrected his century, lived poor, unfortunate, and died
almost forgotten; we were ignorant till within these few years, of the true
place of his birth. Madrid, Seville, Lucene and Alcala, disputed this honor
with each other; thus Cervantes, like Homer, Camoens and many other great men,
found several countries after his death, and wanted necessaries during his life.

The Spanish academy under the protection of its sovereign, has at length
rendered the memory of Cervantes that homage which Spain has owed him for too
long a time; they have published a splendid edition of Don Quixotte. It seemed
as if they had believed that the magnificence of this publication could repair
the injuries that the nation had done its author. His life is at the head,
written after the most exact researches, by a distinguished academician. I
shall follow this authority, as far as regards facts, permitting myself to
speak o^ the works of Cervantes, according to the sentiments they have inspired
me with.

Cervantes was a gentleman, son to Roderigo Cervantes, and Leonora de Cortinas;
he was born at Alcala de Henares, a city of new Castile, the 9th day of October
1547, under the reign of the emperor Charles the fifth. From his infancy he
loved books; he studied in Madrid under a celebrated professor, where he very
soon surpassed the most expert scholars. The grand science of that time was
latin and theology; the parents of Cervantes intended to have made him an
ecclesiastic or a physician, the only lucrative professions in Spain; but he
had still this trait in common with many celebrated poets, of making verses in
spite of his parents. An elegy on the death of Queen Isabella de Valois, a
number of sonnets, and a little poem called "Filene," were his first essays;
the small regard that they paid to these works appeared to him an injustice, he
left Spain, and went to settle at Rome, where distress forced him to become
valet de chamber to Cardinal Aquaviva.

Disgusted very soon with an employment so little fit for him, Cervantes became
a soldier, and fought with distinguished valor in the famous battle of
Lepanto, gained by Don John of Austria, in 1571: he received there a wound in
his left hand from a musket, of which he was lame all his life; -- as a
recompense for this wound he was put into the common hospital at Messina.
Having left the hospital, the trade of an invalid soldier appeared to him
preferable to that of a despised poet, he went and enrolled himself anew in the
garrison of Naples, in which city he remained three years. As he was repassing
into Spain on board a galley of Philip the Second's, he was taken and brought
into Algiers, by Arnaut Mami, the most renowned of all the corsairs.

Fortune, who exhausted her rigours upon the unfortunate Cervantes, could not
wear out his courage; -- slave to a cruel master, sure of dying in torments if
he durst make the least attempt to recover his liberty, he concerted his escape
with fourteen Spanish captives. They agreed to redeem one from among themselves
who should go to his own country, and return with a bark to carry the others
during the night; the execution of his project was not very easy: it was
necessary at first to get as much money as should pay for the ransom of one of
the prisoners, afterward to escape from the houses of their different masters,
and be able to remain all together, without being discovered, till the very
moment that the bark should arrive to carry them away. So many difficulties
appeared insurmountable; the love of liberty brought it all about. A captive, a
native of Navarre, employed by his master in cultivating a large garden upon
the borders of the sea, took on himself the task of hollowing out a cave in the
most retired part of the garden, capable of containing the fifteen Spaniards;
he spent two years in this work, during which time they gained, what with alms
and hard work, the ransom of a Majorcan, named Viane, whose fidelity they were
sure of, and who knew perfectly well all the coast of Barbary. The money being
ready, and the cave being finished, it was necessary to wait yet six months
before every one was prepared to go there; then Viane ransomed himself, and
parted from them, having sworn to return in a little time.

Cervantes had been the soul of the enterprise; it was he who exposed himself
every night in seeking food for his companions; as soon as day appeared, he
retired into the cave with provisions enough for the day. The gardener, who was
not obliged to conceal himself, had his eyes continually on the sea, to
discover if the bark was yet come.

Viane kept his word; arrived at Majorea, he went to the viceroy, laid his
commission before him, and demanded his assistance in favor of the enterprise;
the viceroy gave him a brigatine. Viane, with his heart full of hope, flew to
the deliverance of his brothers; he arrived on the coast of Algiers, the 28th
day of September, of that same year 1577, one month from the day he had left
it. Viane had observed every place so well, that he knew them again although it
was night, he directs his little vessel toward the garden, where he was
expected with so much impatience. The gardener, who was on the watch, perceived
him, and ran to acquaint the captive Spaniards of it. All their misfortunes are
forgotten at this happy news, they embrace each other, they press to get out of
the cave, they view with tears of joy the bark of their deliverer; -- but alas!
as the prow touched the shore, some Moors were passing that way, and knowing
the Christians, cried out to arms! Viane trembling spreads his sails, gains the
open sea and disappears; the unhappy captives, fallen again into their chains,
went to weep at the bottom of their cave.

Cervantes re-animates them, he made them hope, and flattered himself that
Viane would return again; but Viane returned no more. Grief, and the dampness
of their narrow and unhealthy abode, brought disorders on these unhappy people.
Cervantes was no longer able to procure necessaries for some, to take care of
others, and to encourage all: he got one of his companions to assist him, and
gave him the charge of providing victuals in his place. The person he made
choice of was a traitor, he went to the King of Algiers, turned Mussulman, and
led himself to the cave, a troop of soldiers, who put the thirteen Spaniards in
irons, and dragged them before the King; that Prince promised them their lives,
if they would declare who was the author of the enterprise; -- It is I, said
Cervantes to him, save my brothers, and put me to death. The King respects his
intrepidity, he gave him back to his master Arnaut Mami, who would not put so
brave a man to death.

The unhappy gardener, who had made the cave, was hung up by one leg, till his
blood smothered him. Cervantes, deceived by fortune, betrayed by his friend,
and returned to his first chains, only became more ardent to break them; four
times he failed in his attempts, and was on the point of being impaled. His
last effort was to cause a revolt among all the slaves in Algiers, and to make
himself master of it; they discovered this conspiracy, yet Cervantes was not
put to death; -- so certain it is, that true courage will make itself respected
even among barbarians.

It is true, that Cervantes being willing to speak of himself, in the novel of
the Captive, one of the most interesting in Don Quixotte, says,

That the cruel Azan, King of Algiers was never merciful only to a Spanish
soldier, named Saavedra; who exposed himself often to the most frightful
punishments, which will not for a long time be forgotten by the infidels.

In the mean time, the King of Algiers, willing to be the master of so famous a
captive, purchased him from Arnaut Mami, and had him closely confined. A short
time after, this Prince being obliged to go to Constantinople, demanded from
Spain the ransom of his prisoner. The mother of Cervantes, Leonora de Cortinas,
a widow and poor, sold all that she had, and ran to Madrid, carrying with her
three hundred ducats to the fathers of the Trinity, who were charged with the
redemption of captives. This money, which was the entire and only fortune of
the widow, was far from being sufficient. The King Azan would have five hundred
crowns of gold; the Trinitarians, touched with compassion, completed the sum,
and Cervantes was ransomed the 19th of September 1580, after a slavery of five
years.

On his return to Spain, disgusted with a military life, and resolving to
deliver himself up entirely to letters, he retired near his mother, with the
fond hope of supporting her by his works. Cervantes was then thirty three years
old, he began with GALATEA, of which he gave but the first six books, and which
he never completed. This work succeeded pretty well; the same year he married
Donna Catherine de Palacios, she was descended from a good family, but she was
poor, and this marriage did not enrich him. To maintain his family, Cervantes
wrote comedies; he assures us, that they were well received, but very soon
after this, he quitted the theater for a small employment which he obtained at
Seville, where he went to settle. It was there he wrote those novels where he
paints so well the vices of that great city.

Cervantes was near fifty years old, when he was obliged to take a journey into
La Mancha. The inhabitants of a little village named Argamazilla, picked a
quarrel with him, threw him into prison, and left him in it a long time; it was
there that he began Don Quixotte, he believed that he should revenge himself on
those who had insulted him, by making their country the country of his hero. He
affected in the mean time not to mention once in his romance, the town where he
had been so badly treated. He began by giving to the public no more than the
first part of Don Quixotte, which did not succeed. Cervantes knew mankind; he
published a pamphlet called "The Squib," -- this work, which it would be
impossible to find now, even in Spain, seems to be a criticism on Don Quixotte
that covered his slanderers with ridicule; -- every one read the satire, and
Don Quixotte obtained by this bagatelle, the reputation which since has been
due only to itself. -- Then all the enemies of good taste let themselves loose
against Cervantes. Criticisms, satires, calumnies, all were set to work. More
unhappy by his success, than ever he had been by his disgraces, he durst not
venture to give any thing to the public for several years, his silence added to
his misery without appeasing envy. -- Happily the Count de Lemos and the
Cardinal of Toledo lent him some succors; this protection, which Cervantes
considered as so valuable, was continued to him almost to his death, but was
never proportioned either to the merit of the protected, nor to the wealth of
the protector. Cervantes, to show his gratitude to the Count de Lemos,
dedicated his novels to him, which appeared eight years after the first part of
Don Quixotte; the year following he gave his "Voyage to Parnassus," but these
works brought him but little money, and the succors of the Count de Lemos were
always very weak, since Cervantes to procure bread was obliged to print eight
comedies, which the players had refused to perform; he seemed destined to
misfortunes and humiliations of every kind*

This same year, an Arragonian, who took the name of d'Avellaneda, wrote a
continuation of Don Quixotte; a wretched continuation, without taste, without
wit, and without gaiety, but in which he said many things injurious to
Cervantes; -- this sort of merit made the book be read. Cervantes replied to it
as all the satires ought to have been replied to: -- he published the second
part of Don Quixotte, superior still to the first, every one was convinced of
his merit, but the more they were obliged to render him justice, the less sorry
were they that a rival, even despicable, should insult him whom they were
forced to admire. -- Spain is not, perhaps, the only country in the world,
where malignity so severe on good works is always indulgent to their
detractors. Whilst Cervantes lived, Avallaneda was read, as soon as he was
dead, his enemy was forgotten.

The second part of Don Quixotte was the last work printed during his life; --
he worked still at the romance of "Perfiles and Sigismunda," when he was
attacked by a complaint of which he died, it was a dropsy; -- he felt very soon
that he could not be cured, and fearing not to have time to finish his work,
augmented his disorder by intense application. He was very soon at the
extremity; tranquil and serene on the bed of death, as he had been patient
under his misfortunes, his constancy and philosophy never forsook him a moment.
Four days before his death he had his romance of Persiles brought to him, and
traced with a feeble hand, the epistle dedicatory, addressed to the Count de
Lemos, who just then arrived from Italy; -- this letter deserves to be
remembered -- it is as follows: --

To DON PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE CASTRO, COUNT DE LEMOS, etc. etc.
We have an old Spanish ballad, which is but too applicable to me; -- it begins
with these words,

"Though Death impatient calls on me;
"Still do I wish to write to thee, etc."
Behold precisely the state I am in; they gave me yesterday extreme unction. I
am dying, and I am very sorry that I have not the power of telling you how much
pleasure your arrival in Spain has given me. The joy which I feel at it, ought
to save my life; but the will of God be done. Your excellency will know, at
least, that my gratitude has lasted all my days. I have much to regret in not
being able to finish certain works which I had destined for you, as The
Gardener's Calendar," -- "Bernard the Great," -- and the last books of
"Galatea;" -- for whom I know you have a friendship. But it would be necessary
for this, to have a miracle from the Almighty; and I ask for nothing, but that
he may have your Excellency under his protection. -- Madrid, April 19, 1616.

MICHAEL DE CERVANTES.


He died the 23d of the same month, aged sixty-eight years, six months, and
some days.

The man who conducted himself among the Algerines as we have seen; who
composed Don Quixotte -- and who wrote this letter when dying, was no ordinary
man.

OF THE WORKS OF CERVANTES.
THE first poetical works of Cervantes are not much known, nor do they deserve
it; -- his sonnets and elegies are written too much in the taste of his age --
his best work, that which has immortalized his name, is the "Romance of Don
Quixotte;" -- the judgment, the gaiety, the fine irony diffused through this
work, the great truth of the portraits, the purity, the simplicity of the
style, have rendered this work immortal: I know that it is not equally pleasing
to all French readers who do not understand Spanish; this arises from the
faults of the only translation which we have of it, it is very far from the
elegance and the delicacy of the original. The translator seems to have
considered Don Quixotte as a common romance, whose sole merit was to be
entertaining. He has translated the Spanish word by the French one, which he
found in the dictionary, without comparing or without choosing; he forgot that
in works of humor no word is synonimous to another; that one word alone is
apt, and all others improper.

The manner in which he has translated the pieces of poetry, of which there are
many in Don Quixotte, would persuade us that the Spanish verses are ridiculous;
when, in fact, they are all agreeable -- perhaps too abstruse.

But Cervantes wrote for his nation, whose taste is different from ours; and
the translator, who wrote for us, ought, whilst he preserved the thoughts of
Cervantes, to have weakened some comparisons, softened some of the images, and
have, above all, given sweetness and harmony to the verses. He appears to have
thought of nothing but being literal, and this among the French, is considered
as a fault. To us almost all foreign books seem too long; even Don Quixotte has
prolixities and strokes of bad taste, which might be retrenched without the
translator's meriting the reproach of not being exact; when a work of
entertainment is to be translated, the translation most agreeable, is, without
doubt, the most faithful.

Notwithstanding these faults, the work is so excellent in itself, the episodes
so interesting, the adventures so comic, that all the world knows it, all the
world read it again and again; -- our tapestry, our pictures and our prints,
all represent Don Quixotte to us; and even the children laugh when they see
Sancho Panza.

Cervantes's novels fall far short of Don Quixotte; he wrote twelve, and four
alone are worthy of him, -- "The Curious Impertinent," which is inserted in Don
Quixotte; "Riconnet and Cortadille," a whimsical but true picture of the rogues
of Seville: -- "The Force of Blood," the most interesting and best conducted of
the whole; -- and "The Dialogue of the Dog?." This last is a charming piece of
criticism, abounding with philosophy and gaiety; the Spanish manners are there
drawn with all the accuracy, simplicity, and spirit of Cervantes. We have had
within those few years a French translation of these twelve novels, but they
ought to be read in the original.

The "Journey to Parnassus," is a poetical work, divided into chapters.
Cervantes feigns that Apollo threatened by legions of bad poets, sends Mercury
into Spain, to assemble all his favorites, and conduct them to defend
Parnassus. Mercury finds Cervantes, and shows him the list of those whom Apollo
requires to assist him, and of their adversaries. It is evident what a fine
opportunity this fiction gave a man of wit to be revenged on the dunces who had
insulted him. This work is not very agreeable, nor can we relish it highly; I
know not any translation of this, nor of his comedies; they are eight in
number, and Cervantes says in his prologue, that he had written twenty or
thirty; this uncertainty must appear wonderful to those who know how difficult
it is to write even one comedy; -- be that as it may, those which are
preserved, diminish our regret for those that are lost. I have read them all
with attention, none of them are tolerable; uninteresting, badly conducted,
often witty, always improbable; such is the characteristic of all his plays. In
that called "The Happy Ruffian," the hero, who in the first act is the greatest
villain in Seville, becomes a Jacobin at Mexico in the second: he is the
pattern of the convent; he has frequent encounters with the devil, upon the
stage, and always remains conqueror. Being called to attend a lady of the
place, then on her deathbed, whose life had been very irregular, Father Crux,
for so he is called, presses her in vain, to confess her sins; the dying lady
believes herself too culpable to hope for pardon: -- At last Father Crux,
anxious to prevent her reprobation, offers to take her sins on him, and give
her his merits; the exchange is made, the bargain signed, the dying lady
confesses, angels receive her soul, and devils seize upon the Jacobin; who sees
his body covered with frightful ulcers. In the third act he dies, and works
miracles. This is one of the comedies of the author of Don Quixotte, and
perhaps, his best.

There are, besides, eight little pieces of Cervantes, which the Spaniards call
Entremeses; these are better than his comedies; they are comic and natural,
some of them rather too free, but two of them are charming above the rest; one
called "The Cave of Salamanca," is exactly our Soldier Magician; the French
comic opera is formed after the model of the Spanish; the other, called "The
Miraculous Picture," has furnished Piron with the idea of an opera ballad, The
False Prodigy, much inferior to Cervantes's work.

"Persiles and Sigismunda," of which we have two unfaithful translations, is a
long romance, loaded with episodes and adventures, almost always incredible. It
seems as if Cervantes wished to imitate the old Greek romances still esteemed
and formerly admired. But all his imagination, which, perhaps, never was more
brilliant than in Persiles, is insufficient to render his heroes interesting;
their useless adventures, their improbable dangers, and the constant medley of
love and devotion, have hindered this work from attaining the reputation of its
author; but the elegance of the style, the great truth of some of the
portraits, and the episode of "Ruperte" are sufficient to render it of great
value.

It remains that I should speak of "GALATEA," his first performance. At the
time he wrote it, Spain was the most gallant nation in the world, love was the
sole occupation of the Spaniards, and the subject of all their books.

Montemayor, a celebrated poet, published the romance of "Diana," which has
been translated into French. This work met with the greatest success, and
merited it in some respects; a pure style, great wit, sweetness and sentiment,
often an enchanting strain of poetry, and the affecting elegant simplicity
which predominates in the novel of the moor Abindarraes, redeems in the eyes of
connoisseurs, the improbability of the story, the intervention of magic, and
the want of action which have been the reproach of the Diana of Montemayor.
Cervantes, who perceived all these defects, as may be seen from his scrutiny of
Don Quixotte's library, has, in Galatea, avoided some of these faults; but not
all. His adventures are more natural, his characters more interesting, but his
style, and above all his poetry, place him below Montemayor. -- Infected with
the miserable scholastic taste which then prevailed, Cervantes has made his
shepherds declaim as if in the school, they pronounce long dissertations for
and against Love; they cite Minos, Ixion, Antony, Rodriguez and all the heroes
of fable and history: if Tircis wishes to console his friend who can obtain no
mark of favor from his shepherdess, his speech is to this effect:

It is allowed by all, that Galatea is still more beautiful than cruel; but
they add, that above all, she is discreet. Now if this be true, as it ought to
be, it follows that by her good sense she should know herself, and from this
knowledge that she should esteem herself; from this esteem that she should wish
not to be lost, and from this wish, that she will not yield to your desires.

In another place, a lover separated from his mistress, says in verse, Although
I seem to see, to understand, and to feel, yet I am only a phantom formed by
Love, and sustained by Hope. Through the whole work the sun only illuminates
the world by the light which he receives from the eyes of Galatea. These
specimens enable us to form an idea of the bad taste which formely prevailed,
and from which even Cervantes was not free. But in the midst of these follies,
we find beautiful ideas, true sentiment, elegantly expressed, interesting
situations, the emotions and agitations of the heart. These were what induced
me to give an imitation of his Galatea; it has never been translated, this
romance is utterly unknown to the French.

As it is very possible my labors will be unsuccessful, I must, for the honor
of Cervantes, enumerate here all the changes which I have made in his work.
Galatea, in the original, consists of six books, and is not concluded: these I
have comprised in three, and have finished it in a fourth. I have translated
hardly any part, the verses in particular, only resemble the Spanish ones in
the places quoted. I have only taken the heads of the adventures, I have even
changed circumstances, where it has appeared necessary; I have added entire
scenes, as the exchange of crooks in the first book; the country feast and the
story of the doves in the second; and the farewell to Elicio's dog in the
third; the fourth is entirely my own invention. I shall no doubt, be reproached
with the great number of episodes, and the few events in which Galatea is
concerned. In Cervantes, there are twice as many episodes, and Galatea does
still less. Montemayor has committed the same fault in Diana, which is in fact,
nothing but a recital of different histories; such was the taste of the times.
Such are our great French romances, so long the fashion, where the authors took
the Spaniards for their models, as to battles and duels, which one will be
perhaps astonished to find in a pastoral work; it is a tribute which Cervantes
paid to his nation. I know no Spanish romance or comedy without combats; this
people, one of the most valiant in Europe, and without dispute, the most
amorous, required in a book to please them, recitals of Love and War. Finally,
we ought to pardon Cervantes, who himself met with adventures, the most
extraordinary, for supposing that what had happened to himself would appear
probable in a romance.

I have but one word more to say on the judgment which I have presumed to pass
on the works of Cervantes. Notwithstanding the particular study I made of his
language, I rested not entirely on my own knowledge; but I have been guided by
the information of a Spaniard, who is as much devoted to literature, as to his
country, and who has this in common with Cervantes, that he is still more
celebrated for his talents than for his misfortunes The Count De Pilos.
.

GALATEA.


GALATEA. BOOK THE FIRST.
I.
B^ (...) the sun has brightened over our plains*
(...) stolen the liquid dew-drops from the flowers;
Before the earliest birds have quit their bowers,
^less and struck with love's tormenting pains*
I w^ke the echoes from the hollow ground;
And to my moans the rocks and woods and vales resound.
II.
The ring-dove joins his sad complaints to mine.
And thou sweet bird that sing'st the live-long night,
Thy plaintive notes no more my soul delight,
In vain to sooth me all your powers combine;
The limpid brook my falling tears increase,
Whose gentle murmurs often have soothed my soul to peace.
III
Nor echoes, woods nor streams assuage my woes;
Stretched on the flowery turf I hapless lie,
Beneath the shade that spreading oaks supply,
And mourn my fate and weep my lost repose;
In sighs and tears my wearied nights are past,
And each returning day's more wretched than the last!
Such were the complaints of Elicio, a shepherd on the banks of the Tagus.
Nature had enriched him with her gifts, but Fortune and Love had not treated
him with equal kindness.

Long had he loved Galatea, without being able as yet to flatter himself that
he was beloved of her. Galatea was a simple shepherdess of the same village as
Elicio; but she had been queen of the world, if the world had been given to the
most beautiful, and most deserving.

It Is Galatea and Elicio, whose adventures I am going to relate. I shall join
to these some others, of whose constancy love was willing to make trial; and I
shall also describe the manners of a village. Oh! ye whose chief pleasures are
centered in a country life; souls of sensibility! to whom the aspect of
laughing fields, and the noise of falling waters afford delights equal almost
to what are felt in doing of good actions; may you be able to find some
pleasure in perusing me!

Of all the shepherds who were in love with Galatea, Elicio was the most
tender, and least confident. Nor was his respect alone the sole cause of his
timidity; Meoris the father of Galatea was the richest husbandman in the
canton; while all the wealth of Elicio was his cottage, and a few goats.

Erastres his rival was less poor, without being more happy. Erastres, ever the
most insensible of shepherds, had not been able however to resist the charms of
Galatea; but he did not flatter himself that he could be pleasing to her. Too
simple to be amiable, he could feel, but he knew not how to express himself.
Nature in forming him had been content with giving him a good heart.

One day as Elicio in a solitary dale was thinking of her whom he loved, he saw
Erastres appear, preceded by his flock, which he left the conducting of to his
dogs. These faithful animals seemed as if they guessed that their master was
too much in love to mind his sheep. Their attention seemed to be doubled. They
ran round them, pressed on the lazy ones, led back those that were rambling
from their fellows; thus doing at the same time their own duty and that of the
shepherd.

As soon as Erastres was near Elicio, I hope, said he to him, that you are not
sad, because I am in love with Galatea. You know that it is impossible not to
love her. May my lambs in the moment that I wean them find nothing in their
pastures but poisonous herbs, if it be not true that a thousand times I have
been tempted to forget my love. I have consulted all the doctors in the
country, yet none of them have been able to cure me; and I come to ask your
leave to retain my malady to my death. You will risque nothing in granting me
this favor, since you who are the most engaging of all our shepherds, have not
been able to move Galatea to pity, what have you to fear from a clown like me?

Elicio smiled at this discourse. My friend, said he, I have no right to be
jealous. Our sorrows are the same, and they ought to endear us to each other.
From this moment we will separate no more; we will talk unceasingly of Galatea,
and friendship, without doubt, will help to assuage the pains that love causes
us to suffer.

The two rivals now become friends, were preparing their pipes to play, when
Galatea with her flock appeared upon the hill. A simple bodice, and a petticoat
of plain stuff, composed the whole of her attire. Her shape alone rendered this
habit charming. Her long light hair floated on her shoulders, and a straw hat
guarded her face from the ardour of the sun. Unadorned as the simple flowers of
the field, she was beautiful and she knew it not.

Elicio advanced to speak to her, but the dogs of Galatea, who let no person
approach the flock, ran growling toward the shepherd. Scarcely had they
recollected him, when ashamed of their ill behavior, they stooped down their
necks, dropped their tails, and went to hide their heads under his caressing
hands. The conducting ram with whom Elicio had often divided his bread,
perceived him, and came up to him with his head erect, and bell ringing, all
the sheep followed him. Elicio opened for them his scrip, he distributed to the
dogs, and to the flock all that it contained, while tears of joy ran from his
eyes. The shepherdess embarrassed thus, at seeing the sheep know her lover so
well, blushed, and hasting to the ram, struck him with her crook, and obliged
him to remove from Elicio.

The shepherd reproached her for this movement of anger; why, said he, punish
your sheep when it is me that you wish to punish. These pastures are the best
in the canton; you have power to fly me; but leave here your lambs, and I will
neglect my goats to take care of them; -- if this favor seems too great,
choose the place where you would wish to pass the day, and I will remove
myself, because it will be more agreeable to you: Elicio, said Galatea, it is
not to avoid you that I turn my sheep another way I am leading them to the
brook of palm trees, where I expect to meet my dear Florise; -- I am grateful
to you for your offers; and I prove it to you by dissipating your suspicions.
While she was still speaking, she pursued her way. Erastres cried out to her
from far, May you yet fall in love with some one who will treat you with as
little pity as you treat us; May you.... he would have said more if Galatea had
not began to sing, as her custom was, whenever she moved with her flock. The
most angry lover would rather listen to the voice of his mistress, than say
injurious things to her; Erastres was silent, and Galatea sung these words: --

I.
In the care of my flocks, I place my delight,
Surrounded by them, I am cheerful and blessed,
My joy is to lead them to streams that are blight*
If they are contented, my heart is at rest.
II.
I sleep all the night, and when daylight appears,
Nor wishes, nor sorrows my bosom ever move.
This quiet is sweet, it would waken my fears
To know that Old Child, which I hear them call Love.
III.
Be wolves, and this love, ever far from my bowers,
While dogs guard my sheep from beasts savage and wild;
My only defense is this crook, hung with flowers,
Yet sure it is enough for to combat a Child.
Galatea had finished her song just as she had arrived at the rivulet of
palm trees. Florise was already there, her best friend, the confident of her
most secret thoughts. They sat down together upon the borders of the brook, and
employed themselves in gathering the surrounding flowers; when they perceived a
shepherdess who was unknown to them. This stranger, young and beautiful, seemed
overwhelmed with grief; from time to time she stopped, sighed, and ^^oked up ^o
heaven, with her eyes swimming in tears. Too much occupied with her sorrows, to
perceive Galatea, she approached the brook, took up some of the water in her
hands, and washed her eyes wearied with weeping: Alas! said she, there is no
water able to extinguish the fire that consumes me.

Galatea and Florise ran toward the stranger; If Heaven, said they to her, is
as much touched with your tears as we are, you would very soon have no cause to
shed them; we pity your misfortunes, even though we do not know them; how often
are they assuaged by recounting them! a satisfaction of that sort you might
feel, by pouring them into our bosoms; yet it would be cruel to demand a
recital of what might be wounding to your heart. This recital, replied the
stranger, will perhaps deprive me of the friendship which you seem to promise
me; when you are informed that all my sorrows spring from love; may I hope that
you will still pity me? The shepherdesses, after having assured her in the
tenderest manner of their freindship, conducted her into a neighboring grove
-- they sat down in the shade, and after a pause of a few moments, the stranger
began her history:

"I was born in a village, situated on the banks of the Henares, celebrated for
the freshness, and the clearness of its waters; my father is a farmer, and my
life was occupied solely in country employments; every morning I led my sheep
to their pastures, frequently alone, yet solitude never weared me. In the woods
I listened delighted to the birds, I sung with them; I gathered the red rose,
the lilly without spot, and the pink of various dye; this amusement rendered
the day happy, I loved nothing so well as my lambs, and I fought for nothing in
the country, but flowers and the cool shade.

"How many times have I laughed at the sighs and tears of some of our
sheperdesses, who have made me the confident of their loves? I remember that
one day the young Lydia came, and throwing herself upon my neck, bathed me with
her tears. Alarmed at her despair, I wiped her eyes, and embracing her,
enquired with tenderness what frightful misfortune had cost her (...), cried
(...) to her, is he de^^? (...) Leolinda, replied (...) me, he is gone!.... he
is (...) this morning I have seen the shepherders Leolinda, with the rose
colored ribband, which I, the other day gave (...) ingrate. I declare to you,
amiable shepherdesses, that I could not hinder myself from laughing at this
recital, every word of which was cut short with sighs. Lydia was offended, she
looked at me, bowed her head, and went away. I would have detained her:
Teolinda, said she to me, may you one day feel the sorrows that I now suffer,
and experience in your confidents the same pity that I find in you! Such was
her wish, perhaps it is you, shepherdesses, who will accomplish it this day.

"Thus did I live, careless, free and happy; but I was not to be long so: --
One day, it was the vigil of the patron saint of our village, I had gone with
many other girls to get green boughs, and gather flowers to ornament our
church; we found on our way, a troop of shepherds, sitting under the shade of
myrtles; they were all our friends or relations, and had come out before us,
six of them requested that they might go in our place, to get the green boughs
and flowers, which we wanted, we accepted their offer, and remained with the
rest of their companions.

"Among these young people, was a stranger, whom I then saw for the first time.
Scarcely had I beheld him, when I felt a fire run through my veins that was
unknown to me before, I doubted what it could be, Lydia was there, I thought to
have fallen at her feet, and asked forgiveness for not having compassionated in
her, the pains that I already felt.

"It was easy to read in my face all that passed in my heart; but every one was
occupied with the stranger. They begged of him to finish a song, which our
arrival had interrupted; he agreed, and I trembled, lest love should be the
subject; if he be in love, said I to myself, he will not think of any thing but
love; happily he sung only the pleasures of a country life, and the means of
preserving flocks, he said nothing of that, which causes the death of
shepherdesses.

"Scarcely had he finished, when we saw those coming back, who had gone to cut
the green branches; they were so laden, that walking in a line, and linked
closely together, one would have believed they saw a little hill approach,
covered with its own trees. When they came near to us, they began a village
round, to which we responded; soon after they laid down their burdens, and
offered each shepherdess a garland of different kinds of flowers. We accepted
their presents, and began to prepare to return to the village; when the oldest
amongst them, named Eleuco, stopped us: I think, said he, that each of you
ought to recompense us for our pains, by giving her garland to him that she
loves best; that is but just, said one of my companions, at the same time
putting her garland on the head of her cousin; the others followed her example,
and every one made choice of a relation. I remained for the last, and by good
fortune, I had no cousin there.

"I appeared as if I was uncertain what to do, at length approaching the
stranger, I give you this garland, said I, in the name of all my companions, as
a tribute of thanks for the pleasure your song, has afforded us. I pronounced
these fe^ words, out o^ breath, and not daring to lift my eyes up to him that I
was crowning, and I trembled so, that the garland was ready to drop from my
hands.

"The stranger received my favors with gratitude and modesty; he seized the
instant when no one could hear him, to say to me in a low voice, I have paid
you very dear for the garland I have received: you have given me nothing but
flowers; and I, I,..... he could not finish, for my companions came up, and
pressed me to depart. I answered nothing, but I kept my eyes on the stranger,
as long as it was possible; he occupied my thoughs all the way, and when I go
home, I could only think of him.

The next day which was the festival, after having paid our adorations to the
Eternal Father of Mercie^ all the inhabitants of the village and its
neighbourhoo^ assembled upon the public green, to exercise themselves in
different country sports. A troop of young men, vain of their youth, their
strength and activity presented themselves to dispute the prize -- of
wrestling, leaping and the race. Each appeared as if confident of bearing it
away; I was only interested for one person, and for him all my vows were
exhausted. Artidore, for this was the name of my stranger, was conqueror in all
the sports, he was applauded by every one. Alanio, said one, ran swifter than
Sylvanio Marcellus is stronger than Lysander; but Artidore carries it away from
them all. I heard these praises, bu^ durst not join in them; I pretended not to
have heard them, however, that I might have them repeated the oftener to me.

"Thus was our holiday ended. The next day, about dozen young girls (...), the
most respectable of our village, assembled together, ^g each other by the ^and,
and preceded by a tabor and pipe; we formed ^ dance, and in this manner,
proceeded to a neigh^ouring meadow, where we found Artidore with all ^ur young
lads. As soon as they saw us, they ran and mixed in our dance, each shepherd
separated two ^hepherdesses, and broke our chain by doubling it; ^hen the
flutes and tamborines were joined to our mu^ic, the dance became more animated;
my good for^^ne would have it that my hand found itself in that of Artidore's.
The gentle pressure of his hand, caused ^ sudden faintishness to come over me;
my heart throb^ed violently, and I was sinking to the ground; when Artidore
perceiving it, caught me suddenly in his arms and pressed me closely to his
bosom. The remedy was worse than the disease.

"The dance being ended, we sat down upon the green turf; every one wished to
hear Artidore sing, ^hey entreated him and he complied. I have never forgot his
song, and I am going to repeat it to you, in spite of the tears that I shall
give perhaps to so sweet a rememberance.

I.
The brightest day we never could enjoy,
Sad gloomy cares would all our thoughts employ,
If love came not to make the prospect gay;
And strew his roses in life's rugged way.
No ills a favored lover ever can know,
A word, a smile, can happiness bestow,
Nor fate itself can render him unblest;
She says, I love you, and his heart's at rest*
Love, we ought to bless thy chains,
If two lovers are in trouble,
They can feel but half their pains;
Whilst their pleasures you can double.
II.
The other day beneath a myrtle shade,
Two hapless lovers sad complainings made,
Their future union was their only care;
The uncertain future filled them with despair.
I heard them thus, in broken accents say,
Still as they dried their falling tears away: --
"It Is more relief to share each others woe,
"Than single happiness can ever know."
Love we ought to bless thy chains.
If two lovers are in trouble,
They can feel but half their pains;
Whilst their pleasures you can double
"It was time to return to the village; each shepherd offered his arm to his
shepherdess; whether it was chance or address, I was not sure; but Artidore
gave me his. We walked on in silence, without daring to look at each other; but
each of us seized the instant when the other was not observing, to steal a
glance, and if by chance our eyes met, they were instantly bent to the ground.
At length I said to him, Artidore the few days you have given us, must appear
to you as so many years, if you have left in your village any one that is dear
to you; I would give all that I possess, said he, if these happy days would but
continue as long as my life. You love these sports then? Ah! it is not the
sports,... he gave a deep sigh; I sighed also. he pressed my hand; nor am I
very sure, but that I returned it.

"We were thus situated, when the old Eleuco, whose advice every one respected,
proposed that we should sing a roundelay, in order, as he said, to enter the
village as gaily as we had left it; I took it upon myself willingly, and laid
hold of that occasion to give some advice to Artidore; I sung these words,
keeping my eyes on him all the time;

I.
Would you a happy lover be?
Be guided still by mystery;
This maxim is the golden rule
Of all the learned in love's school;
Would you be loved, discreet then be,
The key of hearts is secrecy.
II.
Those who love's soft passion blame,
In vain malign his purest flame;
Love is the virtue of the soul,
When prudence regulates the whole.
Would you be loved, discreet then be;
The key of hearts is secrecy.
III.
Your pleasure learn to restrain,
Be secret, though it gives you pain;
A thoughtless word may often destroy
The fairest hopes of promised joy.
Would you be loved, discreet then be;
The key of hearts is secrecy.
IV.
Your conquests then alone impart
To that best confident, your heart;
And though your glory may seem less,
'Twill be repaid in happiness.
Would you be loved, discreet then be;
The key of hearts is secrecy.
"I did not know whether my song was pleasing to Artidore; but he profited by
it. During his stay with us, he used so much circumspection and prudence in the
attentions he rendered me, that the most envious observer could not find a word
to say.

"I was certain of being beloved, nor had I been able to conceal from my lover
that my heart was his. We had agreed that he should return to his village as he
had given out; and that a few days after he should send a friend of his family
to ask me in marriage of my father; we were both of us sure that our parents
would consent, every thing seemed favorable to our wishes, when two days
before the departure of Artidore, my ill fate brought back my twin sister from
a neighboring village where she had been for some time, to see an aunt of
mine; this sister, by a fatality very rare, is my living picture, her face, her
shape, her voice, all bear so exact a resemblance to mine, that our parents in
order to know us from each other, were obliged to clothe us in different
habits; but our characters are far from having this resemblance; had our hearts
been twins I should not have shed so many tears.

"The day after her return, my sister drove the flocks ^o their pasture before
I was awake. I would have followed her, but my father detained me the whole
day; -- I was obliged to give up the hope of seeing Artidore. In the evening my
sister returned, and told me with an air of mystery, that she had something to
say to me of importance; my heart beat violently, already I had a foreboding of
my misfortune, I went and shut myself up with her; judge what my thoughts were,
when I heard her speak these words: --

"This morning, my dear sister. I was conducting the flocks to the banks of the
Henares, when I saw a young shepherd approach me whom I had never seen before;
he saluted me, and took my hand with a freedom which both surprised and
offended me, neither my silence, nor the alteration which he saw in my
countenance, was capable of stopping his transports. Alas! said he to me,
beautiful Teolinda, do you no longer remember him who loves you better than he
does himself. I saw very clearly my sister, that I was taken for you, and not
being willing that so forward a shepherd as he should have your reputation in
his power, and so be capable of injuring you; I was resolved to release you for
ever, from this impertinent. I took care not to let him know that he deceived
himself; and assuming that style and manner that Teolinda ought always to have,
I replied to his words with an haughtiness and disdain that did not fail to
astonish and confound him; but all this was necessary for your justification,
my dear sister, and fortunately for you, my words made a proper impression on
him, he looked wildly on me, upbraided me, called me perfidious and ungrateful;
-- and, as he left me, I think he said something... as if you were never to see
him more!

"You may easily conceive, amiable shepherdesses, what I suffered during this
recital; I would have given the half of my life that it was morning, that I
might fly and undeceive my unhapy lover. Ah! what a night for me, how long did
it appear! -- The stars were yet glittering in the Heavens, when I was already
in the fields; never had my poor sheep walked so fast before; I hastened to the
spot where I had been accustomed to meet my Artidore; I seek him, I call him, I
run over the fields, the woods, and the banks of the river; but I cannot find
Artidore! Return, cried I, my beloved, come and behold the true Teolinda, she
who only lives for to love you. Echo repeated my words, but Artidore came not.
At length, wearied with the fruitless search, I sat down at the foot of a beech
to wait for broad day light, that I might again traverse every place where I
had before sought him.

"Scarce had the morning's dawn given me the power of distinguishing objects
clearly, when I perceived letters out upon the bark of a white poplar; I looked
earnestly, it is the hand of Artidore, nor do I know how it was possible I
could read without dying, the verses I now repeat to you --

O thou, unmatched in every charm and grace,
But false of heart, as beautiful of face;
Alike indifferent in thy eyes,
Thy broken vows, thy violated truth,
Or the sad fate of the unhappy youth
That breathes away his soul in sighs.
My liberty to you I gave,
My life you with me to resign,
Receive it from thy wretched slave;
Alas! my more than life is thine.
Yet, in the last sad moment of my fate,
I would to your unfeeling soul repeat
Once more my vows, and with my latest breath,
Still talk of love, though sinking into death.
On this smooth poplar rind, I Have marked my doom,
More deep engraved, than in thy cruel heart
Mine still will love thee, even to the tomb;
Ah! must we then for ever, ever part!
Could but my fate thy breast with pity move,
More sweet than all my life, my death would prove.
"I read, without crying, these sad adieus, twice over; I should have still
continued reading them, but tears prevented me, and surely, if these tears had
not flowed, I must have died on the spot Grief took from me in this moment, the
little reason that Love had left me; I resolved to forsake all and fly after
Artidore, I would that instant have done so; but I could tare myself from the
tree where my sentence was written; I made fruitless efforts to get this bark
off the poplar, I kissed it a thousand times, I bathed it with my tears; when,
suddenly I ran across the country, repeating the last words that I had read.

"I arrived upon these borders, they are not far from the country of my lover;
but to this instant, no one has been able to give me any intelligence of him; I
would yet seek him a few days -- but if my searches are in vain -- If my
Artidore is no more, my fate is decided! I will follow him: yes, (said she,
bursting into tears) I will follow thee, my Artidore to the grave: -- it is my
last hope."

Such was the recital of Teolinda. Galatea and her friend did all in their
power to console her; -- Remain here, said Galatea to her, we will assist you
in finding Artidore; and, in the mean time we will partake your distress, and
mingle our tears with yours. Teolinda, moved by these kind offers, embraced
Galatea, and promised not to quit her for some days.

The sun was now set, and the shepherdesses collected their scattered flocks,
to lead them to the village; but scarcely had they got half way, when Galatea
perceived that she had left her crook behind her, she begged of Florise and the
stranger to take care of her sheep, while she returned alone to seek it; she
soon saw through the trees an old shepherd, named Lenio, sitting in the place
where she had been, and holding in his hands, the crook that she had come to
look for.

At the same instant, Elicio returning to his cottage with his little flock of
goats, passed that way, and knowing the crook of Galatea, he stopped and looked
at Lenio, with an astonish^d air; -- Galatea, attentive to the movements of
Elicio, hid herself behind some large shrubs, anxious to hear what he was going
to say.

Where did you get that crook? said Elicio, with a quick voice. I found it
here, by chance, said the old shepherd, and I intend it for Belise, who will
hardly refuse so handsome a present; I wish, said Elicio, that the heart of
Belise may be softened to tenderness by the gift of that crook; but mine is
still more beautiful; see how the bark, neatly raised, seems to form a branch
of ivy that curls round it, I would be willing, however, to change it for the
one you hold; -- you must then, said Lenio, give me also the best of your goats
in exchange. -- Ah! I agree, I have but six, you see them here, choose which of
them that pleases you most. The old shepherd, had no great trouble in deciding
of the six goats of Elicio; one only was near yeaning, and it was that which he
chose. Elicio, transported with joy, gave him the goat, changed the crook, and
embraced him with all his heart. The two shepherds, equally satisfied,
separated, and Galatea, pensive and musing, flowly rejoined Florise and the
stranger; they asked her, what news of her crook? some one has taken it,
replied the shepherdess, but I do not regret it.

In the meantime, the shades of Night began to darken the mountains; the birds
assembled together, under the thick foliage, disputed with a confused murmur,
the branch where they were to spend the night. One heard on all sides, the
pipes of the shepherds, and the drowsy tinklings of the sheep-bells, as the
flocks, approached the village. The shepherds, as they entered it, found great
preparations making, the cause of which, they soon learned; -- Daranio, one of
the wealthiest farmers, was the next day to espouse Sylveria, whose only
fortune was her blue eyes. The prodigal lover would celebrate his happiness by
the most brilliant nuptials. He had invited all the shepherds of the
neighboring villages to be witnesses of his happiness; and the famous Tircis,
who had no equal in singing, or the art of playing on the flute, was also to be
there; with his friend Damon. Teolinda h^d a faint hope that Artidore might
come to these nuptials; she resolved therefore to follow Galatea. All the
shepherds were preparing themselves for the sports and rural games, that were
to be celebrated the next day.

END OF THE FIRST BOOK.
GALATEA.


GALATEA. BOOK THE SECOND.
WHEN shall I be able to live in a village -- when shall I be the possessor of
a cottage, encompassed by cherry trees! close by it, could there be a garden,
an orchard, a meadow, some bee-hives, and a rivulet, bordered with filbert
trees surrounding my Empire; -- My desires should never pass beyond that
stream. There should my happy days glide peaceably away; every moment of my
time should be occupied in walking, reading, or in rural employments. -- I
would have besides, something to live on, and also something to give away; for
without this, riches are nothing; to have only for one's self, is having
nothing. If I could enjoy all these blessings with a partner, prudent and
amiable, and see our children sporting on the green (...), vieing with each
other, who shall run swiftest to embrace their mother; -- I believe, that I
ought to excite the envy of all the Kings of the Universe.

Such was the state of those shepherds, whose history I write. A happy marriage
generally crowned a virtuous attachment. Daranio, the beloved of Sylveria, was
now to become her husband. At the first dawn of the morning, all the
inhabitants of the village, and of the neighboring hamlets, were already
assembled on the public green. Some had made garlands to ornament the doors of
the bride and bridegroom; others with flutes and tamborines ushered in the
happy day, with joyful melody; here was heard the rural pipe; there the
harmonious violin; and farther off, the antique psaltery. One was employed in
tying ribbands to his castanets; another ornamenting his hat with bunches of
flowers. -- Every one was eager to please his mistress; all were animated with
Love and Joy.

The bride and bridegroom did not wait long. They were soon discovered, coming
decked out in their gayest apparel; Galatea and the young girls conducted
Sylveria; -- and Elicio and the shepherds surrounded Daranio. The happy troop
took their way to the church, amidst the sound of all the instruments.

After they had vowed an eternal fidelity, the new married couple returned to
the village green, and all the young women ran to seek for the presents which
they had destined for the bride; -- One came and offered to Sylveria, a basket
of fruits; another carried in her hat, eggs that her pullets had newly laid --
here one presented a pullet, another a young cock; every one without regret,
and without vanity, made an offering proportionable to their riches.

Galatea approached in her turn; she carried two young turtles, which a servant
of her father's had taken in his nets. The shepherdess was fearful of doing
the^ an injury, and both her hands could scarce confine the two birds; with
their white wings and their rose-coloured bills, they were every moment ready
to escape; she hastened to Sylveria, and saluting her with a modest air, my
dear friend, said she, here are two sweet doves that would wish to live with
you: I pray you to receive them; every faithful spouse ought to give them an
asylum. In saying these words, she presented her turtles, Sylveria stretched
out her hands to receive them, Galatea opened hers. The birds profiting of the
moment, escaped, and as they shot suddenly into the air, brushed lightly with
their wings, the faces of the shepherdesses. Sylveria was surprised and Galatea
almost sorrowful; they followed them with their eyes till they had lost sight
of them; they then looked at each other without saying a word, while every one
laughed, except Galatea.

Elicio approached her, and said with a low voice, these birds have punished
you for the little care you took in not keeping them; but they will soon wish
to come back to you again; and I dare answer for it, that they will soon return
to you. I do not, said Galatea, reckon much upon that; but I shall console
myself if they are more happy by being free; -- and immediately she went to her
sheepfold, to seek a beautiful lamb, that replaced her doves.

Whilst they were thus offering their presents, a number of tables were laid
out covered with all sorts of meats, under the thick foliage of the trees.
Daranio who gave the treat, made the matrons, the old men, and the young women
sit down; the young lads remained standing, that they might attend the rest. --
At some distance from them, upon a sort of a stage erected on casks, the
musicians placed themselves; the symphonies began, and were often interrupted
by the joyful shouts of the company. Pleasure and Gaiety shone on every face;
some spoke, some listened, all laugh at once, every one is content, every one
is happy? -- One would have thought, that every shepherd had that day espoused
his mistress.

That nothing might be wanting to this rural treat, no sooner was the repast
ended, than Daranio proposed a pastoral contest. Sylveria took off her garland
and declared that it should be the prize of whoever sung best the praises of
his shepherdess. Then the instruments ceased; all the young girls turned their
eyes on their lovers. The shepherds prepared themselves to sing; Erastres even
would have entered the lists* but the famous Tircis rose up, and Erastres sat
down again -- no person was hardy enough to contend with Tircis. Elicio alone
presented himself; shepherd, said he, I do not pretend to dispute the garland
with you; but I would wish to celebrate her whom I love. A deep silence reigned
in the assembly, while the two rivals sung, alternately, these words: --

TIRCIS. Love and fair Phyllis, now sustain my voice,
You know her swains, the object of my choice;
Phyllis, the lovely Phyllis, I adore
Her name I Have told, what need I then say more?

ELICIO. Her name (...), who first my breast inspired
With new born flames, and all my senses fired,
To paint her charms, exceeds the power of song*
Where ever she moves, the shepherds round her throng

TIRCIS. The richest tints that ripening apples wear,
With Phyllis' glowing cheeks cannot compare.
Her dark arched brows, and eyes of soft desire
All hearts enslave, and all with love inspire.

ELICIO. The rose of vermil dye, the dazz'ling snow,
Their mingled tints, my fair one's cheeks can sho^.
Nor winter's winds can make this rose decay,
Nor ardent summer melt this snow away.

TIRCIS. Two years have passed, since Phyllis first I kn^w
And saw her eyes, of pure celestial blue;
While Love lay lurking in her golden hair,
And of her nesses, wove the chains I wear.

ELICIO. Long have I bent beneath Love's mighty power,
And pleased recall the happy day and hour,
When first I saw the maid, whom now I sing,
Love hovered over her, sportive on the wing;
His laughing eyes expressed a treacherous joy,
And in my heart I instant felt the boy.

TIRCIS. A broken mirror shows our wondering eyes
One object that it often multiplies;
So with a sidelong glance that Phyllis gives,
In every heart, her lovely image lives.

ELICIO. The bleating lamb, that seeks its dam around,
At her return, gives many a joyful bound;
So might you see our swains spring with delight,
Whenever my shepherdess appears in sight.

TIRCIS. For Phyllis' birth day, joyful I shall bear
Two speckl'd kids, that I have nursed with care,
An humble offering from a heart sincere,
And richly shall I deem myself repaid,
To gain the flowery wreath that crowns her head.

ELICIO. So from my hand should liberal offerings flow,
But ah! what gifts can poverty bestow?
No gifts have I, to purchase happiness,
My heart and dog were all I did possess;
She whom I love, long since has had my heart,
My dog now follows her, as if my other part.

Here the shepherds ceased to sing, and Sylveria was uncertain to which of them
she should give the prize. -- Your talents, said she, are equal, and I durst
not, neither indeed, am I able to tell which I prefer; let each receive a
branch of laurel, and permit me to bestow the garland on my best friend; -- in
saying these words, she presented to Tircis and Elicio two laurel branches,
which she bent into equal crowns; and then turning to Galatea, she placed the
garland upon her head.

Then the music struck up for the dance; all were eager to join in it, Elicio
begged of Galatea to dance with him; she blushed and consented, -- would you
have wished, said Elicio to her, with a trembling voice, that Tircis should
have carried away the prize? No, replied Galatea, I should have been sorry, for
the honor of our village, to see you vanquished by a stranger; after these few
words, he durst not say any more to her.

Night came on, and every one was to have supped with Daranio, except Galatea,
who conducted to her house her friend Florise, and the sad Teolinda; as soon as
the three shepherdesses were gone, Elicio took the road to his cottage, with
Erastres, Tircis and Damon. These two last had been, for a long time, the
faithful friends of Elicio, and were well acquainted both with his loves and
his sorrows.

They had not proceeded far on their way, when in passing by the foot of an
ancient hermitage, situated on the top of a little hill, they heard the sound
of an harp, (...) stop, said Erastres to them, that we may hear the voice of a
young man, that came here about fifteen days ago in order to turn hermit. I
have spoke to him many times, and from his discourse, I take him to be some
great Lord, whose misfortunes have forced him to quit the world; and if Galatea
continues to treat me ill, I have a strong notion to turn hermit along with him.

These words of Erastres inspired the shepherds with a desire of knowing the
hermit; they ascended the hill, without making the least noise, and soon
discovered a young man of about twenty-two years of age, sitting upon the
fragment of a rock; he was clothed in dark colored coarse cloth, a cord served
him for a girdle, his legs and feet were bare; and he held between his ^ands an
harp, from which he drew the most plaintive ^oses; -- it was strung by
Melancholy; and every chord went to the heart; his moist eyes were turned up to
heaven, while tears hung upon his cheeks.

The silence of the night, the pale light of the moon, the holy horrors of the
hermitage, seemed all to prepare the mind, and dispose it to receive the sad
accents of the hermit; -- after preluding for some little time, he sung these
words: --

I.
Friendship, the only bliss the wretched prove,
To my sad soul no longer can give (...)
Unsteady Fortune* and thou God of Love,
Ye join your powers, and my peace d^stroy.
In vain I send to Heaven my ceaseless prayer,
Heaven ^rs no more the voice of my despair;
My fate is fixed, I must for ever grieve,
Luckless the hour, that ever gave me birth;
Hopeless I love, and yet alas! I live,
Nor knows my heart one comfort on this earth.
II.
Pure holy friendship, life's most healing balm,
My Love I immolated at thy shrine:
Soothe then my troubled soul into a calm,
And on me shed thy influence divine;
To aching hearts, it is said thou give rest,
But ah! you fill with double grief my breast.
My fate is fixed, I must for ever grieve,
Luckless the hour that ever gave me birth;
Hopeless I love, and yet alas! I live,
Nor knows my heart one comfort on this earth.
Here the hermit ceased, his head dropped upon his shoulder, his hands quit the
strings of the harp and fell motionless to his sides; the shepherds ran to his
assistance; Erastres took him in his arms, and brought him to himself. The
hermit viewed him for a long time, as one just awakened from a frightful dream
-- shepherd, said he to him, the cares you have bestowed on me, serve only to
prolong my miseries, while a vain gratitude is all that I have to offer you in
return. If it would not distress you too much, said Tircis to him, we would
wish to hear a recital of your misfortunes, the tender friendship that we
already feel for you, is worthy of this confidence. Friendship! said the
hermit, ah! what a name have you pronounced; yet shall I do as you desire. I
owe you more than one obligation; -- it is in your village, that I go to ask for
^e few al^ments necessary to my sad existence, they ^lways give me even more
than I want; and since I (...) my life to you, it is but just, that you should
be made acquainted with its sorrows. At these words, ^he shepherds pressed
closer to him, and the young her^^t began his story thus:

"In the ancient and famous city of Xeres, that Min^rva and Mars have always
protected, lived a young cavalier, named Timbrio, his high valor was the least
of his qualities. Drawn by an invincible sympathy, I laid myself out in every
generous way to obtain his friendship, and I succeeded insomuch, that the whole
^y forg^t very soon the names of Timbrio and Fabi^n, which is mine, and they
called us simply -- The two friends."

"We merited this endearing surname; always together, our happy years glided
away, and appeared but as moments in our sight; our occupations were warlike;
-- our recreation was the chase; -- our passion was Friendship.

"Thus happily did we live, till one day, the most unfortunate of my life, that
Timbrio had a quarrel with a cavalier, whose name was Pransil. The family of my
friend advised him to withdraw for a while; but he wrote to Pransil, informing
him, that he was gone to Naples, where he would find him, always ready to
terminate their difference, as gentlemen ought.

"I was at that time ill, and in no condition to follow my friend; our parting
was mixed with many tears: I promised to follow him, as soon as my health would
permit me; but I soon found that the absence of my friend was more
insupportable to me, even than my illness; and learning that there were four
galleys at Cadiz, ready to sail for Italy, I resolved to embark. Friendship
gave me that strength which my slow recovery denied me. I went on board, the
wind seconded my wishes, and in a few days, I arrived at Naples.

"It was night when I landed, and as I crossed a street, I heard the clashing
of swords; I perceived a man with his back against the wall, defending himself
singly against four assailants. I flew to his assistance, and was soon followed
by many people, who seconded me; this unexpected attack made the four villains
take to flight. I ran to the unknown person, I spoke to him, I looked in his
face; it was Timbrio!

"I held him in my arms, and shed tears of joy; how dear did I pay for this
sweet reunion? my friend was wounded, and the emotion that the sight of me
caused in him, exhausted his spirits -- he fell into my arms, fainting and
bloody. -- I sent instantly for succor; a surgeon inspected his wounds, and
gave me some hopes that they were not mortal. This in some degree consoled me,
and Timbrio coming to himself, we made an arm chair of our hands, and thus
carried to his house, my amiable friend.

"There it was, that I learned the cause of his assassination. Timbrio, on his
coming to Naples, had delivered letters from Spain, to one of the first
citizens the^e* whose family was Spanish; received into his house* as an
amiable companion, my friend was not (...) the charms of his eldest daughter
Nisida, the most beautiful and accomplished of all the Neapo^itans.

"His respect and his timidity, restrained him from ever avowing his love; but
an Italian prince, who was in love with Nisida, suspected he had a rival, and
fearing the valor, as much as the merits of Timbrio, he was base and cowardly
enough to attempt having him assassinated.

"This adventure soon spread through the city, and came to the ears of Nisida's
father; he was enraged that the name of his daughter should be brought in
question, and be made a public talk of -- and forbad the Italian prince, and my
unfortunate friend, ever to come to his house again.

"This denial was worse to Timbrio than his wounds. Devoured by a passion, that
obstacles served only to increase; -- in despair, not to have declared it when
it was in his power, he resolved to see Nisida again, at whatever price it was
to be obtained; every means seemed easy to him, and in the end, was found to be
impossible. He wrote a thousand letters, and tore them all again; one
impracticable project succeeded to another with rapidity in his mind; so many
inquietudes and vexations, served only to inflame his wounds. My friend was
very soon in danger; I was resolved, if possible, to save him, and to introduce
myself into the house of his mistress.

"I dressed myself as a captive newly redeemed, and taking a guitar in my hand,
I walked every evening in the street where Nisida dwelt, singing old romances.
I passed for a Spaniard, redeemed from the hands of the Infidels.

"In a little time, there was nothing talked of in that quarter, but the
captive musician, insomuch that Nisida's father wished to hear my romances; on
which account, I was admitted into his house. It was there I beheld this
Nisida, it was there that I lost the repose and the happiness of my life. -- I
had the temerity to view this celestial countenance, this charming shape, these
eyes full or tenderness, whose brightness was tempered by a slight shade of
Melancholy; -- I felt instantly the poison of Love run in all my veins, it was
necessary to fly, but I had not the power; and this single moment made me as
bad as Timbrio.

"They entreated me to sing, and I was scarce able to speak; I however obeyed,
and chose a romance that a Persian slave had taught me.

Here all the shepherds begged that he would let them hear this romance. He
took his harp, and with a soft voice, sung these words: --

I.
Nelsir, the fair Semira loved,
And she, his tender vows approved;
Sweet converse all their hours employ,
Bright with the hopes of future joy.
II.
His life was found, by wondrous art,
Upon a rose leaf to depend;
Semira took the anxious part,
The rose-tree ever to attend.
III.
Long as the tree this leaf sustains,
No fear for Nelsir's life remains;
But should mischance the leaf remove,
Her Nelsir's death 'twould instant prove,
IV.
Ah! who can hope for to possess
Of certain bliss, a day or hour?
We hang our hopes of happiness
On stems as weak as held this flower.
V.
One day, upon her mouth half-clos'd,
Young Nelsir a soft kiss imposed,
"Give back the kiss," Love whispering said,
She would, she wished, yet was afraid.
VI.
But to her rose the kiss she gave,
From lips that thousand sweets distilled,
But ah! it shook away the leaf;
Semira has her lover killed!
VII.
Instant he droops his lovely head.
His bloom is now for ever fled:
He pressed her hand, in death they part,
And Love, reluctant, quits his heart.
VIII.
Distracted! -- Pale! -- Semira stands;
For Death, upon his lips she tries,
Pressed his mouth, and clasped his hands;
And on a kiss -- Semira dies.
"Nisida had a younger sister, whose name was Blanch, almost as handsome as
herself; she seemed to listen to my romance with more pleasure than any other
person. She praised my voice to a great degree, I thanked her, with my eyes
fixed upon her sister.

"Their father entreated me to come again; I hesitated a long time; I debated
with myself often, whether I should avail myself of this permission. I was
certain of adding strength to a disorder, that tore my heart in pieces; but
anxious for my friend, and drawn on by my love, I returned to the house of
Nisida; I saw her again, and all hope of a cure was removed from me for ever.

"Judge of the conflicts, that agonized my heart. I loved Timbrio more than my
life, and I loved Nisida, perhaps, more than Timbrio; I saw her every day, and
was incapable of flying from her, even for the interests of my friend. This
dear friend, weak and slowly recovering from his illness, could not sustain
himself, but for my tender cares and assiduities.

"But Time, far from assuaging my miseries, only added to my unhappiness; --
every instant redoubled my passion, my remorse, and my torments; my health was
no longer proof against these distresses, my face soon lost the freshness of
youth; my sunk and languid eyes could scarce turn themselves on her, for whom I
was thus dying. At length, the father of Nisida expressed his inquietude about
me; -- she herself, and above all, her sister Blanch begged of me one day,
with the most tender solicitude, to open my heart to them and disclose without
reserve, all its sorrows and pains. What a moment for me! but I strengthened my
soul, I recalled to my mind, all that I owed to my friend, and resolved to
expire, rather than betray him, and I summoned up all my resolution to say
these words:

"You will pity my sorrows still more, when I tell you, that they are caused by
Friendship; -- A young cavalier, my countryman, and bosom friend, is in love
with the most beautiful, and most amiable of women; he respects her so much,
that he fears ever to mention his passion to her, and this respect is, in fact,
cutting short his life. It is him that I weep. -- It is the most generous and
the most accomplished of men, that Love is bringing to an early grave.

"At this place, Nisida interrupted me. Fabian, said she, I have never known
Love, but it appears to me to be simplicity to die, rather than tell a woman,
that one loves her; the first avowal of it would not be able, I should think,
to offend her; but even supposing that it wras badly received, there are always
opportunities enough found for dying. Beautiful Nisida, said I, when one looks
on love with the eyes of indifference, they see nothing in it, but the
playfulness of children, which they laugh at, or at best but pity: but when the
heart is wounded, the understanding, far from being of use to us, is the first
to lead us astray. -- Such is the state of my friend; by dint of entreaties and
prayers, I got him to write to the object of his affection; I am charged with
this letter, and I carry it always about me, in hopes of being able to deliver
it. Could not one see this letter, said Nisida, for I am, I confess, curious to
know the style of a lover, who is truly smitten?

"I did not let so good an occasion as this escape me. I drew from my bosom the
billet that Timbrio had given me, a few days before; it was conceived in these
terms: --

I had determined, madam, never to have broken silence, happier in the thought
of having in death deserved your pity, rather than live under your displeasure:
but it was too terrible to live, and not let you know that I adore you. If this
avowal should not offend you, I feel that I shall still cherish life, to
consecrate it to you; but should my temerity appear to you worthy of
punishment, my death shall soon expiate my offense.

"Nisida read this letter with great attention. I do not think, said she, that
a declaration so respectful as this, can displease; and I advise you to deliver
the billet, without being apprehensive that it will be badly received. -- As
yet I have had no opportunity, said I* but my friend, in the mean time, is
dying, and I think, that you have it in your power to save his life; -- How is
it possible? -- Do you reply to this billet, as if it was addressed to you;
this innocent device will restore him to new life, and will give me time to
find the occasion that I so ardently wish for. No, replied Nisida, I have never
as yet returned answers to love letters; and I would not wish to begin now by a
deceit. -- But said she, after a moment's pause, what is to hinder you from
letting your friend know all that has now happened; substituting the name of
her whom he loves, in the place of mine? You may tell him that she has read his
letter, that she had pressed you to give it to her: that in fact you durst not
tell her that the billet was for herself; but that you had, nevertheless, room
to hope that she will yet hear of it, without anger. This stratagem will be of
use to the health of your friend, and cannot be contradicted, until you have
spoken to his real mistress.

"Surprised at this invention, I stammered out some expressions of thanks, and
I ran to report every thing to Timbrio; the hopes which he conceived, his
transports and his gratitude, were so many links, that chained me still more to
my duty.

"I redoubled my attentions toward Nisida, and though the prey of a passion,
which her sight could not fail but to increase; I never spoke to her but of my
friend. I employed for him the expressions which my heart furnished me with for
myself; and thus I made subservient to the cause of Friendship, that very
feeling, which might have destroyed it.

"At length, I took the resolution to acquaint her of every thing. I told her
that the person who was so near dying for her, was Timbrio. I extolled his
birth, dwelt on his good qualities, and his virtues; and in a word, I painted
him as I saw him. Nisida had not forgotten him, she expressed a surprise, true
or feigned, reproached me with my presumption, menacing me, to tell all to her
father; -- but across the anger that she forced herself to assume, I saw
clearly that Timbrio was beloved.

"This was the last stroke for me; a long time I had waited for it, yet it was
not sensibly felt when it came. I resolved to let Timbrio know his good
fortune, and then to fly immediately afterward, and die in a desert.

"I reckoned, however, too much on my courage; the moment that I undertook to
say to my rival that he was beloved, I lost the power of speech, my eyes filled
with tears, vainly would I have hid my trouble; my sighs betrayed me, my
strength failed, and I fell upon the bosom of my friend, and bathed him with my
tears.

"Timbrio, surprised and terrified, supported me in his arms, embraced me with
tenderness, nor would he be satisfied without knowing the cause of so keen an
affliction. I was silent, he pressed me, unable to answer, I threw my eyes down
on the ground. Ah! I understand you, said he, you love her! you love her! 'twas
not possible but that you must have loved her; thy faithful heart groans under
the sacrifice it would make to thy friendship. O my Fabian, I should be indeed
unworthy, if I accepted of her. Continue to love Nisida, for I will never see
her more; I shall, perhaps, be able to live without her, but I should be
certain of dying, were I the cause of thy unhappiness. In saying these words,
he turned away his face to hide his tears, while he pressed me against his
bosom.

"Friendship inspired me in this moment, I felt as it were lift above myself.
You are mistaken, replied I, it is not Nisida that I love, it is her sister,
whose heart I have not been able to touch, and the violence of an unrequited
love, is the sole cause of my despair. You deceive me, Fabian, said he, looking
steadfastly in my face. No, my dear Timbrio, I adore Blanch, but she despises
my vows, pardon me then, if the comparison of thy happy state with mine, draw
some tears from me. I promise you, however, that I shall weep no more. Go, my
friend, I feel, that while near you, my happiness does not depend upon Love.

"Timbrio, either did, or feigned to believe me; he was resolved, however, to
assure himself of the truth of what I said, the first opportunity that he had,
but I had determined myself, to make every sacrifice necessary to his quiet. It
was not enough, that I should immolate my real passion; it was necessary that I
should feign to feel another. The very next day I discovered to Blanch who I
was, and spoke to her of Love.

"Blanch had loved me for a long time, without daring to avow it, even to
herself; but no sooner did she believe herself beloved, than she told it to her
sister; this confidence became useful to Timbrio. Nisida had still opposed a
sentiment that she dreaded, less afraid in finding a companion, she ventured to
give way to it, she spoke of her love, and was penetrated the more with it. The
two sisters, in expressing their fears, mutually strengthened each other; and
the pleasure that diffused itself over their souls, made them feel more
sensibly the happiness of being beloved.

"By favor of my disguise, I preserved a free access into the house. I
constantly carried the letters of my friend; and I procured him the pleasure of
seeing his mistress. While thus I continued to redouble all my attentions to
Blanch, Timbrio remarked, with joy, how well I was beloved, felicitated me,
holding me in his arms, swore never to espouse Nisida, until that day that I
should become the husband of her sister; I bowed my head, resigned to every
thing that Friendship should ordain for me.

"We waited now for nothing but news from Spain, to demand the hands of Blanch
and Nisida in form; when Pransil, the cavalier, who had the quarrel with
Timbrio at Xeres, arrived at Naples, to fight with him.

"The nature of the quarrel was such, as to render a public reparation
necessary. The Viceroy's permission was to be obtained, and Judges appointed;
in fine, all things were fixed, and this terrible combat was to take place in
eight days from that time, in a large plain, at a little distance from the city.

"The news of this made a great noise, and spread itself far and near; in spite
of our utmost precautions, it reached the ear of Nisida. Her inquietude and
grief was as keen as her love was ardent, a prey to silent sorrow, she passed
in tears, and without nourishment, the eight days of delay, which seemed to her
so long, and yet -- so short; a frightful incertitude, more cruel even than the
misfortune she so much dreaded, soon exhausted her strength, she fell ill; and
her father, ignorant of the cause, resolved, in order to re-establish her
health, to bring her to his house in the country.

"The day of their departure, which was the eve of the combat, Nisida had me
called to her; when I came near her bed, scarcely could I recollect her, I was
shocked beyond the power of telling it; I saw her that my soul doated on, pale
and worn away, her long dark eye-lashes moist with tears. Fabian! said she to
me, with a weak and feeble voice, you must carry my last adieus to Timbrio,
tell him, that my life is joined to his; and that tomorrow, he has my life to
defend. As for you, next to me, his best friend, sure I am, that you will not
quit him; should any mischance happen, you will be there to succor him. Ah!
would to Heaven, that I had the power to be with you also -- hold, added she,
untying from her neck, a precious relic, which she wet with her tears, carry
this to him, and tell him that it has ever preserved me from dangers of every
kind; it is tomorrow,... that I expect it to preserve me indeed. I have still
one service more from you. I am going to my father's country house, which is
but half a league from the fatal field; -- promise me, to come there instantly,
and let me know the event of the combat; if my Timbrio be the vanquisher,
fasten this white scarf upon thy arm, I shall see it from far, it will save me
some moments of torment. -- Should he be overcome -- I shall want thee no more!
--

"You may easily conceive, my good friends, what I must have suffered during
this interview, I promised her every thing she asked. I ran to Timbrio, it
elevated his hopes; it redoubled his ardor; he kissed it, laid it next to his
heart, it raised him out of himself; sure of being invincible, he would have
defied the universe.

"At length the moment arrived, the whole city of Naples were already upon the
field of battle. Pransil and Timbrio presented themselves, they chose for
weapons, the sword and poiguard. The barrier is opened, the trumpets sound, and
the two enemies rush upon each other!

"The combat was furious, and for a long time equal. Pransil was active,
skilful and valiant; he wounded Timbrio, and Victory hung wavering; every heart
beat with anxiety. At length, Love had the advantage. Timbrio struck Pransil to
the ground, no sooner was he down, than my generous friend flung away his
sword, and ran to assist him; Pransil acknowledged himself vanquished, and the
spectators rent the air with their applauses.

"The frightful uncertainty that I had been in for so long a time, the grief
that I felt, when I saw Timbrio wounded, and the sudden joy that rushed upon my
heart for his victory, disturbed my mind so much, that I forgot the white
scarf, and I ran without it to announce our good fortune to Nisida. Oh! hapless
maiden, O beauteous Nisida, thy blessed shade, has long ere this, pardoned my
cruel inadvertency, and looks with divine compassion on the sorrows of an
heart, that never more can feel the blessing of a moment's peace. As the moment
of the combat approached, the fever burned with double violence in her veins;
notwithstanding her weakness, she had herself carried up to the highest windows
of the house; there, supported by her women, her eyes fixed upon the road, she
waited her life or her death; she perceived me; saw no white scarf, and fell
motionless into the arms of her sister. At this moment, I arrived, all the
house were in tears; I pressed through to Nisida, we were prodigal of useless
succors, nothing could restore her! I saw her eyes fast shut, her mouth open,
her lips pale; -- then it was, I began to recollect that I was the cause of all
this ruin, wild with despair, I rushed out of the house, I durst no more see my
friend, to whom I was certain of giving his death. Desolate in mind, furious
and distracted, I took the first road that I found; I had not gone far, when I
heard a loud voice calling after me to stop. -- I turned round, it was Felix,
the page of Timbrio, who told me to come quickly to his master; Felix, said I,
thy master I shall never see again; Nisida is dead, and it is I who have killed
her. In pronouncing these words, I redoubled my speed. I arrive at Gaietta, a
vessel is pulling before the wind, for Spain; I embark, I arrive once more in
my native country, where I have taken this habit, which I shall now never quit.

"You have had, my friends, a faithful recital of my misfortunes. I had hoped
to find peace in this hermitage, alas! I have found nothing but solitude. In
vain I force myself to turn my thoughts to that Great Being, that ought to
occupy them entirely. The remembrance of what I have lost, pursues me
unceasingly. I say to myself every day, that I ought to forget Nisida and
Timbrio, and every day I weep their loss."

The shepherds were unable to console the hermit; but they joined in his
sorrows. And now the night being far advanced, and the moon at the height of
her course, the shepherds took their leaves of Fabian, and quitting the
hermitage, soon arrived at the cottage of Elicio; where, after a frugal meal,
they stretched themselves upon the soft skins of goats, to enjoy that rest
which temperance and exercise never fail to bestow.

When Elicio perceived that his companions were fast asleep, he rose up, and
went softly out to execute a project which he had meditated all day.

Just before his door there was a beautiful cherry-tree, which he had himself
reared, and which was covered with the finest fruit in the country, though yet
very young, and the stem slender, it afforded delicacies to its possessor; two
white doves had chosen it to build in, they had placed their nest near the top,
in a forked part of the tree formed by four branches; -- far from disturbing
them, Elicio looked upon it as an happy omen, their coming to build so near his
cottage; he often carried under the cherry-tree, ears of corn and hemp seed,
and even wool for the doves to line the inside of their nests with, and that
their little ones might lie more soft.

While Elicio was at the nuptials of Sylveria, a servant of Meoris, came and
spread his nets over the cherry-tree, took the turtles and carried them
instantly to his master's daughter. They were the same that Galatea had let
escape, and Elicio who knew them, had promised his shepherdess that they should
return to her again.

He was willing to keep his word, he went out of his cottage to seize on the
father and mother while they were asleep, and to put them into a cage with
their young ones; by the help of a ladder which he laid against the chimney of
his cottage, he mounted to the highest branch, stooped his body forward,
removed softly the leaves, and saw by the light of the moon, the two turtles in
the nest, the head under one wing, and the other wing spread out, the better to
cover their little ones. They did not waken, and Elicio had no more to do than
to take them, but he had not the courage; no, said he, dear charming birds, ye
shall not be deprived of your liberty, you shall belong to Galatea without
being slaves; you shall live near her, though free to live elsewhere. He
descended quickly from the ladder, ran to seek a spade, and coming back to the
cherry-tree, he dug a trench round about it, and when it was held only by its
bottom roots, he cautiously and without the least violence, placed his spade
horizontally, and cutting the roots, loosened it entirely from the ground;
then, he took it in his arms, lifted it softly out of the trench, and with a
slow, but firm step, which scarcely agitated the branches, he gained the
cottage of Galatea.

The chamber where she slept had a window, that looked into the fields, before
this window he laid down his burden, with the utmost precaution; the tree stood
firm and upright, supported by the ball of clay which was attached to its
roots. Elicio, who had taken care to carry his spade with him, dug a hole, set
his beloved cherry-tree in it, and placed it in such a manner as to have the
nest opposite the window, and so near, that Galatea by stretching out her hand,
might be able to caress the little turtles. Pleased with his work, he looked to
see if he had not disturbed the doves, they had been just awakened, he could
distinguish their head, which they had stretched out now upon the moss of their
nest. Pardon me, said he to them, pardon me, gentle birds, if I have disturbed
your sleep; it is for your good, as well as my happiness, you are now Galatea's;
as soon as she opens her window, fly upon her shoulder, peek at her beauteous
hair, teach your little ones to love and caress your mistress, when I know that
you are near her, I shall not regret you; but should a rival ever present
himself at this window, Oh! fly away, constant birds, come and find me again;
when I hear thy melancholy murmurs on my cottage, I will soon join my sad
complaints to thine.

The dawn now began to appear, and the swallows were already twittering upon
the chimney of Galatea when Elicio, with his spade on his shoulder, took the
way to his cottage. He had not gone far, when he heard some one walking after
him, he looked back, it was Meoris, the father of Galatea. Elicio trembled when
he saw him, as if had been conscious of doing a bad action; but Meoris soon set
him at rest, for he did not even question him as to the reason of his having
been so early in the village. -- Elicio, said he to him, I was going to you; I
have a secret to entrust you with, and I have a piece of service to demand from
you, in which my daughter is nearly concered. -- The shepherd, full of joy,
kissed the old man's hands with transport.

They then retired into a little wood of myrtles, at some distance from the
road.

END OF THE SECOND BOOK.
GALATEA. BOOK THE THIRD.
WE are ever complaining of the numberless evils of this short life, and it is
from ourselves that they generally proceed. In the thirst of gold we may
perceive the principle of all crimes, and of every misfortune; the Creator of
the world foresaw this, he concealed the fatal metal in the bowels of the
earth, and not content with filling up the chasin, he covered it with ^^^ers,
with fruits, and all that ought to suffice either (...) she wants or pleasures
of man; but Avarice, insatiable Avarice, unsatisfied with so many blessings, by
(...) toils and perils worked into the ^^^p abysses, and te^^^ng the gold from
hell, discovered to the human race (...) sources of all their vices. Alas! who
has suffered the (...) by this fatal discovery? Love. A heart of sen^^bility,
no longer confers the right of loving; if one would wish to obtain the object
of his love, he must bring proofs of his riches rather than proofs of his
constancy; the lover without fortune GALATEA.
may be amiable and deserving, but he will not be happy; the more faith^l he
is, the more he has to lament; torments and despair are the companions of his
life. -- What then is necessary to be done, when Poverty is united to
Sensibility? Not to love, ah! that is yet worse.

Elicio had not made all these reflections when he became attached to Galatea,
or perhaps he had made them; but of what service are reflections in love; we
foresee the evils, we expose ourselves to them; they ^rrive, and yet are as
keenly felt as if they had never been expected.

Erastres, Tircis and Damon were surprised when they awoke and missed Elicio.
-- But no sooner had the sun gained his middle course, than alarmed and inquiet
at not seeing their friend return, they went out to seek him, in the village.
-- As they crossed the little wood of myrtles, they heard his voice; attentive
and curious, they stopped to listen, and heard him sing these words: --

I.
I loved a nymph in happier days,
Whose heart I fondly thought my own;
I deemed her worth above all praise,
And thought her formed for me alone.
In childhood first my passion grew,
Her infant grace my bosom warmed,
No thought my mind could ever pursue
But that I loved, and I was charmed.
II.
The hope that once sustained this breast,
No more, alas! my passion feeds:
Another lover now more blessed,
To all my promised joy succeeds.
Unceasing then my tears shall flow,
My loss demands the constant tear;
Yet I Have more comfort in my woe,
Far more than in forgetting her.
The shepherds, alarmed by these tender plaints, ran toward Elicio, they found
him sitting beneath a beech, his face bathed in tears. Scarce had he perceived
them, when rising up hastily, he ran and threw himself on the neck of Erastres.
My friend, said he, we are going to lose Galatea; alas! she quits us forever!
listen, added he, looking on Tircis and Damon, to the sad secret that Meoris
has this morning made me the confidant of; I am going to repeat it to you, in
his own words.

"Elicio, said he to me, I owe you the utmost gratitude for the attachment you
have ever showed me, and you are the first to whom I confide the intended
marriage of my daughter; I concluded all last night, she is to wed a rich
Portuguese, whose numerous flocks cover the banks of the Lima; four shepherds
sent by the future spouse, are now at my house, and tomorrow they depart with
Galatea; I know you ever had the affection of a brother for her, and I have
therefore made choice of thee, my dear Elicio, and do beseech you to accompany
her to Portugal, to be present at her marriage, and to bring me back the
certain intelligence of her happiness."

In spite of the sorrow that his discourse overwhelmed me with, I recovered my
voice sufficiently to reply to him. How! said I, have you been able to consent
to separate yourself now in your old age, from your only child? Have you had
the heart to condemn her to live far from her father and her friends? Are you
very certain that you will not be the cause of misery to her, by thus exiling
her into a strange land? Do you not think but she will regret....? -- I have
founded the heart of my daughter, said Meoris, interrupting me, I have made her
acquainted with my intentions: she replied to me with her usual gentleness that
she would be always ready to obey me. I discovered, even in her countenance a
slight emotion, the certain mark of that joy, which the most sensible and
modest girl feels when she is going to be married. Do not therefore be uneasy
about her unhappiness, but go and prepare yourself for the journey; I expect it
from your friendship. -- Behold, my friends, what Meoris said to me, behold
that event, which I dreaded more than death.

Tircis, Damon, and above all, Erastres, afflicted themselves with Elicio. --
But, said Damon to him, since Meoris esteems and loves you, how comes it that
you have never been tempted to make an avowal of your passion, and demand
Galatea in marriage of him? You do not, said Elicio, know him as well as I do,
he has repeatedly declared that his son-in-law must have wealth equal to what
he can give his daughter. If I durst have spoken to him, he would have believed
that it was her fortune I loved, and his friendship for me would have been
changed into contempt. Meoris is too rich not to be mistrustful, and I am too
poor to be confident.

My friend, said Tircis, do not lose all hope, let us go and find Galatea, let
us know from herself if it be true she consents to marry this Portuguese, and
if, as I suspect, that it will wound her deeply to obey her father, we will
endeavor to break this unfortunate marriage. Love and Friendship will inspire
us, singly they have worked miracles; what will they not do when united?

Elicio followed the counsel of Tircis; the four shepherds took the road to the
fountain of Ardoises, where Galatea retired in the extreme heat of the day;
they hoped to find her there, nor was their expectation deceived; the
shepherdess was sitting near the edge of the water, and in so profound a
reverie, that she did not perceive the shepherds when they approached; her
eyes, moist with tears, were fixed upon the fountain, her head reclined on one
of her hands, with the other the caressed the dog of Elicio; this dog, that for
a long time had been oftener with her than with his master. The faithful animal
sat at the feet of Galatea, his head was laid upon her knees, his eyes fixed on
hers, and his air seemed wistfully to demand of her, why he was this day
caressed more than usual.

Elicio made his companions stop, that he might enjoy this pleasing sight; a
soft satisfaction replaced already the grief that was painted upon his
countenance.

Galatea, who believed herself alone with the dog, began to sing these words:
--

I.
Thou, who art ever at my feet,
Companion that I love so well:
Alas! I leave thee with regret,
And now in distant climes must dwell.
II.
Obedience leaves me now no choioe,
These fields again I never shall see:
Where often I Have heard my shepherd's voice,
That kindly used to welcome me.
III.
Yet, gentle favorite, come with me,
Thou only witness of my pains;
For of my past felicity,
Thou art all that now remains.
IV.
Thy master quit, with me to dwell,
Yet do not learn of me to grieve:
Thy quick return shall sadly tell,
That far from him I could not live.
The tears that Galatea shed, prevented farther utterance; Elicio wept also,
but his were tears of joy; he was no longer master of his transports, he ran to
the shepherdess, fell upon his knees before her, and seizing one of her hands,
pressed it to his lips; Galatea thus surprised, made ineffectual efforts to get
away, she perceived that the other shepherds were looking at her, she would
have appeared angry, but she could not, she would have fled, but the dog
hindered her, jumping and running round her, and alternately caressing them
both -- one would have said, that he enjoyed the happiness which he was
procuring to his master.

Tircis, Damon, and even Erastres, beheld this scene with tenderness, and durst
not approach the two lovers. -- Galatea called them to her, made Elicio rise,
and endeavoring to dry up her tears; I can no longer pretend, said she to
them, to hide a secret my imprudence has betrayed; yes, I regret my country,
and I leave, perhaps, my heart in it, but I am not the less resolved to obey my
father; the sacred duty that I owe him will support me in every trial. I
conjure you not to double, by your sorrows, a grief that would be useless, and
above all, not to disturb a solitude become necessary to me, after the avowal I
have just made. -- At these words, she bent her steps toward the village,
leaving the four shepherds immovable with surprise; the dog of Elicio alone
durst follow her, she perceived him, and would have hindered him by threatening
him with her crook, but the dog still fawned at her feet, and the poor Galatea
could not bring herself either to beat him or drive him away.

The four friends staid together, holding council upon the most likely manner
of breaking this fatal marriage; -- Tircis advised to have all the shepherds of
the country assembled together, to go in a body, and supplicate Meoris not to
part with that treasure which was the pride of them all. Damon was for going to
Portugal to menace the future spouse, and terrify him, so that he should of
himself, renounce Galatea. Elicio inclined to this part; No, no, replied the
good Erastres, who had been as yet silent, none of these expedients will serve
any purpose but to irritate Meoris; I have a project which will not fail to
render every one happy -- except myself, I have resolved on it, and will go and
instantly put it in practice. In saying these words, he embraced Elicio, and
departed.

The shepherds, who did not reckon much on the invention of so simple a man as
Erastres, proposed to go and consult the hermit Fabian. -- They had already
proceeded on their way, when they were met by a cavalier superbly clothed, and
mounted on a noble horse; two ladies on jennets, were by his side, and the
numerous troop of servants which followed, showed them to be persons of
distinction; -- The shepherds saluted them as they passed, the cavalier
returned their civility, and stopping Elicio -- Have the goodness, shepherd,
said he to him, to direct us to some convenient place in these forests, where
we may pass a few hours; the ladies whom you see, are fatigued with the heat
and the length of the journey, and would be willing to rest themselves here.
Elicio, who always forgot his own concern in the wish to oblige others,
conducted them to the fountain of Ardoises, which was only a few paces distant.

When they arrived there, the serv^nts spr^^d a table, which they soon covered
with refreshments. The two ladies sat down upon the green herbag^* and lifting
up their veils, surprised Tircis and Damon by the splendour of their beauty; the
eldest seemed more beautiful of the two -- but perhaps, she would not have had
this advantage, but for the deep sorrow that clouded the features of her
younger sister.

Elicio now pressed his companions to depart for the hermitage, but the
cavalier detaining them, said, let me enjoy a little longer the happiness I
feel in meeting with you; it would be my wish to live with shepherds -- What a
difference between your happy condition, and that of the inhabitants of towns,
Nature has given you for nothing those pleasures, of which we purchase the
image. Indolence shortens our days; Labor prolongs yours. Deceit, Lassitude,
and perpetual constraint is the round we live in. Freedom, Mirth, Content and
Sincerity mark your happy lives; -- this day I would turn a shepherd, if Nisida
would become a shepherdess.

At the name of Nisida, Elicio looked at the two women with a countenance
expressive of so much astonishment, that it was remarked by the cavalier.
Pardon me, said Elicio, if the name of Nisida has made so visible an impression
on me; -- it is not long since one of our friends shed many tears, in talking
to us of Nisida. Have you then, said the cavalier, any shepherdess who is thus
called? No, replied Elicio, she that I mean is no shepherdess; she is not even
of these parts, Naples is her country. How! do you then know? I will explain it
to you said Elicio, but first tell me if your name be not Timbrio; -- and if
this young person be not Blanch, the sister of Nisida. You have indeed, said
the cavalier, mentioned their names. Ah! Fabian, Fabian, what an happy day for
you! -- Is he then here, cried Blanch, and as she spoke, the paleness of her
face was instantly effaced by a deep and brilliant red.

Yes, replied Elicio, he is here, and the misery of having lost you, was near
putting an end to a life that he has now consecrated to penitence. Fabian is an
hermit, and his hermitage is near this. Let us fly and embrace him, said
Timbrio; Blanch, started up, and instantly set off without knowing the road
she was to take. Nisida leaned on the arm of her lover; and Tircis, Damon and
Elicio, guided them toward the hermitage.

It was almost night when they arrived at the foot of the hill. Timbrio,
Nisida, and above all, young Blanch, mounted the hill by the winding path,
without ever taking breath. When they came to the door of the hermitage, they
found it open, they looked in, but could see no one in the cell; uneasy at not
finding him there, they were going to call and to run and seek him over the
hill. The prudent Tircis stopped them. Fabian, said he, is without doubt, near
this place; but this unhappy friend, who has not even an hope of ever seeing
you more; -- who laments you without ceasing, would die with joy, should you
suddenly present yourselves to his view, manage it so as to restrain your
transports, and we will find the means to prepare his soul to receive a
pleasure which it could not otherwise sustain.

Every one approved the advice of Tircis, they agreed that it was necessary to
send forward the shepherds, that they might announce to Fabian with precaution,
the arrival of those tender friends, that he was once more going to behold
again.

Whilst they were thus consulting, Blanch was considering, by the light of the
moon, the inside of the cell; a mat of rushes, a stool and a crucifix of
box-wood, was all the furniture that Fabian had. Blanch examined them a long
while, she then drew near the crucifix, and throwing herself on her knees
before it, in a low voice, poured out her thanks to Heaven, for having
conducted her to the hermitage.

Timbrio and the shepherds were regarding with looks of tenderness, this
affecting sight; when deep sighs and the plaintive voice of sorrow gave them to
understand that Fabian was not far off: they perceived the hermit under a wild
olive, on his knees, upon the fragment of a rock, his arms spread to Heaven. At
this sight, the two sisters and Timbrio would have thrown-themselves upon his
neck; Tircis was unable to restrain them: but Fabian beginning to pray, they
all stopped to listen. Nisida and Timbrio remained with their arms extended
forward; Blanch scarcely respiring, raised her head over their shoulders, and
endeavored every instant to wipe away the tears which prevented her almost
from seeing her lover.

God of all mercy, said Fabian, Being Supreme, whom only I ought to love, Thou
who fillest this world, and should fill my heart, be not offended at my tears.
-- I have lost all -- I do not murmur -- Oh! my God, calm the agonies that I
suffer, but do not remove from me entirely the remembrance of my misfortunes.

When Fabian began his prayer, Blanch wept in silence; but at the last words,
she cried aloud. Tircis, fearing that she would be heard, desired Damon to go
with Elicio, and interrupt the hermit, -- while he remained with Timbrio and
the two sisters, to hinder them from showing themselves too suddenly.

The two shepherds obeyed, Fabian received them with kindness: you complain
always, said Elicio, and your misfortunes perhaps draw to a conclusion. You are
acquainted with them, replied the hermit, judge then if they can ever end;
without doubt they might, said Elicio; you saw Nisida under the appearance of
death, but you are not sure that she was really dead. -- What if she were
alive? Ah! impossible. On the contrary, replied Elicio, I heard this day, that
she and her sister, together with Timbrio, have been unceasingly occupied in
searching all Spain, in hopes of finding you. What say you? are you very
certain that this is my friend? that these are the two sisters! -- Ah! do not
sport with an unfortunate, have pity on my sorrows, and do not come to agitate
me, by abusing me with a false hope.

As he said these words, Tircis spoke to Nisida, and advised her if she could
recollect any song, to sing it in the place where she then stood, without as
yet, offering herself to the eyes of the hermit.

Nisida followed his counsel, and began the first couplet of a song that Fabian
had formerly made.

Friendship, thy empire now regain,
Over the blind god of lovers reign:
He pleases but while life's in prime,
But thou make happy every time.
He gives birth to ardent fires,
But gentle ties thy breath inspires:
He is the soul's delicious pleasure,
But thou its best, its surest treasure.
Fabian was yet speaking, when the voice of Nisida struck his ears; he stopped,
he listened, he remains immovable! his eyes are fixed and his mouth open,
presently looking with a wild air, his reason abandons him; terror is painted
on his face, he takes the shepherds for phantoms, and views them with affright!
In the mean time, the voice continued, it penetrated to the bottom of his soul.
By little and little his fears are dissipated, his features regain their
sweetness, his eyes recover their softness; he comes to himself, darts like an
arrow to the place from whence the voice came, and fell motionless into the
arms of his friend.

Nisida and Timbrio call out, the shepherds ran to them, they are all anxiously
employed in endeavoring to bring him to life; Blanch had already flown to
seek for water in his cell, she threw it on his face, she held his hands in
hers, And viewed him with all the mingled agonies of hopes and fears. At length
he recovers his senses, he opens his eyes, but is still doubtful of his good
fortune. Is it you then indeed? said he to Timbrio, is it you whom I have wept
and sorrowed for so long? Yes* it is me, it is thy friend, who owes his life to
thee. They embrace each other, they mingle their tears together, and remain a
long time locked in each other's arms. No more of grief, said Timbrio to him,
we are all reunited: behold Nisida thy good friend, and Blanch, who would
have died if we had not found thee. -- What more could you desire? Ah! nothing,
replied the hermit smiling, and weeping at the same time. Blanch and Nisida
held out their arms to him; Fabian would have spoken, but he made vain efforts;
he took the hands of the two sisters, and joining them both together on his
breast, fell on his knees, and bathed their hands with his tears.

After this tender scene, Fabian led his friends into his cell, and there gave
them a detail of all that happened to him since their separation; the recital
was short. The prudent Fabian, always the victim of friendship, spoke of his
love for Blanch, as the sentiment that had most occupied him during his
solitude; the happy Blanch was unable to speak, but she embraced her sister,
and dropped the tears of gladness upon her bosom.

The hermit now entreated his friend to relate to them in his turn, all his
adventures from the moment that he left him on the field of battle, to go and
carry the news of his victory to Nisida. The shepherds all joined with him in
the same request; and Timbrio willing to oblige, began thus: --

"After my combat with Pransil, impatient to see Fabian again, I sent my page
to the country house of Nisida; he came back with terror in his looks, and
announced to me, the death of my mistress, and the flight of my friend, stunned
as if by a stroke of thunder, I instantly departed to inform myself of the full
extent of my misfortunes. I arrived at the country, house, but neither
entreaties, presents, nor supplications, could gain me an entrance; while the
discourse and tears of the domestics, confirmed me in the belief of Nisida's
being no more.

"It would be impossible for me to tell you what my thoughts were at that
moment; surely one cannot die of grief, or I should have expired on the spot.
-- In the midst of my despair, I remembered that there still remained to me a
friend, and all wounded as I was, I followed his tracks to Gaietta; when I
arrived in that city, I was forced to wait the departure of a Catalonian vessel
that was to return in a few days to Barcelona, the captain received me on
board, and my affliction redoubled as we quit the shores of Italy, where I had
lost the dearest object of my heart.

"The wind, which was at first favorable to us, fell all of a sudden, and our
vessel but little removed from the shore, was almost motionless with the calm;
I should have seen a tempest with more pleasure. Unceasingly occupied with my
miseries, always weeping my lost Nisida, I besought Heaven that I might die or
find my friend. Now my last resource, the only moments that I found less
bitter, were those that I spent playing on a lute, belonging to one of the
passengers, and accompanying it with my voice.

"The second day of our departure, in the moment when the morn began to glow in
the horizon, I was sitting upon the poop, viewing the vast sea, whose tranquil
waves reflected the stars, now ready to disappear; all was hushed around me,
the officers and sailors were buried in profound repose; -- and even the pilot
slept upon his helm. The sails were furled, one heard no noise but what the
prow of the vessel made, as it moved softly through the water. This profound
silence, this grand spectacle of the sea and the heavens; Aurora, that came
gently on to revive the unfortunate, made me but more keenly feel my sorrows. I
took the lute and sung these words:

I.
Hushed are the waves, and silence reigns around,
No noise is heard but zephyr's fluttering wings;
The wearied seamen sleep in peace profound,
While I alone do wake to griefs afflictive stings.
II.
Now from her chariot of celestial light,
Aurora, to the world a new day shows,
All nature seems reviving at the sight,
But I alone that brood upon my woes.
III.
I sink beneath the weight, I feel my doom;
Nisida my love, my soul's best part,
Thou art no more. -- The cold and silent tomb
Shuts up thy body and my faithful heart.
"I was in the last verse when I heard the noise of oars, which seemed to
approach the ship; I listened, I looked, the first rays of the morn enabled me
to distinguish a bark, she came right upon us, while the efforts of four rowers
made her fly upon the se^.

"When the bark approached us, a woman stood upon the deck, and addressed me.
In the name of Heaven, cried she, have the goodness to tell me if your vessel
be not the Catalan that sailed a few days since from Gaietta. Judge of my
astonishment, it was the voice of Blanch, the sister of my Nisida. Ah! my
sister! cried I, as by the help of a rope I descended like lightning into the
bark, I flew to throw myself into the arms of Blanch, and I found myself in
those of Nisida.

"I thought I should have died with joy; immovable and mute, I had not the
power to utter a word. Nisida spoke to me, encouraged me; I looked at her and
trembled in the apprehension that this was but a dream, and that my happiness
would disappear on my awaking.

"Recovered from my first transports of joy, my next care was to get the tender
Nisida and her amiable sister into the ship; they were both in the habits of
pilgrims, but the captain, instructed by me, received them with the respect
that was due to their birth. It was then that I learned from Blanch, how
Fabian's forgetting the scarf had thrown her sister, who was weakened down with
illness, into so deep a swoon that every one believed her to be dead; she did
not come to herself, till the end of eight hours, ^^arning then of my victory,
-- my error -- my despair, and our flight, she resolved with her sister, to
quit all and follow us. Neither her illness nor her weakness could detain her,
she was determined to go, and Blanch disposed every thing for their departure.
They had gold and jewels, they were prodigal of all that they might escape from
their father's house. A domestic that had been gained over, brought them a
^^ter in the middle of the night. The two sisters, furnished with diamonds, and
disguised as pilgrims, took the road to Gaietta, where they knew that I had
gone. They arrived two days after the departure of the ship, by dint of money
they procured rowers, who endeavored to overtake us; the calm unexpectedly
seconded their efforts -- and Love, who doubtless protected these amiable
sisters, conducted them without any accident to our vessel.

"I found my Nisida, but you were wanting to us, my dear Fabian, and this was
paying very dear for the favors that we received from Fortune. Blanch felt
this as sensibly as I did, thy absence was all that we had to lament.

"After an happy voyage we arrived at Barcelona, we had hopes of learning
something of you there, but our researches were vain. Blanch was the first to
mention that we should travel over all Spain, and never rest till we had found
thee, she was very sure that this advice would be followed; we resolved to go
first to Toledo, where the relations of Nisida live, we wrote to her father,
acquainting him with our adventures, and asking his permission for us to be
married at Toledo; he replied as we would have wished, and we were now on our
way to that city, still inquiring with painful anxiety for our dear Fabian,
when our good fortune conducted us here."

Such was the history of Timbrio. As soon as he had ceased to speak, the hermit
took him by himself into a corner of his cell, and said to him with a timid
voice, Is it necessary for me to go also to Toledo? Timbrio, surprised at his
question, looked at him, Fabian threw down his eyes and let some tears escape
him. His friend held him in his arms; yes said he, his very necessary that you
should come to Toledo, to espouse thy dear Blanch, she adores thee; never has
she been one instant without thinking of thee, You loved her always. Is it not
true? More than my life, replied Fabian, but I love thee still more; come,
added he smiling, I shall quit this habit of an hermit, and you must find me
one more proper for a bridegroom; but if you will be advised by me, when we
shall be united to these two charming sisters, we will come back here and live
with these good shepherds, who love us, and who deserve that we should love
them. I have already formed the project, replied Timbrio, I am tired of the
parade of the world, and I would wish to finish my life in these sweet
retreats, and enjoy what yet remains of it between my wife and my friend.

After this conversation they came back, and gave an account of it to the two
sisters and the shepherds; every one seemed delighted, and applauded the design.

In the mean time the night advanced, Elicio advised them to hasten to the
village; I have no house, such as would accommodate you, said he, to the four
lovers, but I will conduct you to that of Galatea; Meoris her father, will feel
himself honored by receiving you.

His advice is followed, they set out, they double their pace, they arrive;
Meoris was going to sit down at table, with his daughter* Florise, Teolinda and
the four shepherds from Portugal, who were the next day to carry Galatea along
with them; they knock at the door, the dogs bark, Meoris went to open it
himself; Elicio demands from him an hospitable reception for Nisida, Blanch
and the two friends; the old ^hepherd, honored by such guests, received them
with respect, he called his daughter, and made her add to the supper whatever
was good in the house, and inviting them to sit down to table, made excuses for
what they had; giving them to understand that better fare would have been
provided, had they been expected.

During supper Galatea endeavored all in her power to hide the grief that
preyed on her heart. Elicio placed himself as far off from the Portuguese as he
could, he viewed them with rage; -- and sometimes his eyes met those of
Galatea. The repast being ended, they all rose from table, and went to enjoy
the cooling freshness of the air, upon the stone benches which were at the door
of the house. Old Meoris was willing to recount to his guests the brilliant
marriage which he was making for his daughter; he dwelt upon the riches of his
intended son-in-law, riches which the Portuguese did not fail to exaggerate.
The two friends, and the two sisters, thought themselves bound to felicitate
Galatea, she made no reply; and the unhappy Elicio devoured his tears. Suddenly
they were alarmed with the dismal sound of a trumpet, which was heard in the
village.

Meoris, his guests, and all the inhabitants ran to the public green, from
whence the sad sounds seemed to proceed, they perceived four men clothed in
mourning, and crowned with cypress, two of them carried lighted flambeaus in
their hands, the two others sounded the trumpets, in the midst of the four was
a minister of the Eternal, clothed in his sacerdotal robes.

This was the venerable Salvadore, the pastor of the shepherds, who consoled
them under their misfortunes, and who returned thanks to Heaven for their
happiness; all the village was his family, all the orphans his children; for
forty years he had filled the sublime employment of praising God, and being
serviceable to man.

Shepherds, said he to them, tomorrow is the day that I have chosen in this
year, to honor the ashes of our brothers in the valley of tombs; think on this
sacred duty, and at the earliest dawn assemble yourselves at this place, in the
sad apparel suitable to this interesting occasion.

After having with a strong voice pronounced these words, Salvadore took the
road to his own house. Every one agreed to meet there at the point of day, to
fulfill so holy a duty; Meoris was not willing that his daughter should be
absent. He prayed the Portuguese that they would defer their departure. Elicio
bounded with joy, and Galatea conceived something like Hope, to flutter in the
bottom of her heart.

Nisida, Blanch, Teolinda, and the two friends, requested of the inhabitants
of the village permission* to accompany them to the valley of tombs. They were
flattered with their demand. The four Portuguese then solicited the same
favor; but they were refused with an unanimous voice, they were odious from
the time it was known that they came to seek Galatea. They retired full of
despite; and the night being far advanced, every one now went to deliver
themselves up to steep.

END OF THE THIRD BOOK.
GALATEA. BOOK THE FOURTH.
MELANCHOLY, thou soothing power, I yield myself up to thy influence, come and
shed over my last scenes thy soft and sombre gloom, so pleasing to to the heart
of sensibility; fear not to awaken every tender emotion, the tears which you
cause to flow, are to feeling souls what the dew is to flowers; where is the
lover banished from his mistress, the friend deprived of his friend, the mother
far distant from her beloved child, who does not consider thee as the dearest
possession fate has left them. How delicious are those moments in which,
separated from the world, alone with our hearts and remembrance only, we retire
into ourselves, or rather fill our mind with the dear idea of the object of our
affections; what a pleasure to recall the various aeras of progressive love;
the first hour we have felt that passion, the first avowal we have made of it,
the air with which that avowal was heard, the fears, the suspicions, and even
GALATEA.
the quarrels all are present, all are traced with delight, we enjoy anew the
pleasures we have experienced, we enjoy even the disquietudes we have suffered.
If every hope be torn from the heart, if unpitying death has cut off in the
hour of youth and beauty, the object of our love; the tears which we give to
her memory have charms, the recollection of her still leaves upon our hearts an
impression of happiness; we would perhaps be more deserving of pity if it were
possible we could be consoled.

Thus thought the wise Salvadore; he consecrated one day in the year to tears
of tender recollections of Friendship and of Love. This day was now come,
Salvadore, clothed in his sable vestment, appeared on the green; soon after
him came the inhabitants of the village covered with crapes, crowned with
cypress and carrying their crooks bound round with black ribbands. Salvadore
regulated the order of the march, he separated the shepherds from the
shepherdesses, and ranged them in two files.

On the right moved Nisida, Blanch, Teolinda, Florise; and the young maidens
moved under the conduct of Galatea. On the left side opposite these marched
Timbrio, Fabian, Damon, Tircis, and all the young lads, having Elicio at their
head, Erastres alone was absent. After these came the married women conducted
by Sylveria, and their husbands led by Daranio; this happy troop were almost as
handsome as the first, they were followed by a third, less brilliant indeed,
but more respectable, these were the widows and the old men, they were guided
by Meoris and the mother of Erastres; they wore no crowns, but their white hair
gave them an interesting and affecting appearance, their trembling hands
carried ebony sticks, with which they supported themselves. Alas! it was to
these above all, that the ceremony was affecting; they went to weep upon the
tomb of a child, a sister, a wife, or an husband.

Salvadore closed the march, he had chosen this place, to be near the most
unhappy; at each side of him four beautiful children, clothed in linen robes
and crowned with flowers, carried with respectful awe, the holy water, the
incense and the fire: proud of this employment, which was the reward of a
year's good behavior, they advanced more gravely than the old people.

To arrive at the valley of tombs, it was necessary to go near a league upon
the banks of the Tagus, and under a green canopy formed by a double row of
poplars. The shepherds marched in silence through fields, upon the verdant
turf, thick sown with flowers which were still moist with dew. The sun began to
gild the tops of the mountains, and announced one of the finest days of summer,
all the expanse of heaven was a deep azure, a soft breeze gently agitated the
leaves, and lulled the little birds in their nests; the lark, already lost in
the air, made himself be heard though he could not be perceived; the
nightingale, fatigued with having warbled through the night, reanimated himself
to hail the return of day; the turtle and her mate joined their responsive
plaints to the melody of the linnet's voice; the flowers exhaled their sweets;
the fishes sported upon the smooth waters of the river; all nature at the
moment of its revival, seemed to thank the bountiful Creator for the new
benefits which he bestowed.

Timbrio, Blanch and Nisida, little accustomed to this spectacle, contemplated
it with surprise; the entering into the valley of tombs filled them with fresh
admiration.

Upon the bank of that beautiful river, whose waters roll over golden sands, is
a space of a mile square, girt on all sides by a chain of hills, but one
passage leads into it through a long defile, the sides of which are lined with
rows of cypress that rise above each other like an amphitheatre, and so closely
locked together, that their interlacing branches form a thick wall and high as
the tops of the hills; roses and wild ^ess^mine relieved with their red and
yellow flowers, the dark green of those walls; no flocks had ever penetrated
into this asylum; the wood-cutter never carried the axe into these sacred
groves. A profound silence reigned every where, one only heard the gentle
falling of cascades, which descending under the thick fol^age, united together
in a bed of moss, and rolled their little silver floods into the Tagus.

At the extremity of this avenue is an antique fi^tree, which seems to shut up
the valley, upon its bark are engraven these words: --

This dread asylum, passenger revere,
If vice corrupts thee tremble here to tread;
The good alone may boldly enter here,
And drop a tear upon the virtuous dead.
In the interior of the valley the cypress reigned all around, in the midst a
fountain of water, ever moistened and refreshed the green turf; the tombs are
scattered here and there, some are already covered with ivy, others still
ornamented with garlands; but each of them enclosed what was mortal of a being
that loved virtue.

The honor of being interred in this valley was not granted to all the dead;
it was the recompense of an irreproachable life. The village, in assembly
adjudged it; alas! the tombs were but few!

The shepherds being arrived at the fountain, stopped there; and Salvadore
raising his voice, separate yourselves said he, you will assemble near me, when
the trumpet sounds again. At these words every one disperses; each widow, each
orphan, ran to the stone that covered the object of their tears.

Timbrio, Fabian and the two sisters lost sight of Elicio, they looked around
the valley for him; they soon discovered him on his knees before the tomb of
his mother, his hands were joined together, and his eyes, full of tears raised
up to heaven -- Oh! my mother, said he, you are surely happy, since you were
always good; look down upon me from your dwelling above, watch over me, and so
inspire my heart that I may love virtue as well as I have loved you. In
pronouncing these words, he pressed his face upon the tomb, while his tears ran
along upon the stone.

The four lovers listened to him in silence, they approached him, and Timbrio
taking the hand of the shepherd, worthy son, said he to him, you fill my heart
with tenderness and respect; promise to be my friend, and from this moment, I
will renounce the world, become a shepherd, with Nisida, Blanch, and Fabian;
-- in your neighborhood I will purchase a cottage and live contented. You
would be too near an unfortunate, said Elicio; from the time that I lost my
mother, one sentiment alone remained in my heart to make life d^si^^ble, that
sentiment was love; and tomorrow I love the object of it forever. They pressed
him to explain himself more fully; this, rep^ied the shepherd, is not a place
where I can speak to you of my misfortunes, when we have got out of the valley
I shall relate them to you.

He was still speaking when the trumpet sounded. Explain to us said Timbrio,
why Salvadore now recalls us; -- to honor, replied Elicio, the ashes of the
last shepherd whom we have lost, -- we shall immediately hear the history of
his life, which will be sung to us by the most discreet of our shepherdesses.

Everyone was now assembled at the fountain; their venerable conductor guided
them to a tomb, the stone was still white, and this simple inscription on it:
HERE RESTS A GOOD SON.

Salvadore walked three times round the tomb, he pronounced the accustomed
prayers, b^^nt incense, and sprinkled round the holy water. He then took the
hand of Galatea, and gave her the paper wherein was written the history of him
whom they lamented; a modest blush overspread the face of Galatea, she stood
close to the tomb, and all the shepherds listened to her in deep silence:

I.
Lists, the kind, the generous swain*
Louisa long had loved;
And soon she felt the gentle flame,
And all his vow, approved.
II.
He asked her at her father's hand,
Who, hand of heart, replied;
"Be rich as her whom you demand,
"And she shall be your bride."
III.
Poor Lisis' cottage and his heart,
His only riches ^ere:
The cot, he meant his mother's part,
His heart, Louisa's share.
IV.
All sad, he quits his native plains,
To seek the golden shore;
And there by industry and pains*
Amassed a little store.
V.
Now full of hope, he comes from thence;
And finds Louisa true;
Her hand's to be the recompense,
To faithful love long due.
VI.
At length the bridal morn appears
To end the lover's sighs;
But fearful tidings reach his ears,
That ill his mother lies.
VII.
The trembling Lisis flies like thought,
He quits his lovely maid;
A skilful doctor instant sought,
Embraced his knees and said: --
VIII.
Oh! should she die, I Would ceaseless grieve,
Her life is joined to mine,
If by your skill she yet may live,
My treasure all is thine.
IX.
The doctor saves her by his art,
Poor Lisis yields his store;
The maid resigns -- and grief of heart,
Must think of her no more.
X
A richer shepherd weds the maid,
Wealth bears away the prize;
Yet Lisis no distress betrayed,
But smothered all his sighs.
XI.
He feigned content with pious art,
His mother's peace to save;
But silent sorrow broke his heart,
And laid him in the grave.
Galatea resumed her place.

My friends, said Salvadore, your own hearts speak better to you than it is
possible for me to do, you are all moved to tears at the relation of a virtuous
action; think then, what must be the delight of doing one. After these few
words, the venerable pastor led the shepherds out of the valley; he broke the
order of their march, and all dispersed themselves among the beautiful meadows
that were watered by the Tagus.

The two friends, and the two sisters, who had not forgotten the promise of
Elicio, took the road to the fountain of Ardoises. The unhappy shepherd
recounted to them his love, and the deep despair that he felt at the thoughts
of Galatea's marriage. Fabian, Blanch and Nisida endeavored to console him,
while Timbrio was devising by what means he might have him united to his
mistress.

Behind these at a little distance, Galatea, Florise, Teolinda, Tircis and
Damon walked together without speaking. The daughter of Meoris reflected that
the very next day was to be the day of her departure. Florise was forming the
project of following her into Portugal; while the sad Teolinda envied the
condition of those who slept in the valley of tombs.

To reach the fountain of Ardoises, it was necessary to quit the banks of the
Tagus and cross some hills covered with wood. The dog of Elicio, who was not
that day permitted to follow Galatea, remained in the village; he saw some of
the shepherds coming home; but not perceiving either his master or his mistress
he ran to seek them, and joined them just as they entered the wood.

After having frisked from one party to another, alternately caressing Elicio
and Galatea, he ran about the mountain and started a wild kid, which he closely
pursued; the kid fled and passed near to the shepherdesses. Fear gave him
strength, he gained, without being stopped, a cavern, which he entered
bleating, the dog followed him; Galatea cried out for some one to save the
little goat; every one ran, they arrive at the mouth of the cave, and Elicio in
a moment, darts into it after the dog.

Tircis, Damon and the two friends, laughing, endeavored, to quiet the fears
of the shepherdess, and waited at the mouth of the cave expecting to see the
lover of Galatea appear with the young goat in his arms. -- But suddenly a
frightful noise assailed their ears from the bottom of the cavern; they soon
saw Elicio come forth, struggling with a man whose aspect was terrifying; he
was covered with tattered rags, a black and thick beard hid half of his face,
his long hair floated in disorder on his shoulders, his arms naked and nervous,
were employed in an endeavor to strangle Elicio; the shepherd, not ^ess
vigorous, held his left hand against the hairy breast of the wild man, his
right hand fastened in his hair, pulled back the head of his enemy; they were
silent, their eyes darting fire at each other, their limbs were twisted
together; while each with all his force, endeavored to throw his adversary to
the ground.

The dog of Elicio had not quit his master, and would have made efforts to
succor him, but a wild goat gave him enough to do to defend himself; attentive
that he should not get to her side, she pushed him before her, still menacing
him with her horns, whilst the young kid now losing all fear, jumped round its
mother, and seemed to brave him that he so lately dreaded.

Tircis, Damon and the two friends, flew to separate the combatants, and
Timbrio seizing the savage, had need of all his force to hold him -- but
Teolinda faints, and every one ran to her assistance; the wild man throws his
eyes upon her, he remains immovable, gazing intently upon the pale face of the
shepherdess. Suddenly starting from the arms of Timbrio, he caught up the young
goat, the innocent cause of so many accidents, he fell on his knees to
Teolinda, and presented it to her with a submissive air; scarcely had the
shepherdess come to herself, when she fell on the neck of the wild man. Ah! is
it you, cried she, Artidore, my dear Artidore, you have not then forgotten your
poor Teolinda. At the name of Teolinda, Artidore changed color, he springs up,
and looking wildly on the shepherdess, Teolinda! said he, she has deceived me;
-- I remember her well; Is she here? -- Yes, replied Teolinda, with a trembling
voice, she is here, she only lives for you! Listen, said Artidore, speaking to
her in a low voice, you must bring me to her, I wish to reproach her with her
perfidy, I wish to tell her that I no longer love her. Afterward we will
return and dwell in my cave, you shall be my friend, and I will give you my
little goat.

Teolinda saw by his discourse, that grief had unsettled the reason of the
unfortunate Artidore. She looked on him with earnestness, while the tears ran
down her eyes, and pressing his hand with tenderness, I desire nothing more,
said she, I will never quit you again, I will remain with you to the last hour
of my life, I hope to prove to you that Teolinda was not to blame. In saying
these words, she took the arm of Artidore, and led him with her into the road
that conducted them to the fountain of Ardoises, the goat and her young one
followed them, while the rest of the shepherds kept a few paces behind,
impatient to see the end of this adventure.

As they went along, Teolinda used every effort to recall him to a recollection
which she at once ^^ared and wished; attentive to say nothing that might be
displeasing to her lover, she spoke with precaution of herself, brought with
tenderness their loves to his memory, recounted the history of her twin sister,
and all the tears she had cost her. She observed the effects of each word upon
the countenance of Artidore, followed step by step the progress that she made
on his reason, and strained every faculty of her soul to bring back the
affections of her lever. Artidore listens to her like a man come out of a long
sleep; he replies properly to some questions, makes her repeat others; by
little and little, his memory and his ideas come to him; Love bereft him of
reason, Love ought to give it back to him again; he stops, he considers
Teolinda, recollects her, falls at her feet, holds her in his arms, and his
tears proved to the shepherdess, that her lover was no longer insensible.

They arrived at the fountain, where every one joined them; Florise and Galatea
had related as they went along, all that they knew of the loves of Artidore and
Teolinda. After having felicitated the shepherdess, they begged of her to
prevail on her lover to begin a recital of his adventures from the moment that
the twin sister had so cruelly deceived him. Artidore consented, and though a
little ashamed of the situation in which he found himself, he continued thus
his history: --

"The discourse of the false Teolinda threw me into the most dreadful despair,
I resolved to fly for ever from her whom I believed so perfidious; I was
willing, however, to let her know that I still loved her* and I engraved my
eternal farewell upon the bark of a poplar; I do not even remember what I
wrote. From that time my reason grew weak and abandoned me; I wandered without
end in the fields, and I was four days without taking any nourishment; this
abstinence compl^ted my disorder; I can but confusedly recall what happened to
me; two circumstances alone are engraven on my memory.

"I descended a little hill, which should not, I think, be far from this place,
when I suddenly heard a noise in the thicket, and saw this little goat that is
now lying at my feet, flying from a furious wolf, who pursued him with a
distended throat; the first thing I did was to throw myself upon the wolf; I
had no weapons; -- obliged to struggle with the ferocious animal, we rolled
together in the dust, madness, no doubt, added to my strength, and made me
insensible to danger, I strangled the animal in my arms, and without regarding
whether the little goat followed me, I pursued my way to the cavern where you
found me.

"The obscurity and the total retirement of that habitation, made me choose it
for my tomb. I penetrated into the deepest part of it, I sat down upon a stone,
and then recalling to mind the perfidy of Teolinda, my reason visited me for a
moment to make me more sensible of all my miseries; -- resolved never more to
go out of this cavern, I rolled a great stone to shut up the entrance of it.
Imprisoned in my tomb, I felt a kind of frightful joy. I extended myself upon
the earth, with the hope of never rising more.

"I was in this state of calm despair, neither fearing nor desiring that my
sufferings should be long, when a plaintive bleating struck my ears. I listen,
I hear it still, it seemed to come from the entrance of the cavern. In spite
of myself I was affected, I rise up, I run to where the noise came from, and I
perceived the little goat that I had saved, he had passed his white nose
between the stone and the rock, and seemed to demand of me to open it to him.

"My eyes were filled with tears, I pushed the stone away gently, and as the
entrance was wide enough, a large goat pushed in, followed by its young one,
the dam was wounded and bleeding; scarce had she got in, when she lay down at
my feet, panting with fatigue and pain, the little goat went round and round
her, bleating mournfully, licked the wounds of her mother, and then would
caress me, as if beseeching me to assist her.

"I examined where she bled, I knew the marks of the wolf's teeth, I went to
seek some water, I washed the wounds, staunched the blood, and I tied them up
with a part of my clothes; after this operation, the goat seemed to regard me
with tenderness, she lay softly down, showed her paps full of milk, and seemed
to invite me to partake the nourishment of her little one, whom I restored to
her.

"No human consolations would have been able to hinder me from dying; this goat
and her young one attached me to life. Resolved to pass my days with them, I
went to seek a provision of herbs and fruits, and I arranged the cavern for us
three. The next day I dressed her wounds again, and in four days she was cured;
she went out sometimes alone, sometimes with her young one, who followed us
equally; I rambled on my side, in the neighboring mountains, every evening we
found each other again. When I met in my wanderings wild thyme or city^us, I
brought it to my companion, she eat it out of my hands, I eat my wild fruits,
and the little goat sucked its dam. After our repast I shut up the entrance of
our dwelling with the stone, then lying down upon dried leaves and moss, we
delivered ourselves up to sleep.

"To day, the excessive heat had hindered the goat and myself from going out of
the cave, the little one was jumping and sporting for a long while before its
entrance. I still believed her to be there, when I saw her run in, all
trembling and pursued by a dog; very soon after a man appeared, I declare to
you, that at this sight, I was no longer master of my fury, I ran upon him with
the idea of strangling him, so much was I enraged that a man should come to
take from me the only friends that I thought remained to me in the world. You
have been witnesses of my combat, and its fortunate issue; this day is the
happiest of my life, I have found my Teolinda, and I feel my reason restored to
me again. I will pass my life with her whom I have long adored, and my goat and
its young one shall never quit me."

In saying these words, he caressed them with one hand, and held out the other
to Teolinda.

The recital of Artidore had filled them all with tenderness, and they thanked
him with tears in their eyes. He begged Elicio, in a low voice, to procure him
the means of cutting off his beard, and to furnish him with another habit; --
come with me, said the shepherd, I have in my cottage, all that is necessary
for you. Go then, added Timbrio, we will wait for you here, and in your
absence, I shall consider of something to say to the father of.... he stopped
himself there; -- Galatea blushed -- Artidore went with Elicio, Teolinda begged
of him not to stay long, and the goat and her kid followed him.

Galatea had heard that Timbrio intended to speak to her father, she guessed
that her presence would be a restraint; and seigning to be obliged to return to
her house, she toook leave of Blanch, Nisida and Teolinda, and took the road
to the village, accompanied by no one but her dear Florise.

They had gone but a little way, when four men started from behind a hedge,
seized the two shepherdesses, prevented them with their handkerchiefs, from
crying out, and forced them upon two mules that they had there, ready prepared
for the purpose; Galatea and Florise obeyed them trembling, the four men
mounted on horseback, placed the mules in the center, and set off in a full
gallop toward the frontiers of Castile.

The ravishers were the four Portuguese, who had for some days been at the
house of Meoris; they saw how coldly they were received by all the village,
they remembered the manner that Elicio had looked at them, after supper, and
the tenderness with which he viewed Galatea, had made them suspect the truth;
the delay that Meoris had made to go to the valley of tombs, the refusal of the
inhabitants to let them accompany them to that valley, seemed to them to be a
pretext and an insult; they feared besides, to return without Galatea, and they
conceived that the carrying her off, would be pardoned when the daughter of
Meoris was married to their master; every thing as yet had succeeded to their
wishes, they fled with their prey -- but Love watched over Galatea.

Artidore having changed his clothes in the cottage of Elicio, was returning
with him to the fountain, they saw at a distance, the four cavaliers, and knew
the shepherdesses; Elicio gave a great cry and flew to his mistress, with both
his hands he stopped the mules. One of the Portuguese raised his arm to pierce
Elicio with a lance; at the same instant Artidore ran to his assistance, and
with the stroke of a stick he broke the arm of the barbarian; -- the two
shepherdesses seized the moment of confusion, slipped from their mules, and
being well acquainted with the place, ran with all their speed to look for
succor at the fountain. In the mean time Elicio had seized upon the lance of
the wounded man, and standing close to Artidore, these two brave shepherds on
foot, and armed only with a lance and a stick, made head against the three
treacherous cavaliers, who wished to avenge their companion.

This unequal combat was long continued, but courage was yielding to force.
Elicio, wounded in the arm, could no longer defend himself -- when Timbrio,
sword in hand, fell like thunder upon the Portuguese, at the first stroke, he
made the head fly from the shoulders of him that pressed hardest on Elicio.
Tircis, Damon and Fabian were now arrived, when the two remaining Portuguese,
putting spurs to their horses, fled with the utmost speed.

The wounds of Elicio were not dangerous, but he lost much blood; Galatea is
terrified, she stops it with her handkerchief, she dressed the wound herself,
-- this alone, would have been sufficient to have cured Elicio; they led him to
the village, his arm in a scarf, Galatea supporting him, and this favor more
than paid him for the danger he ran in succouring her.

When they came to the house of Meoris, the old man, enraged at the attempt of
the Portuguese, declared that he looked on himself as released from his
promise. Behold, said Timbrio, presenting the wounded man to him, the deliverer
of your daughter, Elicio deserves to possess her whom his valor has saved; his
poverty alone could have made you hesitate to consent to his happiness; -- but
he is to day as rich as you yourself. I possess a large fortune, and I am
willing...... as he said these words, they heard a great noise at the door of
the house; they saw entering into the yard, a beautiful ram ornamented with
ribbands of various colors, his enormous bell was distinguished amongst those
of an hundred sheep that followed him -- each with its lamb. Erastres came
after them attended by two dogs, with whom he left the care of this beautiful
flock, and with his crook in his hand, spoke thus to the father of Galatea: --

Meoris, said he, I was myself in love with your daughter, and I might have
disputed her with the Portuguese, to whom you have given her: but I must be
just, neither I nor the Portuguese merit Galatea; Elicio alone is worthy of
her. You may believe this avowal, when it comes from the mouth of his rival;
you required that your son-in-law should be rich, behold this flock, which is
in itself a fortune, it is Elicio's, it is not I who have bestowed it; I have
done no more than go among the neighboring hamlets, Elicio has so many
friends, that each of them gave him a lamb and its mother; and in two days I
have formed this flock.

He had scarcely done speaking, when Elicio bathed him with his tears. Ah! my
friend, whatever be my fate, thy friendship will make me worthy of being
envied: I dare not hope for Galatea, but.... She is yours, said Meoris, with
tears in his eyes, come my daughter, I will bestow you on your deliverer; come
and embrace thy husband. Galatea, blushing deeper than the rose, approached,
yet feared to advance too quick; Elicio was on his knees, and held out to her
with respect, the only hand he had at liberty; -- Galatea looked at him,
stopped, threw down her eyes, her face glowed with a deeper crimson. Her
father, who enjoyed this tender embarrassment, took her by the hand, and
conducted her to her happy lover, even then he was obliged gently to force her
to join her mouth to Elicio's; and that kiss was the first that Galatea had
received in all her life.

They then made Erastres acquainted with the vile attempt, that had been made
to carry off Galatea and Florise. Timbrio came to him; shepherd, said he to
him, you have wrested from me one of the sweetest moments of my life. I
intended to divide my fortune with Elicio, that he might have espoused Galatea,
but you have prevented me; you do not love him better however than I do, but as
you have loved him longer, it is but just that you should be preferred. I hope,
at least, added he raising his voice, that you will suffer me to accomplish
another design; I will make four parts of my fortune, the first shall belong to
my friend Fabian; I shall present the second to Teolinda and Artidore, to
engage them to fix here; the third shall be put into the hands of Salvadore to
be distributed among the poor of the village; and the fourth part shall be
disposed of in purchasing an house, lands, and a flock for Nisida and me. Yes,
my good friends, I will become a shepherd, I will end my days with you and
Fabian; our cottages shall be near each other, our families shall be united, we
will live an example for the village, and we will grow old together in peace,
in happiness, and in love.

Every one admired the generosity of Timbrio; Artidore and Teolinda held him in
a long and silent embrace. Meoris was willing that the contracts should be all
settled that evening; he ran to spread in the village the news of so many happy
events, and brought back with him the notary and the venerable Salvadore.

The contracts were soon finished, and it was agreed that Timbrio, the very
next day, should send back all his suite to Toledo; with a confidential
servant, who should carry the news to the relations of Nisida, and bring back
in ready money, the fortune of his master. In the mean time, Meoris was to
purchase the flocks and farms for the new shepherds: and till all was got
ready, Timbrio and Fabian, with their wives, were to remain at the house of
Meoris; and Teolinda and Artidore at that of Erastres.

Nothing was now wanting but to fix the day of their four marriages; Elicio,
notwithstanding his wounds, was decided that it should be the next day, nor
could the wise Salvadore prevail on him to defer it. The rest, without saying
any thing, were of opinion with Elicio.

At supper that evening, each lover was placed next to his mistress. As soon as
their repast was over, they all assembled in the garden, they sat down on seats
of green turf in a beautiful arbor of vines, the moon shed her purest light,
all was still and peaceful. They wished to finish with songs this happy day;
one took his flute, another his pipe, they made a circle, in the midst of which
was placed Meoris and Salvadore; and the lovers sung these words: --

TIMBRIO. The crowd of mortals weak and vain,
That still on sordid wealth attends,
I often despised the selfish train,
Who gold preferred to love or friends:
II.
My heart can pardon them from hence,
That they are right my feelings tell,
For wealth can happiness dispense;
But it is when we bestow it well.

FABIAN. This day, my friends, we all can find,
From friendship's source what pleasures flow,
What soft sensations fill the mind,
That happiness can thus bestow.
From thee, dear Blanch, I grieved to part;
But sure we here shall now find rest,
With Timbrio whose generous heart,
Knows but one wi^h, to make all blessed.

BLANCH. Long I doubted of thy truth,
Yet could never love thee less,
Sorrow preyed upon my youth,
But lessened not my tenderness;
Such grief I could no longer bear,
Had thou not come to end my care.
II.
Here let us pass our ever tranquil days,
With all we love in this sweet village dwell:
Joyful I Will visit often thy hermit cell,
And pour my grateful soul to Heaven in praise.

ARTIDORE. I once believed my shepherdess unkind,
This cruel error long disturbed my mind;
My reason shook and drove me to despair,
Just punishment I own, yet sure severe.
II.
But now I see the maid whom I adore,
I feel my reason perfect as before;
Yet love forbear, or make my transports less,
My mind's not equal to such happiness.

GALATEA. Do you remember well that happy day,
When first you strove my youthful heart to move,
You pleaded sweet, while army feet you lay,
That I should hear your vows of constant love.
II.
I felt my cheeks with modest blushes glow,
But pleasure soon my virgin heart possessed,
Your happiness you asked me to bestow;
While all the time 'twas me you rend'red blessed.

ELICIO. Oh! sweet remembrance, ever happy hour,
Still was this balm to my despair applied;
That while I wooed thee in this fragrant bower,
Thy eyes approved, though still thy words denied;
II.
'Till then with friendship passed my life away,
In love alone new comforts could I find,
I Have found a maid that will my cares repay,
And in my friend a benefactor kind;
Unequalled bliss! Ah! how shall I express
The tender sentiments I this day prove,
My poor heart feels content and happiness;
Thus blessed in Friendship, and thus crowned by Love.

It was now time to retire. Blanch, Nisida, and Teolinda remained with
Galatea; -- Timbrio, Fabian and Artidore went to the house of Salvadore. Before
the dawn next day, the four lovers rapped at the door of Meoris. Timbrio and
Fabian were already furnished with the scrip and the crook; all the
inhabitants, instructed the evening before, had prepared during the night,
fetes more brilliant than when they celebrated the nuptials of Daranio. They
waited some time, because the good Meoris was still asleep; but he soon
appeared, followed by his daughter, Teolinda, Florise, and the two sisters
dressed as shepherdesses.

The worthy Elicio gave his hand to Galatea, and led her to church in the midst
of repeated acclamations. Salvadore united the four lovers, and Heaven blessed
their union. All their wishes were accomplished; they were happy, lived long,
and loved each other always. Their memory is still honored in the beautiful
country in which they lived.

FINIS
Amelia, or the faithless Briton


AMELIA; OR, THE FAITHLESS BRITON. AN ORIGINAL AMERICAN NOVEL, FOUNDED UPON
RECENT FACTS. TO WHICH IS ADDED, AMELIA, OR MALEVOLENCE DEFEATED; AND, MISS
SEWARD'S MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.

BOSTON: PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY W. SPOTSWOOD, AND C. P. WAYNE. 1798.

COPY RIGHT SECURED, AGREEABLY TO LAW.

AMELIA: OR THE FAITHLESS BRITON.
THE revolutions of government, and the subversions of empire, which have
swelled the theme of national historians, have likewise, in every age,
furnished anecdote to the biographer, and incident to the novelist. The objects
of policy or ambition are generally, indeed, accomplished at the expense of
private ease and prosperity; while the triumph of arms, like the funeral
festivity of a savage tribe, serves to announce some recent calamity -- the
waste of property, or the fall of families.

Thus, the great events of the late war, which produced the separation of the
British empire, and established the sovereignty of America, were chequered with
scenes of private sorrow, and the success of the contending forces was
alternately fatal to the peace and order of domestic life. The lamentations of
the widow and the orphan, mingled with the song of victory; and the sable
mantle with which the hand of friendship clothed the bier of the gallant
MONTGOMERY, cast a momentary gloom upon the trophies his valor had achieved.

Though the following tale then, does not exhibit the terrible magnificence of
warlike operations, or scrutinize the principles of national politics, it
recites an episode that too frequently occurs in the military drama, and
contains a history of female affliction, that claims, from its authenticity, at
least, an interest in the feeling heart. It is the first of a series of novels,
drawn from the same source, and intended for public communication, but as the
author's object is merely to glean those circumstances in the progress of the
revolution, which the historian has neither leisure nor disposition to
commemorate, and to produce, from the annals of private life, something to
entertain, and something to improve his readers, the occasion will yield little
to hope from the applause of the public, and nothing to dread from its candor.

HORATIO BLYFIELD was a respectable inhabitant of the state of New York.
Success had rewarded his industry in trade with an ample fortune; and his mind,
uncontaminated by envy and ambition, freely indulged itself in the delicious
enjoyments of the father and the friend. In the former character he
superintended the education of a son and a daughter, left to his sole care by
the death of their excellent mother; and in the latter, his benevolence and
council were uniformly exercised for the relief of the distressed, and the
information of the illiterate.

His mercantile intercourse with Great Britain afforded an early opportunity of
observing the disposition of that kingdom with respect to her colonies; and his
knowledge of the habits, tempers, and opinions of the American citizens,
furnished him with a painful anticipation of anarchy and war. The texture of
his mind, indeed, was naturally calm and passive, and the ordinary effects of a
life of sixty years duration, had totally eradicated all those passions which
rouse men to opposition, and qualify them for enterprise. When, therefore, the
gauntlet was thrown upon the theater of the new world, and the spirit of
discord began to rage, Horatio, like the Roman Atticus, withdrew from public
clamor, to a sequestered cottage, in the interior district of Long Island; and
consecrating the youthful ardour of his son, Honorius, to the service of his
country, the fair Amelia was the only companion of his retreat.

Amelia had then attained her seventeenth year. The delicacy of her form was in
unison with the mildness of her aspect, and the exquisite harmony of her soul,
was responsive to the symmetry of her person. The pride of parental attachment
had graced her with every accomplishment that depends upon tuition; and it was
the singular fortune of Amelia, to be at once the admiration of our sex, and
the favorite of her own. From such a daughter, Horatio could not but receive
every solace of which his generous feelings were susceptible in a season of
national calamity; but the din of arms that frequently interrupted the silence
of the neighboring forests, and the disastrous intelligence which his son
occasionally transmitted from the standard of the union, superceded the
cheerful avocations of the day, and dispelled the peaceful slumbers of the
night.

After a retirement of many months, on a morning fatal to the happiness of
Horatio's family, the sound of artillery announced a battle, and the horsemen
who were observed gallopping across the grounds, proved that the scene of
action could not be remote. As soon, therefore, as the tumult of hostility had
subsided, Horatio advanced with his domestics, to administer comfort and
assistance to the wounded, and to provide a decent interment for the mangled
victims of the conflict. In traversing the deadly field, he perceived an
officer, whose exhausted strength just served for the articulation of a groan,
and his attention was immediately directed to the preservation of this
interesting object, who alone, of the number that had fallen, yielded a hope
that his compassionate exertions might be crowned with success. Having bathed,
and bound up his wounds, the youthful soldier was borne to the cottage; where,
in a short time, a stronger pu^se, and a freer respiration, afforded a
flattering presage of returning life.

Amelia, who had anxiously waited the arrival of her father, beheld, with a
mixed sensation of horror and pity, the spectacle which now accompanied him.
She had never before seen the semblance of death, which therefore afflicted her
with all the terrors of imagination; and, notwithstanding the pallid
countenance of the wounded guest, he possessed an elegance of person, which,
according to the natural operations of female sensibility, added something
perhaps, to her commiseration for his misfortunes. When, however, these first
impressions had passed away, the tenderness of her nature expressed itself in
the most assiduous actions for his ease and accommodation, and the increasing
symptoms of his recovery, filled her mind with joy and exultation.

The day succeeding that on which he was introduced to the family of Horatio,
his servant, who had made an ineffectual search for his body among the slain,
arrived at the cottage, and discovered him to be Doliscus, the only son and
heir of a noble family in England.

When Doliscus had recovered from the senseless state to which he had been
reduced (chiefly, indeed, by the great effusion of blood) the first exercise of
his faculties was the acknowledgment of obligation, and the profession of
gratitude. To Horatio he spoke in terms of reverence and respect; and to Amelia
in the more animated language of admiration, which melted at length into the
gentle tone of flattery and love. But Doliscus had been reared in the school of
dissipation! and, with all the qualifications which allure and captivate the
female heart, he had learned to consider virtue only as an obstacle to
pleasure, and beauty merely as an incentive to the gratification of passion.
His experience soon enabled him to discover something in the solicitude of the
artless Amelia beyond the dictates of compassion and hospitality; and even
before his wounds were closed, he conceived the infamous project of violating
the purity and tranquillity of a family, to which he was indebted for the
prolongation of his existence, and the restoration of his health. From that
very innocence, however, which betrayed her feelings, while she was herself
ignorant of their source, he anticipated the extremest difficulty and danger.
To improve the evident predilection of her mind into a fixed and ardent
attachment, required not, indeed, a very strenuous display of his talents and
address; but the sacrifice of her honor (which an insurmountable antipathy to
the matrimonial engagements made necessary to the accomplishment of his
purpose) was a task that he justly foresaw, could be only executed by the
detestable agency of perfidy and fraud. With these views then he readily
accepted the solicitations of his unsuspecting host, and even contrived to
protract his cure, in order to furnish a plea for his continuance at the
cottage.

Amelia, when, at length, the apprehensions for his safety were removed,
employed all the charms of music and conversation to dissipate the languor,
which his indisposition had produced, and to prevent the melancholy, with which
retirement is apt to affect a disposition accustomed to the gay and busy
transactions of the world. She experienced an unusual pleasure, indeed, in the
discharge of these benevolent offices; for in the company of Doliscus she
insensibly forgot the anxiety she was wont to feel for the fate of her absent
brother; and the sympathy which she had hitherto extended to all the sufferers
of the war, was now monopolized by a single object. Horatio's attachment to the
solitude of his library, afforded frequent opportunities for this infatuating
intercourse, which the designing Doliscus gradually diverted from general to
particular topics -- from observations upon public manners and events, to
insinuations of personal esteem and partiality. Amelia was incapable of deceit,
and unacquainted with suspicion. The energy, but, at the same time, the
respect, with which Doliscus addressed her, was grateful to her feelings; his
rank and fortune entitled him to consideration, and the inestimable favors
that had been conferred upon him, offered a specious security for his truth and
fidelity. The acknowledgment of reciprocal regard was, therefore, an easy
acquisition, and Doliscus triumphed in the modest, but explicit avowal, before
Amelia was apprized of its importance and extent. From that moment, however, he
assumed a pensive and dejected carriage. He occasionally affected to start from
the terrors of a deep reverie* and the vivacity of his temper, which had never
yielded to the anguish of his wounds, seemed suddenly to have expired under the
weight of secret and intolerable affliction. Amelia, distressed and astonished,
implored an explanation of so mysterious a change in his deportment; but his
reiterated sighs, which were for a while, the only answers she received, tended
equally to increase her curiosity and her sorrow.

At length he undertook to disclose the source of his pretended wretchedness;
and, having prefaced the hypocritical tale with the most solemn protestions of
his love and constancy, he told the trembling Amelia that, were it even
possible to disengage himself from an alliance which had been early contracted
for him with a noble heiress of London, still the pride of family, and the
spirit of loyalty, which governed his father's actions, would oppose a union
unaccompanied by the acclamations of dignity, and formed with one whose
connections were zealous in the arduous resistance to the authority of Britain.
"While he lives," added Doliscus, " it is not in my power to choose the means
of happiness -- and yet, as the time approaches when it will be inconsistent
with the duty and honor of a soldier to enjoy any longer the society of
Amelia, how can I reflect upon my situation without anguish and despair!" The
delicate frame of Amelia was agitated with the sensations which this picture
had excited; and, for the first time, she became acquainted with the force of
love, and the dread of separation from its object. Doliscus traced the
sentiments of her heart in the silent, but certain indications of her
countenance, and when tears had melted the violence of her first emotion into a
soft and sympathetic grief, the treacherous suitor thus prosecuted his scheme
against her peace and innocence.

"But it is impossible to resolve upon perpetual misery! One thing may yet be
done to change the scene without incurring a father's resentment and reproach:
-- can my Amelia consent to sacrifice a sentiment of delicacy, to ensure a life
of happiness?" Her complexion brightened and her eye inquisitively turned
toward him. " The parade of public marriage" he continued, "neither adds
strength or energy to the obligation: for, form is the superfluous offspring of
fashion, not the result of reason. The poor peasant whose nuptial contract is
only witnessed by the hallowed minister that pronounces it, is as blessed as the
prince who weds in all the ostentation of a court, and furnishes an additional
festival to a giddy nation. My Amelia has surely no vanity to gratify with idle
pageantry; and as the privacy of the marriage does not take from its sanctity,
I will venture to propose -- nay, look not with severity -- at the neighboring
farm we may be met by the chaplain of my regiment, and love and honor shall
record a union, which prudence fetters with a temporary secrecy."

Hope, fear, the sense of decorum, and the incitements of a passion pure, but
fervent, completed the painful perturbation of Amelia's heart, and, in this
critical moment of her fate, deprived her of speech and recollection.

An anxious interval of silence took place; but when, at length, the power of
expression returned, Amelia urged the duty which she owed to a parent, the
scandal which the world imputed to clandestine marriages, and the fatal
consequences that might arise from the obscurity of the transaction. But
Doliscus, steady to his purpose, again deprecated the folly of pursuing the
shadow in preference to the substance, of preserving fame at the expense of
happiness, and of relinquishing the blessings of connubial life, for the sake
of its formalities. He spoke of Horatio's inflexible integrity, which could not
brook even the appearance of deception, and of his punctilious honor, which
could not submit even to the appearance of intrusion upon the domestic
arrangements of another, as insurmountable arguments for denying him the
knowledge of their union. Finally, he described, in the warmest coloring of
passion and fancy, the effects of Amelia's refusal upon the future tenor of his
life, and bathing her hand with his obedient tears, practiced all the arts of
flattery and frenzy. The influence of love supercedes every other obligation:
Amelia acknowledged its dominion, and yielded to the persuasion of the exulting
Doliscus. The marriage ceremony was privately repeated -- but how will it
excite the indignation of the virtuous reader when he understands, that the
sacred character of the priest was personated by a soldier whom Doliscus had
suborned for this iniquitous occasion! Ye spirits of seduction! whose means are
the prostitution of faith, and whose end is the destruction of innocence, --
tremble at impending judgment, for "there is no mercy in heaven for such
unheard of crimes as these!"

But a short time had elapsed after this fatal step, when the mandate of the
commanding officer obliged Doliscus to prepare for joining his corpse. A silent,
but pungent sense of indiscretion, added to the anguish which Amelia felt in
the hour of separation; and not all his strong assurances of inviolable truth
and attachment, with the soothing prospect of an honorable avowal of their
union, could efface the melancholy impressions of her mind The farmer at whose
house the fictitious marriage had been rehearsed, was employed to manage their
future correspondence; and Doliscus, finally, left the cottage with vows of
love and gratitude at his lips; but schemes of fraud and perjury in his heart.
The small distance from New York, where he was quartered, rendered it easy to
maintain an epistolary intercourse; which became, during its continuance, the
only employment, and the only gratification of Amelia's existence. Its
continuance, however, exceeded not a few weeks. Doliscus soon assumed a formal
and dispassionate style, and the number of his letters gradually diminished,
and every allusion to that marriage, which was the last hope and consolation of
Amelia, he cautiously avoided.

But an event, that demanded the exercise of all her fortitude, now forced
itself upon Amelia's thoughts. She was pregnant; yet could neither resort for
council and comfort to the father whom she had deceived, or obtain it from the
lover by whom she had been seduced. In the tenderest and most delicate terms
she communicated her situation to Doliscus, emphatically called upon him to
rescue her reputation from obloquy, and solicitously courted his return to the
cottage, or, at least, that he would disclose to Horatio the secret of their
union. To prevent any accident, the farmer was prevailed upon to be the bearer
of the paper which contained these sentiments, and, on his return produced the
following epistle.

MADAM,
THE sudden death of my father will occasion my embarking for England
tomorrow. It is not therefore possible to visit the cottage before my
departure; but you may be assured, that I still entertain the warmest gratitude
for the favors which were there conferred upon me by the virtuous Horatio, and
his amiable daughter.

Although I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of some expressions you
have employed, I perceive that you stand in need of a confidential person, to
whom you may reveal the consequence of an indiscreet attachment; and from my
knowledge of his probity (of which you are likewise a judge) no man seems more
conveniently situated, or better calculated for that office than the worthy
farmer who has delivered your letter. To him, therefore, I have recommended
you; and, lest any pecuniary assistance should be necessary on this occasion, I
have entrusted him with a temporary supply, directing him in what manner he
may, from time to time, obtain a sum adequate to your exigencies.

The hurry of package and adieus compels me abruptly to subscribe myself,
Madam, Your most devoted, humble servant, DOLISCUS.


"Gracious God!" exclaimed Amelia, and fell senseless to the ground. For a
while, a convulsive motion shook her frame, but gradually subsiding, the flame
of life seemed to be extinct, and all her terrors at an end. The poor farmer,
petrified with horror and amazement, stood gazing on the scene: but the
exertions of his homely spouse, at length, restored Amelia to existence and
despair.

It has often been observed, that despondency begets boldness and enterprise;
and the female heart, which is susceptible of the gentlest sentiment, is,
likewise, capable of the noblest fortitude. Amelia perceived all the baseness
of the desertion meditated by Doliscus; she foresaw all its ruinous
consequences upon Horatio's peace, her own character, and the fate of the
innocent being which she bore; and wiping the useless tears from her cheek, she
resolved publicly to vindicate her honor, and assert her rights. Animated
then, with the important purpose, supported by the presumption of her marriage,
and hoping yet to find Doliscus in New York, she immediately repaired to that
city -- but alas! he was gone! This disappointment, however, did not defeat,
nor could any obstacle retard the prosecution of her design: a ship that sailed
the succeeding day wasted her to Britain, friendless and forlorn.

Innumerable difficulties and inconveniences were encountered by the
inexperienced traveller, but they vanished before the object of her pursuit;
and even her entrance into London, that chaos of clamor and dissipation,
produced no other sensations than those which naturally arose from her approach
to the dwelling of Doliscus.

Amelia recollected that Doliscus had often described the family residence to
be situated in Grosvenor-place; and the stage, in which she journeyed, stopping
in the evening at a public house in Picadilly, she determined, without delay,
to pay him her unexpected and unwelcome visit. The embarrassed and anxious
manner with which she inquired for his house, exposed her to unjust surmise and
senseless ribaldry; but her grief rendered her incapable of observation, and
her purity was superior to insult.

Doliscus had arrived about a fortnight earlier than Amelia. The title,
influence, and fortune, which devolved upon him in consequence of his father's
death, had swelled his youthful vanity to excess, and supplied him with a
numerous retinue of flatterers and dependants. At the moment that he was
listening in extacy to that servile crew, the victim of his arts, the deluded
daughter of the man to whom he was indebted for the preservation of his life,
stood trembling at his door. A gentle rap, after an awful pause of some
minutes, procured her admission. Her memory recognized the features of the
servant that opened the door; but it was not the valet who had attended
Doliscus at the cottage -- she remembered not where or when she had seen him.

After considerable solicitation, the porter consented to call Doliscus from
his company, and conducted Amelia into an antichamber to wait his arrival. A
roar of laughter succeeded the delivery of her message, and the word
assignation, which was repeated on all sides, seemed to renovate the wit and
hilarity of the table. The gay and gallant host, inflamed with champagne, was
not displeased at the imputation; but observed, that as a lady was in the case,
it was unnecessary to apologize for a short desertion of his friends and wine.

At the sight of that lady, however, Doliscus started. Amelia's countenance was
pale and haggard with fatigue and sorrow; her person was oppressed with the
burden which she now bore in its last stage, and her eye, fixed steadfastly
upon him, as he entered the room, bespoke the complicated anguish and
indignation of her feelings. Her aspect so changed, and her appearance so
unexpected, added to the terrors of a guilty conscience, for a moment, Doliscus
thought the visitation supernatural. But Amelia's wrongs having inspired her
with courage, she boldly reproached him with his baseness and persidy, and
demanded a public and unequivocal acknowledgment of their marriage. In vain he
endeavored to sooth and divert her from her purpose, in vain to persuade her
to silence and delay, -- his arts had lost their wonted influence, while the
restoration of her injured fame and honor absorbed every faculty of her mind.

At length he assumed a different tone, a more authoritative manner. "Madam,"
exclaimed he, "I am not to be thus duped or controuled. I have a sense of pity,
indeed, for your indiscretion, but none for your passion: I would alleviate
your afflictions, but I will not submit to your frenzy." "Wretch!" retorted
Amelia, "but that I owe something to a father's peace, I should despise to call
thee husband." -- " Husband" cried Doliscus, with a sneer, "Husband! why truly,
I remember a rural masquerade, at which an honest soldier, now my humble
porter, played the parson, and you the blushing bride -- but, pr'ythee, do not
talk of husband." --

This discovery only was wanting for the consummation of Amelia's misery. It
was sudden and fatal as the lightning's blast -- she ^unk beneath the stroke. A
deadly stupor seized upon her senses, which was sometimes interrupted with a
boisterous laugh, and sometimes with a nervous ejaculation.

Doliscus, unaffected by compassion or remorse, was solicitous only to employ
this opportunity for Amelia's removal, and having conveyed her into a coach, a
servant was directed to procure lodgings for her, in some obscure quarter of
the city. She spoke not a word during the transaction, but gazing with apparent
indifference upon the objects that surrounded her, she submitted to be
transported whither soever they pleased to conduct her. After winding through a
dreary and dirty passage in the neighborhood of St. Giles's, the carriage
stopped at a hovel which belonged to a relation of the servant that accompanied
her, and, he having communicated in a short whisper the object of his visit, an
old and decrepid beldame led Amelia into a damp and narrow room, whose scant
and tattered furniture proved the wretchedness of its inhabitants.

A premature birth was the natural consequence of the conflict which had raged
in Amelia's mind. She had entered the apartment but a few moments, when the
approach of that event gave a turn to her passions, and called her drooping
faculties once more into action. Without comfort, without assistance, in the
hour of extreme distress (save the officious services of her antiquated host)
she was delivered of a son; but the fond sensibility of the mother obtained an
instantaneous superiority over every other consideration. Though, alas! this
solitary gratification too, continued not long; -- her infant expired after a
languid existence of three days, serving only to increase the bitterness of
Amelia's portion.

Amelia cast her eye toward heaven as the breath deserted the body of her
babe: -- it was not a look of supplication, for what had she to hope, or what
to dread? -- neither did it indicate dissatisfaction or reproach, for she had
early learned the duty of reverence and resignation -- but it was an awful
appeal to the throne of grace, for the vindication of the act by which she had
resolved to terminate her woes. A phial of laudanum, left by a charitable
apothecary, who had visited her in her sickness, presented the means, and she
wanted not the fortitude to employ them. Deliberately, then, pouring the
baneful draught into a glass, she looked wistfully for a while upon the infant
corpse that lay extended on its bed, then bending on her knee, uttered, in a
firm and solemn voice the melancholy effusions of her soul, -- "Gracious
Father! when thy justice shall pronounce upon the deed which extricates me from
the calamities of the world, let thy mercy contemplate the cause that urged me
to the perpetration. I have been deluded into error; but am free from guilt: I
have been solicitous to preserve my innocence and honor; but am exposed to
infamy and shame. The treachery of him to whom I entrusted my fate, has reduced
me to despair -- the declining day of him from whom I received my being, has
been clouded with my indiscretions, and there is no cure left for the sorrows
that consume me, but the dark and silent grave. Visit me not then, in thy
wrath, oh! Father, but let the excess of my sufferings in this world, expiate
the crime which wafts me into the world to come -- may thy mercy yield comfort
to Horatio's heart, and teach Doliscus the virtue of repentance!"

She rose and lifted the glass. At that instant, a noise on the stairs
attracted her attention, and a voice anxiously pronouncing -- "It must be so!
-- nay, I will see her -- " arrested the dreadful potion in its passage to her
lips. "It is my Amelia!" exclaimed Horatio, as he hastily entered the room.

Amelia started, and looked for some moments intently on her father, then
rushed into his arms, and anxiously concealed the shame and agony of her
countenance, in that bosom, from which alone she now dreaded reproach, or hoped
for consolation. He, too, beheld with horror the scene that was presented to
his view: he pressed his deluded, miserable daughter, to his heart, while a
stream of tears ran freely down his cheeks; till, at length, his imagination,
infected with the objects that surrounded him, conceived the dreadful purpose
of the draught, which had fallen from Amelia's hand, and anticipated a sorrow,
even beyond the extremity of his present feelings. When, however, he collected
sufficient courage to resolve his fears, and it was ascertained, that the
meditated act had not been perpetrated, a momentary sensation of joy
illuminated his mind, like the transient appearance of the moon, amidst the
gloomy horrors of a midnight storm.

When the first impressions of this mournful interview had passed away, Horatio
spoke comfort to his daughter. "Come my child, the hand of Heaven, that
afflicted us with worldly cares, has been stretched out to guard you from
everlasting wretchedness: -- that Providence which proves how vain are the
pursuits of this life, has bestowed upon us the means of seeking the permanent
happiness of that which is to come. Cheer up, my Amelia! The errors of our
conduct may expose us to the scandal of the world, but it is guilt alone which
can violate the inward tranquillity of the mind." He then took her hand, and
attempted to lead her to the door. "Let us withdraw from this melancholy scene,
my love!" -- "Look there!" said Amelia, pointing to the corpse. "Look there!"
"Ah!" said Horatio, in a faultering accent-"but it is the will of Heaven!"
"Then it is right," cried Amelia -- "give the poor victim a little earth --
sir! is it not sad to think of? -- but I am reconciled." She now consented to
quit the room, and was conveyed in a carriage to the inn, at which Horatio (who
immediately returned to superintend the interment of the child) had stopped on
his arrival.

It is now proper to inform the reader, that after Amelia had left the Cottage,
and the alarm of her elopement had spread around the neighborhood, the Farmer
hastened to communicate to Horatio the transactions which he had witnessed, and
the suspicions which his wife had conceived of Amelia's situation. The wretched
father sickened at the tale. But it was the sentiment of compassion, and not of
resentment, that oppressed his soul. There are men, indeed, so abject in their
subjection to the opinion of the world, that they can sacrifice natural
affection to artificial pride, and doom to perpetual infamy and wretchedness, a
child, who might be reclaimed from error by parental admonition, or raised from
despair by the fostering hand of friendship. Horatio, however, entertained a
different sense: he regarded not the weakness of human virtue as an object of
accusation, but liberally distinguished between the crimes and the errors of
mankind; and, when he could not alleviate the afflicted, or correct the
vicious, he continued to lament, but he forebore to reprobate, "My poor Amelia!
how basely has her innocence been betrayed! -- But I must follow her: -- it may
be her injuries have distracted her, and she has fled, she knows not whither!
Come! not a moment shall be lost: I will overtake my child, wherever her
sorrows may lead her: for, if I cannot procure redress for her wrongs, I will,
at least, administer comfort to her miseries." Such was the language of
Horatio, as soon as he could exercise the power of utterance. A few days
enabled him to arrange his affairs, and having learned the route which Amelia
had taken, he embarked in the first vessel for England. The peculiar object of
his voyage, and the nature of his misfortunes, determined him to conceal
himself from the knowledge of his friends and correspondents; and a lucky
chance discovered the wretched abode of his Amelia, the very instant of his
arrival in London.

"Can you tell me, ny good host, where Doliscus the lord --, resides?" said
Horatio as he entered the inn. "Marry, that I can," replied the landlord:" his
servant is just now talking with my wife; and if you will step into the next
room, perhaps he will show you the way to the house." Horatio advanced toward
the room door, and, upon looking through a glass panel in the door, he beheld
the identical servant that had attended Doliscus at the Cottage, in eager
conversation with the hostess. He paused. "She is delivered; but the child is
dead:" -- said the servant. Horatio started; his imagination eagerly
interpreted these words to have been spoken of Amelia, and he could scarcely
restrain the anguish of his feelings from loud exclamation and complaint. --
"My lord's conscience grows unusually troublesome" continued the servant; "he
has ordered me again to inquire after her health, and to provide for the
funeral of the child -- would she were safe in America! for, to be sure, her
father is the best old man that ever lived!" "It Is well!" cried Horatio. "Did
you call, sir?" said the hostess, opening the door. The servant took this
opportunity of withdrawing, and Horatio silently followed him, at a distance,
till he arrived at the habitation of Amelia, in the critical moment which
enabled him to save the life he had given, and to rescue his deluded daughter
from the desperate sin of suicide.

When Horatio returned to the inn, after discharging the last solemn duties to
the departed infant, the landlord presented a letter to him, which a servant
had just left at the bar, and asked if he was the person to whom it was
addressed. As soon as Horatio had cast his eye upon the superscription, he
exclaimed, "What mystery is this? -- A letter left for my son Honorius at an
inn in London." He eagerly seized the paper, and retiring into an adjoining
chamber, he perused its contents with increased amazement and agitation.

"SIR,
"I AM sensible that the injuries of which you complain, will neither admit of
denial or expiation, A few minutes after, your note was delivered; some
circumstances had been communicated to me respecting the unhappy Amelia, that
awakened a sentiment of remorse, and prepared me for a ready compliance with
your summons. Tomorrow morning at five o'clock, I shall attend at the place
which you have appointed.

DOLISCUS."


The voice of Honorius, inquiring for the letter, roused Horatio from the
reverie into which its contents had plunged him. The honor of his son, the
villainy of his antagonist, and Amelia's sufferings, contending with the
feelings of the father, and the forbearance of the christian, at last prevailed
with him to suffer the hostile interview to which Doliscus had thus consented.
When therefore Honorius entered the room, and the natural expressions of
tenderness and surprise were mutually exchanged, they freely discoursed of the
lamentable history of Amelia, and warmly execrated that treachery which had
accomplished the ruin of her peace and fame. Nor had Doliscus confined his
baseness to this object. The chance of war had thrown Honorius into his power
shortly after his departure from the cottage, and discovering his affinity to
Amelia, the persevering hypocrite artfully insinuated to the commander in
chief, that Honorius meditated an escape, and obtained an order for his
imprisonment on board a frigate, which sailing suddenly for England, he was
lodged upon his arrival, in the common gaol, appropriated for the confinement
of American prisoners. Here it was, however, that he acquired the information
of Amelia's elopement, and heard the cause to which it was imputed from the
captured master of an American vessel, who had formerly been employed in the
service of Horatio, and had received the communication from the lips of his
ancient patron, in the first moments of his grief. The fate which had
unexpectedly led him to Britain, Honorius now regarded as the minister of his
revenge. He frowned away the tear which started at the recital of his sister's
wrongs, as if ashamed to pity 'till he had redressed them; and feeling, upon
this occasion, an additional motive for soliciting his freedom, he employed the
interest of Horatio's name, which notwithstanding the political feuds that
prevailed, was sufficient, at length, to procure his discharge upon parol.
Having easily learned the abode of Doliscus, he immediately addressed that note
to him which produced the answer delivered to Horatio.

When Honorius was informed that Amelia was, at that time, beneath the same
roof, he expressed an eager desire immediately to embrace his afflicted sister;
but Horatio strongly represented the impropriety of an interview 'till the
event of the assignation with Doliscus was ascertained, and it was, therefore,
agreed for the present, to conceal his arrival from her knowledge.

Absorbed in the melancholy of her thoughts, Amelia had not uttered a syllable
since the removal from her dreary habitation, but suffered the busy attention
of the servants of the inn, with a listless indifference. The agitation of her
mind, indeed, had hitherto rendered her insensible to the weakness of her
frame; but exhausted nature, at length produced the symptoms of an approaching
fever, and compelled her, reluctantly, to retire to her bed. When Horatio
entered the room, the fever had considerably increased, he therefore requested
the assistance of a neighboring physician, who pronounced her situation to be
critically dangerous. In the evening, the unusual vivacity of her eyes, the
incoherence of her speech, and repeated peals of loud and vacant laughter,
proved the disordered state of her understanding, and increased the
apprehensions of her attendants. "A few hours will decide her fate," said the
Doctor, as he left the room. "My poor Amelia!" cried Horatio, raising her hand
to his lips -- she looked sternly at him for a moment, then relaxing the
severity of her features, she again burst into a boisterous laugh, which
terminated in a long and heavy sigh, as if her spirits were exhausted with the
violence of her exertions.

The task which Horatio had now to perform, was difficult indeed! The virtue
and fortitude of his soul could hardly sustain a conflict against the grief and
passion that consumed him; whilst on the one hand, he beheld the distraction of
his daughter, and, on the other, anticipated the danger of his son. He
resolved, however, to keep Amelia's indisposition a secret from Honorius, with
whom he arranged the dreadful business of the morning, and, having fervently
bestowed his blessing there, he returned to pass the night in prayer and
watching by Amelia's side.

Honorius retired to his chamber, but not to rest. It was not, however, the
danger of the approaching combat, which occasioned a moment's anxiety or
reflection; for his courage was superior to every consideration of personal
safety. But that courage had hitherto been regulated by a sense of obligation
consistent with the precepts of religion -- he had often exerted it to deserve
the glorious meed of a soldier, but he scorned to employ it for the
contemptible reputation of a duellist; it had taught him to serve his country,
but not to offend his God. "If there is a cause which can justify the act, is
it not mine? It Is not a punctilious honor, a visionary insult, or a petulant
disposition that influences my conduct:" said Honorius, as he mused upon the
subject. "A sister basely tricked of her innocence and fame, a father
ungratefully plundered of his peace and hopes, in the last stage of an
honorable life, and myself (but that is little) treacherously transported to a
remote and inhospitable land -- these are my motives; and Heaven, Doliscus, be
the judge between us!"

As soon as the dawn appeared, Honorius repaired to the place of appointment,
where a few minutes before the hour, Doliscus had likewise arrived. He was
attended by a friend, but perceiving his antagonist alone, he requested his
companion to withdraw to a distant spot, from which he might observe the event,
and afford assistance to the vanquished party.

"Once more we meet, Sir," said Doliscus, "upon the business of death; but that
fortune which failed you in your country's cause, maybe more propitious in your
own." "What pity it is," exclaimed Honorius, that thou should be a villain,
for thou art brave! "Nay, I come to offer a more substantial revenge for the
wrongs I have committed, than merely submitting to the imputation of so gross
an epithet -- take it, Sir, -- it is my life." They instantly engaged. Doliscus
for awhile defended himself with superior address, but laying, himself suddenly
open to the pass of his antagonist, he received his sword in the left breast, a
little below the ^eat of the heart!

"Nobly done," cried Doliscus as he fell, "it is the vengeance of Amelia; and
oh! may it serve to expiate the crime of her betrayer." His friend who had
attentively viewed the scene, advanced, when he saw him on the ground: and
assisted by Honorius, bore him to a carriage which had been directed to attend
within call. He was then conveyed to the house of an eminent surgeon, who
having ordered the necessary accommodations, examined the wound, and pronounced
it to be mortal." "Fly, sir," said Doliscus, turning to Honorius, at this
intelligence -- "your country will afford you an asylum, and protect you from
the consequences of my fate. I beseech you embitter not my last moments with
the reflection of your danger -- but bear with you to the injured Amelia, the
story of my repentance, and, if you dare, ask her to forgive me." The
resentments of Honorius were subdued; he presented his hand to the dying
Doliscus, in whose eye a gleam of joy was kindled at the thought, but it was
quickly superceded by a cold and sudden tremour; he attempted, but in vain, to
speak; he seized the offered hand; he pressed it eagerly to his lips, and in
the moment of that expressive action, he expired.

Honorius now hastened to inform Horatio of this fatal event, and to contrive
the means of escape. But when he returned to the inn, confusion and distress
were pictured on every face; a wild, but harmonious, voice, occasionally broke
forth into melancholy strains, and the name of Doliscus was repeatedly
pronounced in accents of tenderness and compassion. -- "How is it my son?"
cried Horatio eagerly. "Doliscus is no more!" replied Honorius. "Would he had
lived another day! I wished not the ruin of his soul." "But he repented, sir."
"Then heaven be merciful!" exclaimed Horatio.

Here their conversation was interrupted, by the melodious chauntings of Amelia.

I Will have none of your flowers though so blooming and sweet;
Their scent, it may poison, and false is their hue;
I tell you begone! for I never shall forget,
That Doliscus was lovely and treacherous too.
Honorius listened attentively to the song; it vibrated in his ear, and swelled
the aching artery of his heart. "Come on!" said Horatio leading him to Amelia's
chamber. They found her sitting on the bed, with a pillow before her, over
which she moved her fingers, as if playing on a harpsichord. Their entrance
disturbed her for a moment, but she soon resumed her employment.

He said and he swore he loved me true: -- was it a lover's part,
To ruin good Horatio's peace and break Amelia's heart?
A heavy sigh followed these lines, which were articulated in a wistful and
sympathetic tone, and she sunk exhausted on her bed. -- In a few minutes,
however, she started from this still and silent state, and having gazed with a
wild and aching eye around the room, she uttered a loud and piercing cry -- it
was the awful signal of her dissolution -- and her injured spirit took its
everlasting flight.

The reader will excuse a minute description of the succeeding scenes. The
alarm raised by the death of Doliscus compelled Honorius to quicken his
departure, and he joined the standard of America a few hours before the battle
of Monmouth, in which, for the service of his country, he sacrificed a life
that misfortune had then taught him to consider of no other use or estimation.

As for the venerable Horatio -- having carried with him to the cottage the
remains of his darling child, in a melancholy solitude he consumes the time;
his only business, meditation and prayer; his only recreation a daily visit to
the monument, which he has raised in commemoration of Amelia's fate; and all
his consolation resting in this assurance, that whatever may be the sufferings
of virtue HERE, its portion must be happiness HEREAFTER.

HISTORY OF AMELIA, OR MALEVOLENCE DEFEATED.
MRS. Winifrid Wormwood was the daughter of a rustic merchant, who, by the
happy union of many lucrative trades, amassed an enormous fortune. His family
consisted of three girls, and Winifrid was the eldest: Long before she was
twenty, she was surrounded with lovers, some probably attracted by the splendid
prospect of her expected portion, and others truly captivated by her personal
graces; for her person was elegant, and her elegance was enlivened with
peculiar vivacity. Mr. Wormwood was commonly called a kind parent, and an
honest man; and he might deserve, indeed, those honorable appellations, if it
were not a profanation of language to apply them to a narrow and a selfish
spirit. He indulged his daughters in many expensive amusements, because it
flattered his pride; but his heart was engrossed by the proffits of his
extensive traffic: He turned, with the most repulsive asperity, from every
proposal that could lead him to diminish his capital, and thought his daughters
unreasonable, if they wished for any permanent satisfaction above that of
seeing their father increase in opulence and splendour. His two younger
children, who inherited from their diseased mother a tender delicacy of frame,
languished and died at an early period of life, and the death of one of them
was imputed, with great probability, to a severe disappointment in her first
affection. The more sprightly Winifrid, whose heart was a perfect stranger to
genuine love, surmounted the mortification of seeing many suitors discarded;
and by the insensate avarice of her father, she was naturally led into habits
of artifice and intrigue. Possessing an uncommon share of very shrewd and
piercing wit, with the most profound hypocrisy, she contrived to please, and to
blind, her plodding old parent; who perpetually harangued on the discretion of
his daughter, and believed her a miracle of reserve and prudence, at the very
time when she was suspected of such conduct as would have disqualified her, had
it ever been proved, for the rank she now holds in this essay. She was said to
have amused herself with a great variety of amorous adventures, which eluded
the observation of her father; but of the many lovers who sighed to her in
secret, not one could tempt her into marriage, and, to the surprise of the
public, the rich heiress of Mr. Wormwood reached the age of thirty-seven,
without changing her name. Just as she arrived at this mature season of life,
the opulent old gentleman took his leave of a world, in which he had acted a
busy part, pleased with the idea of leaving a large fortune, as a monument of
his industry, but wanting the superior satisfation, which a more generous
parent would probably have derived from the happy establishment of a daughter.
He gained, however, from the hypocrisy of Winifrid, what he could not claim
from her affection, the honor of being lamented with a profusion of tears. She
di^tingui^hed herself by displaying all the delicate gradations of filial
sorrow; but recovered at a proper time, all the natural gaiety of her temper,
which she now had the full opportunity of indulging, being mistress of a
magnificent mansion, within a mile of a populous town, and enabled to enliven
it with all the arts of luxury, by inheriting such accumulated ^ealth, as would
safely support the utmost efforts of provincial splendour. Miss Wormwood now
expected to see every bachelor of figure and consequence a suppliant at her
feet; she promised to herself no little entertainment in sporting with their
addresses, without the fear of suffering from a tyrannical husband, as she had
learned caution from her father, and had privately resolved not to trust any
man with her money; a resolution the more discreet, as she had much to
apprehend, and very little to learn, from so dangerous a master! The
good-natured town, in whose environs the rich Winifrid resided, very kindly
pointed out to her no less than twenry lively beaux for her choice; but, to the
shame or the honor of those gentlemen, they were too timid, or, too honest, to
make any advances. The report of her youthful frolics, and the dread of her
sarcastic wit, had more power to repel, than her person and her wealth had to
attract. Passing her fiftieth year, she acquired the serious name of mistress,
without the dignity of a wife, and without receiving a single offer of marriage
from the period in which she became the possessor of so opulent a fortune.

Whether this mortifying disappointment had given a peculiar asperity to her
temper or whether malevolence was the earlier characteristic of her mind, I
will not pretend to determine; but it is certain, that from this autumnal or
rather wintry season of her life, Mrs. Wormwood made it her chief occup^tion to
amuse herself with the most subtle devices of malicious ingenuity, and to
frustrate every promising scheme of affection and delight, which she discovered
in the wide circle of her acquaintance. She seemed to be tormented with an
incessant dread, that youth and beauty might secure to themselves that
happiness, which she found wit and fortune were unable to bestow; hence she
watched, with the most piercing eye, all the lovely young women of her
neighborhood, and often insinuated herself into the confidence of many, that
she might penetrate all the secrets of their love, and privately blast its
success. She was enabled to render herself intimate with the young and the
lovely, by the opulent splendour in which she lived, and by the bewitching
vivacity of her conversation. Her talents of this kind were, indeed,
extraordinary; her mind was never polished or enriched by literature, as Mr.
Wormwood set little value on any books, excepting those of his counting house;
and the earlier years of his daughter were too much engaged by duplicity and
intrigue, to leave her either leisure or inclination for a voluntary attachment
to more improving studies. She read very little, and was acquainted with no
language but her own; yet a brilliant understanding, and an uncommon portion of
ready wit, supplied her with a more alluring fund of conversation, than
learning could bestow. She chiefly recommended herself to the young and
inexperienced, by the insinuating charm of the most lively ridicule, and by the
art of seasoning her discourse with wantton inuendos of so subtle a nature,
that gravity knew not how to object to them: She had the singular faculty of
throwing such a soft and dubious twilight over the most licentious images, that
they captivated curiosity and attention, without exciting either fear or
disgust. Her malevolence was perpetually disguised under the mask of gaiety*
and she completely possessed that plausibility of malice, so difficult to
attain, and so forcibly recommended in the words of lady Macbeth:

"Bear welcome in your eye,
"Your hand, your tongue; look like the innocent flower,
"But be the serpent under it!"
With what success she practiced this dangerous lesson, the reader may learn
from the following adventure. --

It was the c^stom of Mrs. Wormwood to profess the most friendly solicitude for
female youth, and the highest admiration of beauty; she wished to be considered
as their patroness, because such an idea afforded her the fairest opportunities
of secretly mortifying their insufferable presumption. With a peculiar
refinement in malice, she first encouraged, and afterward defeated, those
amusing matrimonial projects, which the young and beautiful are so apt to
entertain. The highest gratification, which her ingenious malignity could
devise, consisted in torturing some lovely inexperienced girl, by playing upon
the tender passions of an open and unsuspecting heart.

Accident threw within her reach a most tempting subject for such fiend-like
diversion, in the person of Amelia Nevil, the daughter of a brave and
accomplished officer, who, closing a laborious and honorable life in very
indigent circumstances, had left his unfortunate child to the care of his
maiden sister. The aunt of Amelia was such an old maid as might alone suffice
to rescue the sisterhood from ridicule and contempt. She had been attached, in
her early days to a gallant youth, who unhappily lost his own life in
preserving that of his dear friend, her brother: she devoted herself to his
memory with the most tender, unaffected, and invariable attachment; refusing
several advantageous offers of marriage, though her income was so narrow, that
necessity obliged her to convert her whole fortune into an annuity, just before
the calamitous event happened, which made her the only guardian of poor Amelia.
This lovely, but unfortunate girl, was turned of fourteen on the death of her
father. She found, in the house of his sister, the most friendly asylum, and a
relation, whose heart and mind made her most able and willing to form the
character of this engaging orphan, who appeared to be as highly favored by
nature, as she was persecuted by fortune. The beauty of Amelia was so striking,
and the charms of her lively understanding began to display themselves in so
enchanting a manner, that her affectionate aunt could not bear the idea of
placing her in any lower order of life: she gave her the education of a
gentlewoman, in the flattering and generous hope, that her various attractions
must supply the absolute want of fortune, and that she should enjoy ^he delight
of seeing her dear Amelia happily settled in marriage, before her death exposed
her lovely ward to that poverty, which was her only inheritance. -- Heaven
disposed it otherwise. This amiable woman, after having acted the part of a
most affectionate parent to her indigent niece, died before Amelia attained the
age of twenty. The poor girl was now apparently destitute of every resource;
and exposed to penury, with a heart bleeding for the loss of a most indulgent
protector. A widow lady of her acquaintance very kindly afforded her a refuge
in the first moments of her distress, and proposed to two of her opulent
friends, that Amelia should reside with them by turns, dividing the year
between them, and passing four months with each. As soon as Mrs. Wormwood was
informed of this event, as she delighted in those ostentatious acts of apparent
beneficence, which are falsely called charity, she desired to be admitted among
the voluntary guardians of the poor Amelia. To this proposal all the parties
assented, and it was settled, that Amelia should pass the last quarter of every
year, as long as she remained single, under the roof of Mrs. Wormwood, This
lovely orphan had a sensibility of heart, which rendered her extremely grateful
for the protection she received, but which made her severely feel all the
miseries of dependence. Her beauty attracted a multitude of admirers, many of
whom, presuming on her poverty, treated her with a licentious levity, which
always wounded her ingenuous pride. Her person, her mind, her manners were
universally commended by the men; but no one thought of making her his wife,
"Amelia (they cried) is an enchanting creature; but who, in these times, can
afford to marry a pretty, proud girl, supported by charity?" Though this
prudential question was never uttered in the presence of Amelia, she began to
perceive its influence, and suffered a painful dread of proving a perpetual
burden to those friends, by whose generosity she subsisted; she wished, a
thousand times, that her affectionate aunt, instead of cultivating her mind
with such dangerous refinement, had placed her in any station of life, where
she might have maintained herself by her own manual labor: she sometimes
entertained a project of making some attempt for this purpose; and she once
thought of changing her name, and of trying to support herself as an actress on
one of the public theaters; but this idea, which her honest pride had
suggested, was effectually suppressed by her modesty; and she continued to
waste the most precious time of her youth, under the mortification of
perpetualy wishing to change her mode of life, and of not knowing how to effect
it. Almost two years had now elapsed since the death of her aunt, and without
any prospect of marriage, she was now in her second period of residence with
Mrs. Wormwood. Amelia's understanding was by no means inferior to her other
endowments: she began to penetrate all the artful disguise, and to gain a
perfect and very painful insight into the real character of her present
hostess. This lady had remarked, that when Miss Nevil resided with her, her
house was much more frequented by gentlemen, than at any other season. This,
indeed, was true; and it unluckily happened, that these visitors often forgot
to applaud the smart sayings of Mrs. Wormwood, in contemplating the sweet
countenance of Amelia; a circumstance full sufficient to awaken, in the
neglected wit, the most bitter envy, hatred and malice. In truth, Mrs. Wormwood
detested her lovely guest with the most implacable virulence; but she had the
singular art of disguising her detestation in the language of flattery: she
understood the truth of Pope's maxim,

" He hurts me most who lavishly commends." and she therefore made use of
lavish commendations, as an instrument of malevolence toward Amelia; she
insulted the taste, and ridiculed the choice, of every new-married man, and
declared herself convinced, that he was a fool, because he had not chosen that
most lovely young woman. To more than one gentleman she said, you must marry
Amelia; and, as few men choose to be driven into wedlock, some offers were
possibly prevented, by the treacherous vehemence of her praise. Her malice,
however, was not sufficiently gratified by observing that Amelia had no
prospect of marriage. To indulge her malignity, she resolved to amuse this
unhappy girl with the hopes of such a joyous event, and then to turn, on a
sudden, all these splendid hopes into mockery and delusion. Accident led her to
pitch on Mr. Nelson, as a person whose name she might with the greatest safety
employ, as the instrument of her insidious design, and with the greater chance
of success, as she observed that Amelia had conceived for him a particular
regard. Mr. Nelson was a gentleman, who, having met with very singular events,
had contracted a great, but very amiable singularity of character: -- he was
placed early in life, in a very lucrative commercial situation, and was on the
point of settling happily in marriage with a very beautiful young lady, when
the house, in which she resided, was consumed by fire. Great part of her
family, and among them the destined bride, was buried in the ruins. Mr. Nelson,
in loosing the object of his ardent affection by so sudden a calamity, lost for
some time the use of his reason; and when his health and senses returned, he
still continued under the oppression of the profoundest melancholy, till his
fond devotion to the memory of her, whom he had lost in so severe a manner,
suggested to his fancy a singular plan of benevolence, in the prosecution of
which he recovered a great portion of his former spirits. This plan consisted
in searching for female objects of charity, whose distresses had been
occasioned by fire. As his fortune was very ample, and his own private expenses
very moderate, he was able to relieve many unfortunate persons in this
condition; and his affectionate imagination delighted itself with the idea,
that in these uncommon acts of beneficence he was guided by the influence of
that lovely angel, whose mortal beauty had perished in the flames. Mr. Nelson
frequently visited a married sister, who was settled in the town where Mrs.
Wormwood resided. There was also, in the same town, an amiable elderly widow,
for whom he had a particular esteem. This lady, whose name was Melford, had
been left in very scanty circumstances on the death of her husband, and resided
at that time in London, where she had been involved in additional distress by
that calamity, to which the attentive charity of Mr. Nelson was forever
directed: he more than repaired the loss which she sustained by fire, and
assisted in settling her in the neighborhood of his sister. Mrs. Melford had
been intimate with the aunt of Amelia, and was still the most valuable friend
of that lovely orphan, who paid her frequent visits, though she never resided
under her roof. Mr. Nelson had often seen Amelia at the house of Mrs. Melford,
which led him to treat her with particular politeness, whenever he visited Mrs.
Wormwood; a circumstance on which the latter founded her ungenerous project*
She perfectly knew all the singular private history of Mr. Nelson, and firmly
believed, like all the rest of his acquaintance, that no attractions could ever
tempt him to marry; but she thought it possible to make Amelia conceive the
hope that her beauty had melted his resolution; and nothing she supposed, could
more effectually mortify her guest, than to find herself derided for so vain an
expectation.

Mrs. Wormwood began, therefore, to insinuate, in the most artful manner, that
Mr. Nelson was very particular in his civilities to Amelia, magnified all his
amiable qualities, and expressed the greatest pleasure in the prospect of so
delightful a match. These petty artifices, however, had no effect on the
natural modesty and diffidence of Amelia; she saw nothing that authorized such
an idea in the usual politeness of a well-bred man of thirty-seven; she pitied
the misfortune, she admired the elegant and engaging, though serious manners,
and she revered the virtues of Mr. Nelson; but, supposed his mind to be
entirely engrossed, as it really was, by his singularly charitable pursuits;
she entertained not a thought of engaging his affection. Mrs. Wormwood was
determined to play off her favorite engine of malignity, a counterfeited
letter. She had acquired, in her youth, the very dangerrous talent of forging
any hand that she pleased; and her passion for mischief had afforded her much
practice in this treacherous art. Having previously and secretly engaged Mr.
Nelson to drink tea with her, she wrote a billet to Amelia, in the name of that
gentleman, and with the most perfect imitation of his hand. The billet said,
that he designed himself the pleasure of passing that afternoon at the house of
Mrs. Wormwood, and requested the favor of a private conference with Miss Nevil
in the course of the evening, intimating, in the most delicate and doubtful
terms, an ardent desire of becoming her husband. Mrs. Wormwood contrived that
Amelia should not receive this billet till just before dinnertime, that she
might not show it to her friend and confidant, Mrs. Melford, and by her means,
detect its fallacy before the hour of her intended humiliation arrived.

Amelia blushed in reading the note, and, in the first surprise of unsuspecting
innocence, gave it to the vigilant Mrs. Wormwood; who burst into vehement
expressions of delight; congratulated her blushing guest on the full success of
her charms, and triumphed in her own prophetic discernment. They sat down to
dinner, but poor Amelia could hardly swallow a morsel; her mind was in a
tumultuous agitation of pleasure and amazement. The malicious imposter,
enjoying her confusion, allowed her no time to compose her hurried spirits in
the solitude of her chamber. Some female visitors arrived to tea; and, at
length, Mr. Nelson entered the room. Amelia trembled and blushed as he
approached her; but she was a little relieved from her embarrassment by the
business of the tea-table, over which she presided. Amelia was naturally
graceful in every thing she did, but the present agitation of her mind gave a
temporary awkwardness to all her motions: she committed many little blunders in
the management of the tea-table; a cup fell from her trembling hand, and was
broken; but the politeness of Mr. Nelson led him to say so many kind and
graceful things to her on these petty incidents, that, instead of increasing
her distress, they produced an opposite effect, and the tumult of her bosom
gradually subsided into a calm and composed delight. She ventured to meet the
eyes of Mr. Nelson, and thought them expressive of that tenderness which
promised a happy end to all her misfortunes. At the idea of exchanging misery
and dependence for comfort and honor, as the wife of so amiable a man, her
heart expanded with the most innocent and grateful joy. This appeared in her
countenance, and gave such an exquisite radiance to all her features, that she
looked a thousand times more beautiful than ever. Mrs. Wormwood saw this
improvement of her charms, and, sickening at the sight, determined to reduce
the splendour of such insufferable beauty, and hastily terminate the triumph of
her deluded guest. She began with a few malicious and sarcastic remarks on the
vanity of beautiful young women, and the hopes, which they frequently entertain
of an imaginary lover; but finding these remarks produced not the effect she
intended, she took an opportunity of whispering in the ear of Amelia, and
begged her not to harbor any vain expectations, for the billet she had
received was a counterfeit, and a mere piece of pleasantry. Amelia shuddered,
and turned pale: surprise, disappointment, and indignation, conspired to
overwhelm her. She exerted her utmost power to conceal her emotions; but the
conflict in her bosom was too violent to be disguised. The tears, which she
vainly endeavored to suppress, burst forth, and she was obliged to quit the
room in very visible disorder. Mr. Nelson expressed his concern; but he was
checked in his benevolent inquiries by the caution of Mrs. Wormwood, who said;
on the occasion, that Miss Nevil was a very amiable girl, but she had some
peculiarities of temper and was apt to put a wrong construction on the innocent
pleasantry of her friends. Mr. Nelson observing that Amelia did not return, and
hoping that his departure might contribute to restore the interrupted harmony
of the house, took an early leave of Mrs. Wormwood; who immediately flew to the
chamber of Amelia, to exult, like a fiend, over that lovely victim of her
successful malignity. She found not the person whom she was so eager to insult.
Amelia had, indeed, retired to her chamber, and passed there a very miserable
half hour, much hurt by the treacherous cruelty of Mrs. Wormwood, and still
more wounded by reflections on her own credulity, which she condemned with that
excess of severity so natural to a delicate mind in arraigning itself. She
would have flown for immediate consolation to her friend, Mrs. Melford, but she
had reason to believe that lady engaged on a visit, and she therefore resolved
to take a solitary walk for the purpose of composing her spirits; but neither
solitude nor exercise could restore her tranquillity; and, as it grew late in
the evening, she hastened to Mrs. Melford's, in hopes of now finding her
returned. Her worthy old confidant was, indeed, in her little parlour alone,
when Amelia entered the room. The eyes of this lovely girl immediately betrayed
her distress; and the old lady, with her usual tenderness, exclaimed, "Good
heaven! my dear child, for what have you been crying?" "Because," replied
Amelia, in a broken voice, and bursting into a fresh shower of tears, "because
I am a fool?" -- Mrs. Melford began to be most seriously alarmed, and,
expressing her maternal solicitude in the kindest manner. Amelia produced the
fatal paper -- "There," says she, "is a letter in the name of your excellent
friend, Mr. Nelson; it is a forgery of Mrs. Wormwood's, and I have been such an
idiot as to believe it real." The affectionate Mrs. Melford, who in her first
alarm, had apprehended a much heavier calamity, was herself greatly comforted
in discovering the truth, and said many kind things to console her young
friend. "Do not fancy," replied Amelia, "that I am foolishly in love with Mr.
Nelson, though I think him the most pleasing as well as the most excellent, of
men; and though I confess to you, that I should certainly think it a blessed
lot to find a refuge from the mis^ry of my present dependence, in the arms of
so benevolent and so generous a protector." -- "Those arms are now open to
receive you," said a voice that was heard before the speaker appeared. Amelia
started at the sound, and her surprise was not a little increased in seeing Mr.
Nelson himself, who entering the room from an adjoining apartment, embraced the
lovely orphan in a transport of tenderness and delight. Amelia, alive to all
the feelings of genuine modesty, was for some minutes more painfully distressed
by this surprise, than she had been by her past mortification: she was ready to
sink into the earth, at the idea of having betrayed her secret to the man, from
whom she would have labored most to conceal it. In the first tumult of this
delicate confusion, she sinks into a chair, and hides her face in her
handkerchief. Nelson with a mixture of respect and love, being afraid of
increasing her distress, seizes one of her hands, and continues to kiss it
without uttering a word. The good Mrs. Melford, almost as much astonished, but
less painfully confused than Amelia, beholds this unexpected scene with that
kind of joy which is much more disposed to weep than to speak -- And, while
this little party is thus absorbed in silence, let me hasten to relate the
incidents which produced their situation.

Mr. Nelson had observed the sarcastic manner of Mrs. Wormwood toward Amelia,
and, as soon as he had ended his uncomfortable visit, he hastened to the worthy
Mrs. Melford, to give her some little account of what had passed, and to
concert with her some happier plan for the support of this amiable, insulted
orphan. "I am acquainted," said he, "with some brave and wealthy officers, who
have served with the father of Miss Nevil, and often speak of him with respect;
I am sure I can raise among them a subscription for the maintenance of this
tender unfortunate girl: we will procure for her an annuity, that shall enable
her to escape from such malignant patronage, to have a little home of her own,
and to support a servant." Mrs. Melford was transported at this idea; and,
recollecting all her obligations to this benevolent man, wept, and extolled his
generosity; and, seeing Amelia at some distance, through a bow window, which
commanded the street in which she lived, "thank Heaven," she cried, "here comes
my poor child, to hear and bless you for the extent of your goodness." Nelson,
who delighted most in doing good by stealth, immediately extorted from the good
old lady a promise of secrecy: it was the best part of his plan, that Amelia
should never know the persons to whom she was to owe her independence. "I am
still afraid of you, my worthy old friend," said Nelson "your countenance or
manner will, I know betray me, if Miss Nevil sees me here tonight." -- "Well,"
said the delighted old lady, "I will humor your delicacy; Amelia will,
probably, not stay with me ten minutes; you may amuse yourself, for that time,
in my spacious garden; I will not say you are here; and, as soon as the good
girl returns home I will come and impart to you the particulars of her recent
vexation." -- "Admirably settled," cried Nelson; and he immediately retreated
into a little back room, which led into a long slip of ground, embellished with
the sweetest and least expensive flowers, which afforded a favorite occupation
and amusement to Mrs. Melford. Nelson, after taking a few turns in this
diminutive garden, finding himself rather chilled by the air of the evening,
retreated again into the little parlour he had passed, intending to wait there
till Amelia departed; but the partition between the parlours being extremely
slight, he overheard the tender confessions of Amelia, and was hurried toward
her by an irresistible impulse, in the manner already described.

Mrs. Melford was the first who recovered from the kind of trance into which
our little party had been thrown by their general surprise; and she enabled the
tender pair, in the prospect of whose union her warm heart exulted, to regain
that easy and joyous possession of their faculties, which they lost for some
little time in their embarrassment. The applause of her friend, and the
adoration of her lover, soon taught the diffident Amelia to think less severely
of herself. The warmhearted Mrs. Melford declared that these occurrences were
the work of Heaven. "That," replied the affectionate Nelson, "I am most willing
to allow; but you must grant, that Heaven has produced our happiness by the
blind agency of a fiend; and, as our dear Amelia has too gentle a spirit to
rejoice in beholding the malignity of a devil converted into the torment of its
possessor, I must beg, that she may not return, even for a single night, to the
house of Mrs. Wormwood." Amelia pleaded her sense of past obligations, and
wished to take a peaceful leave of her patroness; but she submitted to the
urgent entreaties of Nelson, and remained for a few weeks under the roof of
Mrs. Melford, when she was united to the man of her heart. Nelson had the
double delight of rewarding the affection of an angel, and of punishing the
malevolence of a fiend: he announced in person to Mrs. Wormwood, his intended
marriage with Amelia, on the very night when the treacherous Old Maid had
amused herself with the hope of deriding her guest; whose return she was
eagerly expecting, in the very moment Nelson arrived to say, that Amelia would
return no more.

The surprise and mortification of Mrs. Wormwood arose almost to frenzy; she
racked her malicious and inventive brain for expedients to defeat the match,
and circulated a report for that purpose, which decency will not allow me to
explain. Her artifice was detected and despised. Amelia was not only married,
but the most admired, the most beloved, and the happiest of human beings; an
event which preyed so incessantly on the spirit of Mrs- Wormwood, that she fell
into a rapid decline, and ended, in a few months, her mischievous and unhappy
life, a memorable example, that the most artful malignity may sometimes procure
for the object of its envy, that very happiness which it labors to prevent!

THE END.
MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.

BY MISS SEWARD, FOURTH AMERICAN EDITION.

BOSTON: PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY W. SPOTSWOOD, AND C. P. WAYNE. 1798.

MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.
LOUD howls the storm! the vexed Atlantic roars*
Thy Genius, Britain, wanders on its shores!
Hears cries of horror wafted from afar,
And groans of Anguish, mid the shrieks of War!
Hears the deep curses of the Great and Brave,
Sigh in the wind, and murmur on the wave!
Over his damp brow the sable crape he binds,
And throws his Victor Garland. -- Alluding to the conquest by Lord Cornwallis.
victor garland to the winds;
Bids haggard Winter in the drear sojourn,
Tear the dim foliage from her drizzling urn;
With sickly yew unfragrant cypress twine,
And hang the dusky wreath round Honor's shrine,
Bids steel-clad Valor chase that dove-like Bride,
Enfeebling Mercy, from his awful side;
Where long she sat and checked the ardent rein,
As whirled his chariot over the embattled plain;
Gilded with sunny smile her April tear,
Raised her wh^^e arm, and stayed the uplifted spear;
Then, in her place, bids Vengeance mount the car,
And glut with gore the insatiate Dogs of War!
With one pale hand the Bloody scroll -- The Court Martial decree, signed at
Tappan, for Major Andre's execution.
bloody scroll he tears,
And bids his Nation blot it with their tears;
And one, extended over the Atlantic wave,
Points to his Andre's ignominious grave!
And shall the Muse, that marks the solemn scene,
"As busy Fancy lifts the veil between,"
Refuse to mingle in the awful train,
Nor breathe, with glowing zeal the votive strain!
From public fame shall admiration fire
The boldest numbers of her raptured lyre
To hymn a Stranger? -- and with ardent lay
Lead the wild mourner round her Cook's morai;
While Andre fades upon his dreary bier,
And Julia. -- The name by which Mr. Andre addressed the Author in his
correspond^^ce with her.
Julia's only tribute is her tear?
Dear, lovely Youth! whose gentle virtues stole
Through Friendship's softening medium on her soul!
Ah no! -- with every strong resistless plea,
Rise the recorded days she past with thee,
While each dim shadow of o'er-whelming years,
With glance reverted Eagle-memory clears.
Beloved Companion of the fairest hours
That rose for her in Joy's resplendent bowr's,
How gaily shone on thy bright morn of Youth!
The Star of Pleasure and the Sun of Truth!
Full from their source descended on thy mind
Each generous virtue and each taste refined;
Young Genius led thee to his varied fame,
Ba^^ thee A^^ his gifts -- Mr. Andre had conspicuous talents for Poetry,
Music, and Painting.
ask all his gifts, nor ask in vain;
Hence novel thoughts, in every luster dressed
Of pointed Wit that diamond of the breast;
Hence glowed thy fancy with poetic ray,
Hence music warbled in thy sprightly lay;
And hence thy pencil, with his colors warm,
Caught every grace, and copied every charm
Whose transient glories beam on Beauty's cheek,
And bid thy glowing Ivory breathe and speak.
Blessed pencil! by kind Fate ordained to save
Honora's semblance from her Early grave -- Miss Honora S. to whom Mr. Andre's
attachment was of such singular constancy, died in a consumption a few months
before he suffered death at Tapp^n. She had married another gentleman four
years after her engagement with Mr. Andre had been dissolved by parental
authority.
early grave.
Oh! while on Julia's arm -- Mr. Andre drew two miniature pictures of Miss
Honora S. on his first acquaintance with her at Buxton, in the Year 1769, one
for himself, the other for the author of this Poem.
Julia's arm it sweetly smiles,
And each lorn thought, each long regret beguiles,
Fondly she weeps the hand which formed the spell,
Now shroudless mouldering in its earthly cell!
But sure the Youth, whose ill-star'd passion strove
With all the pangs of inauspicious Love,
Full often deplored the fatal art t^ stole
The jocund freedom of its Master's soul!
While with nice hand he marked the living grace
And matchless sweetness of Honora's face,
The enamored Youth the faithful traces blessed,
That barb'd the dart of Beauty in his breast,
Around his neck the enchanting Portrait hung,
While a warm vow burst ardent from his tongue,
That from his bosom no succeeding day,
No chance should bear that talisman away.
'Twas thus 'Twas thus Apelles -- Prior is very elegant upon this circumstance
in an Ode to his Friend Mr. Howard the Painter.
Apelles bask'd in Beauty's blaze,
And felt the mischief of the steadfast gaze;
Traced with disordered hand Campaspe's charms,
And (...) the kindling Canvas warms,
T^ (...) with still superior art,
En^ (...) on the Painter's heart.
(...) ^er constant Youth!
(...) ^qual'd truth!
(...) the ensang^^n' laurel on that brow
Where Love orda^n'd his brightest wreath to glow!
Then Peace had led thee to her softest bowers,
And Hymen strewn thy path with all his flowers;
Drawn to the roof, by Friendship's silver cord,
Each social Joy had brightened at thy board;
Science and soft affection's blended rays
Had shone unclouded on thy lengthened days;
From hour, to hour, thy taste, with conscious pride,
Had marked new talents in thy lovely Bride;
Till thou had owned the magic of her face
Thy fair Honora's least engaging grace.
Dear lost Honora! over thy early bier
The muse still sheds her ever sacred tear! --
The blushing rose-bud in its vernal bed,
By Zephyrs fanned and murmuring fountains fed,
In June's gay morn that scents the ambient air,
Was not more sweet, more innocent, or fair.
Oh! when such Pairs their kindred spirits find,
When Sense and Virtue deck eacn spotless mind,
Hard is the doom that shall the union break,
And Fate's dark pinion hovers over the wreck.
Now Prudence in her cold and thrifty care,
Frowned on the Maid, and bade the Youth despair;
For Power Parental sternly saw, and strove
T^^eat the lilly-bands of plighted Love;
Not strove in vain; but while the fair one's sighs
D^^perse, like April storms in sunny skies,
The f^rmer Lover, with unswerving truth,
To his first passion consecrates his youth;
Though four long years a night of a^sence prove,
Yet Hope's soft Star shone trembling on his love;
Till Busy Rumor -- The tidings of Honora's marriage* Upon that event Mr.
Andre qui^ted his profession as a merchant, and joined (...) army in America.
busy R^mour chased each pleasing dream
And quenched the radiance of the silver beam.
"Honora lost! -- my happy Rival's Bride!
Swell ye full sails! and roll thou mighty tide!
Over the dark waves forsaken Andre bear
Amid the vollying thunders of the War!
To win bright Glory from my Country's Foes,
Even in this ice of Love, my bosom glows.
Voluptuous LONDON! where thy turrets blaze,
Their hundred thrones the frolic Pleasures raise;
Bid proud Expense, Sabean odours bring,
Nor ask her roses of the tardy Spring;
Where Music floats the glittering roofs among,
And with meand'ring cadence swells the song;
Where Painting burns the Grecian meed to claim,
From the high temple of immortal Fame,
Bears to the radiant goal, with ardent peace,
Her Kauffman's beauty, and her Reynolds' grace;
Where Sun-clad Poetry the strain inspires,
And foils the Grecian Harps, the Latian Lyres.
"Ye softening Luxuries! ye polished Arts!
Bend your enseebling rays on tranquil hearts!
I quit the Song, the Pencil, and the Lyre,
White robes of Peace, and Pleasure's soft attire,
To seize the Sword, to mount the rapid Car,
In all the proud habiliments of War --
Honora lost! I woo a sterner Bride,
The armed Bellona calls me to her side;
Harsh is the music of our marriage strain!
It breathes in thunder from the western plain!
Wide over the watery world its echos roll,
And rouse each latent ardour of my soul.
And though unlike the soft melodious lay,
That ga^ly waked Honora's nuptial day,
Its deeper tones shall whisper, ever they cease,
More genuine transport, and more lasting peace*
"Resolved I go! nor from that fatal bourn
To these gay scenes shall Andre's steps return!
Set is the star of Love, that ought to guide
His refluent bark across the mighty Tide! --
But while my country's foes, with impious hand
Hurl ^'er the subject plains the livid brand
Of dire Sedition! -- Oh! let Heaven ordain
While Andre lives, he may not live in vain!
"Yet without one kind farewell, could I roam
Far from my weeping friends, my peaceful home,
The best affections of my heart must cease,
And gratitude be lost, with hope, and peace!
"My lovely Sisters! who were wont to twine
Your Souls soft feelings with each wish of mine,
Shall, when this breast beats high at Glory's call,
From your mild eyes the showers of Sorrow fall? --
The light of Excellence, that round you glows,
Decks with reflected beams your Brother's brows!
Oh may his Fame, in some distinguished day
Pour on that Excellence the brightest ray!
"Dim clouds of Woe! ye veil each sprightly grace
That used to sparkle in Maria's face. --
My Tuneful Anna. -- Miss Anna Andre has a poetical talent.
tuneful Anna to her lute complains,
But Grief's fond throbs arrest the parting strains. --
Fair, as the silver blossom on the thorn,
Soft as the spirit of the vernal morn,
Louisa, chase those trembling fears, that prove
The ungoverned terrors of a Sister's love.
They bend thy sweet head, like yon lucid flower,
That shrinks and fades beneath the summer's shower.
"Oh! smile my Sisters, on this destined day,
And with the radiant omen gild my way!
And thou, my Brother, gentle as the gale,
Whose breath perfumes anew the blossomed vale,
Yet quick of Spirit, as the electric beam,
When from the clouds its darting lightnings stream,
Soothe with incessant care our Mother's woes,
And hush her anxious sighs to soft repose. --
And be ye sure, when distant far I stray
^o share the dangers of the arduous day,
Your tender faithful amity shall rest
The Last dear record, -- "I have a Mother, and three Sisters, to whom the
value of my commission would be an object, as the loss of Granada has much
affected their income. It is needless to be more explicit on this subject, I
know your Excellency's goodness.' -- See Major Andre's last letter to General
Clinton, published in the Gazette.
last dear record of my grateful breast.
"Oh! graceful Priestess at the sane of Truth,
Friend of my Soul! and guardian of my Youth!
Skilled to convert the duty to the choice,
My gentle Mother in whose melting voice
The virtuous precept, that perpetual flowed,
With Music warbled, and with Beauty glowed,
Thy tears! -- ah Heaven! -- not drops of molten lead,
Poured on thy hapless Son's devoted head,
With keeper ^ma^ had each sensation torn!
(...) nerve where agonies art born!
(...) not! thy tender strife,
What would it ^ave? alas! thy Andre's life!
Oh! what a wea^y pilgrimage 'twill prove
Strewn with the thorns of disappointed Love!
Never can he break the charm, whose fond control,
By habit rooted, lords it over the soul,
If here he languish in inglorious ease,
Where Science palls, and Pleasures cease to please.
It Is Glory only, with her potent ray,
Can chase the clouds that darken all his way.
Then dry those pearly drops, that wildly flow,
Nor snatch the laurel from my youthful brow! --
The Rebel Standard blazes to the noon!
And Glory's path is bright before thy Son!
Then join thy voice! and thou with Heaven ordain
While Andre lives, he may not live in vain!"
He says! -- and sighing seeks the busy strand
Where anchored Navies wait the wished command.
To the full gale the nearer billows roar,
And proudly lash the circumscribing shore;
While furious on the craggy coast they rave,
All calm and lovely rolls the distant wave;
For onward, as the unbounded waters spread,
Deep sink the rocks in their capacious bed,
And all their pointed terror's utmost force,
But gently interrupts the billow's course.
So on his present hour rude passion preys!
To smooth the prospect of his future days!
Unconscious of the Storm, that grimly sleeps,
To wreck its fury on the unshelter'd Deeps!
Now yielding waves divide before the prow
The white sails bend, the streaming pennants glow,
And swiftly waft him to the western plain,
Where fierce Bellona rages over the slain.
Firm in their strength opposing Legions stand,
Prepared to drench with blood the thirsty Land.
Now Carnage hurls her flaming bolts afar,
And Desolation groans amid the War.
As bleeds the Valiant, and the Mighty yield,
Death stalks the only Victor over the field.
Foremost in all the horrors of the day,
Impetuous Impetuous Andre. -- It is in this passage only that fiction has been
employed through the narrative of the poem. Mr. Andre was a prisoner in America,
soon after his arrival there, but the Author is unacquainted with the
circumstances of the action in which he was taken*
Andre leads the glorious way;
Till, rashly bold, by numbers forced to yield,
They drag him captive from the long-fought field. --
Around the Hero crowd the exulting Bands,
And seize the spoils of War with bloody hands*
Snatch the dark plumage from his awful crest,
And tear the golden crescent from his breast;
The sword, the tube, that wings the death from far,
And all the fatal implements of War!
Silent, unmoved the gallant Youth surveyed
The lavish spoils triumphant Ruffians made.
The idle ornament, the useless spear
He little recks, but oh! there is a fear
Pants with quick throb, while yearning sorrows dart
Through all his senses to his trembling heart.
"What though Honora's voice no more shall charm!
No more her beamy smile my bosom warm;
Yet from these eyes shall Force for ever tear
The sacred Image of that Form so dear?
Shade Shade of my Love -- The miniature of Honora. A Letter from Major Andre
to one of his Friends, written a few years ago, contained the following
sentence. "I have been taken prisoner by the Americans and stripped of every
thing except the picture of Honora, which I concealed in my mouth. Preserving
that, I yet think myself fortunate."
of my Love though mute and cold thy charms,
Never have thou blessed my happy Rival's arms!
"To my sad heart each Dawn has seen thee pressed!
Each Night has laid thee pillow'd on my breast!
Force shall not tear thee from thy faithful shrine!
Thou never were his, and shall be ever mine!
"'It Is fixed! -- these lips shall resolute enclose
The precious Soother of my ceaseless woes.
And should relentless Violence invade
This last retreat, by frantic Fondness made,
One way remains! -- Fate whispers to my Soul
Intrepid Intrepid Portia. --

"BRUTUS.] Impatient of my absence,
"And grieved that young Octavius, with Mark Antony
"Had made themselves so strong, she grew distracted*
"And* her Attendants absent, swallowed fire.

"CASSIUS.] And died so?

"BRUTUS.] Even so!

See Shakespeare's Play of Julius Caesar* Act iv. Scene i^.


Portia and her burning coal!
So shall the throbbing Inmate of my breast
From Love's sole gift meet everlasting rest!"
While these sad thoughts in swift succession fire
The smothered embers of each fond desire,
Quick to his mouth his eager hand removes
The beauteous semblance of the Form he loves.
That darling treasure safe, resigned he wears
The fordid robe, the scanty viand shares;
With cheerful fortitude content to wait
The bartered ransom of a kinder fate.
Now many a Moon in her pale course had shed,
The pensive beam on Andre's captive head.
At length the Sun rose jocund to adorn
With all his splendour the enfranchised Morn.
Again the Hero joins the ardent Train
That pours its thousands on the tented plain;
And shines distinguished in the long Array,
Bright as the silver star that leads the Day
His modest temperance, his wakeful heed
His silent diligence, his ardent speed,
Each warrior duty to the Veteran taught,
Shaming the vain Experience Time had brought*
Dependence scarcely feels his gentle sway,
He shares each want, and smiles each grief away;
And to the virtues of a noble Heart
Unites the talents of inventive Art.
Thus from his swift and faithful pencil flow
The Lines, the Camp, the Fortress of the Foe;
Serene to counteract each deep Design,
Points the dark Ambush, and the springing Mine;
Till, as a breathing Incense, Andre's name
Pervades the Host, and swells the loud acclaim.
The Chief no virtue views with cold regard,
Skilled to discern, and generous to reward;
Each towering hope his honored smiles impart,
As near his Person, and more near his heart
The graceful Youth he draws, -- and round his brow
Bids Rank and Power their mingled brilliance throw.
Oh have thou seen a blooming Morn of May
In crystal beauty shed the modest ray?
And with its balmy dews refreshing shower
Swell the young grain, and open the purple flower?
In bright'ning luster reach its radiant Noon,
Robbed in the gayest mantle of the Sun?
Then 'mid the splendors of its azure skies,
Oh! have thou seen the cruel Storm arise?
In sable horror shroud each dazzling charm,
And dash their glories back with icy arm!
Thus lowered the deathful cloud amid the blaze
Of Andre's Destiny, -- and quenched its rays! --
Ah fatal embassy! -- thy hazards dire
His kindling Soul with every ardor fire;
Great Clinton gives it to the courage proved,
And the known wisdom of the Friend he loved.
As fair Euryalus to meet his Fate,
With Nysus rushes from the Dardan gate,
Relentless Fate! whose fury scorns to spare
The snowy breast, red lip, and shining hair,
So polished Andre launches on the waves,
Where Hudson's tide. -- Major Andre came up the Hudson River to mee^ General
Arnold. On his return by Land he fell into the hands of the Enemy.
Hudson's tide its dreary confine laves.
With firm intrepid foot the Youth explores
Each dangerous pathway of the hostile shores*
But no one Veteran Chief his steps attends,
As silent round the gloomy Wood he wends,
Alone he meets the brave repentant Foe,
Sustains his late resolve, receives his vow,
With ardent skill directs the doubtful course,
Seals the firm bond and ratifies its force.
It Is thus AMERICA, thy Generals fly,
And wave new banners in their native sky!
Sick of the mischiefs artful Gallia pours,
In friendly semblance on thy ravaged shores --
Unnatural compact! -- shall a Race of Slaves
Sustain the ponderous standard Freedom waves?
No! while their feigned Protection spreads the toils,
The Vult^res hover over the destined spoils!
How fade Provincial glories, while You run
To court far deeper bondage than you shun!
Is this the generous active rising Flame,
That boasted Liberty's immortal name!
Blazed for its rights infringed, its trophies torn,
And taught the Wise the dire mistake to mourn,
When haughty Britain, in a luckless hour,
With rage inebriate, and the lust of power,
To fruitless conquest, and to countless graves
Led her gay Legions over the western waves*
The Fiend of Discord, cow'ring at the prow,
Sat darkly smiling at the impending w^e!
Long did my soul the wretched strife survey,
And wept the horrors of the dreadful day;
Through rolling Years saw undecisive War
Draw bleeding Wisdom at his iron Car;
Exhaust ray country's treasure, pour her gore
In fruitless conflict on the distant shore;
Saw the firm Congress all her might oppose,
And while I mourned her fate, revered her Foes.
But when, repentant of her prouder aim,
She gently waves the long disputed claim;
Extends the charter with your rights restored,
And hides in olive wreaths the blood-stained sword.
Then to reject her peaceful wreaths, and throw
Your Country's Freedom to our mutual Foe!
Infatuate Land! -- from that detested day
Distracted Councils, and the thirst of Sway,
Rapacious Avarice, Superstition vile,
And all the Frenchman dictates in his guile
Disgrace your Congress! -- Justice drops her scale!
And radiant Liberty averts her fail!
They fly indignant the polluted plain,
Where Truth is scorned and Mercy pleads in vain.
That she does plead in vain, thy witness bear,
Accursed Hour! -- Oh! darkest of the Year!
That with Misfortune's deadliest venom fraught
To Tappan's Wall the gallant Andre brought,
Snared in her fatal Maze, and borne away
Of fell Revenge, in all its guilt the Prey!
Oh Washington! I thought thee great and good, This apostrophe to General
Washington possesses more sentiment than truth. The author seems to be very
imperfectly acquainted with the circumstances attending the unfortunate event.
AMERICAN EDITOR.

Nor knew thy Nero-thirst of guiltless blood!
Severe to use the power that fortune gave,
Thou cool determined Murderer of the Brave!
Lost to each fairer Virtue, that inspires
The genuine fervor of the Patriot fires!
And You, the base Abettors of the doom,
That sunk his blooming honors in the tomb,
The opprobrious tomb your hardened hearts decreed,
While all he asked was as the Brave to bleed!
Nor other boon the glorious Youth implored
Save the cold Mercy of the Warrior-Sword!
O dark, and pitiless! your impious hate
O'er-whelm'd the Hero in the Ruffian's fate!
Stopped with the Felon-cord -- As I suffer in the defense of my Country, I must
consider this hour as the most glorious of my life. Remember that I die as
becomes a British Officer, while the manner of my death must reflect disgrace
on your Commander.

See Major Andre's last words, inserted in the General Evening Post, for
Tuesday November 14, 1780.


Felon-cord the rosy breath!
And venomed with disgrace the darts of Death!
Remorseless Washington! the day shall come
Of deep repentance for this barbarous doom!
When injured Andre's memory shall inspire
A kindling Army, with resistless fire;
Each falchion sharpen that the Britons wield,
And lead their fiercest Lion to the field!
Then, when each hope of thine shall set in night,
When dubious dread and unavailing flight
Impel your Host, thy guilt-upbraided Soul
Shall wish untouched the sacred Life you stole!
And when thy Heart appalled and vanquished Pride,
Shall vainly ask the mercy they denied,
With horror shall thou meet the fate they gave
Nor Pity gild the darkness of thy grave!
For Infamy with livid hand shall shed
Eternal mildew on the ruthless head!
Less cruel far than thou, on Illion's plain
Achilles, raging for Patroclus slain!
When hapless Priam bends the aged knee
To deprecate the Victors dire decree,
The Nobler Greek, in melting pity spares
The lifeless Hector to his father's Prayers,
Fierce as he was; -- it is Cowards only know
Persisting vengeance over a Fallen Foe.
But no entreaty wakes the soft remorse
Oh murdered Andre! for thy sacred Corse;
Vain were an Army's, vain its Leader's sighs! --
Damp in the Earth on Hudson's shore it lies!
Unshrouded welters in the wint'ry Storm!
And gluts the riot of the Tappan. -- The place where Major Andre was executed.
Tappan-Worm!
But Oh! its dust, like Abel's blood, shall rise
And call for justice from the angry skies!
What though the Tyrants, with malignant pride,
To thy pase corse each decent rite denied!
Thy graceful limbs in no kind covert laid,
Nor with the Christian-Requiem soothed thy shade!
Yet on thy grass-green Bier soft April-Show'rs
Shall earliest wake the sweet spontaneous Flowers*
Bid the blue Hair-bell, and the Snow-Drop there
Hang their cold cup, and drop the pearly tear!
And often, at pensive Eve's ambiguous gloom,
Imperial Honor, bending over thy tomb,
With solemn strains shall lull thy deep repose,
And with his deathless Laurels shade thy brows!
Lamented Youth! while with inverted spear
The British Legions pour the indignant tear!
Round the dropped arm the Funeral-scarf. -- The whole British Army in America
went into mourning for Major Andre, a distinguished tribute to his merit.
funeral-scarf entwine
And in their hearts' deep core thy worth enshrine;
While my weak Muse, in fond attempt and vain,
But feebly pours a perishable strain,
Oh ye distinguished Few! whose glowing lays
Bright Phoebus kindles with his purest rays,
Snatch from its radiant source the living fire,
And light with Vestal flame -- The Vestal fire was kept perpetually burning
and originally kindled from the rays of the Sun.
Vestal flame your ANDRE'S HALLOWED PYRE!

