AN ORATION, Delivered, AT THE REQUEST OF THE SOCIETY OF PH K, IN THE CHAPEL OF
HARVARD COLLEGE, ON THE DAY OF THEIR ANNIVERSARY, JULY 19, 1798.

BY JOHN THORNTON KIRKLAND.

BOSTON; PRINTED BY JOHN RUSSELL. 1798.

An Oration, etc.
TO think well of even the defects of our country, is a pardonable infirmity.
To view them with indulgence, -- to approach them with filial reverence and
tenderness and to cover them with the mantle of a partial, and almost blind
affection, is a degree of virtue. But to value and boast her excellencies and
blessings, to exult in her honor and be made happy by her happiness, is
inseparable from every just mind, and generous heart. If this nationality of
sentiment and feeling be suitable in her fathers, who are approaching the time,
in which they will be unaffected by her fortunes, and released from her
service; it is truly graceful in her children, who, just parting, or parted,
from the goal, must run with her their whole career of life; and make and share
her disgrace or glory, her misery or happiness. If this sensibility to her
interests dignify age, and adorn youth at all times, it does it then more than
ever, when not only her rights are invaded, and her fame reproached, but a
deadly potion is held to her mouth, and a murderous dagger aimed at her bosom.

THOUGH the eulogy of the blessings and prospects of America is so common, as
to want the attraction of novelty; and sometimes so extravagant, as to incur
the imputation of vanity; yet, in an exigency of her circumstances, which
demands all the enthusiasm of patriotism, and engages all the feelings of
philanthropy; in an assembly, composed of persons, possessing, or anticipating
more or less influence upon her opinions and conduct; and in a place,
consecrated to the sublime purpose of rearing her guides, her models, and her
guardians; it can be neither unpleasant nor uninstructive, to extol her
felicity, to unfold her dangers, and to inculcate her duty.

AN ample field for splendid description, and for animating prophecy lies open,
in the population, opulence, and prosperity of our country, in the fertility
and variety of her soil, in the advantages of her climate and situation, in the
abundance of her productions, in the extensiveness of her commerce, and the
immensity of her resources. But it may be more useful and agreeable, on this
occasion, to confine our attention to those PRINCIPLES, MANNERS. and
INSTITUTIONS, which are the price and pledge of all her other blessings; and to
illustrate our obligations and motives to cherish them, in their pure spirit
and tendency, as they were possessed and transmitted to us by our predecessors,
unadulterated by latter mixtures of error and vice. THE text for this comment,
is prepared by that man, whose name will be coeval with his country, in his
address to the young men of the American metropolis. "Without wishing," says
he, "to damp the ardor of curiosity, or influence the freedom of inquiry. I
will hazard a prediction, that after the most industrious, and impartial
researches, the longest liver of you all, will find no principles, institutions
or systems of education, more fit in general to be transmitted to your
posterity, than those, which you have received from your ancestors." Let not
this prediction, so solemn and affectionate, be disregarded, lest we see the
day of bitter, but ineffectual repentance.
These principles, habits, and institutions are not the ephemeral productions
of the day; not the nostrums of upstart political quackery; not the novel
discoveries of infidel philosophy; not the vagaries of brains, distempered with
revolutionary fervor; but they are fabrics, raised by time, covered with the
"venerable hoar" of years, founded in wisdom, improved by experience, and
evinced the most sufficient barriers, that man can erect, against the
inundations of vice, folly, and misery. They are, to our country, the "tree of
life in the midst of the city, which yields her fruit continually, the leaves
whereof are for the healing of the nations." Let our wisdom and virtue guard
it, as the cherubim and flaming sword, which turned every way, guarded the
avenue to the tree of Eden. Let them defend it from the demons, infidelity,
ambition, and faction, which are prowling around it, ready to pluck its fruits,
to strip its foliage, with the blast of their breath, to kill its vegetating
virtue, and with their vengeful axe to hew it down, and cast it into that fire,
which is lighted at the infernal pile to lay waste the natural and moral world.

IT would be no uninteresting labor, to attempt a minute delineation of the
whole design and expression, coloring and drapery of the piece, on which our
fathers, and we have been working; but the present opportunity will afford
sufficient time only for sketching a few of its characteristic outlines.

THE first of the political principles, which we have received, a principle
often expressed in very indefinite language, and whose misconception, or
perversion, has in a manner annihilated society in one country in Europe, is
this, "THAT ALL MEN ARE BORN FREE AND EQUAL." The blasphemies uttered, the
crimes committed, and the desolation spread within the space of a few years, in
the name of liberty and equality, have associated such turpitude and horror
with the words, that the blood freezes, the heart sickens at their sound.
Viewed in this association, instead of tutelary divinities demanding the love
and veneration of men, for the blessings which they shed, they appear
tremendous specter, born of chaos and stalking through the earth with the
scythe of destruction. If we see them only in the (...) of these their
pretended patrons and guardians, they are the agents of envenomed envy, of
phrenzied ambition, and insatiate avarice, commissioned to go forth into the
nations, and convert man into a brute, kingdoms into theaters of blood, and
society into a dreary waste, on which "vegetates no plant but the hemlock and
the nightshade;" they are another name for robbery, devastation, and murder;
for a lofty and presumptuous independence of all laws, natural, civil, moral,
and divine; an impious victory over all the motives and feelings, implanted by
the Creator, to check and modify the infinitaly diverging action of the human
will and passions, and prevent the social state from being worse than a desert.

BUT breaking this unnatural association, we find that we have not so learned
liberty, and that, well understood, it is the first of blessings. As it is
taught in our school, the liberty of a nation, with respect to other nations,
is the right of governing itself in consistency with their rights. Such a
liberty we possessed, before our separation from the parent country, until her
system of aggression began. We ever denied her claim to bind us in any case,
without our consent. Since revolution has come to mean subversion, it means too
much to be applied to that alteration of our political relations made by
independence. We contended for preservation. not acquisition, to keep the
rights we had, rather than to gain those we never had; and the separation was
resorted to chiefly as a necessary means of maintaining the ancient ground. We
are not therefore very much flattered, that our former ally should think we
were complimented, in being told of our emancipation from actual rather than
threatened slavery, by our revolutionary contest. We will not insult the ashes
of our fathers, by admitting, for a moment, that they were ever "hewers of
wood, and drawers of water," to any power on earth; that they, who conveyed to
us an abhorrence of slavery, ever submitted to it; and we will correct the
mistake, and repel the taunt of our hypocritical friend in the language of our
illustrious son of liberty, assuring her, that every AMERICAN, was "BORN IN A
LAND OF FREEDOM." See Ade^'s address to the President on presenting the colors
of the French Republic; and the President's answer.
We have been taught not more resolutely to six our grasp on our own
independence, than sincerely to respect the independence of other nations; to
disdain the ambition of conquest and the meanness and treachery of interference
with their internal concerns.

BY liberty, as it respects our internal relations, we understand protection of
rights; and by rights, the claim of every member of the community to all the
advatages which he can obtain and enjoy, without injuring others. These rights
are declared to be the right to life and personal security, the right to
acquire, hold, and transmit property, the right to liberty of action, the right
to reputation, the right to liberty of opinion, of speech, and of religious
profession and worship. But we consider all these rights subject to various
limitations and exceptions. We deny that they allow any one to be judge in his
own cause; or to exert them in any way inconsistent with law. Society here does
not secure life to the murderer, freedom of action to the madman, property to
the thief, robber, or knave, reputation to the villain, nor liberty of speech
and writing to the tongues or pens, which mislead the ignorant or corrupt the
pure, which blaspheme God and trumpet sedition. Our commonwealth claims to
limit even the rights of conscience. Whilst it tolerates every denomination of
religious teachers, it requires the maintenance of some denomination; and
whilst it extends protection to the Jew, Mohammedan, and Gentoo, it insists that
a christian people will commit the enaction and administration of their laws to
none but those, who profess to be christians.

IN the extension of like privileges to all persons in like circumstances,
consists AMERICAN EQUALITY, an equality which secures the rich from rapacity,
no less than the poor from oppression; the high from envy, no less than the low
from contempt; an equality, which proclaims peace alike to the mansions of the
affluent, and the humble dwellings of the poor.

OUR political fathers have taught us to distinguish between the right to
protection, and the right to govern the state; to consider that the share which
each member shall have in the management of public affairs, is (...) of
convention and expediency, and not an original universal right of man. Whilst
our Constitutions admit to the privilege of choosing, and being chosen, to
public office, as many classes of the society, as consists with the general
safety, they reject that doctrine of universal suffrage, which has so much
contributed in other countries to pull down the fabric of social order. They
disqualify from the exercise of political rights all persons not arrived to a
certain age, and all persons destitute of property; presuming that without
discretion, election is worse than a lottery; and that whilst proprietors will
probably perceive a certain interest in order and justice, the extremely
indigent may hope to profit by anarchy and rapine. For very different reasons
they debar the better half of society from the direct exercise of the powers of
civil government. Had the new theory of the Rights of Women enlightened the
world at the period of the formation of our constitution, it is possible the
framers, convinced by its arguments, might have set aside the old system of
exclusion, upon which the world has always proceeded till this reforming age,
as selfish, illiberal, and tyrannical; perhaps they might have felt it absurd
and insolent for man to claim the honor of being the protector and guardian of
woman; and pernicious also, if they had acknowledged with the champion of her
sex's rights, that it is a consequence of the present order to compel woman to
resort to art, insincerity, and meanness, in order to supply, by influence the
want of prerogative. To disprove this consequence, however, we appeal to the
simplicity and frankness of manners, and dignity of sentiment of American
females; and to test this singular theory, we may submit to them the question,
whether they are not as free, as lovely, as respectable, and happy, in their
present situation in society, as they would be, if their sexuality of
character, and employments were done away; and law and custom allowed them to
exchange the distaff for the plough; the needle and the pencil for the axe and
the hammer; and their stations as mistresses of their families, companions of
their husbands, guides and protectors of their children, and equal sharers of
domestic pursuits and pleasures; to be lawyers, legislators, and town meeting
patriots. We submit to them, whether they are not content to make the best part
of the object of all government, which is society, and to leave to us the
drudgery and vexation, the contest and danger of providing the means of
securing that object.

WE have learned that government, as well as liberty, is among the rights of
the people, and that whilst they may establish, amend or alter their forms, all
essential changes are to be attempted with a cautious and trembling hand. If we
listen to the instruction which we have received, we shall not think ourselves
at liberty capriciously to dissolve a partnership, which includes our
posterity; wantonly to break up the foundations of the state, in order to build
on the ruins a theoretic edifice destitute of the aid of opinion, habit and
attachment -- nor shall we allow society to be "treated as a carte blanch, on
which every man may scribble what he pleases."

THESE are our rights of man; this is our liberty; this, our equality. There is
another sort of liberty and equality, which we consider to be spurious -- it is
fancys child, and folly is its father, made of such stuff as dreams are, and
baseless as the fantastic visions of the evening" and which we leave to those
who choose it -- to that regenerated nation* whose government considers the
people as made for the government, and not the government for the people;
preserves the freedom of elections by the bayonet, and coins money by the
guillotine, makes it DEATH TO EMIGRATE, AND DEATH TO STAY AT HOME. We leave it
to those wonderful philosophers, who in the plenitude of their wisdom, have no
use for the fund accumulated by past ages; who have discovered, that the
collective good depends on the sacrifice of the individual good; that the end
sanctifies the means; that property is a prejudice, and prescription of no
validity, and we leave to them also, all the order, justice, security, and
liberty, which they derive from their precious discoveries.

PATRIOTISM, rightly defined, has never been represented to us* as a doubtful
virtue, still less as a vice. But since it is found an obstacle to the
subjugation of man by certain metaphysical reformers and tyrants, they have set
up the cant of universal benevolence, in which it is to be lost, as the drops
in the ocean. Whoever heard before, that because we must love our neighbor, we
must hate ourselves; or because we must desire the happiness of the world, we
must be indifferent to that of our country; that we must neglect or destroy the
parts, in our zeal to take care of the whole? We have learned to love our
country, because it is our country; because we are near it, and in it, and have
an opportunity of being useful to it; because we breathe its air and share its
bounties; because the sweat of our fathers' brows has subdued its soil; their
blood watered its fields, and their revered dust sleeps in its bosom; because
it embraces our fathers and mothers, our wives and children, our brothers and
sisters; because here are our altars, and here our firesides; because
patriotism is the combined energy of the social affections, and he who can tear
it from his heart, commits sacrilege upon his nature.

REVEALED religion has the venerable sanction of the wisest and best of our
predecessors, joined to its own august authority. Those, who hold fast the form
of sound words which they have delivered, can see neither dignity nor
consolation in the separation of time from eternity; of man from his creator.
From whom but the fountain of wisdom shall we derive the knowledge of our
nature, origin and destiny? Does blindness need no guidance, perverseness no
correction, weakness, no strength? Must no celestial light shine on the night
of affliction? No immortal hope beam on the darkness of the grave? We are
taught to believe that religion is the only support of morality, and revelation
of religion. Unaided reason, unable to solve the difficulties of natural
religion, proves the blind leader of the blind; and after alluring her
followers by false and glimmering lights, leaves them enveloped with the
darkness of atheism. Under the pavilion of religion only, can society find a
covert from that tempest of the passions, which is ever ready to burst upon its
head. Religion lays her hand on the movements of the heart, and directs her eye
into the haunts of secret iniquity. She awes the insolence of the high, and
represses the envy of the of the low. Destroy her influence, and universal
tyranny ensues. Every man in power, knowing that others have no restraint from
crimes but want of opportunity, will by every means keep the weak in a state of
depression; and destroy his rivals, lest if they gain the ascendancy, they give
his own neck to the yoke, or his head to the scaffold. Thus every man's hand is
against every man, and society is a den of wild beasts.

THESE are some of the principles, which we have received from our ancestors.
They have not been wholly ineffectual to produce pure morals, soft and social
manners. Notwithstanding the relaxation of of our sentiments and practices from
those of our ancestors, we still keep so near to them, that it is honorable in
the public opinion, to be rich without luxury and oppression, to be poor
without envy and dishonesty; to be just, faithful, and chaste. We trust there
is but a small minority in our country, who are so venal as to put up their
consciences to sale; so abject, as to be the willing tools of base purposes; so
abandoned, as to become the panders of crime. We are not yet so divested of the
prejudices of education, and the maxims of the nursery, that the insulter of
woman, the despoiler of innocence, the contemner of age; the cruel or
unfaithful husband, the the undutiful or thankless child, can escape
detestation. With our present character, had we a revolutionary tribunal, it
would probably be difficult to find one father the accuser of his son, one wife
of her husband, one brother of his brother. The plague of this new philosophy,
must reach farther into our vitals, before our balls and assemblies shall
exhibit dresses a la Grecque; the people of our towns collected into cannibal
mobs, point their pikes with the hearts of their victims; or our legislative
assemblies vote marriage a tyranny, private property a prejudice and the
patrimony of the nation; and turn a church into a pantheon for the deification
of assassins and atheists.

To what do our fathers and we, as far as we have retained them, owe these
principles and manners? We owe them under God to our excellent institutions. To
our constitutions of government, and especially our federal constitution,
checked and balanced according to the experience of ages, adapted to the
opinions character, and habits of the people, and administered with consummate
wisdom and integrity; to our laws, which erect barriers around our rights; to
public worship and instruction, and the observation of the Lord's day, by which
the ignorant are taught and the devious reclaimed; the social ties are
strengthened and the worldly passions are moderated; to family government and
instruction, which gives a right direction to the habits of youth; to our
schools and colleges, the fountains of knowledge and subordination; to this
Alma Matter, under whose bland influence and nurturing hand the germ of genius
"expands into flowers and ripens into fruitage;" who separating her sons from
the tumultuous scenes of business and pleasure, prescribing the order of their
studies and the rules of their conduct, conducts them up the steep ascent of
science and virtue.

SUCH is a brief representation of the principles, manners, and institutions,
which have descended to us from our ancestors, and deserve to be maintained and
transmitted pure to our posterity. But have they been thus maintained? Will
they be thus transmited? There are spots in thy garments, my country. There is
somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love. Many of thy
children have degenerated from that spirit of order and religion, which marked
the precepts and the example of their fathers. Let us inquire by what means we
have been seduced from their path, and by what means we may regain and preserve
it. Our contest for independence, by keeping our rights so much in view, drew
our attention from our duties; and in our zeal to decorate liberty with her
cap, we for a time forgot to arm law with her sword. The interruption of the
course of justice, the fluctuation of property, the paper medium and tender
laws, and the foreign connexions, which sprung out of war, were so many
channels for the introduction of licentiousness; and the prosperity which
attended peace and neutrality, has been lulling to sleep reflection and public
virtue in her luxurious lap: whilst deriving corruption from internal sources,
we have felt the bane of foreign influence, and been "contaminated with the
foul abominations of the revolution in France." With credulous fondness we
pressed her to our bosoms; and she has bitten like a serpent, and stung like an
adder. The pestilence, which she sent forth, to walk in darkness, and waste at
noon day, here met constitutions predisposed to its reception. The seeds of her
democracy, her infidelity, and immorality, being sown with those of our own
soil, they have been growing up together into rank luxuriance and spreading
from field to field.

THANKS to the God of our fathers, whose providence has led us to discover the
tares, which the foreign and domestic enemy have scattered, and roused us to
unite, in plucking them up by their roots. We would not hear him in the
whispers of his mercy; and he has kindly awakened us by the thunders of his
judgments. Thoughtless and ungrateful, we neglected our government in her
prosperity; but her day of trial has engaged our hearts and hands, riches and
strength in her support. We could not preserve our connection with our Gallic
ally in her present state, without the loss of freedom and virtue; and that
connection is mercifully broken. Her friendship would have proved our infamy;
and we are honored with her enmity; and are taught the impiety and folly of
having supposed there could be communion between christians and atheists,
freemen and tyrants. We have returned to ourselves, and are Americans. We see
the precipice on which we have stood and are eagerly stepping back. May the
enthusiasm, in the cause of our altars and laws, which the exigency has
kindled, become a habit of our souls, and live, a vestal fire, in every
American bosom.

RESISTANCE is begun on the sea. Events may demand it on our shores. In a cause
like ours, what christian or patriot, will not dare to combat and to perish?
Should the fortune of war allot him the cypress for the laurel, it will quicken
the last beat of his heart, to reflect that he dies to save his country. And
should she not be saved, but the inexplicable scheme of Providence suffer her
to sink under the overwhelming ruin let loose upon the world, we may be assured
that before such an event, all her best blood will be shed; that existence here
to a true American will be worse than ten thousand deaths, and to have been an
early victim in her cause will be a favored lot.

WHILST we unite in the defense of our country, let us unite in rendering and
preserving her worthy to be defended. To this end let the pure principles, the
virtuous manners, and the useful institutions, inherited from our ancestors, be
retained and perfected. Be not carried about by every wind of political
doctrine; but inflexibly adhere to the maxims and forms of government which you
have received; and cling to their administration with the grasp of death.
Maintain order and instruction in your families; and provide liberally for the
means of education. If you wish to keep alive religion in yourselves or others,
suffer not your sundays to be perverted to amusement, your bibles to be the
lumber of your shelves, or your churches to be neglected. Let your literary
sons aim as well to be good as great; lest knowledge multiply the objects of
desire, whilst it leaves them destitute of principle to direct their choice and
pursuit of those objects; and superior talents be only qualifications for more
extensive mischief. Let those, who become members of this ancient seminary, be
just to its eminent advantages, draw a respectful veil over imperfections more
or less inseparable from every human institution; and never permit that spirit
of misrule, which scourges the world and menaces the state, to disturb and
dishonor this chosen retreat. Let your sons and daughters be sensible that
virtue, and not wealth, fame pleasure, beauty, or accomplishments is their
chief good. Our fair countrywomen, especially are invited to recollect the
indisputable truth, that the spirit of christianity has contributed more than
any thing to give them the respectable and deserved rank, which they now hold
in society in Europe and America. -- This spirit, by making the marriage
contract indissoluble, and representing woman as endowed with the same
intellectual and moral nature as man, has enforced his respect; and raised her
from being the drudge of his indolence, or the instrument of his pleasure, to
be his companion, his equal, his counselor, and his friend. Far from our youth
be those absurd and unnatural manners, which the innovating spirit of the times
has made fashionable, which disregard the gradations and distinctions of nature
and society; and placing the young on a level with the old, the child with the
parent, and the pupil with the instructor, annul the claim of age to respect,
and of authority to submission.

THE poison of the skeptical and disorganizing philosophy, which is now
perverting and corrupting man, has been administered in writings, many of which
want no confidence of assertion to overawe, no subtilty of argument to perplex,
no sprightliness of wit to amuse, and no charms of eloquence to entice. But
whilst to indulge curiosity, to taste the beauties of composition, or to
gratify the vanity of general reading we peruse them; it is at the hazard of
being entangled in their sophistry, and depraved by their immoral sentiments.
It is proper advice to all, at least to such, whose minds are immature, and
whose habits are unformed; look not into their infectious pages. Tread not on
the bed of flowers, under which a serpent lurks. "What! forbid free inquiry?"
Forbid imprudent, rash, indiscriminate inquiry; inquiry which can do us little
good; and (...) do us infinite mischief. The intense heat of this untried
region, will melt the waxen wings of the (...) who disdains the bounded (...)
and plunge him into the sea of doubt and despair. Will the wise man, who counts
the cost, leave safety in the camp, to attack he enemy with unequal force in
the field? Will the traveller, who wish, to secure an agreeable journey,
forsake the beaten road at the peril of being entangled in inextricable wilds?
Believe not that discoveries are to be made in morality; or that any way will
be found of existing happily in this world, or in the next, but that which the
Lord our God has illuminated with the brightness of a sunbeam, "Do justly,
love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God." These men cant about universal
benevolence, sensibility, and morality. Disinterested benevolence! which
teaches, that the vilest means are consecrated by a benevolent end, and that it
is noble to destroy the parts to serve the whole. Sweet sensibility! which
feels for every thing except that which touches it; for all mankind, except
those with whom it is in contact, and to whom it may be useful; which weeps
over the injustice of governments, and sends its children to the hospital.
Rigid morality! which is (...) with the vices of society, and charmed with the
purity of the natural state, yet writes licentious novels for the rich, which
plants a sting in the conscience for stealing an apple, and seduces a wife, and
betrays a friend, without self reproach.

WHATEVER fascination there might be to some fanatical or corrupt minds, in the
principles of the nation, which these philosophers have put into their
crucible, one would think there could be none to any in their conduct. For any
to approve or justify, must be to resemble it. But the most virtuous need to
guard against the effect of familiarity with such enormous vice in blunting the
moral sensibility. So pestilential is its nature, that to look at it is
dangerous, to look at it with the least indulgence is pollution, to embrace it
is death.

AMERICANS, whilst you study improvement, shrink from innovation. Difficult
enough is the preservation of order with all the aid, which it derives from
antiquity, authority, opinion, and habit. Remember, that confidence not
jealousy is the first of republican virtues; that to settle, not change our
civil systems is the business of our time, and that the spirit of complaint and
opposition should be reserved for the medicine of the Constitution, when it
shall grow old and diseased, and not administered as its daily food, while it
is in the bloom of youth and of health. Such empiricism, will soon make it as
disordered as its enemies pretend: and drug it into a malady, which has no
cure, but death.

IF, as men, as members of society, and christians, we will be thus instructed,
we shall obtain, for our country all the happiness, which a nation can possess
in this state of mingled good and evil, and for ourselves the unfailing
consolation of an approving mind, and a trust in God in this world; and beyond
the line of time, a reward, vast as our desires, and lasting as our existence.




