Mr. Lathrop's ORATION.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED ON THE 4th DAY OF JULY, 1798, AT THE REQUEST OF A
NUMBER OF THE INHABITANTS OF Dedham AND ITS Uicinity, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE
Anniversary of AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY JOHN LATHROP, JUN.

Dedham: PRINTED AT THE MINERVA PRESS.

1798.

Dedham, July 4, 1798.
ON motion, in the company assembled at Mr. Gay's tavern, to celebrate the
Fourth of July, 1776, Voted, That JAMES RICHARDSON, TIMOTHY GAY, jun. GEORGE
ASPINWALL, and JOHN S. WILLIAMS, be a committee to wait on JOHN LATHROP, jun.
Esquire. to thank him for his elegant, federal, patriotic and spirited Oration this
day delivered, and to request a copy of it for the press.

GENTLEMEN,
I DESPISE the miserable coquetry, that affects to receive applause with
indifference; I glory in my sensibility to every token of the approbation of my
fellow-citizens. If the following address possess any merit, it consists in its
truth and American federalism. You have declared, unequivocally, your
accordance with the sentiments which it contains; -- why should I doubt? Why
should I ask for what you have so liberally given -- your candor? But let me
prevail with you to believe, that in presenting the ensuing performance to the
public eye, I yield the suggestions of my own judgment to your polite request.

I am, with due respect, your humble servant, JOHN LATHROP, jun.

AN ORATION.
FROM the turret-crowned palace of the monarch, to the grove-sheltered cottage
of the humble peasant; -- from the elevated sphere of supreme dominion, to the
lowliest grade in the family of man, Independence is the blessing most valued
and dear. In the cause of Independence, the sages and heroes of our own
Columbia and of our own time, waged war against Despotism. They wrenched, from
the monster's grasp, the iron scepter, and bound him in the fetters and chains
he had forged for millions of freemen. Then, Liberty, was thy triumph complete!
Independence, majestic and serene, gave to our country her sacred charter, and
WASHINGTON swore to defend it.

ON the 4th of July, 1776, a phenomenon in politics appeared, which challenges
a parrallel in the annals of the world. -- A nation by her own fiat sprang from
chaos and night, into the full vigor of life, and the unbounded splendour of
day. -- At that awful moment, was foredoomed the downfall of Tyranny.
Rock-rooted bastiles were shivered to their lowest dungeons and their deepest
foundations. The blood encrimsoned cells of the Inquisition, the Austrian
cemetaries of living wretches, dead to the recollection of enslaved empires;
every purple robed jailer; the rack, and every infernal instrument and minister
of his office, were destined to speedy and irremediable destruction. -- Mighty
Columbia -- such were the miracles which attended thy birth, and thy natal
morning beheld thee, like the fabled daughter of Olympian Jove, born with the
wisdom and energies of mature and ripened age!

TO trace the multiplied causes, and expose the hidden springs of revolutions
in states and nations, is the peculiar province of the historian. The speaker,
who has the honor of addressing this respectable assembly, and many, who favor
him with their attention, on this auspicious anniversary, had, when our
political connection with Great Britain was dissolved, scarcely stepped upon the
threshold of existence. But we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have
told us, why they refused to surrender their rights and privileges to an
avaricious, oppressive, insolent king and ministry.

THERE is, and ever has been, a jealousy, an extreme sensibility of intended
wrong, in the American bosom, which operates as an amulet against danger and
injury. May Americans always continue to wear that amulet about them! Most
nations have been subjugated, more by their own supineness, than by the force
and arms of an invading power. Our ancestors, and the authors of our national
independence, were Argus-eyed to their political concerns. They felt an evil as
it approached them. By timely and spirited resistance, they were enabled to
ward off every blow, and frustrate every design of an assailing enemy. Beside,
the American breast was the abode of a noble pride, which viewed with
indignation and resentment an insult or an affront. It stimulated to generous
and manly opinions -- to liberal and undisguised conduct -- to an explicit
declaration of the rights of man, and to heroic resolutions to die or preserve
them. The American people, whose every individual was a Caesar in courage and a
Brutus in patriotism, would have been deemed unconquerable by any other, than
the infatuated politicians who composed the cabinet of St. James'. The
aggressions of Great Britain, at length, became intolerable. -- They followed
each other with increasing magnitude until the souls of Americans could brook
no more, and they made their appeal from the injustice of an overbearing
empire, to the God of Armies. Their glorious exertions, during eight tedious
years, were crowned with merited success, and gave to Liberty the brightest
diadem that ever had decorated her brow.

HAIL ye sainted spirits of sages and warriors, who toiled and bled and died to
procure our national independence! From realms of eternal bliss; from your
star-emblazoned thrones of immortal glory, look down with benignant eyes upon
your grateful children, and inspire their bosoms with your own ardent passions
and unsullied virtues! By your holy and beloved memory we swear, that the land
hallowed with your blood; consecrated, by containing beneath its verdant
surface your venerable remains, shall be yielded to the rapacity of no foreign
power, until the invaders have scaled the rampart of your slaughtered sons!

LET us, my friends and fellow countrymen, consider some of the most rational
and necessary means for securing and perpetuating the blessings which have been
purchased at the expense of infinite treasure, and with the lives of martyred
patriots. Often, when celebrating this jubilee of Freedom, have your songs of
exultation echoed to the skies -- on this, and every similar occasion, may you
remember, that, though victory entwined her laurels around the American arms,
the grand, the efficient cause of the successful termination of our contest
with Great Britain, was UNANIMITY -- the political "bond of perfectness."
Americans were a multitudinous brotherhood. One soul -- one spirit pervaded
three millions of people -- one object was before them; -- the security of
their NATIONAL RIGHTS -- one sentiment inspired them; -- LIBERTY OR DEATH!

ALAS! do I speak of days, that are gone forever? -- Do I present you a
portrait of former times, to weep over it? -- Do I show you a character that,
as a people we ought to possess? -- Oh! my countrymen, may its want of
semblance to the reality never reproach you! Unite or die! -- The alternative
has been offered to all the nations under the sun -- to all the nations which
ever existed -- and they have flourished or decayed, according to the decisive
election. At this critical moment can we hesitate? Who, but a madman would rush
down a precipice, when he has freedom of will, and is invited to range through
fertile fields, and inhabit the abodes of safety and peace? BE AMERICANS! In
one word is comprehended all the duty the good citizen owes to his Country --
his Government, the Laws and his self. -- But, my friends, beware of false
notions of rights and privileges -- of mistaken conceptions concerning the
conduct of your political servants. -- Degrade not the sacred sovereignty of
the people, by unreasonable distrust and caprice. -- Having delegated your
power and authority, be not eager to reclaim it -- you part with it but for a
short time, and those, to whom you have committed it, will not, cannot, and
dare not betray their trusts, or abuse your confidence. But, as you wish to be
free and happy -- to be a nation -- oppose as your deadliest enemy, that demon
most accursed, FOREIGN INFLUENCE, -- "THE DESTROYING ANGEL OF REPUBLICS."

IN the political, as in the moral world, there are duties, which we owe to
ourselves, and duties, incumbent upon us to perform to others. Viewing nations,
as one great family, each should feel for the AUGUST SISTERHOOD, every
affectionate emotion, every desire to promote happiness and interest; -- should
render every kind office in her power, compatible with her own peace, security
and honor. Self consideration, as the main spring of human action, has so
necessary and unavoidable a control, wherever man is an agent, that we can
graduate merit, only by its comparative approach toward the disinterestedness
of perfection. We cannot, therefore, expect any nation to treat with us, unless
she calculate upon an accruing advantage to herself. On our own part, there is
no compulsion -- we have a right to consent and agreement. As an independent
nation, we have the privilege of forming treaties when, and with whom, we
please -- and if the solemn contract be made, the party, who violates it,
becomes an aggressor in injury. One treaty broken by a state, affects its
character as does the infraction of an engagement, between man and man. -- Loss
of reputation is the first consequence -- dishonor, poverty, and bankruptcy
follow, with eternal ruin in their dismal train. In any country, where there
are laws, the aggrieved is entitled to, and will receive judicial redress. When
nation sins against nation, the issue must be determined by the TRIAL AT ARMS.
We, as Americans, have national dignity to support -- we have national honor to
defend -- we have public engagements to fulfill, and we have the fulfillment of
public engagements due to us. If we be insulted or suffer injury, we must have
the means of indemnification and the instruments of inflicting punishment, in
our own hands. -- Our property must be protected by sea and by land -- our
territory must not be profaned by the foot of an invader. -- Hence then the
importance of a well disciplined militia. -- In the melancholy event of war,
the landholders, the mechanics, the merchants -- all, who have any thing dear
to them -- all, who have any thing to lose, will feel the task of defense
devolved upon themselves; -- THE GREAT BODY OF THE PEOPLE. The life and
property of each individual, being in equal jeopardy, the combination of the
whole, for mutual and general security, will be natural and indispensable. Of
what avail are public spirit and a crowd of citizens, without military
knowledge and discipline? The gallant band of LEONIDAS, had they been unskilled
in the use of arms, would, instead of achieving a most important, brilliant and
immortalizing exploit, have deserted the post of honor, and fled to a shelter
among rocks and in caverns. -- Four hundred warriors defended the straits of
Thermopylae against the army of Xerxes -- an army, whose ^an saluted the rising
sun, when the distant rear was enveloped in the shades of night! -- Men,
acquainted with their duty, feel assurance in discharging it. Undisciplined
troops are easily intimidated. The defection of a few cowards, is sufficient to
give a panic to battalions. In battle, fear is epidemical; -- military science
is the only preventative against its admission and ravage in an army. -- Our
favored country can boast of a militia adequate to every occasion, and prepared
for every emergence. -- A militia, whose appearance communicates fortitude, and
whose hearts, contemning danger, would beat with dauntless courage in the field
of death. Thank God, if fate have ordained that war be our portion, we shall
neither be dependent for assistance upon foreign mercenaries, nor shall we be
laid under a new debt of gratitude to foreign volunteers in our cause.

CRITICAL, and in a degree, distressing as is the present situation of our
country, yet much reason has the patriot, for exultation and joy, in a survey
of our public affairs. Let us congratulate each other, in the most affectionate
language, that Columbia is yet free, and that her sons are determined that she
shall remain mistress of her own actions without subjection or control. -- That
our old, tried and venerable friend, JOHN ADAMS, whom we have chosen from the
midst of us, still presides over our national councils, a political Palinurus,
who guides the American ark with skill and safety, through the tempestuous
ocean that rages around her, unmoved among the surges, and unshaken amid the
storm. May he continue to conduct her -- to govern her course and watch at the
helm, until the subsiding billows shall leave her in security on the Ararat of
ETERNAL PEACE! That our President -- our Constitution -- the honor of our land
and the reign of Law, may be long preserved, is a fervent prayer, which ascends
from every unadulterated American, to the throne of GOD.

RETIRED to the consecrated shades of Mount-Vernon, the immortal WASHINGTON
enjoys, in a serene old age, the consoling reflections of a noble mind, whose
own consciousness is an unceasing reward for all the toils and perils of an
active and glorious life. -- The recall to his native skies is delayed by
Heaven, that he may remain a bulwark to his country -- the terror of her
enemies, and the invincible Champion of her rights and dignity! His sword is
ready, and his heart is unchanged. Since the delivery of this Oration, the
appointment of GEORGE WASHINGTON, to the Office of LIEUTENANT GENERAL AND
COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE AMERICAN ARMIES, has been publicly announced. -- This
must give life and spirit to the lukewarm and wavering bosom, and add fresh
fire and enthusiasm to the determined and federal patriot. -- Thus, the
venerable HERO presents to the astonished world an example, in glory without
parallel. -- After having sustained the first and most dignified office in his
country, he nobly advances to defend her -- to serve and toil in her cause, in
a subordinate station. This is the climax of a character, whose constituent
parts are too great for description -- and whose whole swells like a universe
beyond the bounds of conception.
-- Tremble ye, who vainly threaten invasion, and gasconade at a distance. --
We have millions of hardy youth, who mock at fear, and set danger at defiance
-- and we have Washington -- a Gates -- a Lincoln -- a Knox -- and a
constellation of veteran warriors whose names are enrolled in the bright volume
of Fame -- to command them.

Invade our coasts, and by our GOD we swear,
"Each slaughtered corse shall feed the birds of air."
Death is their fate who madly tempt our rage,
Insult our shores, or with our hosts engage.
BY the divine goodness, we have been directed in the choice of our state and
federal officers, to select men eminent for their patriotism, abilities, public
and private virtues. The example of such distinguished personages produces the
general dissemination of piety, honesty, learning and their attendant
blessings. Hence the character of our people wears an amiable and endearing
aspect. It is the Spartan character, mellowed and improved by time and wisdom.
Americans venerate the plough -- and from the furrow, our legislators and
judges are exalted to the senate and the judgment seat. Our merchants and
mariners enrich our land with the treasures and luxuries of every clime, and
our harvests are wasted over arctic seas, and to realms beneath the glowing
line. America is destined by Heaven to be the granary of the world. Already the
emporium of commerce, her navy shall commit to her hands the trident of the
ocean. Our Atlantic receives with joy her floating castles to his bosom, and
swells with pride while his briny mountains are shaken by their thunders.

TO exhibit the reverse of a pleasing picture, is a task disagreeable and
painful. Truth compels a compliance with duty, and demands obedience to her
injunctions. When a great and powerful people forgets the eternal principles of
justice, and violates the compact of nations, she commits a crime most heinous
against the whole world. -- She forfeits all right to the friendship,
assistance and confidence of every other state and country. -- She becomes an
outlaw, a general depredator, against whom arms must be employed, and with whom
no other mode of reasoning will prevail. The consequences of her conduct are
war -- the destruction of order -- the ruin of myriads -- the depopulation of
empires -- anarchy -- confusion and death! Among the victims of the ambition
and avarice of the present scourge of the globe, alas -- our dear America is
numbered! Many of her citizens have been despoiled of the rich earnings of
their industry, and the valuable produce of their enterprise. Attempts have
been made under the direction of the French government, to effect a fatal
division between the people of these States and their constituted authorities.
-- Our neutral flag has been insulted. -- Our ministers of peace and
reconciliation treated with contempt and diplomatic insolence unparalleled in
the annals of history, in any nation or in any age. -- Our fellow-citizens have
been rendered suspicious of each other, and the pestilential spirit of party
had nearly dissolved all those bands of confidence, mutual affection and
friendship, which hold society together, and constitute the happiness, security
and prosperity of civilized man. -- These are serious evils -- these are open
insults to which the high souls of Americans could not submit with Spanish
servility or Batavian tameness. Our gratitude and ardent love to France were
not easily to be shaken -- if they are destroyed, the act that destroyed them
was her own. May this conduct teach us an important lesson. The interposing
providence of GOD directed the developement of her designs, and exposed her
insidious arts in all their deformity. We have escaped the catastrophe, which
threatened us -- civil war -- the hottest instrument of Almighty wrath.

THE voice of the people from New Hampshire to Georgia, has assured our
Executive and Congress of the Union, that they are ready and determined to
protect and defend their Constitution, their Government, their Laws and their
Liberties, against any foreign or domestic enemy who shall dare to assail or
oppose them. You, my fellow-townsmen, will be among the foremost in the
patriotic struggle, whenever summoned to action, and

With dauntless valor -- such as glowed sublime,
When Rome's proud eagle soared through every clime,
Spring boldly on, your Country's rights to save,
Or nobly perish in a glorious grave!
But come, sweet peace! in radient charms arrayed,
Return! a bleeding world requires thy aid!
Columbia calls! on eager pinions fly,
Ere virtue sink, and meek-ey'd pity die;
Restore the golden age, when all mankind,
In one blessed league of brotherhood were joined.
Thine be the sway, and then through every grove,
Shall gentle muses tune their lyre to love,
Over blood-drench'd plains, shall waving harvests spread,
And sportive nymphs Arcadian dances tread,
And hardy freemen, over the teeming field,
Their favorite arms of agriculture wield. --
The useful arts shall speed in fright no more,
From wars dread front and garments rolled in gore,
But where mad rage in horrors wrapped the vale,
Their cheering notes shall float on every gale.

