JOHNSON's NORTHWEST VOYAGE: PERFORMED IN THE YEARS 1796, 1797 and 1798.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF A NORTHWEST VOYAGE: PERFORMED IN THE YEARS 1796, 1797 and
1798.

BY EBENEZER JOHNSON.

When on the boisterous Waves we ride,
Let not the thought of Fear intrude.
MASSACHUSETTS: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, -- 1798. --

TO THE PUBLIC.
METHINKS I hear the reader exclaim, that these few lines will not be
acceptable to the Public. -- But when they have read the following pages, which
I now lay before them, and examined them with the most critical eye, they will
not I apprehend be disappointed. -- The impartial review taken of three parts
of the Globe, and the observations made on the Voyage, (which being nearly two
years) must be pleasing to those who are not acquainted with a Foreign Country.
-- This being the first Voyage that I have made to that Country, (and being
young in the seafaring business) I was induced to keep a daily journal, from my
departure, until my return; which is contained in the following Epistle. -- By
the desire of a few friends, the subscriber is induced to put it to Press for
Public examination, in hopes that it will please some, and give information to
others. -- As such he flatters himself it will be received, which will amply
reward his sufferings.

SHORT ACCOUNT OF A NORTHWEST VOYAGE, PERFORMED IN THE YEARS 1796, 1797 and
1798.
I SAILED from Boston, on board the India Packet, August 29th, 1796, with
pleasant weather, winds N. E; stearing our course S. E. September 18th, on our
course for Cape Horn the Southern extremity of South America; pleasant weather,
light gales of wind attended with a little rain. October 11th. -- Nothing
material happened. Now have the N. E. Trades Fresh. October 5th. -- Some little
disturbance in the Ship as is Natural to suppose there being five different
languages on board. I beginning to make a little proficiency in Navigation.
Sunday October 25th. -- In Lt. 6. S. stearing our course S. E. by S. we
discovered those remarkable clouds called the Magalen clouds, supposed to take
their name from being discovered by Magalen and, are actually about vertical
with the Straits of Magalen. The number of these clouds are three and perhaps
the greatest curiosity ever eye beheld. One of them is jet black the others
white. Perhaps the curious reader will query about the truth of this relation.
Hundreds are the number of we hardy Seamen, that have been eye witness of the
same. To entertain the reader with a further description of these clouds. They
revole round each other in their several orbits. Their appearance is always
plain unless obstructed by a cloudy horrizon, and always in the same place
except revolving. Sunday October 30th -- Morning fair but soon found our
horrizon obstucted by clouds, a melancholy scene to behold; there came on a
gale of wind; finding ourselves in eminant danger of being foundered. As the
gale increased we soon found our fore topmast about our cars, carried close
down to the cap. In replacing the fore topmast we unfortunately lost our main
top gallantmast. The reader will natural suppose our situation really
distroying, and had it not been for the greatest exertion we must unavoidable
perished. Saturday November 5th -- All an entire calm nothing material to day.
Sunday November 6th -- Lt. 45,0. 58 m. S. very boisterous weather a great
variety of birds, some surprising whales seen in those latitudes. November 20th
-- By observation we supposed ourselves not far distant from Cape Horn. In the
Lt. 55 S. frequently seeing seals of an enormous size, and every kind of
animal, natural to the South Seas. Thursday December 2d -- and then discovered
Cape Horn bearing N. from us. We had a very tedious time of it in geting up
with the Cape; but now have very fine weather for this latitude. We find
ourselves becalmed at this time, but soon have a breeze of wind and continue
our course to the southward.

Dec. 9th -- In Lt. 59,0. 30m. S. we discovered an astonishing Mountain of ice,
that we found to be by our Quadrants four miles in height, and supposed to be
twenty four in circumference. Among the curiosities in the South Sea this is
considered one of the greatest. However incredible this may appear kind reader,
yet history will confirm it. Catching some Albetrosses twenty feet from one
wing to the other. One very remarkable thing in this latitude, is that the sun
is to be seen nineteen hours out of twenty four, and plain day light
continually. Sunday December 25th -- Nothing particular occured. We have now
shaped our course for the N. W. Coast of America which is N. N. W.

January 1st 1979. -- By observation find ourselves in Lt. 25,0. 30m. S. nigh
the Trophic Line. We now begin to think of prepairing ourselves for the N. W.
Indians, where we intend to procure our furs. Distressing is our situation on
account of bad provisions, by the neglect of the owners of the Ship, confined
to three small biscuits per day, and three pints of water. -- In this situation
for three months, with a small allowance of beef.

Indulgent reader do not let me tire your patience, with unnecessary (...) for
the want of good style being bread without it, and but little chance for
improvement. Saturday Jan. 14th. -- We have now crossed the Equator and find
ourselves in Lt. 6 N. In taking a great many sea Turtle are tolerably well
furnished for provision. We suffered a great deal for the want of water; but
this day have had a very fine shower of rain, which furnished us with a good
supply. The sharks are surprisingly plenty in this latitude; some of them are
so ravenous that while our beef is toing along side, which necessity requires
they take it away net and all.

I have some occasion to complain of our Captain on the account of usage, his
committing assault and battery on a number of the crew, is something I don't so
well relish, but am not in a situation to seek my redress at present, but
anxiously wait the arrival of the time, in which I will acquiant him that I
took umbridge at it, and shall with the greatest propriety seek my redress.

Sunday January 21st. -- Stearing N. W. by N. by observation found ourselves in
Lt. 15 N. nothing meterial occurred. Saturday February 18th. -- We are now in
Lt. 49 33 N. Being distressed with a terrible gale of wind, of course excited
some alarm in us, for the seas run mountains high, and to appearance should
have our ship covered, dashing and beating as if she would go to pieces every
moment. Feel for us reader in this situation, what must the feelings within our
breast be, expecting to go to the bottom every minute; but through divine
assistance and a little of our own exertions we soon cleared ourselves of fear;
got our sails all in, and our yards and mast down on deck. In this situation we
remained about forty eight hours, and then the storm abated so that in a short
time we found ourselves in our usual situation. Kind reader, I acknowledge we
had great reason to thank Neptune the governor of the Seas.

Tuesday February 21st 1797. -- We this morning had the good fortune to
discover land, at 18 Leagues distance, and after three days sail up into
Norfolk Sound and come to anchor, after being at Sea about six months. Norfolk
Sound is in Lat. 58 5 N. Long. not ascertained, but thought to be in about 129
E.

We soon was encompassed about with canoes with 20, some 30 Indians in each.
Not lying but about a mile from the shore we had traffic enough.

After wooding, and watering, and repairing, we weighed our anchor and sailed
for Mearses Bay, about 3 to the Southward; had very good success in trade,
found furs plenty being the first ship on the Coast this season, purchased our
furs advantageously, after lying at anchor about 20 days; set sail for
Charlotte's Island, about 1 to the Southward; after arriving there was visited
by a great number of canoes; but could not trade much on account of the
boisterous weather; at our arrival at this place, we let go our anchor; but on
account of the gales that are prevalent here, was obliged to heave it up, and
make sail seven times in the space of 24 hours. We then thought best to sail
for Skiticus still further to the Southward; the distance about 40 miles.

After arriving we came to anchor, and find here a large Village rather a
Metropolis of this Nation, where we purchased three hundred skins.

Thursday March 16th. -- We have had the good fortune to procure eleven
hundred skins best prime. After setting sail from this, we shape our course
for Norfolk Sound, on arriving in Norfolk Sound, we spoke the ship Dispatch,
Capt. Bowers, from Boston, under way out of the Sound, all hands, in good
spirits, excepting one sick with the scurvey, a disorder which I suffered much
from. You may well conceive with what raptures we embraced one another, they
being the first christian people we have seen since we left Boston; the
Dispatch being bound to Mearses Bay, we tacked ship, and went in company with
them. On our arrival at the Bay, we found lying there, Capt. Trotter, in a brig
from Providence, likewise the brig Hazard from Boston, sloop Capt. Lay,
master. We had no particular news from them, all were well. We here had good
success in purchasing furs. Weighed anchor and set sail for Norfolk Sound,
arriving there, we got a supply of wood and water, we then purchased a few furs.

The reader will not consider me to minute in mentioning so often our
purchasing furs, as they were the only object of our Voyage, the number of
skins purchased was 2200 and upwards.

The Natives of the N. W. part of this Country, are very much alike in their
manners, they speak a number of languages; they are a hardy robust set of
people, about a middle size, resembling our Indian very much, of a tawny
complexion.

A short description of the animals may attract the attention of the reader.
1st. The sea animal, the Elephant about the size of a large ox, when full
grown, utter a terrible roaring that at times will excite alarm in any human
creature; principally of a vermilion color. 2d. The sea Lion, and sea Dog, are
not much unlike except the Lion (...) the largest.


The fowl kind are extremely numerous such as Geese, Turkeys, Brants, Ducks, of
every kind, the Eagle and Pelican, the largest of the feathered race, in these
Northern and unexplored regions.

The sea Otter that valuable animal, eminant for its fine fur. In Cook's
performances, these skins were sold in China for 100 Dollars per skin, but we
sold them for 25 or 30.

May 31st 1797. -- We set sail for China stearing S. S. W. with a fine breeze.

INDIA PACKET, June 30th, 1797. -- We continue on our passage for China, with a
brisk wind, stearing S. W. in Lat. 30 N. two of our men are taken with the
scurvey, a disorder very common in such a voyage.

I. P. July 7th. -- In Lat. 21 N. we lost our main and fore top mast, in a very
heavy Squall of wind, we however, replaced them very soon.

I. P. July 24th. -- In Lat. 14 N. L. 144 30, seven of our crew have the
scurvy, very bad, including our chief officer. We have been becalmed about 18
days; but have now a breeze of wind.

I. P. July 30th. -- We had the fortune to discover the Island Tinnian, at 5 A.
M. and got in with it at two P. M. We came to anchor and sent our boat on
shore, with the sick to the number of seven; left them and brought of a fine
Bullock, and five hundred oranges, a number of cocoanuts, and several hogs. The
animals on this Island are entirely wild, were put on here by Anson, a
Spaniard, in circumnavigating the Island Tinnian, is in Lat. 14 8 N. W. Long.
145 with several adjacent Islands. Agragan, Sipan, etc.

Thursday July 16th. -- This day we set sail for China, all in good spirits, a
passage in which nothing material happened. After being in the red Sea a few
days, and passing through the thousand Islands arrived at Macow. Macow is
situated at the mouth of the river Ta, or yellow River. We there came to
anchor; after setting sail for Canton we arrived in Wambo harbor in 48 hours,
the distance being 85 miles, we there came to anchor after three months passage
from the N. W. Coast of America.

Wambo harbor, September 1st 1797. -- The trade of Wambo. As to the trade of
this Country, it is rendered something difficult on account of their precarious
dispositions being ever open and ready to accept of every advantage as robbing,
pilfering, etc. etc. Their mode of worshipping is something very peculiar; they
burn incense night and morning; continually offering up sacrifices to the
Deity, or to use their Language to Jose. There are immense numbers that are
born and live on the waters until they die: It is supposed that there are one
Million that live on the waters continually. It is too well known in this
Country to enter into a long history of the Chinese or their manners in general.

I do not wish to tire the reader with intrinsic circumstances; but after
disposing of our furs for money, purchased ourselves a Cargo of Teas and a few
China curiosities, we set sail for Boston, the 12th of November 1797. -- Some
apologies are necessary in this case, but when the reader is become acquainted
with the circumstances he will be kind enough to excuse me for not continuing
my journal in a regular manner as I intended. In the commencing of the Voyage;
I had the misfortune of being sick the most part of the time after I left China
unable to write. So I shall endeavor to satisfy the reader, as far as possible.

October 17th. -- Lost sight of land on our passage for America after sailing
through the China Seas and down the coast of Africa, through the straits of
Balaboam by Java-head for ninety days we arrived at the Cape of Goodhope the
Southern extremity of Africa. In Lat. 34 30 S. Canton lying in 23 N. the reader
may easily estimate the Distance. The Cape of Goodhope is the garden of Africa.
It being very pleasantly situated and the most spacious Bay in the world lying
before the town. This town was taken by the Dutch, a long time since from the
Hottentots, but was three years since captured by the English; and now is in
the hands of them and guarded by as large a sleet for the place as any in the
known world. We found cause to lie in this place ten days on account of our
sick: We had the misfortune to lose three of our people, on our passage from
China; one of them third mate. We find here a variety of people: English,
Dutch, Hottentots, too numerous to mention. One curiosity is the Hottentots
sheep, of an enormous size; their tails are said to weigh 25lb. I have seen
them to weigh 15lb. The fowl kind, the Ostrich are found here in plenty, the
Casovarous are seen here, an extraordinary fowl. The Casovarous are about the
size of the Ostrich, not unlike them except their wings and brustles.

February 3d. -- This morning set sail for Boston, leaving one of our men sick
at the Cape, and after coming too, at the Island Asanchiant to get a little
refreshment by fish and turkle. We set sail for Boston. A description may not
be disagreeable to the indulgent reader. It is in Lat. 8 S. a continued clift
of rocks, about 24 miles in circumference. Destitute of inhabitants or any
animal except rats, and them without number of an enormous size. Of fowl kind
is found here the man of war bird, and Gull in plenty. The turkle of this place
are very large some weighing 900lb. It being within about 8 of the Equinoctial
line, S. is well adapted to them. The turtle furnished us with the most
delicious dish being a variety of meats in them. For brevity sake, I must leave
this subject and continue a sketch of the passage from China to America.

February the 24th, 1798. -- We weighed our anchor for the last time with
joyful hearts, and set sail for Boston steering W. N. W.

I. P. March 15th, 1798. -- Continuing our passage to Boston N. E. trades
steering W. N. W. by observation find ourselves in 23 30 m. North about the
tropic line.

April 1st, 1798. -- By observation we find ourselves in Lat. 30 24 m. upon a
parallel with the W. I. Islands: Nothing particular occurred.

April 7th. -- We came in sight of land through mistake. We got into Marblehead
harbor owing to the fog which was very heavy, we there took a pilot and
directed our course for Boston, where we arrived the 10th, after a passage of
137 days from China.

For two long years upon the main,
Each toil and danger I went through in hopes to see my native shore again:
The whistling winds began to blow,
Where to fix my mind I did not know!
When duty called I began to bid adieu,
But still to myself and country true.
A sailor's life a life, of woe
Now up and down, to and fro!
Blessed with Neptune smiles we fly
To rise seas running mountains high,
Though pearls threat around
All sense of danger drowned!
But think not our case is hard,
For coming home is a sweet reward,
Our sails when in harbor is furled
Then each brave fellow for his girl!
The deck we clear
Then three times cheer,
Our amorous toast
Here we love most!
This world is a stage
On which mankind engage,
A labyrinth of woe
Wandering for they know not who!
FINIS.

