THE COLUMBIAN SONGSTER AND FREEMASON 's POCKET COMPANION.

A COLLECTION OF THE Newest and most celebrated SENTIMENTAL, CONVIVIAL,
HUMOUROUS, SATIRICAL, PASTORAL, HUNTING, SEA and MASONIC SONGS, Being the
largest and best collection ever published in America.

Selected by S. LARKIN.

PORTSMOUTH: NEW HAMPSHIRE, PRINTED BY J. MELCHER, FOR S. LARKIN, AT THE
PORTSMOUTH BOOK-STORE

PREFACE.
THE Editor is happy that after having taken great pains, and having spared
neither trouble nor expense, he is able to present his friends and the public
with the largest and (he believes) the best collection of songs ever published
in this country.

As it frequently happens that collections of this kind abound with ribaldry
and indecency, the greatest attention has been paid, that nothing of that
tendency should he admitted into this selection, so that the cautious parent,
friend or preceptor may present this book as an agreeable companion to the
social mind.

In the Masonic collection he has been able by the help of a variety of books
and the kind assistance of friends, to form what he hopes will prove an
agreeable companion to his brethren in general; he assures them that he has
taken great care in selecting, that none but such as are genuine should be
admitted. He has taken the liberty of adding at the end of the volume, the
celebrated and much admired tale of "Mons^ur Tonson," which he doubts not will
be acceptable, and which he conceives not improper to insert in a collection of
this kind.

If on the w^ (...) should, after an ingenuo^ examination be f^rably ^ed, the
wishes of the Editor will be fully gratified, and he will feel an inward
satisfaction which none but a grateful heart can experience, with this hope it
is most respectfully submitted to the public for their patronage and protection.

INDEX
ATTENTION pray give while of hobbies I sing 18 A beggar I am and of low degree
38 A sup of good whisky will make you glad 45 As gay as a lark, and as blythe
as a be 65 A woman is to -- but stay 69 At sixteen years old you could get
little good of me 73 A sailor's life's a life of woe 75 At dawn I rose with
jocund glee 82 A soldier is the noblest name 83 A voyage over seas had not
entered my head 84 A Clerk I was in London gay 85 Aurora, lovely blooming fair
92 A traveller stopped at a widow's gate 103 At Symond's-Inn I sip my tea 105 A
plough-boy neighbors knew me as jocund as could be 113 A pretty gem'man once I
saw 141 Assist me ye lads who have hearts void of guile 158 As Dolly sat
milking her cow 169 A psalm or a song singing cobbler be I 173 A plague of those
musty old lubbers 209 At the sound of horn 210 By nature soft as kneaded dough
67 By this fountain's flowery side 79 Born under a cloud of misfortune and
sorrow 144 Banish sorrow, grief's a folly 156 Bright Phoebus has mounted the
chariot of day 161 But three months yet I Have been a wife 180 By moonlight on
the green 197 Come hither ye belles, aye and likewise ye beaux 110 Come buy my
ripe cherries fair maidens come buy 115 Contented I am, and contented I Will be
129 Come sailors be filling the can 140 Come let us be jovial and hearty 145
Could you to battle march away 147 Cold blew the wind, no gleam of light 205
Come loose every sail to the breeze 206 Dear Judy my granny was fond of the
sweets 43 Don't you remember a poor carpet weaver 66 Do you hear brother
sportsman the sound of the horn 155 Dear Nancy I Have sailed the world all around
177 Ere around the huge oak that over shadows yon mill 11 Ever since I found
true love beginning 70 Ere I had well grown to an age 109 From north to south,
from east to west 26 Far removed from noise or smoke 35 Faint and wearily the
way worn traveller 73 Faith, you must know I once was born 100 For England when
with favoring gale 123 From night till morn I take my glass 140 Free from the
bustle care and strife 152 From the east breaks the morn 159 Great Washington,
the Hero's come 14 Great news, great news, great news, great news 42
Gad-a-mercy! Devil's in me 124 Give me wine, rosy wine 127 Gather your rose
buds while you may 183 Go patter to lubbers and swabs, do you see 206 How sweet
is the breeze at eve's modest hour 36 Her mouth with a smile 79 Have thou
forgot the oak that throws 99 Hark, hark, the loud drums call the soldier's
away 49 How happily my life I led 139 Had Neptune when he took charge of the
sea 150 Hark forward's the word 164 Here a sheer hulk lies poor Tom Bowling 195
How blessed has my time been, what joys have I known 198 Here I was my good
masters, my name's Teddy Clinch 202 In the first book of Job which I now mean
to quote 19 I never by a lass yet was scouted 22 In the smiles of the fair 24
In my club room so great 34 In life's mom a maiden gay 49 I fell out with my
feyther 'bout something or other 51 I Am nick-nam'd Quack by every prig 52 I Am
lonesome since I crossed the hills 55 In early youth to fear a stranger 60 I of
feeling wont boast I Have no more than my share 61 In the choice of a husband we
widow's are nice 75 I am a brisk and spright^ lad 77 I cannot for my life guess
the cause of this fuss 86 I was called knowing Joe by the boys of our town 89
If round the world poor sailors roam 96 In tattered weed from town to town 96
I Am old enough to be married I was 100 In love be I fifth button high 111 In
storms when clouds obscure the sky 129 I Have kissed and I Have prattled with fifty
fair maids 139 I am a jolly gay pedlar 142 I tremble to think that my soldier's
so bold 148 I was pressed while a rowing so happy 176 I Would fain ask you a this
but in steps a that 184 I sailed in the good ship the Kitty 210 I that once was
a ploughman, a sailor am now 212 John Bull, for pasttime took a prance 32 John
Bull was a bumpkin born and bred 171 Johnny met me the other day 189 Jack Ratlin
was the ablest seaman 214 Let men elate, of Doctors prate 31 Let the toast be
love and beauty 41 Let Us be jovial, fill our glasses 131 London town is just
like a barber's shop 162 Let the sportsman go boast of the joys of the chase
167 My daddy was a Tinker's son 29 My dad was asleep in his old elbow chair 60
My Lord you're a horrid creature 101 My temples with clusters of grapes I Will
entwine 149 My heart is as honest and brave as the best 20^ My heart from my
bosom would fly 20^ Ned often had braved the field of battle 108 No more I Will
court the town bred fair 122 No lark that ever whistled aloft over the downs
179 Now we are launched on the world 185 Night over the world her curtain hung
199 Near Bow'ry Richmond Thames's side 200 No more from fair to fair I rove 211
Once the Gods of the Greeks at ambrosial feast 17 O listen, listen to the voice
of love 27 One sweet May morn in woody dale 27 Once friends I had, but ah! too
soon 35 O love! what the deuce do you want in my bosom 39 On board the good
ship Molly 40 On board the grog went cheerly round 50 On that lone bank where
Lubin died 54 One moon-shiny night about two in the morning 58 O when I was a
boy and a pretty little boy 63 Oh Lord! what a terrible fright I am in 64 Oh!
happy tawny moor, when you love 72 O give me your your plain dealing fellows 85
Of all the girls that are so smart 97 O listen then, and silent feel 106 Of all
the swains both far and near 114 Over barren hills and flowery dales 137 O say
simple maid, have you form^d any notion 145 Oh! think on my fate once I freedom
enjoyed 170 One kind kiss before we part 174 O! fortune how strangely thy gifts
are awarded 178 Our immortal poet's page 193 Poll dang it, how do you do, Nan
will not ye ge's a buss 54 Peaceful slumbering on the ocean 122 Peaceful snoozing
on the ocean 123 Sweet music's aid we happily share 16 Since plenty has crowned
33 Says our Nancy, says she -- one day to I 47 Snip once employed a lawyer
spruce 67 Such beauties in view I 74 Sir Solomon Simons when he did wed 120
Since then I Am doomed this sad reverse to prove 136 Songs of shepherds in
rustical roundelays 153 See ruddy Aurora begins to appear 156 See the dawn how
it rises in golden array 177 Spanking Jack was so comely, so blythe and so
jolly 181 Scarcely had the blushing morning 190 Say, have you seen my Arabell
200 The heart that has never tasted sorrow 22 The waves were hushed the sky
serene 30 The first of my pranks was at little Ratshane 37 Through life's
rugged voyage each mortal must sail 46 'Twas post meridian, half past four 56
'Twas in the green meadows so gay 57 'Twash the top of the morning so pleasant
and clear 66 There was Dorothy Dump, would mutter and mump 77 Though often we meet
severe distress 78 Though I am now a very little lad 82 This maxim let every one
hear 84 Though prudence may press me 87 The sweet briar grows in the merry green
wood 90 The rose just bursting into bloom 91 The gentle maid of whom I sing 94
The violet and primrose to pluck as they grew 95 The bard who glows with
grubstreet fire 98 The man whose life is on the seas 104 Though the lawyer comes
to woo 106 The kiss that he gave when he left me behind 107 'Twas in the grove
the other morn 108 The Other day as I walked in the mall 117 'Twas about ten
o'clock when we first set out 117 To be merry and wise is a maxim of old 119
The moon had climbed the highest hill 119 To hear a sweet Goldfinch's sonnet
125 The card invites in crowds we fly 126 To my muse give attention and deem it
not a mystery 131 Though my dad I must own is but poor 134 The plague of ones
life 143 The true son of Neptune's a friend to the bowl 146 The fox is
unkennel'd 147 The merry man 149 The wealthy fool with gold in store 151 The
silver moon that shines so bright 152 The dusky night rides down the sky 160
The moment Aurora peeped into my room 161 Though Bacchus may boast of his care
killing bowl 168 The meadows look cheerful, the birds sweetly sing 174 They
tell me I Am too young to wed 175 To pleasure let us raise the heart chearing
song 182 There were farmer Thrasher, and he had a cow 186 Tom True Love wooed
the sweetest fair 188 'Twas on a bank of daisies sweet 189 The wind was hushed,
the storm was over 196 The breeze was fresh, the ship in stays 201 Two real
tars whom duty called 204 The twins of Latona so kind to my boon 212 There are
grinders enough, sirs, of every degree 215 Trust not man for he will deceive you
215 Trust not woman she will beguile you 216 Verily ah! how my heart keeps
bumping 185 When our enemies rise and defiance proclaim 11 We meet as a circle,
our title's the same 12 When our Great Sires this land explored 13 When to my
pretty Poll I went 23 Woman now by grace and feature 25 When on board the
Hector I first went to sea 31 While nostrums are held out to cure each disease
40 When first I was kitten'd it was in Kilkenny 62 When morn's approach had
banished night 68 When the hollow drum has beat to bed 71 When William at eve
meets me down at the style 79 When bidden to the wake or fare 80 When I Have
money I am merry 81 Why must I appear so deceitful 87 Wrapped in the evening's
soft and pensive shade 92 When I was a poor little innocent boy 92 Wide over
the tremulous sea 94 What argufies your logic, your sense and all that there
102 When the robber his victim has noted 103 When sleep has closed the
trav'ler's eyes 110 When I was a younker says feyther to I 112 While your opera
squallers fine verses are singing 113 What a hard lot is ours now indeed and
indeed 24 When rural lads and lasses gay 126 When I was of a tender age 128
When first this humble roof I knew 133 When my money was gone that I gained in
the wars 134 When I was a younker, I first was apprentic'd 135 When I had
scarcely told sixteen 136 With care I Have searched the village round 138 When
one's drunk, not a girl but looks pretty 148 When the anchor's weighed and
ships unmoor'd 170 When lovers are too daring grown 183 When the rosy morn
appearing 191 When morn 'twixt mountain and the sky 192 Were I obliged to beg
my bread 197 What argufies pride and ambition 203 While up the shrouds the
sailor goes 207 You may talk about drinking of claret and whiskey 44 You may
talk of your maidens, fair widows and wives 62 Ye lingering winds that feebly
blow 64 You all must have heard of the learned pig 87 Ye nymphs and swains 116
Ye sportsmen draw near 157 You may feast your ears with a fife or a drum 162
You good fellows all 165 Ye sportsmen for pleasure and exercise born 164
THE COLUMBIAN SONGSTER, etc.
THE TRUE AMERICAN.
WHEN our enemies rise and defiance proclaim,
Undaunted to battle we fly;
Forget the soft ties that enervate the frame,
And fight 'till we conquer or die:
Our sweethearts we leave, nay our children and wives,
And brave all the danger of wars,
We fight that the rest may live peaceable lives,
And stand 'till the last in their cause.
In the heat of the battle, when loud cannons roar,
And the wounded our vengeance excite,
We muster our men, more enraged than before,
And with double the fury we fight,
When the tumult is over, and the unfortunate slain,
Are decently laid in the ground,
To our friends and our homes we return once again,
With honor and victory crowned.
ERE AROUND THE HUGE OAK.
ERE around the huge oak that over shadows yon mill
The fond ivy had dared to entwine,
Ere the church was a ruin that nods on that hill,
Or a rook built her nest in that pine;
Could I trace back the time ^much earlier date,
Since my fore-^ers toiled in this field;
And the farm I now hold on your honor's estate,
Is the same that my grandfather tilled.
He dying bequeathed to his son a good ^e,
Which unfullied descended to me;
For my child I Have preserved it, unblemished with shame,
And it still from a spot shall be free.
THE CIRCLE.
WE meet as a circle, our title's the same,
May the circle of honor be ever our fame;
May friendship and truth be the basis of all,
And mirth and good humor be found in our hall;
And Oh! may we never from this maxim depart,
The circle of honor engraved on the heart.
The sun is a circle of splendor most bright,
The moon is a circle which governs the night;
The stars they are circles -- the world too, beside,
Is a well-balanc'd circle on which we all ride:
Then from this firm maxim let us ne^r depart,
The circle of honor engraved on the heart.
If COLUMBIA must join in the loud din of war,
Now heard in the nations both near and afar,
May glory attend her from pole unto pole*
Wherever winds blow, and wherever seas roll;
And, Oh! may she never from this maxim depart,
The circle of ho^ (...) on the heart.
May each to his frien^ be (...) constant and (...),
And anger or malic^ (...) for (...) our view,
May every good P^ (...) long to reign,
And give the old ^er (...) again:
And still may we ne'^ from (...) dep^.
The circle of honor engraved on (...).
Tune. -- Rule Britannia.
WHEN our great Sires this land explored,
A shelter from tyranny wrong!
Led on by heavens Almighty Lord,
They sung -- and acted well the song,
Rise united! dare be freed!
Our sons shall vindicate the deed.
In vain the region they would gain,
Was distant, dreary, undisclos'd,
In vain the Atlantic roared between,
And hosts of savages opposed,
They rushed undaunted, heaven decreed
Their sons should vindicate the deed.
(...) ^edom led the vet'rans forth,
And ^ly fortitude to bear,
They to (...) ^ey vanquished! such high worth
Is (...) ^eculiar care,
The^ (...) still ^spires,
Nor (...) our sires.
It Is ours undaunted to defend
The dear-bought, ^ich Inheritance;
And spite of each invading hand,
We'll fight, bleed, die! in its defense,
Pursue our father's path to same,
And emulate their glorious flame.
As the proud oak inglorious stands,
'Till storms, and thunder root it fast,
So stood our new, unpractic'd bands,
'Till Britain roared her stormy blast.
Then he^ they vanquished, fierce led on
By freedom, and great WASHINGTON.
Hail, godlike hero! born to save!
Never shall thy deathless laurels fade,
But on that brow eternal wave,
And consecrate blessed Vernon's shade.
Thy spreading glories still increase,
'Till earth, and time, and nature cease.
Oh! may that spirit ^n thee shed,
Columbia's truest, noblest friend!
On thy successor's honored head,
In copious, double, showers descend!
This charge to ADAMS be consigned,
Be thou the second of mankind.
So when Elijah, called to heaven,
Up in the flaming chariot rode,
Elisha took the mantle given,
And rose a prophet -- or a god!
Then shout great ADAMS! Freedom's son!
Immortal heir of WASHINGTON.
ODE TO COLUMBIA'S FAVORITE SON.
GREAT WASHINGTON, the Hero's come,
Each heart exulting hears the sound;
See! thousands their deliv'rer throng,
And shout him welcome all around.
CHORUS.
Now in full chorus burst the song,
And shout the deeds of Washington!
There view Columbia's Favorite Son,
Her Father, Savior, Friend and Guide!
There see the Immortal WASHINGTON!
His Country's Glory, Boast and Pride!
Now in full chorus, etc.
When the impending storm of war,
Thick clouds and darkness hid our way,
Great WASHINGTON, our Polar Star,
Arose, and all was light as day!
Now in full chorus, etc.
His bleeding country roused his foul,
Fair Freedom su'd the Warriour's breast,
And drew the glittering faulchion bold,
And round him clasped the martial vest.
Now in full chorus, etc.
Then nobly spoke the intrepid chief,
"Freedom or Death be now my fate!
"This burnished blade no more I Will sheathe,
"'Till Paria's made an Empire great!"
Now in full chorus, etc.
This said, the Hero bent his way,
Where thousands thronged war's deathful coast;
At his approach, Fear fled away,
And dauntless brav'ry fired the host!
Now in full chorus, etc.
'Twas on yon Plains his valor rose,
And ran like fire from man to man;
'Twas here he humbled Parian's foes,
And chased an army to the main!
Now in full chorus, etc.
Through countless dangers, toils and cares.
Our hero led us safely on;
With matchless skill directs the wars,
'Till victory cries -- the day's his own!
Now in full chorus, etc.
His country saved, the contest over,
Sweet Peace restored, his toils to crown,
The Warrior to his native shore
Returns, and tills his fertile ground.
Now in full chorus, etc.
But soon Columbia called him forth,
Again to save her sinking same,
To take the Helm, and by his worth
To make her an immortal name!
Now in full chorus, etc.
Nor yet alone through Paria's shores,
Has fame her mighty trumpet blown;
Even Europe, Africa, Asia, hears,
And emulate the deeds he is done!
Now in full chorus, etc.
Accept, great Chief, this tribute due,
To deeds of virtue such as thine;
Thy glorious footstep we'll pursue
And in our hearts thy worth enshrine!
Now in full chorus, etc.
IN PRAISE OF MUSIC.
SWEET Music's aid we happily share
To charm the ills of wayward life,
To smooth the ruffled brow of care,
And cheer when all within is strife,
Harmonia's sons your hearts and voices raise,
And join ye powers in music's praise.
The call melodious we obey,
And fain would sing its powers divine;
Hark! it is Apollo joins the lay,
Responsive shout the sacred Nine.
Harmonia's Sons, etc.
It Is thou can madd'ning rage disarm,
And free the mind from base alloys,
And when distressing fears alarm,
'Wake in the soul celestial joys.
Harmonia's sons, etc.
Orpheus famed as poets tell,
(So wondrous were the magic strains;)
Whose powers, transportive, fled through hell,
And soth'd awhile its endless pains.
Harmonia's sons, etc.
While earth and hell its charms admire,
(All praise to music does belong,)
Angels seraphic strike the lyre,
And join the universal song.
Harmonia's sons, etc.
May jarring discord ever cease,
And all our lives harmonious prove,
'Till in the happier realms of peace,
We "taste what Angels do above."
Harmonia's sons, etc.
ONCE THE GODS OP THE GREEKS.
ONCE the Gods of the Greeks at ambrosial feast
Large bowls of rich nectar were quaffing,
Merry Momus among them was set as a guest,
Homer says the celestials loved laughing,
On each in the s'ynod, the humorist droll'd,
So none could his jokes disapprove;
He sang reparteed, and some smart stories told,
And at last thus began upon Jove.
"Sire Atlas who long has the universe bore,
"Grows greviously tired of late;
"He says that mankind are much worse than before,
"So he begs to be eased of their weight."
Jove knowing the world on poor Atlas was hurled
From his shoulders commanded the ball,
Gave his daughter Attraction the charge of the world,
And she hung it up high in his hall.
Miss pleased with the present reviewed the globe round,
To see what each climate was worth;
Like a di'mond the whole with an atmosphere bound,
And she variously planted the earth.
With silver, gold, jewels, she India endowed;
France and Spain she taught Vineyards to rear,
What suited each clime on each clime she bestowed,
And FREEDOM she found flourish here.
Four Cardinal virtues she left in this isle,
As guardians to cherish the root,
The blossoms of LIBERTY 'gan for to smile,
And Americans fed on the fruit,
Thus fed and thus bred from a bounty so rare,
O preserve it as free as 'twas given,
We will while we have breath-nay we'll grasp it in death,
Then return it untainted to Heaven.
THE HOBBIES.
ATTENTION pray give while of hobbies I sing;
For each has his hobby, from cobbler to King:
On some favorite hobby we all get astride,
And when we are once mounted full gallop we ride.
All on hobbies,
All on hobbies,
All on hobbies,
Gee up, gee O.
Some hobbies are restive and hard for to govern,
Even just like our wives, they are so cursedly stubborn;
The hobbies of Scolds are their husbands to teaze,
And the hobbies of Lawyers are plenty of fees.
The Beaux, those sweet gentlemen's hobbies, good lack!
Is to wear great large poultices tied round the neck;
And think in the ton and the tippey they are dressed,
If they have breeches that reach from the ancle to chest.
The hobbies of Sailors, when safe moored in port,
With their wives and their sweethearts to toy and to sport,
When our navy's completed, their hobby shall be
To show the whole world that America's free.
The hobbies of Soldiers, in time of great wars,
Are breaches and battles, with blood wounds and scars;
But in peace you will observe that quite different their trade is --
The hobbies of Soldiers in peace, are the ladies.
The Ladies, sweet creatures, yes, they now and then
Get astride of their hobbies, ay, just like the men;
With smiles and with simpers beguile us with ease,
And we gallop, trot, amble, even just as they please.
The Americans' hobby has long since been known;
No tyrant or king shall from them have a throne;
Their States are united, and let it be said
Their hobby is WASHINGTON, Peace, and free Trade.
THE PROPHETS.
IN the first book of Job, which I now mean to quote,
At the fifth and sixth verses you will find it thus wrote:
"So Moses invited some Prophets to dine,
And drink a few bottles of gooseberry wine."
Derry down.
Then Moses was placed in the chair in a trice,
And Aaron his crony deputed his Vice;
When the glass moving quick, and the wine being strong,
Moses swore they shou'dn't stir till they would each sung a song.
Some looked askew sir, at first Moses saw,
But whatever Moses said, why you know sir, was law;
Nay he frankly declared, that should any decline,
He would fine them a bumper of gooseberry wine.
Little David it seems sir, first was the choice,
For they very well knew he would an excellent voice;
But he vowed he could not sing, they swore 'twas a thumper.
And poor little David was fined in a bumper.
Rear-Admiral Noah, whom much has been said of,
And his jaunt on the water, which we have all read of;
Not liking thin gooseberry, called for a dram,
Hnd gave them the song which he sung to young Ham.
NOAH'S SONG.
Tune -- "Heaving of the Lead."
AND bearing up to gain the port,
Some well known object had in view;
An Abbey tower, or harbor fort,
Which ever the flood old Noah knew,
While often the lead the seamen flang,
And to the watchful pilot sung,
By the mark seven.
Ezekiel rose next sir -- a very great smoaker,
But in lighting his pipe, burnt his nose with the poker,
Being skilful in music, and proud of his voice,
With exquisite fancy, this song was his choice.
EZEKIEL'S SONG.
Tune -- "Knibb's and."
WHY Moses, why Aaron, my (...)*
I am glad I Have met with you ^ere^*
For Zeky, as all of you knows,
Is fond of a drap of good beer --
If you mean for to pass all the night,
Why say such are your purpose and ends,
And d -- n me, we'll have a good bout,
For I loves a full pot with my friends.
Then Solomon rose sir, all in his glory,
And said he had much rather tell them a story;
But the cry against that was a great deal too strong,
For they would have nothing but "Solomon's song."
SOLOMON'S SONG.
I HAVE kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maids,
And changed them as often do ye see;
But of all the fair damsels that dance on the green,
Dear Sheba's the queen for me.
Next Habakuk rose, for they took 'em in course,
But Habakuk's cold had made Habakuk hoarse;
He declared he could not sing any more than the moon,
But if Moses pleased he would whistle a tune --
"LILLABULERO."
Jeremiah rose next sir, at Moses' desire,
Whom wit, sir, nor wine sir could ever inspire:
And in strains which would suit the commemoration,
He sung them a verse of his own Lamentation.
JEREMIAH'S SONG.
Tune -- "Queen Mary's Lamentation."
I SIGH and lament me in vain,
These walls can but echo my moan;
Alas, it increases my pain,
When I think of the days that are gone;
Through the grate of my window I see,
The boys as at marbles they play;
I cry, and exclaim out -- ah, me!
I once could play better than they.
Then up rose little Jonah, who looked like a jelly,
For he was just come sir, from out the whale's belly;
For three days and three nights, was he left to despair,
But he would sing to Moses what he suffered there.
JONAH'S SONG.
CEASE rude Boreas, blustering railer,
List ye landsmen all to me;
Messmates hear a brother sailor
Sing the dangers of the sea.
In the horrid belly pent, sir,
Think on what I suffered there --
Forced to keep a dismal Lent, sir,
And to breath infectious air:
Naught but fish to feed upon sir,
And compelled to eat it raw;
All my hopes were almost gone, sir,
Ever I left the monstrous jaw.
Then Sampson rose next, once in prowess so big,
But at that time friend Sampson had just got his wig*
He related the tale of his dire mishap,
How his wife shaved his head, as he slept in her lap.
SAMPSON'S SONG.
Oh dear, what can the matter be?
Oh dear, what can the matter be?
Sampson has lost all his hair!
Oh that I ever should have taken so sound a nap,
Oh that I ever should have taken it in her lap,
Oh that I had but tied on my red night cap,
Then Sampson had never lost his hair.
Oh dear, what can the matter be?
Mercy on me what can the matter be, etc.
They next called on Job, as a song was his sort,
But they begged as 'twas late, that his song might be short;
So he sung Chevy Chase, to a dismal psalm tune,
Which the Prophets all thought would have lasted till noon.
Now Moses, it seems, sir, who good hours kept,
Whilst they sat a singing, why he sat and slept;
But waked by the noise sir, of crying encore,
He bid them get home, for they should drink no more.
Well-bred Aaron, it seems sir, at this took offense,
And swore want of good manners, showed want of good sense;
This caused a dispute, some reflections were cast,
But for decency's sake, we'll not mention what past.
FAVORITE SONGS, in the Comic Opera of ABROAD AND AT HOME.
THE heart that has never tasted sorrow,
Even happiness often will cloy;
And we ever from misery borrow
Our knowledge of exquisite joy.
To those who all anguish would smother,
The best use of life is unknown;
To feel for the woes of another,
Or value the bliss that is their own.
I NEVER by a lass yet was scouted,
I know the right method to get her,
No cringing for me,
I Will soon let her see
That I Am bold -- and she will like me the better.
I Am a boy that is not easily flouted,
If she give herself airs, why even let her.
When to kiss her I try,
"You're rude," Sir, she will cry.
Why I am -- and you like me the better.
When she finds that I Am not to be routed,
And at morn, noon, and night I beset her,
She Will alter her tone,
And readily own
Though I Am rude, that she likes me the better.
WHEN to my pretty Poll I went,
And I to travel sought her,
"Ah, stay at home, dear Jack," says she,
"I cannot cross the water."
What could I do? Away I flew,
A curricle I bought her;
Six smoking bays, all Hyde Park's gaze,
From Tatterfalls I brought her.
"Dear Jack," says she, "how kind you be!
(She Would coax'd like Eve's own daughter,)
"With you will I both live and die,
"Do all but cross the water."
Then, splashing, dashing through the town,
She drove the stare of all,
The echo of her rattling wheels,
Was, "There goes pretty Poll!"
"Oh, pretty, pretty Poll!"
From every tongue the echo rung
"See, there goes pretty Poll!"
What a lad then was I!
All to dress at me try,
And my praise to withhold none so currish.
With a girl so divine,
Such dinners! such wine!
What a damned clever dog was Jack Flourish!
But an end to my cash,
My fame goes to smash,
No friends my good qualities nourish;
For they, once so kind,
Now agree in one mind.
What a damned stupid flat is Jack Flourish!
Thus, cut by my friends, by bailiffs seized,
And this vile limbo near,
Yet with one hope I still was pleased,
That Poll my cage would cheer,
To Poll I told where I must go,
And not to leave me sought her;
She laughing, cried, "Dear Jack you know --
"I cannot cross the water."
IN the smiles of the fair,
Is the best cure for care,
If ruffled our bosom, they charm it to ease;
Or with eyes sweetly glancing,
Our hearts they set dancing,
They calm us and rouse us even just as they please.
The wise prop of a state,
Or the warrior so great,
Often bows down to kiss Beauty's rod on his knees;
It Is the province of Beauty,
To teach men their duty,
For women can do with us just what they please.
Even the miser quits gold,
Their bright charms to behold,
And gives them his soul, for he yields them his keys;
The dear rogues are so clever,
Oh! bless 'em for ever,
And may they rule over us just as they please.
WHAT a hard lot is ours now, indeed and indeed,
It Is a terrible life we poor servants lead,
Up early and late,
To toil and to wait,
To do as one's bid,
Yet for ever be chid,
Ill humors to bear,
And yet not to dare,
Though with anger we burn,
To be spiteful and cross in return. --
What a hard l^'s ours then, indeed and indeed,
It Is a terrible life that we poor servants lead.
To be sure, when one happens a service to get in, --
Where, to aid Madam's frolics, her secrets we are let in,
Why then, I must own, of our blabbing afraid,
The maid is the mistress, the mistress the maid.
They coax one so pretty,
It Is "dear Miss Kitty!
You're so kind and clever,
I Will love you for ever."
Our wages they double,
Yet give us no trouble,
And, while they are so civil,
We Are as saucy and pert as the devil. --
What a hard lot is theirs then, indeed and indeed,
It Is a terrible life our poor Mistresses lead!
But the times are so altered, these places are rare now,
For who knows their intrigues there are few ladies care now,
A faux pas to conceal they will use little labor,
Whilst each lady's in countenance kept by her neighbor.
Their spouses so kind too,
Such soibles are blind to,
Nay, some will assume our vocation;
If a go-between's needed,
We Are passed by unheeded,
The husband takes our occupation.
What a strange lot is theirs then! indeed and indeed
It Is a whimsical life that some husbands lead.
WOMAN now by grace and feature,
Sighs and vows, will not be caught,
If you have the pretty creature,
The pretty creature must be bought.
You may swear,
You may tear,
You may cry,
You may lie,
You may kneel,
You may feel
All the pangs that from love's raging fervours arise,
And proclaim her an angel dropped down from the skies.
No pity she shows
For your budget of woes;
She scoffs at your tears, and derides all your pain,
And even darling flattery assails her in vain. --
Who then finds the way
His addresses do pay,
In a style which this whimsical creature can fix --
He who drives to her door
In a chariot and four,
Or old Nick himself in a fine coach and six.
O LET MY HARBOR BE YOUR ARMS PRETTY POLLY.
FROM North to South, from East to West,
I have plough'd the ocean wide,
With fearful danger often oppressed,
By warring winds and tide
The billows rolled, the ship was tossed,
My heart was sunk, my hopes were lost;
But now returned and free from harms,
O let my harbor be your arms,
My pretty, pretty Polly.
When whizzing balls around me flew,
My heart would sink through fear,
But roused by one blessed thought of you,
My life became more dear:
Boldly I fought my country's foe,
And laurels crowned thy Harry's brow,
I dared all dangers, scorned alarms,
In hopes to harbor in your arms,
My pretty, pretty Polly.
For you I toiled, for you I fought,
My thoughts were still on you,
The life I saved the wealth I sought,
Had still your bliss in view:
With store of gold, to make you gay,
I Am now safe moored in beauty's bay,
Secure from storms and rude alarms,
My harbor now shall be your arms,
My pretty, pretty Polly.
LISTEN TO THE VOICE OF LOVE.
O LISTEN, listen to the voice of love,
He calls my Daphne to the grove,
The primrose sweet bedecks the field;
The tuneful birds invite to rove,
To softer joys let splendour yield,
O listen, listen to the voice of love.
Where flowers their blooming scents exhale,
My Daphne let us fondly stray,
Where whispering love breathes forth his tale,
And shepherds sing their artless lay.
O listen, listen to the voice of love,
He calls my Daphne to the grove.
Come share with me the sweets of spring,
And leave the town's tumultuous noise;
The happy swains all cheerful sing.
And echo still repeats their joys;
Then listen, listen to the voice of love,
He calls my Daphne to the grove.
NANCY.
Tune -- Dibdin's Sailor's Journal.
ONE sweet May morn, in woody dale,
From a fond parent first I parced,
And kept along the winding vale,
With broken steps and all down hearted --
In climbing slow the village hill,
Full often I turned, indulging fancy --
When on its brow I lingering still,
Looked, sighed, and wept -- Ah! happy Nancy!
The Chester coach, for London, now
Took up its burden gay and cheary --
But as it lengthened on my view,
The busy road to me seemed dreary:
Silent, my flying couch I pressed --
Yet to amuse my troubled fancy,
I sometimes caught the passing jest,
I heard and smiled -- Ah, thoughtless Nancy!
And now arrived at that dear spot,
The bound of many a village longing,
Soon humbler views were all forgot,
'Midst high raised hopes, alternate thronging*
With flattery so it proved to be,
The men caught every female fancy,
And, when in turn it fixed on me,
I fond believed -- Ah! simple Nancy!
Too soon the dreadful storm came on --
Gay London -- would I sought it never!
Saw one more hapless ma^d undone,
And wrecked her fairest hopes for ever!
The day was passed with silent woe,
At night, it may be only fancy --
A pitying angel whispered low,
Fly hence! or thou art lost -- poor Nancy!
At break of day, disguised, alone,
I urged my flight, scarce knowing whither --
And left, for ever, the vicious town,
And a gay villain's arms together:
Thus quitting both, yet, woman still,
A thousand fears rush on my fancy --
Ah, may, at last, kind chance reveal
Some friendly shade, to hide poor Nancy.
THE TINKER's SONG.
MY daddy was a tinker's son,
And I Am his boy, it is ten to one
Here Is pots to mend! was still his cry,
Here Is pots to mend! aloud bawl I --
Have ye any tin pots, kettles, or cans,
Coppers to solder, or brass pans.
Of wives my dad had near a score,
And I have twice as many more --
And what is as wonderful as true,
My daddy was the lord (upon my soul he was) the lord knows who!
It Is a hard matter for a child to know its own father -- besides, my mother
was a queen! -- O! yes, she was Queen of the Gypsies, and perhaps I was born a
Prince! though now, like other tinkers, I mend one hole and make two, with my
Ran, tan, tan, ran, tan, tan,
For pots or can, oh I Am your man,
With my ran tan, etc.
Once I in budget snug had got
A barn-door capon, and what not --
Here Is pots to mend! I cried along,
Here Is pots to mend! was still my song.
At village wake -- oh, curse his throat!
The cock crow'd out so loud a note,
The folks in clusters flocked around,
They seized my budget, in it found
The cock, a gammon, pease and beans,
Besides a jolly tinker (yes by the lord) a tinker's ways and means.
Oh! they took my all, left me nothing but my paternal estate, which consisted
of my -- Ran tan, tan, etc.
Like dad, when I to quarters come,
For want of cash the folks I hum --
Here Is pots to mend! bring me some beer!
The landlord cries 'you'll get none here,
'You tink'ring dog, your tricks I know,
'More beer indeed! pay what you owe!'
In rage I squeeze him against the door,
And with his back rub off my score:
At his expense I drown all strife,
For which I praise the landlord (could not do no less than praise) the
landlord's wife.
Because she was pretty. What a lovely shape and beautiful eyes! Ma'am, (says
I) one pot more, and score it up to the tinker -- and if you should want any
thing in my way, you may always command me, and my -- Ran, tan, tan, etc.
THE WAVES WERE HUSHED.
THE waves were hushed -- the sky serene,
When sailing on the main,
Ben from the main-top viewed the scene,
And sung in tender strain:
Dear ^all, this picture round my neck,
Which bears thy likeness true,
Shall ever my faithful bosom deck,
Which throbs for only you.
Still was the night when last on shore,
We took a parting kiss,
And warm the vows each other swore,
To meet again in bliss:
A token then my Sally gave,
It Is this which now I view --
And in my heart shall ever live,
Which throbs for only you.
Sweet ^all wherever you may rove,
Ah kindly think on me,
And this dear semblance of my love,
Shall prove I dote on thee:
Wherever bound by night or day,
Still as the needle true,
My constant heart shall never stray,
Which throbs for only you.
ALLOWANCE OF GROG.
WHEN on board the Hector I first went to sea,
How the boatswain did grumble and flog,
I swore then no longer a sailor I Would be,
'Till they served my allowance of grog.
It was then rough or fair, safe moored or at sea,
Going large from the land or close under the lee,
For to reef or to steer, or to wear,
Up the hatchway I Would merrily jog,
While to moisten my eye, Mister Purser, says I,
Pray where is my allowance of grog?
Once sick of a fever, a whole week I lay,
From my hammock I hardly could jog,
Just like some old junk they had stowed me away,
And stopped my allowance of grog;
Keep her full says I boy, or you're taken a back,
And the sharks will be making a meal of poor Jack,
For the doctor's mate said he was sure I was dead,
'Till I called him an impudent dog!
Hard a starboard, says I, you lubber, you lie,
All I want is my quantum of grog.
METALLIC POINTS.
LET men elate, of Doctors prate,
That know to spread the plaster;
And make a rout to cure the gout,
Or any sad disaster.
Not GALEN, or HIPOCRATES,
Nor any learned sage, Sir;
Could boast such worth, as has its birth,
In this enlightened age, Sir.
For sting of be, or bite of flee,
Or stiffness, cold, or wound, Sir,
Metallic points will ease the joints,
And leave you safe and sound, Sir.
Rheumatic pain, or bruise, or strain,
Or pimple, wart, or freckle,
But rub enough, they take it off,
And never leave a speckle.
Then fear no more, or pain, or sore,
Or shaking fits, or jerkings,
For each disease, he will cure with ease,
Huzza for Doctor PERKINS.
MONSIEUR NONG TONGUE PAW.
JOHN BULL, for pastime took a prance,
Some time a-go to peep at France,
To talk of Sciences and Arts,
And knowledge gain in foreign parts.
Monsieur obsequious heard him speak.
And answered John in hea-then Greek;
To all he asked, 'bout all he saw,
'Twas "Monsieur, je vous n'entend pas."
JOHN to the Palais-royal came,
Its splendour almost struck him dumb;
I say, whose house is that there here?
"House! Je vous n'entend pas, Monsieur."
What Nong tongue paw again cries JOHN!
This fellow is some mighty don!
No doubt has plenty for the maw,
I Will breakfast with this Nong tongue paw.
JOHN saw Varseilles from Marli's height,
And cried astonished at the sight,
Whose fine estate is that there here?
Stat! Je vous n'entend pas, Monsieur,
His? what the land and houses too?
The fellow's richer than a Jew;
On every thing he lays his claw,
I should like to dine with Nong tongue paw.
Next tripping by a courtly fair,
JOHN cried, enchanted with her air,
What lovely wench is that there here?
Ventch! Je vous n'entend pas, Monsieur.
What, he again? upon my life;
A palace, lands, and then a wife,
Sir JOSHUA might delight to draw,
I should like to sup with Nong tongue paw.
But hold, whose fun'ral's that: cried John,
"Je vous n'entend pas: What is he gone?
Wealth, fame, and beauty could not save
Poor Nong tongue paw, then, from the grave.
His race is run, his game is up,
I Would with him breakfast, dine and sup;
But since he is chosen to withdraw,
Good night to ye Monsieur Nong Tongue Paw.
A RUSTIC's SONG.
SINCE plenty has crowned
All our labors, and sound
Us, her horn full of October b^er;
Then the ^ge ^ng and glass,
To each (...) and shall free pass,
And we'll drink to her health most sincere,
And we'll drink, etc. etc.
Then each lad and each lass,
Fill ^he times as they pass,
With the sweets of our rustical cheer;
Then around the huge oak
Well (...) a good joke,
And we'll ^aff our brown October beer,
And we'll quaff, etc. etc.
Then ye Cits, who content,
With the musty towns scent;
Take a ^ss of our air that is so clear,
Be refreshed as you smell
The perfumes of the gale,
And you will drink of our best nut brown beer,
And you will drink, etc. etc.
Then we'll join round our oak,
And we'll make the plain smoke,
With those sports to us rustics so dear,
Then each lass shall prolong
Our best sports with a song,
While we drink our brown October beer,
While we drink, etc. etc.
THE PRESIDENT.
IN my club-room so great,
When I Am seated in state,
At the head of the table I shine;
With hammer in hand,
Zounds, how I command,
As I push round the bumpers of wine:
Then after we have toasted the health of the King,
Mr. Brisket the butcher is called on to sing.
"SIR I WILL DO MY BEST,"
Ma chere amie, etc.
Now I wink and I stare,
At my next neighbor's chair,
It Is with you sir, a lady to give,
A duchess at least,
Must now grace our feast --
Then the thanks of the room I receive --
'Till silence is called all the table along,
And a bald-pated gentleman sings us a song,
"I WILL TRY GENTLEMEN,"
With my pipe in one hand, etc.
Then we drink and push round the bowl,
Till a medley at last sums up the whole;
Whilst so pleased all the club-room declare,
Bobby B^ is the man for the chair.
THE WOODMAN.
FAR removed from noise or smoke,
Hark! I hear the woodman's stroke,
Who dreams not as he fells the oak,
The mischief dire he brews:
How art may shape his falling trees,
In aid of luxury and ease,
He weighs not matters such as these,
But sings and hacks and hews.
Perhaps now felled by this bold man,
That tree shall form the spruce sedan,
Or wheelbarrow, where oyster Nan
So runs her vulgar rig:
The stage where boxers crowd in flocks,
Or else a quack's, perhaps the stocks,
Or posts for signs, or barber's blocks,
Where smiles the parson's wig.
Thou make, bold peasant, oh what grief,
The gibbet on which hangs the thief,
The seat where sits the grave Lord Chief,
The throne, the cobler's stall --
Thou pamperest life in every stage,
Make folly's whim, pride's equipage,
For children toys -- crutches for age,
And coffins for us all.
Yet justice let us still afford,
These chairs and this convival board,
The bin that holds gay Bacchus' hoard,
Confess the Woodman's stroke:
He made the press that bled the vine,
The butt that holds the generous wine --
The hall itself, where tiplers join
To crack the mirthful joke.
THE SHEPHERD BOY.
ONCE friends I had, but ah! too soon,
Death robbed me of my parents dear,
Left me to mourn my wretched doom,
And wander friendless in despair;
Forlorn over hills and dales I roved,
Deprived of every earthly joy,
At length a swain, by pity moved,
Made me an humble Shepherd's Boy.
Soon as I view the dawn of day,
To flowery plains my flocks I lead,
And whilst for food my Lambkins stray,
On some lone bank I tune my reed,
Did those who bathe in seeming bliss,
Once taste the sweets that I enjoy,
They Would wish for humble happiness,
And envy me the Shepherd Boy.
When down the Western Sky the Sun,
Descends to gladden Eastern climes,
It Is then my daily toil is done,
And I to rest repair betimes;
In rustic garb it is true I Am clad,
Yet nothing does my peace annoy,
And though my fortune is but sad,
Still heaven may bless the Shepherd Boy.
THE GIRL OF MY HEART.
HOW sweet is the breeze at eve's modest hour,
When it murmurs yon lime trees among;
When the blackbird and thrush so enchantingly pour
Their melodious sweetness of song;
When slowly adown from the warm glowing west,
The bright sun is seen to depart,
When all passions but love are hushed into rest,
I fly to the girl of my heart.
My Anna is gentle, is lovely and kind,
Her bosom true sympathy warms;
Enchanting alike are her person and mind,
Each possesses a portion of charms;
For a maiden so lovely, -- a charmer so bright,
Who uses no coquetish art;
I resign all the trifles that others delight,
And fly to the girl of my heart.
Her eyes that so languidly speak soft desire,
Her cheeks that so rival the rose,
In my bosom the softest emotions inspire,
And charm my fond heart to repose;
And when her sweet accents enraptured I hear,
Through my soul they so thrillingly dart;
Oh! What sounds of sweet melody strike my rapt ear,
When I meet -- the sweet girl of my heart.
THE INTRIGUING IRISHMAN.
THE first of my pranks was at little Ratshane,
Where love, faith, like whisky, popt into my brain,
For Ally Mc Gulloch, a sweet little soul,
As tall and as strait as a shaver-man's pole;
Och, she was a sweet creature! with a bloom on her face like a Munster potatoe
-- I met her going to market one morning with a basket under one of her arms.
-- Where do you come from my dear? says I. From Clanterduffy, Sir, says she --
And what is your name, my dear? Ally M'Gulloch, Sir, says she -- Och, what a
soft beautiful name! To be sure then I told her a piece of my mind,
Till she left her old dad and the basket behind.
But soon I was dying for Molly Mc Gree,
A sweet tender shoot just come up from Tralee;
O sweet Molly, says I, do pray case my pain,
By St. Patrick, says she, Sir, pray what do you mane?
Mane! says I, -- Why to marry you to be sure, my dear. -- But do you though?
says she -- To be sure I do, -- What do you think of me? Oh, there is no
resisting ye, says she. -- So we were to be married next day -- But as the
devil would have it a thick fog came on,
When I looked for the church, oh I found it was gone*
But morning and night she was always my plague,
Faith it is time then, says I, for to leave off intrigue;
So from Cork I set sail, in a d -- d open boat,
With some cash in my pocket, two shirts, and a coat;
We sailed so plagued slow, that a big storm overtook us -- To be sure I didn't
swallow a little of the sea broth -- but the worst of my misfortunes was, when
I landed there was Molly McGree! and she put into my arms a grate ugly
squalling brat, with a head as big as a bushel of potatoes -- what is this? says
I -- It Is your own Teddy, says she, and as like ye as two peace. -- Teddy be d
-- d, says I, took it away, woman; I tell ye I don't know any thing at all of
the matter. Then to end my intriguing, I went off to sea,
And bid a good morning to Molly Mc Gree.
THE BEGGAR.
A BEGGAR I am, and of low degree,
For I come of a begging family,
I Am lame, but when in a fighting bout,
I whip off my leg and I fight it out;
In running I leave the beadle behind,
And a lass I can see, though alas I am blind,
Through town and village I gaily jog,
My music, the bell of my little dog.
I Am clothed in rags,
I Am hung with bags,
That round me wags;
I Have a bag for my salt,
A bag for my malt,
A bag for the leg of a goose!
For my oats a bag,
For my groats a bag,
And a bottle to hold my booze:
It Is now, heaven bless you for your charity,
And then push the cann about, fol de roll de re.
Bless your noble honor, and your good lady, I hope you will ^r know the loss
of a leg or an eye. H^aven bless you for your charity,
Then push about the cann, fol de roll. etc.
In begging a farthing, I Am poor and old,
In spending, a noble, I Am stout and bold,
When a brave full company I see,
It Is "My noble masters, your charity!"
But when a traveller I meet alone,
"Stand and deliver, or I Will knock you down,"
All day for a wandering mumper I pass,
All night -- O a barn and a buxom lass.
I Am clothed, etc.
O'WHACK!
O LOVE! what the duce do you want in my bosom,
Get out of my sight and my heart let alone?
For had I a score I should certainly loose 'em,
As that I possess is no longer my own;
What means all this thumping, this fluttering and beating,
O good Master Cupid pray be easy now!
I long every Morn for the next Village meeting,
Though it adds to my pain but I cannot tell how.
Sing lara la, lara, la, lara,
Lara la, lara la, lara;
I cannot for the life of me make out the reason,
Why Love is the only thing never out of season.
Och when on the green we were all of us dancing,
'Twas there I first felt the effect of her eyes,
Each moment she would seize to be privately glancing
Fond looks at a heart she had caught by surprise;
She shot through and through like a loud clap of thunder,
My heart a large hole in my bosom did burn,
And fled to her arms, then pray where is the wonder,
That her own the dear crater should send in return?
O Cupid! you're surely of Irish extraction,
O help your poor countryman now at a pinch,
If you will stand my friend in the heat of the action,
May I never see Kilkenny again, if I flinc^*
I Am not one of those who are given to lying,
I promise no more than I Am able to give,
I hate all your nonsense your kneeling and dying,
But I Will love her as long as she chooses to live.
THE BOTTLE.
WHILE nostrums are held out to cure each disease,
And to parry with pain, or with death as we please,
The protractor of life, and preserver of ease,
I have ever yet found in a bottle!
For when care like a clog, hangs about my poor heart,
And health from the burden seems bent to depart,
I the millstone shake off, and Death draws back his dart,
When he sees that my Doctor's a bottle.
And should love, whose dominion is ever divine,
Drench my doting fond eyes in a deluge of brine,
Every tear that I dropped at bright Venus's shrine,
Let me drown in the tears of the bottle!
And as pride may prevail, where it never should take place,
E're its impulse my portion of prudence disgrace,
Let me nobly renounce all the stiff-necked race,
To bend down the stiff-neck of a bottle!
Or should avarice, the first of all vices I Would shun,
Shrink the cords of my heart, I Will bet millions to one,
That they soon should expand, like the rays of the sun,
And benevolence spring from a bottle.
And when time with his scythe, and his silver toupee,
Would my Spirits expel from the mansions of glee,
They triumphant shall float in a glorious Red Sea!
Which eternally flows from the bottle!
A SEA SONG.
Tune -- Dibdin's Chelsea Pensioner.
ON board the good ship Molly
I sailed from Portsmouth sound,
And left behind my Polly
To trace the world around.
To fear I am no stranger,
But jovial, bold and free;
And for to brave all danger
Resolved to go to sea.
And now on board so cheerly
I drink my flip and grog;
My messmates love me dearly,
And call me jolly dog.
To reef, or luff, or mount the shrouds
So merrily am I,
Or on the main-top face the clouds,
Drunk, sober, wet or dry.
To America then, with pleasure,
I bid a long farewell,
In hopes to gain some treasure,
And poverty repel.
But if on board the Molly
A fatal cannon ball
Should rob me of my Polly,
Why then adieu to all.
A SEA SONG.
Tune -- Life's like a Sea.
LET the toast be Love and Beauty,
While we quaff the generous wine;
Bacchus calls us to our duty,
Where Is the wretch that dare repine?
Life we know's a scene of trouble,
Jolly messmates never despair;
We can prove the world a bubble,
Sailing on the seas of care.
While to windward we are plying,
Strictly here "Life's compass view;
And the shivering topsails flying,
Bid yon craggy shore adieu."
Pleasing gales around us veering,
While on board the "Good Intent;
Like true seamen, wisely steering,
To the "Harbor of content."
Gaily sailing on the ocean,
Fill brave boys the flowing cann;
Trim the sails, observe their motion,
Fame and honor lead the van.
Let your pilot be discretion,
While the raging billows roar;
Providence by intercession,
Lands us safely on the shore.
HYMEN's EVENING POST.
GREAT news! great news! great news! great news!
Great news! great news! I Am hither sent
Among mortals to declare,
What passed in Hymen's parliament,
Where Cupid took the chair;
They made the wisest, best decree
You Have known in all your lives;
Old Maids shall blessed with husbands be,
And Bachelors with wives!
To Bachelors, what rare good news,
And all your Tabby host,
Who may the tidings glad peruse
In Hymen's Evening Post.
Great news! great news! etc.
By every Bachelor for life,
A duty must be paid,
Refusing now to take for wise
An antiquated maid;
Poor soul! how great must be her joy,
Who such a lot escapes!
No more with Pug and Puss to toy,
And freed from leading Apes.
What wonderful surprising news
For all your Tabby host!
Who may the tidings glad peruse,
In Hymen's Evening Post.
Great news! great news! etc.
A Bachelor moreover is
A poor unhappy elf,
Who void of all domestic bliss,
Lies snoring by himself:
He need not now, to cheer his mind,
In search of gossop roam,
For sure as fate he will always find
Enough of that at home;
For Bachelors what pleasing news,
And all your Tabby host!
Who may the tidings glad peruse,
In Hymen's Evening Post.
Great news! great news! etc.
SWEET SUGAR CANDY.
DEAR Judy my granny, was fond of the sweets,
And she knew all the virtues of sugar so well;
That for puddings or pies, sour trout, or sweetmeats,
Aye, and choice apple-dumplings she bore off the bell:
And then for preserving she would got such a name,
And at tossing a pancake was always so handy,
That my grand-daddy took her to better his fame,
And she used to call him her sweet sugar candy.
And faith sure enough she had need to be sweet upon him, for his breath smelt
as agreeable as the slench of a gin barrel -- with his Whack fall lal lal, de
ral la ral lal, lal de ral.
For granny never thought grand-daddy was wrong,
So she called him her sugar-plumb sweet, and what not;
Then she patted his cheek and sung him a song,
And bade him not make quite so free with the pot.
But grand-daddy some how forgot what she said,
And in lifting the pot to his mouth was so handy,
That by some means or other he drank himself dead,
And so there was an end of her sweet sugar candy.
Och, Murphy, says she, and are you dead now? -- What a pity it was that you
made so free with the pot, when we were living together so comfortably -- With
our whack fall lal lal, etc.
Poor Judy my granny, was now left alone,
And the boys in Kilkenny all pitied her case;
'Till she cast a sheep's-eye on one Paddy Machone,
So he led her to church, and the parson said grace:
And Judy and Paddy so well now agree;
For granny's a housewife so loving and handy,
That he swears, och, she is all barley sugar to me,
And she christened him, och, her dear sweet sugar candy.
With a whack fall lal, etc.
THE BOTTLE COMES ROUND SO FAST.
YOU may talk about drinking of claret and whisky,
A jolly companion may term a mere toper!
Since a sup of the creature first rendered one frisky,
Bad luck to my glass! but I never could keep sober.
Let it be what it might,
By sunshine or moonlight,
So cleverly pleasant the toping time past;
That to rise up from table,
I never was able,
'Till tipsy -- the bottle came round so fast.
When I pleasantly breathed in the land of potatoes,
Quite jolly, one day, I detarmin'd so neatly,
To keep myself sober among the sweet creatures,
So rose, just before I was knocked up completely.
But on bidding good bye,
Just to whet the other eye,
Dough-a-duros, a drink at the door I must taste,
As there was no denying,
They found me complying
And tipsy -- the bottle came round so fast.
At a snug monthly club, where we always meet weekly,
They Have white-wash'd the wall all red over with brushes;
Because it was obsarved by myself most obliquely,
Our features look fairest when covered with blushes.
Here we talk and we drink,
And leave others to think;
Oh! the brave jolly moments I with them have past!
And though quite a full table,
To rise I Am unable,
'Till tipsey; -- the bottle came round so fast.
One day in my cups, I was merrily roving,
A friend took my part, says he, Pat why your'e tipsey!
Arrah! where have you been now, and where are you going?
You Have dined out -- drank hard, and are quite non se ipse?
Says I prating elf --
No I dined by myself,
The way to keep sober I planned out at last;
But to rise up from table,
'Till drunk I wan't able,
Because that -- the bottle came round so fast.
WE ALL LOVE A SUP IN OUR TURN
Tune -- Chapter of Kings.
A SUP of good whisky will make you glad,
Too much of the creature will make you mad;
If you take it in reason 'twill make you wise;
If you drink to excess 'twill close up your eyes:
Yet father, and mother,
And sister, and brother,
Will all take a sup in their turn.
Some preachers will tell you to drink is bad,
I think so too -- if there is none to be had;
The Swadler will tell you to drink none at all,
But while I can get it a fig for 'em all.
Both layman and brother,
In spite of this pother,
Will all, etc.
Some doctors will tell you 'twill hurt your health,
And justice will say 'twill reduce your wealth;
Physicians and lawyers will all agree,
When your money's all gone they can get no fee.
Yet surgeon and doctor,
And lawyer, and proctor,
Will all, etc.
If a soldier is drunk on his duty found,
He soon to the three legged horse is bound;
In the face of his regiment obliged to strip, --
A noggin will soften the drummer's whip,
For sergeant and drummer,
And likewise his honor,
With all, etc.
The Turks who arrived from the Port sublime,
They told us that drinking was held a great crime;
Yet after dinner, away they slunk,
And tippled their wine, till they got quite drunk.
The Sultan and Crommet,
And even Mahomet,
They all, etc.
STREW THE RUDE CROSSES OF LIFE OVER WITH FLOWERS.
THROUGH life's rugged voyage, each mortal must sail,
Often tossed by the billows of fortune about;
This hour a calm, and the next one a gale,
Makes all of the harbor of happiness doubt.
Yet amidst the hard troubles that mankind must bear,
The gods have sent pleasures to sweeten our sours;
For friendship and love may defy every care,
And strew the rude crosses of life over with flowers.
Each man in his way must encounter rough seas,
And buffet with perils and tempests of pain;
And should fortune smile, so uncertain's the breeze,
That man must still doubt if its meant to remain.
Yet amidst the hard, etc.
The phantom ambition, often leads us astray,
Then leaves us bewildered quite lost in the dark;
And often to folly, would leave us a prey,
Did not reason throw in a luminous spark,
Yet amidst the hard, etc.
FATHER, MOTHER, and JOE.
Tune -- Dibdin's life of Poor Jack.
SAYS our Nancy, says she -- one day to I --
As you know good example I Am fond on,
Suppose, like some others, my fortune I try,
And get me a Sarvice in London?
I Am courted by Joseph, the curate's own son,
That took so much pains with my learning, --
As its a fortune I want, I can there get me one,
And it will not be the worser for earning; --
Well, says I to our Nan -- an thou toil in that track --
To London determined to go,
Take care of thy honor -- or never come back,
To father, and mother, and Joe.
As her trunk she were packing, Nan whimpering said,
She hoped to do well with a blessing, --
And the tricks of the town running still in my head,
I bestowed on her 'tother good lesson:
For a housekeeper's place she was shaping her views,
With some ancient old Duke -- when I asked her --
Why, dom it! says I -- mind your P's, and your Q's --
Would you find out so wicked a master?
Such a presence as thine, 'twould be ruin good lack!
To those mumping old monkies to show; --
They Would make free with thy honor! and then send thee back,
To father, and mother, and Joe.
Then says Nan -- trusting other fine tales she had heard,
And scheming things stranger, and stranger,
With a lady of fashion, if not with a lord,
Sure! sure! I should be out of danger;
There, such a fine bustle, by night and by day!
And then -- what a chance! -- Heaven bless us!
If at fair-o, and hazard, they do us folks say,
I might soon be as rich as a Croesus!
What? says I then -- with gamblers and cheats would you snack?
High life wunna do for us -- No!
Never act with dishonor! -- or never come back
To father, and mother, and Joe.
With no limb of the law says I, never go to place,
For lawyers young maids are so fond on,
At the very first sight, he would plead on the case,
As sure as the devil's in London;
Then to tuck up a sober old bachelor's bed,
Would set busy clappers a clinking,
And your pious old maids would soon turn thy poor head,
With religion, God bless 'em! or drinking;
Of the best place in town, there is no great deal to crack,
And if fortunne should smile on thee -- so, --
Heaven watch over thy honor, and send thee safe back,
To father, and mother, and Joe.
Away then to London, whisk'd Nan by the stage,
That will-o-whisp fortune pursuing,
With as pure and as honest a heart I Will engage,
As ever was devoted to ruin;
It Is a sad wicked town, and yet some people there,
May let honor and honesty bind 'em,
But so strangely made up, and such deep ones they are,
That a simple young maid could not find 'em;
Nay our parson's proud son too, has gotten the knack,
Keen j^ mi^fortune ^o throw,
So it is father and mother, poor Nan, call thee back,
Not father, and mother and Joe.
ELLEN's FATE DESERVES A TEAR.
IN life's morn a maiden gay,
Meek Ellen wandered light and free:
Where pleasure winged the shining day,
Among the flowery wilds of Dee:
In beauty like the vernal scene,
Like balmy gales her mind serene:
'Till luckless love her heart oppressed,
And banished from her bosom rest.
Now she warbles soft and slow,
Madrigals of plaintive woe,
Hear the tale, in pity hear,
Ellen's fate deserves a tear.
A pensive Pilgrim doomed to stray,
Her strains a settled grief impart,
But still the love-lamenting lay
Is soothing to the Mourner's heart;
Her songs no more from frenzy flow,
Her wildness now is changed to woe,
Which still delight in tuneful lays,
To sing of love and happier days.
Now she warbles soft and slow,
Madrigals of plaintive woe;
Hear the tale, in pity hear,
Ellen's fate deserves a tear.
TOM TRIGGER's ADIEU.
HARK, hark, the loud drums call the soldiers away,
Adieu my dear charmer for time's on the wing,
It Is glory invites, and I proudly obey,
To fight in defense of my country and king.
But faithful and true, to their cause while I prove.
Amidst the dread-battle, I Will think of my Nan,
For he who deserts from the standard of love,
Proves plainly his life's a mere flash in the pan.
In Britain's blessed isle, so renowned for its fair,
The same of a soldier is thus understood,
That while he can conquer, he is eager to spare,
And stop the ^fusion of innocent blood;
Though fearless and bold in the field he can prove,
Humanity forms the grand base of his plan,
But he who deserts from the standard of love,
Proves plainly his life's a mere flash in the pan.
In defense of Old England I Will glory to fall,
If orders for that shall be sent from above;
But fortune, who frequently smiles on us all.
May kindly restore honest Tom to his love;
I Will then to the standard of Hymen repair;
And under his banners enlist with my Nan,
For he who deserts from the cause of the fair,
Proves plainly his life's a mere flash in the pan.
CHARMING MOLLY.
Tune -- Di^din's Sailor's Journal.
ON board, the grog went cheerly round,
Each honest tar, oh how delighted,
From Madagascar homeward bound,
The pleasing thoughts their toils requited.
The cann was filled, 'twas filled again,
Resolved to drown dull melancholy,
Nor did each sea-lad pledge in vain,
"Success attend the Charming Molly."
Blue lightning flashed, and thunder rolled,
The raging tempests fiercely howling,
When hardy tars so brave and bold,
Can fearless reach the main-top bowling,
And when the Boatswain pipes aloud,
D -- n those I say, that will not be jolly,
And ^imbly mount the mi^n s^roud,
When ever on board the Charming Molly.
Once more hand round the b^o^ng cann,
Sweethearts and wives we'll drink with pleasure,
So here is long life to saucy Nan,
B^ or on shore my only treasure;
Next then my lads let us drink the King,
And though the winds seem ever so squally,
Brave loyal tars can jovial sing,
Safe moorings to the Charming Molly.
But now behold the shivering sails,
Messmates while we are to windward plying,
By favoring light propitious gales,
Yon craggy shore with glee descrying;
Land lubbers now in groups pursue,
Your dissipation, pride, and folly,
Three cheers, my lads, the harbor view,
Yo, yea, on board the Charming Molly.
NOTHING BUT A PLACE.
I FELL out with my Feyther 'bout something or other,
He gave me a douse called me quarrelsome Elf!
So I bade 'un good bye, and without any pother
Com'd plump up to London to better myself;
For though pipe and tabor,
Often cheered after labor,
When riggs we were running Dad run such a race!
So to make matters easy,
Why thinks I, an't please ve,
I wants but just nothing, that is only a place.
So I met with a friend when I reached London city
And a^'t him his sarvice most kindly to grant;
Cod, he told me my journey was naught but a pity,
In town scarce a body but had the same want.
Physicians, says he, Sir,
Want patience and fees, Sir;
The patient wants health, limb, and plumb ruddy face;
Your great folks, I Have read it,
Wants honor, and credit;
And patriots, something next door to a place!
Look at 'vertisements filling the front of the papers,
Plague take 'em! such wants as are scare to be borne!
Young heirs at the death of their dads, to cut capers;
The wife to wear weeds, and the hushand to mourn.
Old ladies, young fellows,
And reason, the jealous;
Though truly their dames are often wanting of grace:
The courtier, plain-dealing;
The churchwarden, feeling;
And open-mouthed senators bawl for a place.
Cod! it seemed all so queer I wur all in a flurry,
Their wonderful wants quite me comical struck;
For, adds he, undertakers want bodies to bury,
Rogues pockets to pick; gamblers, pigeons to pluck.
So I tipp'd off my noggin,
Then homeward came joggin;
For certain I there should have got in disgrace:
For I found out, odd rot it,
Those who had not got it;
Would go to the devil to get 'em a place.
THE WELSH QUACK.
I AM nick-nam'd Quack by every prig,
Where sense or nonsense borders;
Without diploma, care, or wig,
I cures the worst disorders;
The gout, secatica, the stone,
Your fevers, ague, phthysic;
The gout, consumption, every one
Yields to all-healing physic,
On restoratives I Am quite intent;
Each patient's ills discover,
Lord! if folks die it is accident,
It Is chance if they recover.
A great chance indeed, I keep so continually plying them -- With cupping,
drenching, couching, clyster,
Emeti^ ^ding, sweating, blister,
Diet, b^ o^ pill --
Ye pot^tion makers!
Like you I Am often, with all my skill,
A friend to undertakers.
I patient visiting essayed,
One who in dangerous way was,
When last I called (oh death to trade!)
My dying man at play was!
"My prescription's done't" says I, "now speak,
"You followed it -- I knew it."
"No! if I had, I Would broke my neck,
"I out of window threw it."
"Avaunt, throw physic to the dogs,
("Fine food for grim death's laughter,)
"Your recipe you first of rogues,
"You soon shall bundle after!
Don't come here to sell your poisons at so much an ounce Mr. Gallipot, for if
you do, you shall swallow them yourself and puzzle all Warwick Lane to tell
what disorder you died of. "With you cupping, etc.
He proved himself, though lacking skill,
No friend to undertakers!
To Guttle's next I sped in haste,
Whose girl a stingy saint is!
He choked was at a city feast,
And died brimful of dainties:
My bill I showed ma'am in a crack,
Says she it will not do, sir,
Lord if you had your bottles back,
^m sure you would be n^ loser!
She vowed I Would killed him, should repent.
To poison such a lover!
Lord, if folks die it is accident,
It Is chance if they recover!
If I had my bottles back! what an unconscionable woman* she (...) nothing of
my great expense, for corks, and pack thread and paper, beside all -- My
^pping, etc.
CAPERING ASHORE.
POLL dang it how do you do, Nan will not ye gi's a buss.
Why what is to do wi' you, why here is a pretty fuss,
Say shall we kiss and toy, I goes to sea no more,
O (...) the sailor boy for capering ashore.
Father he apprentic'd me to a coasting ship,
I being resolved dy'e see to give 'em all the slip;
I got to Yarmouth fair, where I had been before,
So father found me there a capering ashore.
Next out to India I went a Guinea-pig,
We got to Table-bay, but mind a pretty rig,
The ship drove out to sea, left me and many more
Amongst the Hottentots, capering ashore.
I love a bit of hop life's never the worse for it,
If in my wake should drop a fiddle that is your sort,
Thrice tumble up a hoy, once get the labor over,
Then see the sailor boy a capering ashore.
FAIR ROSALE.
ON that lone bank where Lubin died,
Fair Rosale, a wretched maid,
S^ weeping over the cruel tide,
Faithful to her ^bin's shade;
Oh may some kind, some gentle wave,
Waft him to this mournful shore,
These tender hands should make his grave,
And deck his corpse with flowers over.
I Will ever watch his mouldering clay,
And pray for his eternal rest,
When time his form had worn away;
His dust I Would place within my breast,
While thus she mourned her Lubin lost,
And echo to her grief replied;
Lo, at her feet, his corpse was tossed,
She shrick'd, she clasped him, ^igh'd, and died.
THE GIRL I LEFT BEHIND ME.
I AM lonesome since I crossed the hills,
And over the moors that is sedgy,
Such heavy thoughts my mind does fill,
Since parting from my Sally.
In search for one that is fine and gay,
And several does remind me,
Blessed be the hour I past away,
With the girl I left behind me.
The hours I remember well,
When constancy reminds me,
A pain within my breast I felt,
When first she owned she loved me;
But now I Am bound to Brighton Camp,
Kind heaven then pray guide me,
And send me back safe home again,
To the girl I left behind me.
I Would tune my lays to sing her praise,
Had I the tongue of Homer,
With compliments most elegant,
I Would recompense my lover.
So let the night be ever so dark,
Or e're so wet or windy,
I will return safe back again,
To the girl I left behind me,
Her golden hair in ringlets were,
Her eyes like diamonds shining,
Her slender waste, her carriage chaste,
She left the swain repining;
Ye gods above pray hear my prayer,
The beauteous fair who binds me,
And send me safe back home again,
To the girl I left behind me.
The be shall lavish, make no store,
The dove become a ranger,
The falling waters cease to roar,
Whenever I mean to change her:
If ever I return that way,
And she has not dec^ me,
I Will reconcile myself and stay,
With the girl I left behind me.
THE SAILOR's JOURNAL.
'TWAS post meridian, half past four,
By signal I from Nancy parted,
At six she lingered on the shore,
With uplift hands and broken hearted;
At seven while taught'ning the fore stay,
I saw her faint, or else 'twas fancy;
At eight we all got under way,
And bid a long adieu to Nancy.
Night came, and now eight bells had rung,
While careless sailors ever chearly,
On the mid watch so jovial sung,
With tempers, labor, cannot weary;
I little to their mirth inclined,
While tender thoughts rushed on my fancy,
And my warm sighs increased the wind,
Looked on the moon, and thought of Nancy.
And now arrived that jovial night,
When every true bred tar carouses,
When over the grog all hands delight,
To toast their sweethearts and their spouses;
Round went the cann, the jest, the glee,
While tender wishes filled each fancy,
And when in turn it came to me,
I heaved a sigh and toasted Nancy.
Next morn a storm came on at four,
At six the elements in motion;
Plunged me and three poor sailors more,
Headlong within the foaming ocean:
Poor wretches they soon found their graves,
For me it may be only fancy,
But love seemed to forbid the waves,
To snatch me from the arms of Nancy.
Scarce the foul hurricane was cleared,
And winds and waves had ceased to rattle,
When a bold enemy appeared,
And, dauntless, we prepared for battle;
And now, while some loved friend or wife,
Like lightning rushed on every fancy,
To Providence I trusted life,
Put up a prayer, and thought of Nancy.
At last, 'twas in the month of May,
The crew, it being lovely weather,
At three A. M. discovered day,
And England's chalky cliffs together;
At seven, up Channel, how we bore,
While hopes and fears rushed on my fancy;
At twelve I gaily jumpt on shore,
And to my throbbing heart pressed Nancy.
HOW DO YOU DO?
'TWAS in the green meadows so gay,
Where lovers their passions repeat,
Young William did tenderly say,
"How do you do," as we happened to meet;
"How do you do, Sir," again answered I,
Not thinking of harm it is true,
When Echo (or else may I die)
Replied in return, "How do you do!"
Echo. -- "How do you do!"
Replied in return, "How do you do?"
In vain we explored all around,
No creature whatever was near,
Alas! what a wonderful sound,
"How do you do?" we could both of us hear.
Sure Cupid lay hidden hard by,
And gave gentle Echo the cue.
For still it continued to cry,
I vow and protest -- "How do you do?"
Echo -- "How do you do:"
Says William, "dear girl never mind,
"Since Echo can do us no harm,"
Then kissed ^e both tender and kind,
And circled my waist with his arm;
Let Hymen, he cried, make us one,
I agreed the advice to pursue!
Now Echo, says I, babble on,
Which it did sure enough -- "How do you do?"
Echo -- "How do you do?"
Which it did sure enough -- "How do you do?"
PHELIM's COURTSHIP.
Tune -- Banks of the Dee.
ONE moon-shiny night, about two in the morning,
I wandered myself all alone in the dark;
Not a creature was with me but Chlora, whose scorning
On my poor little heart made a visible mark:
Then list to my ditty,
So dismal and pretty;
O thunder! if ever a fiction was true,
You Will be after declaring
My case is past bearing,
So grating to me -- though diverting to you.
My name, I must tell you, is Phelim O'Blarney,
Just come all the way from the town of Tralee;
My father was born by the Lake of Killarney,
And faith you must know he was older than me*
Nor need you to wonder,
It Is not the first blunder
That nature has made in a comical whim;
For sense might have told her,
Dad never had been older,
If Phelim his son had been born before him.
I Have got a fine house on the banks of the Liffey,
That only wants building to make it complete;
So faith we'll set off for the same in a jiffey,
And build a rare house for our ancestors' seat:
Then come, my dear jewel,
No longer be cruel,
But let us scamper off without making a din;
Like gem's in a casket,
We'll ride in a basket,
If the coach be set off ere we get to the inn.
By Jasus; you will never find me fibbing and swelling,
No, bother my shoul! but I hate such a plan;
Let upstarts and vapouring puppies be telling
How long their mean race before Adam's began --
Before the creation,
My famed generation,
Without ever a soul by themselves all alone,
Invented potatoes,
Who Is worth now so great is,
We Irishmen call 'em roast beef without bone.
Then let us be jogging along to our mansion,
You shall walk by my side, while I follow before;
My heart's so contracted by Cupid's expansion*
Though I Have said all I can, yet I Will tell thee (...) ^e.
As a hot burning cinder
Turns cloth into tinder,
The flame of your conduct so frigidly glows.
That it has, pretty creature,
From Phelim's good nature,
Extracted a secret that every one knows.
Arrab faith, and the force of my passion so great is,
No mother's son dares to tell Phelim he lies,
When he solemnly swears to Shebeen and potatoes,
He prefers a good seat on his Chlora's bright eyes.
Both sleeping and waking,
Still trembling and quaking,
Nor noon, night or morning, from dreaming can keep.
By my shoul and it is vexing,
And cursed perplexing,
So often to be waked ere a body's asleep!
Then come, my sweet angel, be after complying,
By St. Patrick I swear on the word of a man,
I Will try to adore thee until that I Am dying,
Aye faith, and much longer than that if I can.
So sweet little devil,
No more be uncivil.
Oc^ prithee, my jewel, with Phelim agree;
But if after this tender,
You do not surrender,
Then, bother my nob! if I ever have thee.
FAVORITE SONGS IN THE CHARITY BOY.
MY dad was asleep in his old elbow chair,
And my mam at a neighbor's hard by,
When my tasty straw bonnet I put on with care,
And to meet my dear Willy did hie;
We'd appointed the spot, he would been waiting an hour,
Pit-a-pat, went my fond silly heart!
When he flew to embrace me, I trembled all over,
Yet I never once thought we must part!
The birds warbled sweet, music ran in each rill,
The meads were bedecked with wild flowers,
When true lovers meet, cruel time should stand still,
But too rapid, alas! winged the hours!
The fond look he gave me, I never shall forget,
When adieu chilled with sorrow my heart,
With his sweet balmy kiss, are my lips perfumed yet,
Ah me! why should lovers ever part.
IN early youth to fear a stranger,
Contemning indolence and ease,
In Paria's cause I courted danger,
And venurous plough'd the stormy seas.
I dreaded not the cannon's thunder,
Let bullets rage their wonted scope,
Or tempest split our bark asunder,
The tar's sheet-anchor still was hope.
In hammock lulled to sleep or waking,
The mid-watch come, or slung the bowl,
Or signal guns, distress bespeaking,
Implore for aid, while tempest howl,
Or when the battle's heat is raging,
With force superior often we cope,
The mind to placid ease assuaging,
The tar's sheet-anchor still is hope.
WOUNDED FRIENDSHIP.
I OF feeling will not boast -- I Have no more than my share,
Yet humanity bleeds when a friend is distressed,
Who in sorrow's sad moment made friendship his care,
And bade the bright sunshine of hope cheer my breast;
When law's iron hand on by cruelty led,
In a darksome abode me disgracefully penned,
A school-mate, whom pity inspired, thither strayed,
Gave me freedom, and proved himself more than a friend.
Recollection revealed, that in youth's early hour
My Savior he would been; when with billows at strife
I was whirled down the eddy, and aid did implore,
He plunged in, and risquing his own, saved my life.
Again, when a ruffian, who conscience had braved,
And dared against the fiat of justice offend,
His weapon to murder had raised -- me he saved;
And gratitude warmed my full hear^ to my friend.
But, Pelican like, the fair, generous mind
Feeds the suppliant brood with its own vital stream;
My friend to the wretched had often proved so kind,
Liberality made all his wealth but a dream:
Haggard ruin approached, with its heart-rending pains,
Over the straw I had quitted his form did extend;
I flew to console him, but lacking the means,
Did but gaze, and alas! could not speak to my friend.
I read all the workings of passion and grief,
The just indignation that flashed from his eye,
His bosom was bursting -- a tear gave relief --
And the stab of ingratitude forced a deep sigh:
That misfortune such worth should so ^ly as^ --
But who against the will of ^ern fate dare contend?
He drooped -- but I Will over his ^oon draw a veil,
For my heart sure will break when I think on my friend.
PADDY O'BRIAN.
Tune -- Corporal C^sey.
WHEN first I was kitten'd, it was in Kilkenny,
Such a brat sure as me, oh! there never was any;
Nay, the truth is, my father suspected my mother,
For the devil a-bit I was like one or the other.
Sing rub-a-dub, row de-dow, Paddy O Br^
Sing rub-a-dub, etc.
To be sure I Am by nature as tame as a lion;
Och! the world never saw such a Paddy O'Brian.
That my father was kind and my mother was ten^
By my sho^l I Have more reasons than one to remem^
For to sharpen my stomach, and brighten my wit Sir,
Sure they left me to live upon what I could get, Sir,
Och! I rub-a-dub, etc.
Och! my daddy's a god and my mammy's a lion;
Ay, and I am the devil, old Paddy O'Brian.
That my parent^ were given to living genteely,
By by shoul is no lie, so I tell you it freely,
That if one daddy dies I have st^ got another,
And so I Am the Paddy of one or the the other.
Och! rub-a-dub, ^c.
To be sure and my mother was rather a sly one,
Wha^ she got such a chicken as Paddy O'Brian.
Tune -- For (...) I Am your Priest.
YOU (...) of your m^ens, fair widows, and wives.
And (...) things they (...) in the course of their lives
Your maids, wives and widows, it is very well known,
Have all got a way and a will of their own.
Sing balan^ (...) etc.
The swate little c^a^s for me.
To be sure now and then pretty widows will mourn,
And sigh for the loss of their lad which is gone;
But as sighing's all nonsense and grieving's a sin,
They dry up their tears and get married again.
And sing balanamona ora, etc.
Och! the dear little craters for me.
Then though, Sirs, our widow is not quite a chicken,
By my shoul she is as gamesome as any young kitten;
B^ my master's come home, so my dear you will see
A widow and no widow you quickly will be,
Sing balanamona ora, etc.
O^h! the dear little craters for me.
LITTLE DANDY.
O WHEN I was a boy, and a pretty little boy,
With my little curly head of hair so sandy O,
All the damsels used to cry,
What a funny rogue was I,
And they christened me the pretty little candy O.
But when I olde^ grew, and something better knew,
Than sucking lollipops and sugar candy O,
Lord! I pleased them night and day,
And the damsels used to say --
Oh! the pretty little fellow is the dandy O.
O then to end the strife, Lord! I got a little wife,
With a pretty little waist so handy O,
Ay, and then I got a lad,
Just the picture of his dad,
And they christened him the pretty little dandy O.
Now spousy day and night, oh! she calls me her delight,
Her sugar sweet, and pretty Tristram Shandy O.
And then so sweet am I
When I go to lullaby,
That she swears I am the pretty little dandy O.
THE FRIGHTED CLOWN.
OH Lord! what a terrible fright I am in,
Oh Lord! what a terrible fright I am in,
When I never, I Am sure now committed a sin,
When I never, I Am sure now committed a sin.
Then, dang it, it wanted to take me away,
Then, dang it, it wanted to take me away;
But, says I, master ghost, I Would much rather stay,
If it is all one to you I Would much rather stay.
I Would much rather stay.
Two eyes big as saucers it certainly had,
Two eyes, etc.
Which blazed just as thof' for the world it was mad.
Which blazed, etc.
It looked as it wished to take me away,
It looked, etc.
But, says I, master ghost, I Would much rather stay.
I never have done any harm in my life,
I never have done, etc.
Except when old Bridget I took for my wife,
Except when, etc.
And she has been dead for this many a day;
And she has, etc.
But mayhap it is her wants to have I away,
If it is all one to she, why I Would much rather stay.
MARY's TRUE.
YE lingering winds that feebly blow,
Why thus impede my way?
Why moves the lazy ship so slow,
When Mary mourns my stay?
For when she bade me last adieu,
She dropped a tear, and cried -- be true.
When, as the midnight watch I keep,
I view the sparkling sea;
While round my shipmates careless sleep,
I fondly think on thee;
Remembrance paints the last adieu,
When Mary wept, and cried -- be true.
Though I be distant as the pole,
Though furious tempests foam,
Though billows mount, though thunders roll,
No distance, time, or storm,
The scene can banish from my view,
When Mary wept, and cried -- be true.
Often up the shrouds my steps are borne,
I take my airy stand;
And often my longing eyes I turn,
And look in vain for land:
Dejected I rejoin the crew,
Yet fondly hope my Mary's true.
Come then, ye briskly pleasing gales,
For once auspicious prove;
Come swell the bosom of my sails,
And waft me to my love:
Moored in her arms to toils adieu,
If still I find my Mary's true.
I NEVER WILL MARRY.
AS gay as a lark, and as blythe as a be,
Handsome, generous, sprightly, and young;
Cheeks glowing with pleasure, eyes sparkling with glee,
And a voice like the nightingale's song.
As fond as a sparrow, as true as a dove,
Must be the sweet swain whose vows I Will never parry;
Convinced of his constancy, give love for love,
But, indeed, till I am -- why I never will marry.
He never with neglect his fond lass should upbraid,
If by chance for a time we should part;
Though distant, his features would run in my head,
And his form ever reign is my heart:
Kind fancy in dreams should his absence supply;
And, believe me, I mean not much longer to tarry,
For joking apart, I Have a lad in my eye,
Aye, indeed if I have not -- why I never will marry.
Over the lawn, the other day, as I joyously sped
Young Jemmy trip'd out not amiss,
(As light as a fawn to overtake me his tread)
Seized my hand and entreated a kiss;
I frowned, he persisted, and breathed love so sweet,
That somehow I promised a little unwary,
To church both would trip it the next time we meet:
Aye, indeed if we don't -- why, I never will marry.
THE JEW.
Tune -- "In the dead of the night."
'TWASH the top of the morning so pleasant and clear,
I was crying old clothes ven my love did appear;
Her sweet taway beauties vash tempting to view,
Says I, pretty Mistress Solomon's how vas you do?
I vas cheaply then purchase a smile from my dear,
And was whisper my wishes quite loud to her ear;
Says I, pretty Mistress Solomon's we both are undone
If old Rabbi Abraham's don't make us one,
The bargain vash struck then without no delay,
And pretty Mistress Solomon's vash made Mordecai;
All Jew's Place resounded with laughter and glee,
And pretty little smouches soon danced on our knee.
CARPET WEAVER.
DON'T you remember a poor carpet weaver,
Whose daughter loved a youth so true;
He promised one day he never would leave her,
Ah! down in the vale where violets grew.
He flattered and vowed while she sat beside him,
Soft tales telling of love long ago;
But can you tell if she her love denied him,
Down in the vale where violets grew.
Never he told her he would be a rover,
She fondly thought he told her true:
But how shall the maid his truth discover,
Ah! will he plight his vows anew.
If, never, never, her voice deceived him,
Now while telling of love long ago;
Can he forget the girl who believed him,
Down in the vale where violets grew.
SONGS, in Quack! Quack! Quack!
BY nature soft as kneaded dough,
My heart never chilled by cold deceit,
When injury proclaims a foe,
Will glow with a warmed oven's heat.
Never crusty I, though fortune blind
To those around its comforts spare,
Give crumb^ of bliss to all mankind*
Yet seem to stint me of my share:
Still happy I, while pleased attend,
My children, freedom, and my friend.
My sacks are few and small my grain,
Dame fortune never enlarged my store,
The rich often treat me with disdain.
And grandeur flouts because I Am poor;
But then my cherubs sweetly smile.
Though robbed of a fond mother's care,
Their infant pra^e can grief beguile,
And fond endearments lull despair:
So bles^ am I, etc.
SNIP once employed a lawyer spruce,
Old Nick will sure requite him,
For though he chanced his suit to lose,
String'd item followed item*
Dear, such a bill! I Will tell you what,
He trembles still at the thought!
I Will try to con it over: --
For calling to consult him, and drinking up his wine,
Why -- six and eight-pence -- twice as much, for calling once to dine!
Thirteen and fourpence traveling fees, to view the taylor's dome,
And one pound six and eight-pence, for -- not finding him at home.
Besides, likewise, moreover,
The costs he could recover.
Get into debt and you're nipp'd as close as in a lobster's claw.
La! no one in his senses, sure, will ever go to law!
The cost of suit Snip could not pay,
His purse was so disordered,
But Lawyer Brief, quite in his way,
A suit of sables ordered.
Then for Snip's bill, I Will tell you what,
Brief trembles still at the bare thought,
I Will try and con it over: --
For showing him the pattern book, and taking a hob-nob.
Why, six and eight-pence -- twice as much, for a mere measuring job;
Thirteen and four-pence, every time he near Brief's house did roam,
And one pound six and eight-pence for -- not finding him at home.
Besides, etc.
Tune -- Dibdin's Sailor's Journal.
WHEN morn's approach had banished night,
And lovely May the world was cheering,
My infant boy beheld the light,
To greet a mother's fond endearing.
His beauties charmed the village round,
So like his dad were all expressing,
In June the christening bowl went round,
And sweetly smiled a parent's blessing.
'Twas August -- scarce three years were over --
And sweetly he began to prattle,
When an old shipmate reached the shore,
To tell his dad had fell in battle.
I wept -- reflection dried my tears;
My boy required each fond caressing;
And with maternal hopes and fears
I watched a widowed parent's blessing.
When bleak November's winds did blow,
To sea his daring spirit ventured,
To part, my breast was frought with foe,
For every hope in him was centered.
Five times December's moon had past,
Deformed by storms full often distressing,
When over the beach tript home in haste,
To glad my heart, a parent's blessing.
WOMAN.
A WOMAN is to -- but stay --
What a woman is like, who can say?
There Is no living with or without one --
Love bites like a fly,
Now an ear, now an eye,
Buz, buz, always buzzing about one,
When she is tender and kind,
She is like, to my mind,
(And Fanny was so I remember)
She is like to -- Oh dear!
She Is as good very near
As a ripe melting peach in September.
If she laugh and she chat,
Play, joke and all that,
And with smiles and good humor she meet me,
She is like a rich dish
Of ven'son or fish,
That cries from the table come eat me!
But she will plauge you, and vex you,
Distract and perplex you,
False hearted, and ranging,
Unsettled and changing,
What then do you think, she is like?
Like a sand? like a rock?
Like a wheel? like a clock?
Aye, a clock that is always at (...)
Her head's like the island folks (...) on,
Which nothing but monkies can (...) on;
Her heart's like a lemon -- so nice
She carves for each lover a slice;
In truth, she is to me,
Like the wind, like the sea,
Whose raging will hearken to no man;
Like a mill,
Like a pill,
Like a flail,
Like a whale,
Like an ass,
Like a glass,
Whose image is constant to no man;
Like a flower,
Like a shower,
Like a fly,
Like a pie,
Like a pea,
Like a flea,
Like a thief,
Like -- in brief,
She Is like nothing on earth -- but a woman!
EVER since I found true love beginning,
And thought his hand was wo^ the winning,
I called each little artful aid in,
To spare the question from a maiden:
To wake or show
When asked to go,
I still denied
All lads beside,
And prayed of Ralph to carry me;
It seemed so pat, in tender chat,
To whisper, Fanny, will you marry me?
In evening fine, and summer weather,
When ever the fields we walked together,
Though I can trip it like a fairy,
I Have often pretended to be weary:
Then leaning on his arm awhile,
I slily ask him, with a smile,
I Am tired, pray will you carry me?
But on the way, he never would stay
To whisper, Fanny will you marry me?
SONGS, in the Mountaineers.
WHEN the hollow drum has beat to bed;
When the little fifer hangs his head;
Still and mute,
The Moorish flute,
And nodding guards watch wearily;
Then will we,
From prison free,
March out by moonlight cheerily.
When the Moorish cymbals clash by day,
When the brazen trumpets shrilly bray,
The slave in vain,
Must then complain
Of tyranny and knavery:
Would he know,
His time to go,
And slily slip from slavery:
It Is when the ha^ drum has beat to bed;
When the little fifer hangs his head;
Still and mute,
The Moorish flute,
And nodding guards watch wearily;
Oh then must he,
From prison free,
March out by moonlight cheerily.
OH! happy tawny Moor, when you love,
Climb the mountains with your true love,
Will you by the way,
The music play?
Your sweet guitar, a tinkling, Sadi
Listens to his Spanish Lady!
Tang, tanki, tanki, tang, tang,
Tanki, tanki, tay.
Oh! bonny tawney Moor! together,
As we brave the wind and weather,
Will Not you by the way,
From Agnes stray?
While their guitars are tinkling, Sadi,
Love no other Spanish Lady;
Tang, tanki, tanki, tang, tang,
Tanki, tanki, tay.
Cease, pretty Agnes, cease; -- no beauty
Ever could keep me from my duty;
Let them all the day,
Their music play.
Then my guitar a tinkling, Sadi,
Follow now your Spanish lady;
Tang, tanki, tanki, tang, tang,
Tanki, tanki, tay.
Then my guitar, etc.
Her sweet guitar a tinkling, Sadi
Follows now his Spanish lady;
Tang, tanki, tanki, tang, tang,
Tanki, tanki, ^ay,
AT sixteen years old, you could get little good of me;
Then I saw Norah -- who soon understood of me;
I was in love -- but myself for the blood of me,
Could not tell what I did ail.
'Twas dear, dear! what can the matter be?
Och, blood and ouns! what can the matter be?
Och, gramachree! what can the matter be?
Bother'd from head to the tail.
I went to confess me to father O'Flanagan;
Told him my case -- made an end -- then began again;
Father, says I, make me my own man again,
If you find o^ what I ail,
Dear, dear! says he, what can the matter be?
Och, blood and ^uns! can you tell what the matter be?
Both cried out, what can the matter be?
Bother'd from head to the tail.
Soon I fell sick -- I did bellow and curse again;
Norah took pity to see me at nurse again;
Gave me a kiss -- och sounds, that threw me worse again;
Well she knew what I did ail.
But dear, dear! says she, what can the matter be?
Och, blood and ouns! my lass, what can the matter be?
Both cried out, what can the matter be?
Bother'd from head to the tail.
It Is long ago now, since I left Tipperary --
How strange, growing older, our nature should vary;
All symptoms are gone of my ancient quandary,
I cannot tell now what I ail.
Dear, dear! etc.
FAINT and wearily, the way-worn traveller
Plods, uncheerily, afraid to stop!
Wandering, drearily, a sad unraveller
Of the mazes towered the mountain's top!
Doubting, fearing,
While his course he is steering,
Cottages appearing,
When he is nigh to drop;
O! how briskly, then, the way worn traveller
Treads the mazes towered the mountain's top!
Though so melancholy day has passed by,
'Twould be folly, now to think on it more:
Blythe and jolly, he the keg holds fast by,
As he is sitting at the Goatherd's door,
Eating, quaffing,
At past labor laughing!
Better far by half, in
Spirits than before.
O! how merry then, the rested traveller
Seems, while sitting at the Groatherd's door!
SONGS, in the Agreeable Surprise.
SUCH beauties in view I
Can never praise too high,
Not Pallas's blue eye
Is brighter than thine.
Not fount of Susanna,
Nor gold of fair Danoe,
Nor moon of Diana,
So brightly can shine.
Not beard of Silenus,
Nor tresses of Venus,
I swear by quoe genus,
With yours can compare,
No^ Hermes Caduces,
Nor flower de luces,
Nor all the nine muses,
To me is so fair.
Oh! Moses. oh! Moses,
What pos^es, and roses to noses discloses,
Your breath all so sweet,
To the tip of your lip, as they trip the bees dip,
Honey sip like choice flip, and their Hibl^ forge^
When girls like you pass us,
I saddle Pegassus,
And ride up Pernassus,
To Helicon's stream.
Even that is a puddle,
Where others may muddle;
My nose let me fuddle
In bowls of your cream.
Old Jove, the great Hector,
Of gods the director,
May tipple his nectar,
And thunder above:
I Would quaff off a full can,
As Bacchus or Vulcan,
Or Jove the old bull can,
To her that I love.
Chorus, Oh! Moses, etc.
IN the choice of a husband we widows are nice,
I Would not have a man who'd grow old in a trice,
Not a bear or a monkey, a clown or a fop,
But one that could bustle and stir in my shop.
A log I Will avoid, when I Am choosing my lad.
And a stork that might gabble up all that I had,
Such suitors I Have had, Sir, but off they might hop,
I want one that can bustle and stir in my shop.
The lad in my eye is the man to my mind,
So handsome, so young, so polite, and so kind,
With such a good soul to the altar I Would pop,
He Is the man that can bustle and stir in my shop.
SONG, in no Song no Supper.
A SAILOR's life's a life of woe,
He works now late, now early,
Now up and down, now to and fro,
What then? he takes it cheerly.
Blessed with a smiling can of grog,
If duty call,
Stand, rise or fall,
To fate's last verge he will jog;
The cadge to weigh,
The sheets belay,
He does it with a wish;
To heave the lead,
Or to cat-head
The pon'drous anchor fish.
For while the grog goes round,
All sense of danger's drowned,
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, and laugh a little,
And work a little, and swear a little,
And fiddle a little, and foot it a little,
And swig the flowing can.
If howling winds and roaring seas,
Give proof of coming danger,
We view the storm our hearts at ease,
For Jack's to fear a stranger.
Blessed with the smiling grog we fly
Where now below
We headlong go,
Now rise on mountains high;
Spite of the gale,
We hand the sail,
Or take the needful reef;
Or man the deck,
To clear some wreck,
To give the ship relief:
Though perils threat around,
All sense of danger drowned
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, etc.
But yet think not our case is hard,
Though storms at sea thus treat us;
For coming home, (a sweet reward!)
With smiles our sweethearts greet us.
Now too the friendly grog we quaff,
Our amorous toast,
Her we love most,
And gaily sing and laugh;
The sails we furl,
Then for each girl,
The petticoat display;
The deck we clear,
Then three times cheer,
As we their charms survey:
And then the grog goes round,
All sense of danger drowned.
We despise it to a man.
We sing a little, etc.
SONG, in the Children in the Wood.
THERE was Dorothy Dump, would mutter and mump,
And cried, "my dear Walter -- heigho!"
But no step she could take, could my constancy shake,
For she had a timber-toe.
There was Deborah Rose, with her aquiline nose,
Who cried, "for you, Walter, I die!"
But I laughed at each glance, she threw me askance,
For she had a gimblet eye!
There was Tabitha Twist, had a mind to be kis'd!
And made on my heart an attack;
But her love I derided, for she was lop-sided;
And cursedly warped in the back!
There was Barbara Brian, was always a crying,
"Dear youth, put an end to my woes!"
But to save in her head all the tears that she shed,
Nature gave her a bottled nose!
Josephine came at last, to nail my heart fast --
Firm as the oak will I prove to my dear;
And when parson Tether, has ^ack'd us together,
Some chips of the -- block may appear!!
SONGS, In th spoiled child.
I AM a brisk and sprightly lad,
But just come home from sea, Sir,
Of all the lives I ever led,
A sailor's life for me. Sir,
Yeo, yeo, yeo! yeo, yeo, yeo!
Whilst the boatswain pipes all hands,
With a yeo, yeo, yeo, Sir.
What girl but loves the merry tar,
We over the ocean roam, Sir,
In every clime we find a port,
In every port a home, Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo, etc.
But when our country's foes are nigh
Each hastens to his gun, Sir,
We make the boasting Spaniard fly,
And bang the haughty Don, Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo, etc.
Our foes subdued, once more on shore,
We spend our cash with glee, Sir,
And when all is gone, we drown our care,
And out again to sea, Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo! yeo, yeo, yeo!
And when all is gone, again to sea,
With a yeo, yeo, yeo, Sir.
THE ROSARY.
THOUGH often we meet severe distress,
In vent'ring out to sea:
The perils of the main seem less,
As we to heaven our vows address,
And sing the cheering Rosary.
Our kids that rove the mountains wide,
And bound in harmless glee,
I seek each day an even-tide;
And while their course I homeward guide,
I sing the cheering Rosary.
And in the deeper shades of night,
While through the woods I flee,
Where gloom and silence yield affright,
To make my beating heart sit light,
I sing the cheering Rosary.
SONGS, in Rosina.
WHEN William at eve meets me down at the style,
How sweet is the nightingale's song!
Of the day I forget all the labor and toil,
Whilst the moon plays yon branches among.
By her beams without blushing, I hear him complain,
And believe every word of his song:
You know not how sweet it is to love the dear swain,
Whilst the moon plays yon branches among.
HER mouth with a smile,
Devoid of all guile,
Half opens to view,
Is the bud of the rose,
In the morning that blows,
Impearl'd with the dew.
More fragrant her breath
Than the flower-scented heath
At the dawning of day;
The hawthorn in bloom,
The lily's perfume,
Or the blossoms of May.
BY this fountain's flowery side,
Dressed in nature's blooming pride,
Where the poplar trembles high,
And the bees in clusters fly;
Whilst the herdsman on the hill
Listens to the falling rill.
Pride and cruel scorn away,
Let of share the festive day.
Taste our pleasures ye who may,
This is nature's holiday.
Simple nature ye who prize,
Life's fantastic forms despise.
CHORUS.
Taste our pleasure's ye who may,
This is nature's holiday.
Blushing Bell, with downcast eyes,
Sighs, and knows not why she sighs;
Tom is by her -- we shall know --
How he eyes her! -- Is It not so?
CHORUS.
Taste our pleasure's ye who may,
This is nature's holiday.
He is fond and she is shy:
He would kiss her! -- fie! Oh, fie!
Mind thy fickle, let her be;
By and by she will follow thee.
CHORUS.
Busy censors, hence, away!
This is nature's holiday.
Now we'll quaff the nut-brown ale,
Then we'll tell the sportive tale;
All is jest, and all is glee,
All is youthful jollity.
CHORUS.
Taste our pleasures ye who may,
This is nature's holiday.
Lads and lasses, all advance,
Carol blithe, and form the dance;
Trip it lightly while you may,
This is nature's holiday.
CHORUS.
Trip it lightly while you may,
This is nature's holiday.
WHEN bidden to the wake or fair,
The joy of each free hearted swain,
'Till Phoebe promised to be there,
I loiter'd, last of all the train.
If chance some fairing caught her eye,
The ribbon gay or silken glove,
With eager haste I ran to buy;
For what is gold compared to love?
My posy on her bosom placed,
Could Harry's sweeter scent exhale!
Her auburn locks my ribbon graced,
And fluttered in the wanton gale.
With scorn she hears me now complain,
Nor can my rustic presents move:
Her heart prefers a richer swain,
And gold, alas! has banished love.
SONGS, in the Highland Reel.
WHEN I Have money I am merry,
When I Have none I Am very sad;
When I Am sober I am civil,
When I Am drunk I Am roaring mad.
With my titol teedle tum,
Likewise fol lol feedle fum,
Not forgetting diderum hi,
And also teedle, tweedle dum.
When disputing with a puppy
I convince him with a rap;
When I Am romping with a girl,
By accident I tear her cap.
Gadzooks, I Will never marry,
I Am a lad that is bold and free;
Yet I love a pretty girl,
A pretty girl is fond of me.
With my, etc.
There Is a maiden in a corner,
Round and sound, and plump and fat;
She and I drank tea together,
But no matter, Sir, for that.
If this maiden be wi' bairn,
As I do suppose she will be;
Like good pappy I must learn
To dandle Jacky on my knee.
With my titol teedle dum, etc.
AT dawn I rose with jocund glee,
Far joyful was the day
That could this blessing give to me;
Now joy is fled away, Jenny.
No flocks, nor herds, nor store of gold,
Nor house, nor home have I;
If beauty must be bought or sold,
Alas! I cannot buy, Jenny.
Yet I am rich if thou art kind,
So prized a smile from thee;
True love alone our hearts shall bind,
You Are all the world to me, Jenny.
Sweet gentle maid, though patient meek,
My lily drops a tear,
Ah! raise thy drooping head, and seek
Soft peace and comfort here, Jenny.
THOUGH I am now a very little lad,
If fighting men cannot be had,
For want of a better I may do,
To follow the boy with a rat tat too;
I may seem tender, yet I Am tough,
And though not much of me, right good stuff,
Of this I Will boast, say more who can,
I never was afraid to meet my man.
I Am a chickabiddy, see take me now now now,
I Am a little merry he, for your row dow dow,
Brown Bess I Will knock about, O, there is my joy,
At my back a knapsack like a roving boy.
In my tartan played a young soldier view,
My phillibeg and dirk, and my bonnet blue,
Give the word, and I Will march where you command,
Noble Sergeant, with a shilling strike my hand.
My Captain, as he takes his glass,
May wish to toy with a pretty lass,
For such a one I have a roguish eye,
He Will never want a girl when I am by.
I Am a chickabiddy! etc.
Though a barber never yet has mowed my chin,
With my great broad sword I long to begin,
Cut, flash, ram damn -- O glorious fun,
For a gun, pip, pop, charge my little pop-gun.
My foes shall fly like geese in flocks,
Even Turks I Will drive like turkey-cocks,
And where ever quartered I shall be,
O, zounds! how I Will kiss my landlady.
I Am a chickabiddy, etc.
A SOLDIER is the noblest name,
Enrolled upon the lists of fame,
His country's pride and boast;
Honor the glorious bright reward,
For which the hero draws his sword,
Should never be stained or lost.
To guard her rights and liberties,
His duty and his care;
The brave and worthy to respect,
And to the verge of life protect
The innocent and fair.
When Glory sent her legions forth,
Her influence spread from south to north,
There freedom soon appeared.
'Twas there she found her favorite Son,
Through all the world his name is known,
Through all the world revered;
When ^ng, ^s the Gooddess spoke,
"C^ ^ons draw near;
"A soldier's ^y never forget,
"Behold the great example set,
"The school of honor here."
SONGS in Incle and Yarico.
A VOYAGE over seas had not entered my head,
Had I known but on which side to butter my bread.
Heigho? sure I for hunger must die?
I Have sailed like a booby; come here in a squall,
Where, alas! there is no bread to be buttered at all,
Oho? I Am a terrible booby?
Oh, what a sad booby am I?
In London, what gay chop-house sings in the street.
But the only sing here is of nothing to eat.
Heigho! that I, for hunger should die?
My mutton's all lost, I Am a poor starving elf,
And for all the world like a lost mutton myself:
Oho? I shall die a lost mutton!
Oh, what a lost mutton am I?
For a neat slice of beef, I could roar like a bull;
And my stomach's so empty, my heart is quite full.
Heigho? that I for hunger should die?
But grave without meat, I must here meet my grave,
For my bacon, I fancy, I never shall save;
Oho? I shall never save my bacon!
I cannot save my bacon not I?
THIS maxim let every one hear,
Proclaimed from the north to the south,
Whatever comes in at your ear,
Should never run out at your mouth.
We servants, like servants of state,
Should listen to all and be dumb;
Let others harrangue and debate,
We look wise, shake our heads, and are mum.
The Judge in dull dignity dressed,
In silence hears barristers preach,
And then, to prove silence is best,
He Will get up, and give 'em a speech,
By saying but little, the maid,
Will keep her swain under her thumb;
And the lover that is true to his trade,
Is certain to kiss, and cry mum.
O GIVE me your plain dealing fellows,
Who never from honesty shrink;
Not thinking on all they should tell us,
But telling us all that they think.
Truth from man flows like wine from a bottle,
His free spoken heart's a full cup;
But when truth sticks half way in the throttle,
Man's worse than a bottle cork'd up.
Compliance is a Gingerbread creature,
Used for show, like a watch by each spark;
But truth is a golden repeater,
That sets a man right in the dark.
A CLERK I was in London gay,
Jemmy linkum feedle,
And went in boots to see the play,
Merry fiddlem tweedle,
I marched the lobby, twirl'd my stick,
Diddle, daddle, deedle;
The girls all cried, "He Is quite the kick,"
Oh Jemmy linkum feedle.
Hey, for America I sail,
Yankee doodle deedle;
The sailor boys cried, "smoke his tail!"
Jemmy linkum feedle.
On English belles I turned my back,
Diddle, daddle, deedle,
And got a foreign fair, quite black,
Oh twaddle, twaddle tweedle!
Your London girls, with roguish trip,
Wheedle, wheedle, wheedle,
Boast their pouting under lip,
Fiddle, faddle, feedle,
My Wows would beat a hundred such,
Diddle, daddle, deedle,
Whose upper lip pouts twice as much,
O pretty double wheedle!
Rings I Will buy to deck her toes,
Jemmy linkum feedle;
A feather fine shall grace her nose,
Waving fiddle feedle.
With jealousy I never shall burst,
Who'd steal my bone of bone-a?
A white Othello, I can trust
A dingy Desdemona.
SONGS, in the Deserter.
I CANNOT for my life guess the cause of this fuss,
Why there is pipers and fiddlers; while Robin and Harry
And Clodpole and Roger, and ten more of us,
Have pulled as much fruit as we are able to carry.
Why, numskull, that is nothing; her ladyship's wine,
All over the village, runs just like a fountain;
A^ (...) heard the folks say, every dish, when they dine,
Will be swimming in claret, madeira, and mountain.
Then for poultry, and such like -- good Lord, what a store!
I saw Goodman Gander six baskets full cramming;
Then such comfits and jelli^s! why one such feast more,
Would certainly breed in the village a famine,
CHORUS.
What the meaning can be
We shall presently see,
For yonder is old Russet, who certainly knows;
Be what it will,
Our wish shall be still,
Joy and health to the Duchess wherever she goes!
WHY must I appear so deceitful?
I cannot dear father comply:
Ah! could I think him so ungrateful,
With anguish I surely should die,
What so tender at parting, he told me,
Which such joy to my bosom conveyed:
When next he was doomed to behold me,
Could I think would be this way repaid?
THOUGH prudence may press me,
And duty distress me,
Against inclination, O what can I do!
No longer a rover,
His follies are over;
My heart, my fond heart, says my Henry is true.
The be, thus, as changing,
From sweet to sweet ranging,
A rose should he light on, never wishes to stray;
With raptures possessing
In one every blessing,
'Till torn from her bosom, he flies far away.
THE LEARNED PIG.
YOU all must have heard of the learned pig,
A little one in size, but in science very big;
But what will you say to a pig of my own,
To which that pig was no more than a drone;
For as Cocklane ghost, on wainscot or post,
With a knock or a scratch, to answer was wont, sir,
So my pig too, will answer as true --
Saying no, with a snort, and yes, with a grunt, sir.
Fol lol, de roll.
The parson of the parish, a pious man,
Says, pray Mr. Pig, now resolve me, if you can,
As I christen, and I bury, and I preach, and I pray,
And I constantly keep every festival day:
Then say, shall not I be a bishop bye and bye,
And from diocese to diocese to Canterbury pass, sir?
No! says the Pig. -- Says the parson, looking big,
You are an imposter, and your pig is but an ass sir,
Fol lol, de roll.
Then old lady wish for it, a widow I wot,
Who the joys of wedlock never had forgot,
With a thumping colt's-tooth fast in her head,
And thinking of the life she had formerly led;
Says pray Mr. Swine, will a husband soon be mine,
And I no longer a widow be forlon, sir?
Yes, says the Pig, which set her all a-gig, --
For she vowed that such a pretty little pig was never born, sir.
Fol lol, de roll.
Then a French refugee, who was jealous of his rib;
And knowing that my Pig at an answer was glib,
Says Monsieur, Repondez, moi san fason,
Am I von cuckold sir, oui or non?
Yes was the reply, begar says he, you lie,
My vife to be sure she no care for me von fig, sir,
But if I vear de horn, no Frenchman ever born,
Vill suffer to be called von cuckold by a pig, sir.
Fol lol, de roll.
Then Sir Guttlebelly Gobbledown, who never baulk's his glass,
Says, dam'me, an't it hard for a sot that I should pass.
But though I Am thus abused Mr. Pig, by my wife,
Did you ever see a soberer man in your life?
Pig grunted so loud, that the rest of the crowd,
All gaped and stared like stuck pigs I vow, sir,
When old Boozy in a pout, turns round hiccoughing out --
Why dam'me, but your pig is as drunk as Davy's sow, sir.
Fol lol, de roll.
A punning philosopher was standing by,
Who Phythagoras' doctrine held, by the bye,
Very gravely exclaimed, I can easily trace
A metemsychosis in that Pig's face;
Pig is but a name, and man is but the same,
And in transmigration, if I am not mistaken,
That learned Pig must be by consanguinity,
A lineal descendant of the great Lord Bacon.
Fol lol, de roll.
The Pig at a joke so humourous and blunt,
Cried, whee! whee! whee! as loud as he could grunt
Which showed that he knew, though a four-footed elf,
His pedigree as well as Cadwallader himself;
And my life will I pawn that when collard into brawn,
He that eats but his fill, though at college never bred, sir,
Like an egg full of meat, will with learning be replete,
He Will have it in his belly, if not in his head, sir.
Fol lol, de roll.
KNOWING JOE.
I WAS called knowing Joe by the boys of our town,
Old dad taught me wisely to know folk;
Cod! I was so sharp, when they laughing came down
I ax't "how do do?" to the show folk:
I could chaunt a good stay that I know'd very well,
No boy of my age could talk louder!
Crack a joke, tip the wink, or a droll story tell;
Of my cleverness, too, none were prouder:
So, thinks I, it is better not following the plough,
To try with these youths, to queer low folk;
Their master I meet, so I made my best bow,
How do ye do, Sir? says I -- I'ze a mighty notion of turning a^an -- I be main
lissome -- boxes and wrest^s vary pretty -- sin^es a good jig -- and can play
-- the very devil! And a place, and so joined with the shew-folk.
The place that I Would got, I detarmin'd to keep,
(...) ^ookers! they were all so drollish!
K^s ob^ers, and tailors! a prince or a sweep!
And j^aw'd so at I, I looked foolish!
Th^r ^rs and sw^rds, (...) they handled so cute,
And their ladies were all so bewitching!
When I thought to be droll, I was always struck mute,
As the bacon rack hangs in our kitchen:
They ax'd me to say, how, "the coach was at the door,"
When were seated above and below folk!
Feggs! I was so shamefaced, I flopp'd on the floor!
A kind of a sort of giddiness seized me all over! the candles danced the hays!
-- 'twere as dimish as a Scotch mist! I dropped down dead as a shot! And swounded
away among the Shew-folk.
They laughed so, and jeered me, as never wur seen?
All manner of fancies were playing;
One night I was sent for to wait on a queen,
I believe it were Queen Hamlet of Dunkirk! (Not thinking the plan they were
laying!
My leady she died on a chair next her spouse,
While with pins me behind they were pricking!
All at once I scream'd out! lent her grace such a douse!
That alive she was soon -- aye, and -- kicking!
The people all laughed at, and hooted poor I!
And the comical dogs did me so joke!
That I made but one step, without bidding good bye.
From their stage; cod! I never so much as once looked behind me! -- tumbled
over a barrel of thunder -- knocked down a hail-storm -- rolled over the sea --
darted like lightning through the infernal regions. And, so, took my leave of
the Shew-folk.
THE MULBERRY TREE.
THE sweet briar grows in the merry green wood,
Where the musk rose diffuses its perfume so free;
But the blight often seizes both blossom and bud,
While the mildew flies over the mulberry-tree.
In the nursery reared like the young tender vine,
Mankind of all orders, and every degree,
First crawl on the ground, then spring up like the pine,
And some branch and bear fruit, like the mulberry-tree.
To the fair tree of knowledge some twine like a twig,
While some sappy sprouts with their fruits disagree;
For which we from birch now and then pluck a twig,
Which is not quite so sweet as the mulberry-tree.
The vast tree of life we all eagerly climb,
And impatiently pant at its high top to be,
Though nine out of ten are lopped off in their prime,
And they drop like dead leaves from the mulberry-tree.
Some live by the leaf, and some live by the bow,
As the song or the dance, their vocation may be,
And some live and thrive, though we know no more how,
Than the dew that flies over the mulberry-tree.
But like weeping willows we hang down the head
When poor withered elders we are destined to be,
And we are minded no more than mere logs when we are dead,
Or the dew that flies over the mulberry-tree.
Yet like lignum-vita we hearts of oak wear,
Or the cedar that keeps from the canker-worm free,
While the vinejuice we drain to dissolve every care,
Like the dew that flies over the mulberry-tree.
SONGS, in the slaves of Algiers, or a struggle for freedom.
THE rose just bursting into bloom,
Admired wherever it is seen;
Diffuses round a rich perfume,
The garden's pride and queen.
When gathered from its native bed,
No longer charms the eye;
Its vivid tints are quickly fled,
'Twill wither, droop, and die.
So woman when by nature dressed,
In charms devoid of art;
Can warm the stoic's icy breast,
Can triumph over each heart.
Can bid the soul to virtue rise,
To glory prompt the brave,
But sinks oppressed, and drooping dies,
When once she is made a slave.
WRAPPED in the evening's soft and pensive shade,
When passing zephyrs scarce the herbage moves;
Here waits a trembling, fond, and anxious maid,
Expecting to behold the youth she loves.
Though Philomela on a neighboring tree,
Melodious warbles forth her nightly strain;
Thy accents would be sweeter far to me,
Would from my bosom banish doubt and pain.
Then come dear youth, come haste away,
Haste to this silent grove,
The signal's given, you must obey,
It Is liberty and love.
AURORA, lovely blooming fair,
Unbarr'd the eastern skies;
While many a soft pellucid tear,
Ran trickling from her eyes.
Onward she came with heart felt glee,
Leading the dancing hours;
For though she wept, she smiled to see,
Her tears refresh the flowers.
Phoebus, who long, her charms admired,
With bright refulgent ray;
Came forth, and as the maid retired,
He kissed her tears away.
WHEN I was a poor, little innocent boy,
About sixteen or eighteen years old;
At Susan and Marian I cast a sheep's eye,
But Susan was saucy and Marian was shy;
So I flirted with Flora, with Cecily and Di,
But they too, were frumpish and cold.
Says Diego, one day, what ails you I pray?
I fetched a deep sigh -- Diego, says I,
Women hate me. -- Oh! how I adore 'em.
Pho; nonsense, said he, never mind it my lad,
Hate you, then hate them boy, come never be sad,
Here, take a good sup of the jorum.
If they are foolish and mulish, refuse you, abuse you,
No longer pursue,
They Will soon buckle too
When they find they are neglected,
Old maids unprotected,
Ah! then it is their turn to woo;
But bid them defiance, and form an alliance,
With the mirth-giving, care-killing jorum.
I took his advice, but was sent to the war,
And soon I was called out to battle;
I heard the drums beat, Oh! how great was my fear,
I wished myself sticking, aye, up to each ear
In a horse-pond -- and skulk'd away into the rear,
When the cannon and bombs 'gan to rattle,
Said I to myself, you're a damned foolish elf,
Sebastian keep up, then I took a good sup.
Turkish villains, shall we fly before 'em;
What, give it up tamely and yield ourselves slaves,
To a pack of rabscallions, vile infidel knaves,
Then I kissed the sweet lips of my jorum.
No, hang 'em, we'll bang 'em, and rout 'em, and scout 'em,
If we but pursue,
They must buckle too:
Ah! then without wonder,
I heard the loud thunder,
Of cannon and musquetry too,
But bid them defiance, being firm in alliance,
With the courage-inspiring jorum.
GENTLE MARY OF THE TWEED.
THE gentle maid of whom I sing,
Once lived where Tweed's blue waters wave,
But now the modest flower of spring
Hangs weeping over her dewy grave.
Fond nymphs! of Mary's fate beware,
Of perjured William's vows take heed.
Lest you should love, and then despair,
Like gentle Mary of the Tweed.
Though long he wooed the lovely maid,
And she was faithful in return,
To every sense of honor dead,
He fled, and left the fair to mourn!
Alarmed at her false lover's flight,
Her fair companions sought the mead,
To sink the hopes, in endless night,
For gentle Mary of the Tweed.
She heard -- but scorning to upbraid,
She b^ea^d alone the secret sigh,
For graceful pride induced the maid
To hide her wrongs from every eye.
Here, in these shades, a prey to grief,
She tuned to plaintive strains the reed,
'Till death, from woe a blessed relief,
Smote gentle Mary of the Tweed.
Now, in her turf-bound grave, at rest,
Where yonder willow droops its head,
With hopeless care no more oppressed.
She sleeps beneath the waving shade.
The cruel wrongs are all forgot
Which forced her virgin heart to bleed:
Fond nymphs! be yours a milder lot
Than gentle Mary's of the Tweed.
THE AFRICAN.
WIDE over the tremulous sea
The moon spread her mantle of light,
And the gale gently dying away,
Breathed soft on the bosom of night:
On the forecastle Maraton stood,
And poured forth his sorrowful tale;
His tears fell unseen in the flood,
His sighs pass's unheard in the gale.
Ah, wretch! in his anguish, he cried,
From country and liberty torn;
Ah! Maraton, would thou had died,
Ere over the salt waves thou were borne.
Flow ye tears, down my cheek ever flow,
Soft sleep from mine eyelids depart,
And still let the arrow of woe
Drink deep of the stream of my heart.
But hark! -- on the silence of night,
My Adela's accents I hear!
And mournful, beneath the wan light,
I see her loved image appear;
Oh Maraton! -- haste thee, she cries,
Where the reign of oppression is over;
The tyrant is robbed of his prize,
And Adela sorrows no more.
THE POOR FLOWER GIRL.
THE violet and primrose to pluck as they grew,
Down hedge rows Iv'e roved among meadows so green,
Now torn with the bramble, now dripping with dew,
For I Am poor and forlorn, and I Am not yet fifteen.
For daisies and cowslips I seek with a sigh;
Their cups all of gold, and their borders of green?
I seek them, in hopes some good Christian will buy;
For I Am poor and forlorn, and I Am not yet fifteen.
My nosegays not sold, and no friend by my side,
At midnight if houseless and hungry I Am seen,
Ah! gentles, be you my protectors and guide;
For I Am poor and forlorn, and I Am not yet fifteen.
THE SAILOR.
IF round the world poor sailors roam,
And bravely do their duty,
When danger's past they find a home,
With each his favorite beauty.
For Nan, and Sue, and Moll, and Bess,
And fifty more delight them,
And when their honied lips they press,
Who says it don't requite them.
If rich he comes, what pleasure then,
If Nancy does not share it,
If poor, he scorns then to complain,
For Nancy too will bear it.
What lubber then like him so gay,
His grog drowns all his sorrow,
For, dam'me, if it is foul today,
It Is sure to right tomorrow.
He springs on shore, assured to meet
The partner loved most dearly,
In merry dance, with nimble feet,
To pipe and tabor chearly.
PRIM ROSE.
IN tattered weed, from town to town,
Is hapless Primrose doomed to stray;
Compelled a wretch, a wanderer known,
To seek a home from day to day.
Barefoot as she strolls forlorn,
Over the flint or pointed thorn,
Silent must her sorrows be,
Her madrigal -- Sweet Charity.
At evening will the village kind,
In raptures listen to her song;
And buy her joy, in hopes to find,
What future joys to him belong.
Barefoot as she strolls, etc.
SALLY IN OUR ALLEY.
OF all the girls that are so smart,
There Is none like pretty Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
She lives in our alley.
There is no lady in the land
Is half so sweet as Sally;
She is the darling of my heart;
She lives in our alley.
Her father he makes cabbage nets,
And through the streets does cry 'em;
Her mother she sells laces long,
To such as please to buy 'em:
But sure such folks could never ^get
So sweet a girl as Sally!
She is the darling of my heart,
She lives in our alley.
When she is by, I leave my work,
I love her so sincerely;
^y master comes like any Turk,
And bangs ^e most severely:
^ut let him ba^g his belly full,
^'ll bear it all for Sally:
^s the darling of my heart,
(...) lives in our alley.
Of all the days that is in ^he week,
I dearly love but on^ ^y;
And that is the day that comes betwixt
A Saturday and Monday:
For then I Am dressed in all my best,
To walk abroad with Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
She lives in our alley.
My master carries me to church,
And often am I blamed,
Because I leave him in the lurch,
As soon as text is named;
I leave the church in sermon time,
And slink away to Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
She lives in our alley.
When Christmas comes about again,
O then I shall have money;
I Will hoard it up, and box and all,
I Will give it to my honey:
I would it were ten thousand pounds,
I Would give it all to Sally;
She is the darling of my heart,
She lives in our alley.
My master, and the neighbors all,
Make game of me and Sally;
And, but for her, I Would better be
A slave, and row a galley;
But when my sev'n long years are out,
Oh then I Will marry Sally;
Oh then we'll wed, and then we'll bed,
But not in our alley.
THE SENTIMENTAL SALLY. In (...) "Sally in our Alley.
THE (...) with Grubstreet fire,
In (...) ^suse is;
But know, the (...) I admire,
'Ti^ (...) ^uces;
Swe^ ^tl^ S^, (...) thee ^ean,
T^ (...) ^a^ly;
But as thou art my fancy's queen,
Never let me want a Sally!
It Is true we are told in prose and rhyme,
"A wit is but a feather;"
But let me lightly mount sublime,
While grovelings hug their tether,
Then like the lark, I Will soar and sing,
While from the sordid valley,
The clod-sprung earth worm never takes wing,
Nor ever enjoys a Sally.
Sallies of wit, where wisdom rules,
Are gladsome, gamesome, gay things;
But those who sport with pointed tools,
Should handle well their play-things;
Then happily, when the stroke offends,
No longer prone to rally;
I Will silence keep, to keep my friends,
And check the sportive Sally.
And as old Time speeds on a pace,
His sport and prey to make us,
With hasty strides, and hot-foot chase,
Determined to overtake us;
When from the sally-port of life,
We rush to close life's tally;
Released from cank'ring care and strife,
Triumphant be our Sally!
STELLA.
HAVE thou forgot the oak that throws
Its reverend arms across the ^ide;
Which over the root in silence flows,
From noon's broad beams its course to hide.
My Stella there was used to stray,
When no obstrusive foot was nigh;
At peep of dawn or setting day,
To share the oft-repealed sigh.
There first I marked the damask rose,
Suffusing deep her glowing cheek;
There would the Heavenly eye disclose,
More than the fault'ring tongue could speak;
'Till love had taught her timid heart,
No m^ its feelings to deny:
Then tear from tear would duly start,
And sighs re-echo back to sigh.
THE OLD MAN.
I AM old enough to be married I wis,
Full ninety summers have made me ripe;
For seventy years I could damsels kiss,
Of me is the tough grand oak the type,
I up my brimmers full as an egg!
I can strut about with my elbows square,
My hat I can take off under my leg,
Right nimbly I can dance -- look there Dances.
This globe is mine, and I Will kick it about,
And I will marry a buxom maid.
To please my sweet woman I have not a doubt,
When in my bridal gear arrayed.
My night cap's made of the finest lace,
Our wedding bed's of the softest down,
To me she will turn her charming face,
And neighbors laugh when the stocking's thrown.
FATHER MOONEY.
FAITH, you must know I once was born,
It was near the rock of Cashel O;
My father's cow she wore a horn,
And so did Tony Swatchell O!
Says father Mooney, it is a shame
That you will still keep doing this;
You must do penance for the same,
And I will tell you what it is.
Says he, Oh! be an honest man,
And have the grace your debts to pay;
Yes, Sir, says I, and off I ran,
To have with Jane a bit of play,
Ill luck the priest upon us sent,
And up a whilliloo he set;
Says I -- a kiss to me she lent,
And I was paying off the debt.
As on your sin the saints all peept,
One year O, wine you must not sup;
So in a quart a loaf I steept,
I did not drink -- I eat it up!
Says he, "Child, walk upon your knees
'Till from your soul your sin is fled,"
Yes Sir, says I, but, if you please,
It shall be in a strawberry bed.
He found me out, and swore in rage,
Child, "go to hell," for that is your doom,
Except you trudge on pilgrimage,
To holy Thomas Becket's tomb.
Last Lent came cockles mighty pat,
And bread and butter was a treat,
The cockle shells stuck on my hat,
But first the cockles I did eat.
PINK OF FASHION.
MY lord -- you're a horrid creature -- an't that true my lady?
Why will your ludship be so cursed a flat?
I Am the neatest thing in nature -- what say you my lady?
Natty, witty, pretty -- he! he! -- saucy that!
Look'ce -- cut my coat in two,
Burnt the skirts -- as good as new;
If it an't the stylish go, then am I a Jew!
We shall be the pink of fashion -- what think you my lady?
Natty kiddies for the ladies -- how do you do?
Men of taste improve their phizzes -- an't that true my lady?
Pray make his ludship understand what is what:
I hate your stupid quizzes -- what say you my lady?
Sheepish, mopish, dumpish -- he! he! -- too bad that?
Look'ee -- here is the saucy grace,
Whiskers, neckloth, squinting glass,
If it an't a knowing face, then am I a Jew!
We shall be the pink of fashion -- what think you my lady?
Knowing kiddies for the ladies? -- how do you do?
All the deep ones trim their nappers, an't that true my lady?
Twig his lordship -- what a tail our cat has got?
He shall rank among the croppers -- what say you my lady?
Snip it, clip it, dash it -- he! he! he! -- why not?
Look at me -- the true tip top;
Quite the thing -- a frizzled mop.
If it an't the noble crop, then am I a Jew!
We shall be the pink of fashion -- what think you my lady?
Rolling kiddies for the ladies! -- how do you do?
PICTURE SHOP.
WHAT argufies your logic, your sense and all that there,
To prove the world a windmill, a stage play or a fair;
This life I cannot help thinking, in spite of any quiz,
Must be va^ly like a picter-shop, now don't you think it is.
With my row dow dow, etc.
And first of all, your great men that cuts a mighty swell,
To be sure in all their finery they lock monstratious well,
Your patriots and your placemen with awe at first may strike.
But like picters turn 'em round -- they are all paper skulls alike.
Your doctors and attorneys are honest men enough,
And always do their best to be touching of the stuff;
Yet they are like pi^ ^oo, for while the world is in a bustle,
While patients (...) ^ts fail, they never move a muscle.
Your beaux and fl^y ^owing lads that go so sprucely dres^,
Are nothing else than pictures no more than all the rest;
They Are very well to look at, but then for all their pride,
There Is our Nan will take her oath they are fit for nothing else beside.
Your orators in Congress, you scarce can believe the tale,
Like portraits in a print shop are often put up to sale;
My masters it would make no odds -- I Am sure you think the same,
If all such pretty picters were hung up in a frame.
But now a truce with politics, it is time to end my song,
May Adams gain the people's love and live to keep it long;
May the true sons of Columbia be neither bought nor sold,
And may hearty fellows never want his picter set in gold.
THE ROBBER.
WHEN the robber his victim has noted,
When the free-booter darts on his prey
Let humanity spare the devoted;
Let mercy forbid him to slay.
Since my hope is by penury blighted,
My sword must the traveller daunt;
I will snatch from the rich man, benighted,
The gold he denies to my want.
But the victim, when once I have noted,
At my foot, when I ^k on my prey,
(...) humanity spare the devoted;
Let mercy forbid me to slay.
THE TRAVELLER.
A TRAVELLER stopped at a widow's gate;
She kept an inn, and he wanted to bait,
But the landlady slighted her guest:
For when nature was seaking an ugly race,
She certainly molded this ^ller's face
As a sample for all the rest.
The chamber-maid's sides they were ready to crack,
When she saw his queer nose, and the hump at his back;
A hu^ (...) handsome, no doubt.
And though it is confessed, that the prejudice goes
Very strongly in favor of wearing a nose,
Yet a nose should'nt look like a snout.
A bag full of go^ on the table he laid --
Had a wondrous effect on the widow and maid!
And they quickly grew mavelous civil.
The money immediately altered the case;
They were charmed with his hump, and his snout, and his face,
Though he still might have frighted the devil.
He paid like a prince -- gave the widow a smack --
Then flop'd on his hor^, at the door, like a sack;
While the landlady, touching the chink,
Cried -- Sir, should you travel this country again,
I heartily hope that the sweetest of men
Will stop at the widow's to drink.
THE SEAMAN.
THE man whose life is on the seas,
No hoping cares molest,
His hopes still freshen with the breeze,
His thoughts in Nancy blessed
The hardest fortune he can bear,
Since love his labor charms,
It Is Nancy's image foothes his care,
Though absent from her arms.
His happy bosom knows no ill,
He sings his cheerful song,
While, round, the slip his messmates fill,
Nor think the mid watch long.
The helm's^n now ^e ready stands,
With love's sweet hope impressed;
The wheel still govern'd^y his hands,
The compass in his breast.
SLY GIRDER.
AT Symond's-Inn I sip my tea,
Then file a judgment of a plea;
Enrol a deed in special tail,
Tax the costs, or put in bail.
O, its a clear case, Sir! the defendant's a married woman, pleads her
coverture; you would better not go on; your client will have all the costs to p^y.
Will he? well, dem'me, if mine don't, yours shall! that is all. Sings With sham
plea and misnomer;
Nil debet, nulla bona;
Declaration,
Replication;
Fieri facias,
Special capias;
Affidavit
Devastavit;
Clausum fregit,
Non elegit;
Non est factum,
Nudum pactum;
Demoratur,
Allocatur;
Ad satisfaciendum,
Et respondendum.
Should a client ask advice,
There Is six and eightpence in a trice;
O treat me to a dinner.
I make him pay
For all I say,
So I Am sure to be the winner.
Sir, you have certainly merits; I Will speak to Mr. Shark, the plaintiff's
attorney; pray, Sir, did you knock my client's eye out? No, Sir; we plead a
justification to the assault; then, Sir, we must go to trial. Sings With sham
plea, etc.
For plaintiff or defendant,
If but the fees we snack,
We never make an end on it,
Till the coat is on his back.
Lord, Sir, only a few extra costs, such as the master will not allow; poor devils
of clients pay the piper. Rattling down in post-chaises to the assizes;
hackney-coaches to Westminster Hall: my gigg on a Sunday; counsel's fees,
tavern-bills, and traveling expenses. Sings With sham plea, etc.
AVAST! AVAST!
THOUGH the lawyer comes to woo,
Vainly he attempts to sue,
Or with his soft nonsense teaze;
In the searnan's sort of phrase,
Thus I answer all he says,
Avast, avast, Sir, if you please:
For better I like to be aboard a good ship,
When the sa^ls are all loosed, and the anchor' a-trip;
To hear the tight boatswain pipe, hoist and belay,
While the merry, merry sailors all foot it away.
But should he yet the cause pursue,
Still his brief will never do;
For when all his pleading's done,
In the seaman's sort of phrase,
Thus I ^swer all he says,
Avast, avast, Sir, if you please.
For ^tter I like, etc.
O LISTEN THEN.
O LISTEN then, and silent feel
A wretched stranger's hapless lot,
Let pity on thy bosom steal,
And selfish motive be forgot;
Then act a father's tender part,
And raise a wretched drooping heart.
O kindly then thy aid extend,
Avert the near impending blow,
Or soon, alas! my sorrows end,
Soon the tear shall cease to flow
Then act a father's tender part,
And raise a wretched drooping heart.
MAY I NEVER BE MARRIED.
THE kiss that he gave when he left me behind,
Sealed the promise of Patrick's love,
And when to my sailor I Am false or unkind,
Such falsehood expect from the dove.
For the promise of lovers should never be forgot,
And I promised the lad, when behind him I tarried,
That I never would forsake him though humble his lot,
Oh! honey, if I do may I never get married.
Now the winds and the waves bear him over the sea,
The young squire would give me fine things,
But what are his riches or grandeur to me,
His baubles, his ribbons and rings.
For the promise, etc.
His cabin is low, content dwells within,
And snug is the thatch over the door,
For riches without him I care not a pin,
For my sailor's the lad I adore.
For the promise, etc.
The promise of lovers should never be forgot,
Yet sometimes, we all know, such hopes have miscarried;
I trust he will prove true, but I Will fit him if not,
Oh! honey, if I don't may I never be married.
For the promise, etc.
HONEST NED.
NED often had braved the field of battle,
Had often endured the keenest woe,
Had been where deep-mouthed cannons rattle,
And often been wounded by the foe;
His heart was kind -- to fear a stranger,
The name of s^lier was his pride;
He nobly scorned to shrink from danger,
And on the bed of honor died.
For said Ned whatever befalls,
A soldier scorns to flinch or whine,
He Will cheerfully go where duty calls,
And brave all ills, but never repine.
Ned loved sincere the charming Kitty,
She saw with tears her soldier go,
And prayed kind Heaven to grant her pity,
And shield her Edward from the foe;
My love, he cried, thy grief give over,
Those tears disgrace a soldier's bride,
But hapless Kitty lost her lover,
Who on the bed of honor died.
For said Ned, etc.
Though war's dread trumpet flew around him,
Though dismal groans assailed his ear,
Firm in her interest honor found him,
Unused to shame, untaught by fear:
Such was his valor, such his merit,
His country's welfare was his pride,
He, pierced by wounds, maintained his spirit,
And on the bed of honor died.
For said Ned, etc.
Where Is THE HARM OF THAT.
'TWAS in the grove the other morn,
Beneath a hawthorn tree,
I sat and grieving sung forlorn,
Ah! who is so sad as me:
Was it my fate to be a bride,
Two lovers then might chat,
Indeed it is truth, a voice replied,
And where is the ^rm of that.
Abashed, not knowing what to do,
I blushing gazed around;
But when the cause appeared in view,
How did my heart rebound!
'Twas Henry who had loved me long,
The youth pulled off his hat;
He kissed, he pressed, then tuned his song,
And where is the harm of that.
Says he, sweet girl, it is now a year,
Since we agreed to wed,
Come let us then to church my dear,
And be my bride, he said:
Indeed he looked and spoke so kind,
And church was by so pat,
That faith he took me in the mind,
And where is the harm of that.
COT PLESS HUR^
ERE I had well grown to an age,
Allowed young maids to marry,
Three youths would fain my hand engage,
And tried their suits to carry:
Young Paddy first put in his claim,
Then Sandy told soft tales,
And Taffy, look you, sung his flame,
And he came up from Wales,
Cot pless hur,
And he came up from Wales.
Och! I Am the crater, Paddy sung,
Take me, I tell you honey,
Hoot, hoot, cried Sandy, hold your tongue,
I Have, lassie, got the money;
Well, I says, Taffy's cot no pelf,
But hur will give, look you,
Hur heart and soul besides herself,
And hur will love most true,
Cot pless her,
And hur will love most true.
Now when I Would well their merits scanned,
To stop their further teazing,
I even to Taffy gave my hand,
The lad to me most pleasing;
And now he is got me for a wife,
So well we both agree,
That few live half so sweet a life,
As my dear Taff and me,
Cot pless hur,
As my dear Taff and me.
THE ARAB.
WHEN sleep has closed the trav'ler's eyes,
By long fatigues oppressed,
While slumbering soft serene he lies,
And sinks in downy rest.
By the glimpses of the moon
Springs the Arab on his prey,
Or, beneath the scor^ng noon,
Bears the loaded wealth away.
But though in hours of sweet repose
His spoil the rovers seek,
Yet often concern for human woes
Impea^ls his (...) wing check.
When the captive fair one pleads,
Beauty born to (...) ^r'd,
While ^nce ^d him bl^d,
Beauty triumphs over his sword.
THE WAY TO GET MARRIED.
COME ^er y^ (...), and likewise ye bea^,
Come ^ther, and ^d what I have to express*
It Is the way to get married I mean to disclose,
A way of some moment you all must confess.
Physicians it is known for advice claim a see,
But I, oh! I Am not by self-interest carried;
And so you are welcome to my recipe,
Which is, if you like it, the Way to get Married.
Now lovers attend, and I hope there is some here,
Don't trifle too long about this thing or that;
But when you are bent on an object so dear,
Let prudence direct you, and mind what you're at:
To love, and be loved, is the highest of joy,
Then be not, I beg, by indifference carried,
Let honor and truth all your actions employ,
Which is, if you like it, the Way to get Married.
Though money may sometimes be deemed very well,
Yet riches can never true pleasures impart;
It Is love, and love only, each care can repel;
It Is love, and love only, that conquers the heart!
Then make it your study to follow my plan,
All you who live single, and too long have tarried,
Court with zeal, like true lovers, as soon as you can,
Which is, if you like it, the Way to get Married.
BETSY BOBBIN.
IN love be I fifth button high,
On velvet runs my courting,
She, buchr^m, twist, best broad-cloth list,
I leave for other sporting.
From needle, thread, my fancy's fled,
My heart is set a throbbing,
And no one by, I cross-legg'd sigh,
For charming Betsy Bobbin.
Her lips so sweet, are velveret,
Her eyes do well their duty,
Her skin to me is dimity,
The pattern she is of beauty.
Her hand squeezed often, is satin soft,
And sets my heart a throbbing,
Her cheeks, O dear! red kerseyme^e,
Laud! what a Betsy Bobbin.
Her roguish smile can well beguile,
Her every look bewitches,
Yet never stir, when tacked to her,
But Tim will wear the breeches.
I Have face and mein, am sharp and keen,
And though my heart keeps throbbing,
There Is not (in fine) one man in nine,
So fit for Betsy Bobbin.
THE MERRY BELLS.
WHEN I was a younker, says feyther to I,
What trade, little Ralph, would thou take (...)
I answered i'feggs! like a poor harmless boy,
Yours, sure, for I never can forsake you.
You jollily works and you merrily sing,
Then the branch from the tree don't be lopping;
Late or early, in summer, in winter, or spring,
With you I Will (...) cleaving and chopping:
For labor and health will be friends through the day,
And the merry, merry, merry bells join our roundelay.
My school fellow, Jack, why turned lawyer besure,
Old Nick showed the road to pre^ment,
S^ (...) by the ears, and he plundered the poor,
O^ (...)! I hate such black va^nt!
A (...) D^, (...) drugg'd folks to death,
Of (...) the (...) cr^d shame on it!
(...) W^ll, I shall ^e while I Have breath,
(...) had the name on it:
(...) ^il through the day,
(...) the merry, merry, merry bells join our roundelay.
B^ (...) the lawyer one day
(...) ^ng bit of paper;
So ^od! to (...) big-wig they took'd him away,
And on nothing he cut his last caper.
Dick the doctor, was poisoned by drugs of his own;
The corn-factor paid dear for his carving,
Plenty filled every market, the prices went down,
So a bankrupt is Wull now, and starving:
While labor and health stand my friends through the day,
And the merry, merry, merry bells join our roundelay.
THE PLOUGH-BOY's LAST STAKE.
Tune -- A flaxen-headed Cow-boy.
A Plough-boy neighbors knew me, as jocund as could be,
Who blithesome late and early often whistled over the lea;
A saucy footman's place I got, and thought I Would soon grow rich,
But, dang it, Fortune's such a jade, she flung me in the ditch*
So now, do you s^e, to the races I Am com'd to pick up pelf,
And, dang it, but I Will lose my all, before I lose myself;
And if I make my comrades smile, so great a men I Will be,
You Will forget the little plough-boy that whistled over the lea.
When spring adorns the meadows, all nature revels gay,
And when the sun shines cheerily the time is to make hay:
S^ dang it, lass, let us start us fair, no pouting or a frown,
Endeavor yet may heap the cart before the sun goes down;
I Will hedge my stake so warily, and make my bets so sure,
That if ill-luck should call again he will not find out the door:
And if I make auld comrades smile, so great a mon I Will be,
You Will forget the little plough-boy that whistled over the lea.
THE MUFFIN MAN.
WHILE your opera squallers fine verses are s^ng,
Of heroes and p^ets, (...) such like (...);
While the w^r^'s running round like a (...),
I never bother my head with what other folks ai^;
But careless and frisky my bell I keep ringing,
And walk about merrily crying my muffins.
Chorus. -- Lilly-white muffins, O rare cramp^, s^king by Yorkshire cakes, hot
loaves and charming cakes, ^n^ a p^nny, two a p^nny, Yorkshire cakes. What
matters to me, if great folks run a gadding,
For politics, fashion, or such botheration,
Let them drink as they brew, while I merrily bake;
For though I sell muffins, I Am not such a cake
To let other fools fancies ever set me a madding,
Or burden my thoughts with the cares of the nation.
Speaks. -- What have I to do with politicians? and as for your parliament
cakes -- every body knows they are bought and s^ all over the nation -- no, no,
it is enough for me to cry -- Lilly-white, etc. Let sailors and soldiers,
contending for glory,
Delight in the rattle of drums, and of trumpets,
Undertakers get living by other folks dying,
W^ actors make money by laughing or crying:
Let lawyers with quizzes and quiddities bore ye,
It Is nothing to me while I Am crying my crumpets.
Speaks. -- What do I care for lawyers? a'nt I a baker, and Master of the Rolls
myself: -- a roll enough, too, for a Master of the Rolls to be crying --
Lilly-white, etc. MY BONNY LOWLAND LADDIE.
OF all the swains both far and near,
I love but one, believe me,
And he loves me sincerely dear,
And never will deceive me:
Though muckle gold he canna boast,
I Will tell my mam and daddy,
Of all the swains I love him most,
My bonny Lowland Laddie,
My (...) young ^lor lad,
My bo^ny Lowland Laddie.
Whenever the war is at an end,
O we are to be married,
And Cupid will our cause befriend,
For sure we long have tarried;
But O the time is coming round,
When decked in silken plaidy,
In Hymen's chains we shall be bound,
My bonny Lowland Laddie,
My handsome braw young sailor lad,
My bonny Lowland Laddie.
O blessings on the happy day,
When we shall dwell together;
Our lives will sweetly pass away,
In every kind of weather,
And should the fates ordain it so,
We may be Mam and Daddy;
O then what raptures we shall know,
My bonny Lowland Laddie,
My handsome braw young sailor lad,
My bonny Lowland Laddie.
RIPE CHERRIES.
COME buy my ripe cherries, fair maidens come buy,
I sell them so cheap sure you cannot deny;
Not for ^ilver or gold with a cherry I Will part,
To the smile of good humor I yield up my heart.
The true bleeding heart,
Come buy my ripe cherries,
The true bleeding heart.
Not beauty alone I think worthy my prize,
Nor the pout of the lips, or the glance of the eyes;
To the froward though fair, not with one will I part,
To the smile of good humor I yield up my heart.
The true bleeding heart, etc.
My cherries I sell for the smiles of the fair,
Give a poor little boy, O give him a share:
For your kindness, dear ladies, a truth I Will impart,
It Is the smiles of good humor that wins every heart.
The true bleeding heart, etc.
THE CROPS.
YE nymphs and swains,
Attend my strains,
Good humor prompts the lay,
A lively song,
And cheerful throng,
Will chase dull care away;
The times have been hard I allow;
But fate smiles proportionate now,
And fashion itself denotes plenty.
See all around,
What crops abound.
For one of last year we have twenty
Fine crops,
Rich tops,
Huzza, huzza, etc.
What need we fear,
This is the harvest of leap-year, etc.
The ladies too,
As patriots true,
Flock round the green cloth board,
And sitting late,
To help the state,
Deal out their spousy's hoard,
With arms and with elbows all bare,
No pains nor expense do they spare,
Content to be chained round the middle,
With gilded head,
Like gingerbread,
All follow the card and the fiddle,
Great haste,
No waist,
Huzza, etc.
If aid like this,
Though Ma'ma and Miss
From recreation springs,
If bucks and fops,
Produce such crops,
We never can want good things;
But should glit'ring belles shine in vain,
And cruel informers complain,
To stop the fair bank circulation,
Our dogs will help,
Tax every whelp,
And puppies may prop the nation,
Bow wow,
That Is how,
Huzza, huzza, etc.
IT WOULD BE A PITY.
THE OTHER day as I walked in the Mall,
Just by way, Ma', of taking the air;
Believe me the truth I now tell,
I attracted each eye that was there.
I was dressed in my small coat so neat,
And my green Brunswick slippers so pretty;
I had lovers by scores at my feet,
To slight them I Am sure 'twas a pity.
But Tender's the man to my mind,
So charming, so tasty his air;
My papa must, I Am sure now, be blind,
Such a cake as Jack Chip to prefer,
In the dance, ^a^ to see Tender glide,
His steps and his action's so pretty;
If he says Nance will you be my bride!
Was I to say No, sure it would be a pity.
DASH-ALONG.
Tune -- Collin's Co^ch-^ox.
'TWAS about ten o'clock when we first set out,
An I through London and St. George's Fields made a r^ut;
There was no need to bawl out -- Greenwich, a-hoy!
For inside and out was well crammed, my boy.
Ay, ay, we had them of all sorts and sizes, millin^ and mantua-makers, shopmen
and 'prentices; ay, and two or three tailors, with their customers clothes on,
all crammed in my Whip away, dash-along, heigh gee ho^c.
My silk handkerchief gives all the girls delight,
Which is tied in a bow round my squeezer so tight;
And then at these times I sports every thing new;
From the hat on my head, damme, down to my shoe.
And then I Am the clev'rest whip going; 'twas but the other day, turning sharp
round the corner, I upset an old woman and her apple-stall; I loves fun, and
blow me tight into a gin-shop if I wa'nt off before the old woman could say --
Hollo! stop that fellow there, with his Whip away, etc.
Now I Have got to my journey's end ^ound as a roach,
I Will just run you over the contents of my coach:
The first was a prude, with a visage quite tart,
With her back to the horses, like a thief in a cart.
And it was -- Lord! only look at that impudent creature, I dare be bound she
a'nt seventeen, and yet she is ogling and leering at every fellow she meets;
oh! fie, for shame; fie, for shame: what will this world comes. Come, come,
Dina, says her brother, you forget when I found you behind the parlour door
with the Captain -- 'Pshaw! brother, accidents will happen sometimes, with my
Whip away, etc.
A sailor, good natured and brisk as a be,
Making pleasant remarks on each object he see;
A W^man a ^ot, and a vast number more,
And a Paddy from Cork, with his back against the door.
O^! blood and c^ns, says he, low cool it is now; I Have pulled up the windows to
keep out the heat. Arra^! sait, honey, and then we are surrounded of three sides
with a cloud of d^st, j^st ^e a party of s^t soldiers on h^rseback; och! to be
sure and it is very pretty fetching a walk in these Whip away, etc.
But just as we got within sight of the town,
As the devil would have it, the coach it broke down;
At this sad mishap all my guests looked queen,
But none more than Tender, a pretty little dear.
(...) ye, ye soundrel, says he, why didn't you look to your co^ before you
came out? So I did, says I, you little pinsticking son of a --! You lie, damme,
says he. Don't give me the lie, says I, or I shall be apt to give you a taste
of my Whip away, etc.
MERRY AND WISE.
TO be merry, and wise, is a maxim of old,
But a maxim so good cannot too often be told,
Then attend to my song, nor my counsel despise,
For I mean to be merry -- but merry and wise.
Ye Bucks, who when toping, such rapture express,
Yet give the next day dismal proofs of excess,
Avoid all extremes, and mark what I advise,
It Is to drink, and be merry -- but merry and wise.
In women, all lovely, is centr'd each Bliss,
But let Prudence direct you, 'twill sweeten each kiss;
Let not beauty, or folly, your senses disguise,
You may kiss and be merry -- but merry and wise.
Then ye topers, and rakes, who would lead honest lives,
Avoid all excesses, and choose modest wives,
While Prudence presides, it is thus I advise
Love, drink, and be merry -- but merry and wise.
MARY's DREAM.
THE moon had climbed the highest hill
Which rises over the source of Dee,
And from the Eastern summit shed
Her silver light on tower and tree,
When Mary laid her down to sleep,
Her thoughts on Sandy far at sea,
Then soft and low a voice was heard
^ay -- Mary weep no more for me.
She from her pillow gently raised
Her head to ask who there might be,
And saw young Sandy shivering stand,
With pallid cheek and hollow eye;
"O Mary dear, cold is my clay,
It lies beneath a stormy sea,
Far, far from thee I sleep in death,
So Mary weep no more for me."
"Three stormy nights and stormy days
We tossed upon the raging main,
And long we strove our bark to save,
But all our striving was in vain:"
Even then when horror chilled my blood,
My heart was filled with love for thee;
The storm is past, and I Am at rest,
So Mary weep no more for me.
"O maiden dear, thyself prepare,
We soon shall meet upon that shore
Where love is free from doubt or care,
And thou and I shall part no more;"
Loud crow'd the cock, the shadow fled,
No more of Sandy could she see,
But soft the passing spirit said --
Sweet Mary weep no more for me.
THE FARTHING RUSH-LIGHT.
SIR Solomon Simons when he did wed,
Blushed black as a crow, his fair lady blushed white,
The clock struck twelve, they were both tucked in bed,
In the chimney a rush-light,
A little farthing rush-light,
Fall lal lal lal la,
A little farthing rush-light.
Sir Solomon gave his lady a nudge,
Cries he, Lady Simons, there is vastly too much light,
Then Sir Solomon, says she, to get up you cannot grudge,
And blow out the rush-light,
The little farthing rush-light,
The little farthing rush-light.
Sir Solomon then out of bed pops his toes,
And vastly he swore, and very much did curse light,
And then to the chimney Sir Solomon he goes,
And he puffed at the rush-light,
The little farthing rush-light,
The little farthing rush-light.
Lady Simons got out in her nightcap so neat,
And over the carpet my Lady did brush light,
And there Sir Solomon found in a heat,
Puffing at the rush-light:
Then she puffed at the rush-light;
But neither of them both
Could blow out the rush-light.
Sir Solomon and Lady, their breath quite gone,
Rang the bell in a rage, determined to crush light,
Half asleep, in his shirt, then up came John,
And he puffed at the rush-light,
This little farthing rush-light;
But neither of the three
Could blow out the rush-light.
Cook, coachman and maids, very near all in buff,
Came, and swore in their lives they never met with such light,
And each of the family by turns had a puff
At the little farthing rush-light,
The cursed farthing rush-light,
But none of the family
Could blow out the rush-light.
The watchman at last went by, crying one.
Here ^atchman's, come up, than you we might on worse light,
Then up came ^e watchman, the business was done,
For he ^rn'd down the rush-light,
The little farthing rush-light --
Past one o'clock!
So he put out the rush-light.
BETSY BLOSSOM.
NO more I Will court the town-bred fair,
Who shines in artificial beauty;
Her native charms without compare,
Claim all my love, respect and duty.
Oh! my bonny, bonny Bet, sweet Blossom,
Was I a king so proud to wear thee,
From off the verdant couch I Would bear thee,
To grace thy faithful lover's bosom.
Yet (...) me where those beauties lie,
I cannot say in smile or dimple;
In blooming check or radiant eye,
It Is happy nature wild and simple.
Oh! my bonny Bet, etc.
Let dainty beaux for ladies pine,
And sigh in numbers trite and common;
Ye gods! one darling wish be mine,
And all I ask is lovely woman.
Oh! my bonny Bet, etc.
Come, dearest girl, the rosy bowl,
Like thy bright eye, with pleasure dancing;
My heaven art ther^, (...) take my ^l,
With ^ure every ^se en^ncing.
Oh! my bonny Be^, etc.
LULLABY.
PEACEFUL slumbering on the ocean,
Sermon ^ear no danger nigh,
The winds and waves in gentle motion,
Sooth them with their lullaby.
Lullaby, lullaby.
Is the wind tempestuous blowing?
Still no danger they des^ry,
The guileless heart its been bestowing,
Sooths them with its lullaby.
Lullaby, lullaby.
THE SLEEPING MARINERS. (...) tune of Lullaby.
PEACEFUL snoozing on the ocean,
Seamen fear no dangers nigh,
Though the world is in commotion,
We are rocked to Lullaby!
Lullaby! Lullaby! etc.
In Torbay secure at anchor,
Top-masts struck, and calm the sky;
Safe from storm, or gallic rancour,
We enjoy our Lullaby!
Lullaby! Lullaby! etc.
Give Monsieurs who are so curious,
Double watches -- wet or dry:
But give us, who are not furious,
Double spells of Lullaby!
Lullaby! Lullaby! etc.
Let right come with billows roaring,
'Tw^ two Hamm^ sung we ^e;
Full allowance take of snoting,
To the tune of Lullaby!
Lullaby! Lullaby! etc.
HEAVING OF THE LEAD.
FOR England, when with favoring gale,
Our gallant ship up channel steered,
And scudding under easy sail,
The high blue western land appeared;
To heave the lead the seaman sprung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
By the deep nine!
And bearing up to gain the port;
Some well-known object kept in view;
An abbey-tow'r, an harbour-fort,
Or beacon, to the vessel true.
While often the lead the seaman flung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
By the mark seven!
And, as the much loved shore we are near --
With transport we behold the roof,
Where dwelt a friend, or partner dear,
Of faith and love a matchless proof!
The lead once more the seaman flung,
And to the watchful pilot sung,
Quarter-less five!
Now, to her birth the ship draws nigh:
We take in sail, she feels the tide:
Stand clear the cable! -- is the cry:
The anchor's gone -- we safely ride.
The watch is set, and through the night
We hear the seaman with delight.
Proclaim all is well!
GAD-A-MERCY! DEVIL'S IN ME.
GAD-a-mercy! devil's in me,
All the damsels wish to win me;
Like a may pole round me cluster,
Hanging garlands -- suss and fluster!
Lilting, cap'ring, grinning, smirking,
Pouting, bobbing, winking, jerking,
Kates and Betties,
Polls and Letties,
All were doting gentle creatures,
On these features --
To their apr^ (...)
Gad-a-mercy! devil's m^
All the damsels wish to win me,
Pretty damsels, ugly damsels;
Black-hair'd damsels, plump'd faced damsels;
Six feet damsels, three feet damsels;
Pale faced damsels, red faced damsels;
Small legged damsels, thick legged damsels:
Pretty, ugly, black-hair'd, red-hair'd, six feet, three feet,
Pale faced, plump faced, small legged, thick legged, dainty, dowdy.
All run after me, Sir, me;
For when pretty fellows we,
Pretty maids are frank and free,
For their stays taking measure
Of the ladies, oh! the pleasure!
Oh! such tempting looks they gi' me!
Wishing of my heart to win me;
Pat and cry, you devil Jemmy?
Pretty ladies, ugly ladies, etc.
BETTY BLACKBERRY.
TO hear a sweet goldfinch's sonnet,
This morning I put on my bonnet,
But scarce in the meadow, pies on it!
When the captain appears in my view;
I felt an odd sort of sensation,
My heart beat in strong palpitation,
I blushed like a pink or carnation,
When says he, my dear, How do you do?
The dickins, says I, here has pop'd him,
I thought to slip by, but I stopped him,
So my very best curtsey I dropped him;
With an air then he took off his hat;
He seemed with my person enchanted,
He squeezed my hand, how my heart panted!
He asked for a kiss, and I granted,
And, pray now, what harm was in that?
Says I, Sir, for what do you take me?
He swore a fine lady he would make me,
No, dem' him! he would never forsake me,
And then on his knee stooped down;
His handkerchief, la! smelt so sweetly,
His white teeth he showed so completely,
He managed the matter so neatly,
I never will be kissed by a clown.
THE MIDNIGHT HARK-AWAY.
THE card invites, in crowds we fly
To join the jovial rout, full cry;
What joy from cares and plagues all day,
To hie to the Midnight Hark-away!
Nor want, nor pain, nor grief, nor care,
Nor dronish husbands enter there;
The brisk, the bold, the young, the gay,
All hie to the Midnight Hark-away.
Uncounted strikes the morning clock,
And drowsy watchmen idly knock;
'Till daylight peeps, we sport and play,
And roar to the Jolly Hark-away.
When tired with sport to bed we creep,
And kill the tedious day with sleep;
Tomorrow's welcome call obey,
And again to the Midnight Hark-away.
HE STOLE MY HEART AWAY.
WHEN rural lads and lasses gay,
Proclaimed the birth of rosy May,
When round the may pole on the green,
The rustic dancers all are seen;
'Twas there young Jockey met my view,
His like before I never knew,
He pip'd so sweet, and danced so gay,
Alas! he danced my heart away.
At eve, when cakes and ale went round,
He placed him next me on the ground;
With harmless mirth and pleasing jest,
He shone more bright than all the rest:
He talked of love, and pressed my hand,
Ah! who could such a youth withstand?
Well pleased I heard what he could say,
His charms have stole my heart away.
He often heaved a tender sigh,
While rapture sparkled in his eye;
So winning was his grace and air,
He might the coldest heart ensnare;
But when he asked me for his bride,
I promised soon, and soon complied.
What nymph on earth could say him nay?
Alas! he stole my heart away.
THE SUMMUM BONUM.
GIVE me wine, rosy wine, that foe to despair,
Whose magical power can banish all care,
Of friendship the parent, composer of strife,
The soother of sorrow, and blessing of life:
The schools about happiness warmly dispute,
And weary the sense in the phantom pursuit,
In spite of their maxims, I dare to define
The grand Summum Bonum's a bumper of wine.
To the coward a warmth it never fails to impart,
And opens the lock of the miserly heart.
While thus we carouse it, the wheels of the soul,
Over life's rugged highway agreeably roll,
Each thinks of his charmer, who never can cloy,
And fancy rides post to the regions of joy.
In spite of dull maxims, I dare to define
The grand Summum Bonum's a bumper of wine.
It Is the balsa^ specific that heals every sore,
The oftener we taste it we love it the more;
Then he who true happiness seeks to attain
With spirit, the full-flowing bumper must drain;
And he who the court of fair Venus would know,
Undaunted, through Bacchus's vineyard must go,
In spite of dull maxims, I dare to define
The grand Summum Bonum's a bumper of wine.
MIND HUSSY WHAT YOU DO.
WHEN I was of a tender age
And in my youthful prime,
My mother of^ would in a rage,
Cry, girl take care in time;
For you are now so forward grown,
The men will you pursue,
And all the day this was her tone,
Mind, Hussy, what you do!
Regardless of her fond advice,
I hastened over the plain,
Where I was courted in a trice
By each young sylvan swain;
Yet by the bye, I must declare,
I virtue had in view,
Although my mother cried beware,
Mind, Hussy, what you do!
To Damon, gayest of the green,
I gave my youthful hand,
His blooming face, and comely mein,
I could not well withstand;
But strait to church we tript away,
With hearts both firm and true,
Ah! then my mother ceased to say --
Mind, Hussy, what you do!
Ye lasses all attend to me,
And hence this lesson learn,
When to your mind a man you see,
Never look morose or stern;
But take him with a free good will,
Should he have love for you;
Although your mother's crying still,
Mind Hussy, what you do!
I WOULD THINK ON THEE MY LOVE.
IN storms, when clouds obscure the sky,
And thunders roll, and lightenings fly --
In midst of all these dire alarms,
I think, my Sally, on thy charms.
The troubled main,
The wind and rain,
My ardent passion prove;
Lashed to the helm,
Should seas overwhelm,
I Would think on thee my love.
When rocks appear on every side,
And art is vain the ship to guide:
In varied shapes, when death appears,
The thought of thee my bosom chears.
The troubled main, etc.
But should the gracious powers be kind --
Dispel the gloom, and still the wind,
And waft me to thy arms once more,
Safe to my long-lost native shore.
No more the main,
I Would tempt again,
But tender joys improve;
I then with thee
Should happy be,
And think on naught but love.
CONTENTED I AM.
CONTENTED I am, and contented I Will be,
For what can this world more afford,
Than a girl that will sociably sit on my knee,
And a cellar with liquor well stored,
My brave boys.
My vault-door is open, descend every guest,
Broach that cask, aye, that wine we will try,
It Is as sweet as the lips of your love to the taste,
And as bright as her cheek to the eye.
In a piece of slit hoop I my candle have stuck,
'Twill light us each bottle to hand;
And the foot of my glass for the purpose I Have broke,
For I hate that a bumper should stand.
We are dry where we sit, though the oozy drops seem
The moist walls with wet pearls to emboss,
From the arch, moldy cobwebs in Gothic taste stream,
Like stucco-work cut out of moss.
Astride on a butt, as a butt should be strod,
I sit my companions among,
Like grape-blessing Bacchus, the good fellow's god,
And a sentiment give or a song.
I charge spoil in hand, and my empire maintain,
No ancient more patriot-like bled;
Each drop in defense of delight I will drain,
And myself for my bucks I Will drink dead.
Sound that pipe, it is in tune, and those bins are well filled,
View that heap of Old Hock in the rear;
Yon bottles of Burgundy, see how they are pil'd.
Like artillery, tier over tier.
My cellar's my camp, and my soldiers my stasks,
All gloriously ranged in review,
When I cast my eyes round, I consider my casks,
As kingdom's I Have yet to subdue.
Like Macedon's madman, my drink I Will enjoy,
In defiance of grav^ and go^t;
Who cried when he had (...) ^re worlds to subdue --
I Will weep when my liquor is out.
When the lamp is brimful, see the flame brightly shines,
But when wanting moisture, decays;
Replenish the lamp of my life with rich wines,
Or else there is an end of my blaze.
It Is my will when I die, not a tear should be shed,
No hic jacet be cut on my stone,
But pour on my coffin a bottle of red,
And say a choice fellow is gone.
My brave boys.
Let Us BE JOVIAL.
Let Us be jovial, fill our glasses,
Madness it is for us to think
How the world is ruled by asses,
And the wise are swayed by chink.
Then never let vain care oppress us,
Riches are to them a snare;
We Are every one as rich as Croesus,
While our bottle drowns our care.
Wine will make us red as roses,
And our sorrows quite forget;
Come let us suddle all our noses,
Drink ourselves quite out of debt.
When grim death comes looking for us,
We are toping off our bowls,
Bacchus, joining in the chorus,
Death, begone, here is none but souls.
God-like Bacchus thus commanding,
Trembling death away shall fly,
Ever after understanding,
Drinking souls can never die.
GOOD QUEEN BESS.
TO my Muse give attention, and deem it not a mystery,
If we jumble together, music, poetry, and history,
The times to display in the days of good Queen Bess, Sir,
Whose name and whose memory posterity may bless, Sir,
Oh the golden days of good Queen Bess!
Merry be the memory of good Queen Bess.
Then we laughed at the bugbears of Dons and Armadas,
With their gun powder puffs and their blustering bravadoes,
For how we knew to manage both the musket and the bow, Sir,
And could bring down a Spaniard just as easy as a crow, Sir,
O the golden days, etc.
Then our streets were unpav'd, and our houses were thatched, Sir,
Our windows were latticed, our doors only latch'd Sir,
Yet so few were the folks that would plunder or rob, Sir,
That the hangman was starving for want of a job, Sir,
O the golden days, etc.
Then our ladies, with large ruffs tied round about their necks fast,
Would gobble up a pound of beef-steaks for their breakfast,
While a close quill'd-up cap their noddles just did fit, Sir,
And they trussed up as tight as a rabbit for the spit, Sir,
O the golden days, etc.
Then jerkins and doublets, and yellow worsted hose, Sir,
With a huge pair of whiskers was the dress of our beaux, Sir;
Strong beer they preferred too to claret or to hock, Sir,
And no poultry they prized like the wing of an ox, Sir,
O the golden days, etc.
Good neighborhood then was as plenty too as beef, Sir,
And the poor from the rich never wanted relief, Sir;
While merry went the mill-clack, the shuttle and the plough, Sir,
And honest men could live by the sweat of their brow, Sir,
O the golden days, etc.
Then the folks every Sunday went twice at least to church, Sir,
And they never left the parson or the sermon in the lurch, Sir,
For they judged that the Sabbath was for people to be good in,
And they thought it Sabbath-breaking if they dined without a pudding,
O the golden days, etc.
Then our great men were good, and our good men were great, Sir,
And the props of the nation were the pillars of the state, Sir;
For the sovereign, and the subject one interest supported,
And our powerful alliance by all powers then was courted.
O the golden days, etc.
Thus renowned they lived all the days of their lives Sir,
Bright examples of glory to us that survive Sir,
May we their descendants, pursue the same ways Sir,
That our PRESIDENT like Bess, may have his golden days Sir;
And may a longer reign of glory and success
Make his name eclipse the same of old Queen Bess.
THE ALL OF LIFE IS LOVE.
WHEN first this humble roof I knew,
With various cares I strove;
My grain was scarce, my sheep were few,
My (...) of life was love.
B^ (...) our board was dressed,
T^ (...) ^r drink ^st^w'd:
But, w^ (...) the brim had pressed,
The c^p (...) ^r flowed.
C^tent and (...) ^'d,
No (...) ^gh:
In (...) ^'d)
W^ (...) ^y.
No value has a splendid lot,
But as the means to prove:
That from the castle to the cot,
The all of life is love.
WHEN MY MONEY WAS GONE.
WHEN my money was gone that I gained in the wars,
And the world it did frown at my fate,
What mattered my zeal, or my honored scars,
When indifference stood at each gate.
The face that would smile when my purse was well lined,
Showed a different aspect to me,
And when I could naught but ingratitude find,
I hied me again to the sea.
I thought 'twas unjust to repine at my lot,
Or bear with cold looks on the shore,
So I packed up the trifling remnants I Would got,
And a trifle, alas! was my store.
A handkerchief held all the treasure I had,
Which over my shoulder I threw,
Away then I trudged with a heart rather sad,
To join with some jolly ship's crew.
The sea was less troubled by far than my mind,
And when the wide main I surveyed,
I could not help thinking the world was unkind.
And fortune a slippery jade.
I swear if once more I can take her in tow,
I Will let the angrateful ones see,
That the turbulent winds and the billows could s^w,
More kindness than they did to me*
THE MARKET LASS.
THOUGH my did I must own i^ but (...),
His co^ (...) co^ ^pply,
The vine tendril evils round his door,
And streamlets meandering nigh;
Health reigns and rewards daily toil,
I rise at the lark's early song,
And meeting my swain at the style,
To market we trip it along.
Sweet scented as blossoms in May,
Butter-prints my neat basket overspread,
Milk-white chickens, cream-cheese, I display,
And I Will vouch every egg is new-laid:
To partake in my health-earning toil,
My swain holds it never can be wrong,
Bears the weight of my load with a smile,
As to market we trip it along.
Arrived, soon I purchasers view,
Sell my stock very often in a trice,
Reap the produce to industry due,
But never charge above market-price.
Returning, the way we beguile
With a tale, or a joke, or a song,
Snatch a warm parting kiss at the style,
To our cot then I trip it along.
DICKEY GOSSIP.
WHEN I was a younker, I first was apprentic'd
Unto a gay barber, so dapper and airy;
I next was a carpenter, then turned a dentist,
Then tailor, good Lord! then an apothecary;
But for this trade or that,
They all come as pat
As they can;
For shaving and tooth-drawing,
Bleeding, cabbaging, and sawing,
Dickey Gossip is the man.
Though tailor and dentist but aukwardly tether,
In both the vocations I still have my savings;
And two of my trades couple rarely together,
For barber and carpenter both deal in shavings.
So for this trade or that,
They all come as pat, etc.
But blunders will happen in callings so various,
I fancy they happen to some who are prouder:
I once gave a patient whose health was precarious,
A terrible dose of my best shaving powder.
But no matter for that,
My trades come as pat, etc.
SINCE, THEN I AM DOOMED.
SINCE, then I Am doomed this sad reverse to prove,
To quit each object of my infant care;
Torn from an honored parent's tender I^ve,
And driven the keenest, keenest storms of fate to bear:
Ah! but forgive me, pitied let me part,
Your frowns too sure, would break my sinking heart.
Wherever I go, whatever my lowly state,
Yet grateful memory still shall linger here!
And when, perhaps, you're musing over my fate,
You still may greet me with a tender (...).
Ah! then forgive me, pitied let me part,
Your frowns too sure, would break my sinking heart.
I NEVER WILL BE MARRIED.
WHEN I had scar^ly told sixteen,
My flattering t^ ^ale g^ss,
Told me the^ ^n could be seen
A blith^r^ ^er lass:
^ll twenty lovers round me bowed,
But high my head I carried,
And with a scornful air I vowed
I never would be married.
Young Harry warmly urged his suit,
And talked of wealth in store;
While Jemmy thought to strike me mute,
And told his conquests over:
Each youth a different art essayed,
And still their arts I parried;
Believe me, Sirs, I laughing said,
I never will be married.
Then five revolving summers past,
While I the tyrant played;
Ah! then I feared 'twould be, at last,
My fate to die a maid:
Of all the lovers in my train,
There was but one that tarried,
I thought 'twas time to change my strain,
And we this morn were married.
SWEET LILIES OF THE VALLEY.
OE'R barren hills and flowery dales,
Over seas and distant shores,
With merry song and jocund tales,
I Have passed some pleasing hours:
Though wandering thus I never could find
A girl like blithsome Sally;
Who picks, and cu^s, and cries aloud,
Sweet Lilies of the Valley.
From whistling over the harrow'd turs,
From nesting of each tree,
I chose a soldier's life to lead,
So social, gay, and free:
Yet, though the lasses love as well,
And often try to rally,
None pleases me like her, who cries,
Sweet Lilies of the Valley.
I Am now returned, of late discharged,
To use my native toil;
From fighting in my country's cause,
To plough my country's soil:
I care not which, with either pleased,
So I possess my Sally,
That little merry nymph, who cries,
Sweet Lilies of the Valley.
SWEET NAN OF HAMPTON GREEN.
WITH care I Have searched the village round,
And many a hamlet tried:
At last a fair I happily found,
Devoid of art and pride.
In neat built cot,
It is her lot
A rustic life to lead,
With tender care,
Her lambkins rear,
And watch her ewes at feed.
Where Thames in silver current flows,
To beautify the scene;
There blooms this fair, a blushing rose.
Sweet Nan of Hampton-Green.
Her eyes bespeak a soul for love,
Her manner formed to please,
In mildness equal to the dove,
With innocence and ease.
To paint her face,
Her form and grace,
All words are weak and vain;
Enough to tell,
She does excel
The daughter of the main.
Where Thames, etc.
When first this charmer I surveyed,
With doubt my heart was fraught,
Fancy, the beauteous maid portrayed,
A goddess to my thought:
In amor^us bliss I stole a kiss,
Which banished all alarms:
Then joyful found my wishes crowned,
A mortal in my arms.
Where Thames, etc.
HOW HAPPILY MY LIFE I LED.
HOW happily my life I led,
Without a day of sorrow!
To plough and sow --
To reap and mow --
No care beyond the morrow.
In heat or cold, in wet or dry,
I never grumbl'd, no, not I:
My wife, it is true,
Loves words a few,
What then? -- I let her prate;
For sometimes smooth and sometimes rough,
I found myself still rich enough
In the joys of an humble state.
But when with law I crazed my head,
I lost both peace and pleasure;
Long says to hear --
To search -- and swear --
And plague beyond all measure.
One grievance brought another on,
My debts increase, my stock is gone:
My wife she says,
Our means 'twill raise;
What then? -- it is idle prate;
For sometimes smooth and sometimes rough,
I found myself still rich enough
In the joys of an humble state.
THE MAID OF THE MILL.
WILLIAM. I HAVE kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maids,
And changed 'em as often do you see;
But of all the fair maidens that dance on the green,
The maid of the mill for me.

PHOEBE. There Is fifty young men have told me fine tales,
And called me the fairest she;
But of all the gay wrestlers that sport on the green,
Young Harry's the lad for me.

WILLIAM. Her eyes are as black as the sloe in the hedge,
Her face like the blossoms in May;
Her teeth are as white as the new-shorn flock,
Her breath like the new-made hay.

PHOEBE. He Is tall, and he is strait as the poplar tree,
His cheeks are as fresh as the rose;
He looks like a 'squire of high degree
When dressed in his Sunday clothes.

FROM NIGHT TILL MORN.
FROM night till morn I take my glass,
In hopes to forget my Chloe,
But though I take the pleasing draught,
She Is never the less before me.
Ah! no, no, no, wine cannot cure,
The pain I endure for my Chloe.
To wine I flew to ease the pain,
Her beauteous charms created;
But wine more firmly bound the chain,
And love would not be cheated;
Ah! no, no, no, wine cannot cure
The pain I endure for my Chloe.
WE CONQUER, DEAR GIRLS.
COME, sailors, be filling the can,
The wind is beginning to blow:
We Have time to drink round to a man,
And then to weigh anchor must go.
Wh^t thousands repair to the strand,
To give us a cheering adieu:
It Is plain they believe on the land,
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
When on the main-top-sail yard
The sailor is swung to and fro,
Let the tempest blow ever so hard,
He whistles defiance to woe.
The gale can but last for a while,
Is always the boast of the crew;
And then they reflect with a smile,
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
Though battle tremendous appears,
When blood stains the face of the main;
Though thunder resounds in his ears,
The sailor's a stranger to pain;
The thought with what rapture and pride
Each girl will her hero review,
It Is this makes him danger deride,
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
A PRETTY GEM'MAN ONCE I SAW.
A PRETTY gem'man once I saw,
The neighbors said he studied law.
When full of grief,
In's h^d a brief,
A poor man came,
Good sir, he cried,
Plead on my side,
The lawyer careless answered -- No!
A rich gown'd p^son would you ask
To d^a charita^ ^sk
For Tom and ^ue,
A come true,
^ho'd fain be tied,
(...) ^iate,
And (...) of state,
The parson surly answers -- No!
Shou^ ^ing, honest, low-fed Dick,
In spite of ^ing, very sick
To doctor send,
By some kind friend,
To beg advice;
He strait will see
No hope of fee,
And ten to one he answers -- No!
A senator you asked to vote,
The dear red-book he knows by rote,
His country's good
He understood
You had in view,
But should he find
No place designed,
His bow polite you know, means -- No!
To a young beauty would you kneel,
And talk of all the pangs you feel?
With eyes askance
She Will steal a glance,
And blushing sigh,
But should you press
Her power to bless,
She Will whisper forth a trembling -- No!
THE PEDLAR.
I AM a jolly gay pedlar,
Come here to sell my ware;
Yet though in all things I Am a meddler,
I meddle most with the fair.
When I show my ribbons to Misses,
Though copper and silver I gain;
Yet better I Am pleased with the blisses,
That I cannot now explain.
I am a jolly gay pedlar, etc.
Fools say that this life is but sorrow,
And seem disinclin'd to be gay;
But why should we think of tomorrow,
When we may be happy today.
I rove round the world for my pleasure,
Resolved to take nothing amiss;
And think my existence a treasure,
When blessed with the cup and the kiss.
They surely are thick-headed asses,
Who know that youth's gone in a crack,
Yet will not enjoy, as it passes,
The season that never comes back.
Let time jog on slower, or quicker,
Or whether we are silly, or wise;
We shall not be the worse for good liquor,
Or the smiles of a girl with black eyes.
THE PLAGUE OF ONE'S LIFE.
Tune -- Who has the best Wise, etc.
THE plague of one's life
Is surely a wise;
Who still is fomenting of evil;
From morning to night,
All is wrong, nothing right:
A scold is sure worse than the devil.
When I first gave a kiss,
I thought that each bliss
Was centr'd in sweet pretty Mary;
But now I am wed,
O! I wish I was dead,
Her temper I find so contrary.
Let me say what I will,
Her tongue will not lie still,
Like the (...), of a mill it is going;
If I stop up my ears;
In a rage she appears,
And more hot then her passion is glowing.
If I go or I stay,
At home or away,
Each serves her alike for a riot;
Though a foe to all strife
Such a devil's my wife,
She never will let me be quiet.
THE LITTLE COWSLIP GIRL.
BORN under a cloud of misfortunes and sorrow,
The child of distress from the hour of my birth
No blessing to comfort the thoughts of tomorrow,
A prospect so dreary, no joy upon earth.
Then what care I? this world's a bubble,
Full of naught but care and trouble:
I check the tear, suppress the sigh,
And cheerful often am heard to cry,
Come buy my sweet cowslips, who will buy my sweet cowslips?
Who Will buy of the poor little cowslip girl?
The embrace of a parent never known to this breast,
Was supplied by a hand who charity cursed,
Who'd have robbed me of honor, of peace, and of rest,
To crush to the earth what he raised from the dust.
Yet what care I? a few tears flow:
I bless the hand that saved the blew;
Then check the tear, suppress the sigh,
And cheerful often am heard to cry,
Come buy my sweet cowslips, come buy my sweet cowslip,
Come buy of the poor little cowslip girl.
This life is a path I have traveled with fame:
(...) world, yet I laugh at its ^pi^e.
Th^h ^ess and poor, I Have preserved a good name,
And look for reward in the regions of light.
So what (...) it is (...) ^ve,
And ^nd^g (...) g^:
The tear then gone, no more I sigh,
Nor ever again you will hear me cry,
Come buy my sweet cowslips, come buy my sweet cowslips,
Come buy of the poor little cowslip girl.
SONG, In Inkle and Yarico.
INKLE. O SAY, simple maid, have you formed any notion,
Of all the rude dangers in crossing the ocean?
When winds whistle shrilly, ah will not they remind you,
To sigh with regret for the grot left behind you?

YARICO. Ah! no, I could follow and sail the world over,
Nor think of my grot when I look at my lover!
The winds which blow round us your arms for my pillow,
Will lull us to sleep whilst we are rocked by each billow.

INKLE. Then say lovely lass what if happily espying,
A rich gallant vessel with gay colors flying?

YARICO. I Will journey with thee, love, to where the land narrows,
And fling all my cares at my back with my arrows.

BOTH. O say then my true love we never will sunder,
Nor shrink from the tempest nor dread the big thunder,
Whilst constant, we'll laugh at all changes of weather,
And journey all over the world both together.

THE HEARTY FELLOW.
COME, let us be jovial and hearty,
As hearty as hearty can be,
No trouble or care shall perplex us;
From sorrow we always are free.
Give me the gay fellow in life,
Who never of dull thoughts had one;
Who'd rather kiss any man's wife,
By one half than he would kiss his own.
Then come my brave boys fill your glasses,
And merrily pass away time;
For believe me there is nothing surpasses
The joys of women and wine.
Since life is at best but a span,
It Is as well to be merry as not,
We'll happily live while we can,
For sorrow brings nothing but thought;
We'll rattle away with the lasses,
And crack a gay flask with our friends;
So thus our time merrily passes,
In taking the world, as God sends.
Then come my brave boys, etc.
Damn money it is nothing but trash,
I Will be happy though never so poor;
When I have it I Will cut a great dash;
When it is gone I Will never think of it more;
Then let me be wealthy or not,
My spirits are always the same:
Quite free of every dull thought;
And hearty DICK DAWSON's my name.
Then come my brave boys, etc.
THE TRUE SON OF NEPTUNE.
THE true son of Neptune's a friend to the bowl,
And exults in the heart chearing portion:
Averse to a calm, it is the joy of his soul,
To keep all its billows in motion.
Th^' you reel to and fro,
Y^'re safe we all know,
If a plenty of sea room you're tossed in:
So charge to the brim,
That your spirits may swim,
(...) that is shallow you're lost in.
THE FOX.
THE fox is unkennel'd -- the hounds are in cry,
And dash through the commons below;
The hunters all eager, sly reynard must d^
A double, in Pit, Tally-ho!
Again, with fresh vigor, he leads them the chase,
To baffle he cunningly tries,
But ah! how he faulters, he limps in his pace;
Redoubles, enfeebled, he dies.
DUET -- LA GLOIRE AND MADELON.
MADELON. COULD you to battle march away,
And leave me here complaining?
I Am sure 'twould break my heart to stay,
When you were gone campaigning:
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Could never quit her rover!
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Would go with you all the world over!

LA GLOIRE. And can you to battle go,
To woman's fear a stranger?

MADELON. No fear my breast will ever know,
But when my love's in danger.
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Fears only for her rover!
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Will go with you all the world over!

BOTH. Then let the world jog as it will,
Let hollow friends forsake us;
We both shall be as happy still,
As war and love can make us.
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon,
Shall never quit her rover!
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Shall go with you-[me] all the world over!

MADELON.
I TREMBLE to think that my soldier's so bold,
To see with what danger he gets all his gold;
But danger all over, 'twill keep out the cold,
And we shall be warm when we are married.
For riches, it is true that I covet them not,
Unless it is to better my dear soldier's lot;
And he shall be master of all I have got,
The very first moment we are married.
My heart, how it beats! but to look to the day,
In church, when my father shall give me away;
But that I shall laugh at, I Have heard many say,
A day or two after we are married!
PETER PANICK.
WHEN one's drunk, not a girl but looks pretty,
The country's as gay as the city,
And all that one says is so witty,
A blessing on brandy and beer!
Bring the cup,
Fill it up,
Take a sup,
And let not a slincher come near.
O give me but plenty of liquor,
I Would laugh at the Squire or Vicar,
And if I Would a wife, why I Would kick her,
If ever she pretended to sneer.
Bring the cup, etc.
Though I know its a heavy disaster,
Yet I mind not the rage of my master,
He bullies, and I drink the faster.
A blessing on brandy and beer!
Bring the cup, etc.
When a cherry-cheek'd maid I Have my eye on,
I do many thing she cries fie on;
Ecod, I Am as bold as a lion.
A blessing on brandy and beer!
Bring the cup, etc.
THE MERRY MAN.
THE merry man,
Who loves his can,
Laughs and jokes,
Chats and smoaks,
Nor dreams of noise and state,
Enjoys the hour,
That Is in his power,
Tells a tale,
Quaffs his ale,
Nor fears the frowns of fate.
CHORUS.
Here with liberty blessed, brightest gem of our isle,
United with plenty and health:
At the restless ambition of grandeur we smile,
Content without title or wealth.
When the dawn first appears and the Lark tunes her lay,
We rise to sweet scenes of delight;
Mirth pleasantly softens the toils of the day,
And with pastime we welcome the night.
MY TEMPLES WITH CLUSTERS.
MY temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine,
And barter all joys for a goblet of wine,
In search of a Venus no longer I Will run,
But stop and forget her at Bacchus's tun.
Yet why thus resolve to relinquish the fair?
It Is a folly with spirits like mine to despair;
For what mighty charms can be found in a glass,
If not filled to the health of some favorite lass?
It Is woman whose charms every rapture impart,
And lends a new spring to the pulse of the heart;
The miser himself, so supreme is her sway,
Grows a convert to love, and resigns her the key.
At the sound of her voice sorrow lifts up her head,
And poverty listens, well pleased, from her shed;
While age, in an ecstacy, hob'ling along
Beats time, with his crutch, to the t^ of her song.
Then bring me a goblet from Bacchus's hoard,
The largest and deepest that stands on his board;
I Will fill up a brimmer, and drink to the fair;
It Is the thirst of a lover -- and pledge me who dare.
HAD NEPTUNE.
HAD Neptune, when first he took charge of the sea,
Been as wise, or at least been as merry as we,
He Would have thought better on it, and instead of the brine,
Would have filled the vast ocean with generous wine.
What trafficking then would have been on the main,
For the sake of good liquor, as well as for gain,
No fear then of tempest, or danger of sinking,
The fishes never drown that are always a-drinking.
The hot thirsty sun then would drive with more haste,
Secure in the evening of such a repast;
And when he would got tipsey, would have taken his nap,
With double the pleasure in Thetis's lap.
By the force of his rays, and thus heated with wine,
Consider how gloriously Phoebus would shine,
What vast exhalations he would draw up on high,
To relieve the poor earth as it wanted supply.
How happy us mortals, when blessed with such rain,
To fill all our vessels, and fill 'em again,
Nay even the beggar that has never a dish,
Might jump in the river and drink like a fish.
What mirth and contentment, on every one's brow,
Hob as great as a prince, dancing after his plough
The birds in the air as they play on the wing,
Although they but sip would eternally sing.
The stars, who I think, don't to drinking incline,
Would frisk and rejoice at the fume of the wine;
And merrily twinkling would soon let us know,
That they were as happy as mortals below.
Had this been the case, what had we enjoyed,
Our spirits still rising our fancy never cloyed;
A pox then on Neptune, when 'twas in his power,
To slip like a fool, such a fortunate hour.
FRIEND AND PITCHER.
THE wealthy fool with gold in store,
Will still desire to grow richer,
Give me but these I ask no more,
My charming girl, my friend, and pitcher.
CHORUS.
My friend so rare, my girl so fair,
With such what mortal can be richer;
Give me but these, a fig for care,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
From morning sun I Would never grieve
To toil a hedger or a ditcher,
If that when I come home at eve,
I might enjoy my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
Though fortune ever shuns my door,
I know not what can thus bewitch her;
With all my heart can I be poor,
With my sweet girl, my friend, and pitcher
My friend so rare, etc.
PUSH ABOUT THE PITCHER.
Tune, Friend and Pitcher.
THE silver moon that shines so bright,
I swear, with reason, is my teacher;
And if my minute-glass runs right,
We Have time to drink another pitcher.
It Is not yet day, it is not yet day;
Then why should we forsake good liquor?
Until the sunbeams round us play
Let Us jocund push about the pitcher.
They say that I must work all day,
And sleep at night, to grow much richer;
But what is all the world can say,
Compared to mirth, my friend, and pitcher.
It Is not yet day, etc.
Though one may boast a handsome wife,
Yet strange vagaries may bewitch her;
Unvex'd I live a cheerful life,
And boldly call for the other pitcher.
It Is not yet day, etc.
I dearly love a hearty man
(No sneaking milk-sop Jemmy Twitcher,
Who loves a lass and loves a glass,
And boldly calls for the other pitcher.
It Is not yet day, etc.
THE YOUNG MAN's WISH.
^E from the bustle care and strife,
Of this short variegated life,
O let me spend my days
In rural sweetness, with a friend,
To whom my mind I may unbend,
Nor censure heed or praise.
Riches bring cares -- I ask not wealth,
Let me enjoy but peace and health,
I envy not the great:
It Is these alone can make me blessed;
The riches take of east and west,
I claim not these or state.
Though not extravagant nor near,
But through the well spent checkered year,
I Would have enough to live;
To drink a bottle with a friend,
Assist him in distress, never lend,
But rather freely give.
I too would wish, to sweeten life,
A gentle, kind, good natured wife,
Young, sensible and fair:
One who could love but me alone,
Prefer my cot to ever a throne,
And soothe my every care.
Thus happy with my wife and friend,
My life I cheerfully would spend,
With no vain thoughts oppressed;
If heaven has bliss for me in store,
O grant me this, I ask no more,
And I am ^ly blessed.
SONGS OF SHEPHERDS.
SONGS of shepherds in rustical roundelays,
Formed in fancy, and whistl'd on reeds,
Sung to solace young nymphs upon holidays,
Are too unworthy for wonderful deeds.
Sottish Silenus to Phoebus the genius
Was sent by dame Venus, a song to prepare,
In phrase nicely coined, and verse quite refined,
How the states divine hunted the hare.
Stars quite tired with pastimes Olympical,
Stars and planets that beautiful shone,
Could no longer endure that men only should
Revel in pleasures, and they but look on.
Round about horned Lucina they swarmed,
And quickly informed her how minded they were,
Each god and goddess to take human bodies,
As lords and ladies to follow the hare.
Chaste Diana applauded the motion,
And pale Proserpina sat down in her place,
To guide the welkin, and govern the ocean,
While Dian conducted her nephews in chase.
By her example, their father to trample,
The earth old and ample, they soon leave the air:
Neptune the water, and wine Liber pater,
And Mars the slaughter, to follow the hare.
Young god Cupid was mounted on Pegasus,
Borrowed of the muses with kisses and prayers;
Stern Alcides upon cloudy Caucasus
Mounted a c^taur that proudly him bears.
The postilion of the sky, light-heeled sir Mercury,
Made his swift courser sly fleet as the air;
While tuneful Apollo the pastime did follow,
To whoop and to hollow, boys, after the hare.
Drowned Narcissus, from his metamorphosis
Roused by Echo, new manhood did take.
Snoring Somnus upstarted from C^'ries:
Before for a thousand years he did not wake.
There was lame club-footed Mulciber booted;
And Pan, too, promoted on Corydon's mare.
Aeolus floured; with mirth Momus shouted;
While wise Pallas pouted, yet followed the hare.
Grave Hymen ushers in lady Astrea.
The humor took hold of Latona the cold.
Ceres the brown, too, with bright Cytherea,
And Thetis the wanton, Bellona the bold;
Shamefaced Aurora, with witty Pandora,
And Maria with Flora did company bear;
But Juno was stated too high to be mated,
Although, sir, she hated not hunting the hare.
Three brown bowls of Olympical nectar
The Troy-born boy now presents on his knee;
Jove to Phoebus now carouses in nectar,
And Phoebus to Hermes, and Hermes to me:
Wherewith infused, I piped and mused,
In language unused, their sports to declare,
'Till the vast house of Jove like the bright spheres did move,
Here Is a health, then, to all that love hunting the hare.
DO YOU HEAR BROTHER SPORTSMAN.
DO you hear brother sportsman, the sound of the horn,
And yet the sweet pleasure decline?
For shame, rouse your senses, and ever it be morn,
With me the sweet melody join,
Through the wood and the valley,
How the traitor we'll rally,
Nor quit him 'till panting he lies.
While hounds in full cry,
Through hedges shall fly,
And chase the swift hare till he dies.
Then saddle your steed, to the meadows and fields,
Both willing and joyous repair;
No pastime in life greater happiness yields,
Than chacing the fox or the hare.
Such comforts my friend,
On the sportsman attend,
No pleasure like hunting is found;
For when it is over,
As br^ as before,
Next morning we spurn up the ground.
SEE RUDDY AURORA.
SEE ruddy Aurora begins to appear,
And chaces from hence the dull night,
The huntsmen are up and the hounds 'gin to cheer.
Ye gods what a glorious sight,
Yoicks,
Jowler and Sweetlips, hark forward away!
Tantara we'll hail the sweet morn,
To join in such pastimes no longer delay,
But follow the sound of the horn.
The fox is unearth'd, and the chase is begun,
Pursuing is each hound and steed,
He doubles, and tries by his cunning to shun,
His fate, and now skims over the mead,
There closely pursued, by the river he aims
To escape to the other side lawn,
But, alas! he is o'erta'en, and the huntsman proclaims
His death, by the sound of the horn.
Then while all your coxcombs and sweet-scented beaus,
Who delight in the noise of the town,
Hunt fashion and folly and such foolish shows,
In pursuit of which often they are thrown;
Like them where such stupid dull pastime abounds,
So idly to waste time we scorn,
But pursue rosy health, whilst with horses and hounds
We follow the sound of the horn.
WISDOM'S FAVORITE.
BANISH sorrow, grief's a folly,
Thought unbend thy wrinkled brow;
Hence dull care, and melancholy,
Wine and mirth engage us now.
Bacchus opens all his treasure,
Comu^ brings us wit and song;
Join to follow, follow, follow pleasure,
Let us join the jovial throng.
Life is short it is but a season,
Time is ever on the wing;
Let Us the present moment seize on,
Who knows what the next may bring,
All our time by mirth we'll measure,
All dull thoughts we will despise;
Join to follow, etc.
To be merry is to be wise.
Why the plague should we perplex us,
Why should we not merry be,
Since on earth there is naught to vex us;
Drinking sets our hearts all free,
We'll have drinking without measure,
We'll have wine while life we have;
Join to follow, etc.
There Is no drinking in the grave,
When death comes we'll say, good fellow,
Take a glass, sit down by me;
Drink with us 'till you are mellow,
Then like us you will be free.
Sit down death we must have leisure,
Drinking cannot be hurried so;
Join to follow, etc.
When there is no more wine we'll go.
YE SPORTSMEN DRAW NEAR.
YE sportsmen draw near, and ye sportswomen too,
Who delight in the joys of the field,
Mankind, though they blame, are all eager as you,
And no one the contest will yield,
His lordship, his worship, his honor, his grace,
A hunting continually go;
All ranks and degrees are engaged in the chase,
With hark forward, huzza tally ho.
The lawyer will ^ise with the first of the morn
To hunt for (...) mortgage or deed;
The husband gets up at the sound of the horn
And rides to the common full speed;
The patriot is thrown in pursuit of the game;
The poet too often lays low,
Who, mounted on Pegasus, flies after fame,
With hark forward, huzza, tally ho.
While fearless over hills and over woodlands we sweep
Though prudes on our pastime may frown,
How often do they Decency's bounds overleap
And the fences of Virtue break down?
Thus public, or private, for pension, for place,
For amusement, for passion, for show,
All ranks and degrees are engaged in the chase,
With hark forward, huzza, tally ho.
ONE BOTTLE MORE.
ASSIST me, ye lads who have hearts void of guile,
To sing in the praises of old Ireland's isle,
Where true hospitality opens the door,
And friendship detains us for one bottle more.
Old England, your taunts on our country forbear;
With our bulls, and our brogues, we are true and sincere,
For if but one bottle remained in our store,
We have generous hearts, to give that bottle more.
At Candy's, in Church-street, I Will sing of a set
Of six Irish blades who together had met;
Four bottles a piece made us call for our score,
And nothing remained but one bottle more.
Our bill being paid, we were loath to depart,
For friendship had grappled each man by the heart;
Where the least touch you know makes an Irishman roar
And the whack from shilella, brought six bottles more.
Slow Phoebus had shone through our window so bright,
Quite happy to view his blessed children of light;
So we parted with hearts neither sorry nor sore,
Resolving next night to drink twelve bottles more.
Like our old Irish friends, let us brethren unite
And toss off a glass to the Children of Light;
But instead of twelve bottles we'll lessen the score,
And content us with drinking but one bottle more.
FROM THE EAST BREAKS THE MORN.
FROM the east breaks the morn,
See the sunbeams adorn
The wild heath and the mountains so high;
Shrilly opes the staunch hound,
The steed neighs to the sound;
And the floods and the valleys reply.
Our forefathers, so good,
Proved their greatness of blood
By encount'ring the pard and st^r;
Ruddy health bloomed each face,
Age and youth urged the chase,
And taught woodlands and forests to roar.
Hence of noble descent,
Hills and wilds we frequent,
Where the bosom of nature's revealed;
Though in life's busy day
Man of man make a prey,
Still let ours be the prey of the field.
With the chase in full sight,
Gods! how great the delight!
How our mutual sensations refine!
Where is care? where is fear?
Like the winds in the rear,
And the man's lost in something divine.
Now to horse, my brave boys:
Lo! each pants for the joys
That anon shall enliven the whole:
Then at eve we'll dismount,
Toils and pleasures recount,
And renew the chase over the bowl.
THE DUSKY NIGHT.
THE dusky night rides down the sky,
And ushers in the morn;
The hounds all join in jovial cry,
The huntsman winds his horn,
And a hunting we will go.
The wife around her husband throws
Her arms to make him stay:
My dear, it rains, it hails, it blows,
You cannot hunt today.
Yet a hunting, etc.
Sly Reynard now like lightning flies,
And sweeps across the vale;
But when the hounds too near he spies
He drops his bushy tail.
Then a hunting, etc.
Fond echo seems to like the sport,
And join the jovial cry;
The woods and hills the sound retort,
And music fills the sky,
When a hunting, etc.
At last his strength to faintness worn,
Poor Reynard ceases flight;
Then hungry homeward we return
To feast away the night.
And a drinking, etc.
Ye jovial hunters in the morn
Prepare then for the chase;
Rise at the sounding of the horn,
And health with sport embrace,
When a hunting, etc.
HARK AWAY.
THE moment Aurora peeped into my room,
I put on my clothes and I called for my groom:
Will Whistle, by this, had uncoupl'd the hounds;
Who lively and mettlesome frisk'd over the grounds;
And now we are all saddl'd, fleet, dapple, and gray;
Who seemed longing to hear the glad sound hark away!
'Twas now, by the clock, about five in the morn;
And we all galloped off to the sound of the horn:
Jack Garter, Bill Babbler, and Dick at the goose,
When, all of a sudden, out starts Mrs. Puss:
Men, horses, and dogs, not a moment would stay,
And echo was heard to cry, Hark, hark away!
The course was a fine one she took over the plain;
Which she doubled, and doubled and doubled again;
'Till at last she to cover returned out of breath:
Where I and Will Whistle were in at the death:
Then, in triumph, for you I the hare did display;
And cried to the horns, my boys, Hark, hark away!
BRIGHT PHOEBUS.
BRIGHT Phoebus has mounted the chariot of day,
And the horns and the hounds call each sportsman away;
Through woods and through meadows, with speed now they bound,
While health, rosy health, is in exercise found;
Hark away! Hark away! Hark away is the word to the sound of the horn,
And echo, blithe echo, makes jovial the morn.
Each hill and each valley is lovely to view,
While Puss flies the covert, and dogs quick pursue.
Behold where she flies over the wide-spreading plain!
While the loud opening pack pursue her amain.
Hark away, etc.
At length Puss is caught, and lies panting for breath,
And the shout of the hu^ the signal of death.
No joys can delight like the sports of the field;
To hunting all pa^mes and pleasures must yield.
Hark away, etc.
TWIGGLE AND A FRIZ.
LONDON town is ^ust like a barber's shop;
But by the Lord Harry, it is wondrous big!
There the painted doll, and the powdered fop,
And many a blockhead wears a wig.
And I tickled each phi^ with a twiggle and a friz.
A captain of horse I went for (...)
O, damme! says he, with a mar^
I poised my razor like a barber brave;
I took him by the nose; but he knocked (...)
But I tickled. etc.
I next went to dress up a fine gallant miss,
Down the lady sits and her bosom bares;
Cupid or the devil made me seize a kiss;
But ere my iron cooled I was kicked down stairs,
But I tickled, etc.
I went to dress a lawyer, O rare sport!
Who had a false oath that day for to swear.
By my skill some trouble I spared the court;
For my iron burn^ Six-and-eight-pence's ear.
So I tickled, etc.
I went for to dress up an old maid's hair,
Wrinkl'd and ^ld as a scalded pig;
As she led the dance down with a swimming air,
The poor old lady dropped her wig.
So I tickled, etc.
THE COACHBOX.
YOU may feast your ears with a fife or a drum,
Or the cat-gut tickle, or the wire strum,
But next to the smack of a sweet girl's lip,
The music for me is the smack of the whip.
With my ding dong dash along heigh gee ho!
At the statesman's driving the patriot pouts,
While the changes he rings of the ins and the outs,
Swearing every courtier's a minister's hack,
And that none but the devil's own cattle are so black.
With my ding dong, etc.
When the prodigal son takes the rein in his hands,
And the go-by gives to his houses and lands;
With black, white, and brown, his career he runs,
But alack he is at last overtaken by the duns.
With my ding dong, etc.
But let them quarter the road of care,
While I on the road have a birth to spare;
If I overtake a friend that is put to a shift,
Overturn me plump, but I Will lend him a lift,
With my ding dong, etc.
When a passenger pointing at ten men packed
On the top of the roof talked of Gammon's act,
Why, says I, Master Gammon may a great man be,
But all you can say, is but gammon now to me.
With my ding dong, etc.
Once to ride in my coach little Teague had a mind,
But for want of the blunt took the basket behind;
When the great fear, that put poor Paddy in a bother,
Was the basket and the coach running foul of one another.
With my ding dong, etc.
When to silence all his scruples at once,
He was pitched in the boot to secu^ his sconce,
Now, says he, push away, I Will complain no more,
Since I Am first at last, though behind (...) before,
With my ^ng dong, etc.
But whether before or behind we are stowed,
When in life we are over the ^pland road,
May the veil of years then the prospect crown,
And the journey end in a safe set down.
With my ding dong, etc.
IN PURSUIT OF THE FASHION.
HARK, forward's the word, and all join in the chase;
Ambition, and politics, now must give place:
After fancy and folly we eagerly fly;
In pursuit of the fashion, Hark forward's the cry.
Pell-mell, after Cupid, each heart-wounding dame,
From sixteen to sixty's pursuing the game:
With their full-flowing tresses, some hobble, some fly!
In pursuit of the fashion, Hark forward's the cry.
Ding-dong, helter-skelter, the sweet-scented beaux,
Either lead the pursuit, or fall in at the close;
With their pockets so low, and their collars so high.
Pursuing the fashion, Hark forward's the cry.
Let the fashion be changed, it has lasted too long;
If its conquest we aim at, we are all in the wrong;
To the fame of Columbia, let each have an eye;
And her foes be the game, when Hark forward's the cry.
EACH PLEASURE TO HUNTING MUST YIELD.
YE sportsmen for pleasure and exercise born,
For shame, leave your beds, and arise with the morn,
The Goddess Diana leads forth to the chase,
And day, my brave fellows, breaks on us apace;
The morn is a fine one, right healthy and clear,
Fine sport will attend us, my boys, never fear.
And now we are all ready, huzza! for the field,
Each pleasure to hunting, etc.
Our steeds are sure-footed, our dogs staunch and good,
Prepared to encounter with lake, fence, and wood,
Now, Reynard, have at ye; the hounds have the scent,
And eager for blood, on destruction are bent.
Hark! hark! how the clamor resounds through the spheres,
The glorious confusion enraptures the ears;
Old Crafty still heads them the length of a field,
Each pleasure to hunting, sweet hunting must yield.
Each pleasure to hunting, etc.
By Nimrod, how charming the chase does improve!
Hills, valleys, and mountains apparently move;
The fox is a stager, how daring he flies!
Dogs, horses, and huntsmen, the brusher defies:
But, see, how he trembles, and halts to gain breath,
Now nothing can save him from imminent death;
The harriers have seized him, what shouts rend the field!
Each pleasure to hunting, sweet hunting must yield.
Each pleasure to hunting, etc.
'SQUIRE JONES.
YOU good fellows all,
That love to be told where there is claret good store,
Attend to the call;
Of one that is never frighted,
But greatly delighted;
With six bottles more,
Be sure you don't pass
The good house nor the glass,
Which the jolly red god so peculiarly owns;
It will well suit your humor,
For pray what would you more
Than mirth with good claret in a bumper 'Squire Jones.
You lovers that pine,
For lasses that often prove as cruel as fair,
That whimper and whine;
For lillies and roses,
With eyes, lips and noses;
Or tip of an ear,
Come hither I Will show ye
How Phillis and Chloe
No more shall occasion such sighs and such groans;
What mortal so stupid,
As not to quit Cupid,
When called by good claret in a bumper, 'Squire Jones.
Ye Physical tribe,
Whose knowledge consists in hard words and grimace,
Whenever you prescribe,
Have at your devotion,
Pills Bolus or Potion,
Be what will the case;
Pray what is the need,
To purge blister or bleed;
When ailing yourselves the whole faculty owns
That the forms of old Galen
Are not so prevailing;
As mirth with good claret in a bumper, 'Squire Jones.
You lawyers so just,
Be the cause what it will that so learnedly plead,
How worthy of trust;
You know black from white,
Yet prefer wrong to right;
As you chance to be fee'd,
Leave musty reports,
And forsake the law courts,
Where dullness and discord have set up their thrones.
Burn Salkeld and Ventris,
With all their damned entries,
And about with good claret in a bumper, 'Squire Jones.
You soldiers so stout,
Who have plenty of oaths though not plenty of coin,
That make such a rout;
Of all your Commanders,
That served us in Flanders;
And eke at the boyne;
Then leave off your rattling,
Of seiging and battling,
And know it is much better to sleep with whole bones,
Were you sent to Gibralter
Your notes would soon alter,
And wish for good claret in a bumper 'Squire Jones.
You poets who write
And sing of your drinking famed Helicon's brook,
Though all you get by it
Is a dinner often times,
In reward of your rhymes,
With Humphry the Duke:
Learn Bacchus to follow,
And quit your Apollo;
Forsake all the Muses those senseless old drones,
For the jingling of glasses,
All rhyming surpasses
When called by good claret in a bumper 'Squire Jones.
GIVE ME A RICH BUMPER.
LET the sportsman go boast of the joys of the chase,
And tell how their coursers kept Reynard in pace;
How they leaped over the mounds, over the fences and rocks:
And joy'd at ingloriously killing a fox.
CHORUS.
Give me a rich bumper of care killing wine,
Of red rosy nectar that springs from the vine:
To circle it freely does friendship improve;
And adds a fresh charm to the dimpels of love.
Let Grippus go boast of what money he is lent,
At no less an in'trest than seventy per cent;
Let the miser go boast of his coffers and bags
Whose drink is cold water, whose clothing is rags.
Give me, etc.
Let the deep politician exult in his scheme,
And let the Misanthrop against mankind declaim;
Let the tea table hero exult in his lies,
And writers hunt fame 'till they write out their eyes.
Give me, etc.
Let the great speculator amid his deep plans,
Go boast of his purchase in Georgia lands;
Let Whigs and let Tories maliciously grin:
For the votries of folly are all of a kin.
Give me etc.
Let coxcombs with lapdogs coeval dispute,
Which with the fine ladies shall gain most repute;
Let wits crack a joke at the fops as they pass:
And would be though it wise men, look grave as an ass.
Give me a rich, etc.
THOUGH BACCHUS MAY BOAST OF HIS CARE-KILLING BOWL.
THOUGH Bacchus may boast of his care-killing bowl,
And folly in thought drowning revels delight,
Such worship alas! has no charms for the soul;
When softer devotions the senses invite.
When softer, etc.
To the arrow of fate, or the canker of care,
His potions oblivious a balm may bestow:
But to fancy, that feeds on the charms of the fair,
The death of reflection's the birth of all woe.
The death, etc.
What soul that is possessed of a dream so divine,
With riot would bid the sweet vision begone?
For the tear that bedews sensibility's shrine
Is a drop of more worth than all Bacchus's tun.
Is a drop, etc.
The tender excess which enamours the heart,
To few is imparted, to millions denied;
It Is the brain of the victim that tempers the dart,
And fools jest at that for which sages have died.
And fools, etc.
Each change and excess has through life been my doom,
And well can I speak of its joy and its strife;
The bottle affords us a glimpse through the gloom,
But love's the true sunshine that gladdens our life.
But love's, etc.
Come, then, rosy Venus, and spread over my sight
The magic illusions that ravish the soul!
Awake in my breast the soft dream of delight!
And drop from thy myrtle one leaf in my bowl!
And drop, etc.
Then deep will I drink of the nectar divine,
Nor ever, jolly god, from thy banquet remove;
But each tube of my heart ever thirst for the wine
That Is mellow'd by friendship and sweetened by love.
That Is mellow'd, etc.
BONNY HODGE.
AS Dolly sat milking her cow,
Young Hodge he by chance passed that way;
He left both his cart and his plough;
Her beauty so led him astray.
With rapture he leap't over the style,
And he swore he never saw a maid so pretty, very pretty,
I will kiss you says he with a smile,
But the nymph soon replied I wont let ye'.
I wont let ye' I wont let ye',
But the nymph soon replied I wont let ye'.
Young Hodge then his suit did renew,
What harm is in kissing I pray;
Was you the wide world to pursue,
You Would find it was done night and day.
The Monarch who sits on his throne,
He kisses his Queen so pretty, very pretty;
That is true Doll replied I must own.
"Then why do you say you wont let me?
You wont, etc."
The cow she perceived in a trice,
That Doll had neglected her call;
And thinking 'twas Cupid's advice,
Kicked the milk pail, stool down and all,
Oh! if these are your tricks then cried Hodge,
I Will away to my dairy maid Betty, Bonny Betty,
Curse the cow, Doll replied in a rage,
Come back Bonny Hodge and I Will let ye'.
And I Will, etc.
THE CAPTIVE.
OH! think on my fate! once I freedom enjoyed,
Was as happy, as happy could be!
But pleasure is fled! -- even hope is destroyed!
A Captive, alas! on the sea!
I was taken by the foe -- 'twas the fiat of fate
To tear me from her I adore!
When thought brings to mind my once happy state,
I sigh! -- while I tug at the oar.
Hard, hard is my (...)! how galling my chain!
My life's steered (...) chart;
And though against (...) tyrants I scorn to complain,
Tears gush forth to (...) full heart;
I disdain even to shrink, though I feel the sharp lash;
Yet my breast bleeds for her I adore!
While around me, the unfeeling billows will dash,
I sigh! -- and still tug at the oar.
How Fortune deceives! -- I had pleasure in tow,
The port where she dwelt, we'd in view;
But the wished nuptial morn was o'erclouded with woe,
And, dear Anna! I was hurried from you!
Our shallop was boarded, and I borne away,
To behold my dear Anna no more!
But despair wastes my spirits, my form feels decay!
He sighed -- and expired at the oar.
JACK THE GUINEA PIG.
WHEN the anchor's weighed, and ship's unmoor'd
And landsmen lag behind, sir;
The sailor joyful skips on board,
And swearing prays for wind, sir.
Hauling here, bawling there,
Steadily, readily, merrily, cheerily;
Still from care and thinking free,
Is a sailor's life at sea.
When we set sail with a fresh'ning breeze,
And landsmen they grow sick, sir;
The sailor lo^ls with his mind at ease,
And the song and can goes quick, sir.
Laughing here, quaffing there,
Steadily, etc.
When the wind at night whistles over the deep,
And sings to landsmen drearily;
The sailor fearless goes to sleep,
Or takes his watch most cheerily.
Snoring here, boozing there,
Steadily, etc.
The sky grows black, and wind blows hard,
And landsmen skulk below, sir;
The sailor mounts the topsail yard,
And turns his quid as he goes, sir.
Hawling here, bawling there,
Steadily, etc.
When the foaming waves run mountains high,
And landsmen cry all is gone sir;
The sailor hangs 'twixt sea and sky,
And jokes with Davy Jones, sir.
Swearing here, tearing there, steadily, etc.
When the ship, d'y'see, becomes a wreck,
And landsmen hoist the boat, sir,
The sailor scorns to quit the deck,
While a single plank's afloat, sir.
Dashing here, splashing there,
Steadily, etc.
THE WEST COUNTRY BUMPKIN.
JOHN BULL was a bumpkin born and bred
At a clodhopping village in Gloucestershire,
And as for this world or the world that is to come,
For to puzzle his noddle 'twas never the near:
For he never was known to set foot in a church,
'Till the day he took Dorothy there for a wife;
And says John, 'by the Lord I was never before,
In a place like a church, all the days of my life.
Tol lol de roll, lol de roll, lol de roll lol,
Tol lol de roll, lol de roll, lol de roll lol.
For there I looked up and zeed nine or ten fellows,
A zinging as loud as their lungs could clink;
So thinking that I was got into an alehouse,
I looked up and ax'd if they would nothing to drink:
When up came a man and he pulled off my hat,
And he told me no drink was allowed in the place;
I thought that for zartain he must be the landlord,
Or else I Would have fetched him a punch in the face.
Howsomdever I fancied 'twas never the ne'ar
For to kick up a dust and to frighten the bride,
So I went further in for to look at the place,
And Lord what a comical zight I espied:
There were men folks and women folks penned up together,
Like so many weathers and ewes at a fair;
Besides a long booby-h^tch, built up for holding
The whole Corporation, Just-asses and Mare.
Then up got a little man into a tub,
And he looked just as tho'f he would been rolled in the dirt,
For you could not suppose he coul'd be very clean,
When he would got nothing on but a long black shirt;
Excepting a little while slobbering bib,
Tucked under his chin and slit in two:
To be perched in a tub, and to wear a black shirt,
I was puzzled to think what a plague he could do.
For while he did turn up the whites of his eyes,
And for mercy upon us did heartily pray,
Another below that sat in a chest,
Was mocking of every word he did say:
And when he had fairly tired him out,
To the very last word -- to do nothing by halves,
I verily thought he was going to fight him,
For he stood up and called for a couple of staves!
But the little man tho'f he had a black shirt on,
Whipped over another as white as a clout,
And then in a twink, with a twist of his fist,
He sat open the tub and he let himself out:
Upon which he took hold of a poor little babe,
And as tho'f he had got neither shame nor grace,
He dipped his fingers into a trough,
And splash'd the cold water all over his face.
To be sure I thought 'twas a shameful thing,
To serve a poor babe such a woundy trick,
For tho'f he did squeak like a pig that is stuck,
They did mind him no more than a goosemunchick!
Ods bobs, and I thought if the maggot should bite,
And they wanted to make but a child of a man,
Who could tell but in turn such a baby as I,
May be ^ous'd in the trough like a sop in a pan.
So I took to my heels and I scamper'd away,
Like a lusty fellow for sure and sure,
And swore in my guts if they ever caught I,
OF the in-a-door-side of a church any more;
They should plump me up to the ears in the hog-tro',
Just like a toast in a tankard then,
And souse me and sop me, and sop me and souse me,
A hundred times over and over again.
THE COBBLER.
A PSALM or a song-singing cobbler be I,
Who cares not a snap for the proudest;
I joket in my stall with the girls passing by,
And hammers away with the loudest;
My soul's made of right honest well-wearing stuff,
And my upper-leathers cannot be surpassed;
As the very best tanned hide my merry heart's tough,
First of cobblers, I stick to my last:
With hammer, awl, and sharp'ning hone,
Wax and strap, pegs and paring-knife,
Bristles, thread, and lap-stone,
The cobbler leads a jolly life;
Singing loudly all the while,
To make his work go merry,
Tol de roll, lol lol lol de roll lol,
And heigh down derry.
When a bachelor spruce, all the young giggish tits,
With their eyes a love story would tell,
Says I, that will not do girl, that shoe never fits,
'Till at last I got tacked to my Nell:
What tho'f now and then Doctor Strap gives advice,
Our quarrels are unmixed with gall;
A kiss and a smile makes it up in a trice,
I Am Nell's, and my Nell is my all.
With hammer, etc.
I was ax'd by a master to dine at his shop,
Who'd a deuce of a quarrelsome wife,
Who made the house shake, aye from bottom to top,
A vixen she was to the life:
In her tantrums, her spouse swore he would kick her (he was vexed)
Out of doors if no stranger was nigh;
I seeing the gemman and his lady so perplexed,
Cried don't make a stranger of I.
With hammer, etc.
ABSENCE.
THE meadows look cheerful, the birds sweetly sing,
So gaily they carol the praises of spring,
Though nature rejoices poor Norah must mourn,
Until her dear Patrick again shall return.
Ye lasses of Dublin, ah! hide your gay charms,
Nor 'lure my dear Patrick from Norah's fond arms,
Though sattins, and ribbons, and laces are fine,
They hide not a heart with such feelings as mine.
THE KISS.
ONE kind kiss before we part,
Drop a tear and then adieu;
Though we sever, my fond heart
'Till we meet shall pant for you.
Yet, yet weep not so, my love,
Let me kiss that falling tear;
Though my body must remove,
All my soul will still be here.
All my soul and all my heart,
Every wish shall pant for you;
One kind kiss then 'ere we part,
Drop a tear and bid adieu.
FOR WE SHALL BOTH GROW OLDER.
THEY tell me I Am too young to wed,
But sure it is all a fancy;
A smiling girl runs in my head,
It Is pretty little Nancy:
My mother says it must not be,
Though this I Have often told her
That Nancy is as young as me,
And we shall both grow older.
Her eyes are blue, with flaxen hair,
Her smile just hit my fancy;
No girl so mild, so soft, so fair,
As pretty little Nancy:
Then why not wed as well as love,
And so I Have often told her,
If now too young, we shall improve,
For we shall both grow older.
When year on year rolls over her head,
She still will please my fancy,
As when to church I fondly led,
My pretty little Nancy:
Then let us wed as love invites,
For this I Have often told her,
It Is love alone can give delight,
When we are both grown older.
BEN BLOCK.
I WAS pressed while a rowing so happy --
No matter, 'twas childish to grieve;
So to drown care with grog I got nappy,
Yet sighed my sweet Kitty to leave;
But what hurt me most were those ninnies,
On whom I had thought to depend,
For I wished to raise Kate a few guineas,
But found I had got never a friend.
When aboard, why I troubled a shipmate
A note to my sweetheart to write,
Which in doing he somehow a slip made,
His own tale of love did indite!
So when I at Battersea landed,
(He Would patter'd her so to his end)
I learnt he my frigate commanded,
And found I had got never a friend.
When again on the salt seas in motion,
The ill-humour'd winds loudly roar,
And friendship I found on the ocean,
As scant as I left it on shore:
We were wrecked -- but my tale little matters,
While messmates to Davy descend,
I escaped but was poor, all in tatters,
And found I had got never a friend.
Yet still to all fear was I stranger,
In battle (where death tips the grin)
Was exposed to the heat of each danger,
'Till a musket-ball splinter'd my fin:
Well, away to the cockpit I hobble,
Where so many customers tend,
Then the surgeon, to save further trouble,
Lopped it off, damme, -- not like a friend.
But now every comfort's imparted,
I find, I laid in Greenwich snug dock,
My messmates are true, honest hearted,
And each wishes well to Ben Block:
The rear of my life glides on cheerly
In a calm here my moments I Will end,
I have fought for my King late and early,
And, bless him, the King is my friend.
SEE THE DAWN HOW IT RISES.
SEE the dawn how it rises in golden array,
While the horn sounds the summons to join in the chase;
Hark! the dogs with their voices now welcome the day,
Which for sport and true concord we hunters embrace:
The hounds are abroad, see the breaking of day,
From the cover unkennel the fox:
Attend to the cry -- hark away, hark away,
We'll bound over mountains and rocks.
While we sweep over the dale, or the mountain ascend,
Or through rapid rivers our steeds boldly guide;
No danger we fear that can hunting attend,
For courage was never to a huntsman denied.
The hounds are abroad, etc.
Then leave for awhile the soft arms of your fair,
See Aurora, to tempt you, has nature displayed;
The sports of Diana the morning must share,
Then to friendship and love let due tribute be paid.
The hounds are abroad, etc.
PRETTY BRUNETTE.
DEAR Nancy, I Have sailed the world all around,
And seven long years been a rover,
To make, for my charmer, each shilling a pound.
But now my hard perils are over.
I Have saved from my toils many hundreds in gold,
The comforts of life to beget;
Have borne in each climate the heat and the cold,
And all for my pretty Brunette:
Then say, my sweet girl, can you love me?
Though others may boast of more riches than mine,
And rate my attractions even fewer;
At their jeers and ill nature, I Will scorn to repine,
Can they boast of a heart that is truer?
Or, will they, for thee, plough the hazardous main?
Brave the seasons, both stormy and wet?
If not, why I Will do it again, and again,
And all for my pretty Brunette.
Then say, etc.
When ordered afar, in pursuit of the foe,
I sighed at the bodings of fancy,
Which fain would persuade me, I might be laid low,
And ah! never more see my Nancy*
But hope, like an Angel, soon banished the thought,
And bade me such nonsense forget:
I took the advice, and undauntedly fought,
And all for my pretty Brunette.
Then say, etc.
BELLISARIUS.
O! FORTUNE, how strangely thy gifts are awarded,
How much to thy shame, thy caprice is recorded;
As the wise, great and good of thy frowns, seldom 'scape any,
Witness, brave Bellisarius, who begged for a halfpenny.
Date Obolum, Date Obolum, Date Obolum, Bellisario.
He whose fame for his valor and victories, arose sir,
Of his country, the shield, and the scourge of her foes, sir,
By his poor faithful dog blind and aged was led, sir,
With one foot in the grave, thus to beg for his bread, sir.
Date Obolum, etc.
When a young Roman Knight, in the street passing by sir,
The vet'ran surveyed, with a heart-rending sigh, sir;
And a purse in his helmet he dropped with a tear, sir,
While the soldier's sad tale thus attracted his ear, sir.
Date Obolum, etc.
I have fought, I have bled, I have conquered for Rome, sir,
I have crowned her with laurels, which for ages will bloom, sir;
I Have enriched her with wealth, swelled her pride and her power sir,
I espoused her for life, and disgrace is my dower, sir.
Date Obolum, etc.
Yet blood I never wantonly wasted at random,
Loosing thousands their lives with a Nil Desperandum;
But each conquest I gained I made friend and foe know,
That my soul's only aim was pro Publico Bono.
Date Obolum, etc.
I no colonies lost by attempts to enslave them,
I of Roman's free rights never strove to bereave them;
Nor to bow down their necks to the ^e, for my pleasure,
Have an Empire dismembered, or sqander'd its treasure.
Date Obolum, etc.
Nor yet for my friends, for my kindred, or self, sir,
Has my glory been stained by the base views of pelf, sir;
For such sordid designs I Have so far been from carving,
Old and blind, I Have no choice but of begging or starving.
Date Obolum, etc.
Now if soldier, or statesman, of what age or nation,
He hereafter may be, should, hear this relation;
And, of eyesight bereft, should, like me, grope his way, sir,
The bright sunbeams of virtue will turn night to day, sir.
Date Obolum, etc.
So I to distress and to darkness inured, sir,
In this vile crust of clay when no longer immured, sir;
At death's welcome stroke my bright course shall begin, sir,
And enjoy endless day from the sunshine within, sir;
Date Obolum, Date Obolum, Date Obolum, Bellisario.
THE POOR CABIN BOY.
NO lark that ever whistled aloft over the downs
Was more cheerful or blithesome than I,
'Till fate lost my pleasure with fortune's rude frowns,
And caused my poor heart for to sigh:
For father he died, and friends turned me adrift
On the billows my time to employ;
To weather life's voyage I Have made many a shift,
Although but a Poor Cabin Boy.
I Have often times remembered the maxim of old
As a loose to my sorrows I gave,
That love's not worth having when purchased for gold,
Or friendship, where interest's a slave:
So contented I Have braved the rude storms, dry or wet,
Buoyed up with hope's flattering joy,
That fortune perchance might yet not forget
To smile on the Poor Cabin Boy.
Now three years elapsed 'ere our vessel was bound
To England again for to steer;
My heart felt with raptures new life at the sound,
My eyes dropped with pleasure a tear:
But, alas! adverse fate, like false friends, proved untrue,
And soon did my wishes destroy,
For wrecked was our ship by the tempest's rude wind,
And the hopes of the Poor Cabin Boy.
Yet through fortune's smiles I again reached the shore,
And sought my companions to find;
But the friends of my youth were dispersed or no more,
Or scarce left a relict behind:
If this be life's fate, with a sigh, I replied,
May heaven soon my hours employ,
And give that fond blessing which here is denied,
To the orphan, or Poor Cabin Boy.
I CAN BEAT HIM, SIRS, AT THAT.
BUT three months yet I Have been a wife,
And spouse already shows his airs;
I wish I Would lived a single life,
But as I did not, why, who cares?
Besides, let husband use his tongue,
And scold, and bounce and cock his hat,
By Jove he will find I Am not so young
But I can beat him, Sirs at that.
I Will go to operas, balls and plays,
Or where I will, and wont be checked
Egad I Will racket nights and days,
Until he treats me with respect,
And if he romps with I know who,
Perhaps he will meet with tit for tat;
And faith may find, and shall so too,
That I can beat him, Sirs at that.
But this I vow if he will be good,
And let me sometimes have my will,
(Young wives you know most surely should)
I Will duly every rite fulfill,
And never, O! no never rove,
But stay with him at home and chat;
And prove by kindest deeds of love,
That I can beat him, Sirs, at that.
THE SAILOR's CONSOLATION.
SPANKING Jack was so comely, so blythe, and so jolly,
Though winds blew great guns, still he would whistle and sing;
Jack was true to his friend and was kind to his Molly,
And if honor gives greatness was great as a King.
One night as we drove with two reefs in the mainsail,
And the scud came on lowering upon a lee shore,
Jack went up aloft for to hand the top ga'nt sail;
A spray washed him off, and we never saw him more.
But grieving's a folly, come let us be jolly,
If we have troubles at sea boys, we have pleasures ashore.
Whissling Tom, still of mischief and fun in the middle,
Through life, in all weathers, at random would jog,
He Would dance and he would sing, and he would play on the fiddle,
And swig with an air his allowance of grog;
Alongside of a Don, in the Terrible frigate,
As yard arm and yard arm we lay off the shore,
Whissling Tom, in and out did so caper and jig it;
His head was shot off and we never saw him more.
But grieving's a folly, etc.
Bonny Ben was to each jolly messmate a brother,
He was manly and jovial, kind hearted and free,
If ever one tar was more true than another;
To his friend and his duty, that sailor was he;
One day with the David, to heave the kedge anchor,
Ben went in the boat, on a bold craggy shore,
He overboard tip't, when a shark, and a spanker,
Soon nipt him in two, and we never saw him more.
But grieving's a folly, etc.
But what of it all lads shall we be downhearted,
Because now perhaps we may take the last sup,
Life's cable must one day or other be parted;
And death in safe moorings will bring us all up;
But it is always the way on it one can scarce find a brother,
Sound as pitch, honest, hearty, and true to the core,
But by battle or storm, or some damned thing or other;
He Is popp'd off the hooks and we never see him more.
But grieving's a folly, etc.
HARK FORWARD! TANTIVY, HUZZA.
TO pleasure let us raise the heart-chearing song,
While echo repeats the sweet sound;
In the prime of our life, whether man, maid, or wife,
It Is gay pleasure we hunt through the throng,
And sweet the reward when she is found.
When bright pleasure's in view, we all briskly pursue.
Hark forward! hark forward! huzza!
Tantivy, hark forward, away!
All ages and states will join in the song,
While echo repeats the sweet sound;
Some in riches delight, some few love to fight,
Some the bottle will hunt the night long,
Some seek her in study profound.
When bright pleasure's in view, we all briskly pursue, etc.
Then all will delight in the heart-cheering song,
While echo repeats the sweet sound;
We diff'rently aim, our plan still's the same,
While winding our pleasures prolong,
Contentment by pleasure is crowned.
When bright pleasure's in view, we all briskly pursue, etc.
GATHER YOUR ROSE BUDS.
GATHER your rose-buds while you may:
Old Time is ever flying;
And that same flower which smiles to day,
Tomorrow will be dying.
That age is the best which is the first,
While youth and blood are warmer;
Expect not, then, the last the best,
The worst succeeds the former.
Then be not coy, nor waste your time;
But while you're young, go marry;
For, having once gone past your prime,
You may for ever tarry.
NO, THAT WILL NEVER DO.
WHEN lovers are too daring grown,
Young maidens should beware;
For men, it is for certain known,
Will often protest and swear;
But virgins, though they kneel and vow,
And each fond art pursue.
No foolish freedom should allow,
For that will never do;
No, that will never do.
My Damon calls me dear, and love,
And every thing that is kind,
Then vows he will die to prove his love,
But this I never mind.
Last night, he fain would have a kiss,
Nay, even asked for two;
Dear, sir, said I, 'twould be amiss;
O! that will never do;
No, that will never do.
Tomorrow, he declares he will prove,
His love cannot be denied,
And at the church, each doubt remove,
By making me his bride.
If that is the case, what can I say?
I Will e'n appeal to you;
Would it be right to answer nay?
Pshaw, that will never do.
No, that will never do.
I WOULD FAIN ASK YOU A THIS.
I WOULD fain ask you a this, but in steps a that,
Ah! why did you, truant, away from me go?
Yet, not that I Am curious, but merely for chat!
It Is only no harm to know it, you know.
What lady detained you? I Am sure she was fair,
Much taller than I am, perhaps full as low:
No business of mine it is -- what color her hair?
It Is only no harm to know it, you know.
Pray was she demure? or coquetishly gay?
The voice of a cherub, or may be so, so?
Her eyes -- I don't ask whether ha^le or gray,
It Is only no harm to know it, you know.
But one thing, O tell me! No more then impart,
Did give her what was not yours to bestow?
Though sure you don't venture to give her your heart,
It Is only no harm to know it, you know.
THE SENTIMENTALIST.
NOW we are launched on the world,
With our sails all unfurled,
Before the wind, down the tides proudly posting,
May the voyage of life,
Free from tempest and strife,
Prove as calm as a smooth water coasting;
But should some sudden squall, incidental to all,
Rouse up reason to reef every sail, boys,
May it be yours and my lot to have such a pilot,
When passion increases the gale, boys.
For to what point soe'r
Of the compass we steer,
While the helm still obeys our direction;
It Is as true as the light,
That the sports of the night
Will never shrink from the morning's reflection,
And when rest or refreshment succeeds work or play,
Of enjoyment from both to be certain;
May true friendship's hand draw the cork every day,
And true love every night draw the curtain.
But blow high or blow low,
Let it rain, freeze, or snow,
And clay cold and wet should our birth be;
The lamb newly shorn,
Shows the blast may be borne,
Let our station on sea or on earth be,
And as poor Robin Redbreast will ch^p on the spray,
Almost stripped by the frost of each ^er,
May a conscience as clear as the (...),
Keep us warm in the coldest of weather.
THE LOVING QUA^R.
Tune -- What (...) ^e m^ be.
VERILY ah! (...) bumping*
A pendu^ (...)
Or a mo^ (...)
It Is truth now by yea and by nay!
And it is umph! umph! what can the matter be,
Umph, umph, what can the matter,
Moved by the spirit so, what can the matter be,
Ephraim, you are going astray.
Yea, mavelous 'twas, when mine eyes first went roving,
From meek sister Sarah toward vanity moving,
I found a profane one it was I was loving.
It Is truth, etc.
'Twas folly's vain garment, the maid smiled so good in,
Yea, silk hose and pumps on the pavement she stood in,
Which stirred up my zeal, as you would stir up a pudding.
It Is truth, etc.
When I, yea and nay ever pronounce to deceive her,
May I bow down my body or take off my beaver,
I would cherish the maiden for ever and ever,
By yea and nay thus much I own,
And it is umph, umph, what can the matter be,
Umph, umph, what can the matter be,
I verily long to know what can the matter be,
When she is bone of my bone.
JACKY AND THE COW.
THERE were Farmer Thrasher, and he had a cow,
And gammer were very fond on un,
And they would a son Jacky that made a fine bow,
So they sent un a prentice to London.
Jacky's master a barber and hair-dresser were,
Than some squires 'cod he thought unself bigger,
In the day through the town he would dress and cut hair,
And dressed out at night -- cut a figure.
To ape Jacky's master, were all his delight,
The soap suds and razor both scorning,
He Is been took't by the nose by the same fop at night,
That he took't by the nose in the morning.
Now to see the cow moan, would have made a cat laugh,
Her milk were his food late and early,
And even if Jacky had been her own calf,
She could not ha loved un more dearly.
She moaned, and she moaned, nor knew what she did ail,
To heart so she took this disaster,
At last roaming about, some rogues cut off her tail,
And then sent her back to her master.
Here Is the kiaw come home, Gammer, come bring out the pail,
Poor creature I'ze glad we have found her,
Cried Dame, ten't our kiaw, she is got never a tail,
Here Roger goo take her and pound her.
It Is our kiaw, but you zee she is been maimed by somebrute,
Why, dame, you are a vool -- give me patience;
So to squabbling they went -- when to end the dispute,
Came home Jacky to see his relations.
His spencer he sported, his hat round he twirled,
As whistling a tune he came bolt in,
And bedocked, and belopped, wounds, he looked all the world
Like trimmed bantums, or magpies a moulting.
Oh dear! it is our Jacky, come bring out the ale,
So Gammer fell skipping around him,
Our Jacky, why, dom't, he is got never a tail --
Here, Roger, go take un, and pound un.
It Is the kick, I say, old one, so I brought it down,
Wore by Jemmies so neat, and so spunky;
Ah, Jacky, thou went up a puppy to town,
And now thee be come back a monkey.
Gammer stormed, Gaffer swore, Jacky whistled, and now,
'Twas agreed, without any more passion,
To take Jacky in favor as well as the cow,
Because they were both in the fashion.
TOM TRUELOVE's KNELL.
TOM True Love wooed the sweetest fair,
That ever to tar was kind;
Her face was of a beauty rare,
More beautiful her mind.
His messmates heard, while with delight,
He named her for his bride.
A sail appeared -- ah, fatal sight!
For grief his love had died.
Must I, cried he, those charms resign,
I loved so dear, so well:
Would they had tolled, instead of thine,
Tom Truelove's knell.
Break, heart, at once, and there is an end!
Thou, all that heaven could give. --
But hold! I have a noble friend,
Yet, yet for him I Will live.
Fortune, who all her baleful spite,
Not yet on Tom had tried,
Sent news, one rough tempestuous night,
That his dear friend had died: --
And thou too! -- must I thee resign,
Who honor loved so well?
Would they had tolled, instead of thine,
Tom Truelove's knell.
Enough, enough, a salt-sea wave,
A healing balm shall bring.
A sailor you, cried one, and brave?
Live still, to serve your king!
The moment comes, behold the foe,
Thanks, generous friend, he cried:
The second broadside laid him low;
He named his love and died.
The tale, in mournful accents sung,
His friends still sorrowing tell,
How sad and solemn, three times rung,
Tom Truelove's knell.
THE BLACKBIRD.
'TWAS on a bank of daisies sweet,
A lovely maiden sighed;
The little lambs played at her feet,
While she in sorrow cried --
Where is my love, where can he stray?
When thus a Blackbird sung --
Sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, he will not stay,
The air with music rung.
Ah! mock me not, bold bird, she said,
And why pray tarry here?
Do thou bemoan some youngling fled,
Or, have thou lost thy dear?
Do thou lament his absence? say:
Again the Blackbird sung --
Sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, he will not stay:
The air with music rung.
Sing on, she cried, thou charming bird,
Those dulcet notes repeat!
No music ever like thine was heard,
So truly sweet, sweet, sweet.
Oh, that my love was here today,
Once more the Blackbird sung;
Sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, he comes this way!
The air with music rung.
YOU SHALL NOT SIR.
JOHNNY met me the other day,
Blithe young soldier Johnny;
Whither going he did say,
Pretty lass, so bonny:
Stop awhile, and let us tall --
No, says I, I cannot, Sir,
Then, says he, with you I Will walk --
No, says I -- you shall not Sir.
Johnny dropped his hand with speed,
And he kissed me sweetly;
Yes, he truly did, indeed,
Oh, he did it neatly: --
Still he cried, come, let us woo --
No, says I -- I cannot, Sir,
Then, says he, I Will gang with you --
No, says I -- You shall not, Sir.
Come, my dear, be kind -- says he --
Soothe a lover's sorrow;
And to Church repair with me,
Bonny lass, tomorrow:
Say you will, and ease my woe --
No, says I -- I cannot, Sir.
Then, said he, to war I Will go --
No, says I -- You shall not, Sir.
A PRIZE.
SCARCELY had the blushing morning,
Wooed the waves with tender light;
When the bright'ning plain adorning,
A distant vessel rose in sight.
Aloft, the crouding sailors viewing
Her misty sails with straining eye,
In fancy now the foe subduing,
A prize! a prize! exulting cry.
The boatswain's whistle loud and shrill.
Shames the tardy sleeping wind:
In vain our chuse-gun fires -- for still
The crowds her sail -- we are left behind.
At length the breeze affords assistance;
Right-afore the wind's our course;
We clear our decks -- she threats resistance,
And proudly boasts superior force.
Amid her thunder boldly steering.
Our battered ship almost a wreck,
With steady courage persevering,
They board, they storm her gory deck.
Her wounded Captain -- life disdaining,
Yet mourning over his gallant crew;
Casts a last look on those remaining;
Then strikes to save the valiant few.
THE GLEANERS.
WHEN the rosy morn appearing,
Paints with gold the verdant lawn,
Bees on banks of thyme disporting,
Sip the sweets, and hail the dawn.
See, content, the humble gleaners,
Take the scattered ears that fall:
Nature, all her children viewing,
Kindly bounteous, cares for all.
Warbling birds, the spring proclaiming,
Carol sweet the enlivening strain;
They forsake their leafy dwelling,
To secure the golden grain.
See, content, etc.
When his weary task is over,
Ended with the setting sun,
Soon the mind forgets its labor,
To his lowly cot does run:
See, content, etc.
Lisping babes all fly to meet him,
And receive a father's prayer;
His loved partner smiles to see them,
Climb, the envied kiss to share.
See, content, etc.
Balmy sleep attends his pillow,
Free from sorrow, free from fear*
Heaven-born guards each moment watch him,
Peace and innocence live here.
See, content, etc.
THE TIMID HARE.
WHEN morn, 'twixt mountain and the sky,
On tiptoe stands, how sweet to hear
The hounds melodious cheerful cry,
As starts the game possessed with fear:
Over brook and brake
Our course we take,
The sportsman knows no grief or care:
When sweet the horn,
Across the lawn
Awakes the sleeping timid hare.
Who panting flies, like freed from pain,
As trembling she resigns her breath,
The sportsman joyous leaves the plain,
Well pleased to be in at her death;
Then sweet the horn,
Across the lawn,
Re-echoes blithe both far and near;
Over meads and downs,
We know no bounds,
While coursing of the timid hare.
Then say what pleasure can inspire
To that of coursing? -- Sweet employ!
Except when homeward we retire,
Our bottles and our friend enjoy:
The brook and brake
We then f^sake,
For sportsmen know no grief or care;
Then sweet the horn,
Across the ^v^,
Awakes the trembling timid hare.
SHAKESPEARE'S SEVEN ^ES. PARAPHRASED.
OUR immortal Poet's page,
Says that all the world's a stage;
And that men with all their airs,
Are nothing more than players;
Each using skill and art,
In his turn to play his part,
All to fill up this farsical scene O!
Enter here,
Exit there,
Stand in view,
Mind your cue.
High down, ho down, derry derry down.
All to fill up this farsical scene O!
First the infant in the lap,
Mewling, pewling, with its pap,
Like a chicken that we truss,
Is swaddled by its nurse;
Who to please the puppet tries,
As it giggles and it cries.
All to fill, etc.
Hush a bye,
Wipe an eye,
Kiss pretty,
Suck a titty.
High down, etc.
Then the pretty babe of grace,
With his shining morning face;
And satchel on his back,
To school alas! must pack,
But like a snail he creeps,
And for bloody Monday weeps,
All to fill up, etc.
Book mislaid,
T^ant played,
Rod in pickle,
Tom to ^ickle.
High down, etc.
Then the lover next appears,
Soused over head and ears;
Like a lobster on the fire,
Sighing ready to expire;
With a great hole in his heart,
Through which you may drive a cart,
All to fill, etc.
Beauty spurns him,
Passion burns him;
Like a wizard,
Guts and gizzard.
High down, etc.
Then the soldier ripe for plunder,
Breathing slaughter -- blood and thunder.
Like a cat among the mice,
Kicks a dust up in a trice,
And talks of shattered brains,
Scattered limbs, and streaming veins.
All to fill, etc.
Fight or fly,
Run or die,
Pop and pelter,
Helter skelter,
High down, etc.
Then the justice in his chair,
With broad and vacant stare:
His wig of formal cut,
And belly like a but,
Well lined with turtle hash,
Calipee and calipash.
All to fill, etc.
Wig profound,
Body round;
Sit at ease,
Snatch the fees.
High down, etc.
Then the slipper'd pantaloon,
In life's dull afternoon;
With spectacles on nose.
Shrunk Shank in youthful hose,
His voice once big and round,
Now whistling in the sound.
All to fill, etc.
Body bent,
Vigor spent,
Shaking noddle,
Widdle waddle,
High down, etc.
At last to end the play,
Second childhood leads the way;
And like sheep that is got the rot,
All our senses go to pot.
So death among us pope,
And down the curtain drops.
All to fill, etc.
Then the coffin,
We move off in,
While the bell,
Tolls the knell,
Of high and low down into the cold ground.
All to fill, etc.
POOR TOM, OR THE SAILOR'S EPITAPH.
HERE, a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling,
The darling of our crew;
No more he will hear the tempest howling,
For death has broached him to.
His form was of the manliest beauty,
His heart was kind and soft;
Faithful below he did his duty,
And now he is gone aloft.
Tom never from his word departed,
His virtues were so rare,
His friends were many, and true-hearted,
His Poll was kind and fair:
And then he would sing so blithe and jolly,
Ah many's the time and often!
But mirth is turned to melancholy,
For Tom is gone aloft.
Yet shall Poor Tom find pleasant weather,
When he who all commands,
Shall give, to call life's crew together,
The word to pipe all hands.
Thus death, who kings and tars dispatches,
In vain Tom's life has doff'd;
For, though his body's under hatches,
His soul is gone aloft.
BUXOM NAN.
THE wind was hushed, the storm was over,
Unfurled was every flowing sail,
From to^ released, when Dick of Dover
Went with his messmates to regale.
All danger's over, cried he, my neathearts,
Drown care, then, in the smiling can:
Come, bear a hand, let us toast our sweethearts,
And first I Will give my buxom Nan.
She Is none of they that is always gigging,
And stem and stern made up of art;
One knows a vessel by her rigging,
Such ever slight a constant heart.
With straw-hat, and pink-streamers flowing,
How often to meet me has she ran;
While for dear life would I be rowing,
To meet with smiles my buxom Nan.
Jack Jollyboat went to the Indies,
To see him stare when he came back,
The girls were so all off the hinges,
His Poll was quite unknown to Jack.
Tant masted all, to see who is tallest,
Breast works, top-ga'nt sails, and a fan;
Messmate, cried I, more sail than ballast,
Ah still give me my buxom Nan.
None on life's sea can sail more quicker,
To show her love, or serve a friend:
But hold, I Am preaching over my liquor,
This one word more, and there is an end.
Of all the wenches whatsomever,
I say, then, find me out who can,
One half so true, so kind, so clever,
Sweet, trim, and neat, as buxom Nan.
SOMEBODY.
WERE I obliged to beg my bread,
And had not where to lay my head;
I Would creep where yonder herds are fed,
And steal a look at -- Somebody,
My own dear -- Somebody,
My constant -- Somebody;
I Would creep where yonder herds are fed,
And steal a look at -- Somebody.
When I Am laid low, and am at rest,
And may be numbered with the blessed,
Oh! may thy artless feeling breast
Throb with regard for -- Somebody:
Ah! will you drop the pitying tear,
And sigh for the lost -- Somebody?
But should I ever live to see
That form so much adored by me,
Then thou wilt reward my constancy,
And I Will be blessed with -- Somebody:
Then shall my tears be dried by thee,
And I Will be blessed with -- Somebody.
THE TARTAN PLAIDIE.
BY moonlight on the green,
Where lads and lasses stray,
How sweet the blossomed bean!
How sweet the new made hay!
But not to me so sweet
The blossoms on the thorn.
As when my lad I meet,
More fresh than May Day morn:
Give me the lad so blithe and gay,
Give me the Tartan plaidie;
For, spite of all the wise can say,
I Will wed my Highland laddie.
His skin is white as snow,
His even are bonny blue,
Like rose-bud sweet his mou'
When wet with morning dew.
Young Will is rich and great,
And fain would ca' me his;
But what is pride or state,
Without love's smiling bliss?
Give me the lad, etc.
When first he talked of love,
He looked sae blithe and gay,
His flame I did approve,
And could na say him nay.
Then to the kirk I Will haste,
There prove my love and truth;
Reward a love sae chaste,
And wed the constant youth.
Give me the lad, etc.
HOW BLESSED HAS MY TIME BEEN.
HOW blessed has my time been, what joys have I known,
Since wedlock's soft bondage made Jessy my own:
So joyful my heart is, so easy my chain,
That freedom is tasteless, and roving a pain.
Through walks grown with woodbines as often we stray,
Around us our boys and girls frolic and play:
How pleasing their sport is (...) the wanton ones see,
And borrow their looks from my Jessy and me.
To try her sweet temper, often times am I seen,
In revels all day with the nymphs on the green:
Though painful my absence, my doubts she begailes,
And meets me at night with complacence and smiles.
What though on her cheeks the rose loses its hue,
Her wit and good humor blooms all the year through:
Time still, as he flies, adds increase to her truth,
And gives to her mind what he steals from her youth.
Ye shepherds so gay, who make love to ensnare,
And cheat with false vows the two credulous fair,
In search of true pleasure how vainly you roam,
To hold it for life you must find it at home.
LUCY, OR SELIM's COMPLAINT.
NIGHT over the world her curtain hung,
The vale was silent late so gay,
The bird of night melodious sung,
Her anthem at departing day;
When Selim on a bank reclined,
Beneath a spreading willow tree
Thus spoke the feelings of his mind,
Oh! Lucy shed one tear for me.
Yes had I all that Heaven could give,
Were my possessions rich and great,
Then for my Lucy would I live:
Then at her feet a suppliant wait,
But since hard poverty's my lot
No hope remains to wed with thee,
Thy beauties never can grace my cot;
Oh! Lucy shed one tear for me.
Deprived of all that life could bless,
Its torments now no more I crave;
The hour that offers happiness
Is that which marks my hapless grave,
Be each fond wish enjoyed of thine;
May Heaven protect and comfort thee,
The turf must press this head of mine;
Oh! Lucy shed one tear for me.
ARABELLA.
SAY, have you seen my Arabell?
The Caledonian maid,
Or heard the youths of Scotland tell,
Where Arabell has strayed?
The damsel is of Angel mein,
With sad and downcast eyes;
The Shepherds call her, sorrow's queen,
So pensively she sighs.
But why her sighs so sadly swell,
Or why her tears so flow;
In vain, they press the lovely girl,
The innate cause to know.
E're reason framed her tender mind,
The virgin learned to love,
Compassion taught her to be kind,
Deceit she was above.
And had not War's terrific voice,
Forbid the mutual bands,
E're now, had Sandy been her choice,
And Hymen joined our hands:
But, since the sword of War is sheathed,
And peace resumes her charms,
My every joy is now bequeathed
To Arabella's arms.
ELLEN, or the RICHMOND PRIMROSE GIRL.
NEAR Bow'ry Richmond, Thames' side,
Dwelt Ellen when her father died;
One snowy night he lost his way,
And never more beheld the day:
Two infant boys, around their mother clung.
And kindred grief the heart of Ellen wrung.
Upon the earth her eyes she threw,
Where flowerets wild before her grew;
Those gifts, by bounteous nature spread,
She gathered to procure them bread:
And through the hollow founding streets,
By some relieved, but jeered by many,
Her cry each morning she repeats,
Primroses, Primroses, two bunches a penny.
Her pensive way I Have seen her keep,
With anxious step, from door to door,
And often, I Have turned aside to weep,
And mourned that fortune made me poor:
E're early light adorns the sky,
She roves the heath, or valley, Jenny,
And toward proud London hastes, to cry
Primroses, Primroses, two bunches a penny.
THE TOKEN.
THE breeze was fresh, the ship in stays,
Each breaker hushed, the shore a haze,
When Jack, no more on duty called,
His true Love's Tokens overhaul'd:
The broken gold, the braided hair,
The tender motto writ -- so fair;
Upon his Bacco Box he views
Nancy, the Poets love the muse --
"If you loves I, as I loves you,
"No pair so happy as we two."
The storm that, like a shapeless wreck,
Had strewn with rigging all the deck;
That jaws for sharks had given a feast,
And left the ship a hull, had ceased;
When Jack, as with his messmates dear,
He shared the grog, their hearts to cheer,
Took from his Bacco Box a quid,
And spelled for comfort on the lid,
If you loves I, etc.
The battle, that with horror grim,
Had m^ly ravished life and limb,
Had see, ^s drenched with human gore
And widowed many a wife, was over,
When Jack, to his companions dear,
First gave ^ribute of a tear;
Then as the Bacco Box he held
Restored his comfort while he spelled,
If you loves I, etc.
The voyage that had been long and hard,
But that had yielded full reward;
Had brought each sailor to his friend
Happy and rich, was at an end:
When Jack, his toils and perils over,
Beheld his Nancy on the shore;
He then the Bacco Box displayed,
And cried and seized the lovely maid,
If you loves I, etc.
BOB OF THE MILL.
MY heart is as honest and brave as the best,
My body's as sound as a roach;
Though in gay fangled garments I ne^ was dressed,
Nor stuck up my nob in a coach:
If fortune refuses to flow with my (...),
My sacks with her riches to fill;
Why surely it is fortune alone that is to blame,
And not honest Bob of the Mill.
My breast is as artless and blithe as my lay,
From my cottage content never flies;
She is sure to reward the fatigue of the day,
And I know how to value the prize:
Would the girl that I love, then, but give me her hand,
The world it may wag as it will;
I defy the first 'squire, or the lord of the land,
To dishonor plain Bob of the Mill.
THE LONG TROT.
HERE I was, my good masters, my name's Teddy Clinch,
My cattle are sound, and I drives to an inch;
From Hyde-Park to White-Chapel I well know the town,
And many's the time I Have took up and set down:
In short, in the bills I Will be bound for it there is not
A young youth who, like Teddy, can tip the long trot.
Oh the notions of life that I see from my box,
While fares of all kinds come about me in flocks;
The sot, whom I drive home to sleep out the day,
The kind one, who plies for a fare at the play;
Or, your gents of the law, there, who four in a lot,
To Westminster Hall I often tip the long trot.
My coach receives all, like the gallows and sea,
So I touch but my fare, you know all is one to me;
The men of the gown, and the men of the sword,
A ma'am, or a gambler, a rogue, or a lord:
To wherever you're going, I well know the spot,
And, do you tip me a tizzy, I Will tip the long trot.
DRINKING SONG.
WHAT argufies pride and ambition?
^on or late death must take us in tow:
Each bullet has got its commission,
And when our time's come we must go:
Then drink and sing, hang pain and sorrow,
The halter was made for the neck,
He that is now 'live and lusty -- tomorrow
Perhaps may be stretched on the deck.
There was little Tom Linstock, of Dover,
Got killed, and left Polly in pain,
Poll cried, but her grief was soon over,
And then she got married again.
Then drink, etc.
Jack Junk was ill used by Bet Crocker,
And (...) took ^o guzzling the stuff,
'Till he tumbled in old Davy's locker,
And there b^g^t liquor enough.
Then drink, etc.
For our prize-money then to the proctor,
Take of joy while it is going our freak;
For what argufies calling the doctor,
When the anchor of life is apeak.
Then drink, etc.
MORALITY IN THE FORE-TOP.
TWO real tars, whom duty called
To watch in the fore-top,
Thus one another over-haul'd,
And took a cheering drop,
I say, Will Hatchway! cried Tom Tow,
Of conduct what is your sort,
As through the voyage of life you go,
To bring you safe to port?
Cried Jack, you lubber, don't you know
Our passions close to reef?
To steer where honor points the prow,
To hand a friend relief.
These anchors get but in your power,
My life for it that is your sort,
The bower, the sheet, and the best bower,
Must bring you into port.
Why then you're out, and there is an end,
Tom cried out, blunt and rough,
Be good, be honest, serve a friend,
The maxim's well enough;
Who swab^ his bows at other's woe,
That tar's for me your sort,
The vessel right ahead shall go,
To find a joyful port.
The storms of life upon me press,
Misfortunes make me ^eel,
Why, damme, what is my own distress,
For others let me feel;
Ay, ay if bound with a fresh gale,
To heaven this is your sort,
A hand^rchief's the best wet sail
To bring you safe to port.
SWEET ELLEN, SORROW'S CHILD.
COLD blew the wind, no gleam of light,
When Ellen left her home,
And braved the horrors of the night,
Over dreary wilds to ^oam:
The lovely maid had late been gay,
When hope and pleasure ^'d,
But now, alas! to grief a prey
Was Ellen, sorrow's child.
She long was William's promised bride,
But, ah! how sad a doom,
The gentle youth in beauty's pride,
Was summoned to the tomb:
No more those joys shall Ellen prove,
Which many an hour beguiled,
From morn to eye she mourns her love,
Sweet Ellen, sorrow's child.
With falt'ring step away she hies,
Over William's grave to weep,
For Ellen there with tears and sighs,
Her watch would often keep:
The pitying angel saw her woe,
And came, with aspect mild,
Thy tears shall now no longer flow,
Sweet Ellen, sorrow's child.
Thy plaintive notes were heard above,
Where thou shall soon find rest;
Again thou shall behold thy love,
And be forever blessed:
Ah! can such bliss be mine, she cried,
With voice and looks so wild,
Then sunk upon the earth and died --
Sweet Ellen, sorrow's child.
HOMEWARD BOUND.
COME loose every sail to the breeze,
The course of my vessel improve,
I Have done with the toils of the seas,
Ye sailors! I Am bound to my love,
Ye sailors! I Am bound to my love,
Ye sailors! I Am bound to my love.
I Have done with the toils of the seas,
Ye sailors! I Am bound to my love.
Since Emma is true as she is fair,
My griefs I fling all to the wind,
It Is a pleasing return for my cares;
My mistress is constant and kind.
My sails are all filled to my dear:
What tropick-bird swifter can move,
Who cruel shall hold his career,
That returns to the nest of his love.
Hoist every sail to the breeze,
Come, ship-mates, and join in the song;
Let Us drink while the ship cuts the seas,
To the gale that may drive her along.
POOR JACK.
GO patter to lubbers and swabs, do you see,
'Bout danger, and fear, and the like,
A tight water boat and good sea room give me,
And t'ent to a little I Will strike;
Though the tempest top-gallant masts smack smooth should smite,
And shiver each splinter of wood,
Clear the wreck, stow the yards, and bowse every thing tight,
And under reef'd foresail we'll feud:
Avast, nor don't think me a milk-sop so soft,
To be taken for trifles a-back,
For they say there is a providence sits up aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Why I heard our good Chaplain palaver one day
About souls, heaven, mercy and such --
And, my timbers! what lingo he would coil and belay!
Why 'twas all just as one as high Dutch:
But he said, how a sparrow cannot founder, do you see,
Without orders that come down below,
And many fine things that proved clearly to me
That providence takes us in tow;
For says he, do you mind me, let storms ever so often
Take the topsails of sailors aback,
There Is a sweet little cherub that sits up aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
I said to our Poll, for do you see she would cry,
When last we weighed anchor for sea,
What argufies sniv'ling and piping your eye?
Why what a great fool you must be!
Cannot you see the world's wide, and there is room for us all,
Both for seamen and lubbers ashore;
And if to old Davy I should go, friend Poll,
Why you never will hear of me more:
What then, all is a hazard, come don't be so soft,
Perhaps I may laughing come back;
For, do you see there is a cherub sits smiling aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Do You mind me, a sailor should be every inch,
All as one as a piece of the ship,
And with her brave the world without offering to flinch,
From the moment the anchor's a-trip;
As for me, in all weathers, all times, sides, and ^ds,
Nought's a trouble from duty that springs,
For my heart is my Poll's, and my rhino my friend's,
And as for my life it is the king's:
Even when my time comes, never believe me so soft,
As with grief to be taken aback;
That same little cherub that sits up aloft,
Will look out a good birth for poor Jack.
CAN OF GROG.
WHILE up the shrouds the sailor goes,
Or ventures on the yard,
The landsman who no better knows,
Believes his lot is hard:
Bold Jack with smiles each danger meets,
Weighs anchor, heaves the log,
Trims all the sails, belays the sheets,
And drinks his can of grog.
When mountains high the waves that swell
The vessel rudely bear,
Now sinking in a hollow dell,
Now quivering in the air:
Bold Jack, etc.
When waves against rocks and quicksands roar,
You never hear him repine;
Freezing near Greenland's icy shore,
Or burning near the line:
Bold Jack, etc.
If to engage they give the word,
To quarters all repair,
While splinter'd masts go by the board,
And shot sing through the air.
Bold Jack, etc.
HENRY.
MY heart from my bosom would fly;
And wander, oh! wander afar,
Reflection bedews my sad eye,
For Henry is gone to the war.
Oh! ye winds, to my Henry bear
One drop, let it fall on his breas^
The tear, as a pearl he will wear,
And I in remembrance be blessed.
In vain smiles the glittering scene,
In vain blooms the roseat flower:
The sunshine of April's not seen,
I have only to do with the shower.
Oh, ye winds, etc.
Ye winds that have borne him away,
Restore my dear youth to my arms;
Restore me to sunshine and day --
It Is night 'till my Henry returns.
Oh, ye winds, etc.
NOTHING LIKE GROG.
A PLAGUE of those musty old lubbers,
Who tell us to fast and to think,
And patient fall in with life's rubbers,
With nothing but water to drink.
A can of good stuff, had they twigg'd it,
Would have set them (...) agog,
And spite of the (...)
The rules of the schools,
The old fools would have all of them swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
My father, when last I from Guinea
Returned with abundance of wealth,
Cried, Jack, never be such a ninny
To drink; -- says I, -- father your health!
So I passed round the stuff, and he twigg'd it,
And it set the old codger agog;
And he swigg'd, and mother,
And sister, and brother,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
One day, when the chaplain was preaching,
Behind him I curiously slunk,
And, while he our duty was teaching,
As how we should never get drunk
I tipped him the stuff, and he twigg'd it,
Which soon set his reverence agog;
And he swigg'd, and Nick swigg'd,
And Ben swigg'd, and Dick swigg'd,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
Then trust me, there is nothing like drinking
So pleasant on this side the grave,
It keeps the unhappy from thinking,
And makes 'em more valiant, more brave,
For me, from the moment I twigg'd it,
The good stuff has set me agog,
Sick or well, late or early,
Wind foully or fairly,
I Have constantly, constantly swigg'd it;
And d -- mn me, there is nothing like grog.
I SAILED in the good ship the Kitty,
With a stiff blowing gale and rough sea,
Left Polly the lads call so pretty,
Safe here at anchor, yo yea, yo yea, yo yea, yo yea, yo yea.
She blubbered salt tears when we parted,
And cried, now be constant to me;
I told her not to be down-hearted,
So up with the anchor, yo yea.
When the wind whistled larboard and starboard,
And the storm came on weather and lee,
The hope I with her should be harbored,
Was my cable and anchor, yo yea.
And yet, my boys, would you believe me,
I returned with no rhino from sea;
My Polly would never receive me,
So again I heaved anchor, yo yea.
TALLY HO.
AT the sound of the horn,
We rise in the morn,
And waken the woods as we thunder along;
Yoix, yoix, Tally ho!
After Reynard we go,
While echo on echo redoubles the song.
We waken the woods as we thunder along,
Tally ho! tally ho!
After Reynard we go,
While echo on echo redoubles the song.
Not the steeds of the sun
Our brave courses outrun,
Over the mound horse and hound see us bound in full cry,
Like Phoebus we rise,
To the heights of the skies,
And, careless of danger five bars we defy.
We waken the woods, etc.
At eve, Sir, we rush,
And are close to his brush;
Already he dies, see him panting for breath:
Each feat and defeat,
We renew and repeat,
Regardless of life, so we are in at the death.
We waken the woods, etc.
With a bottle at night,
We prolong the delight.
Much Trimbush we praise, and the deeds that were done;
And y^x, Tally ho!
The next morning we go
With Phoebus, to end as we mount with the sun.
We waken the woods, etc
ADIEU MA LIBERTE.
NO more from fair to fair I rove,
A convert now to love I prove,
And boast my constancy;
I pensive sigh beneath the shade,
While thus resounds the echoing glade,
Adieu ma liberte.
No more with pipe or jocund song
I now attract the listening throng,
With merry wanton glee;
Alone I sigh for Chloe's charms,
And musing cry, with solded arms,
Adieu ma liberte.
Yet would the smiling fair (...)
My fond desires, my const^ (...)
How happy should I be?
With jocund song each grove should (...)
With joyful heart would Streph^
Adieu ma liberte.
THE TWINS OF LATONA
THE twins of Latona so kind to my boo^,
Arise to partake of the chase,
And Sol lends a ray to chaste Dian's fair moon,
And a smile to the smiles of her face.
For the sport delight in, the bright Queen of love,
With myrtles my brows shall adorn,
While Pan breaks his chaunter, and skulks in the grove,
Excelled by ^e sound of the horn.
The dogs are uncoupl'd, and sweet is their cry,
Yet sweeter the notes of sweet echo's reply;
Hark forward, bark forward, the game is in view,
But love is the game that I wish to pursue.
Tho s^ng from his chamber of woodbine peeps out,
His sentence he hears in the gale;
Yet flies, 'till entangl'd in fear and in doubt,
His courage and constancy fail.
Surrounded by foes, he prepares for the fray,
Des^ taking place of his fear!
With antlers erected a while stands at bay,
The^ surrenders his life with a tear.
The dogs are, etc.
THE LUCKY ESCAPE.
I THAT once was a ploughman, a sailor am now,
No lark that a^o^ in the sky,
Ever fluttered his wings to give speed to the plough,
Was so gay and so ^less as I,
But my friend was a carfindo aboard a king's ship,
And he ax'd me to go just to sea for a trip;
And he talked of such things
As if sailors were kings,
And so teazing did keep,
That I left my poor plough to go ploughing the deep.
No longer the horn
Called me up in the morn,
I trusted the Carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
I did not much like for to be aboard a ship,
When in danger there is no door to creep out;
I liked the jolly t^rs, I liked bumbo and flip,
But I did not like rocking about;
By and by came a hurricane, I did not like that,
Next a battle that many a sailor laid flat;
Ah! cried I, who would roam,
That like me had a home;
When I Would sow and I Would reap,
Ere I left my poor plough, to go ploughing the deep,
Where sweetly the horn
Called me up in the morn,
Ere I trusted the Carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
At last safe I landed, and in a whole skin,
Nor did I make any long stay,
Ere I found by a friend who I ax'd for my kin,
Father dead and my wife ran away!
Ah who but thyself, said I, have thou to blame?
Wives losing their husbands often lose their good name.
Ah why did I roam
When so happy at home:
I could sow and could reap,
Ere I left my poor plough to go ploughing the deep;
When so sweetly the horn
Called me up in the morn,
Curse light upon the Carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
Why if that be the case, said this very same friend,
And you ben't no more minded to roam,
Gi'e's a shake by the fist, all your care's at an end,
Dad's alive and your wife's safe at home,
Stark staring with joy, I leapt out of my skin,
Buss'd my wife, mother, sister, and all of my kin:
Now, cried I, let them roam,
Who want a good home,
I am well, so I Will keep,
Nor again leave my plough to go ploughing the deep;
Once more shall the horn
Call me up in the morn,
Nor shall any damned Carfindo, nor the inconstant wind
Ever tempt me for to go and leave my dear behind.
JACK RATLIN WAS THE ABLEST SEAMAN.
JACK Ratlin was the ablest seaman,
None like him could hand, reef, and steer:
No dangerous toil but he would encounter,
With skill and in contempt of fear.
In fight a lion, the battle ended,
Meek as the bleating lamb he would prove:
Thus Jack had manners, courage, merit,
Yet did he sigh, and all for love.
The song, the jest, the flowing liquor,
For none of these had Jack regard:
He, while his messmates were carousing,
High sitting on the pendant yard,
Would think upon his fair one's beauties,
Swore never from such charms to rove;
That truly he would adore them living,
And dying sigh -- to end his love.
The same express the crew commanded
Once more to view their native land,
Amongst the rest brought Jack some tidings,
Would it had been his love's fair hand;
Oh fate! her death defaced the letter;
Instant his pulse forgot to move;
With quivering lips, and eyes uplifted,
He heaved a sigh -- and died for love.
THE KNIFE-GRINDER.
THERE are grinders enough, sirs, of every degree,
From jewel-deck'd great to low poverty;
Whatever the station, it sharpens the sense,
And the wheel it goes round to wind in the pence.
Master-grinders enough at the helm you may find,
Though I Am but a journeyman -- Knives to grind.
Whatever the statesman may think of himself,
He turns fortune's wheel in pursuit of the pelf;
He grinds back and edge, sirs, his ends to obtain,
And his country may starve, so he pockets the gain.
Master-grinders, etc.
The rich grind the poor, is a saying of old;
The merchant the tradesman, we need not be told:
Whether Pagan, Mohammedan, Christian you be,
There are grinders of all sorts, of every degree.
Master-grinders, etc.
The patriot, with zeal animated, declares
The curtain he will draw, and display the state-play'rs;
He is a staunch grinder, to some it is well known,
And they are mightily galled by the grit of his stone.
Master-grinders, etc.
I too am a grinder; what, what, sirs, of that?
I am but in taste, since I copy the great:
To be, sirs, ingenuous, I Will tell you my mind;
It Is for what I can get, makes me willing to grind.
Master-grinders enough at the helm you may find,
Though I Am but a journeyman -- Knives to grind.
ADVICE TO THE LADIES.
TRUST not man for he will deceive you;
Treach'ry is his sole intent;
First he will court you, then he will leave you,
Poor deluded! to lament.
Formed by nature to undo us,
They escape our utmost heed;
Oh! how humble when they woo us,
But how proud when they succeed!
So the Bird when once deluded,
By the fowler's artful snare;
Pines out life, in cage secluded; --
Fair ones, while you're young, beware!
ADVICE TO THE GENTLEMEN.
TRUST not WOMAN she will beguile you,
All her smiles are formed by art;
First she will flatter then exile you,
Sighing with a broken heart!
Formed by nature to pursue us,
They outstrip the fleetest men; --
Ah! how sweet they bill and coo us,
But how proud they triumph then!
So the FISH the bait admiring,
On the angler's fatal snare,
Gasps out life in pangs expiring; --
LOVERS, of the hook, beware!
THE FREE-MASON'S Pocket Companion.

A COLLECTION OF Masonic Songs.

(...)

THE Free-Mason's Pocket Companion.
SONG I. ORIGIN OF MASONRY.
[Sung to the tune King Solomon.]
EVER time's great machine was in motion,
Or light had emitted a ray;
Enwomb'd in the bowels of Chaos,
All nature in embryo lay;
'Till the word of the Great Architector
Bid matter approach to the birth:
Then his hand spread the etherial blue curtain,
And molded the solid round earth.
CHORUS.
From the chaos of mankind selected,
A qualified, fraternal band,
By affection and honor cemented,
The Masonic Order shall stand.
But still did a veil of thick darkness
The face of creation invest;
'Till the omnific word of the Master
Bid light to burst forth from the East:
And instant the Sun, in full splendour,
Obeyed the potential behest;
And the Moon, in unclouded effulgence,
Displayed her fair orb in the West.
CHORUS.
Selected from darkness and ignorance,
(...) deep and divine,
Illumined by mental effulg^,
The Masonic Order shall shine.
In order the bright constellations,
Through space, ad i^ shone;
Instarr'd with its signs, the b^oad Zodiac
Begirt the fair heavens like a zone.
Then all the bright orbs, and their systems,
Composing one uniform whole,
Round their axis, and primary centers,
In mystical motion did roll.
CHORUS.
All taught by the most refined order,
In one friendly circle to move;
And tending to one general center,
The Lodge stands cemented in love.
The work thus completed, the Muses
All harmony's powers did employ;
Aloud all the sons of God shouted,
And clapped their pure hands with new joy;
Their goblets all charged with rich nectar,
High raised in their hands when they sung,
While with rounds to the grand Architector,
The Arch through immensity rung.
CHORUS.
Then, brethren, charge! charge all your glasses;
The sentiment echo along;
United, let us join to commem'rate
The harmony, mirth, and the song.
Hence, man, taught geometry, motion,
The musical powers so divine!
The circle, the rules of proportion,
The square, and the unerring line;
On the face of rude unadorned nature,
Caused cities and temples to rise;
His barks plowed the billowy waters;
His songs mounted up to the skies.
CHORUS.
Hail! Masonry -- hail! (...) descended,
With music and arts (...);
Thy existence, with ^s^, shall be (...).
'Till arts and the muses shall die.
SONG II. MOST EXCELLENT MASTER's SONG.
ALL hail! to the morning
That bids us rejoice;
The Temple's completed,
Exalt high each voice*
The Cape-Stone is finished,
Our labor is over;
The sound of the Gavel
Shall hail us no more.
To the power Almighty, who ever has gilded
The tribes of old Israel, exalting their fame*
To him who has governed our hearts, undivided,
Let Us send forth our voices to praise his great name.
Companions, assemble
On this joyful day,
The occasion is glorious,
The Key-Stone to lay;
Fulfilled is the promise,
By the ANCIENT OF DAYS,
To bring forth the Cape-Stone,
With shouting and praise.
CEREMONIES.
There Is no more occasion for Level or Plum-Line,
For Trowel or Gavel, for Compass or Square;
Our works are completed, the Ark safely seated,
And we shall be greeted as workmen most rare.
Now those that are worthy,
Our toils who have shared,
And proved themselves faithful,
Shall meet their reward.
Their virtue and knowledge,
Industry and skill,
Have our approbation,
Have gained our good will.
We accept and receive them, most excellent masters,
Invested with honors, and power to preside;
Amongst worthy craftsmen, wherever assembled,
The knowledge of Masons to spread far and wide.
ALMIGHTY JEHOVAH,
Descend now, and fill
This Lodge with thy glory,
Our hearts with good will;
Preside at our meetings,
Assist us to find
True pleasure in teaching
Good will to mankind.
Thy wisdom inspired the great institution,
Thy strength shall support it, 'till nature expire;
And when the creation shall fall into ruin,
Its beauty shall rise, through the midst of the fire!
SONG III. MASTER's SONG.
[Tune -- "Greenwich Pensioner."]
I SING the Masons glory,
Whose prying mind does burn;
Unto complete perfection,
Our mysteries to learn;
Not those who visit Lodges
To eat and drink their fill;
Not those who at our meetings
Hear lectures against their will:
CHORUS.
But only those whose pleasure
At every Lodge can be,
TO improve themselves by lectures,
In glorious Masonry.
Hail glorious Masonry!
The faithful worthy Brother,
Whose heart can feel for grief;
Whose bosom with compassion
Steps forth to its relief,
Whose soul is ever ready,
Around him to diffuse
The principles of Masons,
And guard them from abuse;
CHORUS.
These are thy sons, whose pleasure,
At every Lodge, will be,
TO improve themselves by lectures,
In glorious Masonry.
Hail! glorious Masonry!
King Solomon, our patron,
Transmitted this command,
"The faithful and praiseworthy,
True light must understand;
And my descendants, also,
Who Are seated in the East,
Have not fulfilled their duty,
'Till light has reached the West."
CHORUS.
Therefore, our highest pleasure
At every Lodge, should be,
TO improve ourselves by lectures,
In glorious Masonry.
Hail! glorious Masonry!
My duty and my station,
As Master in the chair,
Obliges me to summon
Each Brother to prepare;
That all may be enabled,
By slow, though sure degrees,
To answer in rotation,
With honor and with ease.
CHORUS.
Such are thy sons, whose pleasure
At every Lodge will be,
TO improve themselves by lectures,
In glorious Masonry.
Hail! glorious Masonry!
SONG IV. SENIOR WARDEN's SONG.
Tune -- "When the hollow drum does beat to bed."
WHEN the Senior Warden, standing in the West
Calls us from our labor to partake of rest,
We unite, whilst he recites
The duties of a Mason.
On the level meet,
On the square we part,
So says each worthy Brother.
This rule in view,
We thus renew,
Our friendship for each other,
Chorus. -- When the Senior, etc.
When our work is over, implements secure,
Each returning homeward, with intentions pure,
Our wives we kiss, give sweethearts bliss,
Which makee them both love Masons;
And thus we may
Enjoy each day
At home, and at our meetings;
Our sweethearts eased,
Our wives well pleased,
Saluted with such greetings.
Chorus. -- When the Senior, etc.
SONG V. JUNIOR WARDEN's SONG.
Tune, -- "Faint and wearily, etc."
NOW the Junior Warden calls us from our labors,
Now the Sun is at meridian height,
We will merrily unite most cheerily,
With social harmony new joys invite.
One and all, at his call,
To the feast repairing,
All around joys resound,
Each the pleasure sharing.
Chorus. When the Junior Warden, etc.
Mirth and jollity, without frivolity,
Pervade our walls while at the festive board;
Justice, temperance,
And prudence govern us,
There Is naught but harmony amongst us heard.
One and all, at the call,
To the feast repairing,
All around joys resound,
Each the pleasure sharing.
Chorus. Mirth and jollity, etc.
Thus we ever will enjoy the pleasant moments
Given unto us from the Master's chair,
'Till the Sun an hour has past meridian,
And then each Brother to his work repair.
One and all hear the call,
From the feast repairing,
All around gavels sound,
Each the labor sharing.
Chorus. Thus we ever will, etc.
SONG VI. WARDEN's TOAST.
FREEMASONS all,
Attend the call;
It Is by command
You all are warned,
To fill up a bumper and keep it at hand,
To drink to "The Mother of Masons."
Let each give the word to his Brother,
To prove that we love one another;
Let Us fill to the dame
From whom we all came,
And call her "Of Masons the Mother."
CHORUS.
The Stewards have laid foundations,
To prove that we love our relations;
By toasting the Dame
From whom we all came,
We'll call her "The Mother of Masons."
In days of yore
Freemasons bore
A flask of wine,
Of mirth the sign,
And often they filled with the liquor divine,
To drink to "The Mother of Masons."
'Twas on these joyful occasions,
All charged stood firm to their stations,
And toasted the dame, from whom we all came,
Repeating, "The Mother of Masons."
Chorus. The Stewards have laid, etc.
Be all prepared,
Each motion squared,
And at the nod,
With one accord,
In strictest rotation we'll pass round the word,
Drink, Drink, to "The Mother of Masons."
Have a care right and left, and make ready,
Be all in your exercise steady;
And fill to the dame
From whom we all came,
And toast her "The Mother of Masons."
Chorus. The Stewards have laid, etc.
SONG VII. NEW-YEAR, OR FESTIVAL SONG.
COME Brothers, let us cheerful sing,
Who can our arts discover?
For friendship, like a boiling spring,
Flows constant for each other.
Let Us crown the festival with mirth,
And hail the great mysterious birth,
That adds such friendship here on earth,
As makes a faithful Brother.
While jarring discords separate
The firmest bands of unity,
Of every class, of every state,
Except it be Freemasonry;
Our arts are formed so just and pure,
They will from age to age endure,
And in the bosom rest secure,
With all that gain the mystery.
Our manners we derive and wear,
From actors we discover;
Let Us cheerful hear him in the chair,
And each proclaiming brother.
And as we now begin the year,
Let love and friendship fill the ear,
With cordial harmony sincere,
To every faithful Brother.
The greatest man found in the land,
Of this, or any other,
Will take a brother by the hand,
And bid him welcome hither.
O may their same in raptures roll,
And wide extend from pole to pole;
There Is no such friendship for the soul,
No, not with one another.
Where is an art with Masons vie?
None -- say the wise, of every tongue;
Yet so secure, from thought, or eye,
And handed down from fire to son.
Now let each celebrare the strain
That echoes with a Mason's name:
And all as one salute the fame
Of our Grand Master WASHINGTON.
SONG VIII. KNIGHT TEMPLAR's SONG,
TO the Knight Templar's awful dome,
Where glorious Knights in arms were dressed,
Filled with surprise, I slowly came,
With solemn jewels on my breast.
A pilgrim to this house I came,
With sandal, scarf, and scrip so white,
Through rugged paths my feet were led,
All this I bore to be a Knight.
With feeble arm I gently smote
At the Knight Templar's mercy gate,
What I beheld when it was ope'd
Was splendid, elegant and great.
Twelve dazzling lights I quickly saw,
All chosen for the cross to fight;
In one of them I found a flaw,
And speedily put out that light.
In regimentals did I dress,
Trimmed with colors black and blue,
A blazing star on the left breast,
Denotes a heart that is always true.
Let none the Templar's name deny,
As Peter did the pass forsake,
Your conduct still preserve from blame,
And keep your heads free from the stake.
Unite your hearts and join your hands,
In every sole^ the of love,
United shall each Templar stand,
The virtue of his cause to prove,
Until the world is lost in fire,
By order of the Trinity,
The amazing world will still admire
Our steadfast love and unity.
SONG IX. ROYAL ARCH SONG.
ALMIGHTY Sire! our heavenly king,
Before whose sacred name we bend,
Accept the praises which we sing,
And to our humble prayer attend!
All hail great Architect divine!
This universal frame is thine.
Thou who did Persia's King command,
A proclamation to extend,
That Israel's sons might quit his land,
Their holy temple to attend.
That sacred place where three in one,
Comprised thy comprehensive name;
And where the bright meridian sun
Was soon thy glory to proclaim.
SONG X.
[Tune, He comes, etc.]
UNITE, unite, your voices raise;
Loud, loudly sing Free Masons' praise:
Spread far and wide their spotless fame,
And glory in the sacred name.
Behold, behold, the upright band,
In Virtue's paths go hand in hand;
They shun each ill, they do no wrong,
Strict honor does to them belong.
How just, how just, are all their ways,
Superior far to mortal praise!
Their worth description far exceeds,
For matchless are Free Masons' deeds.
Go on, go on, ye just and true,
Still, still the same bright paths pursue;
The admiring world shall on you gaze,
And Friendship's altar ever blaze.
Begone, begone, fly discord hence,
With party rage and insolence:
Sweet peace shall bless this happy band,
And Freedom smile throughout the land.
SONG XI.
[Tune, Rule Britannia.]
WHEN earth's foundation first was laid
By the Almighty Artist's hand,
'Twas then our perfect, our perfect laws were made,
Established by his strict command.
CHORUS.
Hail, mysterious; hail, glorious Masonry!
That makes us ever great and free.
As man throughout for shelter sought,
In vain from place to place did roam,
Until from heaven, from heaven he was taught
To plan, to build, to fix his home.
Hail mysterious, etc.
Hence illustrious rose our Art,
And now in beauteous piles appear;
Which shall to endless, to endless time impart,
How worthy and how great we are.
Hail mysterious, etc.
Nor we less famed for every tie,
By which the human thought is bound;
Love, truth, and friendship, and friendship socially,
Join all our hearts and hands around.
Hail mysterious, etc.
Our actions still by virtue blessed,
And to our precepts ever true,
The world admiring, admiring shall request
To learn, and our bright paths pursue.
Hail mysterious, etc.
SONG XII.
[May be sung to the Tune, Rule Britannia^]
ERE God the Universe began,
In one rude heap all matter lay,
Which wild disorder overran,
Nor knew of light one glimmering ray;
While, in darkness over the whole,
Confusion reigned without control,
Then God arose, his thunders hurled,
And bade the Elements arise;
In Air he hung the pendant World,
And over it spread the azure Skies;
Stars in circles caused to run,
And in the center fixed the Sun.
Then man he called forth out of dust,
And formed him with a living soul;
All things committed to his trust,
And made him Lord of all, the whole;
But ungrateful unto Heaven
He proved, and was from Eden driven.
From thence proceeded all our woes,
Nor could mankind one comfort share;
Until Free Masons greatly rose,
And formed another Eden here;
Where true Pleasure ever reigns,
And native innocence remains.
Here crystal fountains bubbling flow,
Here naught that is vile can enter in;
The Tree of Knowledge here does grow,
Whose fruit we taste, yet free from Sin;
While sweet Friendship does abound,
And guardian Angels ho^er round.
SONG XIII.
NOT the fictions of Greece, nor the dreams of old Rome,
Shall with visions mislead, or with meteors consume:
No Pegasus' wings my short soarings misguide;
Nor raptures detain me on Helicon side.
All clouds now dissolve; from the East beams the day --
Truth rises in glory, and wakens the lay.
The Eagle eyed Muse -- sees the light -- fills the grove
With the song of Free Masons, of Friendship and Love!
Inspired with the theme, the Divinity flies;
And throned on a rainbow -- before her arise
Past, Present and Future -- with splendid array,
In masonick succession, their treasures display.
She views murdered Merit by ruffian hand fall,
And the grave give its dead up, at fellowship's call!
While the Craft, by their badges, their innocence prove;
And the song of Free Masons is Friendship and Love!
From those ages remote, see the Muse speeds her way,
To join in the glories, the Present display.
In freedom and friendship, she sees the true band,
With their splendour and virtues illumine the land.
Religion's pure beam breaks the vapors of night,
And from darkness mysterious, the Word gives the Light!
While the Lodge here below, as the choirs from above,
Join the song of Free Masons in Friendship and Love.
That the Future might keep, what the Present bestows,
In rapture prophetic the goddess arose,
As she sung through the skies, angels echoed the sound,
And the winds bore the notes to the regions around!
The kind proclamation our song shall retain:
'Twas -- "That Masonry long may its luster maintain:
And 'till Time be no more, our Fraternity prove,
That the objects we aim at, are Friendship and Love!"
SONG XIV.
[Tune, Rural Felicity.]
YE dull stupid Mortals, give over your conjectures,
Since Free Masons' secrets ye never can obtain;
The Bible and Compass are our sure directors,
And shall be as long as this world does remain.
Here Friendship inviting, here Freedom delighting,
Our moments in innocent mirth we employ:
CHORUS.
Come, see, Masons' felicity,
Working and singing with hearts full of joy.
No other Society that you can mention,
Which has been, is now, or hereafter shall be,
However so laudable is its intention,
It cannot compare with divine Masonry.
No envy, no quarrels, can here blast our laurels,
No passion our pleasure can ever annoy:
Come, see, etc.
To aid one another we always are ready,
Our Rites and our Secrets we carefully guard;
The Lodge to support, we like pillars are steady,
No Babel confusion our work can retard.
Ye Mortals come hither, assemble together,
And taste of those pleasures which never can cloy.
Come, see etc.
We are to the Master for ever obedient,
Whenever he calls, to the Lodge we repair;
Experience has taught us, that it is most expedient
To live within Compass, and act on the Square,
Let mutual agreement be Free Masons' cement,
Until the whole Universe time shall destroy:
Come, see, etc.
SONG XV.
[Tune, When Phoebus the tops, etc.]
WHILST Princes and Heroes promiscuously f;ight.
And for the World's empire exert all their might,
We sit in our Lodges from danger secure,
No hardships we meet with, no pains we endure;
But each Brother cheerfully joins in a song:
Our rites we renew,
Our pleasures pursue;
Thus we waft time along.
To restless ambition we never give way,
Our friends and our secrets we never betray;
Henceforth, O ye Heroes, your ravages cease,
And the ^urels ye wear, to Free Masons release:
Though ye ^n them by war, we claim them by peace.
They are ours, ours, ours, ours, ours;
Though ye won them by war, we claim them by peace.
SONG XVI.
[Tune, Hearts of Oak.]
NO sect in the world can with Masons compare,
So ancient, so noble's the badge that they wear,
That all other Orders, however esteemed.
Inferior to Masonry far has been deemed.
CHORUS.
We always are free,
And for ever agree;
Supporting each other,
Brother helps Brother,
No Mortals on earth are so friendly as we.
When first attick fire Mortals glory became,
Though small was the spark, it soon grew to a flame;
As Phoebus celestial transcendently bright,
It spread over the world a fresh torrent of light.
We always, etc.
The greatest of Monarchs, the wisest of Men,
Free Masonry honored again and again;
And Nobles have quitted all other delights
With joy to preside over our mystical rites.
We always, etc.
Though some may pretend we have no Secrets to know,
Such idle opinions their ignorance show;
While others, with raptures, cry out, they are revealed,
In Free Mason's bosoms they still lie concealed.
We always, etc.
Coxcomical Pedants may say what they can,
Abuse us, ill use us, and laugh at our plan,
We'll temper our mortar, enliven our souls,
And join in a chorus over full flowing bowls.
We always, etc.
SONG XVII.
[Tune, Arno's Vale.]
WHEN my divine Althaea's charms,
No more shall kindle soft alarms,
And the keen lightning of her eye,
Passes unfelt, unheeded by;
When moral Beauty's heavenly form
Shall cease the frozen soul to warm;
When manners thus corrupt we see,
Farewell the sweets of Masonry!
When Science shall withdraw her light,
And Error spread a Gothic night;
When Pity's sacred source is dry,
No pearly drop to melt the eye;
When Truth shall hide her blushing head,
And famished Virtue beg her bread;
When manners thus corrupt we see,
Farewell the sweets of Masonry!
But while the fair transport our fight,
And moral beauty's charms delight;
While Science lifts her torch on high,
And pity thaws the melting eye;
While Truth maintains despotick power,
And Virtue charms without a dower;
While manners thus unstained we see,
All hail the sweets of Masonry!
SONG XVIII.
ON, on, my dear Brethren, pursue your great lecture,
And refine on the rules of old architecture;
High honor to Masons the Craft daily brings,
To those Brothers of Princes and Fellows of Kings.
Then Master and Brethren preserve your great name,
This Lodge so majestic will purchase you fame;
Revered it shall stand till all nature expire,
And its glories never fade till the world is on fire.
See, see, behold here, what rewards all our toil,
Inspires our genius, and bids labor smile:
To our noble Grand Master were solemnly bound,
With honor we are decked, and with virtue we are crowned.
Again, my loved Brethren, again let it pass,
Our ancient firm union cements with the glass:
And all the contention amongst Masons shall be,
Who better can work, or who better agree.
SONG XIX.
[Tune, In infancy, etc.]
LET Masonry from pole to pole
Her sacred laws expand,
Far as the mighty waters roll,
To wash remotest land;
That virtue has not left mankind,
Her social maxims prove,
For stamped upon the Mason's mind,
Is Unity and Love.
Ascending to her native sky,
Let Masonry increase;
A glorious pillar raised on high,
Integrity its base.
Peace adds to olive boughs, entwined,
An emblematick dove,
As stamped upon the Mason's mind,
Is Unity and Love.
SONG XX.
[Tune, Mulberry Tree.]
YE sons of fair Science, impatient to learn,
What Is meant by a Mason you here may discern;
He strengthens the weak, he gives light to the blind,
And the naked he clothes -- is a friend to mankind.
All shall yield to Masonry,
Bend to thee
Blessed Masonry,
Matchless was he who founded thee,
And thou, like him, immortal shall be.
He walks on the Level of Honor and Truth,
And spurns the trite passions of folly and youth;
The Compass and Square all his frailties reprove,
And his ultimate object is Brotherly Love.
The temple of Knowledge he nobly does raise,
Supported by Wisdom, and Learning its base;
When reared and adorned, Strength and Beauty unite,
And he views the fair structure with conscious delight.
With fortitude blessed, he is a stranger to fears,
And governed by Prudence, he cautiously steers,
Till Temperance shows him the port of Content,
And Justice unasked, gives the sign of consent.
Inspired by his feelings, he bounty imparts,
For Charity ranges at large in our hearts;
And an indigent brother relieved from his woes,
Feels a pleasure inferior to him who bestows.
Thus a Mason I Have drawn and exposed to your view,
And truth must acknowledge the figure is true;
Should you members become -- be brothers and friends,
There Is a SECRET remaining, will make you amends.
SONG XXI.
[Tune, God save the King.]
HAIL Masonry divine;
Glory of ages shine,
Long may thou reign:
Wherever thy Lodges stand,
May they have great command,
And always grace the land,
Thou art divine!
Great fabrics still arise,
And grace the azure skies,
Great are thy schemes:
Thy noble Orders are
Matchless beyond compare;
No Art with thee can share,
Thou Art divine!
Hiram, the architect,
Did all the Craft direct
How they should build;
Sol'mon, great Isr'el's King, Chorus 3 times.
Did mighty blessings bring, Chorus 3 times.
And left us room to sing, Chorus 3 times.
Hail, royal Art! Chorus 3 times.
SONG XXII.
COME let us prepare,
We Brothers that are
Assembled on merry occasion;
Let Us be happy and sing,
For Life is a spring
To a Free and an Accepted Mason.
The world is in pain
Our secrets to gain,
And still let them wonder and gaze on:
They never can divine
The word or the sign
Of a Free and an Accepted Mason.
It Is this and it is that,
They cannot tell what,
Nor why the great men of the nation
Should aprons put on,
And make themselves one
With a Free and an Accepted Mason.
Great Kings, Dukes, and Lords,
Have laid by their swords,
Our mystery to put a good grace on,
And never been ashamed
To hear themselves named
With a Free and an Accepted Mason.
Antiquity's pride
We have on our side,
To keep up our old reputation:
There Is naught but what is good
To be understood
By a Free and an Accepted Mason.
We Are true and sincere,
And just to the Fair;
They Will trust us on any occasion:
No mortal can more
The Ladies adore,
Than a Free and an Accepted Mason.
Then join hand in hand,
By each Brother firm stand,
Let Us be merry and put a bright face on:
What mortal can boast
So noble a toast
As a Free and an Accepted Mason.
CHORUS. Three times.
No mortal can boast
So noble a toast
As a Free and an Accepted Mason.
SONG XXIII.
WHEN a Lodge of Free Masons are clothed in their aprons,
In order to make a new Brother,
With firm hearts and clean hands they repair to their stands,
And justly support one another.
Trusty Brother, take care, of evedroppers beware,
It Is a just and a solemn occasion;
Give the Word and the Blow, that workmen may know.
There Is one asks to be made a Free Mason.
The Master stands due, and his officers too,
While the Craftsmen are plying their station:
The Apprentices stand, right for the command
Of a Free and an Accepted Mason.
Now traverse your ground, as in duty you're bound,
And revere the authentic oration,
That leads to the way, and proves the first ray
Of the light of an Accepted Mason.
Here Is Words, and here is Signs, and here is Problems and Lines,
And here is room too for deep speculation;
Here Virtue and Truth are taught to the Youth,
When first he is called up to a Mason.
Hieroglyphics shine bright, and here light reverts light
On the rules and the tools of vocation;
We work and we sing, to the Craft honor bring,
It Is both duty and choice in a Mason.
What is said or is done, is here truly laid down
In this form of our high installation;
Yet I challenge all men to know what I mean,
Unless he is an Accepted Mason.
The ladies claim right to come into our light,
Since the Apron, they say, is their bearing;
Can they subject their will? -- Can they keep their tongues still,
And let talking be changed into bearing?
This difficult task is the least we can ask,
To secure us on sundry occasions;
When with this they comply, our utmost we'll try
To raise Lodges for Lady Free Masons.
'Till this can be done, must each Brother be mum,
Though the fair one should wheedle or teaze on;
Be just, true, and kind, but still bear in mind,
At all times that you are a Free Mason.
SONG XXIV.
HOW happy a Mason whose bosom still flows
With friendship, and ever most cheerfully goes,
The effects of the mysteries lodged in his breast,
Mysteries revered, and by Princes possessed.
Our friends and our bottle we best can enjoy,
No rancour or envy our quiet annoy,
Our plumbline and compass, our square and our tools,
Direct all our actions in virtue's fair rules,
Direct all our actions, etc.
To Mars and to Venus we are equally true,
Our hearts can enliven, our arms can subdue;
Let the enemy tell, and the ladies declare,
No class or profession with Masons compare;
To give a fond luster we never need a crest,
Since honor and virtue remain in our breast,
We'll charm the rude world when we clap, laugh and sing.
If so happy a Mason, say who'd be a King;
If so happy, etc.
SONG XXV.
[Tune, Belleisle March.]
IN History we are told, how the Lodges of old
Arose in the East, and shone forth like the Sun;
But all must agree, that divine Masonry
Commenced when the glorious creation begun:
With glory divine, oh, long may thou shine,
Thou choicest of blessings, derived from above!
Then charge bumpers high, and with shou^s rend the sky,
To Masonry, Friendship, and Brotherly love.
Cho. With glory divine, etc.
Judea's great King, whose vast praises we sing,
With wisdom contrived, while the temple he planned;
The mysterious art then took place in each heart,
And Hiram with Solomon went hand in hand:
While each royal name was recorded in fame,
Their works, Earth and Heaven did jointly approve;
Then charge bumpers high, and with shouts rend the sky,
To Masonry, Friendship, and Brotherly Love.
Cho. While each royal, etc.
Then Masons were true, and the Craft daily grew;
They lived within Compass, and worked by the Square;
In friendship they dwelt, no ambition they felt,
Their deeds were upright, and their consciences clear;
On this noble plan, Free Masons began,
To help one another they mutually strove;
Then charge bumpers high, and with shouts rend the sky
To Masonry, Friendship, and Brotherly love.
Cho. On this noble plan, etc.
Those maxims pursue, and your passions subdue,
And imitate those worthy Masons of yore;
Fix a Lodge in each breast, be fair virtue your guest,
Let wisdom preside, and let truth tile the door:
So shall we arise, to an immortal prize,
In that blissful Lodge, which no time can remove;
Then charge bumpers high, and with shouts rend the sky,
To Masonry, Friendship, and Brotherly Love.
Cho. So shall we arise, etc.
SONG XXVI. THE REVIVAL OF MASONRY.
[Tune, Vicar of Bray.]
WHEN Masonry expiring lay, by knaves and fools rejected,
Without one hope, one cheering ^ay, by worthless sons neglected,
Fair virtue fled, truth hung her head, overwhelmed in deep confusion,
Sweet friendship too her smiles withdrew, from this blessed institution.
CHORUS.
Now this is law, I will maintain, until my dying day, Sir,
What institution ever may reign, Masonry bears the sway, Sir,
Columbia's sons determined then Free Masonry to cherish,
They roused her into life again, and bid fair science flourish;
Now virtue bright, truth robbed in white, with friendship hither hasten,
All go hand in hand, to bless the band of true Columbian Masons,
Cho. For this, etc.
Since Masonry's revived once more, pursue her wise directions,
Let circumspection go before, and virtue square your actions;
Unite your hands in friendship's bands, supporting one another,
With honest heart, fair truth impart, to every faithful Brother.
Cho. For this, etc.
Let coxcombs grin, and critics sneer, while we are blythe and jolly,
Let fops despise the badge we wear, we laugh at all their solly;
Let empty fools despise our rules, Brothers we never will heed 'em,
Say what they will, we are Masons still, and will support our freedom.
Cho. For this, etc.
But may kind Heaven's gracious hand, still regulate each action,
May every Lodge securely stand against the storms of faction;
May love and peace each day increase, throughout this happy nation,
May they extend, till all shall end, in one great conflagration.
Cho. For this, etc.
SONG XXVII.
[Tune, In infancy,]
HAIL Masonry! thou sacred art,
Of origin divine!
Kind partner of each social heart,
And favorite of the Nine!
By thee we are taught, our acts to square,
To measure life's short span;
And each infirmity to bear
That Is incident to man.
Cho. By thee, etc.
Though envy's tongue would blast thy fame,
And simple ignorance sneer,
Yet still thy ancient honored name
To each true Brother's dear:
Then strike the blow, to charge prepare,
In this we all agree,
May freedom be each Mason's care,
And every Mason free.
Cho. Then strike the blow, etc.
SONG XXVIII.
[Tune, Casino.]
COME ye Masons hither bring
The tuneful pipe and pleasing string,
Exert each voice,
Aloud rejoice,
And make the spacious Concave ring:
Let your hearts be blythe and gay,
Joy and mirth let all display,
No dull care
Shall enter here,
For this is Masons' holiday.
Cho. Let your hearts, etc.
Friendship here has fixed her seat,
And virtue finds a calm retreat,
Go tell the fool,
It Is wisdom's school,
Where love and honor always mee^.
Cho. Let your hearts, etc.
Social pleasures ^ere invite,
To fill the soul with sweet delight,
While hand in hand
Our friendly band
In love and harmony unite.
Cho. Let your hearts, etc.
May we often assemble here,
And long the badge of honor wear,
May joy abound,
And we be found
For ever faithful and sincere.
Cho. Let your hearts, etc.
Take the flowing glass in hand,
And drink unto our Master Grand,
Long may he reign,
The cause maintain,
And Lodges flourish through the land.
Cho. Let your hearts, etc.
SONG XXIX.
[Tune, From the East breaks the Morn.]
WHILST each Poet sings of great Princes and Kings,
To no such does my ditty belong:
To no such does my ditty belong:
It Is freedom I praise, that demands all my lays,
And Masonry honors my song.
And Masonry honors my song.
Cho. It Is freedom I praise, etc.
Within compass to live, is a lesson we give,
Which none can deny to be true;
Which none can, etc.
All our actions to square, to the time we take care,
And virtue we ever pursue;
And virtue we ever, etc.
Cho. All our actions, etc.
On a level we are, all true brothers share
The gifts which kind Heaven bestows;
The gifts, etc.
In friendship we dwell; none but Masons can tell
What bliss from such harmony flows;
What bliss, etc.
Cho. In friendship we, etc.
In our mystical school, we must all work by rule,
And our secrets we always conceal;
And our, etc.
Then let us sing and rejoice, and unite every voice,
With fervency, freedom, and zeal;
With fervency, etc.
Cho. Then let us sing, etc.
Then each fill a glass, let the circling toast pass,
And merrily send it around;
And merrily, etc.
Let us Masonry hail, may it ever prevail,
With success may it ever be crowned!
With success, etc.
Cho. Let us Masonry, etc.
SONG XXX.
[Tune, Balance a straw.]
WHEN the sun from the east first salutes mortal eyes,
And the sky lark melodiously bids us arise;
With our hearts full of joy, we the summons obey,
Straight repair to our work, and to moisten our clay.
On the trassel our Master draws angles and lines,
There with freedom and fervency forms his designs;
Not a picture on earth is so lovely to view,
All his lines are so perfect, his angles so true.
In the west see the Warden submissively stand,
The Master to aid, and obey his command;
The intent of his signals we perfectly know,
And we never take offense when he gives us a blow.
In the Lodge, sloth and dullness we always avoid,
Fellow Crafts and Apprentices all are employed:
Perfect ashlers some finish, some make the rough plain,
All are pleased with their work, and are pleased with their gain.
When my Master I Have served seven years, perhaps more,
Some secrets he will tell me I never knew before;
In my bosom I Will keep them as long as I live,
And pursue the directions his wisdom shall give.
I Will attend to his call both by night and by day,
It is his to command, and it is mine to obey;
Whensoe'er we are met, I Will attend to his nod,
And I Will work 'till high twelve, then I Will lay down my hod.
SONG XXXI.
[Tune, By Jove I Will be free.]
OF all institutions to form well the mind,
And make us to every virtue inclined;
None can with the Craft of Free Masons compare,
Nor teach us so truly our actions to square;
For it was ordained by our founder's decree,
That we should be social, be loving, and free,
be loving, and free, etc.
We in harmony, friendship, and unity meet,
And every Brother most lovingly greet;
When we see one in distress, we then do impart
Some comfort to cheer and enliven his heart;
Thus always we live, and for ever agree,
Resolved to be social, most loving, and free,
most loving, and free, etc.
By points of good fellowship we still accord,
Observing each Brother's true sign, grip, and word;
Which from our Great Architect was handed down,
And never will to any but Masons be known;
Then here is to our Brethren of every degree,
Who always are social, are loving, and free,
are loving, and free, etc.
Thus we interchangeably hold one another,
To let mankind see how we are linked to each Brother;
No monarch that secret knot can untie,
Nor can prying mortals the reason know why;
For our hearts like our hands, still united shall be;
Still secret, still social, still loving, and free,
still loving, and free, etc.
SONG XXXII.
ONCE I was blind and could not see,
And all was dark around;
But Providence did pity me,
And soon a friend I found;
Through secret paths my friend me led;
Such paths as babblers never tread.
With a fa, la, la, etc.
All stumbling blocks he took away,
That I might walk secure;
And brought me long ever break of day,
To Sol's bright temple door;
Where there we both admittance found,
By power of magic, spells and sound.
The eurber of my bold attempt,
Did then my breast alarm;
And hinted I was not exempt,
If rash, from double harm;
Which quickly stopped my rising pride.
And made me trust more to my guide.
In solemn pace I was led up,
And passed through the bright dome,
But soon I was obliged to stop,
'Till I myself made known;
Then round in ancient form was brought,
TO obtain the favor that I sought.
With humble posture and due form,
I listened with good will;
And found, instead of noise and storm,
That all was hushed and still;
And soon a heavenly sound did hear,
That quite dispelled all doubt and fear.
The guardian of this mystic charm,
In shining jewels dressed;
Said, that I need to fear no harm,
If faithful was my breast;
For though to rogues he was severe,
No harm an honest man need fear.
Bright wisdom from his awful throne,
Bade darkness to withdraw;
No sooner said, but it was done.
And then -- great things I saw;
But what they were -- I now will not tell,
But safely in my breast shall dwell.
Then round and round me he did tie
An ancient noble charm;
Which future darkness will defy,
And ward off cowans harm:
Then I returned from whence I came,
Not what I was, but what I am.
SONG XXXIII.
YE gracious powers of choral song,
Attend; inspire your festive throng;
Let harmless mirth, and frolic glee,
Dance sportive at our Jubilee.
We ask no sound of spear or shield,
No trophies of the ensanguin'd field;
Let hope, let faith and charity,
Begin and end our Jubilee.
No savage warrior's scarlet name,
Shall ever defile our roll of fame;
But peace, with white robbed train we see,
Presiding at our Jubilee.
The heart that feels for widowed woe,
The tears, for orphans pangs that flow,
The voice which bids distress to flee,
Shall celebrate our Jubilee.
Mercy, with pearly melting eye,
Stern Justice with her sword on high,
Shall both attendant angels be,
To guide, to guard our Jubilee.
Each Brother's soul shall rapturous swell,
Nor sorrow ^l her sadd'ning knell;
The voice, the hands, the heart by three,
Shall thrice repeat our Jubilee.
Then call from east to west the world,
The mystic banners are unsurl'd!
And O^ departed ancients, see
From heaven, and bless our Jubilee!
Lo! from his great or little store,
Each Brother flies his ^ite to pour,
That men may still rejoice to see,
A Mason's lodge a Jubilee.
Then, round the circle, let the glass
Yet in the square, convivial pass;
And when the sun winds over the lea,
Each lass shall have her Jubilee.
Be this the general, cordial toast,
A wish that never should be lost,
That a^ the world may Masons be,
And live and love in Jubilee.
SONG XXXIV.
DEAR Brothers of fraternal mind.
Whom virtue, truth and honor bind,
In whom the sons of science find
No sly dissimulation;
Accept a tribute justly due,
From a fond heart, faithful and true,
Accept a tender, sad adieu,
And believe
That I grieve,
Your worthy social band to leave,
Because I am a Mason.
Yet though remote from you I stray,
Where fickle fortune leads the way,
Your memory in my breast shall stay,
While I have respiration:
And let me hold that fond idea,
That you will mind unworthy me,
Whenever you meet in social glee:
Give a toast,
Let me boast
The friendship of your noble host.
I ask it as a Mason.
If ever the Sirens of the age
Has drawn me from your mystic gage,
Pray blot the error from the page
Of rigid observation.
Your kindness on my heart I Will write,
And all unkindness from my sight,
I Will banish to eternal night.
Let us be
Masons free;
Forgive, likewise forgiven be,
The creed of every Mason.
Your choicest love I often did share,
Your brightest badge did often wear,
Placed in the Oriental chair,
By mystic installation.
And by the emblematic three,
Dispersed the gifts of Masonry,
'Till the meridian hour we see;
Then we may
Wet our clay,
And pass an hour cheerful and gay,
In grateful relaxation.
A listening ear obtain our art,
A silent tongue will never impart
The secrets of a faithful heart,
Whatever the temptation.
Honor and truth will still combine
To dignify the grand design,
And love will through their actions shine.
With a ^ind
Just and and.
And all their pleasures are ^n'd,
So happy in (...) Mason.
Then faith, upheld by reason's voic^,
Their hopes foretell enjoyment's choice.
In charity their hearts rejoice
In blessed conciliation.
When unforeseen misfortunes press
The sons and daughters of distress,
With kind fraternal tenderness,
Prompt relief
Soothe their grief.
Of their pleasure it is the chief
To raise a fallen Mason.
Humanity, that virtue bright,
Friendship so lovely to the sight,
Brotherly love their hearts unite,
And bless each friendly action.
No doting sot their mirth shall wound,
No minor knows their rights profound,
No atheist treads the hollowed ground,
No alloy
To their joy;
Pleasures pure, which never cloy
Belongs to every Mason.
May friendship, harmony and love
Your guardians and companions prove,
Till the celestial Lodge above,
Shall be each brother's station:
But death, the level, time the line,
And plumb of justice must combine,
To fit us for that bliss divine,
Then shall we
Happy be;
Toward the East we'll bow the knee
To our Grand Master Mason.
SONG XXXV.
COME, come, my brethren dear,
Now we are assen^ed here,
Exalt your voices clear,
With harmony.
There Is none shall be admitted in.
Were he a Lord, a Duke, (...) King,
He Is counted but an empty thing,
Except he is free.
CHORUS.
Then (...) every man take gl^ in hand,
Dr^ ^mpers to our Master Grand,
As long as he can sit or stand,
With decency.
By our arts we prove,
Emblems of truth and love,
Types given from above,
To those who are free.
There Is not a King who fills a throne,
Will ever be ashamed to own,
Those secrets to the world unknown,
But such as we.
Cho. Then let, etc.
Now ladies try your arts,
To gain us men of parts,
Who best can charm your hearts,
Because we are free.
Then take us, try us, and you will find
We Are true and loving, just and kind,
And taught to please a lady's mind,
By Masonry.
Cho. Then let, etc.
Great WASHINGTON, long may he reign,
To curb the pride of foes that is vain,
Long may his conquering sword maintain,
Free Masonry.
Cho. Then let, etc.
SONG XXXVI.
SO much of Masonry's been sung,
It Is praise resounds from tongue to tongue;
It Is light remotest isles explore,
It Is fame rebounds from shore to shore.
CHORUS.
Now in full chorus let ^join,
To hail great Masonry a^.
First the East the light did rise,
It now shines bright in western skies;
While wondering nations loud declare,
The power of compass and of square.
Cho. Now in, etc.
When war pours forth her hostile band,
We rear the bulwarks of the land;
Nor even stops our glory there:
We draw our swords to shield the fair.
Cho. Now in, etc.
Fair science reigns within our walls,
We ^id misfortune when she calls:
While justice, love and pity shine;
To prove our mystic art divine.
Cho. Now in, etc.
Let wandering cowans rail in vain,
Our mysteries they shall never obtain:
Our secrets shall not to them be known;
Who never have power to keep their own.
Cho. Now in, etc.
SONG XXXVII.
ADIEU, a heart, fond, warm, a ^e^,
Ye brothers of our mystic tie;
Ye favored and enlightened few,
Companions of my social joy;
Though I to foreign lands must hie,
Pursuing fortunes slippery ba'l:
With melting heart and brineful eye,
I Will mind you still when far awa.
Often have I met your social band,
To spend a cheerful, festive night,
Often, honored with supreme command,
Presided over the sons of light:
And by that hieroglyphic bright,
Which none but craftsmen ever saw,
Strong memory on my heart shall write,
Those happy scenes when far awa.
May freedom, harmony and love,
Cement you in the grand design,
Beneath the Omnicient eye above;
The glorious Architect, divine;
That you may keep the unering rule,
Still guided by the plummet's law,
'Till order bright completely shine,
Shall be my prayer when far awa.
And you, farewell, whose merit claim
Justly that highest badge to wear,
May heaven bless your noble name,
To Masonry and 'Scotia dear;
A last request permit me then,
When yearly you're assembled a'l,
One round, I ask it with a tear;
To him, the friend, that is far awa.
And you, kind hearted sisters, fair,
I sing farewell to all your charms,
The impression of your pleasing air;
With rapture often my heart did warm,
Alas, the social winter's night
No more returns while breath we draw,
'Till sisters, brothers, all unite;
In that Grand Lodge that is far awa.
SONG XXXVIII.
HERE social love serenely smiles,
Soft harmony inspires the breast,
Music the weight of care beguiles,
And lulls each gloomy thought to rest.
Come dove'ey'd peace, thou heavenly guest,
And concord; attribute divine!
Reside within each Mason's breast,
Their hearts with sacred union join.
Thus long shall stand our noble art,
Hid deep within each faithful breast,
We feel its influence on the heart,
Therefore we say -- probatum est.
SONG XXXIX.
CONVENED we are met my jovial souls,
With sparkling wine come fill our bowls,
Let concord be the toast;
With glass in hand let each agree
To sing in praise of Masonry,
What mortal more can boast.
Here dove-ey'd peace, celestial maid,
Stands ready waiting for to aid,
And guard the sacred door;
Here Is charity from Heaven sent,
To bring her freeborn sons content,
And comfort to the poor.
See in the East effulgent shine,
Bright Wisdom with his rays divine,
Hark! hark the solemn sound:
"While thus we live in mutual love,
"We taste what angels do above,
"Here happiness is found.
"The fruit of Eden's tree we taste,
"Its balmy joys are our repast,
"Here freedom cheers the heart;
"The indigent oppressed with grief,
"Gains from his brother's ha^ relief,
"Each to his wants impart.
"The great and good, with us combine
"To trace our mysteries divine,
"And find the pleasing light;
"With pleasure we pursue the plan,
"While friendship rivets man to man,
"How pleasing is the sight."
United thus our structure stands,
Untouched by sacriligious hands,
A monument of fame;
Nor envious foes shall ever deface
The virtues that our order grace,
Or blast a Mason's name.
'Till Heaven sends her summons forth,
From East to West, from South to North,
Her chosen sons to call;
While time runs its continual round,
Shall fame with golden trumpet sound,
Masons shall never fall.
SONG XL.
MASTER. RECITATIVE.
ARISE, my brethren, let us arise,
For work let us prepare,
Let Us build a fabric to the skies,
True architects we are.
AIR.
With plum-line and square,
Come let us prepare,
True friendship shall be our foundation;
Da Capo. A temple we'll raise,
Deserving of praise,
For our first Master Grand was a Mason.
SEN. WAR^ RECITATIVE.
See in the East yon star refulgent shine,
Whose accents sweet fill me with love divine;
Attentive, brethren -- ^ark his precepts true,
Come heart in hand -- and eager let us pursue.
AIR.
Come follow, follow, let us pursue
Yon eastern star, we have in view;
From whence true knowledge springs,
Behold! with what effulgent rays,
Upon his breast, his jewels blaze;
An ornament to kings.
Da Capo. From West to East, let us pursue,
And keep yon orient star in view.
JUN. WAR. RECITATIVE.
It Is high meridian, laborers all retire,
(Rest after labor, our bodies do require)
Till called again, your task for to fulfill,
I go a while to learn our Master's will.
AIR.
Whenever commanded we are always obedient,
When wisdom he orders, for work we prepare,
We work (...), yet think it expedient,
To govern (...) ^tions by compass and square,
CHORUS.
With love that is delighting,
And friendship inviting,
Our moments in innocent mirth we employ;
Come see Mason's felicity,
Working and singing with hearts full of joy.
TREASURER. RECITATIVE.
When harmony and love unite,
To me how pleasing is the sight,
My soul's elate -- my heart's on fire;
Who can behold, and not admire?
AIR.
Come Charity thou goddess fair,
Come immortal heavenly guest,
Teach to us thy virtues rare,
Reside within each Mason's breast,
Da Capo. Cement, unite us all in love,
And fit us for the realms above.
SECRETARY. RECITATIVE.
Jehosephat, the great Recorder,
Chosen by great Solomon,
Trace his pages there in order,
See the deeds by Masons done.
AIR.
When our Master command,
With my pen in my hand,
With pleasure I always obey,
Da Capo. Recording each name,
On the annals of fame,
That will stand till the world does decay.
GRAND CHORUS.
With lofty praise rehearse,
In soft poetic verse,
Hail Masonry.
With heart and hand unite,
Let us support with might
And guard our ancient Rite,
That makes us free.
SONG LXI.
CURIOSITY labors and longs for to know,
Why Masons are children of fame,
What makes them respected wherever they go,
Give me leave and the cause I Will explain.
A Mason's unawed by the sound of a name,
He harbors no hate in his breast;
What superiors may do he pretends not to blame,
As he hopes they intend for the best.
He Is upright and just, to his country he is true,
Likewise to his friend and his lass,
Sincerity bids him give merit its due,
Thus happy his moments does pass.
No office he flatters, compounds with no cheat,
But always takes honesty's part,
Beloved and esteemed by the good and the great,
And Charity dwells in his heart.
From his store with a generous hand he bestows,
His mite to the indigent poor;
Compassion invites him wherever he goes;
When misery groans at the door.
The widow and orphan oppressed with grief,
When hunger and want on them wait,
His heart sympathizing, he sends them relief;
Humanity stands at his gate.
Yes, this is the man whom the good does revere,
Though envy may aim to disgrace,
Undaunted he smiles, having nothing to fear,
While Innocence beams on his face.
What makes him beloved is his merit you see,
But this to the base is unknown;
In the eye of a Mason, the mote they can see,
But discern not the beam in their own.
SONG XLII.
YE Masons look round, and hark to the sound,
To none but the worthy it is known;
It Is not every he, who says I am free,
Deserves to be reckoned as one.
When I entered the road, dressed alamode,
My gold it most brilliantly shone,
More clothes I put on by the help of friend John,
Who freely disposed of his own.
When deeper I sought, arose a fresh thought,
Of the glorious thing I did see,
A jewel most bright appeared to my sight,
A rock and foundation to me.
I Am sure it is true, call me Christian or ^w,
Its rays I beheld in the East;
From whence the wise came to honor and fame,
Declaring the Author of peace.
Be every Lodge-Night conducted upright,
Abide by the things that are pure;
No evil take in, choose virtue, quit sin,
Then shall the lodge ever endure.
That a glorious sound encircles us round,
When once formed, the method to peace;
No afflictions near, no griefs interfere,
To lessen those measures of bliss.
O ye Angels above, unite us in love,
Proclaim the the world Masonry,
Our actions (...) ^ight as we come to the light,
When entered (...) once are made free.
SONG X^^II.
ASSEMBLED and ty^, let (...) social agree
With the Mason that sits on a throne;
For he charges a glass, and round le^ it pass,
To celebrate ancient St. John.
Though bablers may prattle in showing their spleen,
Their spite we compare to the drone;
For in sweet harmony in love we'll agree,
To celebrate ancient St. John.
The world is in pain, our secrets to gain,
In ignorance let them think on;
For in sweet harmony in love we'll agree,
To celebrate ancient St. John.
With toast after toast, let us drink, laugh and sing,
Remember the great WASHINGTON;
For his actions are rare, by the compass and square,
Thus celebrate ancient St. John.
Then join hand in hand, in a body firm stand,
Our cares and our troubles are gone;
Let us love, laugh and sing, and WASHINGTON bring,
To celebrate ancient St. John.
SONG XLIV.
BACCHUS open all thy treasure,
Let sweet music charm the ear;
Love cements us all together,
Sons of Hiram welcome here.
Vulgar, base and sordid wretches,
May deride us, what care we;
Slander write malignant sketches,
By the fruit we know the tree.
Come my brothers, love unites us,
Come let beauty be our toast;
Here Is to her that can delight us,
The charming fair we prize the most.
Let us join our hands together,
May peace and love the cement be;
Charge your glasses, prime together,
Here Is a health to Masons free.
SONG XLV.
The SWORD-BEARER's Song. N. B. -- The two last lines of each verse is the
Chorus.
TO all who Masonry despise,
This council I bestow:
Don't ridicule, if you are wise,
A secret you don't know.
Yourselves you banter, but not it,
You show your spleen, but not your wit.
With a fa, la, la, la.
Inspiring virtue be our rules,
And in ourselves secure,
We have compassion for those fools,
Who think our acts impure:
We know from ignorance proceeds,
Such mean opinions of our deeds.
With a fa, la, etc.
If union and sincerity
Have a pretense to please,
We brothers of Free Masonry
Lay a just claim to these.
To State-disputes we never give birth,
Our motto friendship is, and mirth.
With a fa, la, etc.
Then let us laugh since we have imposed
On those who make a pother,
And cry the secret is disclosed
By some false-hearted brother:
The mighty secret's gained they boast,
From post-boy and from flying post.
With a fa, la, etc.
SONG XLVI.
ASSIST my muse, thy influence bring,
In praise of Masonry I sing;
In flowing notes my voice shall raise
To sing the worthy Mason's praise.
CHORUS.
Whose heart is free from envy's stain,
And while he lives will so remain.
Hail oriental splendid light,
And dove'ey'd peace, with beauty bright;
Thy all-enliv'ning, strengthening rays,
Does crown our bliss with happy days.
Statesmen and Kings with hand and heart,
Support, adorn our royal Art.
With music sweet, sage Tubal Cain,
On the deep organ tuned the strain;
Sweet melody inspired his tongue,
With lofty note he sweetly sung:
Hail Masonry from heaven sent,
In thee alone we find content.
Benevolence and mutual love,
Sent by our Master from above,
Are pillars of our royal Art,
Engraved on each Mason's heart.
Those lofty pillars stand secure,
And shall the date of time endure.
Hail royal Art, from heaven revealed,
In Mason's heart thou art concealed,
Cowans may seek and knock in vain,
Our ivory keys their arts disdain.
Each Mason smiles and sees their art,
While prudence guards his faithful heart.
SONG XLVII.
SOME folks have with curious impertinence strove,
From the Free-Masons bosom their secrets to move;
I Will tell why in vain their endeavors must prove.
Which no body can deny.
Of that happy secret when we are possessed,
Our tongues cannot explain what is lodged in our breast;
For the blessing's so great it can never be expressed.
Which no body, etc.
By friendship's strict ties we brothers are joined
With mirth in each heart, and content in each mind:
And this is a difficult secret to find.
Which no body, etc.
Truth, charity, justice, our principles are,
What one may possess, the other does share,
All these in the world are secrets most rare.
Which no body, etc.
But you would fain our grand secret expose,
One thing, best concealed, to the world you disclose,
Much folly in blaming what none of you knows.
Which no body, etc.
While then we are met the world's wonder and boast,
And all do enjoy what pleases each most,
I Will give you the best and most glorious toast.
Which no body, etc.
Here Is a health to the generous, the brave and the good,
To all those who think, and who act as they should:
In all this the Free-Mason's health's understood.
Which no body, etc.
SONG XLVIII.
COME are you prepared,
Your scaffolds well reared?
Bring mortar, and temper it purely;
It Is all safe, I hope,
Well braced with each rope,
Your ledgers and putlocks securely.
Then next your bricks bring.
It is time to begin,
For the Sun with its rays is adorning;
The day's fair and clear,
No rain you need fear,
It Is a charming and lovely fine morning.
Pray where are your tools,
Your plumb line and rules?
Each man to his work let him stand, boys;
Work solid and sure,
Upright and secure;
And your building, be sure, will be strong boys.
Pray make no mistake,
But true your joints brake,
And take care that you follow your leaders;
Work, rake, beck and tueth,
And make your work smooth,
And be sure that you fill up your headers.
SONG XLIX.
COME follow, follow me,
Ye jovial Masons free;
Come follow all the rules
That ever were taught in schools,
By Solomon, that Mason King,
Who honor to the craft did bring.
He Is justly called the wise,
His fame does reach the skies,
He stood upon the square,
And did the Temple rear;
With true level, plumb and gage,
He proved the wonder of the age.
The mighty Mason Lords
Stood firmly to their words,
They held it in esteem,
For which they are justly deemed:
Why should not their example prove
Our present craft to live in love?
The royal art, and word,
Is kept upon record,
With upright hearts and pure,
While sun and moon endure;
Not written but indented on
The heart of every Free Mason.
And as for Hiram's art
We need not to impart,
The scripture plainly shows
From whence his knowledge flows;
His genius was so much refined
His peer he has not left behind.
Then let not any one
Forget the widow's son.
But toast his memory
In glasses charged full high,
And when our proper time is come,
Like brethren part, and so go home.
SONG L.
WITH plumb, level, and square, to work let us prepare,
And join in sweet harmony;
Let Us fill up each glass, and around let it pass
To all honest men that are free.
To all honest men that are free.
CHORUS.
Then a fig for all those who are Free-Masons foes,
Our secrets we'll never impart;
But in unity we'll always agree,
And Chorus it, prosper our art,
And chorus it, etc.
When we are properly clothed, the Master discloses
The secrets that is lodged in his breast:
Thus we stand by the cause that deserves great applause
In which we are happy and blessed,
In which, etc.
Chor. Then a fig for all those, etc.
The bible's our guide, and by that we'll abide,
Which shows that our actions are pure;
The compass and square, are emblems most rare
Of justice, our cause to insure,
Of justice, etc.
Chor. Then a fig for all those, etc.
The Cowan may strive, nay, plot and contrive,
To find out our great mystery;
The inquisitive wife, may in vain spend her life,
For still we'll be honest and free.
For still, etc.
Chor. Then a fig for all those, etc.
True brotherly love, we always approve,
Which makes us all mortals excel;
If a knave should by chance, to this grandeur advance,
That villain we'll straightway expel.
That villain, etc.
Chor. Then a fig for all those, etc.
So our lodge, that is so pure, to the end shall endure
In virtue and true secrecy;
Then let us toast a good health, with honor and wealth
To attend the blessed hands made us, free.
To attend the kind hands made us free.
Chor. Then a fig for all those, etc.
SONG LI.
KING Solomon, that wise projector,
In Masonry took great delight;
And Hiram, that great Architector,
Whose actions shall ever shine bright.
From the heart of a true honest Mason
There Is none can the secret remove;
Our maxims are justice, morality,
Friendship and brotherly love.
CHORUS.
Then who would not be a Free-Mason,
So happy and social are we;
To all honest men we are Brothers,
And in every Lodge we are free.
We meet like true friends on the level,
And lovingly part on the square;
Alike we respect King and Beggar,
Provided they are just and sincere.
We scorn an ungenerous action,
None can with free Masons compare;
We love for to live within compass,
By rules that are honest and fair.
Cho. Then who, etc.
We exclude all talkative fellows,
That will babble and prate past their wit,
They never shall come into our secret,
For they are neither worthy, nor fit;
But the person that is well recommended,
And we find him honest and true,
When our lodge is well tyl'd we'll prepare him,
And, like Masons, our work we'll pursue.
Cho. Then who, etc.
Success to all accepted Masons,
There Is none can their honor pull down;
For ever since the glorious creation
These great men are held in renown.
When Adam was King of all nations,
He formed a plan with all speed;
And soon made a fit habitation,
For him and his companion Eve.
Cho. Then who, etc.
There Is some foolish people reject us,
For which they are highly to blame,
They cannot show any objection,
Or reason for doing the same.
The art's a divine inspiration,
As all honest men will declare.
So here is to all true hearted brothers,
That live within compass and square.
Cho. Then who, etc.
Like an arch well cemented together,
Thus firmly united we stand,
And justly support one another;
With plumb line and level in hand.
'Till the world is consumed by fire,
And judgment is passed on us all;
They never shall come into our secret,
Or we from Free-Masonry fall.
Cho. Then who, etc.
ROYAL ARCH. SONG LII.
WHEN orient WISDOM beamed serene,
And pillar'd STRENGTH arose --
When BEAUTY tinged the glowing scene,
And Faith her mansion chose --
Exulting bands the Fabric viewed;
Mysterious powers adored;
And high the Triple Union stood,
That gave the MYSTIC WORD.
Pale Envy withered at the sight,
And frowning over the pile,
Called Murder up from realms of night,
To blast the glorious toil.
With ruffian outrage joined in woe,
They form the league abhorred;
And wounded Science felt the blow,
That crushed the MYSTIC WORD.
Concealment, from sequestered cave,
On sable pinions flew;
And over the sacriligious grave,
Her veil impervious threw.
The associate band in solemn state,
The awful loss deplored;
And wisdom mourned the ruthless fate,
That whelmed the MYSTIC WORD.
At length, through Time's expanded sphere,
Fair Science speeds her way;
And warmed by Truth's refulgence clear,
Reflects the kindred ray. --
A second Fabric's towering height,
Proclaims the Sign restored;
From whose foundation -- brought to light,
Is drawn the MYSTIC WORD.
To depths obscure; the favored TRINE,
A dreary course engage --
Till through the Arch, the ray divine,
Illumes the sacred page!
From the wide wonders of this blaze,
Our ancient Sign's restored;
The Royal Arch alone displays,
The long lost MYSTIC WORD.
SONG LIII.
"O WHAT a happy thing it is,
"Brethren to dwell in unity;"
Whilst every action's squared by this,
The true Base-line of Masonry,
Our Plumb-rule fixed to the point,
The Angle of Uprightness shows;
From side to side, from joint to joint,
By steps the stately mansion rose.
Whatever the order or the plan,
The parts will with the whole agree;
For, by a geometric man,
The work is done in symmetry.
From East to West, from North to South,
Far as the foaming billows run;
Faith, Hope, and silver-braided Truth,
Shall stamp with worth their Mason son.
But, chiefest, come, sweet Charity,
Meek, tender, hospitable guest;
Aided by those, inspired by thee,
How tranquil is the Mason's breast.
An Olive branch thy forehead binds,
The gift that peerless Prudence gave;
An emblem of congenial minds,
And such Masonic Brethren have.
SONG LIVE.
[Tune, "A Rose Tree in full hearing."]
COLUMBIA'S sons, attend awhile.
To one who will the truth impart,
And show that you are in exile
'Till science guides you by our art;
Uncultivated paths you tread,
Unlevel'd, barren, blindfold be,
'Till by a mystery you are led
Into the Light of Masonry.
From chaos this round globe was formed,
A Pedestal for us to be,
A mighty column it adorned,
In just proportion raised were we;
When our Grand Architect above
An Arch soon raised by his decree,
And placed the Sun the arch key-stone,
The whole was formed by Masonry.
It pleased our Sovereign Master then
This glorious fabric to erect.
Upon the square let us, as men,
Never the noble work neglect,
But still in friendship's bonds unite
Unbounded as infinity,
It Is a sure cornerstone fixed right,
And worthy of Free-Masonry.
In ancient times before the flood,
And since, in friendship we have adhered,
From pole to pole have firmly stood,
And by all nations been revered.
When rolling years shall cease to move
We from oblivion raised shall be;
Then, since we are met in peace and love,
Let Us sing All hail to Masonry.
SONG LV.
YE thrice happy few,
Whose hearts have been true,
In concord and unity found;
Let Us sing and rejoice,
And unite every voice,
To send the gay chorus around,
To send, etc.
CHORUS.
For like pillars we stand,
An immovable band;
Cemented by powers above,
Then freely let us pass,
The generous glass
To Man ^ship and love.
The Grand A^ word did erect
(...) ^ce,
(...) o^ which we began,
(...) ^y and peace,
^
(...). For like pi^r, etc.
Whose firmness of heart, fair treasure of arts
To the eyes of the vulgar unknown;
Whose luster can beam new dignity and fame
On the pulpit, the bar, or the throne,
On the, etc.
Indissoluble bands our hearts and our hands
In social benevolence bind,
For, true to his cause, by immutable laws,
A Mason's a friend to mankind,
A Mason's, etc.
Let joy flow around, and peace-olive abound,
Preside at our mystical rites,
Whose candor maintains our auspicious domains,
And freedom with order unites,
And freedom, etc.
Nor let the dear maid our mysteries dread,
Nor think them repugnant to love;
To beauty we bend, and her empire defend,
Her empire derived from above,
Her empire, etc.
Then let us all unite, sincere and upright,
On the level of virtue to stand;
No mortals can be more happy than we,
With a Brother and friend in each hand,
With a Brother, etc.
SONG LVI.
AS long as our coast does with whiteness appear,
Still Masons stand foremost in verse;
While harmony, friendship, and joys are held here,
New bands shall our praises rehearse.
CHORUS.
Though Lodges less favored, less happy, decay,
Destroyed by old Time as he runs;
Though Albions, Gregorians, and Bucks fade away,
Still Masons shall live in their sons.
If envy attempt our success to impede,
United we'll trample her down;
If faction should threaten we'll show we are agreed,
And discord shall own we are one.
Cho. Though Lodges, etc.
While with ardour we glow this our order to raise,
Promoting its welfare and peace,
Old Masons return our endeavors to praise,
And new ones confirm the increase.
Cho. Though Lodges, etc.
Go on, cry our parents, for Time is your friend,
His flight shall increase your renown:
And mirth shall your guest be, and Bacchus attend,
And joy all your meetings shall crown.
Cho. Though Lodges, etc.
SONG LVII.
THUS happily met, united and free,
A foretaste of heaven we prove;
Then join heart and hand, and firmly agree,
To cultivate brotherly love.
With corn, wine, and oil, our table replete,
The altar of Friendship divine;
Each virtue, and grace, the circle complete,
With aid of the musical nine.
Thus blessed, and thus blessing, employment supreme
May Masonry daily increase,
Its grand scheme of morals, our favorite theme,
The source of contentment and peace.
SONG LVIII.
IN times of old date, when (as stories relate)
Good men to the Gods had admission,
When those who were grieved might with ease be relieved,
By offering an humble petition;
Some few, who remained in their morals unstained,
Submissively made application,
To build a retreat, if the Gods should think meet,
To shield them from wicked invasion.
Delighted to find there was yet in mankind
Some la^dable sentiments planted,
Without hesitation they gave approbation,
And instant their wishes were granted.
Then for artists they sought, and famed architects brought,
Who the various employments were skilled in;
Each handled his tools, and by science and rules
They straightway proceeded to building.
Fair Wisdom began first to sketch out the Plan
By which they were all to be guided;
Each Order she made was exactly obeyed,
When the Portions of Work she divided,
The great cornerstone was by Charity done,
But Strength was the principal Builder,
When for Mortar they cried, 'twas by Friendship supplied,
And Beauty was Carver and Gilder.
Having long persever'd, a Grand Temple they reared,
A refuge from folly and scandal;
Where all who reside are in virtue employed,
Nor fear the attacks of a Vandal.
But if in their rage they should ever engage
In the attempt, 'twould be always prevented;
The door is so high, 'twould be madness to try,
And the walls are all strongly cemented.
The Gods all agreed 'twas an excellent deed,
And to show the affection they bore 'em,
A treasure they gave, which the tenants still have,
Secured in the Sanctum Sanctorum.
Thus blessed from above with a token of love,
Each Brother with joy should receive it;
Safe locked in his heart, it should never depart,
Till called for by Heaven that gave it.
SONG LIX.
LIGHTLY over the village green
Blue-eyed Fairies sport unseen,
Round and round, in circles gay --
Then at cock-crow flit away:
Thus it is said, though mortal eye
Never their merry freaks could spy,
Elves for mortals lisp the prayer --
Elves are guardians of the fair;
Thus, like Elves, in mystic ring,
Merry Masons drink and sing.
Come, then, Brothers, lead along
Social Rites and mystic song!
Though nor Madam, Miss, or Bess
Could our myst'ries ever guess,
Nor could ever learned Divine
Sacred Masonry define,
Round our Order close we bind
Laws of Love to all mankind.
Thus, like Elves, in mystic ring,
Merry Masons drink and sing.
Health, then, to each honest man,
Friend to the Masonic plan!
Leaving Parsons grave to blunder,
Leaving Ladies fair to wonder,
Leaving THOMAS still to lie,
Leaving BETTY still to spy,
Round and round we push our glass --
Round and round each toasts his lass:
Thus, like Elves, in mystic ring,
Merry Masons drink and sing.
SONG LX.
A MASON's life's the life for me,
With joy we meet each other,
We pass our time with mirth and glee,
And hail each friendly Brother:
In Lodge no party feuds are seen,
But careful we in this agree,
To banish care or spleen,
The Master's call we one and all,
With pleasure soon obey;
With heart and hand we ready stand,
Our duty still to pay.
But when the glass goes round,
Then mirth and glee abound,
We Are all happy to a man;
We laugh a little, we drink a little,
We work a little, we play a little,
Cho. We laugh, etc.
We sing a little, are merry a little,
And swig the flowing can,
And swig, etc.
See in the East the Master stands,
The Wardens South and West, sir,
Both ready to obey command,
Find work or give us rest, sir.
The signal given, we all prepare,
With one accord obey the word,
To work by rule or square:
Or if they please, the ladder raise,
Or plumb the level line.
Thus we employ our time with joy,
Attending every sign;
But when the glass goes round,
Then mirth and glee abound,
We Are all happy to a man;
We lau^ a little, and drink a little,
We work a little, and play a little,
We sing a little, are merry a little,
And swig the flowing can.
The Almighty said, "let there be light;"
Effulgent rays appearing,
Dispelled the gloom, the glory bright
To this new world was cheering:
But unto Masonry alone,
Another light so clear and bright,
In mystic rays then shown;
From East to West it spread so fast,
And Faith and Hope unfurled,
And brought us thee, sweet Charity,
Thou darling of the world.
Then while the toast goes round,
Let mirth and glee abound,
Let Us be happy to a man;
We'll laugh a little, and drink a little,
We'll work a little, and play a little,
We'll sing a little, be merry a little,
And swig the flowing can.
SONG LXI.
WHEN quite a young spark,
I was in the dark,
And wanted to alter my station;
I went to a friend,
Who proved in the end,
A free and an accepted Mason.
At a door he then knocked,
Which quickly unlocked,
When he bid me to put a good face on,
And not be afraid,
For I should be made
A free and an accepted Mason.
My wishes were crowned,
And a Master I found,
Who made a most solemn oration;
Then showed me the light,
And grave me the right
Sign, token, and word, of a Mason.
How great my amaze,
When I first saw the blaze!
And how struck with the mystic occasion!
Astonished I found,
Though free I was bound
To a free and an accepted Mason.
When clothed in white,
I took great delight
In the work of this noble vocation:
And knowledge I gained
When the Lodge he explained
Of a free and an accepted Mason.
I was bound it appears,
For seven long years,
Which to me is of trifling duration:
With freedom I serve,
And strain every n^ve
To acquit myself like a good Mason.
A bumper then fill
With (...) hearty good will,
To our Master pay d^e veneration;
Who taught us the the art
We never will impart,
Unless to an accepted Mason.
SONG LXII.
WHAT joys do the Crast on each Mason bestow
(Such rapturous pleasures as Cowans never know)
All equally share the delightful repast,
Which time cannot change but eternal will last.
CHORUS.
Hark away! Hark away! Hark away is the word!
To the Lodge let us repair;
Where echo! Where echo! Where harmony echoes,
And banishes care.
Behold as the Sun in the East does arise,
Our Master the Workmen and hirelings employ;
The West and the South their assistance impart,
TO embellish the Fabric and strergthen the ART.
With Level and Rule we our business prepare,
We work by the Compass, and act on the Square;
No murmurs are heard and no discords are known,
Tranquillity reigns, and Ambition has flown.
Let the World make a scoff, we their sneering despise,
Since they know not how much we Free Masonry prize;
In brotherly love let the time social pass,
And mirth and festivity garnish each glass.
Then charge my dear Brethren, a bumper all round,
To the brim fill each glass, let no day light be found;
Here Is a health to all Masons who honor the name,
By walking upright, and observing the same.
CHORUS.
Hark away! Hark away! Hark away is the word!
Let us sing and rejoice;
Whilst echo! sweet echo! whilst echo of Masonry
Sounds from each voice!
MONSIEUR TONSON. -- A TALE.
THERE lived, as Fame reports, in days of yore,
At least some fifty years ago, or more;
A pleasant wight on town, 'yelep'd Tom King,
A fellow that was clever at a joke,
Expert in all the arts to teaze and smoke;
In short, for strokes of humor, quite the thing.
To many a jovial club this King was known,
With whom his active w^t unrivaled shone;
Choice spirit, grave Freemason, buck and blood,
Would crowd his stories and bon mots to hear,
And none a disappointment ever could fear;
His humor flowed in such a copious flood.
To him a frolic was a high delight,
A frolic he would hunt for day and night;
Careless how prudence on the sport might frown,
If ever a pleasant mischief sprang to view,
At once over hedge and ditch away he flew;
Nor left the game 'till he had run it down.
One night our hero, rambling with a friend,
Near famed St. Giles's chanced his course to bend;
Just at that spot the seven dials light,
'Twas silence all around, and clear the coast,
The watch, as usual, dosing on his post;
And scarce a lamp displayed a twinkling light.
Around this place there lived the numerous clans,
Of honest, plodding, foreign Artizans;
Known at that time by name of Refugees,
The rod of persecution from their home,
Compelled the inoffensive race to roam;
And here they lighted, like a swarm of Bees.
Well! our two friends were saunt'ring through the street,
In hopes some food for humor soon to meet;
When in a window near, a light they view,
And though a dim and melancholy ray,
It seemed the prologue to some merry play;
So toward the gloomy dome our hero drew.
Strait at the door he gave a thundering knock,
(The time we may suppose near two o'clock;)
"I Will ask" says King, "if Thompson lodges here,"
"Thompson" cries the other, "who the devil's he,"
"I know not" King replies, "but want to see
"What kind of animal will now appear."
After some time a little Frenchman came,
One hand displayed a rush-light's trembling flame;
The other held a thing they call Culotte,
An old stripped woolen nightcap graced his head,
A tattered waistcoat over one shoulder spread;
Scarce half awake, he heaved a yawning note.
Though thus untimely roused, he courteous smiled,
And soon addressed our wag in accents mild;
Bending his head politely to his knee,
"Pray, Sare, vat vant you, dat you come so late?
"I beg your pardon sare, to make you vate;
"Pray, tell me, Sare, vat your commands vid me?"
"Sir, replied King, "I merely thought to know,
"As by your house I chanced to night to go;
"But, really, I disturbed your sleep, I fear --
"I say, I thought that you perhaps could tell,
"Among the folks who in this street may dwell;
"If there is a Mr. Thompson lodges here?"
The shivering Frenchman, though not pleased to find,
The business of this unimportant kind;
Too simple to suspect 'twas meant in jeer,
Shrug'd out a sigh that thus his rest should break,
Then with unaltered courtesy, he spoke;
"No Sare: no Monsieur Tonson lodges here."
Our wag begged pardon, and toward home he sped,
While the poor Frenchman crawled again to bed;
But King resolved not thus to drop the jest,
So the next night, with more of whim than grace,
Again he made a visit to the place;
To break once more the poor old Frenchman's rest.
He knocked -- but waited longer than before,
No footstep seemed approaching to the door;
Our Frenchman lay in such a sleep profound,
King with the knocker thundered then again,
Firm on his post determined to remain;
And often indeed he made the door resound.
At last King hears him over the passage creep,
Wondering what fiend again disturbed his sleep;
The wag salutes him with a civil leer,
Thus drawling out to heighten the surprise,
(While the poor Frenchman rubbed his heavy eyes;)
"Is there a Mr. Thompson lodges here?"
The Frenchman faulter'd, with a kind of fright,
"Vy, Sare, I Am sure I tell you, Sare, last night;
(And here he labored with a sigh sincere)
"No Monsieur Tonson in de varld I know,
"No Monsieur Tonson here -- I toll you so;
"Indeed Sare, dear no Monsieur Tonson here."
Some more excuses tendered, off King goes,
And the old Frenchman sought once more repose;
The rogue next night pursued his odd career,
'Twas long indeed before the man came nigh,
And then he uttered in a piteous cry,
"Sare, 'pon my soul no Mons. Tonson here."
Our sportive wight his usual visit paid,
And the next night came forth a prattling maid,
Whose tongue, indeed than any jack went faster --
Anxious she strove his errand to enquire:
He said "'it was vain her pretty tongue to tire,
"He should not stir 'till he had seen her master."
The damsel then began in doleful state,
The Frenchman's broken slumbers to relate,
And begged he would call at proper time of day --
King told her, she must fetch her master down,
A chaise was ready, he was leaving town,
But first had much of deep concern to say.
Thus urged, she went the snoring man to call,
And long indeed was she obliged to ball;
Ere she could rouse the torpid lump of clay,
At last he wakes, he rises, and he swears,
But scarcely had he tottered down the stairs,
When King attacked him in the usual way.
The Frenchman now perceived 'twas all in vain
To this tormentor mildly to complain,
And strait in rage began his crest to rear --
"Sare vat the devil make you treat me so?
"Sare, I inform you, sare, tree nights ago,
"Cot tam, I swear no Mons. Tonson here."
True as the night, King went, and heard a strife,
Between the harrass'd Frenchman and his wife;
Which should descend to chase the fiend away,
At length to join their forces they agree,
And strait impetuously they turn the key,
Prepared with mutual fury for the fray.
Our hero, with the firmness of a rock,
Collected to receive the mighty shock,
Uttering the old enquiry, calmly stood;
The name of Thompson raised the storm so high,
He deemed it then the safest plan to fly,
With -- "well, I Will call when you're in gentler mood."
In short our hero, with the same intent,
Full many a night to plague the Frenchman went;
So fond of mischief was this wicked wit:
They threw out water, for the watch they call,
But King expecting, still escapes them all;
Monsieur at last was forced his house to quit.
It happened that our wag about this time,
On some fair prospect sought the Eastern clime;
Six lingering years were there his tedious lot,
At length content, amid his ripening store,
He treads again on Britain's happy shore,
And his long absence is at once forgot.
To London, with impatient hope he flies,
And the same night, as former freaks arise,
He fain must stroll the well-known haunt to trace,
"Ah! here is the scene of frequent mirth," he said:
"My poor old Frenchman, I suppose is dead;
"Egad! I Will knock, and see who holds his place."
With rapid strokes he makes the mansion roar
And while he eager eyes the opening door,
Lo! who obeys the knocker's rattling peel?
Why even our little Frenchman, strange to say,
He took his old abode that very day:
Capricious turn of sportive fortune's wheel!
Without one thought of the relentless foe,
Who, fiend like, haunted him so long ago;
Just in his former trim he now appears;
The waistcoat and the nightcap seemed the same,
With ^ush-light as before he creeping came,
And King's detested voice astonished hears.
As if some hideous spectre struck his sight,
His senses seemed bewildered with affright;
His face, indeed, bespoke a heart full sore,
Then starting, he exclaimed, in rueful strain,
"Begar! here is Mons. Tonson come again."
Away he ran -- and never was heard of more.
INDEX TO MASONIC SONGS.
A
ALL hail! to the morning PAGE. 5 Almighty Sire! our heavenly king PAGE. 13
Adieu, a heart, fond, warm, adieu PAGE. 39 Arise, my brethren, let us arise
PAGE. 42 Assembled and tyl'd, let us social agree PAGE. 46 Assist my muse, thy
influence bring PAGE. 48 As long as our coast does with whiteness appear PAGE.
59 A Mason's life's the life for me PAGE. 62
B
Bacchus open all thy treasure PAGE. 47
C
Come Brothers, let us cheerful sing PAGE. 10 Come let us prepare PAGE. 22 Come
ye Masons hither bring PAGE. 28 Come, come, my brethren dear PAGE. 37 Convened
we are met my jovial souls PAGE. 41 Curiosity labors and longs for to know PAGE.
44 Come are you prepared PAGE. 50 Come follow, follow me PAGE. 51 Columbia's
sons attend awhile PAGE. 56
D
Dear Brothers of fraternal mind PAGE. 35
E
Ever time's great machine was in motion PAGE. 3 Ere God the Universe began
PAGE. 15
F
Freemasons all PAGE. 9
H
Hail Masonry divine PAGE. 21 How happy a Mason whose bosom still flows PAGE.
25 Hail Masonry thou sacred art PAGE. 28 Here social love serenely smiles PAGE.
40
I
I sing the Mason's glory PAGE. 6 In History we are told, how the Lodges of old
PAGE. 25 In times of old date, when (as stories relate) PAGE. 60
K
King Solomon, that wise projector PAGE. 53
L
^t Masonry from pole to pole PAGE. 20 ^ightly over the village green PAGE. 61
N
^ow the Junior Warden calls us from our labors PAGE. 8 ^ot the fictions of
Greece, nor the dreams of old Rome PAGE. 15 No sect in the world can with
Masons compare PAGE. 18
O
^n, on, my dear Brethren pursue your great lecture PAGE. 20 ^f all
institutions to form well the mind PAGE. 31 Once I was blind and could could
not see PAGE. 32 O what a happy thing it is PAGE. 56
S
So much of Masonry's been sung PAGE. 38 Some folks have with curious
impertinance strove PAGE. 49
T
To the Knight Templar's awful dome PAGE. 12 To all who Masonry despise PAGE.
47 Thus happily met, united and free PAGE. 59
U
Unite, unite, your voices raise PAGE. 13
W
When the Senior Warden, standing in the West PAGE. 8 When earth's foundation
first was laid PAGE. 14 Whilst Princes and Heroes promiscuously fight PAGE. 17
When my divine Althaea's charms PAGE. 19 When a Lodge of Free Masons are
clothed in their aprons PAGE. 23 When Masonry expiring lay, by knaves and fools
rejected PAGE. 26 While each poet sings of great Princes and Kings PAGE. 29
When the Sun from the East first salutes mortal eyes PAGE. 30 With plumb,
level, and square, to work let us prepare PAGE. 52 When orient Wisdom beamed
serene PAGE. 55 When quite a young spark PAGE. 63 What joys do the Craft on
each Mason bestow PAGE. 65
Y
Ye dull stupid Mortals give over your conjectures PAGE. 16 Ye sons of fair
science, impatient to learn PAGE. 21 Ye gracious powers of choral song PAGE. 34
Ye Masons look round and hark to the sound PAGE. 45 Ye thrice happy few PAGE.
57

