OBSERVATIONS ON FREE MASONRY; WITH A MASONIC VISION. ADDRESSED, BY A LADY IN
WORCESTER, TO HER FEMALE FRIEND.

Not all the orient gems that shine,
Nor treasures of rich Ophi^'s mine,
Excel the Mason's heart:
True to the fair, he honors more,
Than glittering gems, or brightest ore,
The plighted pledge of Love.
To every tie of honor bound,
In love and friendship constant found,
And favored from above.
PRINTED AT WORCESTER, 1798.

OBSERVATIONS ON FREE MASONRY.
AS you are no stranger, Madam, to my enthusiastic opinion, that Morpheus is
frequently accompanied by some supernatural companion, in his midnight
wanderings, I flatter myself that you will indulge me with the perusal of one
of my moon light excursions. The masonic figures can be explained by your
respectable companion, who, from principles of benevolence, will not refuse to
gratify you; and perhaps, Madam, it may occasion your becoming a convert to a
good opinion of the sublime art.

The dreary season, ill health, and a depression of spirits which unfits me for
sociciety, occasion my devoting a part of my time to dreaming. And what is
life, but a dream? Half the world appears to most advantage when asleep; and I
am one of that number.

The Right Worshipful Master, after perusing the enclosed, (should he confer
upon me that honor) will, with his usual pleasantry, I expect, ask when I was
initiated. I answer -- At my birth. Faith, Hope and Charity presided: Wisdom,
Strength and Beauty refused to attend. And, with unusual care and attention, my
three godmothers, ere the dawn of reason expanded my ideas, laid the foundation
of a masonic structure, Benevolence and Philanthropy, in my breast. Are there
not Miltons at the plough, and Statesmen in the field? And why not Masonesses
at the toilet? If secrecy in charity, and dispositions to oblige a neighbor or
a friend, are pillars of the Craft, our sex may vie with a Solomon, a Hiram, or
the best ancient or modern master builders, in raising them.

The sublime institution of Masonry, I fancy, was ordained by the wise
Architect of the universal Lodge, to level the masculine character of the other
sex with the feminine softness of ours; by tempering Courage, Fortitude and
Gravity, with Candor, Benevolence and Charity, and cementing them with
Friendship, Sensibility and Affection. Were our sex admitted into the society,
it would counteract the grand design, as we have generally too great a
proportion of those delicate feelings, in our composition, for our own
happiness. The science of Masonry, I view as a refined study of nature,
entirely divested of those insidious arts, that (from their secrecy, order, and
signs, by which the Brethren discover themselves to each other) many judicious
persons, of both sexes, have been led to believe they practice. It is a
science, that is both useful and instructive. It refines the understanding,
softens the manners, blends together every virtue of the human heart, and
teaches us to distinguish between the favors of fortune, and real merit.
Masonry has been styled the "Daughter of Heaven, Patroness of the liberal arts,
that polish and adorn the mind," etc.

As we naturally esteem our companions, in proportion as they excel us in
knowledge, Is it not happy for us, that Masonry is confined to man? Happy,
thrice happy, would it have been for her descendants, if Madam Eve, instead of
tasting the apple, had politely presented it to her spouse. This mistake was
never rectified, till the eastern Monarch was inspired with the ideas of
building a temple, founding a Lodge, and consecrating it as sacred forever from
the old lady's female descendants. But we enjoy this pleasing consolation, that
it has a tendency to attach them to our sex -- "Next to the Deity," says a
Right Worshipful Master, at the close of a charge to his Lodge, "whom can I so
properly address myself to, as to the most beautiful part of the creation. The
sanction of the fair is our highest ambition; to preserve it will be our
greatest care." And although flattery may be termed a foible, (if the Honorable
Fraternity will pardon the expression) in some instances, in this in
particular, it appears a virtue. "Honey," says the proverb, "has caught more
flies than vinegar;" and who is proof against the charm of adulation, when the
alluring bait is so delicately gilt.

To be serious. A good Mason may be compared to a respectable Divine. The
lectures of the former, and the precepts of the latter, are equally
interesting. One instructs us in the principles of morality; the other explains
the mysteries of divinity: Both point to the same grand view -- the temple of
Virtue. The three steps of this noble edifice, Justice, Love and Mercy, it is
in our power to ascend; and were we clothed with Wisdom, Strength and Beauty,
and adorned with Faith and Charity, reclining on Hope, we might extend our
prospect, and, with the aid of three times three, be introduced into the Royal
Arch of Safety, which would preserve us from the dangerous shoals and
quicksands of folly and dissipation, upon which so many of the vain and
thoughtless, of both sexes, suffer shipwreck.

A good Mason must be a good man; and a good man is a Mason. Upon the pillars
of Justice, Benevolence, and Humility, he raises an edifice, which will remain
firm as the adamantine rock. Slander may attack ^^s walls, Malice assault its
battlements, and Calumny batter its spacious roof, but all in vain. I^ will
remain impregnable, when the pillars of the universe are shaken, "and the great
globe itself, like the baseless fabric of a vision," vanishes at the command of
the Almighty Architect. Borne up on those pillars, amidst a chaos of nature, he
will arrive at the summit of happiness, in the celestial mansions of peace and
harmony, and gain admission into the "Universal Lodge," founded at the
creation; whose Grand Master sits enthroned in light and glory, and surveys the
hearts of all at one view; whose Lodge is styled the Holy of Holies; where all
distinctions are annihilated -- the Knight Templar levelled with the Entered
Apprentice, the Royal Arch with the Fellow Craft, and the widow's son rank no
higher than her daughters, provided the latter are clothed in their necessary
^^wels, Innocence and Virtue. Those brilliant ornaments will entitle them to
the p^^u^it of "Well done" -- the "heavenly pass word" to the realms of bliss.

A MASONIC VISION.
Bright Wisdom, from his awful throne,
Bid darkness to withdraw:
No sooner said, but it was done,
And then great things I saw.

IN consequence of an invitation from one of the members of the Honorable
Fraternity, the other evening, to visit a Lodge, my thoughts were engaged with
the subject of such a visit, and I fell into a most profound reverie. By the
assistance of Morpheus, I was conveyed, in a moment, to the Morning Star; The
name of the Lodge at Worcester.
the Lodge was tyled; the S -- S -- m, or court cabinet, was unlocked, and the
emblems of the Royal Art properly arranged and displayed; the murdered Knight
rose from the awful silence of the tomb, and seated himself upon the left hand
of his Royal Master, while his name sake, to complete the order, sat upon his
right; the Senior and Junior Grand Wardens, agreeably to their ancient custom,
were placed in the East and West; the tapers were eclipsed amidst a blaze of
jewels, which were excelled only by the bright luminary of heaven in meridian
splendour. No eloquence can convey an idea of the beauty, order, and harmony,
which reigned. Like the glory of the apostle's third heaven, it could not be
revealed. They were such, indeed, as the eye of the uninitiated has not seen,
nor has it entered into the heart of a cowan to conceive. But my impatience
for information exceeded all bounds. I asked for the signs of the different
orders of entered, passed, raised and arched. But I asked in vain. -- No voice
was heard. -- A universal silence reigned. -- I then began to fancy myself with
the disciples of Pythagoras, or that the grand secret of Masonry was to become
speechless.

After admiring their prudence in excluding females, (for it would be scarcely
possible for the different sexes to assemble and keep silence, even in heaven,
for half an hour,) I acknowledge I began to fancy a silent heaven no heaven for
me; and meditated an escape: When, lo! -- Sacred to heaven, behold, the dome
appears,
See what august solemnity it wears!
In a moment, as if by enchantment, appeared a beautiful fabric, whose base was
Benevolence, and whose strength was Peace and Harmony. The Plumbline, Square
and Compasses, were placed upon the Tressel Board, as emblems of the proportion
of the design. On a beautiful column sat Faith, Hope and Charity, viewing
Misfortune. On another reclined Wisdom, Strength and Beauty, casting a
benignant smile upon those benefactors of mankind. Here, regardless of the
awful silence that reigned, I exclaimed with the Oratorio, Angels themselves
have deigned to deck the frame,
Behold they come upon the wings of light,
And with their shining vestments cheer the sight.
To heaven's high Architect all praise,
All gratitude be given,
Who deigned the human soul to raise,
By secrets sprung from heaven.


I was proceeding in this rapturous strain, when Phoebus, who had just mounted
his golden car, displayed his splendid rays upon my pillow, and I awoke, as
much confused in my ideas, perhaps, as an entered Apprentice, when just
introduced from darkness into light; but with the pleasing consolation, that I
was not entrusted with those profound secrets, so essential to preserve the art.

To all, who Masonry despise,
This counsel I bestow,
Don't ridicule, if you are wise,
A secret you don't know.
From ignorance alone proceeds,
A mean opinion of their deeds.
A LETTER. To -- --.
SIR,
I HAVE neglected to send you the enclosed copy of a Letter, (accompanied with
the Masonic Vision) which I wrote to Mrs. *****, from the conjectures which
arose in my mind, respecting the purpose it might answer. I, at length, indulge
your request, not to gratify my vanity, or sound the trumpet of fame; but,
perhaps, to afford you a little hilarity at high meridian.

My connections with the masonic order, naturally lead me to reverence it. I am
the daughter, the sister, and have been twice the beloved wife, of a Mason; yet
curiosity never tempted me to ask any questions upon the subject -- sensible
that the sacred obligations, by which they are bound to silence, are registered
in heaven -- more sacred than the emblematic Roll -- the ever blooming Sprig --
the sympathetic Tear -- or the responsive "So mote it be."

The Sacred Volume, and the books published under the sanction of the
Fraternity, contain all the knowledge in the sublime art, necessary for my sex.
Jachin and Boaz, and the spurious writings of other Evesdroppers, are too
trifling to merit either my censure or contempt -- For, Who can unfold the
Royal Art,
Or show its secrets in a song:
They Are safely kept in Masons' hearts,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.


I am, Sir, with esteem, Yours, etc. -- --.


