MISCELLANEOUS EXTRACTS IN PROSE and VERSE. CALCULATED FOR THE AMUSEMENT OF THE
HUMEROUS AND GAY, AS WELL AS FOR THE INSTRUCTION AND SERVICE OF THE ENQUIRING
AND BUSY WORLD.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, A NUMBER OF IMPORTANT QUESTIONS; WHICH QUESTIONS, WHOEVER
WILL EFFECTUALLY AND SATISFACTORILY ANSWER, SHALL BE ENTITLED TO ONE HUNDRED
DOLLARS REWARD ON DEMAND, FROM DAN. C. MELVILLE.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED IN THE YEAR, 1798.

EXTRACTS, etc.
NECESSARY HINTS TO THOSE THAT WOULD BE RICH.
THE use of money is all the advantage there is in having money.

For six pounds a year you may have the use of an hundred pounds, provided you
are a man of known prudence and honesty.

He that spends a groat a day idly, spends idly above six pounds a year, which
is the use of one hundred pounds.

He that wastes idly a groat's worth of time per day, one day with another,
wastes the privilege of one hundred pounds per day.

He that idly loses five shillings worth of time, loses five shillings, and
might as prudently throw five shillings into the sea.

He that loses five shillings, not only loses that sum* but all the advantage
that might be made by turning it in dealing, which, by the time that a young
man becomes old, will amount to a considerable sum of money*

Again: He that sells upon credit, asks a price for what he sells equivalent to
the principal and interest of his money for the time he is to be kept out of
it; therefore he that buys upon credit, pays interest for what he buys; and he
that pays ready money, might let that money out to use: so that he that
possesses any thing he has bought, pays interest for the use of it.

Yet, in buying goods, it is best to pay ready money, because, he that sells
upon credit, expects to lose five per cent, by bad debts; therefore he charges,
on all he sells upon credit, an advance that shall make up that deficiency.

Those who pay for what they buy upon credit, pay their share of this advance.

He that pays ready money, escapes, or may escape that charge.

A penny saved is two pence clear;
A pin a day's a groat a year.
FRANKLIN. THE WAY TO MAKE MONEY PLENTY IN EVERY MAN's POCKET.
AT this time, when the general complaint is that -- "Money is scarce," it will
be an act of kindness to inform the moneyless how they may reinforce their
pockets. I will acquaint them with the true secret of money-catching -- the
certain way to fill empty purses -- and how to keep them always full. Two
simple rules-well observed, will do the business.

First, let honesty and industry be thy constant companions; and,

Secondly, spend one penny less than thy clear gains.

Then shall thy hide bound pocket soon begin to thrive, and will never again
cry with the empty bellyache: neither will creditors insult thee, nor want
oppress, nor hunger bite, nor nakedness freeze thee.

The whole hemisphere will shine brighter, and pleasure spring up in every
corner of thy heart. Now therefore, embrace these rules and be happy. Banish
the bleak winds of sorrow from thy mind, and live independent. Then shall thou
be a man, and not hide thy face at the approach of the rich, nor suffer the
pain of feeling little when the sons of fortune walk at thy right hand: for
indepednency, whether with little or much, is good fortune, and places thee on
even ground with the proudest of the golden fleece. Oh then, be wise, and let
industry walk with thee in the morning, and attend thee until thou reachest
the evening hour for rest. Let honesty be as the breath of thy soul, and never
forget to have a penny when all thy expenses are enumerated and paid: then
shall thou reach the point of happiness, and independance shall be thy shield
and buckler, thy helmet and crown; then shall thy soul walk upright, nor stooop
to the silken wretch because he has riches, nor pocket an abuse because the
hand which offers it wears a ring set with diamonds.

FRANKLIN. THE WHISTLE. A TRUE STORY.
WHen I was a child, at seven years old, my friends on a holiday filled my
pockets with coppers, I went directly to a shop where they sold toys for
children; and being charmed with the sound of a whistle, that I met by the way
in the hands of another boy, I volluntarily offered him all my money for one. I
then came home, and went whistling all over the house, much pleased with my
whistle, but disturbing all the family, my brothers and sisters, and cousins,
understanding the bargain I had made, told me I had given four times as much
for it as it was worth. This put me in mind what good things I might have
bought with the rest of my money; and they laughed at me so much for my folly
that I cried with vexation; and the reflection gave me more chagrin than the
whistle gave me pleasure.

This however was afterward of use to me, the impressions continuing on my
mind; so that often when I was tempted to buy some unnecessary thing, I said to
myself don't give too much for the whistle; and so I saved my money.

As I grew up, came into the world, and observed the actions of men, I thought
I met with many, very many, who gave too much for the whistle.

When I saw any one too ambitious of court favors, sacrifice his time in
attendance on levees, his repose, his liberty, his virtue, and perhaps his
friends to attain it, I have said to myself, this man gives too much for his
whistle.

When I saw another fond of popularity, constantly employing himself in
political bustles, neglecting his own affairs, and ruining them by that
neglect: he pays indeed, says I, too much for his whistle.

If I knew a miser, who gave up every kind of comfortable living, all the
pleasure of doing good to others, all the esteem of his fellow citizens, and
the joys of benevolent friendship, for the sake of accumulating wealth: poor
man says I, you do indeed pay too much for your whistle.

If I fee one fond of fine clothing, fine furniture, fine equipage, and above
his fortune, for which he contracts debts, and ends his career in prison, alas,
say I, he pays dear, very dear, for his whistle.

When I see a beautiful, sweet tempered, girl married to an ill-natured brute
of a husband: what a pity it is, says I, that she has paid so much for a
whistle.

In short, I concieve, that great part of the miseries of mankind were brought
upon them by the false estimates they had made of the value of things, and by
their giving too much for their whistle.

FRANKLIN. LIFE.
AUGUSTUS, a few moments before his death, asked his friends who stood about
him, if they thought he had acted his part well; and upon recieving such answer
as was due to his extraordinary merit -- Let me then, says he, go off the stage
with your applause, using the expression with which the Roman actors made their
exit at the conclusion of a dramatic piece.

I could wish that men, while they are in the health, would consider well the
nature of the part they are engaged in, and what figure it will make in the
minds of those they leave behind them: whether it was worth coming into the
world for; whether it be suitable to a reasonable being; in short, whether it
appears graceful in this life, or will turn to advantage in the next. Let the
sycophant, or buffoon, the satirist, or the good companion, consider with
himself, when his body shall be laid in the grave: and his soul pass into
another state of existence, how much it would redound to his praise to have it
said of him, that no man in England eat better, that he had an admirable talent
at turning his friends into ridicule, that no body out* did him at
an-ill-natured jest, or that he never went to bed before he had dispatched his
third bottle.

These are, however, very common funeral orations, and elogiums on deceased
persons who have acted among mankind with some figure and reputation. But if we
look into the bulk of our species, there are such as are not likely to be
remembered a moment after their disappearance. They leave behind them no traces
of their existence, but are forgotten as though they had never been. They are
neither wanted by the poor, regretted by the rich, nor celebrated by the
learned. They are neither missed in the commonwealth, nor lamented by private
persons.

Their actions are of no significancy to mankind, and might have been performed
by creatures of much less dignity than those who are distinguished by the
faculty of reason. An eminent French author speaks somewhere to the following
purpose; I have often seen from my chamber-window two noble creatures, both of
them of an erect countenance, and endowed with reason. -- These two
intellectual beings are employed from morning to night, in rubbing two smooth
stones one upon another; that is, as the vulgar phrase is, in polishing marble.

My friend, Sir Andrew Freeport, as we were sitting in the club last night,
gave us an account of a sober citizen, who died a few days since. This honest
man being of greater consequence in his own thoughts than in the eye of the
world, had for some years past kept a journal of his life. Sir Andrew, showed
us one week of it. Since the occurrences set down in it mark out such a road of
action as that I have been speaking of, I shall present my readers with a
faithful copy of it; after having first informed him, that the deceased person
had in his youth been bred to trade, but finding himself not so well turned for
business, he had for several years past lived altogether upon a moderate
annuity.

Monday, eight o'clock. I put on my clothes, and walked into the parlour.

Nine o'clock ditto. Tied my knee strings; and washed my hands.

Hours ten, eleven, and twelve. Smoaked three pipes of Virginia. Read the
Supplement, and Daily Courant. Things go ill in the north. Mr. Nisby's opinion
thereupon.

One o'clock in the afternoon. Chid Ralph for mislaying my tobacco box.

Two o'clock. Sat down to dinner. Mem. too many plumbs and no suet.

From three to four. Took my afternoon's nap.

From four to six. Walked into the fields. Wind S. S. E.

From six to ten. At the club. Mr. Nisby's opinion about the peace.

Ten o'clock. Went to bed, slept sound.

Tuesday being holy day, eight o'clock. Rose as usual.

Nine o'clock. Washed hands and face, shaved, put on my double soaled-shoes.

Ten, eleven, twelve. Took a walk to Islington.

One. Took a pot of Mother Cob's Mild.

Between two and three. Returned, dined on a knuckle of veal and bacon. Mem.
Sprouts wanting.

Three. Nap as usual.

From four to six. Coffee house. Read the news. A dish of twist. Grand Vizier
strangled.

From six to ten. At the club. Mr. Nisby's account of the Great Turk.

Ten. Dream of the grand Vizier. Broken sleep.

Wendesday, eight o'clock. Tongue of my shoe buckle broke. Washed hands but not
face.

Nine. Paid off the butcher's bill. Mem. To be allowed for the last leg of
mutton.

Ten, eleven. (...) At the coffee house. More work in the north. Stranger in a
black wig, asked me how stocks went.

From eleven, to one. Walked in the fields. Wind to the South

From one, to two. Smoaked a pipe and an half.

Two. Dinner as usual. Stomach good.

Three. Nap broke by the falling of a (...) dish. Mem. Cook maid in love, and
grown careless.

From four to six. At the coffee house. Advice from Smyrna. That the grand
Vizier was first of all strangled, and afterward beheaded.

Six o'clock in the evening. Was half an hour in the club before any body else
came. Mr. Nisby of opinion that the grand Vizier was not strangled the sixth
instant.

Ten at night. Went to bed* Slept without waking 'till nine next morning.

Thursday, nine o'clock. Staid within, 'till two o'clock for Sir Timothy; who
did not bring me my annuity according to his promise.

Two in the afternoon. Sat down to dinner, loss of appetite. Small beer four.
Beef over-corned.

Three. Could not take my nap

Four and five. Gave Ralph a box on the ear. Turned off my cook maid. Sent a
messenger to Sir Timothy. Mem. I did not go to the club to night. Went to bed
at nine o'clock.

Friday. Passed the morning in meditation upon Sir Timothy, who was with me a
quarter before twelve.

Twelve o'clock, Bought a new head to my ^ane, and a tongue to my buckle. Drank
a glass of purl to recover appetite.

Two and three. Dined and slept well.

From four to six. Went to the coffee house. Met Mr. Nisby there. Smoked
several pipes. Mr. Nisby of opinion that tacid coffee is bad for the head.

Six o'clock. At the club as Steward. Sat late.

Twelve o'clock. Went to bed, dreamt that I drank small beer with the Vizier.

Saturday. Waked at eleven, walked in the fields. Wind N. E.

Twelve. Caught in a shower.

One in the afternoon. Returned home and dried myself.

Two. Mr. Nisby dined with me. First course, marrow bones, second, ox che^k,
with a bottle of Brooks and Hillier.

Three o'clock. Overslept myself.

Six. Went to the club, (...) to have fallen into the gutter. Grand Vizier
certainly dead, etc.

I question not but the readers will be surprised to find the abovementioned
journalist taking so much care of a life that was filled with such
inconsiderable actions, and received so very small improvements; and yet, if we
look into the behavior of many whom we daily converse with, we shall find most
of our hours are taken up in those three important articles of eating, drinking
and sleeping.

I do not suppose that a man loses his time, who is not engaged in public
affairs, or in an illustrious course of action. On the contrary, I believe our
hours may very often be more profitably laid out in such transactions as make
no figure in the world, than in such as are apt to draw upon them the attention
of mankind. One may become wiser and better by several methods of employing
ones-self in secrecy and silence, and do what is laudable without noise or
ostentation. I would, however, recommend to every one of my readers, the
keeping a journal of their lives for one week, and setting down punctually
their whole series of employments during that space of time.

This kind of Self examination would give them a true state of themselves, and
incline them to consider seriously what they are about. One day would rectify
the mistakes of another, and make a man weigh all those indifferent actions,
which, though they are easier forgotten, must certainly be accounted for.

SPECTATOR. SEVERAL RELATIONS touching the nature of those perpetual La^ps
which have continued burning for many centuries together, etc. (From the
British Magazine.)
SIR,
SINCE you have entertained your readers with several curious pieces, which
refer to nature and art, I doubt not, but the subsequent passages of those
perpetual lamps which have continued burning (in the sepulchers of the
Ancients) for many centuries together, without any fresh supply, will prove
acceptable.

All fire, but especially flame, says philosophers is of an active and stirring
nature, and cannot possibly subsist without motion: Now there are several
authors who have treated of this subject by the by, though none, says the learned
and judicious Bishop Wilkins, that have writ any thing to the purpose, (except
the ingenious Fortunius Licetus) from whom we shall beg leave to borrow some
undeniable proofs, which we hope will be suitable to our present enquiry.

First then that there has been such lamps, St. Austin mentions one of them in
a temple dedicated to Venus which was always exposed to the open weather, and
could never be extinguished; Pamyrollus mentions a lamp found in his time, in
the sepulcher of Tulli^, Cicero's daughter, which had continued there for 1550
years, but was presently extinguished by the admission of new air. And it is
commonly reported of Cedrenus, that in Justinian's time there was another
burning lamp found in an old wall at Antioch; which had remained for above 500
years, there being a crucifix placed by it; hence it appears, that they were in
use with the primitive Christians.

But more especially remarkable is that of Olybius, which had continued burning
for 1500 years: the relation is this: "As a rustic was digging the ground by
Padua, he found an urn, in which there was another urn, and in this a lesser,
with a lamp clearly burning; on each side of it there were two other vessels,
both of them full of a pure liquor the one of gold, the other of silver". Hence
we may probably conjecture, that it was some chemical secret by which it was
contrived. Baptista Porta, tells us of another lamp, burning in an old marble
sepulcher belonging to some of the Ancient Romans, enclosed in a glass vial,
found in his time, about the year 1550, in the Isb Nisis which had been buried
there before our Savior's incarnation.

In the tomb of Pallas the Areadian, who was slain by Turnus in the Trojan war,
there was found another burning lamp.

In the year of our Lord 1401, whence it would seem that it had continued there
for above 2600 years; and being taken out, it continued burning,
notwithstanding either wind or water, with which some strove to quench it, nor
could it be extinguished till they had spilt the liquor in it. Ludouicus Vives
tells us of another lamp that continued burning for 1050 years, which was found
a little before his time. There is another relation of a certain man, who, upon
diging somewhat deep in the ground, met with something like a door, having a
wall on each hand of it, from which he cleared the earth; he farved open the
door, and there discovered a fair vault, toward the farther side of which was
the statue of a man in armor, ^iting by a table, leaning upon his left arm,
and holding a scepter in his right hand, with a lamp burning before him; the
floor of this vault being so contrived, that upon the first step into it, the
statute erected itself from its leaning posture, upon the second step, it
lifted up the scepter to strike, and before the man could approach near the
lamp, to take hold of it, the statute struck and broke it to pieces; such care
was had that it might not be taken away, nor discovered; and the learned and
judicious Mr. Cambden, in his description of Yorkshire, page, 572, speaking of
the tomb of Constantius Clorus, broken up in those times, mentions such a lamp
to be found within it.

It is evident that there are several other relations to this purpose, besides
these above mentioned, notwithstanding the opposite opinions of our
adversaries, by which it clearly appears that there have been such lamps which
have remained burning for several centuries together, etc, and there are
several opinions why the Ancients were so careful in preserving them, some of
which we shall here exhibit.

1st. Some think it to be an expression of their belief, concerning the soul's
immortality after its departure out of the body; a lamp among the Egyptians
being the hyerogliphick of life: and therefore that they that could not procure
such lamps, were yet careful to have the image and representation of them
engraved upon their tombs. Others conceive them by way of gratitude to those
infernal deities, who took the charge and custody of their body's when dead,
remaining always with them in their tombs, and were therefore called Dii Manes.

Others, that these lamps were only intended to make their sepulchers more
pleasant, that they may not seem to be imprisoned in a dismal and uncomfortable
place. True indeed! a dead body cannot be sensible of the light, no more could
it of it is want of burial; yet the same instinct which did excite it to the
desire of one, did also occasion the other.

Licetus concludes this ancient custom to have a double end; 1st. politic, for
the distinction of such as were noble-born; hence it was usual for the nobles
amongst the romans, to take special care in their last wills, that they might
have a lamp in their own monuments, and for that purpose gave liberty to their
slaves on this condition, that they should be watchful in maintaining and
preserving it. ^^d. Natural, to preserve the body from darkness; -- of which
though there have been so many sundry kinds; and several ways to make them, (some
being able to resist any violence of weathers, others being easily extinguished
by any little alteration of the air, some being enclosed round about with
glass, others being open,) yet they are all of them utterly perished amongst
the ruins of Time, and those who are versed in the search after them, have only
recovered such dark conjectures, as are generally rejected and disbelieved by
the litterati of a brighter age; So I shall say no more on this head, but
conclude with that of the poet, viz, -- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus impesti, si non his utere mecum.
HORACE.

I am sir your constant reader: and humble servant. R. Hulfe.
Ellsworth, July 30th. 1760
POETRY. A THOUGHT ON STELLA.
WHEN charming Stella speaks the listening throng
All wrapped in mute attention most profound,
Catch the enchanting accents from her tongue,
And softest, thrilling notes our ears surround.
When Stella's silent, still she breathes around
Odours, which cannot be by words expressed,
Thus, fragrant gales the enraptured soul confound,
Winged from the shores of Araba the blessed.
Were I sole monarch of this ponderous ball,
In all the dazzling glare of pomp arrayed,
Gladly I Would quit the gaudy, tu^^ing all
Blessed in a Cottage with my heavenly maid.
AMINTOR WIT AND BEAUTY.
BEAUTY and wit the mighty maker gave
To woman, to reward the great and brave.
To wing their winter hours, and sooth their cares,
And sweeten the fatigues of camps and wars.
Beauty and wit and every charming grace
Which brightens and adorns the mind and face,
The power creating has in her expressed
And him with every many virtue blessed.
The pleasure beauty gives is an excess,
And nothing in excess, can always please,
Things exquisitely fine will soonest cloy
And man's too apt to surfeit even of joy;
But then the rapture's lasting when it is joined
With wit the winning beauty of the mind.
Wit warms society by pleasing strife,
And quickens and refines the joys of life.
Wit's always gay, agreeable and new.
And pleases when it bites, and when it flatters too
Their mutual aid they to each other lend
Beauty is Wit's and wit is beauty's friend:
But when with virtue they together shine,
The transport is eternal and divine.
The Protector's advice to ALGERNON SIDNEY Communicated by Dr. Rawlinson. (A
very important article from the student.)
The following curious anecdote was found indorsed on paper signed Alg. Sidney.

The Protector's advice to me, when I went from him to the King of Sweden in
Poland; which I write from his own detailing, and the alteration in the second
particular is his own hand.

I. IF you would not miscarry in this business, know first, that all public
businesses* and private too, prosper and succeed only as God is pleased to
determine them.

II. And that therefore the greatest wisdom in them that are employed about
business lies in this, that they seek to be accepted with God, which no man
is, but by Jesus Christ.

III. That there be a denial of man's own abilities, and that work be undertaken
with humility and meekness of spirit, and that one be swift to hear, and slow
to speak, well understanding before he answer.

IV. That a man in his own conversations, as he would have a blessing, abstain
from all manner of evil, and constantly, with all earnestness and truth of
heart, cry to God for a blessing* seeing he disposes the issue of things all
businesses as he pleases.

From a statesman retired from Court, to my Lord --. In commendation of a
country life. (From the Universal Magazine.)
MY LORD,
COULD I think you capable of insulting me in this my absolute retreat from all
the polite and modish part of society, when you request from me a detail of my
solitary amusements; no one should exact a more severe satisfaction: but, as I
have no reason to question your former friendship, I shall, with my usual
undisguised openness, lay before you my manner of life, and how it is agreeable
to one of my years, worn out with the fatigues of the state, and cloyed with
the ways of the world.

I never was so sensible of my own dignity; abstract from business or
diversion, my mind retires within itself, where it finds treasures, till now,
undiscovered; capacities formed for infinite objects, desires that stretch
themselves beyond the limits of this wide creation, in search of the great
Original of life and pleasure. I must tell you my Lord, that I find new powers
exerting their energy, and employed in such exercise, to which, till now, I
have been a stranger. -- How often have You and I rallied the remembrance of our
religious duties, and put his sacred truths on a level with the poet's rosy
bowers, myrtle shades and elyssian fields? But now I am convinced, that the
soil is immortal and capable of celestial joys, and triumph in the privileges
of my own being; -- I rejoice to think, that the moment I began to exist, I
entered on an eternal state, and commenced a duration, that shall run parallel
to that of the supreme and self-existent mind. -- This prospect animates me
with a divine ambition, and casts a reproach on all created glory, which we
have been so long and so anxiously looking after. The world vanishes; it is
charms and soft allurements are no more; a vail is cast on mortal beauty; the
spell is broken, the enchantment dissolved, and though I am every where
surrounded with causeless enemies, nothing gives me so great trouble as the
loss of so much time spent in the pursuit of perishable objects. Perchance you
may smile, and take this for an imaginary triumph, or sort of cowardly insult,
in the absence of an enemy: and may think my contempt of grandeur appears with
an ill grace, in one that enjoys a considerable estate, a grand equipage, and
many other tokens of his sovreign favor, for the services done to his king and
country.

But this, my lord, is what has given me a just opinion of the world, and of
myself: a constant series of success and prosperity, has convinced me, that the
whole creation cannot make me blessed. My ambitious designs have never been
disappointed: I have been so vain to apply to my own power that awful sentence
By me kings reign. -- In love I have always been fortunate. But whatever
pleasure I pursued, the enjoyment always undecieved me, or disgusted me. --
Sometimes I was too wise, sometimes too capricious to be pleased* -- I have
tried all the vanities below the sun; and there is lest no novelty to flatter
me. I know the utmost that beauty and greatness can give, and am cured of love
and ambition by experimental evidence.

Your Lordship has been witness to many of those truths which I recollect in
this seat of retirement. You cannot forget Eustatia; the admired Eustatia, in
whose possessions my youthful days promised themselves lasting joys. -- How did
I adore her! You can tell with what eagerness and anxiety I pursued her virtue.
But her yielding beauty, by granting my desires, lost my esteem; her charms
vanished, her wit was impertinance, and her artifice disgusted me: and this, in
a great measure, put a period to my gallantries. --

I could thence forward look upon women, without any temptation to idolatry. --
Balls and assemblies, dancing and dress, were no longer the subject of my
serious application: and I yielded an implicit assent to those petit maitres,
whose talents lie in discussing the important controversies, who sings best at
the opera' performs best at the play houses, entertains us more agreeably at
Vauxhall and Ranelagh* or who supplies the town best with Masquerade dresses,
when they are ashamed to turn fools in their usual habit.

But these soft follies were only discarded for more spacious vanities. --
Distinction and power. -- Titles and equipage now fill my thoughts -- Ambition
now took full possession of my soul -- I clothed myself with patriotism* and as
the circumstances of the times concerned with my scheme, (...) presently
harrangued myself into esteem* and* -- You must remember that remarkable
debate, by a well-timed opposition and constancy. Made my adversaries think it
worth their while to gain me over at any rate. -- From such beginnings, I
reached the envied height, and made myself gloriously miserable. -- I jumped
into the saddle where I expected the consummation of all my wishes, but this
very period, from whence I hoped to date my happiness, began with distrust and
anxiety.

Forsaken by my patriot friends, I found myself surrounded with flatterers and
mercenary dependants; and my sleep, as well as my daily attendance on the
state, disturbed with courtiers, dispatches, intrigues of the cabinet, and
outcries of a discontented people loading me with the blame of those evils,
which you are sensible would never have fallen upon them, had my moderate and
more wholesome opinion been approved -- My disdiscontent under these vexations,
was grown almost insupportable; and indeed, I must very soon have been borne
down under such a weight, had not kind providence released me; and made my
enemies the instruments of doing me that good, which I was not able to do for
myself. It was a happy coalition* my Lord, that set me free, and took the
burden upon their own shoulders. -- What advantage they have got by it. I know
not: -- For my own part, I have gained a joyous retreat* surrounded with a
charming variety of woods open lawns* and slow'ry vales in their uncultivated
beauty. Here I rove unattended and free with no circumstance of grandeur, but
the consciousness of a reasonable and immortal being

A NIGHT PIECE, Or Modern Philosophy, by Mr. Smart.
"'IT WAS when bright Cynthia with her silver ear,
Soft stealing from Endymean's bed,
Had called forth every glittering star,
And up the ascent of heaven her brilliant host had led.
Night with all her Negro train,
Took possession of the plain;
In an hearse she rode reclined,
Drawn by Schreech-Owls, slow and blind.
Close to her with printless feet
Crept stillness in a winding sheet.
Next to her deaf silence was seen,
Treading on tip-toes over the green,
Softly, lightly, gently, she trips,
Still holding her finger sealed to her lips.
Then came Sleep, serene and bland,
Bearing the death watch in his hand,
In fluid air around him swims
A tribe grotesque of mimic dreams.
You could not see a sight,
You could not hear a sound,
But all confessed the Night
And horror deepen'd round.
Beneath a Plantain's melancholy shade,
Sophron the wise was laid,
And to the answering wood these sounds conveyed,
While others toil within the town,
And to fortune smile or frown,
Fond of trifles, fond of toys,
And married to that woman, noise:
Sacred wisdom be my care,
And fairest virtue wisdom's heir.
His speculations thus the sage begun,
When lo! the neighboring bell
In solemn sound struck one; --
He starts -- and recollects he was engaged to Nell.
Then up he sprang, nimble and light
And rapt at fair Elenor's door,
He laid aside virtue that night,
And next morn por'd in Plato for more.
TO THE SOUL. (From the Theological Magazine.)
VITAL spark of heavenly flame,
Quit, oh quit this mortal frame,
Trembling, hoping, lingering flying,
Oh the pain, the bliss of dying!
Cease, fond nature, cease thy strife
And let me languish into life:
Hark they whisper; Angels say,
Sister spirit come away,
What is this absorbs me quite?
Steals my senses, shuts my sight,
Drowns my spirits, draws my breath?
Tell me my soul, can this be death?
The world recedes, it disappears!
Heaven opens on my eyes! my ears
In sounds seraphic ring:
Lend, lend your wings! I mount I fly!
O grave! where is thy victory?
O Death where is thy sting?
REMARKABLE LONGING AFTER DEATH
YOU have heard, to be sure that S. Ashworth is dead I went to see her almost
every day whilst I was at M -- d; and, I hope, recieved daily improvement by
the sight of her. Her behavior, as it was beyond any thing I ever knew, I
think, deserves the highest encomiums, many people after so long an illness as
hers, was, can bring themselves to be resigned, and easy with the thought of
approaching death; but hers was much more than resignation, she expressed the
greatest joy imaginable (...) the thoughts of dying; and her greatest fear was
(...) she should live. She was one day telling her Aunt, what great mercies she
had received; that she had no more pain than what she could bear; and added, 'I
could bear ten times as much with pleasure if I was sure death would come at
last.' Mrs. Ashworth asked her, whether, if it were possible for her to
recover* she would desire it. O! no, she said the fear of being snatched into
the world again was her greatest dread, and (says she) if you could have any
idea of the transport I feel in the hope of being happy, you could not be so
barbarous to wish me to live* How charming was this from so young a person! She
was even, (I think) instead of being pitied, to be envied in her most painful
moments,

She was always asking, (when people had been to see her) what they said of
her? and the most pleasing thing you could have told her was, they thought she
could not live; sometimes when she had been a long while without sleep, Mrs*
Ashworth has been forced to tell her, she did not believe she could survive an
hour; with this pleasing hope she would compose herself. -- Who would not give
up all the external charms of wealth or beauty. (which if we happen (...) to
possess, we are so apt to be proud of) for such a resolution as this* at a time
when our best earthly enjoyments can be of no advantage to us? I own her
behavior made a much greater impression on me, than the finest admonition I
ever heard from the pulpit; as example is beyond precept.

When I was with her there appeared something more pleasing in death than I had
ever before imagined*

Every human creature is naturally shocked at the thought of a dissolution, but
it seemed to give her so much pleasure that it made me reflect on that fine
saying of St. Paul, O Death! where is thy sting! O Grave! where is thy victory?
The sting of Death is sin: How true is it! for when combatted by virtue and
religion, it loses all its venom, and we recieve it not as an enemy, nor barely
as a release from trouble, but as a kind summons to happiness. I am very
willing to believe this was Mrs Ashworth's case, and that her behavior was not
owing to presumption, or stupidity; but wholly to conscious innocence.

MAXIMS FOR THE CONDUCT OF LIFE. TEMPERANCE.
THE richest endowments of the mind, are temperence, prudence, and fortitude;
Self-denial is the most exalted pleasure; and the conquest of evil habits, the
most glorious triumph.

The meanest approach thou can make to happiness on this side the grave, is
to enjoy understanding and health.

These blessings if thou possessest, and would preserve to old age, avoid the
allurements of voluptuousness, and fly from her temptations.

When she spreads her delicacies on the table, when her wine sparkles in the
cup, when she smileth upon thee, and persuadeth thee to be joyful and happy:
then is the hour of danger, and let reason stand firmly on her guard: for if
thou hearkenest unto the words of her adversary, thou art decieved and betrayed.

The joy which she promises changes to madness; and her enjoyments lead on to
diseases and death.

Cast thine eyes upon her guests, who have listened to her temptations; are
they not meagre, are they not sickly, are they not spiritless?

Their short hours of jollity are followed by tedious days of pain and
dejection: her votaries are become her victims, the just and natural
consequence which God has ordained in the constitution of things, for the
punishment of those who abuse his gifts. A firm faith is the best divinity, a
good life the best philosophy, a clear conscience the best law, honesty the
best policy, and temperance the best physic.

PRUDENCE.
JUDGMENT is the throne of prudence, and silence is its sanctury. It is a maxim
of prudence to leave things before they leave us. The true way to advance
another's virtue, is to follow it; and the best way to decry down another's
vice, is to decline it. A warm heart requires a cool head. Courage without
conduct, is, like fancy without judgment; all ^ail, and no ballast. Put a
bridle on thy tongue; set a guard before thy lips, lest the words of thine own
mouth destroy thy peace.

Boast not of thyself, for it shall bring contempt upon thee, neither deride
another for it is dangerous.

A bitter jest is the poison of friendship, and he that cannot restrain his
tongue; shall have trouble.

Furnish thyself with the proper accommodations belonging to thy condition but
spend not the utmost of what thou can afford, that the providence of thy
youth may be a comfort to thy old age. Let not prosperity put out the eyes of
circumspection, nor abundance cut off the hands of frugality, he that too much
indulges in the superfluities of life, shall live to lament the want of it is
necessaries. From the experience of others do thou learn wisdom, and from their
failings correct thine own faults. Charity obliges not to mistrust a man,
prudence not to trust him before we know him.

When thou have proved a man to be honest, look him up in thine heart as a
treasure, regard him as a jewel of inestimable value.

Refuse the favors of a mercenary man, they will be a snare unto thee, thou
shall never be quit of the obligation. Use not to day what tomorrow may want;
neither leave that to hazard which foresight may provide for, or can prevent.

Yet expect not even from prudence infallible success; for the day knows not
what the night may bring forth.

The fool is not always unfortunate, nor the wise man always successful.

FORTITUDE.
PERILS, misfortunes, pain, and injury, are more or less the lot of every man
that comes into the world.

In human life there is a constant change of fortune, and it is unreasonable to
expect from the common fate. Life itself decays, and all things are daily on
the change.

Imprint this maxim deeply in your mind, that there is nothing certain in this
human and mortal state; by which means you will avoid being transported with
prosperity and being dejected in adversity.

A wise man stands firm in all extremities, and bears the lot of his humanity
with a divine temper.

He suffers not his happiness to depend on her smiles, and with her frowns he
will not be dismayed.

Under the pressure of his misfortunes, his calmness alleviates their weight,
and his constancy shall surmount them.

A peaceful conscience honest thoughts, virtuous actions, and an indifference
for casual events, are blessings without end or measure; this consummate state
of felicity is a submission to the dictates of right nature; the foundation of
its wisdom and virtue; the knowledge of what we ought do, and the conformity of
the will to that knowledge. Every virtue gives a man a degree of felicity in
some kind: honesty gives a man a good report; justice, estimation; prudence,
respect* courtesy and liberallity, affection; temperence, gives health;
fortitude, a quiet mind, not to be moved by any adversity.

Virtue is a blessing, which man alone possesses, and no other creature has any
title to but himself. All is nothing without her, and she alone is all. The
other blessings of this life, are often times imaginary: She is always real --
She is the life and crown of all perfections.

DESIDERATA. (From the Philosophical and Mechanical Magazines)
WHEREAS there are various things, which might justly be supposed solvable, by
the application of some of the numerous experiments in natural as well as moral
philosophy, which have not been as yet investigated, or in the least enquired
into.

I now state to the public the following questions which I humbly concieve*
should they be thoroughly traced out* and completely, and satisfactorily
answered would be of inestimable and immense value to mankind.

1st. AS there are, doubtless sundry mines of gold within the limits of the
three New England states. By what means and measures can they be absolutely
found and obtained.

2nd. What machine can be constructed to plow in any hard* stony, or ^ooty
ground, with dexterity and dispatch without any kind of animal team.

3rd. What method can be taken to make wood of every kind grow in and near all
the most populous towns, to be within (...) year, hence, as thick and as large
as it ever has been at any one period of time since the year of our Lord
fifteen hundred.

4th. By what parts can a great plenty of good manure be forewith produced,
with great cheapness and facility, for all our good old fields, which are very
easy to plow; but will not bear a good crop by reason of poverty.

5th, How can a man cut the flinty rock as easy as he can an equal bulk of soft
Cheese-curd, and transport it as easy as he could an equal bulk of cork.

6th. How can a man fat a thousand weight of pork or beef* with the one tenth
part of the forage or provender which it commonly takes to do the same.

7th. How can we comfortably raise ten times more good fruit in one year than
we commonly do in the same time.

8th. What arts can be used to make ourselves sure of catching every flock of
wild fowls, geese, or pigeons, which we see fly in any, or every part of the
year.

9th. What lawful and honorable arts can be put into immediate practice in
order for a man to gain the affections of the woman he adores; and so vice
versa.

10th. What medical, philosophical, cosmitical, or rational preparation and
applications will absolutely drive far away every kind of sorrow and pain*
forever from a man, and at the same time yield him that cerdain* complete,
finished, and durable happiness and felicity, which shall not fail him in the
least degree for (...) five hundred years.

AN ITALIAN AIR.
WANTON zephyrs softly blowing
Watching, catching, whispering, going;
Bear in sighs, my soul away;
Tell Ormondo what I feel,
Tell him how his chains I wear,
Tell him all my grief and care,
Gently stealing,
And revealing,
More of love than I can say.
SOLILOQUY.
OH fountains! when in you shall I,
Eased of unpeaceful thoughts myself espy,
O fields! Oh woods! when shall I be made,
The happy tenant of your shade!
Here Is the spring head of pleasures flood,
Where all the riches lie.
That she has coined and stamp't for good,
To charm the mind as well as eye;
Pride and ambition here;
Only in far-fetched metaphors appear;
Here Is naught but winds* can hurtful murmurs scatter,
And naught but echo flatter.
The God's when they descended hither,
From Heaven, did always choose their way
And therefore we may boldly say,
That is the way too thither.
FINIS.

