REMAINS OF THE REV. JOHN MASON, A. M. Late RECTOR of WATER-STRATFORD in the
county of BUCKS.

CONTAINING, A variety of devout and useful sayings, on diverse subjects,
digested under proper heads; religious observations; serious advice to youth,
occasional reflections, etc. and christian letters.

First American EDITION.

NORWICH: Printed and sold by JOHN STERRY. Sold also, by I. Beers, New Haven;
Hudson and Goodwin, Hartford; Carter and Wilkinson, Providence; and by J.
Richardson, New-port. 1798.

PREFACE.
IT may not be amiss in the first place to mention a little of the Character of
the Rev. Mr. Mason, as given us by a person intimately acquainted with him. "My
acquaintance (says he) with Mr. Mason I have esteemed one of the greatest
mercies I ever Received. His Learning and piety were great, and his humility
deep. His affections were so fervent, and his zeal so great, that as they were
the comfort so they were the a^mirat^on of those that feared God, and lived
near him. So great was his love to Christ, that he had a value for any one who
spoke a Savory word of him. And as he had a great charity for others, so he was
most highly esteemed by the different denominations of Christi^ns. The frame of
his spirit was so heavenly* his deportment so humble and obliging, his
discourse of spiritual things (and little else could we hear from him) so
weighty, with such apt words and delightful air that it charmed all that had
any spiritual Relish, and at the same time was not so burdensome to others, as
discourses of that nature have been from other writers."

What a happy time would the Church of God experience, if all its members stood
in the same place with this truly pious Christian. Instead of contending about
forms and speculations, we could all unite in the humble charitable, and pious
temper with which this good man was so eminently distinguished. The pravalence
of such a spirit and temper, is more to be wished for, by every good Christian,
than any of those things about which we generally spend our warmest zeal. If we
are Zealous, let us (as he did) turn the heat of our zeal against sin, and for
the necessary and undesputed interest of vital holiness, and then it will not
be so apt to blind and mislead us. If we cannot all be of the same sentiments
let us be all of, and influenced by one spirit -- But this is a happiness
rather to be desired than expected, till some Divine power, more generally
correct our tempers, and give the human mind a better disposition; or till God
shall tune the heart of every Christian to the harmony of his own Divine
feelings -- O! when shall we cease to strive about the chaff while we neglect
the wheat; when shall we cease to build with hay, wood and stubble, which God
will destroy by the brightness of his coming?

But to return. The Author of these remains had an excellent*talent in the
sententious way; he loved to deliver a thought in as few and expressive words
as might be, as appears from these his religious maxims and sentences, the
reader is here presented with; many of them are easy and natural, most of them
strong and beautiful, and all of them devout and spiritual.

If such kind of religious sayings as those of Mr Mason, were but as familiar
to us as our common proverbs; and if parents would but take the pains to
insinuate them into, and fix them in the tender minds of their children, I am
satisfied it would answer a very valuable purpose in the religious life.

The serious advice to youth, as it is a plain and affectionate persuasive and
directory to the religious conduct, I hope it may be of service, not only to
those to whom it is immediately addressed, but to all who sincerely desire to
maintain a conscientious walk with God.

The directions and signs, etc. may be useful to doubting and discouraged
christians; and to all who make conscience of the great duty of
self-examination, and desire to know the true habit and state of their souls.

Mr. Mason was very happy in his epistolary style and talents; and if the
common maxim may be credited, that a man's true turn and genius may best be
known by his letters; these which are here inserted will abundantly confirm the
character I have given of this excellent man, in most of which we meet with the
same genuine zeal, and unaffected fervor, which animates the rest of these
select remains.

The devout christian loves to be animated and impressed with a strong sense of
divine things. And in most of these devotional maxims the reader will find such
a life and vigor, that he cannot read them considerately, without finding
himself not only seriously but warmly affected; often yielding to the force of
them.

The whole of this collection is principally intended for the benefit of
private families, and for those christians who desire to have their hearts
warmed with a sense of religion (the necessity of which every true christian
often feels, and of the want of which he often complains) and who are not well
able to purchase larger treatises. And if, by the blessing of Almighty God, it
may be subservient to the cause of real religion, and promote a Spirit of true
piety, inward as well as outward holiness, I shall have the satisfaction of
having been of some service to mankind; the reflection of which will be ever
sweet on my memory.

The EDITOR.

REMAINS etc.
CHAP. I. Containing a variety of devout and useful sayings on diverse subjects,
digested under proper heads.
Moral observations and instructions.
THOUGH few there be that care to be virtuous, yet fewer there are that would
not be counted so.

Nothing but what is God's dishonor should be our shame.

We must not walk by example, but by rule.

They that drive a way time, spur a free horse.

As often as a man lays out for God, he lays up for himself.

We have nothing that we can properly call our own, but what we have reason to
be ashamed of.

We are never well informed of the truth, till we are conformed to the truth.

A conceit of knowledge i^ the greatest enemy to knowledge, and the greatest
argument of ignorance.

We remember many things we should forget (as injuries, disappointments, etc.)
but forget what we should remember ( viz. God and our souls.)

They that presume most in prosperity are soonest subject to despair in
adversity.

Man may commend thee, but God may condemn thee.

When God punishes another, he threatens thee, when he wounds another, he warns
thee.

It is as great a mercy to be preserved in health, as to be delivered from
sickness.

If you mind nothing but the body, you lose body and soul too. If you mind
nothing but earth, you lose earth and Heaven too.

As they* who for every slight infirmity take physic to repair their health, do
rather impair it; so they, who for every trifle are eager to vindicate their
character, do rather weaken it.

Honesty is the best policy, and innocence the best wisdom.

Improve the wit you have bought at a dear rate, and the wisdom you have gained
by sad experience.

Learn of Christ, who was sensible of injuries, yet patient under them.

Be lively but not light; solid but not sad.

Keep the body under, but the spirit up.

Keep such company as God keeps.

What can you get by bad company* If you are truly good they will either taunt
you or despise you.

Take heed of being infected with the breath of a profane heart.

Let the body wait upon the soul, and both wait upon God.

Speak not well of yourself, nor ill of others.

Speak of people's virtues, conceal their infirmaties: If you can say no good,
say no ill of them.

To render good for evil is God-like* to render good for good is man-like* to
render evil for evil is beast-like; to render evil for good is devil-like.

Carry yourself submissively toward your superiors; and frienly toward your
equals; condescendingly toward your inferiors; generously toward your
enemies; and lovingly toward all.

Of religion in general.
IT signifies nothing to say we will not change our religion, if our religion
change not us.

If a man lives and dies a mere professor, it had been better for him if he had
lived and died a mere heathen.

The duty of religion flows from a principle of religion.

It is not talking, but walking with God, that gives a man the denom^^^tion of
a christian.

Darkness may as well put on the name of light, as a wicked man the name of a
christian.

It is our main business in this world to secure an interest in the next.

A desire of happiness is natural, a desire of holiness is supernatural.

If God has done that good for us which he has denied to the world, we ought
to do that service for him which is denied him by the world.

If we are willing, God will help us; if sincere, God will accept us.

A serious remembrance of God is the fountain of obedience to God.

If you forget God when you are young, God may forget you when you are old.

When a christian considers the goodness of God's ways, he wonders that all the
world does not walk in them. But when he considers the blindness, (...)
depravity, and prejudice of the (...) nature, he wonders that any (...) enter
upon them.

(...) your calling sure, and your (...).

(...) walking, with a neglect of (...), makes a disconsolate soul. Four things
a christian should especially labor after, viz. to be humble and thankful,
watchful and cheerful.

If we would not fall into things unlawful, we must sometimes deny ourselves in
those that are lawful.

Salvation then draws near to man when it is his main care.

The ordinances of God are the means of salvation; but the God of ordinances is
the author of salvation.

Religion must be our business, then it will be our delight.

It will cost something to be religious, it will cost more not to be so.

A christian's life is nothing else but a short trial of his graces.

Luke warmness is the best natural, but the worst spiritual temper a man can be
in.

There are few but what are som^times in a seri^us fit; but how (...) in a
serious frame, who (...) sense of God upon their (...)

It is a volu^^ary cann^t (...) the soul from God.

The (...) which leads to life (...) gate, therefore we should fear; (...) an
open gate, therefore we should hope.

Do the Lord's work in the Lord's time; pr^y whilst God hears; hear (...) God
(...); believe whil^t God pro^ises, ob^y whilst God commands.

That man has no sense of mercy that wants a sense of duty.

Two duties must run through a christian's life, like the warp through the
woof, blessing and trusting.

Religion is much talked of, but little understood, till the conscience be
awakened; then a man knows the worth of a soul and the want of a Savior.

Then does religion flourish in the soul, when it knows how to naturalize
spiritual things, and to spiritualize natural things.

We may judge of our eternal state by our spiritual state; and of our spiritual
state by the delightful and customary actions of our lives.

If we expect to live with Christ in Heaven, we must live to him on earth.

We may expect God's protection so long as we keep within bounds.

Our opportunities are (like our souls) very precious; but if they are lost
they are irrecoverably lost.

That preaching that is plain* pure, powerful, and practical, men are apt to
dislike.

Religion begins with a knowledge o^ a man's self, and is perfected with the
knowledge of God.

This is a threefold mystery; a gospel published in the midst of an ungodly
world; a little church preserved in the midst of devils; and a little grace
kept alive in the midst of corruptions.

The service of God is the soul's work; and the favor of God is its reward.

A man may be imperfect in his obedience and yet impartial.

God never fails them that wait for him, nor forsakes them that work for him.

It is a sign of advanced grace when opinion is swallowed up of religion.

Of GOD.
That there is a God, may be proved by considering the manner of propagation of
mankind by generation. Thus,

(1.) There must have been one first man. (2.) This first man must have had
some maker. (3.) This maker of him must himself be unmade. Therefore, (4.)
There must have been eternally some unmade being; and that is God.

We may truly conceive of God, though we cannot fully conceive of him.

We may have right apprehensions of him, though not an exact comprehension of
him.

Then our conceptions of God's attributes are carnal, when our high thoughts of
one gives us low thoughts of another.

His goodness makes his majesty amiable, and his majesty makes his goodness
wonderful. His love is not abated by his greatness, nor his greatness by his
love. His holiness hinders him not from dwelling with the poor in spirit.

Nothing is great enough for him to admire, who is infinite majesty; nothing is
mean enough for him to despise, who is infinite mercy.

God deals with his servants, not as a passionate master, but as a
compassionate father.

What pleases God should please us, because it pleases God.

A sight of God begins a saint on earth, and perfects him in heaven.

God takes notice of every particular man as if there were none else; and yet
takes notice of all as if they were but one man.

God repented that he made man, but never repented that he redeemed man.

We cannot live naturally without God, how then can we live happily without him?

We may know what God intends for us, by what he has wrought in us.

They that have God for their God have angels for their guard.

Many have lost for God, but none ever lost by God. If they have lost in
temporals, they have been eternal gainers, Matthew. xix 29.

This is a sure rule; God never takes any thing from his people, but he gives
them something better in the stead of it.

God is a great God, and therefore we should wait upon him; he is a good God,
and therefore it is not in vain to wait upon him.

A man may be a worshipper of the true God, and yet not a true worshipper of
God.

The lowest reverence is due to the highest majesty.

Fear God for his power, trust him for his wisdom, love him for his goodness,
praise him for his greatness, believe him for his faithfulness, and ador^ him
for his holiness,

All creatures are as nothing compared with God, and absolutely nothing without
God.

Of the fear of GOD.
They that fear God least have the greatest reason to fear him.

A fear of departing from God is a good means to keep us from departing from
him.

The more we fear God the less we shall fear men.

They that will not fear God in prosperity, will be afraid of him in adversity.

Of the presence of GOD.
If God's earthly presence is so good, what is his heavenly presence?

If God's being with us is so sweet, what is it to be with God?

There is joy in God's gracious presence, but in his glorious presence there is
fullness of joy.

There are pleasures in approaching to God here, but at his right hand there
are pleasures for ever more.

The nearer we are to Christ, the nearer is God to us.

The presence of God's glory is in heaven; the presence of his power on earth,
the presence of his justice in hell, and the presence of his grace with his
people. -- If he deny us his powerful presence we fall into nothing; if he deny
us his gracious presence we fall into sin; if he deny us his merciful presence
we fall into hell.

Of the love of GOD.
If the love of God set us on work, the God of love will pay us our wages.

God loves his people to the end, therefore they shall endure to the end.

He loves them in his Son, and as his Son and as long as he loves the Son.

We hated God without a cause, and he loved us without a cause.

Love begits love. It Is a flame that communicates itself. They that have much
forgiven them, much done for them, much laid out for them, and muh laid up for
them, will love much.

Our love to God is the reflection of his love to us; 1 John iv.19. We love him
because he first loved us.

Of CHRIST.
Christ made himself like to us, that he might make us like to himself.

Christ must needs have died, how else could sin be expiated, the law
sattisfied, the devil conquered, and man be saved?

They that deny themselves for Christ, shall enjoy themselves in Christ.

Men had rather hear of Christ crucified for them, than be crucified for Christ.

If Christ denied innocent nature out of love to us, shall not we deny corrupt
nature out of love to him?

Christ by his death appeared to be the Son of man, by his resurrection he
appeared to be the Son of God.

Christ was the great promise of the old testament, the Spirit is the great
promise of the new.

Christ's strength is the christian's strength.

If we would stand, Christ must be our foundation; if we would be safe, Christ
must be our sanctuary.

In regard of natural life, we live in God; in regard of spiritual life, Christ
lives in us.

He that thinks he has no need of Christ has too high thoughts of himself; he
that thinks Christ cannot help him has too low thoughts of Christ.

Presumption abuses Christ, despair refuses him.

Christ satisfied God to the uttermost, and therefore can save sinners to the
uttermost.

The blood of Christ, which satisfied the justice of God, may satisfy the
conscience of an awakened sinner.

If sin was better known, Christ would be better thought of.

If sin does not taste bitter, Christ cannot taste sweet.

When sin is hell Christ is heaven.

There is no passage from sin to holiness 'till we are passed from sin to
Christ.

Christ may have an interest in us, though we may not be able to see our
interest in him.

Christ has entreated God to be reconciled ^o us, and now he entreats us to be
reconciled to God.

God will give us nothing for our sakes; but he will deny us, nothing for
Christ's sake.

None are so low as Christ was, none so lowly, none so loving.

We may know what Christ has done for us, by what he has done in us*

C^^atur^s die that our bodies may live. Christ (...) our souls may live.

Our judge, instead of condemning us, sl^pt from the bench (...) for us.

Christ is to be a believer's judge, and i^ he was to choose his judge he could
not choose a bett^r fri^nd.

As God glorifies Christ in heaven, so the Spirit glorifies him on earth, in
the hearts of believers.

A believer's Comfort in living is to live to Christ; and in dying it is that
he shall go to Christ.

The blood of Christ upon the heart is the greatest blessing, upon the head is
the greatest curse.

It matters not who are our accusers if Christ be our advocate.

Christ's blood is the soul's ransom; his Spirit its comforter; his word its
food; his supper its feast; the Lord's day its market day.

A christian may triumph in the death of Christ! O death! where is thy sting? O
grave! where is thy victory? O hell! where is thy terror? O world! where is thy
malice? O sin! where is thy strength? O my soul! where are thine accusers?

There is no honor like a relation to Christ; no riches like the graces of
Christ; no learning like the knowledge of Christ; and no persons like the
servants of Christ.

Christ executes the office of a prophet in our affectual calling; of a priest
in our justification, and of a king in our sanctification.

-- Let us then hear him as our prophet; rely on him as our priest; and obey
him as our king -- Think not the worse of him for his manger or his cross, As
he cease not to be man in his highest estate, so he was God in his lowest.
His words were oracles, and his works miracles. His life was a pattern; his
death a sacrifice, his resurrection glorious; his ascension triumphant; his
intercession prevalent; and his coming again magnificent. All the angels in
heaven adore him; all the devils in hell fear him; and all the sons and
daughters of Adam must stand before him.

Own Christ's person, love his name, embrace his doctrine, obey his commands,
and submit to his cross. His person is lovely, his name is sweet, his doctrines
are comfortable, his commands are rational, and his cross honorable -- The very
angels admire him, and shall not we? --

A depraved understanding will not yield that the creature is so bad, and that
Christ is so good! --

O! did we but know ourselves* and our Savior! We are poor, but he is rich; we
are dead, but he is life; we are sin, but he is righteousness; we are
guiltiness, but he is grace; we are misery, but he is mercy; we are lost, but
he is salvation: -- If we are wi^ling, he never was otherwise -- He ever lives,
ever loves, ever pities, ever pleads. He loves to the end, and saves to the
^^^ermost, all that come unto him.

(...) invitation is sinners to come to Christ.
Have you sins, or have you none? -- If you have, whither should you go, but in
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world? Have you souls, or
have you none? -- If you have, (...) should you go but to the Savior of souls?
Is there a life to come, or is there not? If there is whither should you go but
him, who only has the words of eternal life? Is there a wrath to come, or is
there not* -- If there is, whither should you go but to him, who only can
deliver from the wrath to come? -- And will he not receive you? -- If he
yielded himself into the hands of them that sought his life, will he hide
himself from the hearts of them that seek his mercy? If he was willing to be
taken by the hand of violence, is he not much more willing to be taken by the
hands of (...) He that died for thy sins, will be (...) thee off for thine
infirmities? -- O come, come, come! -- I charge you (...) -- I beseech you come
-- (...) and he will give you life. Come (...) he will give you rest. Come
(...) will receive you. Knock, and (...) open to you Look to him, and (...)
save you. -- Did ever any come to him for a cure, and go away without it? --
Thou would find something in thyself, but thou find nothing -- but what
thou have reason to be ashamed of; but let not that hinder, but further thy
coming. -- Come as thou art; come poor, come needy, come naked come empty, come
wretched, only come, only believe; his heart is free, his arms are open, it is
his joy and his crown to receive thee. -- If thou art willing, he never was
otherwise.

Of the love of CHRIST.
Nothing grieves Christ more than to (...) is love slighted; nothing pleases
(...) than to have it accepted.

(...) of Christ is stronger than (...) than life, and better (...).

(...) sense of Christ's love adds (...) to ours.

(...) of Christ has a height (...), a depth without a (...) without an end,
and a (...) without a limit, Ephesians. iii 18.19.

Christ's sorrows, griefs and sufferings, can be paralleled with nothing but
his love.

Of saints, or true believers.
God has no sons that are unlike himself.

Believers are children of the same Father, members of the same Son, and
habitations of the same Spirit, fellow-citizens, fellow servants,
fellow soldiers, fellow-travellers, and fellow-heirs.

None are so easily acquainted (...) close knit together, and so much (...) to
one another, as real (...)

One true christian differs from (...) without breach of charity, (...) love
one another, though in (...) garbs.

It is not so considerable (...), what his judgment is, (...) temper is.

Heart-work is better than (...) and, it is a better temper to be (...)
charity, than in disputes.

Better be a melancholy saint, (...) mad sinner.

If good men are sad, it is not because they are good, but because they are not
better.

Whom God chooses, the world refuses.

God's gold is the world's dross. They, of whom the world is not worthy, are
counted not worthy to live in the world.

If believers are condemned by the world, let them remember that they (...) not
be condemned with the world. (...) may live in a believer, but a (...) cannot
live in sin. It may lose (...), though not leave its (...).

(...) man is so far acquainted with (...) of his own heart; that, (...)
condemning others, he is apt (...) them better than himself.

(...) of God had rather ten (...) suffer for Christ, than that (...) suffer by
him.

(...) ^^perfection of a believer's (...), makes him continually (...) on
Christ for his justification.

When a child of God thinks he can go alone, he is nearest falling.

A true christian may be weary in serving God, but he is never weary of serving
him.

He is neither afraid of dying nor living* he desires to go to heaven to see
Christ, yet, is willing to stay upon earth to serve Christ.

If the children of God did but know what was best for them, they would
perceive that God did that which is best for them.

A christian shall be here as long as he has any work to do for Christ, or as
long as Christ has any work to accomplish in him: Christ will fit him for
himself, and then take him to himself.

A true christian lives like a saint, and begs like a sinner.

All God's children have received God's spirit, wereby they are made humble,
believing and holy; humble in regard of their sins, believing in regard of
Christ, and holy in regard of their conscience and care to keep all God's
commandments.

A good deal of the trouble of God's people arises from a mistake and
misapprehension of God: they judge of God by their sense, and not by his
promise; by their own frame, and not by his constant ^a^ure.

As saints have groanings unutterable, so they have joys unutterable.

A christian is what he is between God and his own soul.

All saints have had ^^eir doubtings. David, cast me not off in mine old age,
Psalm. lxxi.9. Asaph, will the Lord c^st off for ever? and will he be favorable
no more? Psalm. lxxvii.7. Peter, Lord ^s it (...)? Matt. ^xxvi.22. And Paul,
l^st I should be a castaway, 1 Cor. xi.27.

But believers, remember, there may be true grace, where there is no comfort;
there may be saving faith without assurance. A soul may be in a pardoned state,
though in a troubled state. Your sins can never be triumphant, your graces
never decay, your souls can never be lost, your God and you never be separated.
The devil shall as soon p^^ck Christ out of heaven, as out of a believer's
heart. He sits as fast upon his throne here as there. The devil could not enter
into the herd of swine without Christ's leave; and will he let him worry his
lambs?

Believe firmly, hope joyfully, love fer^ently, pray earnestly, walk humbly,
work diligently, and wait quietly; and all this will be graciously considered.

Hold up, hold on, hold out, hold fast that which ye have received; still
watch, still pray, still believe, fight and run, that you may obtain; it is but
a little while, and he that comes will come and will not tarry; it is but a
little while, and your warfare is accomplished, and your iniquities shall be
everlastingly separated from you; your sin and sorrows, tears and fears, fled
and gone, gone for ever; and you meet with an unspeakable reward.

Of sinners.
Are not they miserable, who, if they had their wish, could not be happy?

They* that will not hear Christ say come to me, in a day of grace, shall hear
him say depart from me, in a day of judgment.

If we are graceless here we shall be speechless hereafter.

Sinners are first driven, then drawn to God.

The conversion of a sinner is a greater wonder than the creation of the world.

If a sinner's thoughts be not changed by grace, they will be changed hereafter
by experience.

They that are least serious, have the greatest reason to be so, their
condition is awful, and therefore their disposition ought to be so.

Hatred is due to sin, compassion to the sinner.

Sinners, if you will not hear God call to day, you will harden your hearts to
day: and, if you harden them to day, God may harden them to morrow. If you will
not set about repentance to day, God may justly deny you his assistance to
morrow.

If you will not do that which God has enabled you to do, how can you look
that he should do that for you which, of yourselves, you cannot do?

Don't think to begin to live, when thou art ready to die.

If you would not go to hell, you must know that you have deserved it.

Let not your hearts flatter you, nor the world comfort you, when God threatens
you.

God tells you, if you repent, you shall find mercy; and will you not believe
him* because thou have been a sinner, will thou make God a liar?

Sinners, you must be changed; if your hearts be not changed for the better,
your condition will be changed for the worse.

The worst of the ways of God, are better than the best of the ways of sin.

Of sin.
He that pleads for sin, is an advocate for his accuser.

God allows us any thing but sin.

If sin be in the fashion, we must be out of it.

Then a man shows himself to be a christian, when he chooses rather to suffer
than sin.

Sin di^s graves for bodies, and kindles hell for souls.

That is a sufficient cause for trouble, that is the cause of all the trouble
in the world.

Should not we groan for that which makes the whole creation groan?

If the heart be under the power of sin, the conscience is under the guilt of
sin. If thou art not purified, thou art not pardoned.

A man can never leave sin thoroughly, till he loathes it heartily.

We must be sick of sin, before we can be dead to sin.

There is no sin a man can be tempted to, but he will find greater comfort in
resisting than in indulging.

How can we say that we love Christ, if we love sin, which was an enemy to his
life and soul when he was on earth; and is an enemy to his glory now he is in
heaven?

Our sins cried as loud to heaven, as the Jews did to earth, that Christ might
be crucified.

Go to Golgotha, and see what sin did there.

Christ did not die for sin that we might live to sin.

Christ died that our sins might die, and our souls live.

Sin received its sentence in the death of Christ; but it does not receive its
execution till the death of a christian.

All our sins shall not separate between God and our souls, if unbelief does
not separate between Christ and our souls.

There is no sin but what may be traced up to unbelief.

He that glories in his sin, glories (...) his shame.

We should be ashamed of sin, but not ashamed to take shame for sin.

Get this principle into your hearts; there is nothing got by sin, nor lost by
holiness.

by suffering we may avoid sinning, but by sinning we cannot avoid suffering.

One that truly fears God, is afraid of sin; he sees more evil in it than in
all the evil in the world.

If we be not humble for sin, we derogate from the majesty of God; if we
despair under it, we derogate from his mercy.

One that is sincere hates sin in himself* and laments it in others.

Our hatred of sin must be irreconcilable; and our endeavors against it
perpetual.

The sins of the wicked, anger Christ, the sins of his people grieve him.

Want of sorrow for sin, more argues Want of love to Christ, than the sin
itself.

Sin is a believer's burden and wound, but Christ is his cure and comfort.

Sin is the sickness of the soul, and Christ the only physician, that can cure
it of the leprosy of profaneness, the fever of concupiscence, the dropsy of
covetousness, the tympany of pride, the lethargy of luke-warmness, the phrenzy
of passion, and the palsy of unbelief.

Hatred is heart-murder; lust is heart adultery; and covetousness
heart-stealing.

How tender is our flesh? How hard our hearts? i. e. How much more sensible are
we of suffering than sin?

We should fear to think that before God, which we are afraid to do before man;
for God knows our hearts better than any man knows our faces.

Vain thoughts are sin's advocates, and Christ's adversaries.

God is so holy that he would not suffer such an evil as sin; but that he is so
wise, that he can bring good out of it.

Of REPENTANCE.
Repentance begins in the humiliation of the heart, and ends in the reformation
of life.

Though we want power to repent; yet we do not want means to repent, nor power
to use these means.

He that repents of sin, as sin, does implicitly repent of all sin.

Let not sinful pleasures prevent godly sorrows.

An humble confession of sin brings shame to ourselves, but glory to God.

You cannot repent too soon. There is no day, like today. Yesterday is gone,
to morrow is God's, not your own. And, think how sad it will be to have your
evidences to seek, when your cause is to be tried; to have your oil to buy,
when you should have it to burn!

Let the hopes of mercy encourage to the exercise of repentance.

Turn to God, and he will turn to you; and then you are happy, though all the
world turn against you.

If we think amiss of Christ, we shall never believe: If we think well of sin,
we shall never repent.

If we put off our repentance to another day, we have a day more to repent of,
and a day less to repent in.

If we study to honor God, we cannot do it better than by confessing our sins,
and laying ourselves low at the feet of Christ.

Godly sorrow is the sorrow of love; the melting of the heart; love is the pain
and pleasure of a mourning heart.

The Evangelical penitent loves and grieves. Alas ( says he) that I who am as
high as heaven in privilege, should be as deep as hell in iniquity! instead of
repenting, I have run further on score! instead of honoring God, I have
dishonored him! instead of pleasing him, I have provoked him! instead of
following him I have forsaken him! -- O what bowels have I grieved! how can I
sin against my Jesus! shall I deny and crucify my Savior! he was crucified for
me, and shall he be crucified by me? shall I wound his heart and pierce his
side again, and give him cause to say, these are the wounds I received in the
house of my friends.

Of FAITH.
Reliance is the essence of faith, Christ is the object, the word is the food,
and obedience the proof: so that true faith is a depending upon Christ for
salvation in a way of obedience, as he is offered in the word.

The true tears of repentance flow from the eye of faith.

Though faith be necessary to our justification, good works are necessary to
our salvation.

We must derive our works from says, and demonstrate our faith by our works.

God is often pleased to imbitter (...) life of sense, that he may indear the
life of faith.

A steadfast faith begets a constant peace.

The more faith, the more humility.

Keep good principles, and they will keep you.

Men would first see, and then believe; but they must first believe, and then
see.

As believers live upon Christ by faith, so they live to him by obedience.

Justifying faith is always attended with universal obedience.

There is a difference between contending for the faith, and babbling for a
fancy.

Assurance sets the notion of faith too high, assent too low.

There is as much difference between faith and assurance, as there is between
the root and the fruit.

There may be joy without faith, and there may be faith without joy.

Human faith is founded upon probability, divine faith upon certainty.

If the exercise of faith be the care of your souls, the end of your faith will
be the salvation of your souls.

Of HUMILITY.
To be low is the safest and comliest posture for sinful creatures.

It is the creature's honor to abase himself before the most high God.

God had rather see his children humble for sin, than proud of grace.

If men did but know themselves more, they would be more humble.

They that are humble, are content and thankful.

An humble spirit is a charitable and quiet spirit.

Judge thyself with a judgment of sincerity, and thou will judge others with a
judgment of charity.

To humble ourselves, is the only way to rise.

Believers must be humble for sin pardoned, and because it is pardoned.

When Paul was a Pharisee he thought he was blameless; when he was a Christian,
the chief of sinners ^ before, any thing but Christ, now, none but Christ.

If Christ humbled himself to honor our nature, we should humble ourselves to
honor his name.

Neither all the devils in hell, nor all the temptations of the world, can hurt
that man that keeps himself humble and depending on Christ.

It is no humiliation to aggravate sin above Christ's saving power.

Despair is a corruption of humiliation, it is a counterfeit humility, a sullen
pride, the covert of a* hardened spirit.

That is true humiliation, which (like a harbinger) makes way for Christ; and
throws the soul at his feet.

Our Savior was a preacher and pattern of humility: he did so admire it, that
he set them in the highest form, that had the lowest hearts.

None so high and glorious as Christ, yet none so meek and lowly.

Of CONTENTMENT.
Humility is the mother of contentment.

The deeper your self-abhorrence, the easier is self-resignation.

They that deserve nothing should be content with any thing.

Bless God for what you have, and trust him for what you want.

We must cammit our souls to God's keeping, and submit ourselves to God's
disposing.

We should obey his revealed will, and then be resigned to his providential
will.

If we cannot bring our condition to our mind, we must labor to bring our mind
to our condition.

Neither contentment nor coffeehouse, arises from the outward condition, but
from the inward disposition.

If a man is not content in that state he is in, he will not be content in any
state he would be in.

Of PRIDE.
To be sure a man is proud of that which he scorns another for the want of.

That which a man envies in another, he would be proud of, if he had it himself.

Pride is founded on error and self-ignorance.

Some are pro^d of what they are, others of what they are not.

There is a sullen pride in not acknowledging benefits.

A man may be poor in purse, yet proud in spirit.

There may be pride in rags, in a solemn look and lowly carriage.

God had rather his people should fare poorly, than live proudly.

How can thou be judge of another's heart, that do not know thine own?

As the first step heavenward is humility, so the first step hell-ward is
pride.

Pride counts the gospel foolishness, but the gospel always shows pride to be
so.

Pride is a sin that will rise out of the ashes of other sins.

Folly is the beginning of pride, and shame shall be the end of it; either
penitent shame, or penal shame; either temporal repentance, or eternal
punishment.

Shall the sinner be proud that is going to hell? shall the saint be proud that
is newly saved from it?

Thou that can call nothing thine own but sin and shame, art thou proud? dust
and ashes, proud? a worm, and proud? emptiness, and proud? perishing, and proud?

It is unreasonable for the creature to be proud, much more the sinner.

Of HYPOCRISY.
An hypocrite is one that neither i^ what he seems, nor seems what he is.

An hypocrite is the picture of a saint; but his paint shall be washed off, and
he shall appear in his own colors.

God is good in earnest with us, we ought therefore to be so with him.

An hypocrite is hated of the world for seeming a christian, and hated of God
for not being one.

Of IDLENESS.
Idleness is the mother of many wanton children.

They that do nothing, are in the ready way to do that which is worse than
nothing.

If we hide our talent in the earth, we shall lose our treasure in heaven.

A christian should never say, he has nothing to do.

It was not for nothing that we were called out of nothing.

Of the SOUL.
It matters not what a man loses, if he saves his soul; but, if he loses his
soul, it matters not what he saves.

They that are least sensible of their soul's wants, are most miserable.

It Is our greatest wisdom to be tenderly watchful over the frame of our
spirits; to observe what helps it, and what injures it.

If you lose your time, you lose your hopes; and if you lose your hopes, you
lose your souls; and when your souls are lost they shall never be ransomed;
when your hopes are lost, they shall never be recovered; and when your time is
lost, it shall never be redeemed.

Of the heart and conscience.
The soft mercies of God will break the hard heart of man.

An hard heart is not so soon broken, as a broken heart is bound up.

It is better to have a good conscience, and be censured, than to have a bad
one, and be slattered.

We must hear the warnings of conscience, or we shall feel the woundings of
conscience.

A word from God, a look from Christ, a touch from the spirit, will break the
heart.

Of GRACE.
The notion of free grace may make persons dissolute, but a sense of it (...)
from ^in.

The goodness of God respects our emptiness, the grace of God our sinfulness,
and the mercy of God our unworthiness.

What sin is there, which grace cannot pardon? what heart is there, which grace
cannot soften? what soul is th^re, which grace cannot save?

All grace flows from Christ united to the soul; as all life flows from the
soul united to the body.

The more God's justice was declared toward his Son, the more was his me^cy
magnified toward the sinner.

God humbled his Son to exalt his grace.

Saul was not so free in persecuting Christ, as Christ was in pardoning P^^l.

Bless God for Christ, Christ for the spirit* and the spirit for grace.

Possibly a christian's enemies may spoil him of his common mercies; but they
shall never rob him of his covenant mer^i^s.

God's faithfulness performed what his mercy pro^^sed.

Mercy ^rew the covenant; faithfulness keeps it: mercy called us; faithfulness
will not cast us off.

Common mercies may be sweet, but covenant mercies are sure.

Abusers of mercy are treasurers up of wrath.

If thou were worthy, thou could have no mercy.

There is grace in the desire of grace, as there is sin in the desire of sin.

You that have found mercy, show mercy.

Though God in mercy has done great things for you, yet consider what in
justice he might have done to you.

Whilst we carry a sense of grace in our conscience to comfort us, let us carry
a sense of sin in our memory to humble us.

We can never bless God enough for his patience, that has kept us so long out
of hell; nor for his mercy, that so earnestly invites us to heaven.

All that are chosen are vessels of mercy; all that are regenerate, are
patterns of mercy; all that are saved, are monuments of mercy; and the work of
heaven, is to sing the loud praises of mercy.

It melts the heart to think, that God is as full of mercy, as I am of sin; he
is as free to forgive, as I am to offend; he has daily mercies for daily sins.

The heart* of man is such a barren soil, that no good can grow therein, unless
Almighty grace plant it.

Grace is an immortal seed, cast into an immortal foil, that brings forth
immortal fruit.

Of TEMPTATIONS.
Temptations are instructions.

He is over-wise that goes out of God's way to escape a cross.

God will either keep his saints from temptations by his preventing mercy, or
in temptations by his supporting mercy, or find a way for their escape by his
delivering mercy.

A christian that lives here among his enemies, should never* stir abroad
without his guard.

Satan tempts to sin, the Spirit counsels against sin.

If you follow satan, you will find the tempter prove a tormenter; if you
follow the Spirit, you will find the counselor prove a comforter.

Of the WORLD.
If the world be our portion here, hell will be your portion hereafter

We must neither leave the world nor love it.

The world promises comforts, and pays sorrows.

Riches and prosperity will either kill with care, or surfit with delight.

Be not proud of riches but afraid of them, lest they be as silver bars to
cro^^ the way to heaven.

We put a price upon riches, but riches cannot put a price upon us.

We must answer for our riches but our riches cannot answer for us.

Riches are as indifferent things; good or bad, as they are used: be then as
indifferent to them as they are to you.

I^ there be too great an affection for any thing here, there will be an
answerable affliction.

It Is a sad thing when a man can have no comfort but in diversions, no joy but
in forgetting himself.

Love the men of the world, but not the things of the world.

To have a portion in the world, is a mercy; to have the world for a portion,
is a misery.

Whatever we make an idol of, will be a cross to us if we belong to Christ; a
curse to us if we do not.

We should endeavor to pass through this world with a cheerful indifferency.

Covetousness betrayed our Savior, envy accused him, and the friendship of the
world condemned him.

Man is not made for the world, but the world for man.

It is our business in this world, to secure an interest in the next.

The things of the world, the more they are known, the less they are admired;
but the things of God, the more they are known, the more they are admired.

There is no miss of the creature, where there is a full enjoyment of the
Creator.

If thou art not afraid of the world* I fear thou art a friend of the world,
and an enemy to God.

As you love your souls, beware of the world* it has slain its thousands, and
ten thousands. What ruined Lot's wife? the world. What ruined Judas? the world.
What ruined Simon Magus? the world. What ruined Demas? the world. And, what
shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Ma^t
xvi.26.

To speek the truth freely; riches are dust, honors are shadows, pleasures are
bu^bles, and man a lump of vanity, compounded of sin and misery.

Of the word of GOD.
The word of God must be nearer to us than our friends* dearer to us than our
lives, sweeter to us than our liberty, and pleasanter to us than all earthly
comforts.

Take the candle of God's word, and search the corners of your heart.

We speak to God in prayer; God speaks to us in his word.

Two things are to be trembled at; the presence of God which fills all places,
and the word of God which reaches to all times.

All arguments against the word of God are fallacies; all conceits against the
word are delusions; all derision aagainst the word is folly; and all opposition
against the word is madness.

When God threatens, that is a time to repent; when he promises, that is a time
to believe; when he commands that is a time to obey.

If a man believed the threatenings of the word of God, he would tremble, and
fly to the promises for refuge.

As Christ came out of his Father's Bosom, so the promises came out of Christ's
side.

The church cannot live without faith, and faith cannot live without the
promises.

We have less power to stand than our first parents, but we have better
promises.

Whatever promises, faith takes hold of, it makes the good thing there promised
to be our own.

God's promises are a defense against man's threatenings.

The promises of the gospel are sealed to us by the oath of the Father, the
blood of the Son, and the witness of the Spirit.

Of the LAW.
The moral law was weak through the flesh; the cerimonial law was so in its own
nature; but Christ was the end of the moral law to fulfill it; and the end of
the ceremonial law to answer its intention, by offering himself a sacrifice.

Christ was God's righteous servant to perform all the duties of the moral law;
and our devoted sacrifice to bear all the penalties of it.

By the law is the knowledge of sin, by the gospel is the knowledge of Christ.

God has written a law and a gospel; the law to humble us, and the gospel to
comfort us; the law to cast us down, and the gospel to raise us up; the law to
convince us of our misery, and the gospel to convince us of his mercy; the law
to discover sin, and the gospel to discover grace and Christ.

Of PROVIDENCE.
Providence are sometimes dark texts that want an expositor.

God's providence fulfils his promise.

Count every day, as well as you can, the providence of God toward you that
day.

Without God's providence nothing falls out in the world; without his
commission nothing stirs; without his blessing nothing prospers.

Of AFFLICTIONS.
It Is a worse sign to be without chastisement, than to be under chastisement.

Two things should comfort suffering christians, viz. all that they suffer is
not hell; yet it is all the hell they shall suffer.

Afflictions are not so much threatened, as promised, to the children of God.

To be a christian, and a suffering christian, is a double honor,

By affliction God separates the sin which he hates, from the soul which he
loves.

The more a man fears sin, the less will he fear trouble.

Afflictions are of God's sending, but of sin's deserving.

Sin is the poison, affliction the physic.

When God is humbling us, let us endeavor to humble ourselves.

May every one do what he will with his own, but God?

If the servants of Christ are never so low; yet his heart is with them, and
his eye upon them.

God takes it unkindly when we grieve too much for any outward thing; because
it is a sin we fetch not that comfort from him which we should.

Though the hand of God may be against you; yet, the heart of God may be
toward you.

What if the providence of God cross you, if the promise of God bless you?

What is bearing a temporal cross, to the wearing an eternal crown?

Our enjoyments are greater than our afflictions, and our afflictions less than
our sins.

Our sufferings should stir up our graces, as well as our griefs.

Of PRAYER.
Fill up the void spaces of your time with meditation and prayer.

They are safest who are most in their closets; who pray not to be seen of men,
but to be heard of God.

Prayer does not consist in gifted expressions, and volubility of speech; but
in a brokenness of heart.

Imperfect broken groans, from a broken heart, God will accept.

An hard heart connot pray; a broken heart is made up of prayer.

It is a comfort to christians apart to think their prayers meet before a
throne of grace; and their persons shall meet before a throne of glory.

There wants nothing but a believing prayer to turn the promise into a
performance.

God is a great God, and therefore he will be sought; he is a good God, and
therefore he will be found.

When God pours out his spirit upon man* then will man pour out his heart
before God.

He that lives without prayer, or prays without life, has not the spirit of
God.

Prayer does not consist in the elegance of the phrase, but in the strength of
the affection.

Where there is a willing heart, there will be a continual crying to heaven for
help.

Pray that you may pray.

Waiting upon God continually will abate your unnecessary cares, and sweeten
your necessary ones.

God counts all the steps we take to the throne of grace, and all the minutes
of our waiting.

Let nothing get between heaven and prayer, but Christ.

Prayer, if it be done as a task, is no prayer.

Sin quenches prayer, affliction quickens it.

The same spirit of faith which teaches a man to cry earnestly, teaches him to
wait patiently: for as it assures him the mercy is in the Lord's hand; so it
assures him, it will be given forth in the Lord's time.

The breath of prayer comes from the life of faith.

Whatever you want go to God by faith and prayer, in the name of Christ, and
never think his delays are denials.

They that spend their days in faith and prayer, shall end their days in peace
and comfort.

Of ETERNITY.
Look backwards, and time was when souls were not; look forward, and our souls
will be when time shall not.

Who would not deny himself for a time, that he may enjoy himself for ever?

What is the world to them that are in the grave, where our bodies must shortly
be (...) or to them that are in eternity* where our souls must shortly be?

Remember you are at the door of eternity, and have other work to do than to
trifle away time; those hours which you spend in your closets, are the golden
spots of all your time, and will have the sweetest influence upon your last
hours.

Our life is a passage to eternity; it ought to be a meditation of eternity;
and a preparation for eternity.

Of DEATH.
The longest life, is but a lingering death.

First infancy dies, then childhood, then youth, then man hood, then old age,
and then we make an end of dying.

Though thou may have been nearer death (in thine own apprehensions) than
thou art now* yet it is certain, death was never so near thee as is now.

Man does not die because he is made of earth, but because he is infected with
sin.

Death to a christian, is putting off rags for robes.

We need not be ashamed of that now, which we are sure we shall not repent of
when we come to die.

As the king of terrors leaves us, so the day of terror will find us.

Death will be very terrible to him who dies not in his thoughts daily.

There is nothing terrible in death, but what our lives have made so.

It Is death to many to think of death; they are as unwilling to be led into a
discourse of death as children into the dark: The thoughts of it are no more
welcome to them, than Moses was to Pharaoh; to whom he said, get thee from me,
and let me see thy face no more, Exodus x.28.

Death shuts in the light of this world and is the daybreak of eternity.

Let us familiarize death by meditation, and sweeten it by preparation.

The great comfort of a believer, on his deathbed, is faith in Christ, hope in
the promises, and an interest in the covenant.

This life is a middle state; we must soon go higher or lower, where we must
spend upon the treasure we here lay up, whether of wrath or glory.

We should think of death, not as though we were thinking, but as though we
were dying.

It is the greatest business of life, to think of the end of life, and to lay
hold of eternal life.

Let us make a friend of death and our judge; and then we shall die out of
choice, as (...) as necessity.

Of HEAVEN.
If heaven does not enter into us by way of holiness, we shall never enter into
heaven by way of happiness.

If you would lay up a treasure of glory in heaven, lay up a treasure of grace
in your hearts.

If your souls are rich in grace, they will be rich in glory.

The more you do for God in this world, the more God will do for you in the
world to come.

As heaven is kept for the saint^ by Christ, so they are kept for heaven by the
Spirit.

In heaven all God's servants will be abundantly satisfied with his dealings
and dispensations with them; and shall see how all conduced, like so many winds
to bring them to their haven; and how, even the roughest blasts helped to bring
them homeward.

In heaven God will never hide his face more, nor the devil show his more.

How can we expect to live with God in heaven, if we love not to live with him
on earth?

If thou love to worship God here below* God will take thee up to worship him
above. Thou shall change thy place, but not thine employment.

Heaven is a day without a cloud to darken it, and without a night to end it.

We would be seated in the heavenly canaan, but are loath to be scratched with
the briers and thorns of the wilderness.

In heaven there is the presence of all good, and absence of all evil.

Grace and glory differ, but as the bud and the blossom: what is grace but
glory begun? what is glory, but grace perfected.

We may hope for a place in heaven, if our hearts are made suitable to the
state of heaven.

If there will be any grief in heaven, sure it will be for this, that we have
done no more for God on earth.

Of HELL.
They that will not fear the punishment in the threatening, shall feel the
threatening in the punishment.

In heaven holiness is their everlasting temper, and happiness their
everlasting portion; in hell sin is their eternal temper, and sorrow their
eternal portion.

The reason why so many fall into hell, is because so few think of it.

They fall deepest into hell, that fall backward into hell.

None are so near heaven, as they that are convinced; none so near hell, as
those who have quenched conviction.

The scorner's seat stands next hell gate.

We must fall into the arms of Christ, or into the flames of hell.

You may think it a sad thing to repent on earth, but it is a sadder thing to
repent in hell.

CHAP. II. Containing a variety of religious observations by way of Simile.
AS Noah's dove could find no rest for the sole of her foot; so the spirit of
God can find no residence in that heart which is deluged in sin.

Our conscience is as fire within us, our sins as the fuel; therefore, instead
of warming, it will scorch us; unless the fuel be removed, or the heat of it
allayed by penitential tears.

All true christians must be like Noah's Ark, that was pitched within and
without, Genesis vi.14. They must have a holy inside, and a holy outside; their
profession and practice must agree together.

They that are professors only, and make show of religion for sinister ends,
are like Orpah; in times of affliction they will kiss their mother and be gone;
they will soon take leave of the church of God. But they that are true
christians are like Ruth; they will cleave to her, stay by her, live and die
with her, and never depart from her. Ruth i.14.

As it is not putting on a gown that makes a scholar, but the inward habits of
the mind* so it is not putting on an outward cloak of profession that makes a
christian, but the inward grace of the heart.

As Noah's dove found no footing but in the Ark; so a christian finds no
contentment but in Christ.

Our hearts are like instruments of music well tuned; they will make no melody
in the ear of God, unless they be gently touched by the finger of the Spirit.

Christians hearts are as iron; if they be once made hot with the love of God,
they will more easily be joined together in love to one another

As the sun ripens and sweetens fruits by shining upon them, without which they
would be sour and unsavory; so it is the sunshine of God's love and favor that
sweetens all earthly blessings, without which they would be but crosses and
curses to them that possess them.

God's mercies are as cords to draw us to him; but our sins are as sharp swords
that cut those cords.

Outward comforts are like the rotten twigs of a tree; they may be touched, but
if they are trusted to, or rested upon, they will certainly deceive and fail us.

As cankers breed in the sweetest roses, so pride may arise out of the sweetest
duties.

A zealous soul without meekness, is like a ship in a storm, in danger of
wrecks. A meek soul without zeal, is like a ship in a calm, that moves not so
fast to its harbor as it ought.

Notional knowledge is like the light of a candle, which enlightens, but does
not warm; true and saving knowledge is like the sun, which not only enlightens
but enlivens.

As God commanded under the law, that the inwards of every sacrifice should be
burnt, that they might be an offering made by fire, of sweet savor, unto the
Lord, Levit* iv.8. so he looks for no less now: for, unless we offer up our
hearts to him on the altar of Christ's merits with the fire of zeal, our duties
will never be acceptable to him.

As old testament saints had sacrifices under the law; so new testament saints
have under the gospel: for every duty in which saints consecrate themselves, is
called a sacrifice, Psalm iv.5.cxvi.17. Heb. xiii.16. and we may parallel law
and gospel sacrifices thus, ^epentance is a trepass offering, zeal a
burnt-offering, praise a free-will-offering, and sincerity the oblations of
unleavened bread.

As every shred of gold is precious, so is every minute of time.

As it would be great folly to shoe horses (as Nero did) with gold; so it would
be to spend time in trifles.

A christian's birth is like the red sea, that brings him into the wilderness;
his death is like Jordan, that brings him into Canaan.

As the waters that sunk the men of the old world, raised up Noah in the ark;
so death which sinks sinners into hell, raises saints up to heaven.

As a Basilisk, if he sees a man first, kills him, but, if a man sees it first,
it does him no harm; so, if we see death first, and prepare for it, we unsting
it, and it can do us no hurt.

As lamps fed with sweet oil, cast a sweeter smell when they are put out; so
after death, the memory of the righteous is precious.

A wicked man is like one that hangs over a deep pit by a slender cord with one
hand, and is cutting it with the other.

CHAP. III. Containing serious advice to youth.
PART I.
I. CHOOSE God for your portion; remember that he is the only happiness of a
rational and immortal soul. The soul that was made for God can find no
happiness but in God: It came from God, and can never be happy but in returning
to him again, and resting in him. Mic. ii.10. Arise, for this is not your rest.
Col. iii.1, 2, 3. If ye be then risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your affections on
things above, not on things on the earth: for ye are dead* and your life is hid
with Christ in God.

God is all-sufficient* get him for your portion and you have all: Then you
have infinite wisdom to direct you, infinite knowledge to teach you, infinite
mercy to pity and save you, infinite love to care for and comfort you, and
infinite power to protect and keep you. If God be yours, all his attributes are
yours; all his creatures, all his works of providence, shall do you good, as
you have need of them. He is an eternal, full, satisfactory portion. He is an
ever-living, ever-loving, ever-present friend; and without him you are a cursed
creature in every condition, and all things will work against you.

II. Consider, that by nature you are dead in trespasses and sin; a child of
wrath, a stranger, and enemy to God; and while such, the thoughts of God are
terrible to you; you can expect nothing from him but wrath and ^verlasting
burnings. God is ever angry with the wicked: His holiness hates all sin; his
all-seeing eye behold it, and his justice will punish it.

While you are in a state of nature you can do nothing but sin, Genesis vi.5.
Matthew. vii.18. Every thing is a snare, and a wicked heart is apt to be taken.
Labor to be sensible of this, and let the sinfulness of your nature be your
greatest burden. Strive and labor against this principally. Get purity of
heart, and a holy life will follow upon it; but if you strive only against
outward acts of sin, while your heart is let alone, your labor will be in vain,
your heart will tire you out; or if it does not, yet remember, that God's eye
is in the heart, and he has provided a hell for hypocrites. Nothing more
damnable than a wicked unrenewed heart*

III. Consider, that Christ alone is your way to God. Justification, pardon,
and acceptance with God, is by faith in him alone. Sanctification, and a new
nature, is by the power of hi^ Spirit alone. Let Christ therefore be precious
to your soul. Labor for true faith in him. Take him for your Lord and Savior;
submit to his commands in all things; and rest your soul upon him alone for
reconciliation and peace with God. Open your heart to the motions of his
spirit; welcome that principle of a holy and divine life, and be sure to
improve his motions, follow his drawings, and by no means grieve him.

IV. Be speedy in your repentance, and diligent in your endeavour^ after
holiness. Know the time of God's gracious visitation. While God is calling,
Christ inviting, the gate of heaven set open, the ministers of the word
exhorting, and the Spirit drawing, make haste and delay not.

Consider your life is but short, and altogether uncertain. To defer one day
may be to our everlasting undoing. When your life is once gone it will be in
vain to think of repenting. You shall then have no more sermons, no more offers
of Christ and grace, Heb. ix.27. God will be patient no more. And if God should
take away your life to morrow, you would perish inexcusably for refusing his
grace to day. One offer of grace refused renders a sinner inexcusable, though
God should never offer his mercy more. O, trifle not with your soul! be not
careless of eternal happiness. You have heaven and hell, life and death before
you, and it depends upon your own hearty choice which shall be your portion:
And they are chosen by the choice of the way which leads to them. Choose life,
and choose it speedily. And remember once again, that you have but one life to
choose in. Trifle not away this moment, upon which depends eternity: Mispend not
your short time to your eternal loss.

Stand not upon a short labor; difficulty, self-denial, or suffering, for your
eternal happiness. God would have you saved; Christ has died for you to
reconcile you to God; he is ascended into heaven to open the door for your soul
to enter in at, and he is interceding with the Father for all grace and mercy
for you, if you refuse him not. He came into the world to seek and to save that
which is lost, Luke xix.10. Be sensible of your sinful, lost, damnable
condition without him. O! make ha^te to your Savior, yield to all his demands,
and take him as offered in the gospel, in all his offices.

V. Endeavor to be truly and thoroughly religious, and be not discouraged at
the difficulties of it. God's grace shall be sufficient for your help; his
promises shall be your sweet encouragement; peace of conscience, and communion
with God, shall be your ever present cordials. The trouble and pains of
religion shall be but short, and your reward shall be glorious and eternal.
Remember that of the Apostle, when religion calls you to self-denial and
sufferings, Our light afflictions that are but for a moment shall work out for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. iv.17. if we suffer
with Christ we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy ii.12. and the sufferings of
this present life are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed, Romans viii.18. see also, Isa. xliii.2, 3, when thou passes through
the waters I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee: when thou walk through the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel
thy Savior. Never are we more joyful than when we deny our joy for Christ's
sake! and if these arguments will not prevail, then consider, that all the
pains and difficulties of religion will be found in the end far more tolerable
than hell.

VI. Devote your young years to a good God, and your loving Savior. The first
fruits are to be offered to him. The green ears of your youth are to be carried
to his sanctuary. Think it not pity that the vain delights and sinful pleasures
of youth should be lost: You shall but exchange them for spiritual delights,
which are far more excellent, inward and lasting. The joy of the Holy Ghost,
the rejoicing of a good conscience, communion with God, the sense of his love,
and the hope of heaven, are far better than the pleasures of sin, and will more
than recompense your loss of youthful and carnal delights. And consider this
seriously, that none have usually more comfort in their souls than those, who
are willing to lose their sinful comforts for God and their soul's sake.

Remember that you must give an account to God how you spend your youth, as
well as for old age. Consider, as young as you are, how many years are already
spent; and what account you are able to give to God of them. One day spent in
sin is too much; and the sins of one hour deserve a hell. Younger than you, are
dead and gone. Let the thoughts of them mind you seriously of your account.
Your call to God's bar may be next. Are you ready? Think often what expense of
time may be best accounted for to God; and so spend your younger days, as you
will wish you had spent them when you come to die and be judged.

Suppose God should call you away suddenly, what sentence could you expect from
him? Are you ready, if the bridegroom should now come? Matthew. xxv.6. It will be
no excuse at judgment, if you be found in your sins, to say, Lord, I was but
young. He that is old enough to sin is old enough for hell. You cannot make
sure of God's love, and an interest in Christ too soon. You cannot secure your
soul too soon*

Consider those young ones in scripture who are commended for their early
piety* Samuel was ministering to God in his childhood, 1 Samuel ii.18. Josiah had
a tender heart for God in his tender years, 2 Kings xxii.19. Children sang
hosannas to Christ. Matthew. xxi.15. Timothy was a saint betimes, 2 Timothy iii.15.
And let these young ones be your pattern.

The young disciple was the beloved disciple. God takes great delight in an
early convert. All your life is due to God, let him therefore have all that
still remains, and beg his pardon that any of it has been denied.

Repentance is easiest in youth. Sin is less rooted, satan not so fortifyed,
grace not so much frighted, the Spirit not so much grieved, and the conscience
not so much hardened.

Be sure therefore to give God your youth. Resolve now to be seriously
religions. Now beg for the pardon of your sins, and the spirit of holiness; and
though the generality of youth take another course, yet be not swayed by the
multitude, and carried down the stream toward hell; let them go, you shall
have better company. The saints of God will love you, the angels of God will
guard you, and the presence of God himself shall be with you.

And if you find yourself still inclined to be as the most are, and to do as
the most do, consider that you cannot have that pleasure in sin which others
may. You have had a good education, and good instructions; your conscience has
been more awakened, and will not suffer you to enjoy the pleasures of sin, as
others, who are more ignorant, and worse educated, may. Conscience will mix
gall with your honey; when you go to prayer, in the evening, upon your bed,
when alone and retired, or in the dark, it will read sad lectures to you, and
make you review your past delights with bitterness.

Labor therefore to approve yourself to God in youth; and though others may
condemn you, yet God (from whose mouth only you must live or die) will acquit
and justify you.

And as a conclusion of this advice, let me persuade you to consider, that
forsaking sin, when you are most capable of pleasure or honor by it, and
turning to God when your most capable of enjoying the world, will clearly
evidence the truth of your conversion. So that a timely conversion to God in
youth, as it is most easy, so it is least questionable; for it now appears that
God is loved for himself, and Christ is preferred above the flesh, and grace
above the sweetest delights in the world

PART II.
THE great command and duty of the gospel, is, to make self nothing, and God
all in point of wisdom, strength, righteousness and glory.

And by these things examine all you do: By whose rule have I acted? By whose
strength have I acted? In whose name have I acted? And for whose glory have I
acted? What faith, what humility, what self-denial, what love of God and
Christ, has there been in all my actions?

Endeavor to make every day the Lord's, to spend it well, and to get nearer
heaven by it.

And to this end accept kindly of this advice.

1. As soon as ever you awake in the morning, lift up your heart to God, and
open it to him. As much as possibly you can, avoid all thoughts about the world
until your morning devotions are over. For you will find by experience that, if
the world gives your soul the first salute, and be embraced with kindness in
your morning affections, it will greatly deaden your heart in the morning
duties.

2. As soon as you are up present your desires to God, in the name of Christ,
for whatever your soul feels the want of, and give God his due praises for his
mercies toward you the night past. Thus David, Psalm. v.3. My voice shall thou
hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee.
And for thanksgiving, Psalm. xcii.1, 2. It is a good thing to give thanks unto
thee, O Lord -- to show forth thy loving kindness in the morning.

3. Let no day go without reading some portion of the scriptures: And it is no
great matter, whether you read it before you pray in the morning, or just
after; your own inclination and experience will direct you; but be sure it be
done. You will find it very profitable to begin the day with such a converse
with God. Prove. vi.22, 23. When thou wakest it shall talk with thee. See John
v.39. the command of Christ; and Joshua i.8* the command of God, with a promise.

The scripture discovers sin, and the devil's devices and malice* it discovers
duty, and the love of God and Christ; and it discovers your strength and
encouragements: There are the promises of assisting and crowning grace. By
these, the spirit acts, the devil is conquered, and the soul is comforted.
Through these, the eye of faith can see the love of Christ, the grace of God,
and the glory of heaven. In these are the food, the physic, and the arms of the
christian's soul. These are the word of reconciliation, grace and truth, and
the power of God to salvation: Therefore every day look into these, praying for
the spirit's teachings, and mixing faith with what you read.

4. Let all your ordinary or worldly business of the day be done with integrity
of heart, and a respect to God, whose servant you ought to be in all things.
Psalm. lxxviii.72. Do all things as to the Lord, as in his eye, and according to
his will; and your whole day's work will be as it were a religious worship:
This respect will make all holy.

5. Have a care every day that nothing put you into a passion: Do nothing with
an over eagerness of mind; and be ever upon your guard against sudden
accidents. And this can never be obtained but by committing yourself, and your
affairs, into God's hand and care every day; believing that he governs all
things wisely, and will ever do that which is best for you.

The power, wisdom and goodness of divine providence, must every day be
believed by him that would live ev^ry day in peace and tranquillity of soul.

6 Every evening to your prayers again, and to your praises for that day's
mercies. The Jews were appointed their evening sacrifices* as well as morning.
Exodus xxx.7, 8. twice a day is as little as can be allowed to those who are
commanded to pray continually, Phil. iv.6. These. v.17. And every prayer should
have its praises in it, Psalm. xcii.1, 2. It is good to give thanks unto the
Lord -- to show forth his faithfulness every night. A child will ask his
earthly father's blessing at morning and night; and it is better manners, and
to better purpose, to ask our heavenly Father's blessing as often. We are ever
in want, and God is ever giving; prayers therefore, and praises, are ever
suitable and becoming.

Let no day go without observation, and review of God's carriage toward you,
and of yours toward him; of mercies and afflictions; and of your duties, and
the frame of heart in them; of your sins or inclinations to sin; and so
likewise of any special or remarkable providence of God related to you by
others, or seen or read of by yourself. And let God have the glory of what is
good. In afflictions be humble, be ashamed and grieved for sins; and consider
what God's special providence speak to you.

CHAP. IV. Containing some occasional reflections, directions, means and signs
of grace. etc.
Proper reflections for poor Saints.
OUTWARD good things are no sign of God's special Love. The sun of prosperity
shines upon the brambles of the wilderness, as well as upon the flowers of the
garden; and the snow of affliction falls upon the garden as well as upon the
wilderness.

What though the streams of creature comforts run low with thee, so that thou
have the more from the springhead? There is more comfort in one drop that
distills immediately from God, than from ten thousand rivers that flow from
creature delights.

God does sometimes on purpose show us the creatures emptiness, that we may go
to his fullness. He makes us see the creatures to be broken cisterns, that we
may know him to be the fountain: And that we may feed more largely upon
spiritual dainties, he does deny us carnal ones.

What though God deny thee the earthly jewel, if he gives thee the heavenly
crown? -- If thou have no portion here thou shall have a kingdom hereafter; and
God is thy portion here, and so long thou shall not want any good thing.
Creature comforts at the best, are only delightful, not satisfying; pleasant,
not gainful!

What if all thy friends forsake thee, so long as God (who is better than all)
stands by thee? -- Whatever enjoyment friends afford, that God does much more.
Do they love thee? He died for thee. Do they pity thee in thine afflictions? In
all thy afflictions he is afflicted, Isa. lxiii.9 -- What would thou have a
friend for? For converse? O! taste and see how good and pleasant a thing it is
to have communion with God! Hear (if thou can, and not be ravished) the sweet
voice, I am thine, and thou art mine. O! feel the pantings of his heart, and
hear the soundings of his bowels! -- Would thou have a friend to pour out thy
breast into? -- O! who is so fit for that as God? He will bear part of thy
burden if thou art laden, or he will add new strength to sustain it. -- His
love, his converse, his society, is life itself* and such a life as is made up
of nothing but sweetness and delight.

The mystery of a christian.
1. He lives in another, Gal. ii.20. He is wise in another, 1. Cor. i.30. He is
righteous in another, Romans x.4. He is strong in another, Isa. xlv.24.

2. He is very low in humility, but very high in hope. He knows he is
undeserving of the least mercy, yet expects the greatest, Genesis xxxii.10, 12.

3. He is in the world, but not of the world, John xv.9. In the world as a
Pilgrim, but not as a citizen. His habitation is below, but his conversation
above.

4. He is meek but vehement; meek in his own cause, yet vehement in the cause
of God. (As Moses, who was dead to affronts, deaf to reproaches, and blind to
injuries.) He will comply with any thing that is civil, but nothin that is
sinful. He will stoop to the necessities of the meanest, but will not yield to
the sinful humors of the greatest.

5. He works out his salvation with fear and trembling, yet believes in Christ
without fear and trembling, Phil. ii.12* 13. He does much for God, yet counts
himself an unprofitable servant. He works as if he was to live here always, yet
worships as if he was to die tomorrow.

6. When he is weak then is he strong, 2. Cor. xii.10. When he is most sensible
of his own weakness, and most dependant on Christ's strength, then he stands
the safest.

7. When he is most vile in his own eyes he is most glorious in the eyes of
God. When Job abhored himself then God raised him, Job xlii.6. When the
centurion thought himself the most unworthy, Christ said, I have not found so
great faith, no not in Israel, M^tth. viii.8, 10.

8. He is content with his condition, yet longs and prays for a better, 2 Cor.
v.4.

9. His losses are gains; (as Job's Job xlii.12.) His falls are risings; (as
Peter's, John xxi.17.) His afflictions are promotions; (as Jacob's, all those
things are against me, says he, Genesis xlii, 36 Yet all those things were for
him.) His disappointments are preferments; (as Moses': though he did not go to
Canaan, as he desired; yet he went to heaven, which was better, Deuteronomy. xxxiv.4,
5.)

10. He cannot sin, 1 John iii 9. yet he cannot but sin, 1 John i.8. He cannot
sin habitually, and with full consent of will; yet he cannot but sin actually
through weakness.

11. He says O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? Romans vii.24. Yet
he says, O blessed man that I am, who shall condemn me? Romans viii.34.

12. He grieves, yet rejoices under the strokes of his heavenly Father's hands.
He grieves that his Father's hand strikes him, yet rejoices that it is the hand
of a Father Heb. xii.6.7.

13. He knows there is no absolute perfection in this life, yet is continually
reaching after it, Phil. iii.12, 13, 14.

14. The less his burden grows the more he feels it. The less sin he has the
more sensible he is of sin; not that sin grows, but light, holiness, and
tenderness is increased, 1 Timothy i.15.

15. He is content to live, yet willing to die. He desires to serve Christ
here, yet desires more to depart, and to be with him in heaven, Phil. i.23.

Some doubts and fears of a tender conscience answered.
1. I fear Christ is not willing to save me*

Answ. What is this but limiting, or setting bounds to infinite mercy? -- What
greater signs of his willingness would you have than those he has already
given you? He has died, and purchased salvation for you, Heb. ii.9 1 John
ii.2. He calls and entreats you to come and accept of it, Matthew. xi.28. He
says he will not cast you out He complains that you will not come, and will thou yet say, he is not willing? If thou art willing, he never was otherwise.
Be of good comfort, he calls thee. Isa. lv.1. Ho! every one that thirsts,
come ye to the waters, and he that has no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea,
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price -- Bring only yourself,
come out of need, as all do; as the prodigal did.

2. But I am so unworthy --

Answ. If you would have nothing but what you are worthy of, you must have
nothing but hell. What was Abraham or Saul, or any, worthy of, before the Lord
called them? Say not, I am unworthy. Art thou willing? Rev. xxii 17. Whosoever
will, let him take of the water of life freely.

3. But my sins are very great, and I am confounded at the sight of them. Alas!
how can I think of a pardon? --

Answ. Are thy sins great? the more need thou have of a Savior. Greater
sinners have been pardoned, Manasseh and Saul. -- But do thou think thou art
more guilty than Christ is gracious? read Isa. i.18. Come and let us reason
together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet they shall be as white
as snow, though they be red like crimson they shall be as wool. 1 John i.7. The
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Bless God for that
word all.

4. But I have a proud, hard, dead heart.

Answ. Put that among your sins, and come to Christ.

My sins are many as well as great. I sin daily; I so sin that I must suffer.

Answ. Yea, if there were none to appear for thee. Luke vii.47. Her sins which
were many are forgiven her. 1 John i.7. Christ is a daily advocate. 1 John
ii.1, 2. If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. This scripture should be as
daily bread for believers to live upon.

6. I have sinned against light and conviction.

Answ. So did David and Peter, who yet were pardoned.

7. But I am a revolter and backslider.

Answ. Jer. iii.1. -- Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return
again unto me, says the Lord. Hos. xiv.4. I will heal their backslidings, I
will love them freely.

8 I am afraid of departing from God again.

Answ. Jer. xxxii.40. -- I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

9. I have no strength.

Answ. Isa. xlv.24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and
strength.

10 I am afraid to die.

Answ. Psalm. xxiii.4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death I will fear no evil, for thou art with me. Phil. i.23. I am in a strait
between two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far
better. -- When you die God shall be with you; and Christ shall be with you;
and you shall be with God and Christ for ever.

The difference between inherent and imputed righteousness.
1. Inherent righteousness sanctifies, imputed righteousness justifies.

2. Inherent righteousness makes us shine before men, imputed righteousness
makes us shine before God,

3. Inherent righteousness pleases God, imputed righteousness appeases him.

4. Inherent righteousness dicharge^ from hypocrisy, imputed righteousness from
guilt.

5. Inherent righteousness makes us pray, imputed righteousness makes our
prayers prevail.

6. Inherent righteousness is our sincerity, imputed righteousness our
perfection

7. Inherent righteousness respects the law, imputed righteousness answers the
law.

8. Inherent righteousness is the evidence of our salvation, imputed
righteousness the foundation of it.

9. Inherent righteousness is our joy, imputed righteousness our glory, Isa.
xlv.25.

10. Inherent righteousness is to be loved, imputed righteousness to be trusted.

11. Inherent righteousness is imperfect, imputed righteousness perfect.

12. Inherent righteousness is our qualification for heaven, imputed
righteousness our title to it.

Directions for those that are under convictions of conscience
1. Don't presume, you are not yet come to the heavenly Canaan.

2. Don't despair, you are in the way to it.

3. Beware of ill company.

4. Fear falling away, Heb. iv.1 Preserve a tender frame.

5. Keep up prayer. Be much in ejaculations.

6. Don't rest in convictions, nor duties, nor any thing short of Christ.

7. Be much in humiliation and confession.

8. Remember to keep holy the Lord's day.

9. Study your soul's case, and labor to get your heart affected with it, and
mortified to the world.

10. Remember the great day of accounts, Eccl. xii, 14.

11. Prepare for, and think not strange of trials, Heb. x.32.

12. Let not religion be your diversion but your business.

Directions to keep from sin.
1. Run not into temptation.

2. Maintain a constant watch against, and fear of sin.

3. Beware of pride and presumption.

4. Avoid and abhor slothfulness.

5. Remember you stand by faith Your strength is in Christ, look to him for it.

Means to gain repentance.
1. Sit with care, Constancy, and conscience under the word of truth and gospel
of grace.

2. Study the nature of God.

3. Sit loose to the world.

4. Consider the shortness of life, and the limitation of the day of grace.

5. Be much in the business of self-examination, Psalm. iv.4. Stand in awe and
sin not, commune with your own heart upon your bed and be still. Lam. iii.40.
Let us search and try our hearts, and turn again unto the Lord.

6. Seriously expect approaching judgment.

7. Think much of death and eternity.

8. Wash thy heart in the blood of Jesus, and take every day a turn on mount
Calvary.

9. Seriously apprehend the possibility, nay, the probability; nay, the
absolute certainty of a pardon through Christ.

10. Sue for repentance at the hand of God: Say with Ephraim, turn thou me and
I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God, Jer. xxxi.18.

Means to live at peace.
1. Mind your own business, 1 Thessalonians. iv.11.

2. Keep your tongue from evil, 1 Pet. iii.10.

3. Don't contend for every trifle, whether it be matter of right or opinion.

4. If others neglect their duty to you, be sure that you perform yours to
them. To render railing for railing, is to return sin for sin.

5. Make your enemy see and feel your love to him Romans xii.20.

6. Beg of God for universal charity*

7. Be humble

8. By faith wait for the providence of God.

Means to be content.
1. Consider you have what God allo^ you; what his providence allows you. Your
crosses and comforts are mixed by his hands. It is the will of God that thou
should be thus and thus* Labor then to have that dearer to thee than any
thing in the world.

2. Consider, that if you had fewer comforts, and more crosses, you ought to be
thankful; for do you know what you have deserved? It Is of the Lord's mercy that
you are not consumed.

3. Whatever comes, take it as from the hand of God. Assure yourself, that
without his permission and direction it could not come.

4. Prepare to receive the will of God, and look for changes and alterations in
the world.

5. Faith is another means to quiet, satisfy, and content the mind. That
assures us, that that which is consistant with the love of God may well be
borne. Outward losses and afflictions are consistant the love of God. Whom the
Lord loves he chast^neth, Heb. xii.6. We are all subject to alterations; our
life, health, estate, friends, families, and all we have, are liable to
changes. Let us then fix upon a God that never changes, that never fails, who
is from everlasting to everlasting. Let us depend upon a God that depends upon
none. And, what though our house be not so with God as it has been; yet, if he
has made with us an everlasting covenant, we have great reason to be content
with all his outward dealings with us, 2 Samuel xxiii.5.

Means to preserve mercies.
1, Be thankful for them.

2. Receive them as mercies, not as dues.

3. Prepare to part with them.

4. Expect the continuance of mercies from God; he is the strength of our life,
the staff of our bread, the breath of our nostrils, and the length of our days.

Signs of Sincerity.
1. Prayer is a sign of sincerity; if it be secret, Matthew. vi.6. Frequent, Acts
x.2. Fervent, Romans viii.26.

2. A willingness to be searched by God, Psalm. cxxxix.23. By the righteous,
Psalm. cxli.5. By ministers, Acts x, 33. By conscience, Psalm. lxxvii.6. By the
scriptures, John iii.19, 20, 21. Sincere souls love sincere dealings.

3. A sense of sin; particularly of spiritual sins, Mark ix.24. Romans vii.21.
And of orlginal sin, Romans vii.24. especially when it drives to Christ, ver. 25.

4. When a man is most sensible of, and watchful against his own sin, his
constitutional sin, the beam in his own eye

5. Universal tenderness. When a man will not plead for any sin, Psalm.
cxix.128, nor quarrel with any of the co^^andments, Psalm* cxix.6. Acts ix 6.

6 It Is a sign of sincerity when a man chooses affliction rather than sin, Dan.
iii.17, 18.

7. When a man relies upon Christ for strength against sin*

8. When a man loves God above all, and loves others principally for what is
God-like in them.

9. When a man delights in the word of God.

10. When he makes conscience to watch his heart in duty.

11. When a man's thoughts run freely on heavenly things.

12. When the glory of God is prefered above all.

13. When a man's profession is joined with meekness.

14. A well governed tongue (for an outward sign) when a man dares neither
boast of himself, nor censure others, James iii.2. Matthew. xii.36.

15. Constancy in the ways of God, Job xxvii.6* 10 -- Such a man can never be a
hypocrite.

Short questions whereby to know whether the heart be truly changed.
1. Has thine heart been turned into sorrow for sin?

2. Has thy sorrow turned into prayer?

3. Has thy prayer turned into faith?

4 Has thy faith issued in universal tenderness and obedience?

Signs of faith.
To those that believe,
1. Christ is precious.

2. The word is sweet.

3. Sin is bitter

4. Prayer is delightful.

5. Saints are dear.

6. Religion is their business.

7. The world is a broken idol.

8. Death is welcome. -- Or thus,

They that believe,
Have Christ in their hearts; heaven in their eye; and the world under their
feet. God's Spirit is their guide; God's fear is their guard; God's people are
their companions; God's promises are their cordials. Holiness is their way, and
heaven is their home.

Signs of love to Christ.
They that love Christ,

1. Love to think of him.

2. They love to hear of him.

3. They love to read of him.

4. They love to speak of him, for him, and to him.

5. They love the presence of Christ.

6. They love the yoke of Christ.

7. They love the ministers of Christ.

8. They love the name of Christ.

9. They hate sin.

10. They are pleased when Christ is pleased.

11. They are grieved when Christ is grieved.

12. They long to be with Christ.

Christ's will is their will; Christ's dishonor is their affliction; Christ's
cause is their care; Christ's ministers are their stars; Christ's saints are
their companions; Christ's day is their delight; Christ's word is their oracle*
Christ's glory is their end.

Signs of the fear of God.
A man then fears God,

1. When he dares not sin though solicited and tempted to it.

2. When sin is common and yet he fears it.

3. When he is afraid of an evil thought.

4. When he dares not sin though he should suffer if he does not.

5. When his heart is broken, and trembles at the word of God.

6. When he f^ies to Christ.

7. When he is studious to please God.

Signs of true grace.
1. When self-loving is turned into self-loathing; self-excusing into
self-condemning; self-admiring into self-abhorring; self-seeking into
seld-denying.

2. It Is a sign of true grace when a man seriously complains of the want of
grace.

A graceless person connot truly complain that he has no grace. There is grace
in that complaint.

3. When the heart is tender, and feels the power of an ordinance.

4. When the soul has an appetite after the word, 1 Pet. ^i.2.

5. When a man makes a conscience of secret prayer.

6. When we are taken with their conversation, and manner of life, who are most
spiritual, Zech. viii.23.

7. When we are willing to be acquainted with Christ, and reconciled to God
upon any terms.

8. When a man approves of all duties.

9. When he desires more grace: There is grace in the desire of grace, as there
is sin in the desire of sin, Neh. i.11. Psalm. lxxxiv.5.

CHAP. V. Containing some letters of the late Reverend Mr. John Mason, which he
sent to several of his friends; tending to promote the power of Godliness, both
in persons and families.
LETTER I. To my dear sister, Mrs. Hannah Wyat, under illness.
Dear Sister,
I Beseech his most merciful Majesty to send his word and heal you! that we may
not have sorrow upon sorrow! -- O, if it were his will to restore you for his
glory, and the good of many! -- And who can tell, but by this affliction he is
fitting you for future service? And that the prayers of your many affectionate
and faithful friends may be a means of your recovery? Which I hope, through the
thanksgiving of many, will red^und to the praise and glory of God. -- But, I
believe, it is not recovery you wish for, any farther than as it will be a
manifestation of God's pleasure, and an opportunity of serving him; it is not
that you so much desire, as to depart and to be with Christ, which is indeed
far better.

My dear Sister what thanks can we render unto God who has visited us with
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, through our dear Redeemer? and has given us
that communion with him here, which is a pledge of our joint communion with him
in everlasting glory? Certainly you cannot but remember some Bethels and
Chebars, where the Lord has met you and owned you; some promises which have
been made your own; and some times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord.
Blessed be God that you have a witness in yourself; and internal evidence, and
inward sigh^ and taste that the Lord is gracious.

The Lord has acquainted you with that which is the very sum and substance of
the gospel, viz. That Christ came into the world to save sinners: That a
christian's thankfulness flows from faith in the promises; That self-denial
must run through the whole course of this life, as the warp through the woof:
And that Christ is a christian's life, peace* hope, and security* Whilst he
lives we are in safety: Whilst God is merciful and true,
We are both safe and happy too:
That a christian's important and daily duty is to eye and engage his continual
assistance: And that our recovery from daily infirmities must be by a daily
recourse to this ever-living, ever-loving, ever-pleading advocate.

You know also, that submission to the will of God, is a yielding to those
methods whereby he is conducting us to eternal happiness and glory; and that
every drain of affliction is ordered us by the love of our ever-gracious and
all-merciful Father. -- Bow then to his sovereignty, and believe his grace: You
are in a happy hand; in happy circumstances; all the paths of God are mercy and
truth to you. -- Infinite and immortal thanks are due to our ever-blessed
Father, Redeemer, and Comforter. The Lord be with your spirit! -- Grace and
peace be with you! Amen. -- I remain, etc.

JOHN MASON.

LETTER II. To my dear friend Mrs. Mary Holmes.
Dear Friend,
-- O That you might live in the Lord's sight -- If I knew the present state of
your heart, I could better tell what to write to you. However, I shall set down
some things for your comfort.

Do not say that you are left of God, and there is no hope for you: I tell you
there is mercy enough in God, merits enough in Christ, power enough in the
Spirit, room enough in heaven, and scope enough in the promises for you.

Do not say that you are a reprobate, and a castaway; it is a sin to think so:
Every one is bound to hope that he is elected; and, in virtue of that hope, to
strive to make his calling and election sure. The Lord is good to them that
wait for him, and to the soul that seeks him, Lam. iii.25. There will be
doubts and fears, but we must not cherish them. We must not question God's
ability to save* for he can do all things: Nor m^st we question his willingness
to save; for he has sent his own Son into the world to save us. -- Say to
thyself, he has made me willing to be saved, and is not he willing to save me?
Alas! my tender mercies are cruel^^es in respect of his infinite compassions?
We cannot be so willing to confess sin, as he is to pardon it. We cannot desire
to be saved, so much as he delights to save. None ever trusted him, but they
found him a good God.

Therefore my dear friend, have honorable thoughts of God* though he should
hide himself from thee for a moment, yet lift up thy heart to him; in his own
time he will make himself known unto you; he will be your own God, for your own
dear Savior's sake.

Perhaps you sit in darkness; but the Lord will be your light. It is darkest a
little before the break of day: Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for
the upright in heart; and it will spring up. Behold, the husbandman waits for
the precious fruits of the earth: Be patient then, and wait for God in the use
of all his means, and the good hour will come.

Perhaps you find a coldness and deadness of heart, and co^plain that you
cannot serve God with life and affection. This is a complaint of many of God's
dear children. But we must do what we can, we must be reading, hearing,
praying, waiti^^ upon God in his own way, and he will give us his quickening
Spirit.

The world will reproach us; but it r^proached (...) before us. We must be
willing to follow a suff^ring Savior in a suffering way. Whatev^r men say a
against us, they must answer for it, not we. Only let our conversation be such
as becomes the gospel of Christ. Let us give no occasion to his enemies to
blaspheme his name. And he that suffered so much for us, O! let him not suffer
by us.

We must take our rules of living from the word, and not from the world. And
the Lord give us wisdom to direct us, and zeal to quicken us in his own blessed
ways! -- And to confirm our obedience and patience, let us remember, that the
Lord is coming, and his reward is with him: He is coming to receive us to
himself, that where he is we may be also.

And as for the things of this life, the same love that provided a savior for
thee, will provide all necessary temporal blessings, for thee: Thy heavenly
Father, who knows what is best for thee, will choose thine inheritance;
therefore be not too careful about these things, but rest your care upon him
who cares for you. Leave yourself with him for he is Love, 1 John iv 8. Commit
your whole self, soul and body, into the hands of infinite love.

Now the Lord of his infinite mercy put his spirit into this dead letter, for
the quickening your soul; and I beseech him to make it effectual for your
eternal good. -- I commend you to God, and the word of his grace, and rest your
etc.

JOHN MASON.

LETTER III. To my dear sister Mrs. Margaret Holmes
Dear Sister,
MAY these lines find you well and happy -- E^joy in the thoughts, that your
soul is secured in the hands of Christ, and that in this life you are as happy
as content itself can make you. Who has the largest share of external
comforts, but he who believes this world is vanity? Indeed, the surest
experience of the world's emptiness arises from a taste of Christ's fullness.
Though there be nothing but disappointments in the world to them that make it
their idol, yet it will be slavishly pursued and craved by them, because they
know no better things; for the infatuated idolater has not the sense to say
within himself, Is there not a lie in my right hand.

O blessed be God, who has engaged your heart for himself; in the strength of
Christ, follow on to know him. How should the way of spiritual thrift be valued
and improved by those who are taught of God, where their main and eternal
interest lies? Where every superadded degree of favor in religion does at once
increase the stock in the heart, and the bank that is laid up in heaven. It Is a
provision of spikenard, and precious ointment, against our funeral. -- Let us
call those our golden hours that are spent with God.

I should now at large commend to you that excellent duty of self-examination,
but that it has been effectually pressed upon you by a dear saint now in
heaven Nor have I cause to doubt, but as her memory, so her counsels are
inviolably preserved in the most inward rooms of your heart. -- Accept the
hearty respects of me and mine -- most ardently desiring for you all the
blessings that were purchased by the most valuable blood of the Son of God. I
remain in him,

Dear Sister, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER IV. To the same.
My dear Sister,
I preserve carefully my ancient respects. -- though I have been long silent I
am your orator before the highest throne, and do earnestly desire, that you may
grow in the faith of Jesus, and in lively communion with him, which is the most
comfortable thing in the world. -- Alas! we are less than nothing, worse than
nothing. Christ is all -- may he be so to us! -- Let us glorify him more by
relying upon his satisfaction and merits, for all that we can do or suffer
cannot at one for the least of our sins. -- It Is the self-emptied heart, and
beggar's hand, that must receive this infinite gift of God The woman of Canaan
is our pattern. True, Lord, I am no better than a dog, but there are crumbs for
dogs. I am as bad as sin can make me, and deserve to be as miserable as hell
can make me; but, Lord, I am not so bad as thou art good; I am not so miserable
as thou art merciful. --

O, my dear sister, I desire that you may now live by faith, and breathe by
prayer; that you may finally dwell above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God. -- The Lord spiritualize our souls. and quicken us according to
his loving kindness. -- We long to see you. -- farewell in Christ.

Your etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER V. To the same
My dear Sister,
YOU are dearly remembered by us; though we seldom converse personally, or by
letters, our hearty prayers are for you at the throne of grace. I hope we shall
meet together before the throne of glory.

I hope I need not suggest arguments of comfort to you, who know what it is to
enjoy the presence of God on earth, and are therefore prepared to enjoy the
presence of Christ in heaven. -- Doubtless the Lord is our Father; though our
earthly parents be ignorant of us. I commend you to him through Christ. -- Let
us hope in the Lord, who is Almighty and most merciful. -- The Lord abound in
his mercy to you! May he be a sun to direct you, a shield to protect you, a
portion to sustain you, and a God to save you!

O, that we may hear the rod! which says -- Sin no more* get an interest in
Christ; prize time, and prepare to meet your God! That we may inwardly hear the
voice of the rod, whilst we outwardly feel the smart of it! -- I beseech the
Lord to prosper you every way; to watch over you; and to rejoice over you, to
do you good; to sweeten your life with his love, and to fit you for his whole
pleasure. -- No more, but all hearty respects to you, and that I am

Yours, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER VI. To Mrs. Elizabeth Glover.
My dear friend in Christ*
HOW hard a thing is it to exercise faith when we have most need of it? And how
sad a thing is it, that when we have most need of the Lord's presence and help,
we should then especially grieve him with our doubts and distrusts? However we
have this to comfort us, that where the Lord sees faith in sincerity he will
pardon its infirmity. -- But O! when shall we believe against sense, and hope
against hope? When shall we give all glory to God by grounding upon his word,
when we want present experience and feeling? saying, The glory of my glory
still shall be,
To give all glory and myself to thee.


When shall we attain to that excellent frame of believing which the church was
in, Mic. vii.8, 9. Rejoice not against me O mine enemy; when I fall I shall
arise; when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear
the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead
my cause, and execute judgment for me. He will bring me forth to the light, and
I shall behold his righteousness?

But though we have not attained so far, let us bless God for any measure of
faith, one grain whereof excels all the riches in the world. -- And let us
take heed of falling into sin. To lie under the hidings of God's face is a
great affliction; but to lie under a sense of his displeasure is a greater.
There is no evil so great as sin. Let us flee from error and temptation; avoid
ill company, which will either taint us, or grieve us; be jealous over our own
spirits; hate presumption and carelessness and be much in humble prayer, and
holy fear. I am*

Your etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER VII. To the same.
Loving christian Friend,
YOU complain of that in your letter which no creature upon earth is free from.
The best christian must acknowledge that pride dwells in him. You do well to
complain of it; but you must strive against it, and so we must all. -- There is
so much of heaven in the soul as there is of humility. -- Take a true measure
of yourself. Consider what you are. Beg of the Lord for a humble spirit.
Remember Christ was humble. As for your temptations, and castings down, -- it
is no news to hear of a tempted christian, or a dejected saint. I cannot see
that any other temptation has taken you than what is common to the people of
God. Let not Zion say, her God has forsaken her; her God has forgotten her;
can a mother forget her sucking child? -- You may be in the dark awhile, but
wait for the Lord, as they that wait for the morning. -- To his everlasting
grace and mercy I commend you, and remain,

Your etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER VIII. To the same.
My dear Friend in our dearest Lord Jesus,
THE Lord has said, I will never fail you nor forsake you. He will not turn
away from doing you good* but he will put his fear into your inward parts, that
you shall never depart from him. Having these promises, let us stand fast,
holding faith and a good conscience. -- Let us allow God to be infinitely wiser
than ourselves, and maintain honorable thoughts of his Majesty and mercy; for
as is his Majesty, so is his mercy. Let us bow to his sovereignty, and believe
his grace. There are crumbs for dogs; gifts for rebels; and compassion for
sinners -- The Lord increase our hope, encourage our faith, and inflame our
love, and perfect that which concerns us! -- As we have had joint communion
with our good God on earth, I trust it shall be perfected in glory. -- To
everlasting glory is my dear sister Wyat and my dear brother Peter Holmes
lately gone. The Lord, who (I trust) had fited them for himself, fit us also!
-- O! blessed be God, for good hope through grace! -- Pray for me, that I may
stand fast in the Lord. -- With mine and my wife's kind respect to you, and
commending you to infinite and eternal mercy in Christ, I rest in him,

Your etc. JOHN MASON.


POSTCRIPT.
Let not your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, etc.

Trust in the Lord and do good.

Look unto Jesus, the author and finisher of your faith.

Surely there is an end, and thine expectation shall not be cut off.

It is but a little while and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

LETTER IX. To the same.
My dearly beloved in the Lord,
I HAVE had abundance of comfort whilst I have been caring for thy precious
soul (the Lord is my witness!) and I hope we shall both rejoice together in the
day of Christ.

I received your letter, and read it with a sad heart, finding you were
troubled. The Lord guide you and settle you!

I look upon this as a sure principle -- that the worship of God must agree
with the word of God. I judge a form of prayer lawful, as agreeable to the word
of God -- The ceremonies are no part of God's worship, for then they must be a
matter of necessity, which we hold them not to be -- but matters of decency and
order, as the Apostle says, Let all things be done decently, and in order.
Neither sin nor holiness is to be put in them; but they are of the nature of
those meets which (the Apostle says) if we eat we are not the better; if we
eat not we are not the worse -- I do not know your particular scruples,
otherwise I should be glad to offer what satisfaction I could. I only tell you
some part of my thoughts. I have much christian affection for those that are
otherwise minded; in case they be purely conscientious, humble, and charitable
souls. -- The Lord keep you through his name! -- I am your, etc.

JOHN MASON.

LETTER X.
My dearly beloved friends in Christ,
I REJOICE in God, who has called you into the fellowship of his Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ; and into that grace, wherein you stand. Let us remember, that we
are, by nature, children of wrath, even as others. We might have been cast into
hell long ago. Were we not provoking sinners? O how did the Lord call upon us,
and we regarded him not? -- But did the Lord stand and knock, and call till he
made us answer, speak, Lord, for thy servants hear? Did he give us ears to
hear? Would he not let us alone, till he had won our hearts? -- O blessed be
his name! We might have been blasphemers, persecutors, haters, and despisers of
that which is good, at this day. We might have counted the life of religion
madness; praying, and professing of religion, fancy and solly. We might have
been left to ourselves; all our hope might have been in this life; all our
comfort in this world; all our confidence in creatures; and all our heaven upon
earth: Has the Lord caused us to know better things? O let us admire his free
grace, now and for ever.!

My friends, consider how great things the Lord has done for you. Call to mind
your former experience, and live as those whom the Lord has redeemed by his
blood. Now you must look upon yourselves as the Lord Christ's, and not your
own. Consider from what you are called, and to what you are called.

Would you live holily, observe these rules.

1. Live in the eye of God. 2. Observe the example of Christ. 3. Consider the
fruit and end of things. The fruit of sin is shame and sorrow. Sin is a viper
in the end: But the fruit of righteousness is peace; holiness is eternal life,
in the end.

4. Bind the commandments upon your hearts. 5. Shun the appearances, and the
least beginnings of sin. 6. Be frequent and fervent in secret prayer.

My friends, would you live comfortably, take these directions.

1. Live not so much upon the comforts of God, as upon the God of comforts. Be
afraid of unbelief* that is a great sin. Do not greaten your sins above God's
saving power. Believe in the word, firmly and constantly. Trust perfectly to
the grace and mercy of God in Christ. I will trust in the mercy of God (says
David) for ever and ever, Psalm. lii.8. 2. Beware of sin, especially of wilful
sin: That will bring a cloud, and make a breach between God and your soul. 3.
Do not mind earthly things. O take heed of unlawful affections; of an unlawful
carriage of the heart; about lawful things. 4. Examine the ways of your heart
daily: Search yourselves. What sin have I committed? What duty have I omitted
this day? Every night look back upon the thoughts and affections, and speeches
of the day past. Confess your failings over the head of the Scapegoat. This is
another necessary means to keep your peace with God, and to walk comfortably
before him: And I pray observe it. 5. Examine your heart farther, and consider
the gracious actings and workings of God's blessed Spirit within you; what good
thoughts, what good desires, aims, resolutions, God has put into you. Consider
what outgoings of your heart, after God, there have been, what incomes, and
influences of his grace. Daily examine your hearts for these things, and give
God the glory of all the gracious workings of his spirit in your soul. 6. If
you would walk comfortably with God, mind not what is forged, but what is
written. Heed not every fancy the devil may dart into you (for then you lie at
the mercy of your enemy) but keep close to the written word of God. Thus it is
written, said our Savior to satan the tempter. -- So much for comfortable
walking.

Dear friends; Would you walk peaceably and charitably, take these rules.

1. Remember God has called you to peace. 2. Remember when Christ was reviled,
he reviled not again. 3. If others neglect their duty to you, yet do you not
neglect your duty to God, nor to them. Let not another's sin cause you to sin:
To render railing for railing, is to return sin for sin 4. You must show your
love to God, whom you have not seen, by your love to your brother, whom you see
daily. Show your piety by your charity. 5. Consider that an unbridled tongue is
a sign of an unsanctified heart. They that have not a dram of grace to tame
their tongues, shall one day want a drop of water to cool the^r tongues. 6. Do
good to others, if they do not thank you for it. The less reward you have on
earth, the greater shall your reward be in heaven: As the less wages the
servant takes up within his year, the more comes in at the year's end.

Dear friends; Would you be constant in good ways and purposes, take these
directions.

1. Remember you have engaged yourselves to God, and therefore you must keep
yourselves from idols. You have given up your names to God, and you must give
up your hearts to God. You have made a covenant with God by sacraments. If
satan or the world are suitors for your hearts, tell them, you are already
disposed of; you are pre-engaged to God; you have chosen your God, and you must
not think of changing him. 2. Consider whither would you go from Christ? Where
do you think to find such another God as your God; such another friend as Jesus
Christ? 3 Remember, if it be good to draw near to God, it is better to draw
nearer to him: Still the nearer the better. One may see an end of earthly
perfection; but there is no end of the perfection of Jesus Christ. 4. Be
downright for God; and you shall find soul-hearting comfort in God, that shall
keep you close to God. 5. Walk humbly with God; that is the way to walk closely
with God. If a christian is humble, he is a christian indeed: God will not
suffer such a one to be tempted above his strength. 6. Let not opinions swim in
your heads; that will make you fall: But let the great things of religion sink
into your hearts, and that will make you stand. Be content, yea, willing to
suffer for Christ; who did so contentedly and willingly suffer for you. And if
you suffer with him, you shall be glorified together.

Now, my dear friends, the Lord be with you all! I beseech him to strengthen,
stablish, confirm and settle you; and preserve you all to his holy and
everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. In whom I am Your etc.

^^HN MASON.

LETTER XI.
Dear friend in Christ,
I Long to hear of the state of your soul. O lay hold upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, by a true and lively faith. He is an able, willing, only Soviour; the
soul's resting place, the soul's dewlling place; the soul's hiding place: O
that you may be hid in him now, that you may be ^ound in him at last. Sin must
drive us to him, not from him. We need him infinitely. We are, like Peter,
sinking into the waters: Save, Lord; or we perish! Christ, or hell, must be our
portion for ever. Christ is our only ark, to save us from perishing. Every soul
will be uncas'd, (...) it be long; and then it will appear whether they ever
seriously applied themselves to Christ. There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus. Nothing but condemnation to them that are out of him.
Faith makes Christ ours. This consists in self-denial, and self-resignation. We
must see our sins, so far as to abhor ourselves; abhor ourselves, so far as to
deny ourselves; deny ourselves, so far as to resign ourselves up into the
saving arms of an only Savior. They that do this, are pardoned, sanctified,
saved for ever.

Now let me entreat you to ask your own heart some questions.

1. Has sin been laid to my heart? has it been my greatest burden?

2. Have I confessed my particular sins, and the sinfulness of my nature, with
sorrow?

3. Have I been forced to make my appeal to Christ, knowing that I am lost for
ever, unless he freely save me? Have I cried for a Christ, as a condemned man
for a pardon?

4. Do I believe he is able and willing to save me? Do I believe that he that
spread his arms on the cross to die for me, spreads his arms now in the gospel,
and in heaven, to save me? Have I pleaded his promises? O what a precious
promise is that, John vi.37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
out!

5. Have I had joy and peace in believing? Has Christ, relied on, calmed and
quieted my poor troubled afflicted soul?

6. Do I love Christ more than riches, honors, pleasures? Do I love all his
ordinances? Do I love all his saints?

7. Do I hate sin in itself? Do I hate sin in myself? Do I hate every sin?
every false way?

8. Do I unfeignedly, entirely yield up myself to the service of my Savior?

If your heart answers to these questions, happy, happy, are you, that ever you
were born.

O my friend, I commend you to Christ, the Lord follow you with the motions of
his spirit; that you may follow him with continual supplications in the spirit!
That, of the fullness of Christ, you may receive grace for grace. -- The peace
of God, and the God of peace be with you. With mine and my sister's love,
desiring your prayers, I rest Your etc.

JOHN MASON.

LETTER XII.
My dear Friend,
I HEAR the hand of the Lord is gone out against you: O hear the rod, and who
has appointed it! O turn to him that smites you! It has pleased the Lord to
take away the earth that lay next your root: He has been digging about you;
pray now that you may be fruitful. Now fly from the wrath to come, and lay hold
on eternal life. Now let the business of your soul be the business of your
life. Open your doors to Christ: Invite him to dwell among you, by worshipping
him in your family. Whilst your hand is in this world, let your heart pe in
heaven: O lay up for yourself a treasure there. What is the world! Seek things
above* if we be not sure of Christ, what are we sure of? If young ones die, how
long have we to live? -- O strive to enter in at the straght gate. Search and
try your ways: Consider in the Lord's fear, wherefore he has thus contended
with you. Repent of every sin your conscience sets before you: Confess sin, and
earnestly plead the blood of Christ Now the Lord has a controversy with you,
humble yourself under his mighty hand. Cry for the blood of sprinkling: Never
rest till your pardon be sealed through the blood of Christ. -- Our kind
respects from hence to you and your wife. The Lord pity you in your great
afflictions, and every way bless you.

I am Your etc.

JOHN MASON.

LETTER XIII.
My reconciled and dear Friend,
THESE are to thank you for your pious and kind letter, and to assure you of my
hearty affection to you and yours. For why? Had you been a perfect stranger to
me, if I had but heard that there was such a one as loved Christ in sincerity,
and earnestly desired more communion with him, a deeper sense of his love, and
larger communication of his graces, I should be very unworthy to deny my love
and respect to such a worthy object. But since I have had the spiritual benefit
and c^^fort of your acquaintance for diverse years together (wherein we took
sweet counsel together, and walked to the house of God as good friends, where
we were mutually refreshed with the Word and bread of life, eating of the same
spiritual meat, and drinking of the same spiritual drink, and receiving sweet
pledges of our eternal communion with God) God forbid I should be wanting in
any office of christian (...) toward you and yours. Nor do I (...) your
jealousy to be any other (...) fruit of your abundant love, (...) not utterly
lost, though I (...) shame* I fall short of that (...) of brotherly kindness,
(...) others, which I beseech God to cover with his mercy in Christ. The Lord
enable me to run with diligence and patience the race which he has set before
me -- God be merciful to little Lynford, which is left as sheep without a
Shepherd. But if they hunger and thirst after the word of righteousness they
shall be filled. I hope when I have leisure and opportunity I shall not be
wanting to them. The Lord comfort their hearts. I and my wife remember our
hearty respects to you and yours. God has been infinitely merciful to us, and
has give us a daughter (now called Martha.) I hope he will perfect his mercy
toward us. We are full of his mercies. O that we were full of his praises! --
My prayers are for you and yours; whom God bless, preserve and keep. O that all
his ways might be mercy and truth toward you! Cast not away your confidence,
which has so great recompense of reward. The life of sense is a troublesome,
disquieting life; for what does sense discover but vanity and misery? But the
life of faith is a comfortable life. For faith makes glorious discoveries of
God and Christ, saints and angels, rest and peace, and life for ever. Nothing
troubles you when you are above. -- Keep where you are well. I remain,

Your etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XIV.
Dear Friend,
THOUGH providence has separated us, yet it refreshes me to think upon you,
and that I am interested in your prayers as you are in mine. Well, if we are
met in Christ, we shall meet upon the bench in the great day of assize, and
before a throne of glory in our Father's kingdom. In the mean while, our God is
with us both whilst we are with him. In his presence is fullness of joy. It is
not so much the change of place, as the presence of God, which makes heaven.
There is heaven where God shines and manifests himself. When a soul can say, I
would not go to heaven, if it were not to meet God there; and if I should be
cast into the flames of hell, I could not find in my heart to blaspheme God;
the exercise of such a meditation will greatly help her against temptations.

Many a good soul does not know how much she loves God; but when she feels that
affection stirring within her. -- O then, she is in a new, serene, comfortable
frame! Satan flies. Perfect love casts out fear. Love God, and praise God, and
all is at peace. Nay, admit the soul has not got full assurance of her pardon;
yet if she sets down this resolution -- Let God be glorified whatever become of
me. Let the angels praise him; let the saint praise him; let the Jews and
Gentiles be called in to praise him; and if it may please his divine majesty,
let my poor unworthy soul please him, and be a praise to his grace for ever and
ever: if it can say this, it must be happy with it. That must needs be a happy
soul that breathes forth the praises of God, ascribes all glory to God, and can
sing, The glory of my glory still shall be,
To give all glory and myself to thee.


The Lord put and keep your heart in a praising frame. O how well does this
angelical and evangelical disposition befit and become those, who of sinners
are made saints; of enemies, children; of slaves, heirs; of burning brands,
shining stars! When we consider seriously what we have been, and what we might
have been, nay, what we must have been, if infinite mercy had not prevented;
(as the Lord, was seen in the mount, when Isaac day bound upon the alter, mercy
came in between the knife and the sacrifice) instead of scourged, how nobly
pardoned and promoted! raised from devils to angels company* from the lowest
depth to the greatest height; this (I say) if we consider it, is matter of
admiration, not of expression. If we had as many tongues as we have veins or
drops of blood, they could never utter a thousandth part of the due praises of
divine grace. Let us now magnify the Lord and exalt his name together. O the
height, and breadth, and depth, and length, of the Father's love! O the
infinite and unsearchable riches of free grace! O! the tremendous mystery, and
invaluable mercy of the incarnation the Son of God! O the stupendous
humiliation and condescension of eternal glory and omnipotency! O the
unparalled love of a dying Savior! O the sweet heavenly communion of the
blessed comforter! -- Lord, what do these things mean? -- Lord, what are we? or
what is our father's house, that thou have brought us hitherto? That thou
should make thy self glorious in our glory, who had made ourselves vile in
dishonoring thy name? -- O, let us give him our whole souls, who has redeemed
them by his blood! For it is fit he should have the utmost of so dear a
purchase. Farewell, my dearest friend in the Lord, in whom I am, Your, etc.

JOHN MASON.

LETTER XV.
My dear Friend,
THOUGH we be parted on earth I hope we shall meet in heaven; though our work
should not lie together in the Lord's vinyard, yet I hope we shall sup together
with Christ; though we do not sojourn together, yet I hope we shall dwell
together to all eternity; if we should never feast together any more upon the
word and sacraments, yet I hope we shall eat that Bread and drink that wine
which is for ever new in our Father's kingdom. Be of good comfort, Sister, it
is but yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. We shall be welcome at home however it fares with us in our journey.
Remember the apostle Paul had no certain dwellin^-place: nay, our blessed
Savior (...) not where to lay his head. We may (...) poured from vessel to
vessel, and (...) to and fro upon this ocean; it (...) not be long, I hope,
ever we be fixed in our harbor. My prayers are and shall be for thee, that God
would dispose of thee to his own glory and thy comfort. Let not thy heart be
troubled, thou believe in God, etc. I saw your mother yesterday, and she was
in good health, as we all are here, blessed be the Lord. I should be glad to
hear of your welfare. I rest

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XVI.
My dear Friend in Christ,
THE providence of the Lord extends itself to every thing; but there is a
special providence over the children of God, 1 Timothy iv.10. The providence of
God, to the children of God are purchased providence, sanctified providence,
Soul providence: They are ordinances to them, instruments of good to their
souls Again, the providence of God to his children are promises fulfilled,
Psalm. xxv.10. Again, the providence of God to his children are the fruits and
answers of prayer. Again, the providence of the Lord steer the children of God
heaven-wards, Again, the providence of God combine and join their forces for
the good of every sincere, single-hearted believer, Romans viii.28. My friend,
this, I trust, is your happiness, that you are under the eye and conduct and
tuition of a fatherly and special providence. Let us answer the call of
providence; which is to watch, pray, and believe; and let us expect good things
from a good God; and great things from a great God, through our faithful and
dear mediator, who ever lives to make intercess^^n for us. -- I suppose you may
have heard, that our friend Mary Tompkins is gone to her eternal rest: She died
triumphantly. O! (said she upon her death bed) what things have I seen? Ann
Kemp asked her, Has the Lord given you a glimpse of heaven? I cannot tell
(said Mary) whether it be heaven or not, but joys, joys, such things as never
mortal eye beheld. I have fought the good fight. And so she went on in heavenly
expressions. O! what cause have we to bless the Lord, that she who was
afflicted and tossed with so many temptations in her lifetime, found joy and
comfort in a dying hour! The Lord was nearest to her when she needed him most.
My wife remains as formerly; I hope (through the goodness of God) not worse. I
desire the continuance of your prayers for us. The Lord be with your spirit. No
more, but our love. In haste, I rest

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XVII.
Dear Friend,
THOUGH I am but a weak interpreter of the scriptures, and especially of those
hard places which are liable to so many different translations and expositions,
as that is Psalm. xi.3. Yet that I may not be thought to slight your request
whose profit I am bound to seek, I will tell you what seems to me to be the
true sense of that text. Not that David here doubted of God's word, as if it
were not a sufficient foundation for him to build upon; (for in this Psalm we
find him very much believing, and confident in his God, from the beginning to
the end:) I think rather, this was part of the speech of his carnal
counselors, who had bid him fly as a bird to his mountain, in the first verse;
and they gave this reason for it in the second verse: for ^o (say they) the
wicked bend their bow, etc. But he scorns their carnal counsel in that word, in
the Lord put I my trust. But they continue their speech in the third verse. if
the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? As if they had said,
the forests, mountains, and caves, are your strongest holds; keep to those
foundations; hold you there, or you will perish, though your cause be never so
righteous. Holy David disdains their carnal Advice, as you may read in the next
verse. There is a God in heaven that takes ^^tice how things are carried in the
world; that will favor the righteous (though he try them for a while) but he
will utterly destroy the wicked, and show them no mercy. Which is the meaning
of the fourth verse, and of those that follow, to the end of the Psalm. And
this is the most natural sense, which, upon serious consideration, I can fix
upon this portion of scripture. Not but that I am willing to be informed by any
one, of a better interpretation. -- My dear friend, it pities me to read your
complaints. The good Lord (if it be his heavenly will) restore you the joy of
his salvation. Self-abasing, and constant waiting upon God in his own blessed
ways, are approved means to recover lost comfort. My prayers are, and shall be
for you. With mine and my wife's hearty love to you, and all our christian
friends with you, or near you, I rest,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XVIII.
My dear Friend,
CHRIST be your soul's comfort! -- Though he has taken away your husband, the
desire of your eyes, with a stroke, he has promised, that his loving kindness
he will not take away. The world is full of changes, but our God is
unchangeable. Common mercies are sweet mercies, but covenant mercies are sure
mercies. Christ is faithful: He ever lives, and (says he) because I live ye
shall live also.

The Lord support and comfort your heart under this heavy hand of his which he
has laid upon you. O! that it may bring your soul nearer to God, and to Jesus
Christ. O! that that providence which has wrought death in your husband, may
work life in your heart. Hate sin; overcome the world; love Christ; mind heaven
and heavenly things my dear christian friend.

I have great hopes that your soul is safe, however it may please the Lord in
his wisdom to deal with your body and family. Submit yourself cheerfully to his
will and pleasure; and say, Lord, here I am, here is my family, do with them
what shall seem good in thine eyes. -- The Lord be gracious to you. The Lord be
gracious to Haversham. The Lord awaken the hearts of the people. O that they*
might repent quickly! Because wrath is gone out from the Lord. The Lord stay
his hand if it be his will. The Lord Jesus stand between the living and the
dead. The Lord bless his word and rod to yourself and others. The Lord dwell,
and rule, and walk in the midst of you. O keep close to God! He will never fail
you nor forsake you.

My prayers are for you. My kind respects to yourself, and all our christian
friends. My wife sends her love to you. The Lord be with your spirit. -- I
remain,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XIX.
My dear christian friend, and heartily beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ,
WHAT a good God have we! that remembers us in our low estate, thinks upon us
when we are poor and needy, and is nearest to us when we need him most! He is a
sun to comfort us, a shield to protect us; he gives us grace, he gives us
glory, he gives us himself. O what a good God have we! -- Why has he chosen
us! We did not choose him, but he has chosen us. He has loved us first, and
has loved us freely. Behold wh^^ manner of love the Father has bestowed upon
us, that we should be called the children of God! Is not his love sweeter than
wine? Is it not better than life? Does it not sweeten a sickbed? Does it not
sweeten the thoughts of death? When the love of God is shed abroad in the
heart, then the blessed soul cries, welcome death, welcome judgment, welcome
eternity: Come sweet Lord Jesus, come quickly.

I rejoice to hear of your recovery. And I rejoice in the thoughts of that
comfortable entertainment your Savior gave you in the time of your sickness.
When the Apostle Peter was upon the water, he said Lord, bid me come to thee.
And so many of Christ's friends have desired him to call them. And did you run
to embrace Christ? Did you rejoice in the thoughts of his coming? And long to
depart, that you might be with him, which is the best of all? O! Blessed be God
for the savor of his sweet ointments, which drew out your soul after him.
Blessed be God for his Almighty spirit which made you so eagerly and joyfully
desirous of the coming of Jesus Christ. But now you must wait for Christ, as
the people by the seaside, Luke viii.40. He will certainly come. He says,
behold I come quickly. It is but yet a little while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry. You must wait for him, and watch for him. Trim
your lamp, that when you hear the joyful sound, Behold your bridegroom comes,
you may be ready; and the bride-chamber door may stand open for you -- A good
Martyr in Scotland going to suffer for Christ, said to his wife, I will not bid
you good night, for we shall meet at supper. It is not long ever all God's
people shall be gathered together to him, and shall be for ever with him.

Remember my kind love to all my dear friends with you, and near you, as duly
as if I named them one by one. Mine and my wife's love to you. Let us continue
to pray for one another. The Lord be with your spirit. I remain

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XX.
Dear Friend.
I Thank you for your letter, and am glad to hear you are so well settled; but
especially of the good frame of your mind, which God preserve for his glory. I
desire you may still cherish thoughts of your own mortality. All our
meditations and prepartions are little enough to fit us for a dying hour. Hold
fast what you have received; make much of your experiences. Does not
experiences tell you, that the worst of the ways of God, are better than the
best of the ways of sin? When you see the abundance and glory of the world,
pray for the Light of God's countenance. When the soul says, The Lord is my
portion, it is satisfied; whilst others who have their Portion in this world
remain unsatisfyed.

Watch over your heart and tongue, and life. Watch against sin; watch unto
duty; watch for the coming of Christ. Seek the Lord, seek his strength, seek
his face evermore. Be not weary of well doing, and waiting upon God, Remember
what you hear, what you read, what you pray for; and live accordingly. The God
of peace be with you.

My wife and I send our hearty love to you, and your brothers, and my cousin
Betty. We are in good health at present, Blessed be the name of the Lord. I
hope your brothers profit in learning. The Lord give every one of them a
portion of grace. Commending you to the protection, direction, and comforts of
the blessed God, I rest

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXI.
Dear Friend,
I Received yours, and should be glad to hear where, and in what condition you
now are. Want of jealousy and zeal for the great name of God, deserves to be
complained of. I am glad it is your burden; nevertheless I would not have you
be discouraged. It is a sound conclusion of divines, That a christian may be
more sensibly affected with outwar things, which touch the senses, than with
spiritual things; and yet have a more inward, deep, and hearty concern for
spirituals. He may have a more radicated love to God, than to any earthly
things; he may have a more judicious hatred of sin than of any plague; he may
have a more solid, profound grief for the dishonor of God, than for an injury
done to his earthly relations; albeit he may be under more vehement passions,
and may shed more tears for wrongs done to his friends, or for plagues
inflicted upon his body, than he does from spiritual evils. Besides, I am glad
Almighty God has so far enlightened your mind, to see so much of the evil of
sin as to be displeased with yourself for being no more displeased at it. It is
some argument of softness, when the stone grates upon the flesh, and makes it
bleed. To be sensible of hardness argues that hardness does not prevail. -- God
go on with his work in your heart, and make all graces abound in you. Wait
continually upon your God. Seek the Lord, seek his strength, seek his face
evermore. Above all gettings get wisdom; get understanding, forget it not. --
Let me know how it is with you; and whether you have lighted into good company.
With our love, I rest

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXII.
Honest and dear Friend,
GOD Almighty bless you, and keep you and make his face to shine upon you, and
give you peace: The Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon you, and
encourage you beyond all discouragements.

I rejoice to hear of your care to keep sabbaths; and your willingness rather
to suffer for keeping them, than to sin in breaking them. Undoubtedly it is
better to suffer the greatest suffering, than to sin the least sin. If we keep
sabbaths holy, sabbaths will keep us holy. Be much in prayer. Be always
watching against sin, over your heart, unto duty, and for the coming of the
Lord, Be always in your earthly callng, or in your heavenly calling, or in some
way that may fit you for these callings* Be heartily content with that
condition that divine providence, or your good parents, shall call you to.
Adorn every state by religion, and adore religion in every state. Labor in all
things to please God, that through you God's name may be honored, and his ways
the better thought of.

I am glad to hear of your willingness to depart out of this world. The rule
is, vitam in patientia, mortem in desiderio habandum est. We must be content to
live, willing to die. I pray God to use you whilst you live. And not to refuse
you when you come to die. I hope you will live to glorify him on earth. I
beseech God to preserve your body and spirit.

It Is saturday, and my work is upon me, which makes me take my leave of you
sooner than else I should do. I should be glad to hear from you. God be with
your spirit. I rest,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.
LETTER XXIII.
My dear Friend,
THE Lord love you, and bless, you and keep you, and make his face to shine
upon you. I beseech him to stablish your heart with grace, and preserve you
harmless and blameless unto the coming of Christ. Cleave unto God with full
purpose of heart. Be assured that the world is vanity, sin is folly, Christ is
all in all. Live upon God by faith, live unto him by obedience* watch and pray,
that you enter not into temptations. Cherish good motions, quench bad. Honor
God by a faithful discharge of duties, personal and relative. Be assured your
labor is not in vain in the Lord. Cast not away your confidence, which has
great recompense of reward.

I was last week at Mursley to see your mother, who was ill; but removing to
great brickhill she found herself better. I hope God will restore her to you
all, for his glory and your comfort. We are all at present in good health,
through God's goodness.

My wife and Mrs. W. and all your brothers send their several respects to you,
and so does,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXIV.
My dear Friend,
I AM glad to hear of your proficiency in the good ways of God. The further you
walk in them the sweeter you will find them, and the better you will like them;
and therefore I beseech you, For* God's sake, and for the Lord Jesus Christ's
sake, not to hearken to the world, the flesh, or the devil, for they would take
you off from the pure and pleasant ways of God. Blessed is he that watches,
and happy is the man that fears always. Commune with your own heart* consider
your latter end. Look at things eternal. What is the world to the soul? The
judge is before the door* pray continually. Own the substantials of religion.
-- I told you my mind before we parted in the celler-chamber; and my prayers
are for you by name. Heart-work is better than head-work. It is a better temper
to be fervent in charity, than in disputes. Own the image of Christ, wherever
you see it; and beg wisdom of God, who will give it you liberally. Judge others
with a judgment of charity (as the Apostle Paul does) but judge yourself with a
judgment of verity and severity. Spare not a corruption. Slack not a duty. Be
always abounding in the work of the Lord.

My dear friend, I received your kind sympathizing letter, and thank you for
it. I sent to you an answer, but it could not find you out; and therefore I
send this by your mother, whom I saw last week, blessed be God, finely
supported. -- With mine, my wife's, cousin H -- 's and your brothers respects
to you, I rest,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXV.
Dear Friend,
I THANK you for your letter. God has blessed me with a son; and we are all in
good health, God be praised. My brother Wyat was suddenly taken away, and my
sister is left a poor sorrowful widow. See the course and fashion of the world;
first the birth of a son, then the death of a brother. God never changes, never
dies. Happy are they that have God for their God? They are sure of something,
or rather of all. If a man had the whole world he were sure of nothing -- There
is nothing like close communion with God. Watching and praying, and peace with
God, makes a man's life comfortable in despite of all the rage and fury of
earth or hell. Follow on to know God and you shall know him more. The Lord
stablish your heart with grace, and give you a further experience and liking of
his good ways. -- It would be much to my satisfaction to hear of your
proficiency in a christian way, and that your soul prospers. O that I may
rejoice in the day of Christ upon your account! That I have not run in vain,
nor labored in vain. -- I wish you a good settlement, and under a good master,
God's holy and wise providence take the care of you, that you may be disposed
of to your eternal good. -- Mine and my wife's, and Mrs. W -- 's Love to you.
Your brothers send you their due respects. I am,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXVI.
Dear Friend,
I Thank you for your letter. I earnestly desire your proficiency and comfort
in the good ways of God* A christian must be humble but never discouraged. The
first is a duty; the second is a sin. Though the bare talking of the lips tends
only to penury; yet talking of God, and of the things of God, from the heart,
is part of the christian practice, especially among those that are endued with
a sense of religion. Our words must be savoury, seasoned with salt; tending to
edification; and such as may minister grace to the hearers.

I commend to you secret duties. A christian is what he is between God and his
own soul. Go to God for God; go not from God without God: Seek his face in
Christ. Endeavor for a sense of his favor, and the supply of his spirit. You
have the blessed and most worthy name of Christ to speed your requests;
therefore let nothing lie upon your heart to trouble you. It is not only a
suffering but a sin, to let any thing lie upon our heart to trouble us, when we
have a God that bids us cast all our care upon him. God will deal familiarly
with you; he will be all things to you, if you depend upon him. If your spirit
flags or faints, search the cause of this untowardness and averseness, and
conclude it is not well with you till you have recovered a cheerful, obedient
frame of heart, that you can say from your soul, Lord, whom have I in heaven
but thee? Whom have I in earth but thee?

Two things resolve upon by the grace of God, viz. To judge yourself; and to
judge no body else. God requires these two things, to be severe toward
yourself; and charitable toward others. This will bring you comfort. Attend to
the vitals and essentials of religion; they will nourish the life and power of
Godliness in your heart.

Three things make a christian, viz. Repentance toward God; faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ; and sincere and universal obedience. Mind these three things, and
the God of peace shall be with you. -- Assure yourself, there is such a thing
as religion in the world, though some deride it, and others falsely pretend to
it. There is such a thing as communion with God. -- Seek comfort in God through
Christ, there it is to be found; rest not till you have found it and then your
soul will say. This is that I would have; this satisfies and refreshes. If a
man has his chest full of treasure, what cares he though he be called a poor
man; he hugs himself, and says, Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo. So if a
man be judged a hypocrite it matters not, so long as he has the evidence of
his sincerity in his bosom; a testimony within that he has pleased God. -- In
a great house there are grooms and scullions, yet we say, it is not their
house, it is such a nobleman's house, he owns it; so there is not a christian
in the world but has vile slaves lodging within him, but Christ is the Lord of
the house. Corruption rebels, but grace reigns, There are two houses, two
parties, Christ's side and the devil's; and a conflict between them. If it were
not so; if it were not for this inward conflict, earth would be heaven; for
outware opposition would be nothing, if it were not for this inward Corruption.
Well but Quod non placet, id non nocet. If sin be our grief and hatred it shall
not be our ruin. Christ's side shall prevail.

I commend you, my dear friend, to the grace of God, which is able to
illuminate your mind, to govern your spirit, and to preserve you to his
everlasting kingdom. I rest

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXVII.
My indeared Friend,
IT is the duty of every true christian to give God the glory of his grace. We
can never bless God enough for his patience, that has kept us so long out of
hell; nor for his mercy, that so earnestly invites us to heaven. Is it nothing,
that the Lord is continually following us with terms of peace, and tenders of
mercy, and beseeching us to be reconciled? -- Say not in your heart, I have
nothing of Christ in me, because you have not attained to such perfection and
assurances as you desire. It was the saying of a good christian. I bless God
for a good thought. Bless God for any token of his love; any portion of his
spirit. Thou can not say, thy sins are forgiven thee; but can thou not say,
they are confessed; they are confessed over the head of the Scapegoat? Do
thou heartily confess thy sins unto God, with all their aggravations? O! it is
a great mercy. -- Thou can not say, thou have an interest in Christ; but has
not Christ an interest in thee? Has he not won thine heart and affections? O!
it is a great mercy. -- Thou say possibly, I am not worthy to be called a
child of God. But does not God receive and treat thee as a father? The prodigal
( Luke xv.) acknowledged he was not worthy to be called the son; but yet his
Father received him. -- Again, it may be thou complainest of sin; but is it
with thee as it was formerly? Should thou not bless God for some amendments?
If a sick man be any thing bettered in health (though he still be very bad,
yet) he will tell his friends, he is somewhat better than he was, and he
blesses God for it. Besides, though sin dwells in thee, yet, perhaps, it is the
grief of thy soul: Thou art its captive not its convert. As sin is against thy
soul, so is not thy soul against sin? If it be thy grief it shall not be thy
ruin.

Again 'it may be thine heart is troubled in an hour of temptation but have
thou not sometimes enjoyed sweet peace with God? Were not thine earthly
delights vain? Can thou not say now, O quam sauve est istis sauvitatibus
carere? One quarter of an hour's communion with God is worth all the delights
in the world? Can thou not call to mind some of God's former
loving-kindnesses? Have thou not sometimes tasted and seen how good the Lord
is? -- What a mercy is that! -- Again, thou art not assured of heaven, and thou
want an assurance thereof. But thou have such hopes of heaven as thou
would not exchange for all the kingdoms of the world; and should thou not
bless God for that? Which is more to thee than all the world? -- Again, thou
sinest through mistake or passion. But can thou find in thine heart to sin
against God? He that is born of God cannot sin; that is, he cannot find in his
heart to sin; because he is born of God. -- Again, it may be thou complainest
of a dead heart. But is there not some life in thee? Deadness stands in
opposition to liveliness as well as life. If thou art dead, that is, not
lively, yet bless God that thou art not quite dead in trespasses and sins. --
Again, it may be that thou complainest of a hard heart. But thy heart is not so
hard but it feels its hardness. Did Pharaoh complain of the plague of a hard
heart? He felt it not* he was all stone. But if thy heart feels its hardness,
it is a sign there is something of flesh. Bless God for that covenant-mercy, a
heart of flesh. -- Again, it may be the Lord tarrieth or hides himself from
thee. But art thou not willing to wait upon him, and to wait for him? Do thou
wait under his table for crumbs* Do thou wait at his gate for mercy? Well,
the Lord is good to them that wait for him, Lam. iii.25. -- Again, it may be
thou complainest, thou art often out of frame, or of an uneven temper;
sometimes praying, sometimes sinning, etc. But though thou art not always the
same, yet God is, and Jesus Christ is; and therefore it is that we are not
consumed. -- Again, it may be thou think thou shall never be able to suffer
for Christ, thy weak nature shrinks and trembles at the thot's of it; thou art
afraid thou shall rather deny thy Savior, than thy name, thy liberty, or thy
life. It is true, if thou should be left to thyself, it would be so; but God
is faithful, and he will not suffer thee to be tempted above what thou art able
to bear. He will not send thee into a wood to fell an oak with a penknife. When
he calls thee to the work thou never did, he will give thee the strength thou
never had -- Again, it may be, thou fear thou shall fall away, and never
hold out to the end, but does not this fear of thine rather secure thee than
betray thee? Does it not quicken thee to duty, to watch and pray, etc. It is a
mercy if it be such a fear and trembling as thou art working out thy salvation
by. But wherefore do thou doubt? Has God ever failed thee at thy need? When
the disciples began to be concerned about bread; says our Savior, do you not
remember how many baskets full ye took up at such a time? and how many at such
a time? Are your hearts still hard^ned? So say I, remember how God has
comforted you at such a time, or such a time, and be not faithless but
believing. -- The Lord inspire your heart with courage and comfort, that you
may persevere in his good ways unto the end. The Lord be your keeper, your
guide, your portion for ever.

I shall be glad to hear how it fares with you. I hope we are not unmindful of
one another, though there had been an interruption of epistolary converse. I
suppose you might not receive my last letter. With mine, my wife's, Mrs. W --
's, your brother's, and Martha's hearty love and respects, and all good wishes,
I rest

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXVIII.
My dear Friend,
THOUGH my time be short yet I could not omit to let you know what a refreshing
it was to my spirit, to receive so good a letter from you. The Lord carry on
his work effectually in your heart. If thou have grace, thou have a great
charge about thee: Satan and his instruments will endeavor to rob thee of it,
but they shall not prevail. Our life is hid with Christ in God; and when Christ
who is our life shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory. Only let us
watch and pray that we do not enter into temptation. Encourage yourself in
Christ, and God's gracious promises; as I find you do, blessed be God. Keep
close to God Stand in awe of your own conscience. Pray constantly and
fervently. Wait upon God continually. Abhor the appearance of evil, my faithful
and dear friend. -- The Lord keep you through his name, and command his
loving kindness toward you. The Lord enlarge the hand of his bounty toward
you. The Lord fulfill the good pleasure of his goodness toward you, and the
work of faith with power. I hope we shall meet on earth; if not on earth, I
hope in heaven, through the riches of free grace Grace be with your spirit.

Take this as snatched from my urgent occasions; and be assured of the hearty
affections and prayers of

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXIX.
My affectionate and dear friend,
YOU oblige us by your good and kind letters, and the news you send us. I hope
you have that special gift of God, faith. Now is a time to exercise it. Now
God's wrath seems to be kindled a little against the nation, Blessed are all
those that put their trust in him.

O let us lay up for ourselves a treasure in heaven! O that we were wise to
make provision for our souls whilst we enjoy our lives! That when our lives
shall be lost our souls may be safe, and that for ever. -- What a mercy is it
that we have a God to go to? And the name of Christ to go to him in? Antichrist
is cruel, but Christ is merciful. Let our souls fall into the arms of Christ,
though our lives should fall into the hands of Antichrist. O that our spirits
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus? And that we may meet at last in
heaven! -- O! pray, pray that he would bless, guide, preserve and keep you and
me, us and our's by the Holy Ghost, that we may never fail; but be faithful
unto death, that we may receive a crown of life.

The Lord manifest himself unto you in the riches of his love; and bless you
abundantly with all heavenly favors! Be encouraged to persevere in well-doing,
for you shall reap if you faint not. O let us live by faith till we shall live
by sight. Let us walk with God till he shall take us. -- Mine and my wife's
love to you. Pray for her and me. The Lord watch over your spirit, and and
charge his providence with you; and command all things to work together for
your good. I remain

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXX.
My dear Friend,
I AM sensible of your love to us. You mourn with us, and rejoice with us; and
I hope you pray for us, and praise for us. And therefore I must needs desire
your temporal and especially your eternal welfare. I rejoice in the hopes of
your stedfastness in Christ. Blessed be God who has preserved you, and
followed you with the motions of his good spirit. The Lord carry on his work in
our hearts, that we may at last meet in his kingdom. Be encouraged still to
depend on God. Converse with him by faith, meditation, and prayer. If any
despise the good ways of God, I trust you can justify them by your own
experience. God's work is wages, and in keeping his commandments there is great
reward. Go on (my dear and faithful friend) go on in the strength of God.
Follow after righteousness, holiness, faith, love, patience, meekness. Labor
farther after measures of grace, and more intimate acquaintance and communion
with God. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright. The farther a man
walks in the good ways of God, the better he will find them. Let us live by
faith, till we shall live by sight. Let us breathe by prayer, till we breathe
out our souls into Christ's bosom. -- Say, we are weak, (as it is most true;)
our God will strengthen us. A christian cannot keep himself but he is kept by
the power of God, through faith unto salvation. -- Therefore we must commit our
souls to God's keeping, and derive supplies of strength from Jesus Christ. O
that we might daily receive of his fullness, even grace for grace! When satan
tempts, or the world tempts, fly to Christ, and he will succor. If your heart
be dead, go to Christ, and he will quicken it.

I commend you to Christ in my prayers* I commend Christ to you in my letters,
Christ is all in all* because I live (says he) ye shall live also. Christ
sweetens life, death, the grave, resurrection, judgment, heaven, eternity:
Christ sweetens all: -- Do you not love a man when you see ( aliquid christi)
something of Christ in him? Do you not love a book when you read something of
Christ in it? Are not the ordinances dear to you, because Christ is to be seen
through these Lattices? And do you not love christian assemblies, because Jesus
Christ walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks?

My dear Friend, I hope you truly belong to Christ, and will one day see his
face with joy. He is our priest, he is our surety, he is our advocate at the
right hand of the Father. O let us prize him, and praise him, to eternity. --
To the Lord's Almighty protection, and most gracious favor, I commit you,
remaining,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXXI.
My very affectionate, and dear friend,
I Hope there is an indissoluble knot between us that neither silence nor
distance can break in pieces; I mean the unity of the spirit; which will
outstand all carnal alliances, founded in blood or marriage; and all temporary
confederacies grounded upon interest or temper. Time often breaks the last, and
death ever desolves the first or these ties and communications. But spiritual
friendship grows by time, and is perfected by death; it lasts and holds for
ever. The time comes when there will be no friendship but spiritual friendship.
When Eve awoke out of Adam's side* how was he joyed in her? This is bone of my
bone, etc. But when they had sinned he bitterly accused her at the bar of God.
Such will be the end of all that jocund friendship of all unregenerate allies;
they will be divided at the bar of God, and no otherwise united, than as tares
are in the same bundle, whose nearness does help to consume one another.

But I hope, my dear friend, we are one spirit in Christ for ever: I hope we
are met in him through grace; shall meet with him in the clouds; and shall be
ever with him in heaven. In the mean time I condemn and abhor myself, that when
divine providence gave me a long wished for opportunity of seeing your face, I
was no more inward with you; and that I so foolishly lost the advantage I then
had of consulting and farthering your spiritual estate.

Sorry I am there was so little of heaven, so much of earthliness and carnality
in my conversation with you. And this I write with grief and shame. How often
have my bowels yearned toward your soul! that I have thought. O that you were
but near me, or by me! O that we had but an opportunity of discoursing together
of things pertaining to the kingdom of God! -- I had an opportunity; I say, I
had an opportunity. -- But it is gone, it is gone! and whether I shall ever
have the like again I know not. The Lord forgive me! Though I have not been my
brother's keeper, yet I will commit my brother to that God, who is able to keep
him from this present evil world; and from every evil work, unto life eternal.
-- The Lord, by his spirit, breathe into you better medita^ions than I could
possibly have suggested. I should have spoken to you; but yet I may speak for
you, and you for me, to that God who is with us both at the same time; and who
can bless us both out of the riches of his grace and goodness in Jesus Christ.
In whom I am,

Dear Sir, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXXII.
My dear Friend,
YOURS I received not till about a fortnight ago, for it lodged at Mursley. I
am not unmindful of you. I counsel you to sanctify sabbaths. Remember to keep
holy the sabbath, and that will be a means to keep you holy -- and pray
continually. Wrestle with God for the pardon of your sins. Confess them over
the head of the Scapegoat, Jesus Christ Beg for the spirit of application,
that you may apply Christ to yourself; apply the promises when you hear them,
or read them. The word does us good when it is applied, and providence do us
good when they are applied. The Lord teach us so to number our days, as to
apply our hearts unto wisdom! and so to hear, as we may apply our hearts to the
practice and obedience of the word.

I pray God carry on his work in your heart, that you may grow in grace, as you
grow in years. O! that in these dark and dangerous days, we may fly to our God
to hide us, cry to our God to help us; and he will be a present help in the
time of trouble.

I should be glad to hear any time from you of the case of your soul. Have a
special care of that. We must shortly put off these tabernacles; our souls will
return to God for their sentence. O that we may be changed by grace, before we
are changed by death! I hope we shall meet in our father's house where are many
mansions. The Lord be your guide, your keeper, and your comforter. -- Mine, and
my wife's and sister Wyat's love to you. I rest

Your* etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXXIII.
Dear Friend,
AS sweats are good for a man's body, if a man comes well out of them; so
afflictions are good for the soul, if a man come well out of them. I wish you
may come out of your sickness, and that you may come well out of it. It is good
for you that you have been afflicted, if you can say, I bless the Lord. I see
the vanity of the world, the uncertainty of the world and the approach of
judgment. It is good for you that you have been afflicted, if you have been
taught by it that Christ is best, and sin is worst. O! for the blood of the
everlasting covenant, to wash away my sins, and to deliver me from the wrath to
come. You come well out of your afflictions, if you are more serious, more
cautious, and more circumpect; more watchful and prayerful, more spiritual and
heavenly-minded.

Death is a good debt and must be paid. The clouds return after the rain. O
prepare carefully for your latter end. What time you have to spare from your
worldly occasions, spend in your soul concernments. Accustom yourself to
prayer, to good thoughts, to reading of good books, especially God's book.
Labor to be what all wish they had been when they come to die. Consider and
think of the best things, and keep the best company. -- In every thing aim at
God's glory, and your eternal salvation. -- As we have lived under one roof
together, I desire we may live in our heavenly Father's house together; and be
for ever with the Lord. No more, but hearty love from

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXXIV.
Dear Friend,
THE Lord be with you! The Lord shine upon you in the face of Christ. -- O seek
the face and favor of God. He that finds Christ, finds life; he finds the
sweetest of all blessings; he finds the pearl of greatest price. Christ is
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Sin will find us out,
if Christ do not hide us. But he spreads his wing, and calls us to come under
it. The Lord bring you under the wing of Christ! under covenant protection, my
dear friend, that your soul may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Beg not only pardon but purity of heart, desire a new nature, that you may
serve the Lord in newness of life. Watch and pray against sin; and every night
examine yourself how you have spent the day. Bless the Lord for what good he
has enabled you to do, and confess, and be humbled if you have thought or
spoke, or done any evil. Walk as in the sight of God, speak as in the hearing
of God; do all things as in his presence, who is our judge.

I commend you to the infinite love of God, and rest,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXXV.
Dear Friend,
I Desire your happiness in all respects, and that God who gives you health and
strength for your earthly calling, may enable you for the duties of your
heavenly calling; and that whilst your hand is in the world, your heart may be
in heaven.

I hope you do conscientiously observe God's sabbaths, and delight in his
ordinances, and that you experience the sweetness of communion with God, and of
his service, which is perfect freedom. I desire that you may continue in
well-doing, that you may be faithful to the death, that you may receive a crown
of life. To keep a conscience void of offense, must be your daily exercise, and
it shall be your daily comfort.

I hope you visit the throne of grace daily, and find prayer to be your chief
delight, and the best of your fare. Confess what you find amiss in yourself.
Beg pardon and sanctification. Endeavor to walk closely with God -- There is
nothing like close communion, and close walking with God. -- I should be glad
to hear of your soul's prosperity. Though I seldom write to you, you are not
out of my heart nor out of my prayers. My service to your good brother William,
of whose recovery I long to hear, and to your brother Samuel, to whom I thot'
to write, but at present want opportunity. -- The Lord Jesus be with you. In
him I am,

Your, etc. JOHN MASON.

LETTER XXXVI.
My loving Friend,
YOUR condition puts me in mind of a speech of Jacob. -- And now I must provide
for my own house also. I desire the Lord may dwell in your heart and in your
house, the patriarchs were wont, where they pitched, there to rear altars;
never accounting themselves settled till the worship of God was settled among
them.

My friend, if the Son make you free, then are you free indeed; and where the
spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. I hope you are in Christ, and have the
spirit of Christ dwelling in you. -- Then are you free from the law of sin and
death.

I desire your house may be a Bethel, not a Bethaven; a house of God, and not a
house of vanity. I desire that prayers and praises may there be ascending, and
mercies and blessings descending. He that provideth not for the bodies of his
family is worse than an infidel; he that provideth only for the bodies of his
family is no better than an infidel.

You will see that all that are within your gates keep holy the sabbath days.
That will make happy weekdays. -- The Lord bless you in your soul, and in your
body, in your person, and in your family; in your basket, and in your store; in
your going out, and in your coming in, from this time forth, and for ever more.
Amen.


