ALL IN A BUSTLE.

THE following Dramatic Trifle, being sketched in a hurry and intended merely
to answer a local purpose, has nothing to apprehend from the austerity of
Criticism; he, who would make a formal attack, upon a dialogue, which aims only
to raise a laugh at the whimsical incongruities of a few local perplexities,
would be the very QUIXOTTE of Critics; and the author of these pages would be
the last to tear a single sprig from the laurels obtained by such a victory.

ALL IN A BUSTLE: OR THE NEW HOUSE. A COMIC PRELUDE WRITTEN FOR THE OPENING OF
THE NEW THEATER IN NEW YORK. PERFORMED FOR THE FIRST TIME, ON MONDAY JAN. 29,
1798.

BY WILLIAM MILNS: AUTHOR of the COMET, etc. etc.

NEW YORK: Printed at the Literary Printing-Office, No. 29, Gold-Street. 1798.

[ Copy-Right secured.]

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Acting Manager, MR. HODGKINSON, Poet, MR. JOHNSON, Flanagan O'Flaharty, (an
Actor) MR. SIMPSON, Prompter, MR. MILLER.
The rest of the Performers personate themselves, viz.

MR. JEFFERSON, MR. MARTIN, MR. PRIGMORE, MR. TYLER, MR. HALLAM, Jun. MR. LEE,
MASTER STOCKWELL. MRS. HODGKINSON, MRS. JOHNSON, MRS. TYLER, MRS. BRETT, MRS.
COLLINS, MISS HARDING.
TWO CARPENTERS, etc.

ALL IN A BUSTLE: OR THE NEW HOUSE.
Scene, the Stage, just before the doors of the theater open. Enter the
Prompter and Jingle. Prompter. SIR Mr. Hodgkinson will be here directly.


Jingle. Hodgkinson is a good study is not he?


Prom. Nobody quicker sir --


Jin. Glad of it -- have a few lines here to open the theater, will immortalize
him --


Prom. Sir he is prepared with an address


Jin. Poo -- mere make shift -- because nothing better was offered him --


Prom. I am told it is a good thing sir -- written by a gentleman of approved
taste --


Jin. Mum for that -- not one new idea -- lay my existence of it -- these
things are out of your Sphere Mr. Prompter -- let him once see mine --


Prom. Here he comes sir.


(Enter the Manager.) Manager. Mr. Prompter -- come -- bustle -- we have not a
moment to spare -- who is that? (aside)


Prom. A gentleman has brought you some lines to open the theater with


Manag. Damn his lines.


Prom. No -- let the audience do that.


Jin. Sir -- your most obedient -- Mr. Hodgkinson I presume --


Manag. At your service sir.


Jin. Sir -- (takes his hand) I congratulate you on the opening this elegant
theater -- I am safely arrived, and knowing the barrenness of literary talent
in this country --


Manag. Sir you mistake --


Jin. Oh -- pardon me sir -- policy may dictate excuses -- but mum for that --
you know better


Prom. A modest fellow this (aside)


Jin. My dear fellow -- here -- lock yourself up ten minutes and study there --
all pith -- none of your coarse frothy stuff -- whipped syllabub every syllable:


Manag. Sir, I Have --


Jin. Come, come -- no excuses -- they will immortalize you -- I know they will
succeed -- hark'ye; read them to an old woman of sixty -- Moliere's plan you
know -- an old deaf nurse where I board -- liked them vastly --


Manag. Sir I -- ( eagerly)


Jin. No apologies between friends -- expensive establishment this -- want good
things -- dull stuff wont do -- increase of company -- lights expensive --
salaries raised -- people's expectations raised -- hopes of emolument raised.


Manag. Yes sir -- and if we stand talking here -- the gods will be upon us
before we are ready: and then there will be the devil of a dust raised -- about
our ears.


Enter Mrs. Hodgkinson. Mrs. H. Mr. Hodgkinson, will you be kind enough to
direct me to my dressing room -- for though I Have been in it two or three times, I
cannot find my way to it.


Manag. Go up the staircase my dear round that corner -- on the second story
turn to the left, and you will find a flight of stairs; go down them, and yours
is the fourth door on the right hand: but be careful which staircase you go
down, for if you take the wrong, you will lose yourself among the unfinished
apartments -- the prompter will conduct you.


Jin. Here sir -- another jeu d'esprit -- a serious --


Manag. Sir, I have no leisure now -- my dear do get rid of this poet for me
(turns away to give orders to the servants who are busy with the scenes.)


Mrs. Hodg. I will (she turns to Jingle) Sir, you will excuse me -- but --


Jin. A serious prologue Madam; written in quick measure.


Mrs. Hodg. A serious prologue in quick measure! very singular that.


Jin. Yes Madam and a comic epilogue in blank verse


Mrs. Hodg. And a comic epilogue in blank verse! more singular still.


Jin. You don't see the propriety of that now


Mrs. Hodg. I do not I confess.


Jin. I Am astonished -- no, I beg pardon -- I Am not astonished: these are
errors that a refined taste only can correct -- now Madam -- should not a
serious address he levelled at the passions! --


Mrs. Hodg. Certainly


Jin. And since the passions are impetuous the attacks should be violent -- and
how can that be accomplished, but by a rapidity of utterance, -- and what but
quick measure can trip over the tongue.


Mrs. Hodg. Ingenious at least sir, if not convincing.


Jin. Why are you ladies so persuasive? why have you such superior hold over
the passions? my Dear Madam merely from your volubility.


Mrs. Hodg. From our volubility only sir.


Jin. Solely Madam -- did you ever know a woman capable of sitting three
minutes comfortably without talking


Mrs. Hodg. I have known many such sir


Jin. Must have been deaf or dumb then


Mrs. Hodg. You are very polite sir


Jin. Facts are stubborn things Madam -- Experientia docet; nature fore saw the
evil and out of compassion to the ladies, as she gave them slippery tongues she
left them with smooth chins --


Mrs. Hodg. I don't understand you sir


Jin. Cannot you tell Madam why nature refused to give the ladies beards


Mrs. Hodg. Beards Sir!


Jin. I Will tell you Madam -- because they cannot hold their tongues long enough
to be shaved


Mrs. Hodg. Upon my word sir --


Jin. No general rule though without an exception -- knew two ladies myself that
had beards -- two old maids, one sixty five, the other seventy -- easily
accounted for; time who you know is your greatest enemy, had robbed them of
their teeth, and to prevent discovery they imposed silence on their tongues;
they shut them up in perpetual confinement -- settled a contract between the
nose and chin, to make the lips do the regular duty of strict jailors -- as
soon as nature perceived the danger of talking was over, she became bountiful,
and the harvest on their chins made ample compensation for the daurage the
mouth had sustained in the loss of its furniture.


Mrs. Hodg. If your doctrine is true sir, nature was very spiteful in
furnishing your chin; for if you are always as talkative as at present your
wind pipe must have been in frequent danger.


Jin. That Is right Madam, -- true woman -- retort your foibles upon us -- here,
have you been having all the talk to yourself for this half hour


Mrs. Hodg. I! sir having all the --


Jin. There again -- wont let me put in a word


Mrs. Hodg. Sir --


Jin. No fear of your having a beard Madam -- (he sees the manager turns short
round and follows him) now sir only give me your patient hearing and I will
read one of the principal scenes either of a Tragedy, Comedy or Farce -- I have
them all about me -- (takes them out of his pocket pulls out his spectacles and
puts them on.)


Manag. Sir, it is impossible -- you see how I am engaged -- if you will leave
them at my house, I will read them the first leisure moment.


Jin. Leave them at your house! (stares at him)


Manag. Yes in Fair Street.


Jin. You wrote the launch, Sir didn't you?


Manag. I did!


Jin. And you wrote the Man of Fortitude.


Manag. Yes.


Jin. And I suppose, after you have detained my plays a mouth or two, you would
be writing again?


M anag. Suppose I should?


Jin. Much obliged to you -- cannot leave my plays with any body -- fine
thoughts are worth stealing --


Manag. Sir, do you suspect!


Jin. Know you would -- (pulls off his spectacles)


Manag. Sir -- (in a passion)


Jin. Author cannot help it -- do it myself -- steal half my best things --


Manag. I don't doubt it -- (turns away in a pet)


Jin. (Turning short to Mrs. Hodg.) pick up a good thought Madam -- Strip it of
the author's language -- dress it up in my own -- wiredraw it a little for the
advantage of weak judgments -- and boldly claim the merit of originality.


Mrs. Hodg. But such thefts are easily detected, sir


Jin. Aye by one in a thousand -- Madam thinking is no part of modern
authorship -- the ancients have left us thoughts enough -- all we have to do is
to hammer them well, and lay them on like modern plate, as thin as possible on
any course materials.


Mrs. Hodg. Your ingenuity is equal to your politeness.


Jin. Took all my pieces to a man who has the general character of a
connoisseur, but there is no taste here Madam, would you believe it? he laughed
at the most pathetic parts of my Tragedy; yawn'd and made wry faces during the
greater part of the Comedy, and absolutely went to sleep all the Farce -- there
is want of taste for you Madam --


Mrs. Hodg. But sir you had better call on Mr. Hodgkinson Tomorrow? I cannot
stay any longer.


Jin. Take your advice Madam -- but hark ye -- a word in your ear -- he will be
damned mad -- that he missed my lines -- the finest you ever read -- only give
me five minutes --


Mrs. Hodg. Impossible sir --


Jin. Adieu -- call and read them to you another time -- but hark'ye shall not
trust my pieces out of my own hands -- Sir Fretful Plagiary for that, you
understand me.

(Exit.)
Mrs. Hodg. Writes himself!

(Jingle goes out on one side, the manager enters on the other)
Manag. Well, have you got rid of him?


Mrs. Hodg. With some difficulty.


Manag. No matter how -- so he is gone -- Mr. Hughes desire the stage door
keeper to admit no stranger whatever.


Mrs. Hodg. I want to try my voice, let us go through a short scene.


Manag. It must be a short one then.


Mrs. Hodg. I Will try an invocation to see whether the under tones are distinct.


Manag. Do -- and let it be extempore


Mrs. Hodg. Restore him -- merciful Gods (looks to the general box)


Manag. Ha! ha! ha! --


Mrs. Hodg. (Stops short) what do you laugh at?


Manag. My dear you forget where you are, you are not addressing the gods --
that is the general box, the gods are yonder removed at awful distance.


Mrs. Hodg. True -- I beg their godships pardon, well I Will suppose them there
and apologize -- pardon high and mighty gods, nor let your thun'dring vengeance
fall upon an humble suppliant for so venial an offense: for though my erring eye
mistook the awful seat of your abode, my aspiring heart, on adoration's wings,
was soaring to approach you gratefully to thank you for every favor past, and
humbly to implore your future approbation --


Manag. Very well my dear, very well


Mrs. Hodg. If I was to address the gods, for one quarter of an hour, my neck
would be so set, that I should not have the use of it again for a month.


Manag. Come then I Will tell you how you may try your voice without breaking
your neck.


Mrs. Hodg. How?


Manag. Why by singing a song.


Mrs. Hodg. With all my heart --

Great Shakespeare come! and spread around
Thy magic influence on this ground.
In humble adoration, lo!
We bend the willing knee;
Dear, hollowed shade, on us bestow
What nature gave to thee:
And when thou deign'st to view from high
Our trembling, thrilling, extacy.
Each ravished soul on wings of fire
Shall rise thy favored choir among.
Hark! hark! it is Shakespeare strikes the lyre
Stealing nature's sweetest song.
Awake my soul, these raptures prove,
From none but HIM such transports flow,
His touch can make all bosoms glow,
Inspiring harmony and love.
and now I Will go and see if I can find my dressing room.


Manag. Take care you don't mistake the slairs.

Exit. Mrs. Hodg. (A noise behind between the Prompter and O'Flaharty.)
Promp. Sir, I tell you Mr. Hodgkinson -- cannot be spoken with.


O'Fl. Boderation honey (pushes on with his wife) kape your pratty looking
daddles off that lady joy* or by my shoul I Will -- Oh your sarvant sir -- you
are not Mr. Hodgkinson the manager to be sure now are you?


Manag. I am -- but --


O'Fl. I did not guess that, do you see now --


Manag. And pray sir, who are you?


O'Fl. Oh! -- to be sure I Am not little Flanagan O'Flaharty -- just landed,
comfortably seaked and dry as a salt fish after a pleasant journey from dear
Tipperary.


Manag. And the lady?


O'Fl. Oh to be sure, she is not my wife honey.


Manag. And your business?


O'Fl. Business joy! -- to be sure you live in America and cannot guess now!


Manag. Sir, it is a busy time -- and I will thank you to tell your business as
briefly as possible?


O'Fl. As to our business, look you joy a man of your disarnment cannot see that
with both your eyes shut, why to be sure our business is not playing my dear.


Manag. you are actors then?


O'Fl. You have hit it honey.


Manag. To deal plainly with you.


O'Fl. Oh don't be after complimenting; as to a choice of parts do ye see --
we are not too delicate on that head! for my own part, look you -- Richard --
Macbeth -- Lare -- Hamlet Benedick -- and a few other such characters would do
to start with.


Manag. Sir many of those characters I fill myself.


O'Fl. Why aye, as you say -- a New York audience may have put up with a little
makeshift -- but let them once see me, my dare -- and to be sure they will not
find out the difference --


Manag. Oh no doubt.


O'Fl. And then to show you I Am not unrasonable -- you may set me down now --
for Falstaff -- Wapid -- Don Falix -- Romeo and Marplot -- for such second rate
characters to be sure now little O'Flaharty would not astonish them --


Manag. But I tell you sir


O'Fl. Oh now -- don't be apologizing -- my dare -- I would not refuse to play
such paltry characters as paping Tom -- Lingo or even Shelty -- joy -- now to
be sure you will not call that condacension --


Manag. Damn it sir, I tell you --


O. Fl. But my dare -- don't be for putting me into any of your characters that
have nothing to recommend them but the brogue -- I never could put the damned
brogue upon my tongue in my life.


Manager. Sir.


O. Fl. Oh none of your palaver -- little OF Flaharty, is not to be humbug'd,
my dare -- you may give your brogues to those who cannot speak pure English --
You may play them yourself joy; I Am for your jonteel line honey.


Lady. And as for me, Sir.


Manag. For God's sake, Madam!


Lady. You may clap me down for Juliet -- Lady Macbeth -- Beatrice -- Lady
Townley -- Desdemona -- Lady Racket -- Alicia -- and a few of that sort of
things.


Manag. Madam, once for all, I must tell you -- our company is full, and as for
ladies, there are more already than I can possibly find parts to satisfy.


O'Fl. Now cannot you be easy.


Manag. Sir -- Madam.


O'Fl. Oh, don't be apologizing now.


Manag. Damnation -- here John -- show this Gentleman and Lady the door.


Nay Sir -- I have no time.


O'Fl. Suppose I give you a fane in Macbeth.


Manag. I will not be interrupted Sir -- and if you will not leave me, I must
leave you. (Going.)


O'Fl. How damned fond you are of talking my dare; but since you will have all
the palaver to yourself, I Will call on you again tomorrow. Your sarvant.

(Goes out with his wife.)
Manag. Who the devil would be a manager.


(Comes in again.) O'Fl. One word, honey.


Manag. Damnation.


O'Fl. You could not lend me five dollars for a few days?


Manag, I have no money to lend, Sir.


O'El. I Will pay you out of the profits of my benefit, honey.


Manag. Sir I desire you will leave me.


O'Fl. What Sir. -- Would you be after putting an affront upon a jontleman?


Manag. Leave me Sir.


O'Fl. Oh, oh, to be sure, little O'Flaharty wont show you what good breeding
is -- if you will not engage me, my dear, you shall sight me.


Manag. Any thing to get rid of you -- any thing another time.


O'Fl. To be sure, I wont show you what a coward is.

(Exit.)
Enter Mrs Collins, followed by Mr Prigmore. Mrs. Collins. Pray, Mr.
Hodgkinson, why am I canted up into a three pair of stairs dressing room?


Manag. My dear Madam, I have done all for the best, but you see it is
impossible to please every body.


Mrs. C. Sir, if I am to dance up and down three pair of stairs, at every
trifling change of dress where am I to find breath to go through my part?


Manag. Madam you must be satisfied for to night, at least, this is no time to
make alterations.


Mrs. C. As to that, Sir, I am as soon satisfied as another; but I don't like
partialities.

(Exit.)
During this scene, Mr. Prigmore is measuring the stage, by walking across it.


Manag. Well Prig -- What are you at now?


Prig. Practicing the tread of the stage. I expect some of us, forgetting where
we are, shall think we have made our exit, before we have half crossed it; for
instance, now in one of my characters -- I am standing on this side; four
strides, and three squints at the gallery, at the other theater, carry me
completely off -- egad, you see, here, it would leave me right in the center.


Manag. Well, that would be no bad joke; for you might stand and make pretty
faces at the gallery: They love to see your face, Prig.


Prig. Make faces at the gallery, that is a good joke -- why damme, where would
be the use of that: at the other house, indeed, a well made up face stood a
chance to be noticed: but here, damme, we shall all look like wax-dolls, through
the diminishing end of a telescope.

(Exit.)
Enter Mr. Hallam jun. Mr. Hal. Sir: Mr. Hogg says, if the chimney in his
dressing room is not altered, he shall be smoke dried in a month like a side of
bacon.


Manag. There Is a pretty piece of gammon for you.


Mr. Hal. And here is the bill of the coals just laid in, Mr. Cant's compliments
and you must send him the money.


Manag. Why they an't all delivered are they?


Mr. H. The last load came in this afternoon, Sir.


Manag. He is in a confounded hurry, tell him to call on Mr. Dunlap.


John. He says he cannot wait, he don't like you player folks -- he will not have
dealing with the unrighteous; he has committed a great sin in selling coals for
such an ungodly use, and he fears he shall be read out of the conventicle for
it -- he therefore wants the money directly, that he may close the affair, and
pacify his conscience.


Manag. Damn his conscience -- tell him he shall wait our convenience for his
impudence.

(Exit Mr. H.)
Enter Mr. Johnson. Mr. Johnson. Mr. Hodgkinson, do you know that it is within
half an hour of the time to open the doors.


Manag. Yes -- and every body is in a bustle and nobody ready.


Mrs. Johnson above behind the scenes, calls loud, as in a fright.


Mrs. Johnson. Mr. Johnson! Mr. Johnson!


Johnson. Hark! -- was not that Mrs. Johnson's voice?


Manag. It sounded like it -- where can she be?


Mrs. Johnson. Mr. Johnson! (calling again.)


Mr. Johnson. My God, is that you -- where are you?


Mrs. Johnson. Here.


Mr. Johnson. Here! where?


Mrs. Johnson. I don't know -- I have lost myself --


Mr. Johnson. Lost yourself -- bless my soul!


Manag. Ha! ha! ha! -- there she is, in the upper carpenter's gallery.


Mr. John. How the plague could she get there.

(Exit.)
Enter Prompter. Prompter. If the carpenters don't alter those bells I shall
never be able to give the thunder and lightning proper warning.


Manag. Then Sir, why did not you look after those things in time.


Enter Mr. Lee. Mr. Lee Where am I to put all these properties, Sir?


Manag. Why in the property room to be sure.


Mr. Lee The property room is full of carpenter's lumber, Sir.


Manag. Well, well, don't plague me about it just now, put them any where for
the present.


Enter Mr. Jefferson. Mr. Jeff. All is in confusion above, Sir. the sky and the
sea have run foul of each other -- the garden scene has got entangled over the
clouds! and trying to get them loose the glass in the green-house has cut off
the horns of the new moon, and scratched the clouds so that they look like
flying dumplings.


Manag. Why what the devil has got into the people -- where are the painters
and machinists that they don't look better after things?


Mr. Jeff. They complain that so many people go above, they are perpetually
hindered, and if a stop is not put to it, every thing will be spoiled -- The
black wench that attends the three pair of stairs dressing room, has been
walking over the new clouds and left all the marks of her feet upon them, she
took herself for Juno I suppose.


Manag. I Will make her find out she is more like Beelzebub.


Mr. Jeff. The clouds not being dry down she slipped and measured her whole
length -- smeared the seven stars and swept away half the full moon with her
petticoats; in scrambling to get up she scratched the new Comet so unmercifully
that it looks like a worn out traveller just arrived off a 500 years journey --
talk of Juno -- Juno never did so much mischief in the heavens with all her
spite as that wench has done by accident.


Manag. Why don't they kick every body down stairs that has no business there?


Mr. Jeff. Why sir, there was Miss Harding and little Sam Stockwell when I came
down, making a sleigh of Juno's celestial Car, which Cicery has just finished
painting.

(A great scream is heard and the Car is let down)
Manag. What the devil's the matter now?


Stockw. The Carpenters have loosened the cords and let us down sir.


Mr. Jeff. Ha! ha! ha!


Manag. Thy served you right -- you had no business there, fasten the cords
Carpenters, leave them where they are till I liberate them -- I Will teach them
to go a sleighing in the clouds.

(One of the Carpenters calls out from the upper gallery to another below on
the opposite side.)
Carp. Hallo -- Jack.


Carp. What do you want.


Carp. Pull the rope belonging to that tackle between the first and second
entrance -- pull it hard and make haste, some of the gentlemen are waiting for
the trunk fastened to the end of it.


Carp. I Will trundle it up to you in a jiffy --

(He takes the wrong rope and rings the great bell violently)
Manag. What the devil are you at now?


Mr. Jeff. The thick headed booby has got hold of the bell rope instead of the
tackle rope.


Manag. Do my dear fellow, go and stop his noise.

(Exit. Jeff.)
(Enter Mr. Martin.) Manag. Well Jack what is the news with you?


Mr. Mart. I Have been looking after those things and noseems to be right,


Manag. Right -- why damn me nothing can be right here, every body seems to be
doing every thing but what they ought to do -- the Theater is like the Tower of
Babel, there is nothing but confusion of tongues in it.


Mr. Mart. As the porter was bringing St. Paul's Church upon his shoulder, the
clumsy dog ran it through an Apothecaries window and broke a number of show
glasses -- there sir St. Paul lies in the shop drenched in physic, and the
apothecary swears he will keep St. Paul as a pledge; till you pay the damage.


Manag. I Will forfeit the careless rascal for it.


Mr. Mart. And then here is the rain, is so dry it rattles no louder than a fall
of snow -- and the lightning is so damp it wont flash, and the thunder is out
of order, it makes no more noise than a gentle zephyr, so I sent Tom for the
old thunder from the other house, his foot slipped, the lightning got scattered
about and is so wet that you might as well try to flash with a snow-ball, the
thunder-balls rolled down a cellar kitchen overset a black woman's child and
tumbled into the teawater cask, her husband swore the owner of the thunder
should pay for the water, for his wife's tongue was too turbulent already, and
he would be damned before she should drink thunder water; upon this his wife snapt
her fingers at him, dipped a quart mug into it and drank it off, threw a second
into her husband's face -- cursed him for a sneaking blockhead, kicked one of
the thunder balls against his shins, and threw a handful of lightning in his
eyes.


A great scream is heard behind.


Manag. What next? --


Enter Mr. Jefferson, laughing. Manag. What Is in the wind now.


Mr. Jeff. One of the ladies, I will not mention names, dressing her hair, her wig
I mean, laid it down nicely finished on a chair; who should sneak in but
Chance, Mr. Cooper's dog, and the mischievous cur taking a fancy to it, walked
off with it; the lady scream'd, Chance took to his heels, and the dressers are
now in full chase after him to recover the stolen property.


Enter Mr. Tyler. Mr. Tyler. The springs of that trap, the man says, are so
weak, that the first ghost that ascends, will stand a chance to break his neck.


Manag. My dear fellow, that cannot be, we'll call the man, and examine it --
here John, tell the carpenters to open that trap door.


The trap-door opens and as they are looking down Mrs. Tyler calls out below.
Mrs. Tyler. Mr. Hodgkinson.


Manag. What now, the theatre's haunted, I believe -- above, below, we are
attacked in every direction.


Mr. Tyler. It is Mrs. Tyler's ghost, I believe, by the voice.


Manag. It comes from below sure enough what can she be doing there?


Mrs. Tyler. Mr. Hodgkinson, for God's sake, send somebody to get me out.

(He looks down and sees her.)
Manag. Get you out Madam! how in the name of wonder got you in.


Mrs. Tyler. Coming from my dressing room, I missed my way I suppose, for
instead of getting on the stage, I have found my way under it, you see.


Manag. Prompter, ring the bell for the trap. (Aside.) The bell rings and the
trap comes up with her upon it. There Tyler, do you think it will bear a ghost
now?


Mr. Tyler. All my doubts have vanished.


Enter Prompter. Promp. The doors are opening, Sir.


Manag. Down with the curtain then.


Mr. Tyler. Aye -- or like Sampson, the Philistines will be upon us.


Manag. Every one to his dressing room, I Will just welcome our old friends in
our new house, and then follow you.

(Exit all except the Manager.) May your brows, oh ye Fair, never with sorrow
be clouded,
And our efforts to please, keep our boxes thus crowded;
May you, oh ye critics, abounding with out,
Nightly praise our attempts from an overflowing pit;
Above all, O, ye Gods, we implore without raillery
That your smiles and half dollars support our new gallery;
Our best talents and time we devote to your will,
That you in return may our treasury fill;
May our errors still meet with your quick absolution,
And this theater thrive like the New Constitution.

FINIS.

