A COLLECTION OF PLAYS AND POEMS, BY THE LATE COL. ROBERT MUNFORD, OF
MECKLENBURG COUNTY, IN THE STATE OF VIRGINIA. NOW FIRST PUBLISHED TOGETHER.

PETERSBURG: PRINTED BY WILLIAM PRENTIS. M.DCC.XCVIII.

CONTENTS.
I. Preface page 5 II. The Candidates, a Comedy in three acts page 9 III. The
Patriots, in five acts page 53 IV. A translation of the first Book of Ovid's
Metamorphoses in English verse page 133 V. The Ram, a humorous poem, written
about the time when the ladies wore very high headdresses, being a true story
page 165 VI. First letter from the Devil to his son page 194 VII. Second letter
from the same to the same page 196 VIII. Answer to the foregoing page 197 IX. A
poem in answer to one, entitled, "The Winter piece page 199 X. Colin and Celia;
a pastoral poem page 204 XI. A Dream page 205 XII. A Patriotic Song page 206
PREFACE.
THE following pages are given to the world by a son, whose filial affection
may perhaps have induced him to entertain too high an opinion of the merit of
his father's productions; but who heartily owns, his motives to the publication
were, a conviction that the work is calculated to afford considerable amusement
and instruction, and a warm desire to rescue the memory of a father from
oblivion.

Though to all they may not appear in the light in which they do to me, as
precious memorials of that wit and poetical genius which once animated the
breast of him who is now forever laid in the silent tomb, and who once was the
delight of his friends and family; yet many, I hope, when they read this work,
will remember a departed friend, and mourn the loss of the man while they enjoy
the humor of the poet. All I trust will here find abundant subjects of
merriment and diversion.

The author appears to have thoroughly understood the true points of ridicule
in human characters, and to have drawn them with great accuracy and variety in
his comedies. The piece entitled, The Candidates, is intended to laugh to scorn
the practice of corruption, and falsehood; of which too many are guilty in
electioneering; to teach our countrymen to despise the arts of those who meanly
attempt to influence their votes by any thing but merit. -- The play of the
Patriots is a picture of real and pretended patriots; by which the reader may
perceive the difference between them, may learn to honor and reward the true,
and to treat the false with infamy and contempt. If any construction should be
put upon it as a satire on the conduct of America in the late revolution, the
whole tenor of the author's political conduct will exempt him from the
imputation of such an intention. He entered warmly into the principles of the
friends of America, he ^oldly fought in her defense, and proved his attachment
to her cause not by words only, but by deeds. The play itself also speaks a
different language; and evidently proves it was written in ridicule of
political hypocrites, and not of the true friends of their country.

With respect to the other poems, I believe the translation of Ovid will be
found to be very correct and highly poetical. The author intended, if he had
lived, to translate the whole work, but death put an end to his design. The
smaller poems I submit to the reader, without saying any thing of their merit,
as I wish not to forestall a pleasure, or to raise too great expectations.

With these short observations, gentle reader, I bid thee adieu; with a sincere
wish that the work before thee may afford thee rational amusement.

WILLIAM MUNFORD.

THE CANDIDATES; OR, THE HUMORS OF A VIRGINIA ELECTION. A COMEDY, IN THREE
ACTS.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Candidates for the office of delegates to the general assembly.
Sir John Toddy, Mr. Wou'dbe, Mr. Strutabout, Mr. Smallhopes,
Gentlemen Justices.
Mr. Julip, Capt. Paunch,
Mr. Worthy, formerly a delegate, but now declines. Freeholders.
Guzzle, Twist, Stern, Prize,
Ralph^, Wou'dbe's servant. Jack, a tool to Mr. Strutabout. Ned, the same to
Mr. Smallhopes. Freeholders' wives.
Mrs. Guzzle, Lucy Twist, Catharine Stern, Sarah Prize,

Freeholders, Country girls, etc.

PROLOGUE.
BY A FRIEND.
LADIES and gentlemen, tonight you will see
A bard delighting in satiric glee;
In merry scenes his biting tale unfold,
And high to Folly's eye the mirror hold:
Here eager candidates shall call for votes,
And bawling voters louder stretch their throats:
Here may you view, in groups diverting, joined
The poor and wealthy rabble of mankind;
All who deserve the lash, the lash will find.
Here characters, whose names are now unknown,
Shall shine again, as in their spheres they shone;
While some may make malicious explanation,
And know them all still living in the nation.
If any present, say, fie, shameless bard!
Have thou for decency no more regard
Than at thy betters, thus to make a stand,
And boldly point out meanness, contraband,
Depreciating the wisdom of the land?
Though such, the wondrous sympathy of wits,
That every fool will wear the cap that fits,
I boldly answer, how could he mean you,
Who, when he wrote, about you nothing knew?
The state of things was such, in former times,
'Ere wicked kings were punished for their crimes*
Then strove the candidates to gain their seats
Most heartily, with drinking bouts, and treats;
The meanest vices all the people stained,
And drunkenness, and monarchy both reigned,
With such strong cause his anger to engage,
How could our Bard restrain satiric rage?
But, God forbid, its edge should now apply,
Or on our race-field, when you cast an eye
You there a home-election -- should espy.
Science and virtue, now are wider spread,
And crown with dignity, fair Freedom's head.
We only pray this satire never be just,
Save when applied to other times, and trust
Its keenness only, a rememb'rancer,
And guard from future evils, may appear.
If, after this, objections should remain,
The mot^ve's envy, consciousness disdain,
Or any thing, except the poet's want
Of sense, which no true publisher will grant.
Yet virtue i^ not in our story lost,
Even then, Virginians could much virtue boast.
With plaudits, therefore, and free laughter own
Virginia's first and only comic son;
Ah! could the bard, rejoicing, raise his head
To hear his praise! -- Alas! the bard is dead.
THE CANDIDATES, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Mr. Wou'dbe's house.
Enter Wou'dbe with a news-paper in his hand. Wou'dbe. I AM very sorry our good
old governor Botetourt has left us. He well deserved our friendship, when
alive, and that we should for years to come, with gratitude, remember his mild
and affable deportment. Well, our little world will soon be up, and very busy
toward our next election. Must I again be subject to the humors of a fickle
crowd? Must I again resign my reason, and be naught but what each voter
pleases? Must I cajole, fawn, and wheedle, for a place that brings so little
profit?


Enter Ralpho. Ralpho. Sir John Toddy is below, and if your honor is at
leisure, would beg to speak to you.


Wou'dbe. My compliments to Sir John, and tell him, I shall be glad of his
company. So -- Sir John, some time ago, heard me say I was willing to resign my
seat in the house to an abler person, and he comes modestly to accept of it.


Enter Sir John Toddy. Sir John. Mr. Wou'dbe, your most obedient servant, sir;
I am proud to find you well. I hope you are in good health, sir?


Wou'dbe. Very well, I am obliged to you, Sir John. Why, Sir John, you surely
are practicing the grimace and compliments you intend to make use of among the
freeholders in the next election, and have introduced yourself to me with the
self-same commonplace expressions that we candidates adopt when we intend to
wheedle a fellow out of his vote -- I hope you have no scheme upon me, Sir John?


Sir John. No, sir, upon my honor, sir, it was punctually to know how your
lady and family did, sir, 'pon honor, sir, it was.


Wou'dbe. You had better be more sparing of your honor at present, Sir John;
for, if you are a candidate, whenever you make promises to the people that you
cannot comply with, you must say upon honor, otherwise they will not believe you.


Sir John. Upon honor, sir, I have no thought to set up for a candidate,
unless you say the word.


Wou'dbe. Such condescension from you, Sir John, I have no reason to expect:
you have my hearty consent to do as you please, and if the people choose you
their Representative, I must accept of you as a colleague.


Sir John. As a colleague, Mr. Wou'dbe! I was thinking you did not intend to
stand a poll, and my business, sir, was to get the favor of you to speak a
good word for me among the people.


Wou'dbe. I hope you have no occasion for a trumpeter, Sir John? If you have,
I Will speak a good word to you, and advise you to decline.


Sir John. Why, Mr. Wou'dbe, after you declined, I thought I was the next
fittenest man in the county, and Mr. Wou'dbe, if you would be ungenerous, though
you are a laughing man, you would tell me so.


Wou'dbe. It would be ungenerous indeed, Sir John, to tell you what the people
could never be induced to believe. But I Will be ingenuous enough to tell you,
Sir John, if you expect any assistance from me, you will be disappointed, for I
cannot think you the fittenest man I know.


Sir John. Pray, sir, who do you know besides? Perhaps I may be thought as fit
as your honor. But, sir, if you are for that, the hardest fend off: damn me,
if I care a farthing for you; and so, your servant, sir. Exit Sir John.


Wou'dbe. So, I have got the old knight, and his friend Guzzle, I suppose,
against me, by speaking so freely; but their interest, I believe, has not
weight enough among the people, for me to lose any thing, by making them my
enemies. Indeed, the being intimate with such a fool as Sir John, might tend
more to my discredit with them, for the people of Virginia have too much sense
not to perceive how weak the head must be that is always filled with liquor.
Ralpho! --


Enter Ralpho. Ralpho. Sir, what does your honor desire?


Wou'dbe. I Am going into my library, and if any gentleman calls, you may
introduce him to me there.


Ral. Yes, sir. But, master, as election-times are coming, I wish you would
remember a poor servant, a little.


Wou'dbe. What do you want?


Ral. Why, the last suit of clothes your honor gave me is quite worn out. Look
here, (sh^wing his elbows) the insigns, (as I have heard your honor say, in
one of your fine speeches) the insigns of faithful service. Now, methinks, as
they that set up for bur^^sses, cut a dash, and have rare sport, why might not
their servants have a little decreation?


Wou'dbe. I understand you, Ralpho, you wish to amuse yourself, and make a
figure among the girls this Election, and since such a desire is natural to the
young, and innocent if not carried to excess, I am willing to satisfy you; you
may therefore, have the suit I pulled off yesterday, and accept this present as
an evidence that I am pleased with your diligence and fidelity, and am ever
ready to reward it.


Exit Wou'dbe. Ralpho. God bless your honor! what a good master! who would not
do every thing to give such a one pleasure? But, e'gad, it is time to think of
my new clothes: I Will go and try them on. Gadso! this figure of mine is not
reconsiderable in its delurements, and when I Am dressed out like a gentleman,
the girls, I Am a thinking, will find me desistible. Exit.


SCENE II. A porch of a tavern: a Courthouse on one side, and an high road
behind.
Captain Paunch, Ned, and several freeholders discovered. Ned. Well, gentlemen,
I suppose we are all going to the barbecue together.


Capt. P^^^ch. Indeed, sir, I can assure you, I have no such inten^ion.


Ned. Not go to your friend Wou'dbe's treat! He Is such a pretty fellow, and you
like him so well, I wonder you will not go to drink his liquor.


Capt. P. Aye, aye, very strange: but your friends Strutabout and Smallhopes, I
like so little as never to take a glass from them, because I shall never pay
the price which is always expected for it, by voting against my conscience: I
therefore don't go, to avoid being asked for what I will not give.


Ned. A very disteress motive, truly, but for the matter of that, you have not so
much to boast of your friend Wou'dbe, if what I have been told of him is true;
for I have heard say, he and the fine beast of a gentleman, Sir John Toddy,
have joined interess. Mr. Wou'dbe, I was creditly 'formed, was known for to
say, he wouldn't serve for a burgess, unless Sir John was elected with him.


1 st Freeholder. What Is that you say, neighbor? has Mr. Wou'dbe and Sir John
joined interest?


Ned. Yes, they have; and ant there a clever fellow for ye? a rare burgess you
will have, when a fellow gets in, who will go drunk, and be a sleeping in the
house! I wish people wouldn't pretend for to hold up their heads so high, who
have such friends and associates. There Is poor Mr. Smallhopes, who is not as
much attended to, is a very proper gentleman, and is no drunkard, and has no
drunken companions.


1 st Freeholder. I don't believe it. Mr. Wou'dbe's a cleverer man than that,
and people ought to be ashamed to went such slanders.


2 d Freeholder. So I say: and as we are of one mind, let us go strait, and let
Mr. Wou'dbe know it.


Exeunt two Freeholders. 3 d Freeholder. If Mr. Wou'dbe did say it, I will not
vote for him, that is sartain.


4 th Freeholder. Are you sure of it, neighbor?


(To Ned.) Ned. Yes, I am sure of it: do you think I Would speak such a thing without
having good authority?


4 th Freeholder. I Am sorry for it; come neighbor, (to the 3 d Freeholder) this
is the worst news that I Have heard for a long time. Exeunt 3 d and 4 th
Freeholder.


5 th Freeholder. I Am glad to hear it. Sir John Toddy is a clever open-hearted
gentleman as I ever knew, one that wont turn his back upon a poor man, but will
take a cheerful cup with one as well as another, and it does honor to Mr.
Wou'dbe to prefer such a one, to any of your whifflers who han't the heart to
be generous, and yet despise poor folks. Huzza! for Mr. Wou'dbe and for Sir
John Toddy.


6 th Freeholder. I think so too, neighbor. Mr. Wou'dbe, I always thought, was
a man of sense, and had larning, as they call it, but he did not love diversion
enough, I like him the better for it. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe and Sir John Toddy.


Both. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe and Sir John Toddy. Wou'dbe and Toddy, for ever,
boys! Exeunt.


Capt. Paunch. The man that heard it is mistaken, for Mr. Wou'dbe never said it.


Ned. I Will lay you a bowl he did.


Capt. P. Done.


Ned. Done, sir, Oh! Jack Sly, Jack Sly.


Jack. (without) Halloa.


Enter Jack, saying, who called me? what is your business? Ned. (winking to
Jack). I have laid a bowl with the Captain here, that Mr. Wou'dbe did say, that
he would not serve as a burgess, unless Sir John Toddy was elected with him.


Jack. I have heard as much, and more that is little to his credit. He has hurt
us more than he will do us good for one while. It Is his doings our levies are so
high.


Capt. P. Out upon you, if that is your proof, fetch the bowl. Why, gentlemen,
if I had a mind, I could say as much and more of the other candidates. But,
gentlemen, it is not fair play: don't abuse our friend, and we'll let yours
alone. Mr. Wou'dbe is a clever gentleman, and perhaps so are the rest: let
every man vote as he pleases, and let us raise no stories to the prejudice of
either.


Ned. Damn me, if I don't speak my mind. Wou'dbe shall not go if I can help it, by
God, for I boldly say, Mr. Wou'dbe has done us more harm, than he will ever do
us good, (raising his voice very high). Exeunt into the house.


Jack. So say I. Exit after him.


Capt. P. Go along: bawl your hearts out: nobody will mind you, I hope. Well, I
rejoice that Mr. Wou'dbe is determined still to serve us. If he does us no
good, he will do us no harm. Mr. Strutabout would do very well if he was not
such a coxcomb. As for Smallhopes, I Would as soon send to New Market, for a
burgess, as send him, and old Sir John loves tipple too well: egad, I Will give
Wou'dbe my vote, and throw away the other. Exit.


SCENE III. Wou'dbe's house.
Enter Wou'dbe, looking at a letter. Wou'dbe. This note gives me information,
that the people are much displeased with me for declaring in favor of Sir John
Toddy. Who could propagate this report, I know not, but was not this abroad,
something else would be reported, as prejudicial to my interest; I must take an
opportunity of justifying myself in public.


Enter Ralpho. Ralpho. Mr. Strutabout waits upon your honor.


Wou'dbe. Desire him to walk in.


Enter Mr. Strutabout. Strutabout. Mr. Wou'dbe, your servant. Considering the
business now in hand, I think you confine yourself too much at home. There are
several little reports circulating to your disadvantage, and as a friend, I
would advise you to show yourself to the people, and endeavor to confute them.


Wou'dbe. I believe, sir, I am indebted to my brother candidates, for most of
the reports that are propagated to my disadvantage, but I hope, Mr. Strutabout
is a man of too much honor, to say any thing in my absence, that he cannot
make appear.


Strutabout. That you may depend on, sir. But there are some who are so intent
upon taking your place, that they will stick at nothing to obtain their ends.


Wou'dbe. Are you in the secret, sir?


Strutabout. So far, sir, that I have had overtures from Mr. Smallhopes and his
friends, to join my interest with their's, against you. This, I rejected with
disdain, being conscious that you were the properest person to serve the
county; but when Smallhopes told me, he intended to prejudice your interest by
scattering a few stories among the people, to your disadvantage, it raised my
blood to such a pitch, that had he not promised me to be silent, I believe I
should have chastised him for you myself.


Wou'dbe. If, sir, you were so far my friend, I am obliged to you: though
whatever report he is the author of, will, I am certain, gain little credit
with the people.


Strutabout. I believe so; and therefore, if you are willing, we'll join our
interests together, and soon convince the fellow, that by attacking you he has
injured himself.


Wou'dbe. So far from joining with you, or any body else, or endeavoring to
procure a vote for you, I am determined never to ask a vote for myself, or
receive one that is unduly obtained.


Enter Ralpho. Ral. Master, rare news, here is our neighbor Guzzle, as drunk as
ever Chief Justice Cornelius was upon the bench.


Wou'dbe. That Is no news, Ralpho: but do you call it rare news, that a creature
in the shape of man, and endued with the faculties of reason, should so far
debase the workmanship of heaven, by making his carcass a receptacle for such
pollution?


Ralpho. Master, you are hard upon neighbor Guzzle: our Justices gets drunk,
and why not poor Guzzle? But, sir, he wants to see you.


Wou'dbe. Tell him to come in. (exit Ralpho). All must be made welcome now.


Re-enter Ralpho and Guzzle, with an empty bottle. Guzzle. Ha! Mr. Wou'dbe, how
is it?


Wou'dbe. I Am something more in my senses than you, John, though not so sensible
as you would have me, I suppose.


Guzzle. If I can make you sensible how much I want my bottle filled, and how
much I shall love the contents, it is all the senses I desire you to have.


Ralpho. If I may be allowed to speak, neighbor Guzzle, you are wrong; his
honor sits up for a burgess, and should have five senses at least.


Guzzle. Five senses! how, what five?


Ralpho. Why, neighbor, you know, eating, drinking, and sleeping are three;
the other two are best known to myself.


Wou'dbe. I Am sorry Mr. Guzzle, you are so ignorant of the necessary
qualifications of a member of the house of burgesses.


Guzzle. Why, you old dog, I knew before Ralpho told me. To convince you,
eating, drinking and sleeping, are three; fighting and lying are to others.


Wou'dbe. Why fighting and lying?


Guzzle. Why, because you are not fit for a burgess, unless you will fight;
suppose a man that values himself upon boxing, should stand in the lobby, ready
cocked and prim'd, and knock you down, and bung up both your eyes for a
fortnight, you would be ashamed to show your face in the house, and be living at
our expense all the time.


Wou'dbe. Why lying?


Guzzle. Because, when you have been at Williamsburg, for six or seven weeks,
under pretense of serving your county, and come back, says I to you, what news?
none at all, says you; what have you been about? says I, -- says you -- and so
you must tell some damned lie, sooner than say you have been doing nothing.


Wou'dbe. No, Guzzle, I Will make it a point of duty to dispatch the business,
and my study to promote the good of my county.


Guzzle. Yes, damn it, you all promise mighty fair, but the devil a bit do you
perform; there is Strutabout, now, he will promise to move mountains. He Will make
the rivers navigable, and bring the tide over the tops of the hills, for a vote.


Strutabout. You may depend, Mr. Guzzle, I Will perform whatever I promise.


Guzzle. I don't believe it, damn me if I like you.


looking angry. Wou'dbe. Don't be angry, John, let our actions hereafter be the
test of our inclinations to serve you.


Exit Strutabout. Guzzle. Agreed, Mr. Wou'dbe, but that fellow that slunk off
just now, I Have no opinion of.


Wou'dbe. (Looking about) what, is Mr. Strutabout gone? why, surely, Guzzle,
you did not put him to flight?


Guzzle. I suppose I did, but no matter, (holding up his bottle, and looking at
it,) my bottle never was so long a filling in this house, before; surely,
there is a leak in the bottom, (looks at it again).


Wou'dbe. What have you got in your bottle, John, a lizard?


Guzzle. Yes, a very uncommon one, and I want a little rum put to it, to
preserve it.


Wou'dbe. Hav'n't you one in your belly, John?


Guzzle. A dozen, I believe, by their twisting, when I mentioned the rum.


Wou'dbe. Would you have rum to preserve them, too?


Guzzle. Yes, yes, Mr. Wou'dbe, by all means; but, why so much talk about it,
if you intend to do it, do it at once, man, for I am in a damnable hurry.


Wou'dbe. Do what? who are to be burgesses, John?


Guzzle. Who are to be what? (looking angry).


Wou'dbe. Burgesses, who are you for?


Guzzle. For the first man that fills my bottle: so Mr. Wou'dbe, your servant.
Exit Guzzle.


Wou'dbe. Ralpho, go after him, and fill his bottle.


Ralpho. Master, we ought to be careful of the rum, else 'twill not hold out,
(aside) it is always a feast or a famine with us; master has just got a little
Jamaica for his own use, and now he must spill it, and spare it till there is
not a drop left. Exit.


Wou'dbe. (pulling out his watch.) It Is now the time a friend of mine has
appointed for me to meet the freeholders at a barbecue; well, I find, in order
to secure a seat in our august senate, it is necessary a man should either be a
slave or a fool; a slave to the people, for the privilege of serving them, and
a fool himself, for thus begging a troublesome and expensive employment.

To sigh, while toddy-toping sots rejoice,
To see you paying for their empty voice,
From morn to night your humble head decline,
To (...) an honor that is justly thine,
I^ (...) a fool, who is yours at this day's treat,
And next another's, if another's meat,
Is all the bliss a candidate acquires,
In all his wishes, or his vain desires.

Exit. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A race-field, a bullock, and several hogs barbecued.
Twist, Stern, Prize, Lucy, Catharine, and Sarah, sitting on four fence rails.
Twist. Well, gentlemen, what do you think of Mr. Strutabout, and Mr.
Smallhopes? it seems one of the old ones declines, and the other, I believe,
might as well, if what neighbor Sly says, is true.


Stern. Pray, gentlemen, what plausible objection have you against Mr. Wou'dbe?
he is a clever civil gentleman as any, and as far as my poor weak capacity can
go, he is a man of as good learning, and knows the punctilios of behaving
himself, with the best of them.


Prize. Wou'dbe, for sartin, is a civil gentleman, but he cannot speak his mind
so boldly as Mr. Strutabout, and commend me to a man that will speak his mind
freely; -- I say.


Lucy. Well, commend me to Mr. Wou'dbe, I say, -- I nately like the man; he is
mighty good to all his poor neighbors, and when he comes into a poor body's
house, he is so free and so funny, is'nt he, old man? (speaking to Twist).


Twist. A little too free sometimes, faith; he was funny when he wanted to see
the color of your garters; wa'nt he?


Lucy. Oh! for shame, husband. Mr. Wou'dbe has no more harm about him, than a
sucking babe; at least, if he has, I never saw it.


Twist. Nor felt it, I hope; but wife, you and I, you know, could never agree
about burgesses.


Lucy. If the wives were to vote, I believe they would make a better choice
than their husbands.


Twist. You Would be for the funnyest -- would not you?


Lucy. Yes, faith; and the wittiest, and prettiest, and the wisest, and the
best too; you are all for ugly except when you chose me.


Catharine. Well done, Lucy, you are right, girl. If we were all to speak to
our old men as freely as you do, there would be better doings.


Stern. Perhaps not, Kate.


Catharine. I am sure there would; for if a clever gentleman, nowadays, only
gives a body a gingercake in a civil way, you are sullen for a week about it.
Remember when Mr. Wou'dbe promised Molly a riband, and pair of buckles, you
would not let the poor girl have 'em: but you take toddy from him; -- yes, and
you will drink a little too much, you know, Richard.


Stern. Well, it is none of our costs, if I do.


Catharine. Husband, you know Mr. Wou'dbe is a clever gentleman; he has been a
good friend to us.


Stern. I agree to it, and can vote for him without your clash.


Sarah. I Will be bound when it comes to the pinch, they will all vote for him:
will not you old man? he stood for our George, when our neighbor refused us.


Prize. Mr. Wou'dbe's a man well enough in his neighborhood, and he may have
learning, as they say he has, but he don't show it like Mr. Strutabout.


Enter Guzzle, and several freeholders. Guzzle. Your servant, gentlemen,
(shakes hands all round) we have got fine weather, thank God: how are crops
with you? we are very dry in our parts.


Twist. We are very dry here; Mr. Guzzle, where is your friend Sir John, and Mr.
Wou'dbe? they are to treat today, I hear.


Guzzle. I wish I could see it, but there are more treats besides their's;
where is your friend Mr. Strutabout? I heard we were to have a treat from
Smallhopes and him today.


Twist. Fine times, boys. Some of them had better keep their money; I Will vote
for no man but to my liking.


Guzzle. If I may be so bold, pray, which way is your liking?


Twist. Not as yours is, I believe; but nobody shall know my mind till the day.


Guzzle. Very good, Mr. Twist; nobody, I hope, will put themselves to the
trouble to ask.


Twist. You have taken the trouble already.


Guzzle. No harm, I hope, sir.


Twist. None at all, sir: Yonder comes Sir John, and quite sober, as I live.


Enter Sir John Toddy. Sir John. Gentlemen and ladies, your servant, hah! my
old friend Prize, how goes it? how does your wife and children do?


Sarah. At your service, sir. (making a low courtsey.)


Prize. How the devil come he to know me so well, and never spoke to me before
in his life? (aside.)


Guzzle. (whispering Sir John) Dick Stern.


Sir John. Hah! Mr. Stern, I Am proud to see you; I hope your family are well;
how many children? does the good woman keep to the old stroke?


Catharine. Yes, an't please your honor, I hope my lady's well, with your
honor.


Sir John. At your service, madam.


Guzzle. (whispering Sir John) Roger Twist.


Sir John. Hah! Mr. Roger Twist! your servant, sir. I hope your wife and
children are well.


Twist. There Is my wife. I have no children, at your service.


Sir John. A pretty girl: why, Roger, if you don't do better, you must call an
old fellow to your assistance.


Twist. I have enough to assist me, without applying to you, sir.


Sir John. No offense, I hope, sir; excuse my freedom.


Twist. None at all, sir; Mr. Wou'dbe is ready to befriend me in that way at
any time.


Sir John. Not in earnest, I hope, sir; though he is a damned fellow, I believe.


Lucy. Why, Roger, if you talk at this rate, people will think you are jealous;
for shame of yourself.


Twist For shame of yourself, you mean.


Guzzle. A truce, a truce -- here comes Mr. Wou'dbe.


Enter Mr. Wou'dbe. Wou'dbe. Gentlemen, your servant. Why, Sir John, you have
entered the list, it seems; and are determined to whip over the ground, if you
are treated with a distance.


Sir John. I Am not to be distanc'd by you, or a dozen such.


Wou'dbe. There Is nothing like courage upon these occasions; but you were out
when you chose me to ride for you, Sir John.


Sir John. Let Us have no more of your algebra, nor proverbs, here.


Guzzle. Come, gentlemen, you are both friends, I hope.


Wou'dbe. While Sir John confined himself to his bottle and dogs, and moved
only in his little circle of pot-companions, I could be with him; but since his
folly has induced him to offer himself a candidate for a place, for which he is
not fit, I must say, I despise him. The people are of opinion, that I favor
this undertaking of his; but I now declare, he is not the man I wish the people
to elect.


Guzzle. Pray, sir, who gave you a right to choose for us?


Wou'dbe. I have no right to choose for you; but I have a right to give my
opinion: especially when I am the supposed author of Sir John's folly.


Guzzle. Perhaps he is no greater fool than some others.


Wou'dbe. It would be ungrateful in you, Mr. Guzzle, not to speak in favor of
Sir John; for you have stored away many gallons of his liquor in that bel^y of
yours.


Guzzle. And he is the cleverer gentleman for it; is not he, neighbors?


1 st Freeholder. For sartin; it is no disparagement to drink with a poor fellow.


2 d Freeholder. No more it is, though some of the quality are mighty proud that
way.


3 d Freeholder. Mr. Wou'dbe shou'd'n't speak so freely against that.


Twist. Mr. Wou'dbe.


Wou'dbe. Sir.


Twist. We have heard a sartin report, that you and Sir John have joined
interest.


Wou'dbe. Well; do you believe it?


Twist. Why, it don't look much like it now, Mr. Wou'dbe; but, mayhap, it is
only a copy of your countenance.


Wou'dbe. You may put what construction you please upon my behavior,
gentlemen; but I assure you, it never was my intention to join with Sir John,
or any one else.


Twist. Moreover, I Have heard a 'sponsible man say, he could prove you were the
cause of these new taxes.


Wou'dbe. Do you believe that too? or can you believe that it is in the power of
any individual member to make a law himself? If a law is enacted that is
displeasing to the people, it has the concurrence of the whole legislative
body, and my vote for, or against it, is of little consequence.


Guzzle. And what the devil good do you do then?


Wou'dbe. As much as I have abilities to do.


Guzzle. Suppose, Mr. Wou'dbe, we were to want you to get the price of rum
lowered -- would you do it?


Wou'dbe. I could not.


Guzzle. Huzza for Sir John! he has promised to do it, huzza for Sir John!


Twist. Suppose, Mr. Wou'dbe, we should want this tax taken off -- could you do
it?


Wou'dbe. I could not.


Twist. Huzza for Mr. Strutabout! he is damned, if he don't. Huzza for Mr.
Strutabout!


Stern. Suppose, Mr. Wou'dbe, we that live over the river, should want to come
to church on this side, is it not very hard we should pay ferryage; when we pay
as much to the church as you do?


Wou'dbe. Very hard.


Stern. Suppose we were to petition the assembly could you get us clear of that
expense?


Wou'dbe. I believe it to be just; and make no doubt but it would pass into a
law.


Stern. Will you do it?


Wou'dbe. I will endeavor to do it.


Stern. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe! Wou'dbe forever!


Prize. Why don't you burgesses, do something with the damned pickers? If we
have a hogshead of tobacco refused, away it goes to them; and after they have
twisted up the best of it for their own use, and taken as much as will pay them
for their trouble, the poor planter has little for his share.


Wou'dbe. There are great complaints against them; and I believe the assembly
will take them under consideration.


Prize. Will you vote against them?


Wou'dbe. I will, if they deserve it.


Prize. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe! you shall go, old fellow; don't be afraid; I Will
warrant it.


Exeunt severally; some huzzaing for Mr. Wou'dbe -- some for Sir John -- some
for Mr. Strutabout. SCENE II. Another part of the field.
Mr. Strutabout, Mr. Smallhopes, and a number of freeholders round them. 1 st
Freeholder. Huzza for Mr. Strutabout!


2 d Freeholder. Huzza for Mr. Smallhopes!


3 d Freeholder. Hazza for Mr. Smallhopes and Mr. Strutabout!


4 th Freeholder Huzza for Mr. Strutabout and Mr. Smallhopes! Exeunt, huzzaing.


Enter Guzzle, drunk. Guzzle. Huzza for Sir John Toddy, the cleverest gentleman
-- the finest gentleman that ever was (hickuping.)


Enter Mrs. Guzzle, drunk. Mrs. Guzzle. Where Is my drunken beast of a husband?
(hickups) Oh John Guzzle, Oh John Guzzle.


Guzzle. What the devil do you want?


Mrs. Guzzle. Why don't you go home, you drunken beast? Lord bless me, how the
gingerbread has given me the hickup.


Guzzle. Why, Joan, you have made too -- free with the bottle -- I believe.


Mrs. Guzzle. I make free with the bottle -- you drunken sot! -- Well, well,
the gingerbread has made me quite giddy.


Guzzle. Hold up, Joan, don't fall -- (Mrs. Guzzle falls.) The devil, you will?
Joan! why woman, what is the matter? are you drunk?


Mrs. Guzzle. Drunk! you beast! No, quite sober; but very sick with eating
ginger-bread.


Guzzle. For shame, Joan; get up -- (offers to help her up, and falls upon her.)


Mrs. Guzzle. Oh Lord! John! you have almost killed me.


Guzzle. Not I -- I Will get clear of you as fast as I can.


Mrs. Guzzle. Oh John, I shall die, I shall die.


Guzzle. Very well, you will die a pleasant death, then.


Mrs. Guzzle. Oh Lord! how sick! how sick!


Guzzle. Oh Joan Guzzle! Oh Joan Guz-zle! -- Why don't you go home, you drunken
beast. Lord bless me, how the gingerbread has given me the hickup.


Mrs. Guzzle. Pray, my dear John, help me up.


Guzzle. Pray, my dear Joan, get sober first.


Mrs. Guzzle. Pray John, help me up.


Guzzle. Pray, Joan, go to sleep; and when I am as drunk as you, I Will come and
take your place. Farewell, Joan. Huzza for Sir John Toddy!


Exit huzzaing. Scene changes to another part of the field. Strutabout,
Smallhopes, and freeholders. Strutabout. Gentlemen -- I Am much obliged to you
for your good intentions; I make no doubt but (with the assistance of my friend
Mr. Smallhopes) I shall be able to do every thing you have requested. Your
grievances shall be redressed; and all your petitions heard.


Freeholders. Huzza for Mr. Strutabout and Mr. Smallhopes!


Enter Mr. Wou'dbe. Wou'dbe. Gentlemen, your servant; you seem happy in a
circle of your friends, I hope my company is not disagreeable.


Strutabout. It cannot be very agreeable to those you have treated so ill.


Smallhopes. You have used me ill, and all this company, by God --


Wou'dbe. If I have, Gentlemen, I am sorry for it; but it never was my
intention to treat any person ungenteelly.


Smallhopes. You be damned; you're a turn-coat, by God.


Wou'dbe. Your abuse will never have any weight with me: neither do I regard
your oaths or imprecations. In order to support a weak cause, you swear to what
requires better proof than your assertions.


Smallhopes. Where Is your friend, Sir John Toddy? he is a pretty fellow, an't
he, and be damned to you; you recommend him to the people, don't you?


Wou'dbe. No, sir; I should be as blamable to recommend Sir John, as you, and
your friend there (pointing to Strutabout) in recommending one another.


Strutabout. Sir, I am as capable of serving the people as yourself; and let me
tell you, sir, my sole intention in offering myself is, that I may redress the
many and heavy grievances you have imposed upon this poor county.


Wou'dbe. Poor, indeed, when you are believed, or when coxcombs and jockies can
impose themselves upon it for men of learning.


1 st Freeholder. Well, its no use; Mr. Wou'dbe is too hard for them both.


2 d Freeholder. I think so too: why Strutabout! speak up, old fellow, or
you will lose ground.


Strutabout. I Will lay you fifty pounds I Am elected before you.


Wou'dbe. Betting will not determine it; and therefore I shall not lay.


Strutabout. I can lick you, Wou'dbe, (beginning to strip.)


Wou'dbe. You need not strip to do it; for you intend to do it with your
tongue, I suppose.


Smallhopes. (clapping Strutabout upon the back) Well done Strutabout, -- you
can do it, by God. Don't be afraid, you shall not be hurt; damn me if you shall,
(strips.)


Wou'dbe. What! Gentlemen, do they who aspire to the first posts in our county,
and who have ambition to become legislators, and to take upon themselves part
of the guidance of the state, submit their naked bodies to public view, as if
they were malefactors; or, for some crimes, condemned to the whipping-post?


Smallhopes. Come on, damn ye; and don't preach your damned proverbs here.


Wou'dbe. Are the candidates to fight for their seats in the house of
burgesses. If so, perhaps I may stand as good a chance to succeed, as you.


Smallhopes. I can lick you, by God. Come on, if you dare -- (capering about.)


1 st Freeholder. Up to him -- I Will stand by you. (to Wou'dbe.)


2 d Freeholder. They are not worth your notice, Mr. Wou'dbe; but if you have a
mind to try yourself, I Will see fair play.


Wou'dbe. When I think they have sufficiently exposed themselves, I Will explain
the opinion I have of them, with the end of my cane.


Smallhopes. Up to him, damn ye, (pushing Strutabout.)


Strutabout. You need not push me, I can fight without being pushed to it;
fight yourself, if you are so fond of it. (putting on his clothes.)


Smallhopes. Nay, if you are for that, and determined to be a coward, Mr.
Strutabout, I cannot help it; but damn me if I ever hack. (putting on his
clothes.)


Wou'dbe. So you are both scared, gentlemen, without a blow, or an angry look!
ha, ha, ha! Well, gentlemen, you have escaped a good caning, and though you are
not fit for burgesses, you will make good soldiers; for you are excellent at a
retreat.


1 st Freeholder. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe!


2 d Freeholder. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe!


Enter Guzzle. Guzzle. Huzza for Sir John Toddy! Toddy (hickups) forever, boys!


Enter Sir John, drunk. Guzzle. Here he comes -- as fine gentleman, though I say
it, as the best of them.


Sir John. So I am, John, as clever a fellow (hickups) as the famous Mr.
Wou'dbe, though I (hickups) say it.


Strutabout. There Is a pretty fellow to be a burgess, gentleman: lord, what a
drunken beast it is.


Sir John. What beast, pray? am I a beast?


Strutabout. Yes, Sir John, you are a beast, and you may take the name of what
beast you please; so your servant, my dear. Exeunt Strutabout and Smallhopes.


Wou'dbe. Except an ass, Sir John, for that he is entitled to.


Sir John. Thank you, sir.


Wou'dbe. A friend in need, Sir John, as the proverb says, is a friend indeed.


Sir John. I thank you, I know you are my friend (hickups) Mr. Wou'dbe, if
you would speak your mind -- I know you are.


Wou'dbe. How do you know it, Sir John?


Sir John. Did not you take my part just now, Mr. Wou'dbe? (hickups) I know it.


Wou'dbe. I shall always take your part, Sir John, when you are imposed upon by
a greater scoundrel than yourself, and when you pretend to what you are not fit
for, I shall always oppose you.


Sir John. Well, Mr. Wou'dbe, an't I as fitten a (hickups) man as either of
those?


Wou'dbe. More so, Sir John, for they are knaves, and you, Sir John, are an
honest blockhead.


Sir John. Is that in my favor, or not, John? (to Guzzle.)


Guzzle. In your favor, by all means; for (hickups) he says you are honest.
Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe and the honest ( hickups) Sir John Blockhead.


Enter Ralpho -- gives a letter to Wou'dbe. Wou'dbe. ( Reads) -- this is good
news indeed.


1 st Freeholder. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe!


2 d Freeholder. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe!


Guzzle. Huzza for the honest Sir John Blockhead. ( hickups)


Wou'dbe. Silence, gentlemen, and I Will read a letter to you, that (I don't
doubt) will give you great pleasure. ( he reads) Sir, I have been informed that
the scoundrels who opposed us last election (not content with n^ resignation)
are endeavoring to undermine you in the g^od opinion of the people: It has
warmed my blood, and ^in called my thoughts from retirement; speak this to the
people, and let them know I intend to stand a poll, etc.

Yours affectionately. WORTHY.





Freeholders. Huzza for Mr. Wou'dbe and Mr. Worthy!


Sir John. Huzza for Mr. Worthy and Mr. Wou'dbe! ( hickups) I Am not so fitten
as they, and therefore gentlemen I recline. ( hickups) Yes, gentlemen
(staggering about) I will; for I am not ( hickups) so fitten as they. (falls)


Guzzle. Huzza for the drunken Sir John Toddy! (hickups)


Sir John. Help me up John -- do, John, help.


Guzzle. No, Sir John, stay, and I Will fetch my wife, ^n, and lay -- her along
side of you. Exit.


Wou'dbe. Ralpho.


Ralpho. Sir.


Wou'dbe. Take care of Sir John, least any accident should befall him.


Ralpho. Yes, sir. Exeunt Wou'dbe and freeholders, huzzaing for Wou'dbe and
Worthy.


Enter Guzzle, with his wife in his arms. Guzzle. Here, Sir John, here is my
wife fast asleep, to keep you company, and as drunk as a sow. ( throws her upon
Sir John, and returns to one side.)


Sir John. Oh Lord! you have broke my bones.


Joan. ( waking) John! John! ( punching Sir John) get up; ( looking round, sees
Sir John) what have we here? Lord, what would our John give to know this? He
would have reason to be jealous of me, then!


Enter Guzzle. Guzzle. Well, Joan, are you sober?


Joan. (getting up) How came that man to be lying with me? it is some of your
doings, I Am sure; that you may have an excuse to be jealous of me.


Guzzle. I want no excuse for that, child.


Joan. What brought him there?


Guzzle. The same that brought you, child; rum, sugar, and water.


Joan. Well, well, as I live, I thought it was you, and that we were in our own
clean sweet bed. Lord! how I tremble for fear he should have done what you do,
sometimes, John.


Guzzle. I never do any thing when I am drunk. Sir John and you have done more
than that, I believe.


Joan. Don't be jealous, John; it will ruin us both.


Guzzle. I am very jealous of that.


Joan. If you are, I Will beat the cruel beast that is the cause of it, 'till he
satisfies you I am innocent.


Guzzle. Don't, Joan, it will make me more jealous.


Joan. I will, I tell you I will. (beats Sir John, who all the time cries
murder, help, help!)


Ralpho. Stop, madam, this gentleman is in my care; and you must not abuse him.


Mr. Guzzle. I will, and you too, you rascal. (beats him first, and then Sir
John.)


Ralpho. Peace, stop, madam, peace, peace.


Sir John. Oh lord! help, John, for God's sake, help.


Ralpho. Do as you please, madam, do as you please. (runs off).


Joan. (beating Sir John) I Will learn you to cuckold a man without letting his
wife know it.


Sir John. Help, murder! help.


Guzzle. (taking hold of Joan) Stop, Joan, I Am satisfied -- quite satisfied.


Joan. What fellow is it?


Guzzle. Sir John Toddy, our good friend; Oh, Joan, you should not have beat
poor Sir John, he is as drunk as you and I were, Joan. Oh! poor Sir John.
(cries.)


Joan. Good lack, why did not you tell me? I would have struck you as soon as
him, John. Don't be angry, good Sir John, I did not know you.


Sir John. It Is well enough: help me out of the mire, neighbors, and I Will
forget and forgive.


Guzzle. Yes, Sir John, and so we will, (they help him up.) Come, Sir John,
let us go home, this is no place for us: come Joan. [Exeunt Guzzle and Joan,
supporting Sir John.]


SCENE III. Another part of the field.
Enter Wou'dbe and Ralpho. Wou'dbe. Where Is Sir John?


Ralpho. In the hands of a woman, sir, and as I left him in such good hands, I
thought there was no farther occasion for my attendance.


Wou'dbe. Are you sure he will be taken care of?


Ralpho. Yes, the lady, an't please your honor, seemed devilish kind to him.


Wou'dbe. See that you have all ready; its high time we thought of going home,
if we intend there tonight.


Ralpho. All shall be ready, sir. Exit Ralpho.


Wou'dbe. Well, I Have felt the pulse of all the leading men, and find they beat
still for Worthy, and myself. Strutabout and Smallhopes fawn and cringe in so
abject a manner, for the few votes they get, that I Am in hopes they will be soon
heartily despised.

The prudent candidate who hopes to rise,
Never deigns to hide it, in a mean disguise.
Will, to his place, with moderation slide,
And win his way, or not resist the tide.
The fool, aspiring to bright honor's post,
In noise, in shouts, and tumults often, is lost.

Exit. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. Wou'dbe's house.
Enter Wou'dbe and Worthy. Wou'dbe. Nothing could have afforded me more
pleasure than your letter; I read it to the people, and can with pleasure
assure you, it gave them infinite satisfaction.


Worthy. My sole motive in declaring myself was to serve you, and if I am the
means of your gaining your election with honor, I shall be satisfied.


Wou'dbe. You have always been extremely kind, sir, but I could not enjoy the
success I promised myself, without your participation.


Worthy. I have little inclination to the service; you know my aversion to a
public life, Wou'dbe, and how little I have ever courted the people for the
troublesome office they have hitherto imposed upon me.


Wou'dbe. I believe you enjoy as much domestic happiness as any person, and
that your aversion to a public life proceeds from the pleasure you find at
home. But, sir, it surely is the duty of every man who has abilities to serve
his country, to take up the burden, and bear it with patience.


Worthy. I know it is needless to argue with you upon this head: you are
determined I shall serve with you, I find.


Wou'dbe. I am; and therefore let us take the properest methods to insure
success.


Worthy. What would you propose?


Wou'dbe* Nothing more than for you to show yourself to the people.


Worthy. I Will attend you where ever you please.


Wou'dbe. Tomorrow being the day of election, I have invited most of the
principal freeholders to breakfast with me, in their way to the courthouse, I
hope you will favor us with your company.


Worthy. I will; till then, adieu. Exit Worthy.


Worthy. I shall expect you. It would give me great pleasure if Worthy would be
more anxious than he appears to be upon this occasion; conscious of his
abilities and worth, he scorns to ask a vote for any person but me; well, I
must turn the tables on him, and solicit as strongly in his favor.

It Is said self-interest is the secret aim,
Of those uniting under Friendship's name.
How true this maxim is, let others prove --
Myself I Would punish for the man I love.

Exit Wou'dbe. SCENE II. Mr. Julip's house.
Enter Captain Paunch and Mr. Julip. Capt. Well, neighbor, I have come to see
you on purpose to know how votes went at the treat yesterday.


Julip. I was not there; but I Have seen neighbor Guzzle this morning, and he
says, Sir John gives the matter up to Mr. Worthy and Mr. Wou'dbe


Capt. Mr. Worthy! does he declare, huzza, my boys! well, I Am proud our county
may choose two without being obliged to have one of those jackanapes at the
head of it, faith: Who are you for now, neighbor?


Julip. I believe I shall vote for the two old ones, and though I said I was for
Sir John, it was because I liked neither of the others; but since Mr. Worthy
will serve us, why, to be sartin its our duty to send Wou'dbe and him.


Capt. Hah, faith, now you speak like a man; you are a man after my own heart:
give me your hand.


Julip. Here it is, Wou'dbe and Worthy, I say.


Capt. Done, but who comes yonder? surely, it is not Mr. Worthy! It Is, I declare.


Enter Mr. Worthy. Worthy. Gentlemen, your servant, I hope your families are
well.


Capt. At your service, sir.


Worthy. I need not, I suppose, gentlemen, inform you that I have entered the
list with my old competitors, and have determined to stand a poll at the next
election. If you were in the crowd yesterday, my friend Wou'dbe, I doubt not,
made a declaration of my intentions to the people.


Capt. We know it, thank heaven, Mr. Worthy, though neither of us were there: as
I did not like some of the candidates I did not choose to be persecuted for a
vote that I was resolved never to bestow upon them.


Julip. My rule is never to taste of a man's liquor unless I Am his friend, and
therefore, I stayed at home.


Worthy. Well, my honest friend, I am proud to find that you still preserve
your usual independence. Is it possible Captain, that the people can be so
missed, as to reject Wou'dbe, and elect Strutabout in his room?


Capt. You know, Mr. Worthy, how it is, as long as the liquor is running, so
long they will be Mr. Strutabout's friends, but when the day comes, I Am thinking
it will be another case.


Worthy. I Am sorry, my countymen, for the sake of a little toddy, can be
induced to behave in a manner so contradictory to the candor and integrity
which always should prevail among mankind.


Capt. It Is so, sir, you may depend upon it.


Julip. I Am a thinking it is.


Worthy. Well, gentlemen, will you give me leave to ask you. how far you think
my declaring will be of service to Mr. Wou'dbe?


Capt. Your declaring has already silenced Sir John Toddy; and I doubt not, but
Strutabout and Smallhopes will lose many votes by it.


Worthy. Has Sir John declined? poor Sir John is a weak man, but he has more
virtues to recommend him than either of the others.


Julip. So I think, Mr. Worthy, and I Will be so bold as to tell you that, had
you not set up, Mr. Wou'dbe and Sir John should have had my vote.


Worthy. Was I a constituent, instead of a candidate, I should do the same.


Julip. Well, captain, you see I was not so much to blame.


Capt. Sir John maybe honest, but he is no fitter for that place than myself.


Julip. Suppose he was not, if he was the best that offered to serve us, should
not we choose him.


Worthy. Yes, surely: Well, my friends, I Am now on my way, to breakfast at Mr.
Wou'dbe's, but I hope to meet you at the courthouse to day.


Both. Aye, aye, depend upon us. Exit Worthy.


Capt. Well, neighbor, I hope things now go on better; I like the present
appearance.


Julip. So do I.


Capt. Do all you can, old fellow.


Julip. I will.


Capt. I hope you will, neighbor. I wish you well.


Julip. You the same. shake hands, and exeunt.


SCENE III. Woud'be's house, a long breakfast table set out.
Wou'dbe, Worthy, Capt. Paunch, Mr. Julip, Twist, Stern, Prize, and other
freeholders; several negroes go backwards and forwards, bringing in the
breakfast. 1 st Freeholder. Give us your hand, neighbor Worthy, I Am extremely
glad to see thee with all my heart: So my heart of oak, you are willing to give
your time and trouble once more to the service of your country.


Worthy. Your kindness does me honor, and if my labors be productive of good
to my country, I shall deem myself fortunate.


2 d Freeholder. Still the same sensible man I always thought him. Damn it, now
if every county could but send such a burgess, what a noble house we should
have?


3 d Freeholder. We shall have no polling now, but all will be for the same, I
believe. Here Is neighbor Twist, who was resolute for Strutabout, I don't
doubt, will vote for Mr. Worthy and Mr. Wou'dbe.


Twist. Yes, that I will: what could I do better?


All. Aye, so will we all.


Wou'dbe. Gentlemen, for your forwardness in favor of my good friend Worthy,
my sincere thanks are but a poor expression in the pleasure I feel. For my
part, your esteem I shall always attribute more to his than my own desert. But
come, let us sit down to breakfast, all is ready, I believe; and you're
heartily welcome to batchelors quarters. (they all sit down to the table, he
asks each of the company which they prefer, coffee, tea, or chocolate, and each
chooses to his liking; he pours out, and the servants carry it around.)


Worthy. Gentlemen, will any of you have a part of this fine salt shad? (they
answer, yes, if you please; and he helps them.)


Capt. P. This warm toast and butter is very fine, and the shad gives it an
excellent flavor.


Mr. Julip. Boy, give me the spirit. This chocolate, me thinks, wants a little
lacing to make it admirable. (the servants bring it.)


Prize. Mr. Wou'db^ do your fishing places succeed well this year?


Wou'dbe. Better than they have been known for some seasons.


Stern. I Am very glad of it: for then I can get my supply from you.


Mr. Julip. Neighbor Stalk, how do crops stand with you?


1 st Freeholder. Indifferently well, I thank you; how are you?


Mr. Julip. Oh, very well! we crop it gloriously.


Wou'dbe. You have not breakfasted yet, neighbor, give me leave to help you to
another dish.


2 d Freeholder. Thank ye, sir, but enough's as good as a feast.


Capt. P. (looking ai his watch.) I Am afraid we shall be late, they ought to
have begun before now.


Wou'dbe. Our horses are at the gate, and we have not far to go.


Freeholders all. Very well, we have all breakfasted. (they rise from table, and
the servants take away.)


1 st Freeholder. Come along, my friends, I long to see your triumph. Huzza for
Wou'dbe and Worthy! Exit huzzaing.


SCENE IV. The courthouse yard.
The door open, and a number of freeholders seen crouding within. 1 st
Freeholder. (to a freeholder coming out of the house) How do votes go,
neighbor? for Wou'dbe and Worthy?


2 d Freeholder. Aye, aye, they are just come, and sit upon the bench, and yet
all the votes are for them. It Is quite a hollow thing. The poll will be soon
over. The People crowd so much, and vote so fast, you can hardly turn round.


1 st Freeholder. How do Strutabout and Smallhopes look? very doleful, I reckon.


2 d Freeholder. Like a thief under the gallows.


3 d Freeholder. There you must be mistaken, neighbor: for two cannot be like
one.


1 st and 2 d Freeholders. Ha, ha, ha, -- a good joke, a good joke.


3 d Freeholder. Not so good neither, when the subject ma^e it so easy.


1 st and 2 d Freeholders. Better and better, ha, ha, ha. Huzza for Worthy and
Wou'dbe! and confusion to Strutabout and Smallhopes.


Enter Guzzle. Guzzle. Huzza for Wou'dbe and Worthy! and huzza for ^ir John
Toddy! though he reclines.


1 st Freeholder. So Guzzle, your good friend Sir John reclines, does he? I
think he does right.


Guzzle. You think he does right! pray sir, what right have you to think about
it? nobody but a fool would kick a fallen man lower.


1 st Freeholder. Sir, I will not be called a fool by any man, I Will have you to
know, sir.


Guzzle. Then you ought'nt to be one; but here is at ye, adrat ye, if you are for
a quarrel. Sir John Toddy would have stood a good chance, and I Will maintain it,
come on, damn ye.


1 st Freeholder. On! as for fighting, there I Am your servant; a drunkard is as
bad to fight as a madman. (runs off.)


Guzzle. Houroa, houroa, you see no body so good at a battle as a staunch
toper. The milksops are afraid of them to a man.


3 d Freeholder. You knew he was a coward before you thought proper to attack
him; if you think yourself so brave, try your hand upon me, and you will find
you're mistaken.


Guzzle. For the matter of that, I Am the best judge myself; good day, my dear,
good day. Huzza, for Sir John Toddy. Exit.


3 d Freeholder. How weak must Sir John be to be governed by such a wretch as
Guzzle! The Sheriff comes to the door, and says, Gentlemen freeholders, come
into court, and give your votes, or the poll will be closed.


Freeholders. We Have all voted.


Sheriff. The poll's closed. Mr. Wou'dbe and Mr. Worthy are elected.


Freeholders without and within. Huzza -- huzza! Wou'dbe and Worthy for ever,
boys, bring 'em on, bring 'em on, Wou'dbe and Worthy for ever!


Enter Wou'dbe and Worthy, in two chairs, raised aloft by the freeholders.
Freeholders all. -- Huzza, for Wou'be and Worthy -- Huzza for Wou'dbe and
Worthy -- huzza, for Wou'dbe and Worthy! -- (they traverse the stage, and then
set them down.)


Worthy. Gentlemen, I Am much obliged to you for the signal proof you have given
me today of your regard. You may depend upon it, that I shall endeavor
faithfully to discharge the trust you have reposed in me.


Wou'dbe. I have not only, gentlemen, to return you my hearty thanks for the
favors you have conferred upon me, but I beg leave also to thank you for
showing such regard to the merit of my friend. You have in that, shown your
judgment, and a spirit of independence becoming Virginians.


Capt P. So we have Mr. Wou'dbe, we have done as we ought, we have elected the
ablest, according to the writ.

Henceforth, let those who pray for wholesome laws,
And all well-wishers to their country's cause,
Like us refuse a coxcomb -- choose a man --
Then let our senate blunder if it can.

Exit omnes. END OF THE CANDIDATES.
THE PATRIOTS, A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

THE CHARACTERS ARE,
Two gentlemen of fortune accused of toryism.
Meanwell, Trueman,
Col. Simple. Members of the committee.
1. Thunderbolt, 2. Squib, 3. Col. Strut, 4. Mr. Summons, 5. Brazen, 6. Skip,
Stitch, doorkeeper to the committee. M'Flint, M'Squeeze and M'Gripe, three
Scotchmen. Mr. Tackabout, a pretended whig, and real tory. John Heartfree, a
farmer. Capt. Flash, a recruiting officer. Pickle, servant to Meanwell. Trim, a
recuriting sergeant. Mira, daughter to Brazen, in love with Trueman. Isabella,
a female politician. Melinda, a country girl. Margaret Heartfree, wife to John.
Butler, Cook, Scullion and a Servant to Meanwell. Groom to Trueman.
THE PATRIOTS, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Meanwell and Trueman, meeting. Mean. MR. Trueman, I am happy to see you. In
times like these, of war and danger, almost every man is suspicious even of his
friend; but with you I may converse with the utmost confidence.


True. My dear Meanwell, I know your heart, and am sorry that any man can
suspect its purity; but our case is much the same.


Mean. What? are you too accused of toryism?


True. I am indeed. Unfortunately, I have some enemies who have raised the cry
against me. And what is worse, I fear the consequences will be serious, and a
little uncommon.


Mean. How?


True. They will be bad indeed if they cause the loss of the girl I love. To
your friendly bosom I may trust the secrets of my heart. The lovely Mira,
daughter of our old neighbor Brazen has won my affections. You know her
beauteous form; but that is but an image of her soul, its more charming
inhabitant. I had seen and loved her: her father declared his approbation of my
passion, and encouraged me to proceed. Heaven seemed to promise me success, and
the idol of my soul had with blushing tenderness consented to be my bride. But
all our hopes may probably be blasted by this unfortunate circumstance.


Mean. Indeed!


True. It cannot be doubted. Her father is a violent patriot without knowing
the meaning of the word. He understands little or nothing beyond a dice-box and
race-field, but thinks he knows every thing; and woe be to him that contradicts
him! His political notions are a system of perfect anarchy, but he reigns in
his own family with perfect despotism. He is fully resolved that nobody shall
tyrannize over him, but very content to tyrannize over others. I happened in
conversation to oppose some of his doctines of a state of nature and liberty
without restraint, and he blazed out immediately like a flash of gunpowder. I
endeavored to moderate his anger; but as reason and he can never be reconciled,
I am afraid my sins will never be forgiven; besides, I have a bitter enemy and
rival in Captain Flash.


Mean. Ay, that is the drawcansir of modern times; a fellow who pretends to cat
the smoke of a cannon fresh from the mouth, and to kill all the enemies of his
country, as Caligula would the Roman people, at one blow. But I believe he is a
coward at bottom.


True. So do I. But Old Brazen is persuaded that not even Washington is his
parallel. As I pretend not to extravagant valor, the captain thinks me a puny
milksop, and judges it very great presumption in me to pretend to the lady he
adores. I expect he has assisted the old man's prepossession against me; and,
by his assertions, convinced him I am a tory: -- But this is certain, the old
gentleman declared that I should never enter his doors with his consent again,
and moreover has commanded his daughter to think no more of having me for her
husband.


Mean. What a pity it is that all heads are not capable of receiving the benign
influence of the principles of liberty -- some are too weak to bear it, and
become thoroughly intoxicated. The cause of my country appears as dear to me as
to those who most passionately declaim on the subject. The rays of the sun of
freedom, which is now rising, have warmed my heart; but I hope my zeal against
tyranny will not be shown by bawling against it, but by serving my country
against her enemies; and never may I signalize my attachment to liberty by
persecuting innocent men, only because they differ in opinion with me.


True. It seems for this very reason you are not accounted a patriot; but truth
will at last prevail, the faithful heart be applauded, and the noisy hypocrite
stripped of the mask of patriotism.


Mean. I hope so; and therefore truth, plain truth, shall be the only shield I
will use against my foes. Men who aim at power without merit, must conceal the
meanness of their souls by noisy and passionate speeches in favor of every
thing which is the current opinion of the day; but real patriots are mild, and
secretly anxious for their country, but modest in expressions of zeal. They are
industrious in the public service, but claim no glory to themselves.


True. May the armies of America be always led by such as these! Thus will the
power of Britain be overthrown, and peace with liberty return -- May men like
these conduct our government, and happiness, in the train of independence, will
bless the smiling land! But before this can be accomplished many temporary
evils must be supported with patience.


Mean. Yes, and this under which we now labor among the rest. But what do you
propose to do in the case of your lovely Mira? you will not give up the pursuit?


True. Give up the pursuit? When I do, may I be hanged as a traitor to love!
But it seems a little difficult at present. I have taken the liberty to use
your servant already in the business. As he very lately came into this part of
the country, and possesses a very genteel air, I thought he might easily pass
for a gentleman with old Brazen. I equipped him therefore as an officer, and
sent him to the house of the old gentleman; and ordered him to pass himself for
a traveling captain, and to wait for an opportunity of delivering a letter to
Mira. He executed the commission with fidelity, and brought me an answer from
her, in which she communicates to me all that I have told you.


Mean. And what do you intend to do?


True. With your permission I Will make use of your servant upon a second embassy.


Mean. By all means; but what do you propose?


True. In the pursuit of honorable love few things are reprehensible. I shall
entreat her to elope with me into a neighboring government, where Hymen shall
make us one.


Mean. All fair, in my opinion; as you had her father's license to win her
affections, you have an undoubted right to her person.


True. I am happy you do not condemn my plan.


Mean. I will be of your party, your aid-de-camp in this affair. Your
ambassador shall wait on you immediately. In love and war no time should be
lost.


Exeunt. SCENE II. A drawing room.
Mira alone -- Mira sings. The constant dove on yonder spray,
Cooing, tunes a moving lay;
She warbles out a tender note,
And fills with love her little throat.
No anxious doubts annoy her breast:
Her mate, the guardian of her nest,
Her pretty young attends with care,
And frees her mind from every fear.
So the maid, that is joined to thee,
My lovely Trueman, blessed would be.
Thy virtues would attune her breast.
To constant ease, to perfect rest.
Oh, Trueman! nothing but the fear of losing you, gives me pain. Possessed of
thee, I could join the lark to welcome in the rosy morn, and sing with Philomel
the moon to rest.

SCENE III.
Enter Isabella. Isa. How do you do Mira? Mercy child, how grave you look? Come,
I Will sing you a catch of the new song, that will inspire you, I Am sure.

As Colinet and Phoebe sat,
Beneath a poplar grove;
With fondest truth tne gentle youth,
Was telling tales of love.
There Is a song for you. --

But ah! is this a time for bliss,
Or themes so soft as these?
While all around, we hear no sound
But war's terrific strain,
The drum commands our arming bands,
And chides each tardy swain.
My love shall crown the youth alone,
Who saves himself and me --
What a noble thought is this, my dear Mira! I am determined never to marry any
man that has not fought a battle.


Mira. Your swain then must have a hard courtship. But suppose he should happen
to be killed?


Isa. Why then, I should never marry him, you know. But I am resolved not to
love a man who knows nothing of war and Washington. War and Washington! don't
you think those words have a noble sound?


Mira. They have indeed; and I acknowledge the smiles of beauty should reward
the man who bravely asserts his country's rights, and meets her enemies in the
bloody field; but do you love war for its own sake?


Isa. Lord, no, but then there is something so clever in fighting and dying for
one's country; and the officers look so clever and smart; I declare I never saw
an ugly officer in my life.


Mira. Your fancy must be a great beautifier, as many of them are not much
indebted to nature for personal charms.


Isa. Ay, that is because you are not in love with an officer. When you are,
you will think as I do.


Mira. Are you in love with one?


Isa. Ah! now that is an ill-natured question, I tell you, child, I am in love
with nothing but my country. If, indeed, a man should approach me, who would
lay his laurels at my feet, who could count his glorious fears gained in the
front of victory, I might look upon him.


Mira. I suppose, then, if he wanted an arm, a leg or an eye, it would be all
the better; or a great cut over his eye-brow, would be a beauty spot.


Isa. Certainly. Nothing can be more elegant. It appears so martial -- so -- so
-- quite the thing.


Mira. Well! I Am afraid my taste will never be quite so grand as yours, though I
hope I love my country as well as you.


Isa. You love your country! your sentiments are not refined enough: they are
not exalted to the level of patriotism; for my part, I scorn to think of any
thing else.


Mira. Well, but my dear, don't you think the politicians are capable of
settling these matters better than you or me?


Isa. The politicians! and who are such politicians as the women? We fairly
beat the men, it is universally acknowledged. And why may not I have talents
that way? who knows but I may be a general's lady, or wife to a member of
Congress, some of these days?


Mira. I heartily wish you may; but would it not be better not to lose time in
thinking about things so remote, and attend more to those of the present moment?


Isa. Remote, indeed! not so very remote, I hope! The times are very busy, and
great men very plentiful, and no body can tell what will happen. But, my dear,
I cannot stay any longer. I sent my servant for the newspapers, and expect he
is come by this time. So, child, I wish you a good day, and a good husband
soon, though you don't aspire to marry a general! Exit.


SCENE IV.
Mira alone. Mira. That poor girl's head is turned topsy turvy by the little
insignificant animal that dangles about her: she has conversed with him, till
she has not only adopted his opinions, but caught his ideas. Oh! Trueman, what
a difference!


SCENE V.
Mira and Brazen. Brazen. What damned business employs your thoughts, Mira? you
are always in a study.


Mira. My principal study, sir, is to please my father.


Bra. That Is clever, my girl. I Will tell you, Mira, I intend to marry you to my
friend the captain.


Mira. What captain, sir? There are so many captains nowadays, that I might
guess a fortnight before I hit upon the man, perhaps.


Bra. Captain Flash, is the man. He Is the man, Mira, a fellow of mettle,
spirited to the backbone. He Will fight for his country: those are the men, girl.


Mira. Has he ever been in a battle, sir?


Bra. He Is in the army, child, that is enough.


Mira. Should I not see him, sir, before I promise to accept him?


Bra. See him! yes, and feel him too, for what I care; he is a damned fine
fellow, a fellow of spirit. If you like him, take him; if not, let him alone. I
don't care who you take, so he is no tory, d -- m all tory's, say I. Exit.


SCENE VI.
Mira alone. That was aimed at Trueman; who will ever be suspected, as long as
false patriots and pretenders to heroism have my father's ear. Well, as an
obedient daughter, I will endure one tete-a-tete with this fine fellow he
recommends. Mercy on me, here he comes!

SCENE VII. To her, Flash singing.
Lift up your heads, ye heroes,
And swear with proud disdain
The wretch that would enslave us,
Shall spread his snares in vain.
We'll blast the venal sycophants,
Who dare our rights betray.
Huzza! Huzza! Huzza! Huzza!
My brave America.
Noble, by God! d -- m me! here is the stuff, ( drawing his sword) shall make
the cowardly dogs skip, we'll let the scoundrels see what Americans can do; ha!
Miss, your most humble -- do you know that I have a vast propensity to quit the
army for your sake?

Mira. For shame, sir, what! desert the service of your country, when she most
stands in need of your assistance?


Flash. Why really, madam, I should be damnably missed. Upon my soul I don't
know what they would do without me.


Mira. Then by no means quit the service, captain.


Flash. By God I think I have served long enough. Others should try their luck
as well as I: for a whole year have I been fighting, through heat and cold, wet
and dry, hunger and thirst; poor Flash! were you not a heart of oak, a compound
of steel and gun-flints, you could not stand it, by heavens! here is he that
fears nothing. (sings.)

Should Europe empty all her force,
We'll meet her in array,
And shout and fight, and shout and fight,
My brave America.

Mira. Bravo, captain!


Flash. Mars, I adore thee; Mars, was a fellow of spirit, I Am told, the Flash
of his day, I warrant it. By God, I wish the lad was here now, that he and I
might have a game at tilts together: (draws his sword and pushes at the wall.)
Ha, ha; there I had him! I'god, now I could gizzard these English dogs, if I
had 'em here.


Mira. Pray, captain, put up your sword, I declare you frighten me.


Flash. Frighen you! 'Sblood, madam, the ladies nowadays should be all
amazons, nothing should please them more than a naked sword: however, to please
you, up love (puts up his sword.) enter nous, do you see, Miss, I do think you
are a devilish fine girl. Your father, ma'am, has given me leave. --


Mira. Fie, captain.


Flash. By my soul, he has.


Mira. For shame, sir, a soldier talk at this rate! fighting should be your
theme, captain.


Flash. Fighting! it is victuals and drink to me. I could breakfast upon
fighting, dine and sup upon fighting; but after supper, a fine girl, you know
--


Mira. War and love can never go hand in hand. Love enervates the soul, and
would make the bravest man upon earth a coward.


Flash. Coward: (draws his sword) Coward! damn the word, how it makes my blood
boil.


(Mira shricks, and runs out.) SCENE VIII.
Flash, alone. Coward! ha! If you had not been a woman, well, (puts up his
sword.) It Is no matter, but I Will be damned, if ever I speak to you again. Exit.

SCENE IX. Melinda, and Pickle dressed like an officer, crossing the stage,
meeting each other.
Mel. Here am I forced to walk three miles to warp a piece of cloth. Mammy says
I was born for a fine lady, but I am sure this does not look like it.


Pickle. (seeing her) Ha, a beautiful creature, by my soul! artless and
innocent no doubt. (I Will try my luck with her by God) let me see (musing) I Will
take her in the old way, I believe; address her in heroics, talk of my
honourabl^ intentions, and promise marriage. Come to my assistance, dear
cunning, and sweet dissimulation; ye true harbingers of lust and love. -- Sweet
Miss, your most humble.


Mel. Miss! Lord, how charming that is.


Pick. Charming girl! By God, I Am at a loss how to begin. (aside.)


Mel. (looking at his hat.) what a pretty feather! are you in the wars, sir?


Pick. I have served several campaigns, Miss, (under the banners of Venus)
(aside) I have been in many engagements.


Mel. I hope you never got hurt, sir.


Pick. A trifling scratch or two is all the injury I ever received.


Mel. Do you intend to continue a soldier?


Pick. Nothing but a wife shall ever induce me to quit the service.


Mel. Do you intend to marry, sir?


Pick. As soon as I can get any one in the humor to have me.


Mel. Any one would not do, I guess: you will choose some rich lady, no doubt.


Pick. No, Miss, riches are not my object; I have a sufficient fortune of my
own, thank God; I would marry a woman without a shilling, if she hit my taste,
such a sweet angel as yourself.


Mel. Thank you, sir, for your fleers.


Pick. As I hope for salvation, I would rather have you (for a time, aside)
than any woman I ever saw.


Mel. It Is not worth your while to make your fun of a poor girl.


Pick. Fun! upon my soul I Am in earnest.


Mel. A gentleman like you would never marry a poor girl, I Am sure.


Pick. There, Miss, you are mistaken: I had rather marry a poor girl than a
rich one. My reasons are the best in the world: a poor girl would think herself
obliged to me, would love me from gratitude, and make me an industrious,
frugal, good wife; a rich one would think she obliged me, and would want a
thousand things, a fine house, fine servants, fine clothes, a fine equipage,
all her requests to be granted, and never to be contradicted in any thing: If I
marry a poor girl, I get a wife; if a rich one, I get a mistress.


Mel. You don't mean what you say.


Pick. I do upon my soul, my intentions are honorable; your name, my dear.


Mel. Melinda Heartfree, sir.


Pick. Well, my dear, it shall be Mrs. Meanwell, if you please.


Mel. Is your name Meanwell, sir?


Pick. It is, madam. No doubt you have often heard of me, perhaps seen me
before: my name and character will remove any suspicion you may entertain of my
integrity and honor, I hope.


Mel. I have often heard daddy talk of you, sir.


Pick. What is your father's opinion of me, Miss?


Mel. He likes you mightily, and so does mammy too; you stood for sister Bibby,
when you set up for ^urgess.


(...) True, my dear, I well remember it: and are yo^ (...) daughter of my old
friend Heartfree? Come to (...) ^s, (embraces her) my dear girl, I shall be
proud to be son-in-law to a man of his worth and goodness.


Mel. You surely are not in earnest, sir!


Pick. I am, and to convince you of my sincerity, I would immediately wait upon
you home, and communicate my intentions to your friends; but I have some
business today that prevents me: however, I shall be this way tomorrow; will
my dear girl be so kind as to meet me?


Mel. There is no harm in coming here, sir: I can do it to oblige you; but you
will forget me, and every thing you have said to me, before tomorrow.


Pick. Impossible that I ^^n ever forget that sweet face! (he kisses her, she
seems coy) will you meet me here about twelve o'clock, tomorrow? Don't be
cruel, my sweet girl; you know I love you: my words, my looks, my actions must
discover it.


Mel. Well, sir, I Will be a fool for once, I Will come.


Pick. Charming creature, one kiss my love (kisses her) it is ecstacy by
heavens! (Exit Melinda) Well! these ignorant girls are the finest game in the
world: heave a sigh, look languishingly, and swear a little, the poor things
drop their heads into your bosom, and die away as quick as a sensitive plant.
Well, Trueman, having planned a scheme of amusement for myself, I Will now
proceed to the execution of your commands. Exit.


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A courthouse.
Trueman and Meanwell. True. What, is the committee to meet today, Meanwell? I
hate these little democracies.


Mean. Take care, sir, both property and characters lie at the mercy of those
tribunals.


True. What weighty business calls their high mightinesses together?


Mean. Most of the Caledonians are suspected of disaffection to the American
cause, and either from friendship or attachment to their own country,
disapprove the public measures: from this cause, our holy inquisition are for
the very moderate correction the Jews received in Spain.


True. Banishment, or a renunciation of their error, I suppose.


Mean. This may be the cause; at present an oath is to be applied as a mirror
to their breasts, which reflecting their private opinions and sentiments, must
lay them open to the public eye. This is to be offered as a touchstone of
public virtue, as a trial of faith; and woe be unto those who are found
faithless.


True. The ungracious treatment that some Scotchmen have met with, the
illiberal reflections cast out against them all, give little hope of their
attachment to a country, or to a people, where and with whom they have already
tasted the bitter herb of persecution: some there are, who have behaved well,
conformed to the public will, nor given any cause of offense; yet even those
have not met with the common offices of civility among us.


Mean. Of this character are those who are cited before the committee today.


True. Hush, sir, here come two of the guardians of our state.


Enter Col. Strut and Mr. Summons. Strut. We delegates, Mr. Summons, have a
very hard time of it.


Sum. Men of abilities must give themselves up to the service of their country.


Strut. True, sir, the people will exact the services of those they can depend
upon.


Sum. Your wise men, as they call them, cut but a poor figure in these times.


Strut. They are dangerous men: they are always starting doubts and creating
divisions; divisions are dangerous. United we stand, divided we fall, is the
American motto, you know.


Sum. Very true Colonel, very true. When I became a delegate, I was told it was
the ready way to some profitable post. I long to serve my country.


True. Enter into the army, sir; that is the way to preferment.


Sum. I am a cripple, and cannot be a soldier.


Mean. Be a colonel of militia then, it is a fine post for cripples, for they
never march, but they have no pay, Mr. Summons: you want a post that will bring
you something.


Sum. I love my country and wish to serve her, and I wish some folks were as
true to their country as they ought to be.


Mean. And as disinterested too, and then men of real merit, would be in her
service, in lieu of them who get into office, to catch a few sixpences from her
treasury.


Enter Brazen, Thunderbelt, Squib and Skip. Braz. How goes it? How goes it?
Well, what business do we meet upon today?


Strut. The Scabbies are to be tried according to the ordinance.


Bra. Let Us duck the scoundrels.


Thun. Duck 'em! let us burn the scoundrels.


Skip. Let Us hang them.


Squib. Ay, ay, hang them, that is the best way.


Enter Colonel Simple. Sim. Gentlemen, your servant.


Bra. How goes it, old cock?


Sim. Why, praise be to God, through mercy, I Am reasonably well, I thank you.


Bra. I understand those gentlemen take part with the Scotch (pointing to
Trueman and Meanwell.)


Thun. It is a common talk.


Squib. The people don't like it.


Skip. Some talk very hard of it, I assure you.


True. If to treat the unhappy with kindness be an offense, I shall always be
an offending sinner; meanness dwells with oppression, and cowardice with insult.


Mean. Justice is the birthright of all, and public virtue is displayed by an
impartial distribution of it.


Strut. Would you protect our enemies, gentlemen? would you ruin your country
for the sake of Scotchmen?


True. Prove them to be enemies, show that they plot the downfall of my
country, and courtesy itself shall revolt against them.


Bra. There is sufficient proof that nine hundred and ninety-nine out of a
thousand of them are our enemy.


True. Some may be enemies, others guiltless. It Is ungenerous to arraign this
man for the offense of his neighbor; illiberal to traduce all for the
transgressions of a few.


Mean. Justice would blush at such proceedings: Pity, drop a tear at the
outrage.


Bra. Here comes the Scotchmen.


Enter M'Flint, M'Squeeze, and M'Gripe. Sim. Gentlemen of the committee, pray
take your seats (they sit round a table.) I was requested by colonel Strut, to
summon these men here (coughs) I have a bad cold, tell me, if you please
colonel, what it is about.


Strut. (rising) These men, gentlemen, are cited before this committee,
agreeable to an ordinance of convention.


M'Flint. What is our offense, pray?


Strut. The nature of their offense, gentlemen, is, that they are Scotchmen;
every Scotchman being an enemy, and these men being Scotchmen, they come under
the ordinance which directs an oath to be tendered to all those against whom
there is just cause to suspect they are enemies.


Bra. (rising) As these men are Scotchmen, I think there is just cause to
suspect that they are our enemies. Let it be put to the committee, Mr.
president, whether all Scotchmen are not enemies.


Strut. A good notion, Mr. Brazen, I second it with all my heart.


Thun. We have some Scotchmen in our army; they are our friends, I hope.


Squib. To be sartin they must be our friends.


Skip. Yes, yes, they are our friends, no doubt.


Bra. They are excepted of course.


M'Squeeze. I wish the country very well, I never did it harm, gentlemen.


M'Gripe. I Have gi'en nae cause to suspect that I am an enemy. The ordinance
says, ye must hae just cause. Bring your proof, gentlemen.


Bra. Proof, sir! we have proof enough. We suspect any Scotchman: suspicion is
proof, sir. I move for the question, Mr. President.


True. In the catalogue of sins, I never found it one before to be born on the
north of the Tweed. (aside to Mean.)


Mean. In nature's lowest works, I never saw before such base stupidity. (aside
to True.)


Strut. The question, Mr. President.


All. The question, the question.


Simp. Is all Scotchmen enemies, gentlemen?


All. Ay, ay.


M'Flint. Before you determine so precipitately, gentlemen, I should have been
glad to say somewhat in my own defense.


Simp. What is it, my dear sir?


M'Flint. I was bred in Scotland, but not born there.


M'Squeeze. What, Sandy, do you deny your country mon, tak shame to yoursel,
Sandy.


M'Flint. It is time to deny man, when they make it a crime to be born there.


M'Gripe. I Will lose my life for dear old Scotland, before ev^ I Will blush for it.


Thun. As Mr. M'Flint says he is no Scotchman, we have no^ (...) to suspect him
more than any other man.


Bra. A^ he is no Scotchman, he may be a very good man* I move that he be
discharged.


All. Agreed, agreed.


Strut. I rise to move, sir, (coughs) I say, sir, I move that the oath be
tendered to these men, according to the ordinance.


M'Squeeze. What oath?


Strut. The test oath, sir; you must swear to be true and faithful to this
country.


M'Squeeze. I Will take nae oath, the like of that.


M'Gripe. I Will no swear allegiance to any man but my king.


Strut. There, gentleman, you see what they are, they are all so to a man.


Bra. I move that they be disarmed, as the ordidinance directs.


All. Agreed, agreed.


Simp. Well, gentlemen, the business is done; I suppose we may rise.


All. Ay, ay. They rise.


Enter Mr. Ta^kabout. Tack. Is the committee up? I Am sorry I was not here a
little s^^ner. I had an information or two to lay before the committee.


Bra. We can sit again, sir; order the committee to sit again, Mr. President.


Tack. Upon second thoughts, we'll decline it for the present: I have not all
the proofs about me; besides a witness I expected, is not here, I find.


Squib. I Will lay he has found out some tory.


Skip. He has got some tory in the wind, depend upon it.


Squib. I declare he is the prettiest spokenest man I ever saw.


Skip. Yes, between you and me, he ought to have been our delegate.


Tack. Well, gentlemen, you have trounced those Scotch gentlemen, I hope.


Bra. We have.


Tack. So, colonel, you have resigned your commission, I Am told. (to col.
Simple.)


Sim. Yes, my friend; I grow old and infirm: I thought it best to decline in
time.


Tack. There Is some prudence in retreating from danger: the times are perilous,
colonel.


Sim. Young men, like you, Mr. Tackabout, are the properest persons for
commissions: such old folks as I, are better out of the way.


Tack. Out of harm's way, you mean, colonel.


Sim. I think such men as you ought to step forth: I have often heard you boast
of your courage, Mr. Tackabout; now is the time, sir -- now or never.


Tack. Why sir, I have some expectations in England; the reversion of a
considerable estate, or --


Bra. Poh! damn the estate; let it go.


Tack. My ancestors lost an estate by their loyalty; I should not choose to
lose mine by my disloyalty.


Sim. It Is a sin to lose an estate any how; that is certain.


Tack. A man's patrimony, in my opinion, is a sacred depositum, especially when
an expected title gives luster to the possession.


Bra. Damn the title -- take a commission: that is better than all the titles in
the world.


Sim. Take my commission, Mr. Tackabout: it is expected you should do
something, indeed it is.


Tack. I have done enough already, sir.


Sim. But I observe, you keep out of harm's way, Mr. Tackabout.


Tack. Where is the man that has done more than I have? I have damned the
ministry, abused the king, vilified the parliament, and cursed the Scotch. I
have raised the people's suspicions against all moderate men; advised them to
spurn at all government: I have cried down tories, cried up whigs, extolled
Washington as a god, and called How a very devil. I have exclaimed against a^l
taxes, advised the people to pay no debts; I have promised them success in war,
a free trade, and independent dominion. In short, I have inspired them with the
true patriotic fire, the spirit of opposition; and yet you say it is expected I
should do something.


Sim. There are many to be found, who do all this.


True. And few who do any thing else. (aside)


Mean. Can this be the person we were in company with the other day, Trueman?
(aside)


True. The very same, only Proteus like, he can change from a man to a brute,
from a brute to a serpent, or to any thing he pleases. (to Meanwell.)


Tack. Trueman, your servant; Meanwell, yours. I beg pardon, I really did not
observe you were present.


True. We should not have been offended if you had overlooked us altogether,
sir.


Tack. Poh. Never mind what I say to these fellows, you know my private
sentiments.


True. As well as they do, I suppose, Mr. Tackabout; but, sir, the man who
privately condemns, and publicly approves either men or measures, sh^ws himself
a knave, and proves himself a coward. (aside to Tackabout.)


Tack. Come, sir, no more, sir, I beg of you; I talk to these fellows always in
their own style, to avoid suspicion; nothing else, upon ^^^our, sir, (aside to
Trueman.)


True. So, sir, you inculcate principles subversive of every public and private
virtue, you encourage oppression and spread sedition, merely for your own
security.


Tack. Prudence requires something of this kind.


True. What you call prudence, I call baseness, Mr. Tackabout: however, I leave
you to the pleasures of your prudent duplicity -- Meanwell, I wait upon you.


Mean. I Will attend you, sir. Exit Mean, and True.


Bra. You and the tories were at cross-questions, I believe, Mr. Tackabout.


Tack. It is always the case, sir: I wish to reclaim the fellows, and cannot
but repeat a little of my political catechism to them whenever we meet.


Sim. It Is a pity such clever men should be enemies to their country.


Strut. They are dangerous men; show me a clever man, and I Will show you an
enemy; let me advise you to keep a strict eye upon those men. Mr. President.


Bra. D -- mn all tories, say I. Come, let us go into the muster-ground. Exit
omnes.


SCENE a muster-field (in the courtyard.)
Flash, Thunderbolt, Soldiers, Mob, etc. Flash. (holding a news-paper in his
hand) ha! damn me, I thought so; yes, yes, honies, you have got it, nine
hundred at a clip. Well done, Washington, by God! We'll trim the rascals, d --
me.


Thun. What Is that, captain?


Flash. Great, very great; we have done it at last.


Squib. What have we done, captain?


Flash. Every thing, by God; a noble stroke, old fellow; we have killed and
taken nine hundred of the damned infidels.


Thun. Read it, captain, read it.


Flash. Poh! damn it, you know I hate reading; cannot you believe me? there it
is, in black and white.


Thun. (reads) "A copy of his excellency general Washington's letter to
congress, dated, Trenton."


Flash. That Is it; d -- n my buttons, if I would not give a million that I had
been there.


Thun. This is great news, really, captain.


Flash. It will do; but it might have been better, and more complete. Some got
off, you see; if I had been there, I Will be damned if a single scoundrel should
have escaped; and here am I doing nothing, but encouraging a set of poltroons
to enter into the service; ever perplexed, vexed, and disappointed -- not a
breath of applause; not a sprig of laurel for poor Flash, while others are
reaping it by handfuls.


Thun. Never mind, captain, it will be your time, soon.


Flash. Soon! The enemy will be driven to the de. vil, before I shall arrive at
the scene of action.


Enter Trim. Trim. Noble captain, your servant -- we shall soon get our
complement of men; there are several sine fellows that intend to list.


Flash. Noble fellows: have you any thing for them to drink.


Trim. I have the recruiting jugs full to the brim.


Flash. Of what?


Trim. Peach brandy, the best liquor in the world.


Flash. Produce it, d -- me, and give the lads a drink.


Trim. Never mind me; never mind me, captain, I Will do it.

(sings.) Come on my brave fellows, a fig for our lives,
We'll fight for our country, our children and wives;
Determined we are to live happy and free,
Then join honest fellows, in chorus with me.
We'll drink our own liquor -- our bra^ from peaches;
A fig for the English -- they may buss all our breeches.
Those bloodsucking, beer-drinking puppies retreat,
But our peach-brandy fellows can never be beat.
Where Is the spring?


Mob. We'll show it you.


Trim. Come on, my brave fellows.


Mob. Huzza! for the noble sergeant. Exit shouting.


Flash. My sergeant has enlisted several fine fellows for me; but persecuted
with the wheedling of wives, or the entreaties of parents, I am obliged to
discharge the cowards as fast as I get them.


Thun. You should not let your good nature prejudice the service, captain.


Flash. Prejudice the service! D -- me, sir, I don't know what you mean.


Thun. I beg pardon -- I only meant to say, you ought not to be too
good-natured.


Flash. D -- n good nature, sir, I scorn it. If I let a man off, it is for his
money; he pays for his peeping, honey.


Thun. That Is right; it makes the more bounty-money for others.


Flash. No, no, thank you, none of that, my dear; where are my expenses to come
from, do you think?


Thun. I thought the public allowed for these.


Flash. The public allowance is nothing, if it was not for a little
smart-money, and now and then a run of luck, I should absolutely perish.


Thun. Do you ever play at cards?


Flash. A pretty question, d -- me! Why gaming and whoring are the two first
qualifications of a soldier.


Thun. What say you to a crack at all-fours, now?


Flash. Agreed.


Thun. Let us go into yonder house, and set to it like brave fellows: my
lieutenant shall play with you for what you please.


Flash. Here Is he that never flinches. Enter Trim. Well, Trim, what luck?


Trim. Why, sir, I got ten clever fellows to promise me to enlist (hickups) do
you see me, just as the brandy gave out, they kept punctually calling for more
grog, I told them, says I, (hickups) I am very sorry, says I, the brandy is
out. e'god, sir, the words were no sooner out of my mouth, (hickups) than away
they went, every soul of them.


Flash. I am glad of it, for I may perhaps find another use for the
bounty-money. Trim meet me at old Brazen's tonight. Come, gentlemen. Exeunt.


SCENE Brazen's house.
Isabella and Mira. Is. Prithee, Mira, lay aside those demure looks; when every
creature is running mad for joy at the glorious news from the northward, here
are you like an Egyptian mummy -- without sense or motion.


Mira. I have a fit of the horrors, Miss, whenever I hear of a battle.


Isa. So have I, if it goes against us.


Mira. Victory is attended with the widows lamentations, and the orphan's
tears; I cannot rejoice at any thing, that sounds with funeral dirges, or makes
joy smile in the face of affliction.


Isa. Were I a lump of clay, or an image of wax, the word victory would make me
spring into life, and sing Te deum.


Mira. The untimely death of a parent, husband, or child, might prevent your
vivacity, Miss.


Is. Was I to be made a widow by every victory, I verily think I should rejoice.


Mira. Parental and filial tenderness are too nearly allied to our natures,
connubial bliss too valuable, the sweet affections of sympathy and compassion,
are too much the ornaments of the human hear, to be cast away for the foolish
exultations that flow from the vain triumphs of ambition.


Isa. Ha, ha, ha! Do you imagine that I am such a blockhead as to believe the
widow's lamentations, the orphan's tears have any effect upon your spirits,
Mira? No, no, I know better.


Mira. What do you know, madam?


Isa. I know that a poor creature of the masculine gender, has as high notions
of connubial bliss as your ladyship; that he thinks of the great duties of
parental and filial tenderness as you do, and that he esteems all victories
horrid, unless they are graced with hymenial triumphs.


Mira. You are extremely pleasant, madam.


Isa. Positively, Mira, I am surprised at you.


Mira. Surprised at me! for what, pray?


Isa. Why, child, that you should ever think of being in love with one of those
horrid creatures, called tories; Trueman is a shocking fellow.


Mira. Really, Miss, I am as much surprised at you.


Isa. Why, child?


Mira. That you should ever be simple enough to esteem a silly coxcomb in
politics, who puts on the name of patriot, as all coxcombs do their clothes, to
be distinguished, and to be laughed at.


Isa. What do you mean, madam?


Mira. My meaning requires no interpretation, ma'am.


Isa. If you imagine your satirical scoffs have any effect upon me, madam, you
are much mistaken. The shafts of envy fall short of their mark, when aimed at
the well guarded, public protected principles of an honest whig.


Mira. Irony, is a harmless weapon, when pointed either at folly or meanness.


Isa. You are in your own house, madam.


Mira. Where I shall always be glad to entertain you, when you are disposed to
treat me with decency.


Isa. How have I transgressed?


Mira. Trueman's merits are above the scandal of the times: yet, Miss, it gives
me pain to hear his name mentioned in terms of reproach.


Isa. I hate tories so abominably, that I cannot, for my soul, think of them
with patience: As long, madam, as you persist in your fondness for such
animals, I shall refrain my visits, I assure you.


Mira. Do as you please, Miss.


Isa. Madam, your servant; mercy, that any creature can love a tory! Exit Isa.


Mira. So, I have lost one patriotic acquaintance -- here comes a male bird of
the same species, to torment me; but I Will avoid it. Exit.

Enter Flash. D -- mn me, if I am not the most unlucky dog that ever cut the
cards. (seeing Mira.) so, honey, are you there? Push off, for I Will be damned if
I Will have any thing to say to you.


Enter Brazen. Bra. How goes it, captain?


Flash. It goes damned hard with me, old fellow; I Am sick.


Bra. Sick!


Flash. Beat to death, trimmed most damnably; a round hundred -- nothing less.


Bra. What! lashes?


Flash. Lashes! d -- me, what a thought! no, no, here is the stuff, (laying his
hand upon his sword) here is the stuff.


Bra. How beat, then?


Flash. A round hundred, good continental, lost with a militia fellow, a d --
mn'd milksop lieutenant.


Bra. I Will give you satisfaction.


Flash. Satisfaction, sir!


Bra. Yes, sir; the satisfaction that all gamesters require, a chance to win
your money back.


Flash. You meant to use me ill, sir.


Bra. No, upon my honor, nothing but a joke.


Flash. If that is all, here is my hand, I Am at you, for twenty dollars a game,
if you dare?


Bra. A match, come on. Exeunt.


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. A dressing room.
Enter Isabella, and sings. No sounds but drums shall please my ear,
Farewell, soft folly; love, adieu:
No grief's but hero's griefs I Will share
Nor sigh, but Washington, for you.
Well, what would I give to hear of another victory! I had a horrid dream last
night: I dreamed that I saw the congress running out of Philadelphia, frighted
to death; some barefooted, others bareheaded, that they run into a great crowd,
where I soon saw, as I thought, my dear little colonel, bold as a lion, calling
out, to arms, arms! but I was surprised to see the men have clubs and sticks,
instead of guns; and my dear little colonel with a corn stalk to his side,
instead of a sword. It was a horrid dream.

Enter Strut. Strut. Your servant, madam.


Isa. Colonel, I am glad to see you. -- Do you ever mind dreams, colonel?


Strut. Pleasant dreams are not amiss, madam.


Isa. Well, but bad dreams, I mean. I dreamed of you last night.


Strut. Was that a bad dream, madam?


Isa. Very bad, I thought the congress were running away, and that you, without
a sword, was at the head of a number of men without arms.


Strut. Dreams are illusions; but we have had another battle with the enemy,
madam.


Isa. When, where! how, tell me, dear colonel?


Strut. We attacked them at Prince-Town, and have killed, and taken prisoners,
a prodigious number.


Isa. Thank God: but is it true?


Strut. As true as the gospel, ma'am: it is in the papers.


Isa. At Prince-town, did you say? where is that?


Strut. Prince-Town, is a town, somewhere about -- where general How is
encamped.


Isa. Don't you long to be there, colonel? Lord! If I was a man, how fond I
should be of it!


Strut. If my affairs --


Isa. Affairs: prithee no more of that: when do you think you will set off?


Strut. It is impossible for me, madam -- I have some affairs --


Isa. Affairs, again! every thing should give way to the service of your
country.


Strut. If I had the constitution of some men --


Isa. Constitution! why are you sick? positively, colonel, if you persist in
making such foolish excuses, I shall hate you.


Strut. Upon my honor, madam.


Isa. That Is in my custody, sir: you pawned it to me long ago, as a pledge for
the patriotism and courage I have given you credit for.


Strut. I hope you don't suspect me of wanting either.


Isa. Why really, I never did, but I most certainly shall, unless you go into
the army.


Strut. It Is not necessary that all patriots should be soldiers.


Isa. It Is necessary that you should be a soldier, though: for, to be plain with
you, colonel, I am determined to be a general's lady, or never to marry.


Strut. Positively, madam, the service will kill me.


Isa. You Will be killed in the service, you mean: That Is what you apprehend.


Strut. I could die on the field of battle with pleasure, madam, but, --


Isa. No but's, colonel, you must be a soldier, indeed you must.


Strut. Well, madam, if it is your desire -- but I Have one favor to request of
you, first.


Isa. Any thing: what is it?


Strut. Will you condescend to marry me, before I go?


Isa. No faith, will not I: the conditions upon which I engaged myself to you were
as follows: First, you were to be a delegate, next a colonel, then a general.
The material condition remains yet to be complied with, on your part; that
performed, perhaps I may have no objection to give you my hand.


Strut. Suppose I should be killed?


Isa. I should cry a little, I suppose.


Strut. My dear madam, there are soldiers enough without me.


Isa. You must be a general, or quit your pretensions to me.


Strut. I can apply in a neighboring state, and be made a brigadier-general,
without being a soldier.


Isa. No, no, you shall fight for your commission: I Will have none of your
chimney-corner generals, I assure you.


Strut. Will no excuse do?


Isa. None, sir. I bid you adieu for the present; unless you set off for the
army immediately, it shall be for ever. Exit.


Strut. The devil take this: I have vapour'd away to a pretty purpose, faith!
By pretensions to patriotism, I became a delegate; and putting on the
appearance of a man of courage, I became a colonel; all to tickle the vanity of
this girl -- and now, truly, I must expose my life that she may be a general's
lady! I cannot do it: I never thought of fighting in my life. What! stand and be
shot at! Indeed, Miss, if these are the terms you are to surrender upon, you
may keep your citadel forever, for me: I Am for a whole skin, if I do penance
in it, as an old bachelor, all my days. Exit.


SCENE a field.
Enter Pickle. Simple creature! how soon she blushed her consent to every thing
I proposed? here she comes, fair as Venus, and as Dian chaste. Enter Melinda.
My dearest girl. (kisses her.)

Mel. I have turned fool, you see, sir, and done as you desired. If you were in
earnest in what you said yesterday, I shall always be ready to oblige you in
any thing.


Pick. A pretty forward hint, by God. (aside) Why, do you see, (scratching his
head) as to that, my dear, we'll talk it over another time. I have a few
preliminary articles to propose to you, which if you agree to, you may name the
happy day.


Mel. I don't understand you, sir.


Pick. Why, my dear, I have some preparatory measures to take, respecting my
friends, and a previous agreement to make with you and them.


Mel. Speak plain, if you please. I don't understand these fine words.


Pickle. I should be much to blame, you know, to marry any woman without
knowing whether she would suit my purpose.


Mel. As to that matter, you can best judge: you cannot look for much breeding
from a poor girl like me, without any bringing up.


Pick. My dear, that is not my objection. I only wish to examine my commodity
before I purchase. (taking her hand) I wish to know more of you, my dear.


Melin. (pushing him off) You know as much as you shall know, 'till you have a
better right than you have at present.


Pick. My dearest girl, as we are man and wife in the face of heaven, do you
see, you should not be so vere scrupulous with me.


Mel. It will be time enough to take such freedoms, sir, when I am your wife.


Pick. Wife! mercy on us! (aside) The liberties I wish to take, my dear, are
licensed freedoms. Love requires something of this kind to keep itself alive.
It Is as necessary to love as fuel is to fire. If you don't let me toy and play
with you a little, by my soul, my love will go out.


Mel. I cannot help it; but you shall take no immodest freedoms with me.


Pick. Poh! a little harmless play, my dear, is mere pastime, don't be afraid.
(attempts to be rude)


Mel. You don't behave like a gentleman, sir. I assure you, though I might,
perhaps, consent to be your wife, I never will agree to be any thing else.


Pick. Who the devil would have thought it? (aside) My dear, I humbly beg your
pardon. The violence of my passion is the cause of these transports. Alas! with
what delight would I take you for my bride -- but the objections of my friends
--


Mel. What friends?


Pick. I have some particular friends from whom I have great expectations; and
your fortune and family would be with them insuperable objections.


Mel. As to my fortune, and family, it is out of my power to make either of
them better than they are: you had better then give over all thoughts of the
match.


Pick. No: it is impossible. My friends shall not control me. I am resolved
upon it, and you shall be mine.


Mel. But your great expectations, sir.


Pick. Oh! as to that: I hope, in time they may be reconciled, when they find
the marriage is over, and cannot be prevented. For this reason, I think it
would be best not to have a public marriage. I will beg you therefore, to keep
the marriage a secret for some time, 'till I can reconcile them to it.


Mel. When I am your wife, you shall direct me in all things.


Pick. Well, my dear, my servant will wait upon you at this place, about six in
the evening, and will conduct you to a friend's house. I Will be there with a
clergyman, and proper witnesses.


Mel. Well, sir, if you do marry me, I will study night and day to please you,
and to make you happy. In the evening, you say?


Pick. Yes, my love.


Mel. 'Till then, I wish you well.


Pick. Adieu. Exit Melinda. Little did I expect this resistance in so artless a
creature. I made as sure of my game, as if I had caught it. However, I Will
entangle my pretty linnet yet, in a net often set by us true sportsmen, for
these shy birds. Our butler shall be the parson, the cook and scullion the
witnesses. The butler has a most demure sanctified face, and will make a
tolerable good priest. E'gad, the idea of what is to follow, gives me a
palpitation at the heart already. Well, Trueman, your business: then my own.
Exit.


SCENE Brazen's house.
Flash and Brazen at a gaming table. Flash. (rising in a passion) Damnation
seize me, if you did not pack the cards.


Bra. It is a damned lie, sir.


Flash. Dare you give a soldier the lie, sir?


Bra. Yes, I dare, when he tells one.


Flash. Come, old fellow, I don't mean to quarrel with you. (offers his hand.)


Brazen, Pay the money you have lost.


Flash. Don't be hard, old fellow; I Have no money but the public's, not a
shilling.


Bra. Public or private, pay, I say.


Flash. Consider, sir, the service must be injured, if I apply the public money
to any purposes, but those for which I received it.


Bra. Damn the service: what is the service to me? pay sir.


Flash. I Will give you my note on demand.


Bra. Your note! damn your note, I Will have the money.


Flash. Lord! how I tremble with rage, (sees Pickle coming). A brother officer,
by God! a reinforcement (aside) my note, sir, is as good as any man's note.
Damn you, sir, you have raised my blood. I demand satisfaction. (draws his
sword.)


Bra. Lay down your stickfrog, and I Will give you satisfaction. (puts himself in
the attitude of boxing.)


Flash. What! you are for fifty cuffs? Oh! no, no, honey, I am no black-guard.
Come on, my dear. Here Is the stuff, honey.


Enter Pickle. Pickle. Gentlemen, your servant.


Flash. Your servant, my dear, (stands in the attitude of fencing.)


Pickle. What! at points, gentlemen!


Flash. Draw, my dear, for the honor of the profession, draw. -- Sir, it is a
disgrace upon a soldier to have a fist cocked in his company.


Pickle. Your antagonist has no other weapon. Here Is my sword, sir, (offering
his sword to Brazen.)


Brazen. Sir, I thank you. Now, come on, you scoundrel.


Flash. What! Aid the enemy! Hark'ye, my dear, your name! (to Pickle.)


Brazen. That Is captain Feather, of the flying camp. Come on, sir, I say. (to
Flash.)


Flash. I have nothing to say to you, sir, (to Brazen.) Captain, I should be
glad to speak with you. Walk out, if you please, sir. (to Pickle.)


Pickle. The sword, if you please, (Brazen gives the sword) Come, sir, I Will
attend you.


Flash. But upon second thoughts, my dear, I can say, what I have to say, here.
You seem from the northward, from your uniform.


Pickle. Perhaps not, sir.


Brazen. You are a scoundrel. sir, (to Flash.)


Pickle. Do you hear that, captain?


Flash. Washington has done wonders to the northward, sir, (to Pickle.)


Brazen. You are a damned coward, I say. (to Flash.)


Flash. Are you from the northward, captain? (to Pickle.)


Pickle. I am, sir.


Flash. In what corpse? in the service of what state, sir?


Brazen. Damn your impertinence; what right have you to catechize any gentleman
in my house? (kicks Flash out.)


Flash. I Will be revenged, damn'me, I Will make you pay for this, honey. Exit.


Pickle. Can that fellow be an officer?


Brazen. Yes; and, I once thought, a fellow of spirit. But he is too mean to
talk about. I thought captain, you had taken your departure for the southward,
yesterday.


Pickle. It was my intention when I left this place, Sir. But hearing of
Washington's fresh success, I am now hastening to the scene of action, hoping
that I may partake of the glory acquired by our noble commander in the frequent
rencountres with the enemy.


Brazen. Noble, captain! give me your hand. You are for the place of danger, I
find.


Pickle. Danger and honor are two associates that go hand in hand. We must
encounter the one to obtain the other. Honor is the idol I worship; to that I
would sacrifice my life and limbs.


Brazen. What can British mongrels do with such men as these. Thirty thousand
of them will be but a breakfast for us.


Pickle. Rather hard of digestion (aside.) I should be glad to pay my respects
to the ladies, sir, if you please.


Brazen. By all means. They are all from home except Mira. I Will send her to
you. She Will be glad to see you, I Am sure. Exit


Pickle. I make no doubt of it. Now, hat under arm, a low bow, and a most
obsequious face.


Enter Mira. Mira. So, Mr. Slyboots, are you here again?


Pickle. At your service, madam, and upon an errand of a similar nature to the
last.


Mira. You have a letter for me, then.


Pickle. Yes, madam, upon my knees I present it; and in token of the great
respect I have for the writer, I must kiss the hand that receives it.


Mira reads. "On Edgehill -- at six in the evening -- Meanwell and his trusty
squire -- your affectionate Trueman." You are the trusty squire, I suppose, and
can inform me more fully, perhaps, of Mr. Trueman's intentions, than he has
ventured to communicate in his letter.


Pickle. Yes, madam, I can tell you Mr. Trueman's intentions, I believe.


Mira. Do, sir.


Pickle. His intentions are to run away.


Mira. Run away!


Pickle. Yes, madam, with a beautiful angel like your ladyship, and to marry
her as soon as he can get a person legally authorized to perform the ceremony.


Mira. So the plot is out. Well, Trueman, love sweetly supplicates for worth
like thine; I surrender.


Pickle. What a charming creature! (aside)


Mira. Here, sir, deliver this ring to Mr. Trueman; tell him, what he gave me
as a token of his love, I now send as a token of my fidelity to him.


Pickle. What a pretty way these fine women have of winding themselves round a
man's heart! (aside)


Mira. Inform him, I will play the obedient mistress that I may sooner learn to
act the dutiful wife.


Pickle. Upon my soul, you say so many fine things I shall forget: Do write.


Mira. Time will not permit, adieu. Exit.


Enter Brazen. Brazen. Well, captain, did Mira know you again?


Pickle. Perfectly, sir. Miss and I had some conversation yesterday; she
recognized me at once.


Brazen. I did not observe you had a word to say to any body but my old woman.


Pickle. A little acquaintance gives the tongue a privilege with people of my
profession.


Brazen. Soldiers are seldom at a loss for talk, they say.


Pickle. Very seldom. I Am at a damnable loss though to contrive an excuse for
getting away decently. ( aside)


Brazen. Come, captain, lay by your sword. You Will stay with me tonight.


Pickle. Excuse me, good sir, when duty commands, the inclination must obey. I
should be happy to stay with you many days, but the honor of a soldier compels
me to repair to the scene of action.


Brazen. The honor of a soldier! That Is true: Well, noble captain, success
attend you


Pickle. I thank you, sir, for your civilities, and am your most obedient
servant. Exit.


Brazen. A decent, well-bred lad, and a fellow of spirit, I warrant. Well, I Will
go in pursuit of that cowardly scoundrel, and cudgel the rascal, or make him
pay me my money. Exit.


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE a Courthouse.
Enter Col. Simple and Mr. Tackabout. Simple. (with a newspaper in his hand.)
This is great news, glory to the Lord for it. The Lord is on our side, I am
taught to believe, for we have great success, Mr. Tackabout.


Mr. Tack. Nothing but the tories can hurt us; nothing else, sir.


Sim. Praise be to God they are vastly scattered.


Tack. There are many in this county. I am surprised the committee don't handle
the fellows. I am determined, unless something is done with them, to head a mob
myself, and burn down their houses.


Sim. With the Lord's will, something ought to be done. Indeed, there should.


Tack. You, as president of the committee, should cite the scoundrels. Let them
be stigmatized; mark them out, and it is an easy matter to set a mob upon their
backs that shall drive them to the devil.


Sim. Why, sir, we have had several before the committee, already, but it has
pleased goodness that nothing could be made appear against them.


Tack. You have tories in the committee, sir.


Sim. God forbid.


Tack. Two of the members dined with a Scotchmen the other day.


Sim. Dine with a Scotchman! that was dreadful.


Tack. Dreadful, sir, why, they deserve to be hanged. I was told they were in a
private room, shut up. The person who told me, says he, peeped through the
keyhole, and saw them wink to each other, and then drink; that they would
every now and then, break out into a horse laugh. He heard them drink damnation
to all scoundrels -- very plain.


Simple. That was meant for somebody, I reckon.


Tack. It was intended for the committee, sir.


Simple. Well, sir* the committee is to meet today, you know, at your request.
You Will inform them of all such things, I hope.


Tack. I Will do my duty, depend upon it.


Enter Brazen, Strut, Thunderbolt, Squib and Skip. Thun. Not pay! I thought the
captain was flush of money.


Brazen. He Is a damned scoundrel.


Enter Flash. Flash. Mighty well! very fine! excellent terms, indeed, if the
guardians of their country are to be ab^sed by every fellow!


Sim. What is the matter, my dear, sir?


Flash. You know I dare not accept or give a challenge: It Is contrary to
ordinance. My hands are tied up you see; yet truly, I am to be kicked, cuffed,
and trod upon. I Will be damned if I would not give a million that I durst cut
that fellows head off. (pointing to Brazen.)


Sim. Surely, my friends, you have not used the captain ill?


Tack. Use a soldier ill! They are our dependence -- our support -- our every
thing.


Squib. Yes, yes, and we should keep them from all harm.


Skip. No soldier ought to be hurt.


Flash. Gentlemen, I lodge my complaint with you. If soldiers are to be abused,
do you see me, because they dare not give a challenge, and by a man too, d -- n
my soul if ever I pull trigger again. (cries.)


Sim. Gentlemen, we really ought to sit upon this matter. ( They all huddle
round a table.)


Braz. That is not a business that comes before the committee, sir.


Tack. The committee; sir, begging your pardon, have a right to take up what
business they please; and and to give any opinion.


Sim. So I always thought.


Thun. Except against one of their own body. They have no right to try one
another. A lawyer told me it would be imperium sub imperio.


Sim. Why, as you say, my friend, I don't think that would be right, nor safe
neither, indeed.


Thun. As Mr. Brazen is a member, we have no business with any matter that
touches him.


All. No, no, by no means.


Sim. Well, gentlemen, as that is your opinion, Mr. Brazen, do take a seat; I
say, gentlemen, as that is your opinion, captain, we cannot do any thing in it,
you see.


Flash. Mighty well! very fine! so I am to be abused, and to have no
satisfaction. D -- nation seize me if I don't.


Brazen. (rising) What will you do?


Flash. It Is no matter, sit still, if you please, I Am done with you, sir. But
I Will be d -- m'd if I don't -- (Brazen goes toward him.) I swear the peace,
gentlemen, I swear the peace.


Brazen. You are an infamous coward, sir.


Flash. Very pretty! noble doings! If I fight, I am to be broke; if not, to be
abused; eh!


Brazen. Walk out, if you please. (turns him out.)


Flash. Yes, yes, I Will go, sir, but d -- mme if I don't -- Exit.


Tack. Upon my soul, Mr. Brazen, I am surprised at you.


Braz. For what, sir?


Tack. That gentleman is an officer in the service of the country.


Braz. Suppose he is.


Tack. Our leading men treat our officers and soldiers with the greatest
respect, sir. Whatever they do or say, is overlooked for the good of the
service. -- They would not have one of them offended for the world, sir: they
would not, you may depend upon it.


Braz. He is a scoundrel; as such I have treated him: if you have a mind --
take up the quarrel.


Tack. I take up the quarrel! D -- n the fellow, I don't care a farthing about
him. No, no, old friend, here is my hand; I would not quarrel with you for a
dozen such fellows Well, Mr. President, are the culprits cited, agreeable to
the list I gave you?


Braz. This fellow has more smoke than fire in him, I find. (aside)


Sim. I told the doorkeeper to summon them. Enter Stitch. Mr. Stitch, have you
summond them men as I told you of?


Stitch. I have summoned four; Mr. Trueman, Mr. Meanwell, the reverend Mr.
Preachwell, and a Scotch pedlar, an't please your honor.


Braz. What are they charged with?


Simple. Why, Mr. Tackabout there, gave me a paper, with all their crimes set
down in it, but (searching his pockets) I Have lost it, I believe, some how or
other. Howsomever, I can remember as how that Mr. Meanwell and Mr. Trueman are
to be tried for dining with a Scotchman, Mr. Preachwell for eating upon a fast
day, and the Scotch pedlar for drinking the king's health.


Braz. Well, where are they?


Stitch. Mr. Meanwe^l, and Mr. Trueman, promised to come. The parson snuff'd up
his nose as bad as if he smelled a stink. I Am sartin, says I, it is not me that
has let a --, mentioning the thing itself, an't like your honor. The words
were hardly out of my mouth, before spang he took me with his foot.


Sim. The parson strike!


Stitch. Yes; look, your honor, just here an't please your honor. (showing
his b -- k si -- c.)


Sim. Praise be to God, our holy teachers detest fighting.


Stitch. I said so, an't please your honor. You a parson, says I! By jing, he
ran at me as vigue-rous as a lion, with a monstratious stick; but durn the
heels, thinks I, that lets the body suffer; so off I ran.


Sim. Did he say nothing?


Stitch. He called me a dirty fellow, an't like your honor.


Braz. Where is the pedlar?


Stitch. He got the wind of me, and has made his escape out of the precincts, I
believe.


Braz. You say, Trueman and Meanwell promised to attend?


Stitch. Yes, an't please your honor.


Braz. Suppose we adjourn, Mr. President, for half an hour, 'till the tories
come?


Sim. Agreed. (The committee rifes) Exeunt.


SCENE the Courthouse yard.
Enter Trueman and Meanwell, meeting Tackabout. True. Let us secure our pockets
Meanwell.


Tack. Fie! my dear Sir, that is too severe.


True. The viper that gives a wound, then licks it with an envenomed tongue, is
not more noxious, more offensive, than the base reptile thou art.


Tack. 'Pon honor, gentlemen, I have the greatest veneration for you both.


Mean. So talked the artful serpent, when with show of zeal, and love, he
seduced our first parents.


True. It is at your instance, Mr. Tackabout, we are called here: What is our
offense?


Tack. At my instance! you astonish me: at my instance! I scorn it.


True. If your baseness was not perfectly plebeian, Mr. Tackabout, the
exteriors of the gentleman might perhaps keep you concealed, but --


Mean. Nature is too true to her bias not to make Mr. Tackabout always appear
the complete villain she intended him for.


Brazen, Thunderbolt and Simple crossing the stage. Braz. Mr. Tackabout is
giving the tories a little more of his political catechism, I expect.


Thund. Come, Mr. Tackabout, no favor to tories: let us have no pleading off;
bring them before the committee.


Sim. Yes, yes, let us have them before us.


Tack. I have nothing to say against the gentlemen. I have no charge against
them.


Sim. Why, dear me! did not you have them cited. Did not you give me a paper?


Tack. That Is lost, thank heaven. (aside)


Sim. Did not you give me a paper with their names?


Tack. I give you a paper! I might give you a paper and their names might be
wrote upon it, but not by me, I assure you. You should never betray your
informers, sir. It will stop all your proceedings. It Is a breach of faith and
confidence that I little expected, sir, (aside to Simple.)


Sim. Oh! dear me! Mr. Stitch, Mr. Stitch.

Enter Stitch. Where Is the paper I gave you with the names of the men you were
to summon.


Stitch. An't please your honor, happening to meet with Mr. Pettifogger, the
attorney, I showed it to him. He told me it was a precept, and that I must
leave a copy of it at every place I went to, but being a poor hand at writing,
thof I have pretty good larning too, I bethought me as how it would do as well
to leave the thing itself, so I gave the paper to that gentleman. (pointing to
Trueman)


Tack. Blown, by heavens! (aside)


Stitch. The paper Mr. Tackabout gave me, I lost.


True. Here is the paper he gave me, and in my house this was found. (aside to
Tackabout.) Do you know this handwriting?


Tack. Hide it, for God's sake, my dear sir. (aside) Come this way, and let me
talk with you: Gentlemen, I wish to have a little conversation with Mr.
Trueman. Will you give me leave?


Thun. Ay, ay, try what you can do with him. (the committee retire)


Tack. Do, my dear sir, be advised. You know I Am a tory; if these fellows find
me out, I shall be tore to pieces.


True. To this gentleman ( pointing to Meanwell) and myself, you profess
yourself a tory; with these people you have the merit of being a whig. It Is
high time, Mr. Tackabout, for you to be shown in your proper colors; for,
under your present disguise, you are a nuisance to all parties.


Enter Thunderbolt, Squib, and Skip, listening. Tack. I am a tory, sir, 'pon
honor, sir, I am.


True. Then you are the base villain I always found you to be.


Enter Simple, Brazen, Strut and Summons. Sim. Come, Mr. Tackabout, these
gentlemen were cited at your request. Let Us have 'em before us.


Tack. I have no charge against them, gentlemen. I have talked the matter over
with them, and am proud to find they are innocent.


Sim. Well, well, what a pity! is there nobody here that can make any thing
appear against them? We shall be laughed at if they get off so; indeed we
shall, my friends.


True. You appear anxious, sir, to have us arraigned: By interrogating us, you
may be furnished with answers respecting any thing you wish to be informed of.


Sim. As that is the case, I shall come to the point at once. Are you tories,
gentlemen?


True. Explain what you mean by the word tory, gentlemen.


Sim. Tory! why surely every body knows what a tory is -- a tory is -- pray,
gentlemen, explain to him what a tory is.


Strut. A tory, sir, is any one who disapproves of men and measures.


Braz. All suspected persons are called tories.


True. If suspicion makes a tory, I may be one; if a disapprobation of men and
measures constitutes a tory, I am one; but if a real attachment to the true
interests of my country stamps me her friend, then I detest the opprobrious
epithet of tory, as much as I do the inflammatory distinction of whig.


Sim. How is that? this gentleman is neither whig nor tory.


True. Neither, sir! -- Yes, neither. Whenever the conduct and principles of
neither are justifiable, I am neither; as far as the conduct and principles of
either correspond with the duties of a good citizen, I am both.


Sim. Well, really, I don't understand him. Do any of you, gentlemen?


Skip. I understand as how he says he is a tory, or no tory, a whig or no whig,
just as the maggot bites.


Sim. How is that?


Skip. Why, mayhap, at this present time of asking, he may be a whig, as we
pretend to be. By and by he may be a tory, as occasion offers.


True. I detest the mean subterfuge: this low cunning I leave to your
sycophant, Mr. Tackabout.


Sim. Mr. Tackabout is no tory, I Am sure.


True. Ask him, sir.


Sim. Well, for the joke's sake. Mr. Tackabout, the tories have a mind to turn
the tables upon you. They seem to signify as how you are a tory.


Tack. You are better acquainted with me, sir, than to suspect any thing of
that, I hope.


Sim. Why, to be sure I am.


Thun. Mr. Tackabout and the tories seemed very thick, a little while ago,
while he was talking.


Skip. Let me tell, Mr. Thunderbolt. -- While he was talking with the tories
just now, Mr. Squib, and I bethought us of listening a bit.


Squib. Yes, and he purtested it was not owing to him these gentlemen were
summoned. He signified he was a tory himself.


Skip. So he did.


Squib. Fair play, is fair play, that gentleman called him a villain for it.
(pointing to Trueman.)


Skip. The truth is the truth. That gentleman is lesser a tory than Mr.
Tackabout.


Squib. So he is.


Brazen. (to Trueman) Give me your hand, you are an honest fellow: every tory
is a villain. Henceforth, all malice apart.


Thund. It seems as how the gentlemen are whigs and Mr. Tackabout the tory.


Braz. They are honest fellows, I find. There Is my hand (to Meanwell)
gentlemen, I move that they be discharged.


All. Agreed, agreed.


Sim. What must be done to Mr. Tackabout?


Braz. Duck him.


Skip. Tar and feather him.


Thund. Advertise him.


Mean. He should be duck'd, as an incendiary, tarr'd as a nuisance, feathered
as a foul traitor, hanged --


True. And advertised as a coward. (kicks him.) I beg pardon, gentlemen, but
Mr. Tackabout's errors are so fundamental, that I cannot help applying a certain
specific. (kicks him out.)


Sim. Well, really, he is rightly served.


All. Very right.


Brazen. Let us adjourn, and drive the fellow out of the yard.


All. Agreed. Exeunt all but Trueman and Brazen.


Brazen. ( taking Trueman by the hand.) You are an honest fellow, a fellow of
spirit.


True. I once esteemed you as a friend, respected you as a father, Mr. Brazen.


Brazen. Well, well, all malice apart, it shall be so.


True. What, good sir?


Brazen. You shall have her tonight, if you please.


True. I am at a loss for words.


Brazen. Poh! poh! keep your words to yourself; you are welcome to her, that is
enough; as I find you are no tory, that is enough; I say. Come, let us mob that
rascal of a fellow. Exit.


True. So in spite of all the malice and censure of the times, I am at last
dubbed a whig. I am not wiser or better than before. My political opinions are
still the same, my patriotic principles unaltered: but I have kicked a tory, it
seems: there is a merit it this, which, like charity, hides a multitude of
sins. Well, Mira, I have once more obtained your father's consent to our union,
and lest some suspicion or other should again tickle his brain with the
patriotic itch, I am determined to be thine this night.

Enter Pickle, not observing Trueman; sings: The flocks, the herds, the pretty
birds
Nature alone, obey;
Like them I Will range, like them I Will change,
As free, as blessed as they.
What he gave as a token of love, I now send as a token of my fidelity to him.
So much for my lesson. ( looking at the ring) Alack! alack! how many poor
creature^ do these little magic circles make miserable!


True. What sine soliloquy are you meditating, most noble captain?


Pick. Taken up with your business altogether, I assure you.


True. It becomes intricate, I fear, if it puzzles a man of your adroitness.


Pickle. I was studying how to convey to you, in the best manner, the sweetest
message that ever came from a fond mistress.


True. A lady's message can lose nothing of it is merit, when conveyed by so
great an adept as you, sir, but I expected a letter --


Pick. A letter! Lord, sir, never ask a letter from your mistress. It Is the
worst way of procuring a tender of the affections in the world. A woman, when
she commits her sentiments to paper, is so very cautious, so nicely
circumspect, lest the warmth that animates the expressions of love, should
carry her beyond the usual prudence of her sex, that the glowing ardor of the
passions, gives way to a cold prudish reserve, which I call the grave of love;
though some are pleased to call it the nursery of virtue. How^ver, sir, your
mistress assents to all your proposals, and here are my credentials. (presents
the ring.)


True. I know the token too well, to doubt the faith of my dear girl, or the
fidelity with which you have transacted the business entrusted to you. Take
this as a small acknowledgment. ( offers a purse.)


Pick. I never receive wages for conducting a love-intrigue. These little
offices of friendship circulate the affections so sweetly, that I always find a
reward in my own feelings without any adventitious one.


True. The youngster's expressions and sentiments favor little of the footman,
methinks. ( aside.)


Pick. Have you any farther commands, sir.


Enter Meanwell. Mean. Well, Trueman, you have got your pleni-potentiary with
you, I find. The preliminaries are all settled, I suppose; and you have nothing
to do but enter the fortress.


True. I have always had a friend in the citadel, the little traitor, love: but
I have obtained by treaty, what I lately thought was only to be achieved by
stratagem.


Mean. What? is the old governor in your interest again?


True. Yes, he assents to the surrender, and the terms of capitulation are all
my own.


Mean. I congratulate you with all my soul: when is to be the happy day?


True. This. I am determined to take the old fellow while he is in the humor.
At six in the evening, I expect our plighted troth will be mutually exchanged.
Even that happy hour will have a shade upon it unless dispelled by your
presence: the old gentleman has been rude to you: can you forgive it?


Mean. The interest you have in his affection leaves no room for my resentment.
You may expect me: 'till then, adieu.


Exeunt Meanwell and Tr^man severally. Pick. Well, since this affair of Mr.
Trueman's is to be settled in the old hum drum style: I have nothing to do but
to bring my amor to as speedy a conclusion as possible. You to your Mira,
Trueman, and I to my dear Melinda. Exit.


SCENE a field.
Enter Flash. Flash. Poor Flash! to be broke if you fight, to be kicked if you
don't! ( pull's off his coat.) Lie there, commission and cowardice, together. (
draws his sword) now, d -- me, come on, ha, hah! ( pushing at the ground) how I
could fight, if I durst.


Enter Strut, escorting Isabella. Strut. Well, ma'am, I have taken a
commission, purely to oblige you.


Isab. Your courage must be tried, indeed it must, colonel, before I can
consent. Stop, ( seeing Flash.) A man fighting his own shadow. See, my dear
colonel; now is the time to attack him: do fight him colonel; I long of all
things in the world, to see a duel.


Flash. Hah! there I had him. Hah! again, by God! through and through d -- me!
( Isabella pushes Strut up to him.) Mercy on me! ( starts back and drops his
sword.)


Isa. Speak to him, colonel.


Strut. ( putting his foot on the sword.) Who are you, sir?


Isa. But stay, colonel, let the man have his sword. ( takes up the sword and
gives it to Flash.)


Strut. May I take the liberty to enquire your name, sir?


Flash. My name! d -- me, sir, what right have you to my name?


Isa. He curses you, colonel; pick a quarrel with him; do, dear colonel.


Strut. What! quarrel with a madman? The man is deranged in his mind. Are you
not frantic, sir?


Flash. Frantic, my name Frantic! D -- mn you, sir, I Will not be nicknamed by
any scoundrel living.


Isa. Scoundrel! now we shall have it, draw, colonel. ( She takes Strut's hand,
and puts it upon the hilt of his sword.)


Strut. He did not call me scoundrel, madam. He only said he would not be
nicknamed by any scoundrel living. I have not nicknamed him, madam.


Flash. It is a lie, sir.


Isa. What say you to that, colonel?


Strut. The man is mad, absolutely mad, madam.


Flash. Blood and fire.


Isa. ( Draws Struts sword and puts it in his hand.) Now, colonel.


Flash. A pretty blade, let us see it my dear.


Isa. Let him feel it, colonel. Up to him. ( pushes up Strut.)


Flash. ( puts up his own sword, and advances to look at that of Strut.) With
your leave, my dear, from France, no doubt. I have heard they are all the best
polishers in the world.


Strut. Stand off, sir; what did you mean by calling me a scoundrel?


Flash. I call you a scoundrel! Upon my soul, my dear, you are disordered in
your mind.


Strut. This lady says you did, sir.


Flash. D -- mn all ladies, say I; they are always making mischief, by setting
honest fellows by the ears.


Strut. I told you, madam, he did not call me a scoundrel.


Isa. I heard him give you the lie in plain terms.


Flash. Don't believe her, my dear. You and I will not quarrel about what a woman
says: they will tell fibbs, d -- n'd fibbs, sometimes.


Strut. You hear, madam; he did not give me the lie.


Isab. Was there ever such a paltry coward! to put up with such an affront, and
then stand parleying with a fellow who only apologizes for it, by abusing his
mistress? give me the sword. ( Takes the sword and runs at Flash.)


Flash. A man in petticoats, by God! oh, ho! my dear, I smell a rat. Yes, yes,
honey, catch Flash if you can. Two to one! Oh! no, no, my dear; I Will not be
assassinated by God. ( runs off.)


Strut. That last reproach of yours, my dear madam, raised my blood to such a
pitch -- if he had not gone off -- D -- n the fellow, I must have killed him.


Isa. Colonel Strut, your most obedient. Henceforth, I disclaim all connexions
with you. Never dare to speak to me, nor hope ever hereafter, to see my face
again. This I will take as the trophy of my victory. Exit with Flash's coat.


Strut. Well, I don't know whether I am not better without her. She has such a
cursed stomach for fighting, she would certainly have brought me into some
scrape or other, in spite of my teeth.

Honor's a bubble, fame a sound
Not worth a man's pursuing;
Women at best, are evil's sound,
And often bring men to ruin.

Exit. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE Meanwell's house.
Enter Pickle. Pickle. My master's servants are a set of honest fellows. The
butler made a few scruples at first, but upon his trying on the canonical
habit, and my telling him he would make a charming methodist preacher, by God,
the old fellow kicked conscience out of doors, and immediately became a new
creature -- Enter the butler, in a clergyman's gown. Sage father, your most
humble. A little more gravity, and you will top the hypocrite so perfectly, that
though true sanctity may blush at thee, yet iniquity will own thee here is for ever.


Butler. I don't much like the business you have set me upon, Mr. Pickle.


Pick. Poh! you shall have a buss of the bride, a reward that would make
lechery kick up the beam, though weighed against the charity of a bishop.
Besides, as my tenure will be of short duration, I expect you may like her in
reversion; a gratuity that a lecher of the Romish church would lick his chops
at, with avidity.


But. It goes against my conscience, Mr. Pickle.


Pick. Conscience! ha, ha, ha, as long as you are in that habit, you may defy
the devil, and all his imps. Conscience only serves as a bugbear to the laity,
the clergy are above it is trifling fears. For shame, don't disgrace the cloth,
old fellow. -- Go take the cook and scullion with you. You know our master is
to be at Mr. Trueman's wedding tonight, we shall not be missed.


But. It is a sin to deceive a poor innocent girl, Mr. Pickle.


Pick. Poh! poh! curse your canting, come along.


But. All the sin must lie upon your head.


Pick. Well, I don't care, so I have the pleasure somewhere else.


But. You must bear me harmless.


Pick. Yes, yes.


But. Well, I must go then, I suppose.


Pick. Come on. Exit with the butler.


Enter Meanwell, with a letter in his hand. Mean. My old friend, Mr. Worthy,
writes me that his nephew, George, had arrived from England, about the
beginning of our public disturbances; that being too free in discovering his
political opinions, he was cited before one of their courts. To avoid the
treatment he expected to receive from these guardians of the rights and
liberties of their fellow-citizens, he absconded without informing his friends
of his route or designs. I am requested to make enquiry after him. We have no
asylum with us to which persecuted integrity would fly for shelter. No, no, he
is not with us.


Enter Groom. Groom. Mr. Trueman presents his compliments to your honor: says
he is gone off to Mr. Brazen's, and desires you will follow him as soon as
possible.


Mean. (looking at his watch.) Six is the hour. Tell your master, I Will be with
him at the time appointed. Exit Groom. My butler just informed me that an old
tenant of mine, formerly one of my best and most faithful domestics, has sent
to me very pressingly to call on him in my way to the wedding. He has urgent
business with me. I must comply with his request, and not to be too late, I Will
prepare immediately for my journey. Who Is there? Enter a servant. Where Is
Tickle?


Servant. An't please your honor, I don't know. But since he turned captain, I
suppose as how he is after some of his wild vagaries. I saw him go out not long
ago, with somebody wrapped up in a gown.


Mean. You did! Farther enquiry should be made into this. Do you think any of
the servants can tell whither he is gone?


Servant. They say it is a profound secret, but I thinks your honor, it cannot
be after any good.


Mean. Don't be too suspicious of a fellow servants, but which of them told you
it was a secret?


Servant. The cook, your honor: says he to me, Mr. Pickle is a fly cock, says
he, and knows what to do, says he, but I hope your honor will not tell as how I
told you.


Mean. Get ye gone, and tell the cook to come hither. (Exit servant.) That
young man is out of the way at a very improper time, and may probably have some
trick in view. He appears to be a faithful and honest, and at the same time the
most ingenious and genteel servant, I ever saw; but nevertheless, it is not
impossible but he may have a mixture of the rake in his disposition. Let me
see, what girl is there hereabouts whom he can have in view? It is not my wish
to pry into all the actions of my servants, but no improper conduct must be
permitted.


Enter the Cook. Mean. Well, sir, can you give me any account of Mr Pickle?


Cook. Your honor will not be offended, I hope. I don't wish to raise mischief
against a brother servant.


Mean. You know my authority when I choose to exert it on a proper occasion,
must not be disputed. I understand that Pickle has gone out with some person
muffled up in a cloak, and as secrecy is generally the veil of iniquity, I am
confident he has some evil design. If you know any thing of his schemes, I
insist upon your faithfully disclosing them to me.


Cook. Why, indeed, your honor, he never told me any thing about it; but I
have good reason to believe, and I Will tell your honor all I know about it; for
though I am a poor sarvant, I hope I may be an honest man. Don't your honor
think a sarvant has a soul to be saved as well as great folks?


Mean. They have indeed, and for that reason should be attentive to their duty.
But my time is short, be quick in giving your information.


Cook. Well, your honor must know the butler is gone with Mr. Pickle, and he
wants me and John the scullion, to go too. The butler told me Mr. Pickle was
going to be married, and we were to be the witnesses.


Mean. But if that was all, where was the neccessity of secrecy.


Cook. Ah! your honor have not heard all yet! This marriage, the butler said, is
to be all a trick. He is to marry her with your name, and the butler is to be
the parson, so that Mr. Pickle will gain his ends without any wedding in
reality; the butler said as how he did not approve such doings, and he would
endeavor to let you know in time to prevent it. -- Howsomdever, as he is gone
too, without telling your honor any thing about it, I suppose Mr. Pickle may
have overpersuaded him.


Mean. Bless me! what a scheme of iniquity! But what girl is this he intends to
deceive?


Cook. Melinda Heartfree, sir, the daughter of your honor's old servant John.
Ah! he is a good old soul, and dame Heartfree too: they are so kind and good,
every body loves them; and the young girl, too, is as good a creature, and as
pretty as ever a man might wish to see. Indeed, your honor, I think it would
be a pity to do her any harm.


Mean. I applaud your sentiments, and wish that many in higher stations, who
delight in betraying innocence and beauty, could think as justly. To prevent
the intended villainy no time must be lost. Pickle and the butler may expect you
now. You shall go with me. I Will not stay to dress for the wedding; when
suffering virtue is to be relieved, or innocence protected, the moments are too
precious to be dedicated to ceremony. Exeunt


SCENE John Heartfree's house.
Enter John and Margaret Heartfree. John. Well, my dear, are you ready to take
a walk over to neighbor Homespun's?


Mar. Yes: I believe there is nothing more to be done about the house, and I Will
go as I am, plain and simple. You know neighbor Homespun don't stand upon
finery.


John. No, and God forbid he should; for neither he nor I have much of that to
brag of. But where is Milly?


Mar. Milly had rather stay at home, she says.


John. Well, let her stay; we can go without her. Come, child. Exeunt.


Enter Pickle and Butler. Pick. Come, I have enquired, and find the old folks
are from home. Melinda is within, and will make her appearance immediately.


Butler. What am I to do?


Pick. Be all gravity, sir, and with a demure face and most audible voice, read
the ceremony.


Butler. The ceremony! where must I find it?


Pick. Here, sir, (opens the book) you are to begin here.


But. Yes, yes, how much is there of it?


Pick. All this. (shows him)


But. Why it would take me a month to read all that --


Pick. Zounds! man, cannot you read?


But. Great D-e-a-r, dear, l-y-ly, darly, b-e, be, l-o, lo, belo, v-e-d, ved,
beloved, darly beloved.


Pick. Pish! try here.


But. Great W-i-l-t, wilt, t-h-o-u, though, h-a --


Pick. Hush you clodheaded fool; here comes Melinda.


Enter Melinda. Pickle. My dearest girl. (kisses her)


Mel. Lord bless me, how my heart aches!


Pickle. What Is the matter, my love?


Mel. I Am so seared; you will pardon my folly, I hope, sir.


Pick. Yes, my dear, and reward your love; this worthy clergyman --


Mel. Is that the parson? how my heart aches!


Pickle. He is a learned and sage divine, a true Orthodox minister of the
church, a man of letters, and hard reading (literally true! aside) He has an
impediment in his speech.


Enter Meanwell, Cook and Scullion, on one side a little behind. Cook. There is
the poor girl, as I was telling your honor he intends to trick.


Mean. Is that the butler in the parson's gown?


Scul. Yes, sir, but he said he would keep them apart 'til your honor came.


Meanwell. (clapping Pickle on the shoulder.) So, sir, you have dared to make
use of my name, in order to deceive an innocent girl.


Pick. Blown, by heavens. (aside.)


Mean. When virtue stands upon her guard against the protestations of lust and
treachery, the professed libertine flies to a new object. It Is only the sly
hypocrite and accomplished villain, who under the mask of honor, makes war
upon simplicity and innocence, by prostituting the sanctity of marriage, to the
base purposes of seduction.


Pick. I am ashamed to look him in the face. ( aside)


Mean. Young man -- I could have pawned my life upon your principles: I have
found in you fidelity, sincerity, and truth, an understanding and disposition
far above your rank in life. In your breast I once thought virtue might have
lived in concord with the graces. Sorry I am to see a mind such as yours
polluted and abased by the low cunning, of intrigue, and the base arts of
sensuality.


Pick. How much like a scoundrel must I appear!


Mean. (to Melinda.) It is happy for you, miss, that my other servants are men
of better principles than your fond lover, here.


Mel. Bless me! what do I hear? pray, sir, what is the matter?


Mean. My name is Meanwell, child.


Mel. What is yours, then? (to Pickle.)


Pick. Pickle.


Mel. Pickle!


Pick. Yes, and a most woeful pickle I am in. ( aside)


Mel. What a fool have I been?


Pick. Pardon me, good sir; and you, my dear girl, forgive me. Though your virtue
deserves a greater reward, yet, if you will condescend to marry me, it shall be
the future study of my life, to atone for my base designs upon your
unsuspecting love, by making you a kind and most affectionate husband.


Mel. Your friends will object to your marriage, unless you get a woman of
family and fortune, perhaps.


Pick. My principal friend is here present: If he consents, and you are
willing, there can be no other objection to our union.


Mean. The generous tender you make of your hand and affections, to this poor
injured innocent, gives me hopes that you have not traveled far in the road of
vice. Her example will, I hope, recall you to the paths of virtue. If she is
willing, I not only consent to your union, but will present you with a
sufficient sum to begin the world with.


Pick. Noble fellow. (aside) Well, my dear Melinda, you hear this, can you
forgive me?


Mel. It was your person I loved, not your fortune: Your person is still the
same, I must still love.


Pick. Here Is my hand.


Mel. With mine take my heart.


Butler. Well, as all matters are settled, I may read the ceremony, I suppose.
I can read much better now, Mr. Pickle.


Mean. Come, sir, be merciful, when virtue rides triumphant on the smooth
surface of our affections, you should never ruffle the fair prospect by
stirring the passions.


Mel. Instead of a fine lady, I must be poor Melinda, still, and instead of the
master I Have got the man.

(taking Pickle by the hand, sings) But come, my Pickle, to my arms,
With all thy love attracting charms,
And free my mind from all alarms.
No sordid views, in thirst of gain,
No hopes of riches giving pain,
Shall ever disturb my simple brain.
My loom shall tell, my wheel declare
That no domestic feuds, or war,
Shall drive my Pickle from my care.
I Will spin his coat, I Will knit his hose,
With white the legs, with blue the toes,
And keep him neat wherever he goes.

Pick. My dear Melinda, it is with pleasure I shall now discover to you my real
name and character. -- After the proofs I Have had of your virtue and
disinterested love, I can no longer hesitate in making you mistress of a
fortune equal to that I falsely pretended to be master of.


Mean. What is this I hear?


Mel. More wonders still!


Pick. That gentleman (pointing to Meanwell) will be able to inform you that
there are few families in this western hemisphere superior to mine, either in
estate or other circumstances. By the death of a tender and careful father, I
am possessed of an ample fortune.


Mean. (aside) My suspicions increase every moment.


Pick. The phrenzy of the times, and an unhappy attachment to sentiments and
opinions inculcated into me from my early youth, reduced me to the necessity of
abandoning both friends and fortune for a time, and to seek an asylum under the
roof of a man held high in the esteem of my poor deceased father, and revered
by all his dependants.


Mean. (showing a letter) Do you know this hand writing?


Pick. It is my good uncle's, or I Am much deceived.


Mean. Come to my arms, my dear George; son to the companion of my youth, the
fond associate of my riper years. He will always live in my remembrance, and to
thee I will pay the debt of love I owed him.


Pick. Add no more to what I have received, lest you oppress me with
accumulated kindness.


Mean. My dear George why did you come to me in the character of a footman? you
know the interest you had in my affections which entitled you to a station far
above the lowly homage paid to a master, or that pliant duty service too often
requires.


Pick. Hearing that you were a suspected person as well as myself, and
apprehending I might be held out to public odium, as the phrase is, I feared if
I announc'd myself to you, you might be induced to do something in my behalf,
which would render you still more obnoxious than you are at present.


Mean. Is it not sufficient that public virtue sometimes yields to the torrent
of political enthusiasm, but are the social virtues to be confined within the
narrow circle of self-preservation, or hid under the disguise of time-serving
civility?

Enter John and Margaret Heartfree. My old friend, I am glad to see you.
(shaking John by the hand) Madam, your servant. (to Margaret)


John. I am proud to see your honor. Heaven's bounty be praised, your honor
bears a good face yet.


Mar. And a good heart too, I hope. (curtseying)


Mean. Thank you, my good old lady; you wish me a boon far above the treasures
of the world.


John. Well, but, Milly, how comes it that the gentlemen are all standing,
child? Come, sir, take a seat; nobody welcomer, your honor knows.


Mean. I thank you John, I had rather stand. (pulling out his watch) I have no
time upon my hands, I find. Well, what business have you with me, John?


John. Business! bless your honor, I am proud to see you: it always does me
good, whenever your honor comes a near me.


Butler. (to Meanwell.) It was a feigned story of mine to bring you here, sir.


Mean. Is that it? I Will say no more about it, then. So, John, you were near
having a wedding in your house today.


John. I don't know how that could be, unless Milly would have wedded one of
the bed-posts. There has not been a soul here, that I remember, off and on
these two months and better.


Marg. Except the mad captain; he was here anon.


Mean. What do you think of this gentleman?


John. I don't recollect that ever I saw him before.


Mean. This is a young gentleman of fortune, the son of an old friend of mine.
His name is Worthy, and would be happy to marry your daughter, if you will
grant your consent.


John. Your honor must be joking now.


Mean. Indeed I am not; certain circumstances compelled him, for a while, to
pass himself on the world for my servant, by the name of Pickle; but his
passion for Melinda has induced him to discover his real name and family.


John. I cannot doubt your honor's word: But how came he acquainted with Milly?


Pick. Love, though blind, by instinct finds his way. I confess, with shame, that
when I first saw this beauteous maid, I was tempted to entertain dishonorable
designs upon her, but I found her pure as spotless snows, and firm as adamant
against all improper proposals, though soft as wax to the impressions of
tenderness. I have always wished to find a maiden who could love me for myself
alone; in this artless fair I have found one, who when my base attempt to
impose upon her by a pretended marriage, was discovered, moved by affection,
forgave it all, and deigned to receive the repentant sinner, though seemingly
poor and humble. To her then, I bow, and she, if you object not, shall be the
partner of my future life.


John. All this is new to me; but the gentleman is welcome to Milly, with all
my heart. However, as it is come to this, another secret must be explained, for
that girl is no more my daughter than I am a governor.


All. How?


John. No, your honor, she is of a much better family than I shall ever boast:
she is nearly related to your honor.


Mean. To me!


John. Yes, your honor; but a short story will make all clear. You remember
you had a sister once who is now dead?


Mean. Yes, one whom I have always remembered with lively regret. She married
unhappily.


John. There, your honor, was the beginning of all the mischief. You know Mr.
Spendall, her husband was a very extravagant man. He lived at a great rate, and
gam'd and horse-raced it very much, so that he soon brought himself to ruin.
But that was not all, for, besides all this, he treated the lady, his wife,
very ill, indeed. She had brought him a fine fortune, and he had spent it: so
he thought her heart always upbraided him for it, and that made him worse, but
Lord help the poor lady, she was so sweet and kind hearted, she bore no malice
to any body.


Mean. (weeping) Your tale touches me too tenderly.


John. No wonder it should, your honor, but as I was about to say, the poor
lady you know had a child, which was generally supposed to have died when it
was two months old. Her husband was at that time gone upon a long journey which
he took indeed to keep out of the way of his creditors, and the report was
spread to deceive him, and a pretended funeral was had.


Mean. I remember it, and I attended on the occasion, but I did not examine the
coffin.


John. Neither did any body else: but the poor lady had brought the child to
me. I shall never forget her looks. It was not long before she died. John, says
she, I know I shall shortly die, my heart is broken, and I am going to a better
world than this. My only tie to earth is this tender infant: may she never feel
her mother's sorrow! This infant I cannot have in the house of a man who has
forgotten all the feelings of a husband, who would educate her in ^^^e, and
perhaps leave her to beggary. I can preserve her from the pollution of bad
example only by removing her from him. With you she will be plain and vir^uous.
When I am dead, and my husband is no more, who I know when alive, will never
permit her to reside with him, convey her to my brother if he shall then be
living. I know his generous soul: he will be indeed a father to her: as a proof
of her birth, present him with this picture of his wretched sister, which he
gave her himself. Here it is, an't please your honor. (shows a miniature
picture.)


Mean. It is indeed, the same.


John. Tell him, she said, that is the picture of his once dear Caroline, tell
him it is the only valuable pledge of affection I had to leave him. She went
away weeping so bitterly, that every time I think on it. -- (wiping his eyes.)


Mean. (Taking Melinda in his arms.) My dearest girl -- say, John, is this my
poor sister's child?


John. I Will be sworn.


Mean. How can I doubt it? These eyes tempered with sweetness, these looks of
mildness declare the fountain from whence they take their origin. ( embracing
her.)


Marg. Blessings upon her, she is as good a child, thof I say it, and had the
bringing of her up, as ever sucked it is mother's milk.


Mean. (to Pickle.) Come hither, George; the generous tender you have made of
your person and fortune to this girl, shall be amply rewarded. Take her, not as
poor Melinda, but as my niece, and with her a fortune equal to your wishes.


Pick. Her merit is a sufficient dowry; her beauty would tempt the miser to
forget his gold, and even think of happiness.


Mel. (runs to John and Margaret embracing them alternately.) My dear father,
my dear mother, how comes it that I am not your daughter? I am, I must be,
indeed I must.


Mean. Their kindness, my dear, well deserves a filial attachment. It shall be
my part to acquit you, in some measure, of the obligations you are under to
them, by something more substantial than words.


John. Come, Milly, place your mind upon your uncle; he is worth a dozen such
fathers as I am, child.


Mel. My uncle, I shall respect, no doubt, shall love; but must I forget my
poor good old father and mother, who have fed me, raised me, cherished and
loved me so long? I could as soon forget my victuals, and drink, as forget
those to whose kindness I have so long been indebted for both.


Mean. When gratitude displays itself, it is with a meridian brightness, that
almost casts a shade over the sister virtues. -- But, John, why did you keep
this matter a secret from me?


John. Your honor married, you know, soon after my young mistress went away.
Ever since your poor lady died childless, I have been thinking of telling your
honor, but some how or other, my heart has always misgiven me 'till now.


Mean. Well, my dear niece, I must redeem the time you have been lost to my
affections, by redoubled tenderness for the time to come. Your old friend, Mr.
Trueman, is to be married this evening, John; will you and the old lady go with
us to the wedding?


John. I am always ready to obey your honor's commands. Milly, you must go
behind your spouse, I suppose. The old woman and I can walk.


Mean. By no means, take my servant's horses. They can wait here 'till our
return.


John. Well, well, your honor's will is my pleasure.


Mean. Come, let us away. Exeunt.


SCENE Brazen's house.
Enter Mira. Mira. I wish love and duty could always go hand in hand, but the
little tyrant will be obeyed, even when all the virtues oppose him. What can
poor Duty do when sole competitor against so formidable a rival. She must
submit, I suppose.

(sings.) Hail, Cupid, god of love, to thee
Henceforth I Will bend the suppliant knee;
Hymen, to thee my bliss I Will owe,
And fearless to thine altar go.
I have long given up to filial piety, all the little gratifications and
amusements so ardently pursued by the gay and giddy of my years, but I can
never resign to an arbitrary injunction, proceeding from mere caprice, the fair
prospect I have of a happy establishment through life.

Enter Trueman. My dear Trueman, how came you here? surely, my eyes deceive me;
it cannot be you.


True. My love, my life, my every hope! ( embracing her.)


Mira. For God's sake, my dear sir -- I expect my father, every moment.


True. Let him come. (kissing her) This prattling talk of love, would make the
angry tenants of the forest club their songs, and all the winged race chirp to
the melody. -- ( kissing again.)


Mira. If he should come, and find you here!


True. Lay aside your fears; your father has again consented to our union. What
his inducements are, it is needless to relate at present. Let it suffice, that
here I am by his permission.


Mira. Is it possible?


True. True as my love, doubtless as your fidelity.


Enter Brazen. Brazen. So, so, give these young dogs a scent of the scut, and
away they fly, regardless of whip or horn. Well, I am glad to see you, sir;
Mira, how goes it, child?


True. ( taking Mira by the hand) You see before you, two persons, long united
by the ties of love, now waiting only for the solemn, sacred, service the rites
of honor call for.


Brazen. I hate your high flown speeches, Mr. Trueman.


Mira. My dear father, at your request, I was induced to accept a tender of
this gentleman's affections.


Brazen. You begin upon your high ropes. Hush, take him, that is enough,
(joining their hands) here, now, you are both satisfied, I hope.


Mira. (kneeling) Accept my thanks.


Braz. Kneel to your maker, child, not to me, get up. You may have him, I say,
that is enough.


Enter Meanwell, Pickle, Melinda, John, and Margaret Heartfree. True. My dear
Meanwell, (presenting him to Brazen) Mr. Meanwell, sir.


Braz. Poh! I know him well enough. I have eyed him many a time, damned sharp,
too, you may depend. However, as he is no tory, I have nothing more to say.
Here Is my hand. I Am glad to see you, sir. Who have you with you?


Mean. Mr. Worthy, sir. (introducing Pickle)


Braz. Worthy! no tricks upon travelers. I am glad to see you, captain.


Mean. Miss Spendall. (introducing Melinda.)


Bra. Milly Heartfree, as I live! You have a mind to be funny, sir, but you
cannot cheat me in my neighbor's children, neither. (to John and Margaret.) How
goes it, neighbors? I am glad to see you. Come, take seats. I Will go, and have
a rouzing fire in the great room. ( sees Trueman kissing Mira.) How they ^ill
like two pigeons! The parson will be here presently. He Will set you to kissing,
with a vengeance. Exit.


True. ( to Meanwell.) You were quite funny with the old gentleman.


Mean. I never was more serious in my life. This, sir, is George Worthy, of
Maryland, nephew to our good friend and acquaintance, Charles Worthy, Esquire and
this, can you believe it? is my niece, my dear sister's daughter.


True. I am astonished.


Mira. I never was more so in my life.


Mean. Let it suffice for the present to inform you they are affianced to each
other. The circumstances which have led to a discovery of their rank in life,
and the generous proofs each has received from the other, of a disinterested
affection, I will give you in full at a more convenient season. Their wedding
is to follow yours. Will my Trueman and his lovely bride, favor us with their
company?


True. Doubtless.


Mira. With pleasure, sir.


Enter Brazen. Braz. Come, adjourn into the next room, if you please. Old
Thump-the-cushion is arrived already.


Exeunt omnes. END OF THE PATRIOTS.
THE FIRST BOOK OF OVID's METAMORPHOSES, TRANSLATED.
MY mind impells me first of forms to tell,
Which being changed, to different bodies fell.
Ye Gods, (for you this wondrous change effect,)
Inspire my lays, my arduous task direct.
From works primaeval teach the song to flow
In strains continued to the times we know.
I.
Before the extensive sea and earth were made,
And heaven over all its azure mantle spread,
Throughout, the face of nature was the same,
Rude and confused, and Chaos was its name.
A sluggish weight, a rough unfinished world,
And jarring atoms into contact hurled.
No sun as yet had spread abroad the day,
Or cheered the world with his enlivening ray;
No moon as yet her monthly round begun,
Her horns increasing as her course she run;
No earth suspended in the ambient air,
Self-pois'd, as yet had six'd her station there;
Nor had the sea her circling arms stretched forth
Along the margin of her sister earth. --
Wherever was land, the sea and air appear,
Restless the earth and sea, quite dark the air.
Its proper form with nothing yet remained,
This was by that, and that by this restrained.
For deeds discordant in one body blend,
The cold with hot, and wet with dry contend,
The soft with hard, the heavy with the light:
A God and kinder nature stopped their fight:
Earth from the skies, from water earth he clears,
And heaven refined from dusky air, appears:
Which when he would severed from the dark abyss,
He placed at distance, and he bound in peace.
The fiery meteors of the unequal heaven,
To which no heavy particles were given,
Sprung upwards, chose of all the top extreme,
And shone aloft in eminence supreme.
The air, in lightness next, is next in place;
The earth more heavy, drags around its face
The larger elements, and forced by sat,
Is pressed together by its mighty weight.
The water chose the lowest place of all,
And flowed circumfluent 'round the solid ball.
II.
When he, (whoever of the Gods he was,)
Had cut, and thus disposed the mighty mass;
First, that the parts might be alike in all,
He rolled the earth into a perfect ball.
He ^^de the sea to spread, with winds to roar,
And 'round the bordered earth imprint a shore.
He added springs, and pools immense, and lakes;
With winding banks the rapid river breaks;
While part subsides into the earth, its source,
(...) ^o the sea pursues its various course,
Mixed with the world of waters, beats the shore,
And in its narrow limits runs no more.
The plains he levels, low the valley lies,
The forests foliate, rocky mountains rise.
And as two zones the northern sky contains,
And two the south, a fifth more hot remains:
God thus in number all his work divides,
Over its own region every clime presides:
The middle, scorched with never-ceasing heat,
A dreary land unknown to human feet:
Deep snow over two its chilly reign extends;
In other two, so well the Godhead blends
The heat with cold, that neither can exceed
The temperate bounds his wisdom has decreed.
On all these zones reclines the lofty air,
Which in its weight surpasses fire, as far
As earth the water: he, whose will is fate,
Commands that there the clouds and fogs should wait
The dreadful thunders, and the cooling wind,
Nor would the God permit that unconfined
The winds should wander through the spacious air;
Even now so great their rage they soon would tear
The world apart, without the maker's care.
When each, by providence, assigned his place,
Commands his whirlwinds in a different space,
To bright Aurora, Eurus wings his way,
And takes his station with the dawn of day,
To Nabathaean realms, and Persian hills,
Whose summit first the beams of morning feels.
The regions warmed by Sol's declining ray,
To pleasing Zephyrus the nearest lay.
Dread Boreas, seized on Scythia's frozen plains,
And over the gloomy north in horror reigns.
The lands opposed to his domain we find
Are wet with constant clouds and rainy southern wind.
Over these he placed the ether clear, serene,
Devoid of weight, or speck, of dross terrene.
Soon as these several things their places found,
And God had given to each its proper bound,
The stars which long beneath the mass did lie,
Sprung forth, and glittered, through the spangled sky.
And that no region might hereafter be
Of animals deprived, above we see
The stars, and persons of the gods, alone,
Celestial forms possess the heavenly throne.
For cleanly fish, the waters he designed;
To beasts the earth: to birds the air assigned.
A better animal must yet be found,
Of soul capacious, and of sense profound;
Ordained over all to hold the sovereign sway,
A man is made; and man the rest obey.
Whether the power whom we Creator call
Of this fair world, grand architect of all,
From seeds divine, produced the human frame,
Or new made earth which from the other came,
Connected lately with the starry reign,
Might yet the seeds of kindred heaven retain,
To which Japetus' son, with water mixed,
The image of the ruling gods affixed.
While other animals their heads decline
To earth; to man he gave a face divine:
Bade him sublimely toward the sky to raise
His looks erect, and on the stars to gaze.
Thus earth, which late a shapeless image bore,
Transformed, of men, the unknown figure bore.
III.
The golden age is planted first, and then
Spontaneous, all the happy race of men
Their faith preserved, and what was right they saw,
Without avengers, or the force of law.
No punishment was then, nor pallid dread,
No threatening words in brazen tables read:
No suppliant crowds approached with timid pace
The judge's seat, or feared his angry face;
Safe, without punishment, they all remain.
No pines as yet descended to the main,
Cut from their hills, to visit lands unknown;
And mortals knew no shores besides their own.
Steep ditches then did not the towns surround,
No trumpets then of straight, nor horns were found
Of crooked, brass; nor helmet, nor the sword
Was stained with blood by it is offended Lord.
But all secure, a soft repose enjoyed,
Nor soldiers then their pleasing peace annoyed.
From culture free the earth it is harvest yields,
No rakes, or ploughs, had broke the fruitful fields.
Content with food by no compulsion made,
They picked with ease the fruits from every glade:
The mountain strawberries and cherries culled,
And pleased, the blackberry from brambles pulled;
The acorns fallen from the spreading tree,
Nature's plain feast, to them, were luxury.
'Twas constant spring, and seedless flowers inhale
The temperate breezes of the western gale.
Harvests unbought with toil the earth adorn,
And fields unfallow'd, sing with ears of corn;
Gush streams of milk, and flow nectarious rills,
And honey from the verdant oak distills.
IV.
When, in the gloom of Tartarus confined,
Saturn the world to thundering Jove resigned,
The silver age prevails far worse than gold,
Though better than the race of brazen mould.
Jove now to shorten ancient spring, decreed;
Four seasons in the varied year succeed,
The winter, summer, and unsteady fall,
And spring so short it scarce exists at all.
Then first the air excessive fervor found,
And ice first hung by winds inclement bound.
Men entered houses, caves their houses made,
Thick shrubs and twigs with bark together laid.
Then Ceres' seed was first in furrows sown;
With yoke oppressed the laboring oxen groan.
To these the third, a golden race appear,
More prone to war, in temper more severe,
Not yet completely wicked. Soon the last
Of iron came, which all in vice surpast.
This race depraved all crimes, all horrors stained;
Nor faith, nor truth, nor modesty remained;
But frauds, deceits, and cruel plots prevailed,
And force and avarice the world assailed.
To winds untried the seamen spreads his sails,
And keels which long had stood the stormy gales
On lofty mountains, now triumphant glide
Over waves unknown, and waves unknown deride.
The ground, before as free as light or air,
The weary measurer marks out with care.
The needful food which earth on man bestows,
Suffices not; he to her bowels goes,
And riches which were hidden by her care
Remote in caves, the shades of Stygia near,
To vice, the dire incentives, now appear.
The murdering steel, and gold, more noxious yet,
She then produced; they quickly war beget,
Who ^ights with both, and spreading dread alarms,
Shakes with his bloody hand his rattling arms.
Men live by spoil; even from his host the guest,
And from his son-in-law, the ^ire unblest,
Is never safe: fraternal love is rare.
Husbands, for wives, contrive the deathful snare,
And wives, for husbands: stepdames dire prepare
The dismal aconite: the son desires
His father's death, and (...) ^is years enquires.
Dejected piety qui^ (...):
Astraea, struck with horror, ^ough^ (...) ^s
Last of the gods: she long maintained her ^eat;
Then left the earth with human slaughter wet.
V.
Least heaven itself in safety should remain,
The giants strove the heavenly realm to gain,
And pil'd high mountains to the starry reign.
The ^ire Almighty then with lightning broke
The huge Olympus through, and with the stroke
From Pelion's top the lofty Ossa shook.
Crushed with their mass their dreadful bodies lay:
Spread with their plenteous blood the parent clay,
It Is said, grew warm: a wondrous life began;
The heated gore assumed the form of man;
Sad monument of those detested foes,
A race of men contemning heaven arose;
On violence and murder most intent,
Whose deeds evinced from blood their dire descent.
VI.
The heavenly father from his lofty throne
Beheld these evils with a sorrowing groan.
These to his mind a recent fact restored,
The horrid feast of dread Lycaon's board,
Not yet declared: then fierce his anger blazed
To fury worthy of the Godhead raised.
A council strait he calls: without delay,
The Gods the summons of their king obey.
In heavens vast concave is a lofty way,
The milky named, which, in a sky serene,
Is clearly by its dazzling whiteness seen.
On both sides here the greater gods reside.
Their crowded gates are ever open wide.
Inferior gods are scattered over the skies:
But here in front the stately domes arise
Of deities supreme in power and fame.
This place, if man such liberty may claim,
I dare the palace of vast heaven to name.
Now in the marble hall each filled his throne.
He in the highest seat superior shone;
Reclining on his ivory scepter, shakes
His awful head: then earth, then ocean quakes;
High heaven and all her stars with terror shook:
And thus the sire of gods indignant spoke.
Not more concerned was I for my domain
Of earth of old, when first the hellish train
Of snake-feet monsters dared attempt to lay
Their hundred arms upon the realms of day.
Though fierce and dreadful were those haughty foes,
The fatal combat from one band arose;
But now where Nereus roars, throughout the world,
On all mankind our vengeance shall be hurled.
I swear by all the infernal streams, which move
Beneath the earth within the Stygian grove.
All other remedies have first been tried:
Since these are vain, the sword must be applied
To cut the wound incurable, and clear
The sounder members from infection near.
The Semigods, and Nymphs, those rustic powers,
Fauns, Satyrs, Sylvans, who possess the bowers
Of shady mountains, all by right are our's;
Who, not admitted to the heavenly reign,
The earth we gave them should at least retain.
And, Oh! ye gods, can they in safety be,
When fierce Lycaon laid a snare for me,
For me whose hand the awful thunder guides,
Whose sovereign power over all the gods presides.
He said: they murmuring all with zeal demand
The wretch who dared the will of Jove withstand.
Thus, when an impious band were in a^ (...)
In Caesar's blood to sink the Roman name,
The human race, astonished, felt the stroke,
The world, aghast, through all its members shook;
Nor did the faith of friends, Augustus, prove
To thee, more grateful than was this to Jove;
W^^ then with hand and voice the murmur stayed;
They, all in silence, strict attention paid.
When reverence due their clamours had suppressed,
Again the ^ire supreme the gods addressed.
Dismiss your cares: the wretch has met his fate.
I will the crime and punishment relate.
The growth of vice on earth had reached my ears,
Which wishing false, I leave the heavenly spheres,
And though a god in human shape I go,
And thus disguised survey the world below.
The tale were tedious all the crimes to tell,
Which then within my observation fell,
The infamy beneath the truth I found.
Now had I passed the wild Moenalian ground,
Where secret dens of savage beasts abound,
Cyllenius, cold Lycaeus' piny wood,
And reached the Arcadian tyrant's dire abode,
When twilight late drew on the nightly gloom,
I gave a signal that a god was come.
At this the vulgar, struck with awe, began
Submissive prayers: not so the impious man:
Their holy vows he ridiculed, and cried,
Soon shall this seeming deity be tried,
And whether God or mortal shall be plain
By open proof, nor shall a doubt remain.
He then prepares by night, when all was still,
Me, suddenly, oppressed with sleep, to kill.
Pleased with this proof, but not with that content,
He slew a hostage from Molossia sent.
(...) in water boils,
And part with burning coals beneath them broils
Which soon as he had placed upon his board,
The household gods, who suited such a lord,
I with his house consumed in venge^u^ fire;
He ^lies affrighted to escape mine ire,
And seeks the lone recesses of the plain,
There howls aloud, and strives to speak in vain:
His mouth enraged upon the cattle lights,
His thirst the same, in blood he still delights.
His garments now are changed and pass to hair,
And legs and claws in place of arms appear.
Thus made a wolf, the likeness he retains
Of his old shape: his hoary hair remains;
The same expression of a savage soul,
And still his eyes with sparkling fury roll.
One house thus fell, but not one house alone
Deserves to perish, and for all atone;
For wheresoe'er the earth extends her plains,
The dreadful fury wild Erinnys reigns.
You Would think that all to villainy were sworn;
Immediate therefore let the pains be borne,
Which all deserve, and thus, if you agree,
Stands firm the sentence and the high decree.
The gods consented: part by words approve,
And strengthen with their own the will of Jove;
Others with ready votes applause expressed;
Though sorrow still had touched each heavenly breast
For loss of man: they ask what form will wear
The lonely earth, no mortals being there?
By whom would incense be on altars placed?
Did he, by beasts, to lay the nations waste,
And yield the world to them alone, design?
The king of gods commands them to decline
Questions like these, and void of idle fear,
Confide, in all things, in his guardian care;
And then he promises, by wondrous fate
A race unlike the former to create.
Now was the god prepared his bolts to spread
Over all the earth, and strike the nations dead,
But feared so great a flame by chance might burn
The sacred skies which round their axis turn:
For well he knew a fated time would come
When raging ^ires would sea and earth consume;
When wrapped in flames, high heaven's imperial throne,
And all the world's unwieldy mass would groan.
The bolts by Cyclops framed aside he throws,
And now a different punishment he chose;
His showers from heaven to pour in torrents down,
And in the waters all mankind to drown.
That moment in the dark Aeolian hall
The blasts of Boreas he enclosed, and all
The winds which drive the clouds away confined;
Then ordered forth the rainy southern wind.
The South Wind flies with heavy wings and wet,
His dreadful face in pitchy darkness set.
His beard of falling rains a burden bears,
And water flows from all his hoary hairs.
Upon his brow the mists and fogs low lower,
His wings and sides distill a dripping shower;
And as with spreading hand the clouds on high
He pressed, a rumbling noise is made thereby,
And heavy showers come pouring from the sky.
The maid of Juno, various Iris, ^^ies
And draws up water, and the clouds supplies;
The grain lies ^lat, the clown's full hopes overthrown,
The fruitless labors of the year are gone.
Nor was the wrath of Jove with heaven content;
His azure brother waves assistant lent.
He calls the rivers: they the summons hear,
And in the palace of their prince appear.
In haste he cried, not many words to use
The time allows; but now your strength diffuse.
Your sluices open, over all the lands
Unbounded pour your streams -- so Jove demands.
Swift at the word, they to their sources go,
Let loose the mouths of all their springs below,
And rapid torrents to the ocean flow.
His trident on the earth inflicts a stroke;
It quaked, and waters from its bosom broke.
The rivers rushing over the open plain,
Bear on the flood the shrubs and standing grain,
And cattle, houses, men, and temples sweep,
With all their sacred things toward the deep.
If any house remained, that could oppose
Unmoved the shock, the water over it flows.
And even the lofty towers which waves conceal
Tremble overwhelmed, and from their bases reel,
The sea and land were separate now no more,
But all was sea, and sea without a shore.
This climbs a hill, and this is seen to move
In crooked boat where late his plough he drove:
This plies his vessel over the standing corn,
And over his country house immersed is borne:
This takes a fish within an elm made fast:
In meads (if chance so hap) an anchor's cast.
The crooked keels now rub the vines beneath,
And where the slender goats late cropp'd the heath,
Sea calves deformed, their slimy bodies lay,
The Nereids' wondering, groves and towns survey,
Beneath the sea; through woods the dolphins go,
And beat the branches shaken to and fro.
The wolf swims harmless with the swimming sheep,
And yellow lions ^loat upon the deep:
The tigers too, upon the waters sail,
Nor strength the boar, nor speed the stag, avail.
The wandering birds, for wander now they might,
In search of land, whereon to rest their flight,
With weary wings at length in ocean light.
The sea licentious now the hills o'erthrew,
And now new waves over mountain summits flew.
The greater part the water bears away,
And those it spares through want of food decay.
Between the Athenian and Aonian fields,
The soil of Phocis plenteous harvests yields,
A fruitful land while land it did remain,
But then a sea, of sudden waves a plain,
And there a mountain to the starry reign,
Parnassus named, its lofty summit rears,
And over the clouds with double top appears.
Here when, for all the world besides were drowned,
Deucalion with his wife a landing found,
(This man a little vessel thither bore)
They prostrate fall, the mountain's Gods adore,
The nymphs Corcydian, vows to Themis pay,
Who then was priestess to the God of day.
No better man, more fond of right than he,
No woman fearing more the Gods than she.
As soon as Jupiter beholds the ball
In water buried, and but one of all
The many thousand men so late alive,
And thousand women now but one survive,
Sees both religious, both without a stain,
He stops the clouds, restrains the rushing rain,
The showers before the northern winds are driven;
He shows the heaven to earth, the earth to heaven.
Nor longer does the sea its wrath retain,
Neptune, the mighty ruler of the main,
Calms the rough deep, his trident laid aside,
He stands aloft upon the azure tide.
Shellfish the shoulders of the God surround:
He bids the triton loud the couch to sound
Replete with air, the signal given to all,
And all the waves, and all the floods recall.
The hollow trump, a wreathed shell he takes,
Which grows in breadth, where last a twirl it makes.
When this receives in middle sea the sound,
The shores which lay to either sun resound.
When then toward his mouth the God had reared,
(His mouth now dripping with his watery beard,)
The shell which sounds the bid retreat, it is heard
By all the waters of the sea and land,
And all a^ once obey the great command.
And now the sea obtains its former shore,
Now run the rivers where they ran before;
The streams retire, the waters falling 'round,
The hills arise, and gradual grows the ground.
The woods at length with naked tops remain,
The mud still sticking to their leaves retain.
The world's restored; which when an empty space
Deucalion sees, and over its dreary face
Deep silence reign, he Pyrrha thus addressed,
Nor, as he spoke, the gushing tears suppressed:
Oh! sister, wife, oh last of woman kind,
Whom kindred first, and next the bed has joined
To me, and now these dangers nearer bind;
Throughout the lands which with declining rays
Or with his rising light the sun surveys,
Of all the nations we the stock remain:
The rest are buried in the gulphy main.
Nor even have we of life assurance yet:
For still the clouds my mind with fears beset.
And what, unhappy, would have been thy thought,
If fortune hither thee alone had brought?
How without me would thou these terrors bear,
And how these griefs, with none those griefs to share.
For I, believe me, if the sea had taken
My wi^e (for who behind thee could remain?)
Would thee have followed; yes, my love, I would
With thee have floated on the restless flood.
O that I now could by my father's skill,
Restore mankind; to fashioned earth instill
The souls of men; but such the heavenly will,
The human race appear in us alone,
We mournful samples, all the rest are gone. --
He spoke; they wept, and next inclined to pray,
And ask assistance of the God of day.
Without delay to Cephisus they go,
Whose waves, though muddy, in their channel flow.
There first, with due libation, they adore,
And with the sacred waters sprinkle over
Their heads and garments: next they bend their way,
To where the temple of a goddess lay.
With filthy moss was overrun the spire,
The altar stood without a spark of fire.
When far as to the lowest steps they would gone,
Each prostrate fell, and trembling, kissed the stone.
And thus they said, if angry Gods relent,
If Gods by prayer entreated, ever repent.
Most gracious Themie, now the art declare
The loss of all our species to repair,
And to our sad condition give relief:
The Goddess moved with pity at their grief,
The solemn answer of the fates revealed.
Depart the temple; be your heads concealed,
And let your g^rment^ loose around you flow;
The mighty ^^^ther's bones behind you throw.
Long did they stand amazed, nor either spoke*
First with her voice the silence Pyrrha broke*
Refused the sacred order to fulfill;
And prayed with trembling lips to shun the ill.
By throwing thus her mother's bones she said,
She feared to violate her awful shade
The words they study over, perplexed in thought,
And long the sense ambiguous vainly sought.
Comfort at length Prometheus' son affords
To Epimetheus' daughter, with these words.
The pious oracles no crime advise,
Or far beyond my reach their meaning lies.
Our mighty mother is the earth; her bones
I judge the Goddess darkly named the stones,
Which in the bowels of the earth are hid,
And these to throw behind us we are bid.
Although Titania by this guess is moved,
Still mixed with doubt her hope uncertain proved:
So much they both the heavenly word distrust.
To try what harm? for trials make we must.
Then down they go: their heads with care they hide,
Observant next their garments they untied,
And then the stones behind their footsteps throw,
(Who could believe this wonder, but we know
That sage antiquity the tale declared?)
The stones begin to yield: no longer hard,
They change their shape, and as they larger grow,
A better face, a milder nature show,
Features resembling human now appear,
Though faint at first, without a likeness clear.
But as of marble statues just begun
Are not exact, or likeness yet have none,
Or images a rude appearance wear,
So these to them a great resemblance bear.
Whatever part was moist, with any juice
Or earthly, softened to the body's use.
The solid harder parts were changed to bones,
And that which lately was a vein in stones,
The same within the human frame remains,
And still a vein its former name retains;
And soon the stones which thus by man were thrown,
By aid divine, to manly shape had grown:
The female race created also stands,
Of those which issued from the woman's hands.
From hence a hardy race, to toil enured,
We prove the means which first our life procured.
VIII.
Productive earth, as ancient wisdom thought,
All other animals spontaneous brought.
While the old moisture on her surface lay,
And felt the influence of the solar ray:
The mud and oozy fens to work begun,
Became prolific by the enlivening sun:
The seeds of all things hastening to the birth,
Their quickening nourishment from fruitful earth,
As in a mother's womb abundant drew,
And soon to life and certain figures grew.
Thus when, within its usual bounds decreased,
The sevenfold Nile to overflow has ceased,
While the fresh mud the beams aetherial warm,
O'erturning clods, the plowman finds a swarm
Of insects, scarcely some to birth arrived;
Unfinished some, of members some deprived:
Often in one, a part with life endued,
The other part is earth unformed and rude.
Because, when heat with moisture tempered lies,
They strait conceive, and all things thence arise;
Though fire and water often repugnant meet,
Yet life and being sprung from humid heat,
And jarring concords nurse the render birth:
When from the recent deluge, then the earth
Quite muddy with the aetherial sunshine glows,
The race of creatures numberless arose.
In part to some their former shapes she gives,
And partly unknown monsters now conceives.
Oh monstrous Python, though unwilling she,
Yet she conceived and brought forth also thee;
An unknown serpent thou, a terror then
To all the late created race of men;
So vast the space, the bulk, immense possessed,
Which far and wide the lofty hills oppressed.
This monster then the God who bears the bow
Never used 'till then, except against the roe,
Or timorous goats, with thousand arrows slew,
Which from his almost empty quiver flew;
And as the monster wreathed upon the ground,
The poison flowed through every livid wound.
Least length of days should ever obliterate
The reputation of so bold a feat,
He sacred games appoints, for contests famed,
And Pythia from the conquered serpent named.
In these, whatever youths the rest excel
In boxing, running or in driving well,
Receive the honors of the beechen crown,
No l^urel yet, the laurel was unknown.
And Phoebus then with any sprigs there were
Adorned their temples decked with flowing hair.
IX.
Phoebus for Daphne first a passion feels;
His heavenly breast to Peneus' daughter yields.
Nor did blind chance the painful flame inspire;
The cause is traced to Cupid's cruel ire.
The Delian god exulting that his bow
Had lately laid the monstrous Python low,
Beheld this little mischief-making thing
Attempt his bow, and playful draw the string.
Oh wanton boy, the god triumphant cried,
Shall gallant arms like these by you be tried.
Our shoulders only should those darts array,
Which by our skill can certain wounds convey
To hostile men or dreadful beasts of prey.
We who the swelling Python overthrew,
With countless shafts the bloated monster ^lew,
Who many acres of the soil depressed
Beneath the burden of his poisonous chest.
Be thou content to irritate the blaze;
And with thy torch some kind of love to raise,
Nor claim our praise; with us the merit lies.
To him the son of Venus thus replies,
Thy bow may all things shoot: but now attend,
Against thee shall mine the shaft unerring send.
As far as others yield in power to thee,
So far in glory art thou less than me.
He said: with slutt'ring wings he takes his flight,
Alighting on Parnassus' shady height.
Then from his quiver stored with arrows, two
Of different workmanship, he instant drew.
This love repels, and keeps the soul at rest;
That love creates, and stimulates the breast.
The love-inspiring darts of sharpened gold,
Blunt lead around the other's head is rolled.
With this the nymph Peneian Cupid struck,
That in the marrow of Apollo stuck,
Quite through his bones: he instant loves: she flies
The name of lover, to the thicket hies;
In groves, and skins of captive beasts elate,
Unmarried Phoebe seems to emulate.
Her hair uncomb'd, not now in order placed,
A fillet bound, a hair-string only graced.
Many, the nymph with ardent passion woo:
She hates the suitors, and the passion too:
Averse to man, a stranger to his ways,
She lonely woods and silent groves surveys,
And never regards what Hymen can bestow,
What joy from love and rights connubial ^low.
Often did her father say, my child, you owe
A son-in-law to me: and often from you,
M^ (...) are grandsons due.
She, hating as a crime, the marriage bed,
Her beauteous face, with bashful blushes spread,
With fawning arms her father's neck caressed,
And then in soothing sounds these words addressed:
"My dearest sire, let me this boon obtain,
Oh grant, that I a virgin may remain:"
Diana once the same request had tried,
Her tender father with her wish complied.
Indeed he now complies, but still that air,
That beauty, and thy form, oh lovely fair!
Oppose thy wishes, and forbid thy prayer.
Now Phoebus sees, and loves, and pants to gain
The joys of marriage, but he pants in v^in.
Transporting passion prompts him to believe,
While his own oracles the God deceive.
As stubble burns from whence the ear is cut,
As hedges blaze, if chance the trav'ller put
A torch too nigh, or near the dawn of day,
Has left a torch upon the hedge set way.
With flames incessant thus the god decays,
Thus through his bosom runs the rapid blaze.
He tries his fruitless love with hopes to raise.
He sees her locks all unadorned, which played
Around her neck: if combed, what hair he said!
He sees her sparkling eyes appear as bright
As twinkling stars, like stars emitting light.
Her pretty little mo^th he also sees,
Nor is the sight alone enough to please.
Her fingers, hands, and arms, he praises over,
Her arms half naked he extols the more.
If aught was l^id, the scene his fancy drew
More lovely than the parts exposed to view.
She swifter than the wind affrighted flies,
Nor can his words avail, while thus he cries.
Oh nymph Peneian stay, I beg you do.
No foe am I, nor as a foe, pursue.
Stay nymph: from wolves the lambs thus swiftly go,
Thus from the lion bounds the timid do.
From eagles thus retreat the trembling doves,
And thus each creature from its foe removes.
It Is love impells me; love alone for you,
Is all the cause, why I, oh nymph, pursue,
Oh wretched me, least you should prostrate fall,
Least thorns or brambles now those legs should gall.
Those legs too lovely to be hurt, woe's me,
If I should prove the cause of grief to thee.
The ways are rugged which you wish to gain:
More moderate run, your rapid flight restrain.
I Will slowly follow and more moderate move,
Least any evil should befall my love.
Enquire of all, of all you please to try,
No mountain swain, nor shepherd mean, am I.
Nor do I horrid dirty garments wear,
Or watch the herds and flocks, which ramble here.
Rash nymph! you little know of whom you're shy:
You know me not, and therefore thus you fly.
To me the Delphic lands devoutly pray,
And Claros, Tenedos obedience pay:
Patara's palace trembles at my nod,
My father Jove, the thunder-bearing God.
By me enquiring mortals know their doom,
Whatever is past, and present, and to come.
From me the pleasing voice of music springs,
And songs concord with sweetly sounding strings.
Our arrow to the mark unerring flies;
Yet one more sure within my bosom lies.
Physic from me its first invention claimed:
The helper, I, throughout the world am named.
With me of herbs specific rests the power,
Woe's me that love no herbs specific cure,
Nor do those arts which help to all afford
Suffice to lend assistance to their Lord.
More had he uttered: but to fear resigned
The virgin fled, and left the words behind
With him unfinished; comely still she goes,
The winds her body and her limbs, disclose;
Against her fluttering clothes the blasts now bear,
And gentle gales drive back her uncomb'd hair.
Thus with her flight her beauty is increased,
But now the youthful God his soothing ceased.
Nor longer bears such melting words to waste,
But as his love directs, pursues with haste.
So when a hare in plains the greyhound spies,
He tries to catch, and she for safety ^lies.
The one near taking hopes now, now to close,
And strains her heels with his extended nose.
The other doubts if yet the tooth she feels,
And from the bite and mouth adherent reels.
Thus do the God and beauteous maid appear,
He swift with eager hope and she with fear.
Yet he far swifter with the pinions flies
Which love affords and time for rest denies.
Now on her ^lying back he seems to bear,
Now scatters with his breath her waving hair
Spread on her neck: now with the rapid chase
Her strength is spent with toil, and from her face
The color flies: as Peneas' waves she views,
O father help if ever you rivers use
The power divine, nor now your aid refuse.
Oh earth in which I Have taken too much delight
Open, and take me in, or alter quite
The form which thus the source of mischief proves,
The form he follows it is the form he loves.
The prayer scarce made; her limbs a numbness bound,
Her breast with tender bark was compassed 'round:
Her lovely hair to leaves abundant grew,
Her arms to boughs, her feet which lately flew
Now stick fast bound by the dull roots restrained,
Her face a top, her beauty sole remained.
Phoebus, this form, this beauteous tree, approves,
And still this remnant of his Daphne loves;
(His right hand touched the stock: her fear was such,
The breast still throbs, still trembles at the touch.)
The boughs as members with his arms entwines,
The wood he kissed, his kiss the wood declines.
To whom the god; since now you cannot be
My wife, yet you shall be my favorite tree.
Thy leaves, my laurel, on our hair we'll place,
Our hair and quiver hence shall laurel grace.
The Latian chiefs thy honored boughs shall wear,
When joyous shouts the triumph shall declare,
When to the capitol in pomp repair
The trains victorious: thou shall also wait
A faithful guardian at Augustus' gate
Before the door, on either side, displayed,
Thy friendly leaves the tree of Jove shall shade.
And as my head is young with unshorn hair,
So shall thy limbs a constant foliage bear.
He cea'd, assent the laurel nods, and now,
As once the head, the top appears to bow.
X.
A grove sequestered Aemonia lies,
Around high clifts with forest crowned arise:
There through the vale of Tempe Peneus flows,
Whose stream it is source to lofty Pindus owes.
With foaming waves this river roars aloud,
And raises by it is fall a misty cloud:
The highest woods are in it is vapor drowned,
And distant regions echo to the sound.
This is the house, and this the lone abode,
The sacred palace of the river -- God.
Residing here within his rocky cave,
To waters and their nymphs he mandates gave.
The neighboring rivers thither first repair
In doubt, his sorrow, or his joy, to share.
The poplar-bearing Sperchius first appears,
Then rough Enipeus, and though grown in years
Apidanus, Amphrysos' gentle tide
And Oeas next, then other streams beside,
Whose impulse leads through different realms to go,
And tired with wandering, to the ocean flow.
All came but Inachus, whom grief restrained;
He in his gloomy cavern sad remained,
With falling tears for wretched Io lost,
Increased his waves, in doubts perplexing tossed
If yet she lives, or in the Stygian shade
Glides a pale ghost companion of the dead,
But her to him forever lost, he thought,
Whom over all the earth in vain he sought,
And fears the worst. The king of gods had viewed
Io returning from her father's flood.
Oh spotless maid, and worthy Jove, he said,
And ripe to bless some happy shepherd's bed.
The shade of lofty groves now seek, my maid,
(He showed her too of groves the thickest shade;)
While thus the Sun with hot meredian ray,
Now glows upon us in the midst of day,
But if alone the dens of beasts you dread,
Safe with a guardian god the secret forests tread,
No power inferior but the God who holds
Heaven's awful throne, whose thunder shakes the poles.
Oh fly me not: she fled to fear resigned,
And now the fields of Lema left behind,
Lyrcaea's woody plains as quickly past,
When Jove the earth with darkness overcast,
Restrained her flight, and gained his wish at last.
Meanwhile imperial Juno bent her eyes
Full on the fields, and saw the clouds arise.
Great is her wonder in a day so bright,
To view the appearance of the darkest night:
She knows no river sends the vapors forth,
Nor do they issue from the humid earth,
With jealous care, around, her spouse she sought,
Her spouse, in amorous thefts, so often caught:
Whom when she found not in the skies, she said,
This moment, if I err not I Am betrayed.
Then gliding down from heaven's aetherial height,
On earth she stopped, and put the clouds to flight:
The watchful god his wife's approach foreknew
And over the Inachian maid the figure threw
Of a young heifer, lovely to the view.
Against her will, the queen its' form admired,
And then, (as knowing not the truth,) inquired
From whom, and whence that beauteous heifer came,
And what the herd: to hide her author's name,
He said, from earth she sprung; then Juno asked
The heifer as a gift; and Jove aghast
Was sore perplexed: what can he do? to use
His mistress thus was cruel: to refuse
Would raise suspicions: shame inclines to yield,
Yet love dissuades; and love had won the field.
But should so small a present be denied
To her, his sister, and imperial bride,
Well might the heifer something more appear.
The mistress given: not yet the anxious fear,
Of Jove's deceits aside the goddess laid,
Till she, to Argus' care consigned the maid.
'Round Argus' head a hundred eyeballs burn,
And two of these are laid at rest in turn,
The rest keep guard, and in their station stay:
Whatever his posture, Io these survey.
Though toward her turned his back, before his eyes
Is Io placed, and he her actions spies.
By day to feed he cautious turns her forth,
And when the Sun is hid beneath the earth
He shuts her up, and with a cord would bind
Her neck too beauteous so to be confined.
With leaves of trees and bitter herbs she is fed,
Instead of sleeping on an easy bed
She hapless now on earth the nights must pass,
The earth not always clothed with verdant grass.
Of stagnant pools or slimy water drinks,
And, when a suppliant now her arms she thinks
TO extend to Argus, arms alas! has none
To stretch toward Argus, for her arms are gone.
She tries to cry but makes a lowing noise,
And dreads the sound, affrighted at her voice.
Now to the banks of Inachus she came,
Those banks the scene of many a youthful game;
There in the stream her new made horns surveyed;
And fled with horror, of herself afraid.
The water nymphs the unknown heifer view,
Nor Inachus his wretched daughter knew:
But she her father follows, follows too
Her sister nymphs: she offers to their hands
Her form, and while they stroke her, gentle stands.
Old Inachus the gathered grass, stretched out,
His hands and palms she kissed and licked about;
Nor tears restrains: if words could flow as well,
She Would beg his h^lp, her name and sorrows tell.
Her ^oot the letters serapes, in lieu of words,
A sad discov'ry of her change affords.
Woe's me, her father Inachus exclaims,
And on her horns and snow-white neck remains.
Woe's me repeats. Art thou my daughter, tell,
Whom I through all the world have sought so well?
Unfound occasion of less grief thou were,
Than now of sorrow, when thus found thou art,
In silence lost, you yield us no replies,
Your bosom deep is torn with constant sighs.
A dismal low in answer to my words,
Is all that now thy wretched change affords.
Yet I for thee, to fate all-ruling blind,
The bridal torch and nuptial bed designed.
First to a son-in-law my hopes inclined,
And then with youthful grand-sons cheered my mind;
But now for thee a husband I must find,
And young ones from the herd: for me, to grief
Forever doomed, not death can give relief.
Condemned to be a God, I mourn my state,
Forbid to enter death's more peaceful gate,
To endless sorrows tied by cruel fate.
While thus he mourned, the star-eyed Argus leads
His daughter off, and brings to other meads:
Afar the summit of a mountain found.
And as he sits, on all sides looks around.
XI.
The ruler of the Gods can bear no more
To see Phoroneus' grandchild thus endure
Such heavy ills: his son he orders forth,
Who from the lucid Pleias drew his birth;
To him the mandate gives, her foe to slay,
The cruel Argus: he, without delay,
Wings to his feet and in his potent hand
His winged hat assumes, and sleepy wand.
The progeny of Jove prepared to fly
Down from the lofty palace of the sky,
Leaped to the earth, and there his hat laid down,
Put off his wings, and kept his staff alone.
With this he drives, in likeness of a swain,
A flock of goats across the devious plain,
Which here and there he gathered in his way,
And plays on oat-straw joined, a pleasing lay.
The guard of Juno taken with the sound
Of this new pipe, which sweetly echoed 'round,
Whoever thou art, sit here with me he cries:
Luxuriant pasture here the earth supplies;
Nor can your cattle find more plenteous fields,
And here the cooling shade refreshment yields.
Hermes obedient sits: the day detains
With pleasant converse, and with soothing strains,
Which sweetly from his artful pipe arose,
Attempts in sleep his watchful eyes to close.
The drowsy Argus tries to vanquish sleep,
While half his eyelids soothing slumbers steep,
The others still their vigilance retain:
He then, for late invented was the strain,
Inquired who first with draws together tied
Contrived the pipe: and thus the God replied.
XII.
Within the mountains of Arcadia cold,
In Nonacrine, a Naiad lived of old;
Of all the woodland nymphs, the first in fame
For heavenly charms, and Syrinx was her name.
The satyrs and the Gods, she often eludes,
Who range the fruitful fields and shady woods.
She to Ortygia's goddess pays her court,
And joys to imitate her modest port.
Like Dian clothed the likeness would deceive,
Her as the same you might with ease believe,
Save that one circumstance, the difference told
Her bow of wood, Diana's framed of gold.
Yet thus she often deceived: this lovely maid
The god whose head with leaves of pine's arrayed,
Pan saw and loved, and thus his love declares.
More had he said, how she despised his prayers,
And fled affrighted through the desert ways
To where the sandy Ladon's water strays
With gentle stream: there by the current staid
To change her form the liquid sisters prayed;
How, when the God to catch his Syrinx thought,
For her a bunch of marshy reeds he caught,
And while he sighs the reeds with wind resound,
Like one complaining, make a tender sound.
Pleased with the hollow reed's uncommon noise,
How Pan delighted in the soothing voice,
And said, oh lovely maid, to talk with thee
This mode remains: my comfort this shall be.
Thus with a bond of wax unequal reads
United, from the nymph, their name proceeds.
XIII
Thus had he spoke; but now he sees that sleep
Weighs down the keeper's eyes, and slumber deep
Over all is spread: at once his voice he ceased,
And by his art the growing sleep increased;
Soothing with magic wand his languid eyes,
Without delay as thus he nodding lies.
His crooked faulchion gives a deadly wound
Where to the neck the hanging head is bound.
He throws him bloody on the rock, and over
The rugged mountain sheds his purple gore.
There lie thou, Argus, and the light you bore
In all those hundred eye balls shines no more --
These eyes Saturnian Juno plucked with haste,
Among the feathers of her bird now placed;
With gems like stars the peacock's tail she graced.
XIV.
She instant burned with anger, nor delayed
Her fierce revenge: before the Grecian maid
To fill her eyes and mind with dire dismay,
The dread Erinnys she commands to stay.
And secret stings within her bosom placed;
And through the world the affrighted wanderer chased.
With thee, oh Nile, her tedious labor ends:
Which, when she reached, upon the bank she bends
Prone on her knees, with neck aloof she rears
Her lonely face to heaven; with groans and tears,
And mournful lowings, of her Jove complains,
And seems to implore an end of all her pains.
The pity'ng God embraced his spouse, and prayed
That now her woes might cease: resign, he said
Thy anxious fears: that hapless maid no more
Shall cause thee grief: by Stygia's lakes he swore,
And called their waves to hear: the Goddess yields:
Io her former shape returning feels.
The hairs obedient from her body fly;
Her horns decrease, and less is made her eye.
Her jaws contract, her arms and hands renew,
Off drops the hoof, five nails she takes in lieu.
Now nothing of the brutal form remains.
It Is snow-white hue alone her skin retains.
Now with two feet content the nymph can go
Erect, yet dreads, in speaking, still to low;
And fearfully the words untried so long
Assays to utter: but the numerous throng
Of Aegypt's race, whom linen robes array,
To her, a Goddess, solemn worship pay: --
XV.
At length to mighty Jove a son she bore,
Whom with his mother all their towns adore.
She called him Epaphus: to him in years
And spirit equal, Phaeton appears
From Phoebus sprung: whom yielding not in worth
But proudly boasting of his heavenly birth,
The youth whose race from Inachus descends
In wrath addressed. Poor fool, thy faith depends
On all thy mother says, and idly vain
Of a false father, swells with vaunting strain.
At this, his face with blushes covered over,
Shame stopped the wrath of Phaeton: he bore
The vile reproach, and to his mother told.
More be your grief, he cried, that I the bold,
The fierce, was silent: this completes my shame,
That scandal's such as this should stain thy name
Nor able I to vindicate thy fame.
But if descended of a race divine,
Some token give me of so great a line.
Assert my right to heaven; as thus he said,
Around his mother's neck his arms he laid.
By here is by Merops' head he fondly prayed
And by his sister's wedings, to receive
A certain proof his father to believe.
Doubtful if more by his entreaties swayed,
Than wrath at such an imputation laid.
To heaven then Clymene her arms displays,
And looking at the sun's refulgent rays,
She said, by that bright beam who shines on high,
Who hears me speak, and with his piercing eye
All nature views; by him my son, I swear,
That he whom now you see, whose guardian care
Preserves the world, the sacred source of day,
He is thy fire; if I a falsehood say,
May he the prospect of himself deny,
And may this light the last salute mine eye.
Nor hard the toil, if so thy mind impells
Thyself to know where thy great father dwells.
Contiguous to our earth the palace lies.
Whence in the ruddy morn he takes his rise,
Go, if you wish, and of himself enquire.
These words with joy immense the youth inspire.
Elate he hastens for^h: his eager mind
Is full of heaven; and soon he leaves behind
His Aethiopians, and the Indians placed
Beneath the burning sun with equal haste;
With undiminish'd ard^r speed his way
To where his radiant fire begins the day.
Miscellaneous Poems.
CONSISTING OF THE RAM: A COMIC POEM. LETTERS FROM THE DEVIL TO HIS SON. ANSWER
TO THE WINTER-PIECE. COLIN AND CELIA: A PASTORAL POEM. A DREAM. AND A PATRIOTIC
SONG.


THE RAM: A TALE. Written about the time when the Ladies wore remarkably high
head-dresses.
BUTLER! thou dear facetious wight,
Who know so well to paint a fight,
Whose Muse could flow when battles rage,
Where bears, dogs, men, and all engage,
Who made advance, or made retreat
With ease the beating and the beat,
With equal caution, equal skill,
That none were killed, or could kill;
Oh lend thy pen, thou name divine,
To paint a battle fierce as thine:
A battle which the Grecian bard,
To celebrate would find too hard;
Although his mighty genius taught,
How gods with men together fought;
How frogs and mice engage in fray,
For honor they, as men for pay.
Ye tuneful Nine -- but hush the prayer,
The nymphs must not attend us here;
For in this battle, such our fate,
As truth demands, we must relate,
How ladies fight, how fierce they are,
When battling for a suit of hair.
The tale begins: but first, I trow,
Time, place, and all, you want to know:
But ladies' names, I hold it certain,
Except when fortune smiles, and then
I Will blab 'em forth as soon as men.
Two ladies at their toilet sat,
One talked of this, the other that --
But stop; the one I Will nickname Molly,
And for the rhyme, the other Dolly.
Molly. Oh me! it is horrid, quite too low
(Her cheeks with rage began to glow.)
It Is frightful, wants a pound of wool,
The maker surely was a fool.
Then Dolly looked, and peevish said,
My pack's too low by half a head;
My hair's so thin, de^ce take the pin,
I scarce with squeezing get it in.
'Twill never do: pray now look here.

Molly. It Is horrid shocking, child, I swear,

Dolly. What Is to be done?

Molly. I do not know,
But thus to church I Will never go.

Dolly. Nor I. In pet she instant laid
Low down the honors of her head,
In other words, the pins, the curls,
The plaits, the woolpack, she unfurls.
Then Dolly springing from her chair,
(I dread to tell as you to hear)
Oh fatal, fatal, fatal Ire!
The pack was instant in the fire.

Molly. Dear Dolly, child, for shame, for shame,
Impatient folks are much to blame;
The pack would yet have done, had you
But done as I intend to do.
I Will get some wool, and cram and stuff
My pack until it is full enough.
Let Us go my girl; we'll shear a sheep,
Please God, I will, before I sleep.

Dolly. I Will go, dear Molly, and assist,
I Will have a pack two foot at least.
Their hats and mantles on they drew,
And instant to the meadow flew.
A vicious ram was there confined,
And kept apart from all his kind;
The ewes, and lambs, and other sheep,
Were brouzing on a mountain steep.
The hoary chief our heroines saw;
He gazed, he paused, was struck with awe.
When Molly spoke: What horns? what horns?

Dolly. What charming wool his back adorns?
His horns you see are twisted 'round,
And quite unfit to give a wound.
I Will pen him up in yonder corner.

Molly. I wish the creature may not horn her.
But I will join the grand design,
And half the glory shall be mine.
She nearer drew, as thus she said;
The ram, surpised, turned tail, and fled;
And seemed quite passive, 'til he found,
By thus retreating, he lost ground,
That still the foe came pressing on,
As cowards do when battle's won.
He faced about; the ladies ^^ew,
As sometimes men of mettle do.
The ram to feeding went, and then
The rallied foe came on again.
Molly, the boldest of the two,
Would try what stratagem could do.
Let Us drive him slowly: I Will get near,
And sudden charge him in the rear;
I Will seize behind, you charge before,
Grapple his horns, and then we are sure.

Heroes may boast of battles won,
Of feats by mighty warriors done,
Of marches, counter-marches too,
And arts of war they never knew;
Of defiles, ambuscades, and stuff,
And skill not worth a pinch of snuff,
View Molly's generalship and plan,
Then beat it, heroes, if you can.
Molly, I say, moved slowly on,
To where the first attack begun.
The ram majestic marched along,
As some proud puppy through a throng,
But soon the crafty foes he feels,
Attacking both at head and heels.
One seized his horn, and one his wool;
Now, now, she cried, my pack is full.
Ah! bootless boast, ah! prospect vain!
What toils? what mischiefs yet remain?
Thus, while the shouts of conquest rise,
By random shot, the victor dies.
For soon the ram submission scorns,
With desperate jerks he loosed his horns;
And turning 'round, disdaining fear,
Charged home the plund'rer of his rear.
Just then, poor Molly, at a pull,
Had strove to fill her hands with wool.
The thickest fleece in vain she wrench'd,
Though to the root, her fingers clench'd.
The ram began to kick and jump,
Miss Molly holding still his rump;
Her hands in wool entangled fast;
But from her gripe he broke at last,
Then fired with rage for injured honor,
He swore to wreak revenge upon her;
And rushed to butt with desperate head:
Then Molly from his wrath had fled;
But 'ere she could begin the race,
He fiercely struck her, in that place
Where scoundrels take their due desert,
And none but cowards will be hurt:
'Twas there he struck: Oh, fatal case!
Prone fell poor Molly on her face.
What beauties then the maid revealed?
What charms which envious dress concealed?
But not for me a heaven to paint;
My pencil's dull, my coloring faint.
Now, luckless chance! as thus she lay,
And called for help, in dire dismay,
The ram, his victory pursuing,
As if he meant to work her ruin,
With angry front her head attacks:
Off fell the heaps of wool and flax:
The powder flew, false hair and curls,
Demolished all, around he whirls.
But in the pack his horns were caught;
He tossed, he raged, to clear them, thought
In vain: with hair he blinds his eyes,
And clouds of powder 'round him rise;
Such clouds as often on festal night,
Clothe empty heads in radiant white.
Amazed, confused, perplexed and vexed,
Like preacher who forgets his text,
Now did he rub his head, now fling,
Mad as a bear around a ring.
But naught would do: around his horns
Safe lodged the pack, his fury scorns.
He thought the devil his foes had joined,
The hopes of farther fame resigned,
And waiting not to hear the drum beat,
In haste retreated from the combat.
Dolly, who all the time, amazed,
Upon the dreadful battle gazed,
When now she saw the conqu'ror yield,
Bearing the trophies of the field,
To Molly ran, in haste; she cries,
The foe is gone, dear sister rise.
Then help me up, she groaning said,
May I be doomed to die a maid
If 'ere I fight with rams again:
My curls are scattered over the plain,
Quite dirty all, my pack he bears,
And on his head triumphant wears.
The pack that is gone was quite too small;
How then will look, no pack at all?
Fashion in every thing prevails,
We all are lost, if fashion fails.
While others go with packs so large,
They seem their heads to overcharge;
And ladies' lofty tops aspire
As high as grenadiers or high'r;
Shall I, a little humble chit,
Appear no taller than five feet?
While others, powdered, curled, and friz'd,
Their locks do furbelow and twist,
'Till like a quick-set hedge they show,
Or bunch of briars clothed in snow;
Shall I be seen with plain combed hair?
A shame like that I must not bear.
Oh woeful chance! the church to enter
In such a garb, I cannot venture.
If people only went to prayer,
Indeed, for dress I should not care.
But belles you know, there are, and beaux,
Who place their glory in their clothes,
Who go to church to show their beauty;
Not humbly to perform their duty.
How should I in their eyes appear?
The end of this I never should hear.
Then Dolly said, your grief restrain,
My dear, since now it is in vain,
And let us try to make the best; on it;
Else they, indeed, may make a jest on it.
Shall yonder ram? -- as thus she spoke,
The ram, at length, the pack had broke;
Before his horns the texture yields,
Pins, wool, and hair embrown the fields.
At once the conversation ceased,
Poor Dolly's courage quite decreased,
And Molly quaked, who saw the foe
Prepared again for deadly blow.
They view his threatening horns with fear,
Nor did they dare to venture near.
'Till he in pity to their case,
Retired contemptuous from the place.
He left, with scorn, the tattered pack
Which he could not, but they might lack.
For beasts the gewgaws vile disdain,
The want of which to man gives pain.
The scattered relies then they gather,
Here lay a curl, and there a feather,
And here the pack to pieces torn --
They pick them up, and over them mourn.
With heavy hearts they haste away;
Compelled, that day, at home to stay.
There sad they sit, and mope, and pine;
Each thinks, what conquests had been mine
Of lover's hearts, at church today,
Could I have gone in fair array;
In fashion's airy pride adorned;
But now by all I shall be scorned.
Forgotten, is my favorite boast
To reign, an undisputed toast.
The joke will spread, full well I know.
That many a titt'ring belle and beau
Will laugh to hear our sad disaster.
Says Molly, had I but run faster,
The ram had never knocked me down,
Nor had I spoiled my Sunday gown.
Thus ends our laughable narration,
Nor wants a moral application.
Ye fair ones, let your heads be full
Of sense, but load them not with wool.
Fight not with rams to gain their fleece;
Trust me, such aids can never increase
Your native charms: it is not art,
But nature, which attracts the heart.
Your flowing locks which nature gave
Over ivory necks in beauty wave:
These nets of love, our souls ensnare,
All unadorned with art or care;
While pride, and pomp's fastidious train,
Are parents of disgust and pain.
TO THE READER.
The following letters from the Devil to his son, the reader is requested to
consider as not addressed to any particular person. The author appears to have
indulged his imagination in describing a completely wicked character; but such
a one, as I believe, and hope, can not, with strict propriety, be applied to
any human being, either living or dead. As no name is mentioned, I trust no
application will be made, except by the consciences of those whose vices
resemble those here described, and for whose benefit, by endeavoring to induce
them to amend their lives, and for no other purpose, the present publication is
intended.

THE PUBLISHER.

A LETTER From the Devil to his Son.
MY ever dear and favorite son,
I Have heard of late the deeds you have done.
Go on, my boy, keep true to me,
And I Will keep faith, depend, with thee.
For sure, I never yet did know,
In air above, or earth below,
A son so wedded to my will,
So lost to virtue, prone to ill;
So every way my son and heir,
Or fitter for promotion here.
Know then, that I, of special grace,
Willing to give my boy a place,
Late summoned up my swarthy crew,
To know what seat best suited you.
All pricked their ears, except a black,
Who ears had not; he showed his back*
"No make him overseer," says he,
"For dat man, he been killey me;"
His back, his head, his meagre face,
Drew pity from the hellish race;
A murmur ran from shore to shore,
And hell was instant in a roar.
The clamor stayed, a boy then cried,
"By him begot, by him I died."
An aged matron crept along,
And ^eebly thus addressed the throng;
"A child I bore, a child I cherished,
"And by that child at last I perished."
Such acts, my son, such deeds as these,
Methought the infernal crew would please.
But all cried out, "'it is strange to tell,
"There Is no place fit for him in hell,
"His acts so far surpass your own,
"They Would give him title to the throne."
The truth is this, my son, they fear
Lest you should take the Imperial chair.
Should that, say they, be ever the case,
Hell would be soon an empty space.
The crowd dismissed, a wily peer,
With wicked grin, malicious leer,
Advised to build another hell,
That you alone therein might dwell.
Now, if my son has no objection,
It shall be built by his direction;
Nay more, to give you due content,
I Will send you negroes to torment;
An overseer, or two, besides,
To help you cut and slash their hides*
And if I did not know you well,
(Though seldom any come to hell)
Some women I might send; but then,
I Am sure you would whip them back again.
Should an engrosser come this way,
Send me your answer, aye, or nay. --
Your loving Father, SATAN.

ANOTHER LETTER From the Same to the Same.
I WROTE, my son, to let you know
The seat prepared for you below.
I write again, my child, to tell
The news that is passing now in hell.
A fellow's here, who sets about
A piece of news that makes a rout:
He says, that when he came away,
My dearest boy was heard to say
He would repent. -- Of what, my son?
Of all the good you have ever done?
For, sure I am, you will never relent,
Nor of one wicked deed repent.
I therefore laughed to hear the tale,
Though much it did with some prevail;
Nay more, and that is quite uncivil,
He says, you preach against the devil;
And talk of kindness, doing good,
And giving, to the hungry, food;
However, to remove all doubt,
I gave a little hand-bill out --
That all you did, or said, or thought,
By me was prompted, by me taught.
Take care when here, or you will be baited,
For hypocrites in hell are hated.
Though used by us as dearest friends,
In the other world to serve our ends.
Your Father, SATAN.

LETTER To the Devil from his Son, In answer to the foregoing.
MY much revered and honored ^ire,
Your letters came to hand,
I Am proud to do as you desire --
To act as you command.
I wonder much, dear sir, that you
Who know mankind so well,
Should be surpised at what I do,
At aught I write or tell.
You know my skill has always laid
In hypocritic face,
And what I Have ever done, or said,
Was nothing but grimace.
Don't mind, I pray, what blockheads say
About my turning good:
It Is true I gave some wheat away,
But 'twas not fit for food.
I sold some pork, but then I knew
'T would poison those who ate;
I meant it for the rebel crew;
Your foes I meant to cheat.
I preached, but you would have laughed, I swear,
To hear me roar and rant,
With all my father's look and leer,
And hypocritic cant.
I looked so good, so very mild,
So cunning, and so civil,
Even you would have thought your darling child
Did preach against the devil.
Thus did I damn your name to gain
More honor to myself;
And thus in private to obtain
Rich stores of worldly pelf.
Of all the fiends who serve thy laws,
With all their art and pains.
Not one advances so thy cause,
As he who virtue feigns.
Then blame me not; to wear disguise
Your son you tutored well:
Though men my sanctity may prize,
I Will join you all in hell.
I fell upon a scheme of late,
In which I top'd my part;
Cried I, this poor afflicted state,
My friends, affects my heart.
Your present leaders are all fools;
Your burgess is a dunce;
You are all slaves, you are but tools;
I Will set you right at once.
I then proposed, to stop all trade,
I Would public agent be,
Advised what bargains might be made,
If they would trust to me.
I wanted much to cheat the state,
So swore, I would be true:
I Have dropped all trade myself of late
And now I Will cheat for you.
These little arts but trifles are,
To those I Will practice soon;
So, dear Papa, you will please prepare
The kingdom for your Son.
ANSWER TO THE WINTER PIECE.
DEAR * * * when last you wrote, remember well,
The charms of winter, you presumed to tell;
I felt such shame (kind heaven the shame repay,)
As sense must feel at such a senseless lay;
Take no offense, for every foolish clown,
Since * * *'s muse has come thus hobbling down,
May mount his Pegasus, and laugh at those
Who spur at rhymes, and stumble into prose.
Now, you will say, that view the scholars 'round,
Such wild eccentric wit may often be found,
Wherefore the poets should receive the bays,
Who sometimes sing for laughter -- not for praise,
Thus, while poor Pegasus is flogg'd along,
This hums in prose a dismal dirty song;
That poet's fancies claim a slackened rein,
And often run rapid over the ^low'ry plain,
Yet, as I may, permit me to make bold,
And ask thee, if thy muse or theme be cold?
I say that folly, spite of reason's voice,
Is now elected, and alas! thy choice;
And when poor reason, by some peasant thrown,
Shall lie neglected where he tumbled down;
No friend this sacred gift of heaven to take,
Since even the learned, the pilgrim now forsake;
I here protest, whoever against declare
He should to * * * and its lord repair,
That seat 'round which the muses often have cried,
In doleful strains with reason on their side;
O gracious Pallas, goddess of delight,
Vouchsafe for once at * * * to alight;
The air is temperate, serene, refined,
Not for a dirty, sla^tern muse designd;
Banish to Hottentot, the drunken whore,
And let her shackle prose with rhymes no more;
For nothing better from this muse we have had
Than dirty simile, and prose run mad.
The subject puts us in a gape, and sleep,
In spite of snuff, will over the senses creep;
From line to line the self-same dullness flows,
With not one sketch of wit to yield repose,
A perfect nuisance, which to endure aright,
Another Argus only has the slight.
In vain we hope this muse will cease her song
Till wisdom claps a padlock on her tongue;
Goddess of music; our petition hear,
And lend to * * * a poetic ear.
Dear * * *, reflect, whenever the maggot bites,
And spite of fate the muse of * * * writes,
Myriads of critics do upon her fall,
In vain for measure, or for rhyme they call;
Since common sense by her neglected lies,
While virtue slumbers, and religion dies.
Reflect on this, and own the consequence,
Thus to persist must argue want of sense.
Oh, what repasts the stirling wits prepare?
We read with pleasure or with rapture hear;
Parnassian laurels deck the poets' brow,
And sages to the magic numbers bow.
But verse like thine the modest face inflames,
And yet it tickles not the lovely dames;
The lovely fair, endearing sex, bestowed
On man, to mitigate of life the load.
Who gainsay this, are frantic, I maintain,
Nor merit Hymen nor the silken chain,
And when indecent and immodest, sure
Deserve a gibbet, or a lock secure. --
See the fair charmers blushing as they read,
See virtue start, and decency recede,
Then own your heart of unrelenting stuff;
Or, say you have read too little, -- wrote enough.
Oh sex, held sacred by the good and brave,
Which to the world the promised savior gave!
Let love await thee, and let virtue prove
How much you merit, and how much we love;
Let saints salute thee with a song divine,
Fruition meet for souls attun'd as thine;
But why this flight? -- kind heaven avert the stroke,
Nor let religion droop at * * * 's joke,
Though backed by heathen Gods, or hell, he dare
To treat Redemption as a strange affair. --
Burke, Hewitt, Henley, Gwatkin, I esteem,
Their virtues, * * *, are far above thy theme.
Should Came, with spreading laurels on his head,
Like thee ever write, or thee attempt to read,
To Tartarus the reverend chief should go,
Drink deep of Lethe, and forget below,
Of Helicon the sweet inspiring taste,
Which often has charmed us in his verses past;
He then might mount thy courser's back, and drop
A sprig of birch, triumphant, on the top
Of some rich dunghill, where thy muse often strays
To cull a simile, or gather bays. --
Cervantes little thought his hero's horse,
Would be the subject of a limping verse;
Nor could the Don, whose honest nature knew
To virtue's laws the sacred reverence due,
Whose friendly bosom beat the pulse of love
To all who in this giddy circle move,
Ever dream, though mad with tales of chivalry,
That Rozinante would a pack-horse be
To such a dirty bastard muse; but hold
This faithful quadruped, though blind and old,
By instinct knew an ethic from a whore,
And threw her sprawling, where she will rise no more.
But stop, my muse, in travestying we are crossed,
For here the sense, in Labyrinth, is lost,
The gaudy fly, that now sweet nectar sips,
From Nancy's cheek, or slumbering Chloe's lips,
Now flirts, in ecstacy, the candle round;
Now drops in toddy, and is quickly drowned,
Pardon the simile, (I hate abuse,)
Is but an emblem of thy flirting muse.
Thy list of worthies, worthy we admit,
And wish them social, as we grant them wit. --
The hapless slave who toils, from day to day,
And heedless slumbers half his time away,
Is not an object to deserve a hiss --
But he who strives to write, and writes amiss. --
Thy list of heroes (save the infernal chief
Whose curse eternal, staggers thy belief)
Wise heroes all, but * * *, I think 'twas wrong
TO insert their names in such a silly song, --
But honest nature (conscious as I am
There Is none so blind, in reason none so lame,
But that he must the sting of satire feel,
Though armed his head with lead, his breast with steel)
Impels me in the loudest notes to raise,
Oh bir^h-deserving * * ^ thy song of praise.
A NOTE BY THE PUBLISHER.
The poem to which the above was written, as an answer, has, I believe, been
long since forgotten; and as the author was acknowledged to be a very worthy
and respectable man, though a very bad poet, his shame should be forgotten
also. The satire is therefore published without the name of the author, and
thus it is hoped, some instruction to other writers, and some diversion to the
reader my be gathered from it, without injuring the feelings of any person
whatever. Those who have read the work alluded to, (which the reader will
observe, was printed many years ago with no name annexed,) will judge for
themselves, whether its sentence here pronounced, was just or not; and those
who never have, and probably never will, may consider the answer as a
description of bad poetry in general, in which light it is now given to the
world, and may be serviceable in restraining those who scribble profanely or
indecently, without the skill to compose verse, or sense to entertain their
readers.

THE PUBLISHER.

COLIN and CELIA: A PASTORAL POEM.
WHERE slumbering streams in liquid silence flow,
And fragrant beauties on their borders grow;
Where smiling nature greets the approach of spring,
And warbling songsters soothing sonnets sing;
Where gentle gales their fanning wings display,
And whisper pleasures as they steal away; --
There Colin wandering, lost in dreams of love,
Saw Celia's form in clouded beauty move;
He heard her words in trembling accents break,
Then stepped aside, to listen, as she spoke.
He vowed to love, with sweet submission swore,
But hapless Celia never may view him over.
Her moving words the balmy breezes bear,
And gently waft them to the shepherd's ear.
Each soothing sound his deep attention caught,
But Celia's name enraptured every thought --
When smoothly gliding through the silent grove,
She saw her Colin melting into love,
" His soul thus utt'rance gave."
MILTON. Why dubious, Celia, of thy Colin's love,
And why lamenting to the silent grove?
In early youth your pleasing chains I bore,
And captive still, my lovely maid, adore.
Should Venus, circled in an orb of charms,
With sweet submission court me to her arms,
Her all-divine would ineffectual prove,
Nor could her beauty make me change my love.
" She blushed and smiled."
MILTON. Then Colin's eyes with sparkling pleasure roll,
A torrent rapture rushing to his soul.
He smiling springs, in transport, views her charms,
And clasps her gently yielding in his arms.
A DREAM.
I FOUND my eyelids sliding close,
They softly touching lay,
When smoothly came the pleasing dose,
And stole my sight away.
Then fancy plays in scenes of bliss,
Elysium's airy queen;
She wings the soul to taste and kiss
Of pleasures often unseen.
Methought I heard the cooing dove,
In languid notes complain^*
Methought I saw an ange^ move
Soft sliding over the plain.
Before mine eyes dissolving ^l^w
A gently weeping cloud;
It Is pensive bosom ponderous grow
With watery tempest proud.
Methought I walked in Eden's grove,
The air was soft and mild,
That all was beauty, all was love,
So sweetly nature smiled.
The cooing dove was Celia's voice,
The angel Celia proved;
Her plaints that mask the pleasing noise,
Her form angelic moved.
The weeping cloud with tempest full,
Distilling drops of rain,
Was Celia's face, her eyes grown dull
With inward pensive pain.
But when she found her slumbering swa^,
Her looks as Eden seem,
With eager joy, I clasped my love;
'Twas Celia, not a dream.
A PATRIOTIC SONG.
COME on, my brave fellows, a fig for our lives
We'll fight for our country, our children and wives.
Determined we are to live happy and free;
Then join honest fellows in chorus with me.
Derry down, down, etc.
We'll drink our own liquor, our brandy from peaches,
A fig for the English, they may kiss all our breeches.
Those blood-sucking, beer-drinking puppies retreat;
But our peach-brandy fellows can never be beat.
Derry down, down, etc.
A fig for the English, and Hessians to boot,
Who are sick half their time with eating of crout,
But bacon and greens, and Indian corn-bread,
Make a buck-skin jump up, though he seem to be dead.
Derry down, down, etc.
Come on, my brave fellows, etc.
FINIS.

