THE POLITICIANS; OR, A STATE OF THINGS.

A DRAMATIC PIECE.

WRITTEN BY AN AMERICAN, AND A CITIZEN OF PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR.

1798.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Conciliate, Kitefoot, Dispassionate, Sugar Loaf, Partial, Adz, Hasty, Sawney
Biscuit, Crusty, Cato, O'Callaghan Sarcastic, Sambo, O'Brazen, Coesar, Monsieur
Aristocrat, Pompey, Mynheer Van Plump, Landlord.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Violent, Mrs. Turbulent.
THE POLITICIANS, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A room in Mrs. Turbulent's house. Enter Cato. Cato. I wonder what e debil
woman have do we poletic, dear my miss and miss Violent, talk, talk, talk,
bout trety, bout Mass Jay, bout president, bout congree, bout English, bout
French, it make me sick, dear two tongue go like mill clap.

[Exit.
Enter Mrs. Turbulent and Mrs. Violent. Mrs. Turbulent. Our minister refused!
this is the effects of the cursed treaty, ( walks in passion) I wish -- I wish
--


Mrs. Violent. What do you wish?


Mrs. Turbulent. I wish the president's hand had withered before he had signed
it.


Mrs. Violent. Abominable wicked wish.


Mrs. Turbulent. Wicked, do you say? -- no, he deserves the curses of his
country for that one act, he has blasted his name forever; I was told it would
come to this.


Mrs. Violent. Ah, who was the sagacious person?


Mrs. Turbulent. Mr. Lisp was the person -- Mr. Lisp is a man of penetration --
Mr. Lisp is a man of parts -- of most extraordinary parts.


Mrs. Violent. He, he, he -- Peter Porcupine will not admit that, ( aside) you
really consider him a man of consummate wisdom and parts.


Mrs. Turbulent. I do, but he is not the only one who gave me intimation of
what would happen in consequence of that diabolical treaty: I say Mr. Timid and
Mr. Anticipate of the Senate, told me we might be certain, that the treaty
would draw down upon us the vengeance of the French, and Mr. Timid and Mr.
Anticipate have the good of their country at heart.


Mrs. Violent. Their own, rather say: their party have nothing else at heart.


Mrs. Turbulent. The reverse, they are disinterested men, it would be a great
saving to the nation if such men as them were at the head of it. They would
oeconomise.


Mrs. Violent. Excellent patriots -- excellent oeconomisers! they would
oeconomise in order to disorganise.


Mrs. Turbulent. You are bitter, very bitter, Mrs. Violent.


Mrs. Violent. I will never be otherwise to your party -- a wicked, restless,
marplotting set; ever combining to cross the purposes of government, trying
every possible means to render president washington's administration unhappy to
him.


Mrs. Turbulent. ( scornfully) President washington's administration! He never
was equal to the situation he was placed in: vastly has his talents been
over-rated; he possesses none beyond that of being an overseer to a Virginia
plantation, or the superintendance of a horse-stable: he is an excellent judge
of horses.


Mrs. Violent. Monstrous! monstrous! ( walking in rage) After such sacrilege, I
shall be afraid to remain under your roof, left it should fall upon me, to
speak so contemptuous of a man, who may justly be called, the father of his
country. A man, who is an honor to his God, a credit to his country, and an
ornament to human nature.


Mrs. Turbulent. He an honor to his country, he! and his infamous party have
been the ruin of our country.


Mrs. Violent. Your Jacobin faction are to be charged with all the evils that
have befell us, and all the troubles that await our country: you have been
abetting the French tyrants from the first to the present moment.


Mrs. Turbulent. Madam, I desire to hear no more aspersions. Time will discover
who are the best friends to their country.


Mrs. Violent. Confusion to you all! time will unfold your mole-workings; and,
like that animal, you will be dragged forth before your country, with the dirt
upon your heads.


[Exit in a passion. Mrs. Turbulent. ( following) Your humble servant, Mrs.
Spleen.


SCENE,
A room in Conciliate's house.
Enter Conciliate. It Is unpleasant news, indeed; yet, I trust in God, the
threatening storm will blow over. Continue us peace, Oh, heaven! and we solicit
no more.

Enter Mrs. Violent, in haste. ( Walks in passion) Oh! that I had authority to
punish every democrat.


Conciliate. Who has discomposed you, sister?


Mrs. Violent. Mrs. Turbulent -- she has been abusing our beloved washington
like a Fury: she had the audacity to assort that he has been an impostor, and
that his abilities do not exceed those of a Negro driver, or an hostler -- if
ever I go into her house again, may my feet rot upon the spot.


Conciliate. Don't make so rash a promise, sister: forget and forgive, be more
of the Christian.


Mrs. Violent. ( pettishly) Christian! and I suppose if a person hits me a slap
upon the right cheek, I must turn my left also. --


Conciliate. That would be Christian-like.


Mrs. Violent. Then I will never be a Christian: I am determined always to give
measure for measure.


Conciliate. Forbearance, sister, is a happy quality, -- it frequently makes
our enemies become our friends.


Mrs. Violent. Ah! you are constantly preaching up forbearance: you are for our
government forbearing with the French, until they bear off all the property of
our merchants; for my part, I think our executive have acted very pusillanimous
with their forbearance.


Conciliate. That very forbearance, sister, will cause them to triumph over
France: -- France will blush for her conduct toward us.


Mrs. Violent. Ha, ha, ha, I should as soon expect to see a Negro blush. It is
true, their faces have, from time to time, been well crimsoned with the blood
of their fellow-citizens.


Conciliate. Sister, sister, be not so severe.


Mrs. Violent. Brother, I am honest, and speak my mind: I hate the French
monsters, and I hate our devilish democrats: they would link together and
destroy our country.


Conciliate. Not the least fear of that.


Mrs. Violent. There should be no countenance shown to either of them: I Would
banish them from the country.


Conciliate. Sister, I could wish you were less of a partizan, really: by it
you render yourself very unhappy.


Mrs. Violent. I am afraid, brother, you lean toward the democrats.


Conciliate. I lean toward all honest men, let their politics be what they
may: in myself, I am a decided federalist, but I have no idea that I must knock
a man down or insult him, because he differs in opinion from me: ought we not
to be as liberal in politics as religion?


Mrs. Violent. You may think, brother, to make proselytes of the demo's; but
you will find yourself mistaken: you might as well pretend to dislodge the
largest bell in ChristChurch. You are to have some of them tomorrow to dine
with you, and see if they don't abuse your hospitality by quarrelling at your
table.


Conciliate. I Will trust to that, sister: let us go and arrange matters for
their reception.

(Exeunt.
SCENE,
A room at Partial's lodgings.
Enter Partial and Hasty. Partial. We merit it and worse: we have been
ungrateful to the most magnanimous nation on earth.


Hasty. The most sanguinary and fickle nation on earth: as to gratitude, we owe
them none: all, all is cancelled by their late base and cowardly conduct
toward us.


Partial. They have a right to regulate their own trade.


Hasty. Not to our prejudice.


Partial. What! are they to suffer their commerce to be cut up at all points;
have we made any provision to protect their property in our vessels?


Hasty. That is all a finesse: they are excellent inventers of pretenses: they
know our defenseless situation, and meanly take the opportunity of plundering
us in open violation of the treaty that subsists between us; but I hope, ere
long, our government will unshackle us so, that we may put ourselves in a
condition to retaliate upon those marauders.


Partial. Good! -- we have suffered the arrogant and imperious Britons to
plunder us with impunity: neither we nor our government threw out threats to
them, but meanly crouched and bent to their imperious purposes; in a word, by
the late treaty with England, the executive have bartered away the independence
of their country, for something less than a mess of pottage.


Hasty. By the eternal supreme, sir, you wrong him: I am convinced our
executive, in forming that treaty, had the dignity, peace, and prosperity of
his country full in view.


Partial. I think otherwise.


Hasty. It is in vain to attempt to make any impression upon your prejudices:
be the issue of it as it will, it was legally conducted, and it is our duty to
support the administrators of our government.


Partial. I conceive myself under no such obligations.


Hasty. Ah -- there is a set of men among us, who do not hold themselves bound
by any moral ties; but, in order to promote their ambitious views, decry and
depreciate the most deserving characters among us.


Partial. The good aristocrats, you mean -- Hasty: you are charged with bearing
toward that junto.


Hasty. Show me the man who dare seriously tell me so. No! I despise those two
parties who are designated by the name of aristocrats and democrats. Some of
the aristocrats, from their inordinate pride and arrogance, would trample out
the existence of their fellow-citizens; and some of the democrats, to gratify
their ambition, and others to retrieve their desperate fortunes, would hurl all
things into confusion, that they might rise on the ruins of their country.


Partial. Ha! ha! Hasty, too much politics has almost made thee mad: if you
are not a democrat or an aristocrat, in the name of Lucifer, what are you?


Hasty. A federal republican. That is the name I glory in; that is the party,
which will rally round our inimitable constitution, and support it, against
domestic traitors, or insidious foreign incendiaries.


Partial. Your servant, Mr. Crusty; what is the news?


Crusty. Damn all news.


Partial. Be not so short, good Mr. Crusty. Nothing from our good friends the
French?


Crusty. Damnation to them, the thieves: they our friends!


Partial. I think so. Don't you know the old saying, Mr. Crusty, friends in
need, are friends indeed; we should have been slaves, if they had not
befriended us.


Crusty. Not more so than they would make us.


Partial. Did they not show us their best affections.


Crusty. 'Twas interest, damme, Sir; nothing but interest: 'twas a stroke of
policy; cutting a limb off of their powerful rival. Rome against Carthage,
damme: Rome and Carthage over again.


Partial. Then you don't conceive we are under the storngest ties of
obligations to them?


Crusty. No, Sir, no: I hate the words obligation and gratitude; they are worn
as threadbare, as your great grandmother's under petticoat: put the matter to
concise reasoning; I hate your damned long arguments: we had a dispute with
Great Britain about her unconstitutional attempts, on the score of taxation: we
had recourse to arms: we had occasion for auxiliaries: we hired Frenchmen: we
paid them: and what the devil do they want more?


Partial. So you will not give them any credit -- we are under no obligation!


Crusty. By Jupiter! No, they are under obligations to us.


Partial. How will you make that appear?


Crusty. Why, damme, for inoculating them with liberty; if a change of things
is to be a blessing to them, who are they to thank but us?


Partial. This is curious sophistry; your logic will not do with me.


Crusty. What the devil would you be at?


Partial. I would immediately break the accursed link, which has lately bound
us to England, and make a new one with that of France; the only nation we can
have a natural fraternity with.


Crusty. ( Ironically) Very natural to be sure: the same language, the same
habits -- damn their fraternity, I say. Heaven secure us from their fraternal
hugs. ( Ironically) How affectionately they have hugged part of Italy, and the
United Provinces. ( Significantly) Just so they would hug the United States:
their hugs are like the hugs of the bears, never disengage themselves, until
they have hugged out the breath.


Partial. Hell and the devil! I can no longer command my temper: did they not
shed their blood, and expend their treasure for us?


Crusty. Well, come, damme, I Will take you upon your own tack; who was it
expended their treasure, and shed their blood?


Partial. The people of France.


Crusty. I deny it.


Partial. Not the people of France?


Crusty. No, Sir, damme, if they did, they knew no more about it than the
Hottentots.


Partial. Crusty, you would make a man with a happier disposition than Job,
swear. Who did we receive assistance from?


Crusty. From the king of France; and well has he been rewarded for it: he and
part if his family, and most of his connections and friends, have perished in
consequence of it.


Partial. They deserved it.


Crusty. By the Lord, they did not; they were most inhumanly murdered by a set
of the most bloody cutthroats that ever disgraced human nature.


Partial. You are a lying old scoundrel ( walks up to him in a passion) Your
age protects you.


Crusty. ( with indignant contempt) My age? ( runs up to him in passion) Age
has not so enervated this arm, but it can chastise such an insolent young
jacobin puppy.


Partial. ( Retires) Stand off, or by all that is merciful, I Will make you repent
your temerity.


Crusty. I Will make you eat the lie, and be damned to you.


(Strikes at him, misses the blow, and falls.) Enter Conciliate. Conciliate.
Gentlemen, gentlemen, for God's sake, you are not quarreling, I hope.


Partial. It is morally impossible to avoid quarreling with him: he allows no
latitude to his litigious, abusive tongue.


Crusty. Ah, damme, and while ever I can stir it, I Will oppose it to your
diabolical crew. I shall take another opportunity of resenting this affront.


(Exeunt. Conciliate. What in the world was the occasion of the contest between
you and Mr. Crusty? I thought you were upon very good terms.


Partial. So we have been until now, but it was impossible to hear his
aspersions against the French government without being irritated.


Conciliate. Oh, my dear friend, his years give him a license: old people
should be privileged. I must see this breach made up.


Enter Dispassionate. Dispassionate. Gentlemen, your humble servant.


Omnes. Your servant, Mr. Dispassionate.


Conciliate. Any thing new to day, sir?


Dispassionate. Yes, sir, a very unwelcome piece of news for our commercial
interest: information has just come to hand, that a French privateer, off our
Capes, has taken one of our most valuable Indiamen.


Conciliate. I am sorry to hear it: whatever losses that enterprising class of
citizens sustain, must be very generally felt.


Partial. They have brought it all on themselves, by supporting the executive,
in his vile treaty with England.


Dispassionate. I must beg leave to differ with you in opinion on that subject,
Mr. Partial. There cannot be a stronger proof of the merits of that treaty,
than their advocating it: they are not apt to act against their own interest;
beside, I cannot conceive what right the French government have to take umbrage
at our foreign connections.


Partial. I think they have, if they interfere with them: I maintain it, that
the late treaty with Britain, is an open violation of ours with theirs.


Dispassionate. I cannot be convinced of that. I have looked over the arguments
on both sides of the question, with an unprejudiced eye, and with a mind open
to conviction, but could not discover that we had departed from that good faith
we were bound to support with them.


Partial. ( Pettishly) I have read them otherwise, nor will I give up my
judgment for any man.


Conciliate. Gentlemen, I pray ye to change your subject: politics destroys
friendship, and creates choler.


[Exit. Dispassionate. No, upon my honor, not with me; liberty of sentiment is
the grand privilege of an American.


Partial. I shall never run into passion, with you, Dispassionate: what I
meant, was, my right to a fixed opinion: I cannot give up the idea, but that
France has been provoked to her present temper toward us.


Dispassionate. Rely upon it, that France has adopted the most impolitic policy
toward this country, that was ever conceived, or executed by a government: by
pursuing such a system, she will alienate the affections of the people of the
United States from her; joined to that, it will excite strong resentments
against her, for their attempts to overawe us to her views.


Partial. P'shaw! what cares she for our resentment? what can we do without
ships of war, without soldiers, or resources?


Dispassionate. Rember what we did when we were defending our rights against
Great Britain: our resources were nothing then in comparison to what they are
now.


Partial. Ah, now you are come to the point: what could we have done, had it
not been for France.


Dispassionate. The deuce take it, you are always lugging in the obligations
that we are under to France. I am willing to give them all the credit which is
due to them. They did assist us to our Independence: the benefit was great;
but, surely we did not give an eternal mortgage upon ourselves for that.


Partial. We can never repay them.


Dispassionate. Believe me, if we are to repay them in the way that their
present politics demand, that is, a surrender of our independence, it would
have been better for us never to have applied to them for assistance.


Partial. They have no such designs.


Dispassionate. Their recent conduct but favors it too much.


Partial. Pray, Mr. Dispassionate, what line of conduct would you mark our for
them toward us?


Dispassionate. As thus: immediately to put a stop to their shameful
depredations on our trade, make restitutions for their spoilations, interfere
no more in our domestic affairs, nor presume to dictate to our government about
its concerns with foreign states.


Partial. Now, do you sincerely think, that a nation, who has, at this moment,
the most powerful states of Europe prostrate at her feet, would stoop to us?


Dispassionate. It would not be stooping: it would be but an act of justice:
she has been dealing unfairly with us: we have merited from her a very
different treatment.


Partial. I cannot see where we have been so meritorious toward her.


Dispassionate. Well, now I Will take the matter up from the abolition of
monarchy: were we not the first to acknowledge their new order of things, by
receiving their agent? that, too, in the face of one of the most powerful
combinations that was ever formed against a nation, with the risk of bringing
down on us their vengeance? did not our government almost break its
heart strings to pay our national debt: and every way bemeaned itself toward
them with due rectitude?


Partial. Ah, that is your side of the story: our government discovered much
rectitude, to be sure, when she formed new and social connections with her
inveterate enemy! her enemies should have been ours.


Dispassionate. My dear Sir, you might as well say, you are under an obligation
to set yourself at variance with every person who does not happen to look
pleasant at your particular friend.


Partial. ( pettishly) Comparisonsare not always just: there is a consanguinity
between us which should always bind us.


Dispassionate. At the present crisis that may be disputed: when France was
contending for her liberty and independence, there was a strong similarity:
then, I believe, the hearts of most Americans went with her; but she has
changed her disposition: she is now grasping at power and dominion.


Partial. No more than what she has gloriously acquired by her arms.


Dispassionate. Confessed; but still it would be much more to her happiness,
and to that of her neighbors, were she to retire to her primitive limits --
make peace -- draw her citizens from licentious freedom to industry, by
encouraging agriculture, commerce and manufactures: by so doing, she would do
honor to a republican government in Europe; but if she perseveres in her
present line of conduct, in all probability, ere long, she will bring on her
dissolution as a republic.


Partial. No, she will continue for centuries to come, a great military
republic, and the terror of crowned despots.


Dispassionate. Time will unfold whether you or me are right; but, I think, if
I have made just observations in turning over the page of history, or if I have
acquired any knowledge of human nature, I will be bold to assert, that it is
morally impossible for an individual or a government to flourish long by the
means of rapine and want of moral rectitude.


Partial. What a charge against a nation! You are their avowed enemy?


Dispassionate. Before heaven, I am not. Take them, in toto. I think them the
most accomplished people on earth: it is to be lamented that so great a nation
should be sacrificed to the ambition of men in power.


Partial. Their ambition is of a laudable nature, and that they will teach us
ere long: they will make our aristocrats in power tremble before their
victorious battalions.


Dispassionate. Partial, you are surely bantering: sentiments like those,
cannot seriously proceed from you.


Partial. I never disguise my sentiments.


Dispassionate. In that you are honest: though you may be wrong: it will be very
visionary in France, or her partisans here, to suppose the United States may be
subjected: for, however the people may differ in their domestic or foreign
politics, in case of a French invasion, I am much mistaken in the character of
my countrymen, if they would not generally unite in repelling: the love of
country would prevail, and supercede all animosities.


Partial. Then, you are for a French war?


Dispassionate. No, Heaven avert it as the worst of calamities; nothing but
dire necessity should compel us to it: -- that of supporting our character as
an independent people.


Partial. They will not come to destroy, but secure us in our liberties.


Dispassionate. That would be their pretense.


Enter Hasty. Dispassionate, I have been seeking you for some time -- wish to
speak with you on some particular business.


Dispassionate. I will attend you, sir; fare you well, Partial: reformation to
you.

[Exeunt.
Enter Conciliate. Mr. Partial, I come to make a request of you.


Partial. Sir, I shall be happy to grant it: when so good a man as Mr.
Conciliate begs a boon, who can refuse?


Conciliate. ( makes a bow) Sir, -- you are pleased to flatter.


Partial. No, upon my honor: flattery is a species of meanness I never could
reconcile myself to; but there is no crime in paying a well-timed compliment.


Conciliate. Sir, ( makes a bow) to the point: my request is, that you will
make certain concessions to Mr. Crusty.


Partial. What? to apologize to him, the old --


Conciliate. Hold! refrain from such contemptuous epithets: Crusty is in a
respectable grade of life, at the head of a fine family, and though somewhat of a
cynic, yet he is not one of the worst men in the world.


Partial. He most infamously vilified the French.


Conciliate. Well, well, in that, the old man is, in some degree, to be
excused: some of his connections have sustained very heavy losses by them.


Partial. ( pettishly) So have mine by the piratical English: I wish the damned
island was at the bottom of the sea.


Conciliate. That, my young friend, is a rash, and a very inhuman wish.


Partial. Have they not been the disturbers of the peace of the world, ever
since their wooden walls, as they proudly call them, were built?


Conciliate. Dear Partial, let us wave this subject: I come to you as a pacific
negociator: will you go with me to Crusty's drop a few words of an
accommodating kind, and the matter will be amicably settled? which I can assure
you, will be a pleasing circumstance to me; you are both to dine with me
today, it would be very unpleasant to me, to see you frowning upon each other.


Partial. Do you think I was the aggressor?


Conciliate. Upon my veracity, I do.


Partial. If he had reflected on any other nation -- ( pauses) I Will with you,
Sir.


[ Exeunt. SCENE.
O'Callaghan Sarcastic's lodgings.
Enter O'Callaghan and Monsieur Aristocrat. Aristocrat. Vat you tink of de
news, Misteer Sarcastic?


O'Callaghan. Why, by my soul, I don't like it: it is not of an agreeable nature
at all, at all, and I cannot help thinking, that your countrymen are behaving
damned uncivil to us.


Aristocrat. Dat is because you ave behave uncivil to them.


O'Callaghan. Now faith, that is high enough, you are vindicating them, who, but
the other day was glad to run away from them with your head; but is only
fulfilling the old saying, that a Frenchman will be a Frenchman all over the
world, and all the days of his life.


Aristocrat. Futre -- to be sure.


O'Callaghan. Arrah, but why are you not consistant? if you are an aristocrat,
why do you be a democrat?


Aristocrat. Vat you talk?


O'Callaghan. I say, what is the raison that you are an aristocrat and a
democrat, too?


Aristocrat. I am no democrat.


O'Callaghan. Upon my conshience, if I had my way, there are two descriptions
of Frenchmen I would clare the United States of.


Aristocrat. Vat description?


O'Callaghan. Aristocrats without property, and democrats without principle.


Aristocrat. Sacra! ( walks agitated) I no like dat canversation. ( takes a
pinch of snuff) I tell you, I no like dat remark, Sair, ( takes a pinch of
snuff) Diable.


O'Callaghan By my soul, I will not brake my heart about it, whether you like it
or not: O'Callaghan Sarcastic will always spoke what he thinks, I hate
ingratitude; have we not like good Christians, opened our arms to receive your
fugitives? did we not fade them, and advance money, (a great dale of it too,)
to relave their pressing wants, and for that they have been staling our
property, and want to cut our throats, into the bargain?


Aristocrat. De Americans ave been ungrateful -- dey ave brake deir faith with
my countrymen -- dey go to de Anglish -- dey ave no right to make de treaty so.


O'Callaghan. What is that to France? Our government has a right to do wrong. I
don't mane by that, she has done so.


Aristocrat. Begar, she ave done wrong, and we will make you smoke for it.


O'Callaghan. By J -- s it is enough to make a dumb man swear, to hear the
conversation of some of you Frenchmen: by my soul, I believe the most of you
are nothing but spies some of you pretend to go and explore the country, (
ironically) to see which way the wind blows, to discover the nakedness of our
land: but, I hope they have found, and always will find, nothing but plenty,
and a number of brave souls to defend it.


Aristocrat. Sacra futre! ( walks in passion) you talk too much, Misteer
Sarcastic.


O'Callaghan. That I cannot do, against your countrymen, if I was to talk all
the days of my life. The more I think about you, the more I am provoked; your
impudence is beyond all bounds; you must be interfaring in our national
concerns; you must be striving to make our paple run away from themselves; that
is, I mane you would make them lave their own government, that they built with
their own hands. Now, suppose the Americans were to behave in France, as you do
here, knock up a hubbub there, oppose the government, put on a national
cockade, appare as so many soldiers arrayed against them; by my soul, you would
make them march off, quick-step, without their heads.


Aristocrat. Futre! futre! ( walks in passion) Diable. ( takes a pinch of
snuff) You ar one impudent Irishman: come along; you and I quarrel one little
bit.


Sarcastic. I am your man: I will mate you, in any way you plaise: I should
think myself unworthy of braithing American air, if I would not espouse her
cause.


[Exeunt. SCENE.
The (...)
Coesar and Pompey, meeting. Coesar. Citizen Pompey, how you do, today, Sir?


Pompey. Tank you, citizen Caesar, berry well; I hope you, and you lady, enjoy
good health.


Coesar. Bery good, I gib you tank, Sir.


Pompey. Here cum citizen Sambo, twig he pig cu. Since he get free, how he wag
he tail.


Enter Sambo. Gemmem, it gib me extreme pleasure to see you bote: I hope you
are bote well, citizens.


Omnes. Tank you, Sir, bery will.


Sambo. Any ting new to day, gemmem?


Pompey. Trong talk French war.


Coesar. Dam French.


Pompey. Dam English.


Coesar. What you dam English, for?


Pompey. What e debil you dam French, for?


Coesar. Cause I don't like 'em.


Pompey. Why you no like 'em.


Coesar. Cause massa no like 'em.


Pompey. My massa no like English -- I hate 'em too -- drom proud -- so conceit
coxcomb -- look like ebery body tunk in enose.


Coesar. Ten hundred time better den French, drom fribble, buffoon, ape,
monkey; English, fine, manly fellow, besides French come cut our troat, I like
English: English, for eber!


Pompey. France for eber! France git liberty to slabe liberty; and, France for
eber: my massa for France -- so I, who you for, Sambo.


Sambo. I go we massa too.


Pompey. He for France.


Sambo. No.


Pompey. For English.


Sambo. No.


Coesar. Who debil he for den?


Sambo. He for he country.


Pompey. For he country!


Sambo. Ah, for he country! massa say, dam French, dam English; he say, what e
debil business have we do wi two bully nation? he say, let em fight and be
dom'd.


Coesar. Dear our massas: come, you go, Sambo?

[Exeunt.
END OF ACT FIRST.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Conciliate's house.
Enter Conciliate and Hasty. Hasty. Not arm! do you say? after such insolent
treatment to our commissioners? are we to put up with every insult from that
imperious, overbearing government, am not resent it? such cowardly pusilanimity
would but be courting more aggravated insults.


Conciliate. What should we gain by arming?


Hasty. Protect our property, and support our national and natural rights.


Conciliate. And bring on a war!


Hasty. Fury! -- Are not we now suffering more than if we were at war with
them. They capture our vessels in violation of all treaties -- treat our
mariners in a manner that would disgrace savages -- yet this must be borne with
-- we must bear their stripes without making even wry faces.


Conciliate. The hardships you speak of, are but of a partial nature, in
comparison to the whole nation being involved in a war. Peace, my dear friend,
is what, by all means, our government should preserve. We must view France in a
state of political intoxication: when she becomes sober, she will be more
rational.


Hasty. Then, forsooth, if France gets drunk, you think that in her cups, she
is authorized to plunder, kick cuff and abuse us, and, as mad Alexander did to
his friend, take away our existence: (we must submit to all) The height of
presumption, to think of defending ourselves against the almighty nation. By
Heaven, I Would rather be transmogrified into a hog, and be worried by the dogs,
than such a cancer-hearted American.

Enter Crusty. You have heard the news, gentlemen, from imperial Rome. The next
decree will be, to cite our executive and the principal citizens who have
supported his measures, before them, to answer for their rebel conduct.

Enter Dispassionate. What think you of our affairs now, gentlemen?


Hasty. Mr. Conciliate's opinion is, that France is deranged, and that we must
permit her to act as she thinks fit, that is would be a still greater act of
madness in us, to administer that relief, which is commonly given to people in
a state of insanity, such as bloodletting, etc.


Conciliate. Do not prevert my meaning: I did observe, France was intoxicated
with her successes, and not to be wondered at her fortune in arms, has been
beyond all calculation. She is dazzled with her preponderance in the scale of
European politics. I rather think it would be most prudent in our government,
to forbear a little longer: something may turn up in our favor.


Dispassionate. Our situation is truly critical, and distressingly hard. I am
convinced our government has left nothing undone to avoid a serious controversy
with France; and their refusing to accommodate with our commissioners, reduces
us to the sad necessity of putting ourselves in a state of defense by sea and
land: self-preservation, and national honor, justify the measure.


Conciliate. I hope Congress will not adopt the measure -- Better ten years
depredation on our commerce, than two years war: Those who have experienced its
dreadful effects, fear it.


Dispassionate. I have suffered as much as most men by it; and dread its
deplorable consequences; I know, that even arming in our own defense, is almost
a certain prologue to a war; but, in the name of Heaven, what are we to do?


Crusty. There are two ways to get out of the scrape.


Hasty. Which are they?


Crusty. Why, damme, overturn our government, and (...) a new one to suit the
purposes of France: pour all our wealth into her lap, or send a deputation to
them, requesting them, in their great goodness, to condescend to send over
commissioners, or a'pro-consul to govern us: that will put all matters to
rights, and we shall be a charming, happy people; living under the benign
sunshine of the grand nation.


Hasty. Be governed by them! never, never! by the heavenly powers, never!
Americans are not yet so lost to that duty they owe their country, themselves
and posterity, as to become Helots. I Will answer for it, that there are millions
of our countrymen, who will draw their swords in the support of their rights
and independence.


Conciliate. Whether it is owing to the ardent wish of my heart, I cannot say;
but I am impressed with the strongest hopes, that matters will yet be amicably
settled.


Dispassionate. Heaven grant it! for, to tell the truth, I would rather go to a
good dinner, than to a battle.


Conciliate. True -- recollect you take your plates with me to day.


Dispassionate. The hour?


Conciliate. Four.


Dispassionate. Gentlemen, it is time to be off, in order that we may get
ourselves brushed up a little.


Omnes. Your most obedient, Sir.


[Exeunt. Conciliate. Adieu, Gentlemen.

Enter Mrs. Violent I would seize all their property, and send every soul of
them out of the country, aristocrats and democrats, bag and baggage.


Conciliate. Who are you going to send out of the country in such a hurry,
sister?


Mrs. Violent. The French! The vile French! They don't deserve to live another
moment with us.


Conciliate. I pray you, sister, to be more charitable. You would not, surely,
punish the innocent for the guilty.


Mrs. Violent. They are all guilty, both in deeds and words. Did you not take
notice last night, how Aristocrat vindicated the French government?


Conciliate. That was natural.


Mrs. Violent. Can you thus soften such impudence?


Conciliate. Come, dear sister, I beg you to soften your temper with respect to
politics. How goes the honors of the table?


Mrs. Violent. I have always, brother, done my best to set your table off to
advantage.


Conciliate. I thank you, good sister, we'll go look at it.


[Exeunt. SCENE,
A Beer-House. Adz and Sawney Biscuit, drinking. Adz. Here Is to the French
republic: Success to her by land and sea. ( Drinks.)


Sawney. By my saal, I dinna think you are a very bonny American, to drink sic
a toast as that.


Adz. Are they not our allies and best friends?


Sawney. Ye may ca them allies, and your be friends: If they are year be
friends, they have a very extraordinary way of showing it, by roobing and
insoolting you.


Adz. We have used them damned ill, by making a treaty with the English.


Sawney. I canna kin what they ha to do we that: your gouvernment surely has
a right to make its own bargains; if they canna do that, ye need nae mare make
a boast about year independence.


Adz. Hell take our government! I shall always dislike it, for making such a
treaty.


Sawney. Upon my word, if you was in England, and to mutter sic sentiments
against their gouvernment, you would be ganged awaw to Boutany Bay; for my
part, I am veery weel satisfied with leeving under your gouvernment.


Adz. The treaty, I am talking of.


Sawney. Have you ever read it?


Adz. Have I read it!


Sawney. I ask you the queestion.


Adz. Hem -- ( confused) hem -- I -- hem -- I cannot say I have. --


Sawney. Is it right fair in you to censure and condemn what ye ha na seen?


Adz. Mr. Buzabout gave me an insight into it, and he explained it to all our
neighbors round about: He is a man that watches day and night for the good of
his country.


Sawney. His ai^ interest most likely.


Adz. No, he is not such a man, he is staunch to the back bone, he is a true
friend to equality, and an enemy to the aristocratical part of our government.


Sawney. What part is that?


Adz. The Senate.


Sawney. By St. Andrew, your talk is enough to split ones heed, you dinna know
the constituted parts of your ai^ gouvernment.


Adz. I do not!


Sawney. What do you ca aristocracy.


Adz. The Senate.


Sawney. That's nae an answer: what is the meaning of aristocracy?


Adz. Hem ( confused) why -- hem -- it is aristocracy.


Sawney. Ha, ha, ha! By the Thistle, that is women's reasoning; ye dinna know
the meaning of the word.


Adz. I do not!


Sawney. Nae you do not, but you take up an erroneous idea, that the Senate of
the United States, is like the British house of lairds.


Adz. And so they are.


Sawney. Nae comparison, nae comparison.


Adz. The very same kind of a body.


Sawney. I Will try to convince youof your mistake. Who chooses the senators?


Adz. Why, I suppose you think I cannot tell you that.


Sawney. Weel, tell me.


Adz. Why the state governments?


Sawney. Wha chooses those who make choice of them?


Adz. Of them -- hem -- of them -- let me consider -- the people.


Sawney. Weel, then, how can they be an aristocratical body? All power is from
the people: The people are the great fountain from which all authority flows.
They give it and it gangs back to them again. Ye hae the freest gouvernment in
the world; and if ye dinna continue to be a free people, it is your ain faults,
all that ye hae to do, is to be true to yoursels, do nae suffer English or
French factions to influence you. As I said before, be steady to yoursels, and
you may bid defiance to ae the universe, and your constitution will stand to
the end of time.


Adz. I don't like the constitution.


Sawney. In the name of heeven, were is its defects?


Adz. I don't like three branches.


Sawney. How would you hae it?


Adz. One and devisible.


Sawney. Ha, ha, ha! one and devisible, you canna kin your ain toungue; what do
ye ca it?


Adz. ( Pettishly) What do I ca it -- do you call that English, and be damned
to you. The Americans are come to a pretty pass, when Scotchmen undertake to
teach them English.


Sawney. Out with your shallow brain: Is there a coontry on earth turns oot so
many learned men as Scotland?


Adz. Nor poorer not prouder.


Sawney. Nae, national reflections, Mr. Adz! nae national reflections. It would
be happy for your coontry, if all the refractory Americans were sent out of it,
and replaced by poor honest proud Scotchmen; they would have pride enough to
get a good living, and conform to the laws of your coontry: But pray, Mr. Adz,
let us know the meaning of the word one and devusible.


Adz. Why, damn it, you don't pronounce that word right ( with contempt) but it
is as well as can be expected from an ignorant Scotch-tory-aristocrat.


Sawney. By St. Andrew, you lie! I profess myself to be a republican and a
friend to the gouvernment of the United States.


Adz. Have you the impudence to give me the lie ( goes up to strike him, speaks
loud) will you clear me of the law if I give you a baisting?


Sawney. By my saal I will: ye need nae think because I am less than you, I am
afraid; I will na flinch.


Enter landlord (in haste.) Landlord. Gentlemen, I suffer no quarrelling in my
house.


Sawney. I dinna want to make a distourbance in your hoose, sir, but wha is to
bear with the violence of this doomocrat?


Adz. did not you make game of me and call me a liar?


Sawney. Did you not came a Scotch tory, and an aristocrat, and offer to strike
me?


Landlord. Take my advice, gentlemen, and go home, and be better friends in
future.


Sawney. I owe him nae grudge. I would nae injure a hair in his heed, but in my
ain defense.


Adz. I Will put you to it. I Will warrant you, I Will give you a dressing the first
place I meet you, damme, if I don't.


Sawney. Veery weell, veery weell, try your hand at it. I Will warrant ye, Sawney
will never disgrace his coontry.

[Exeunt.
SCENE.
O'Callaghan Sarcastic's lodgings. Enter O'Callaghan and O'Brazen. O'Brazen.
Cousin Sarcastic, you will bring yourself into a very unaisy situation by
wounding the Frenchman.


O'Callaghan. It hangs very aisy upon my conscience. I would desire no better
sport than to cool every prater against our country, in the same way.


O'Brazen. Perhaps you may mean that to me, or some of my friends from Ireland:
but, I think they have not been well used.


O'Callaghan. In what way?


O'Brazen. Why, after fighting Liberty's battles in their own country, as long
as they could, until necessity constrained them to come here, yet this
government takes no notice of them.


O'Callaghan. What is the government to do with them? it is enough that they
find an asylum here: if the government were to take notice of them, it should
be to send many of them out of the country, for their seditious behavior,
instead of accommodating themselves to the laws of the land, the first thing
they do when they come, is, to join the opposition party, in a hue-and-cry
against the government, and the administrators of it: upon my conscience, I am
ashamed of some of my countrymen: for, after their making their escape from the
jaws of Death -- after getting here, they are so mischievous, or wrong-headed,
as not to have discernment enough to discriminate between the government they
came from, and the government where they are: they think they must fall into
the same practices here as they followed there, of barking at the government:
it may possibly have been right there, but that is not quite clear to me:
however, this much I know, it is damnably criminal here, because our government
is perfectly free, and the administrators of it, honest men.


O'Brazen. There is freedom enough here, but very little fraternity, unless it
is among the good democrats.


O'Callaghan. I tell you, cousin O'Brazen, you had better take my advice, and
leave the company of those good democrats, as you call them: for, by my soul,
in the end, you will gain a loss by them; they are not the most substantial paple
in the world. Come, you know we are engaged to dine out to day, ( pulls out his
watch) it is on the moment of the time.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, a hall in Conciliate's house.
Enter Cato. Cato. Dam segar and politic most choke ( coughs) dam segar and
politic, I say: place tink most enough to knock a body down.


Enter Sambo. Sambo. Ha, ha, ha! dey got at it.


Enter Coesar and Pompey. Coesar. Ha. ha, ha! dey at it, hip e tie, how old
Crusty provoke massa Partial.


Pompey. He don't peak true, damme, he don't peak true, he tell lie bout French.


Coesar. He do peak true, I say, he cannot tell lie bout French, he cannot make
em too bad.


Pompey. Take care what you say, Caesar, you and I friends, but, I bedam if I
hear my friends abuse.


Coesar. Pompey, I no fraid you, I say, I no fraid you, Pompey, I hate e French.


Sambo. He, he, he! two black fool go fight ( aside) citizens, you go too fast,
you go too fast, citizens.


Cato. Caesar and Pompey, take advice of an old man, neber quarrel bout
politic, it bring much trouble, what you do wid such tings? it seem to me,
Negro head got quite wrong now-a-day, you must all be gemmem, must dress in
fashion, talk high flow, must have one and wool powder, dat foolish, only make
your face look more black, howeber, let me advise you no quarrel bout politic,
I wish all e world like my massa, Conciliate; he good man, he seek how he do
good, if any body be in distress, he help em, he neber quarrel bout politic --
if a man be an aristocrat, and for English, he no fight him, if he democrat,
and for French, he no quarrel wid him, he no angry wid any body, for what dey
tink, he ebery body friend, and nobody enemy, he so good, he no hurt cockroach.


Sambo. I suppose he no kill a fly when he bite im.


Pompey. No, I see him many time brush a fly of he leg when he bite him.


Sambo. He no shoot a bird.


Cato. No, he tink dat cruel.


Sambo. He eat him when he shot?


Cato. O yes, he eat him when he shot.


Sambo. Ha, ha, ha! dat make a me laugh, dat put me in mind of a parson who
preach against eating good tings, afterward go home and tuff e gut like e
dibel.


Cato. Ah! you young fool, Sambo.


Pompey. Massa Conciliate a bery good man; I know him bery good man, but I like
a man take some part for all dat.


Sambo. Oh! dram me, I sick of politic, let us go.

(Exeunt.
SCENE
changes, and discovers company at table, as follows: Conciliate,
Dispassionate, Hasty, Partial, Crusty, Kitefoot, Sugar Loaf, Mynheer Van Plump.
Van Plump. Shilence, shentlemen, a doast, cot tam, a doast from Mr. Conciliate.


Hasty. Damn your toasts, I say, the French never assisted us, until we were
able to take care of ourselves.


Partial. You cannot support the assertion.


Hasty. I can; did they not keep us hanging upon them until Burgoyne was
captured? when they found we were capable of capturing a whole British army,
they came forward.


Partial. Aye, that they did, with a powerful navy and army to protect us.


Crusty. So they did, but as the dogs protect sheep from the wolves, that they
may devour them theirselves; damn them, they are nothing but beasts of prey,
cannibals. They have been devouring one another like cannibals, since the
commencement of their revolution.


Partial. It Is false, by heaven, it is false, and we un ratefully forget their
services.


Hasty. Still belching the old story of gratitude! I have told you before, and
I tell you again, sir, that they have cancelled every obligation that we were
under to them, by their infamous treatment to us: from the beginning of their
revolution, delineate their conduct to us after their new situation, see them
sending their agent in the person of Genet, to take possession of us, as their
common property -- see him, arriving at the seat of government, where he had
the impudence to oppose himself to our chief magistrate; nay, had the weakness,
folly and presumption, to compare himself to him in power, as representative of
the French nation -- that not taking effect, they attempted to circumvent us by
the insidious Fauchet, and lastly, by the open audacity of Adet, who dared
attempt to divide the people from their government: all of them were officious
machines from arbitrary, artful, designing juntos: but, thanks to heaven, and
to the vigilance of the illustrious washington, and some of his trusty
counselors, their hellish projects have been counteracted.


Crusty. No, damn them! they are still to be counteracted, by paying them to
keep their tiger paws from us: Monsieur Talleyrand has beheld the glittering
side-boards of our citizens, and has told his masters, the people are wealthy,
and that we are disjointed, and will readily submit to any terms they think
proper to exact.


Hasty. 'Ere that should take place, I Would banish myself to the confines of the
earth. No! that vile government will have ample demonstration that the
Americans will not submit to such ignominious terms as they have prescribed: if
it was but a fraction, it should not be acceded to, the principle is the thing:
war, war, with all its consequences, once more for our liberties and
independence.


Van Plump. Shilence, shentlemen, ( hichups) I gall for a doast, again, from
misder Conshiliate, cot tam Bolidies.


Omnes. A toast from Mr. Conciliate.


Conciliate. Order, gentlemen, and I Will give you a toast. May England and
France make a speedy and reciprocal peace. --


[Omnes drinks it. Dispassionate. Mine, gentlemen -- May their only ambition be
in maintaining it inviolate.


[Omnes drinks it. Van Plump. My doast, shentlemen, shitizens, sheneral
washingdon, Shon Adams, Thomas Shefferson and the Pedavian rebublic.


Crusty. I object to the last part of that toast; it is no sovereign power, it is
nothing but a province of France.


Van Plump. I insist on that bart of the doast, there are a sovereign bower,
your government has acknowledged it as such, cot tam, misder Grusdy, what you
mean?


Omnes. The toast, ( they drink it.)


Kitefoot. My toast, gentlemen -- May congress make no more partial laws.


[Omnes drink it. Sugar Loaf. That is my toast, too.


Conciliate. Mr. Sugar Loaf, not in the same words, but something, if you
choose, that would convey the same meaning.


Crusty. You and Kitefoot have never ceased grumbling at congress, since they
put a duty upon snuff and sugar, do you expect to carry on lucrative business,
without easing the reins of government? are the merchants to be the only money
finders? besides, you don't pay it, damme, you don't pay it; you make the
consumer pay it. Some of you have made great fortunes since the duty was put
on; you have made the consumers pay it, treble and treble.


Conciliate. Order, Mr. Crusty, order, decorum: every one to the liberty of
toasts.


Omnes. A toast, Mr. Sugar Loaf.


Sugar Loaf May I be hanged, if I know what to drink.


Conciliate. Something, Mr. Sugar Loaf, think of something.


Sugar Loaf. Well, then, if congress will not repel the tax upon snuff and sugar,
may their throats pe stuffed full of sour-crout, and stick there 'till Kitefoot
and I pull it out.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha. ( drink it.)


Partial. My turn, gentlemen. The great republic of France, may she never make
peace with her enemies, until she has so erippled them, as never to be in a
condition to kick at her again, nor accommodate with the United States, until
they have humbled them for their ingratitude.


Hasty. May I be damned, if I drink that toast.


Crusty. And I by heaven, I Would much rather see them hamstrung, they have got too
much power already, they would unhinge the universe if they could.


Partial. If it was a toast in favor of England, you would not boggle at it.


Crusty. ( hickups) Ah! what the devil would you do if it was not for England?
( hickups) damme, don't she find you and one-half the world in clothing?
damme, we could not eat without her.


Partial. How will you maintain that?


Crusty. Why, ( hickups) damme, don't she find us in knives and forks?


Partial. I wonder you don't say provisions, too: damn her, and all that takes
her part. I must insist upon you and Hasty's drinking that toast.


Crusty. I Would see you in hell, first.


Hasty. Ditto, ditto, ( hickups) ditto. I Would see you roasting there first, I
would that; we should solicit England for assistance and meet war with all its
horrors, first.


Crusty. ( Hickups) Ah, damme! England for ever! huzza for England!


Partial. ( Hickups) Huzza! huzza for France! France, for ever!


Conciliate. ( gets up and speaks to Crusty, Hasty, and Partial) Gentlemen,
gentlemen, I beg you to drop this conversation. I hope you don't mean to break
up this society.


Crusty. ( hickups) No, damme, I love society: I love my bottle and friend, (
hickups) but I say, he is an enemy to his country, who huzza's for France.


Dispassionate. Gentlemen, I cry you to social order, we did not come to
partake of Mr. Conciliate's hospitality with a view to insult him, I hope.


Hasty. There is no man I respect more than Mr. Conciliate, but I cannot
restrain my resentment. I say, the man that dares to huzza for France, as we
are now circumstanced with her, is a traitor to his country.


Partial. ( takes up a bottle and throws it at Hasty) Take that and the traitor
in your teeth, ( here a general confusion takes place.)


Conciliate. ( gets up and runs through the company much agitated) For heaven's
sake, gentlemen, do not commit yourselves in this way, behave like gentlemen,
from you, Mr. Partial, I should have expected better treatment, is no respect
due?


Partial. Away, sir. I know no respect! now to be called a traitor! ( runs at
Hasty) the epithet should not go unresented, from my brother.


Dispassionate. (interferes) Mr. Partial, this is not, nor must not be a place
for gratifying revenge.


Partial. What, sir, are you his advocate? are you his fighting man?


Hasty. My fighting man! ( runs up to him -- Conciliate interferes) stand off,
my friend, stand off! I respect and esteem you. I am sorry that I have been a
partial cause of this disturbance ( attempts to get from him) I Will convince him
that I want no substitute.


Dispassionate. ( takes hold of Hasty) Are you deprived of every rational
faculty? will you remember that you are in a gentleman's house, and not in a
brothe! or tavern? I insist upon your going home with me.


Hasty, Sir, I stand corrected! I beg pardon, Mr. Conciliate, ( hickup) I beg
pardon, I Will with you, Dispassionate, I Will see you, Partial, in proper time and
place.


Partial. If I don't may the name of traitor rest on my head; and you that are
for France, follow me.


Crusty. And you that are for England, follow me. Huzza! for England.


Partial. Huzza! for France, France will triumph over all her enemies. Huzza,
for France! ( going off huzzaing for France. Crusty follows, huzzaing for
England) as they go off.


Enter O'Callaghan. O'Callaghan. In the name of the tutelar Saint of Ireland,
what does all this mean?


Conciliate. ( with anxiety) Such a scene, they will surely get a fighting in
the street; I must follow, to prevent them.


(Exeunt in haste. O'Callaghan. (solus) God save us, what a combustion here? is
a subject for the most shallow-pated to moralize upon: Americans enrolling
themselves under the banners of foreign powers, now, upon my conshience, I
think the sons of Columbia should observe more dignity, than to suffer
themselves to be divided by governments across the Atlantic; it would be more
to their honor, to parade in favor of their own government, and learn to do
well by other's ills, let them take a lesson from the fate of the United
Provinces, there see the effects of suffering two rival powers to insinuate
themselves; the one dragging them one way, and the other another; for centuries
past, and, finally, they have been swallowed up by the one, their independence
gone as a nation, perhaps never to revive again: I hope in God, it will not be
the lot of the United States: I trust the people will know how to prize their
singular happy situation among the nations of the earth, and join heart and
hand, in supporting the tried patriot, who is at the head of their great
national affairs, (...).


FINIS.

