THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF SINNERS' coming to CHRIST, WITHOUT THE ALMIGHTY DRAWING
OF GOD the FATHER, Illustrated and Proved IN A DISCOURSE, PREACHED AT ROYALTON,
From John vi. 44. and v. 40. Made public by request of the hearers -- with some
addition and enlargement.

BY ELIJAH NORTON OF WOODSTOCK.

"YE CANNOT SERVE THE LORD; FOR HE IS AN HOLY GOD."

JEHOVAH. PRINTED AT SUFFIELD, BY H. and O. FARNSWORTH, FOR THE AUTHOR. M, DCC,
XCVIII.

THE AUTHOR's APOLOGY.
SEEING this subject has employed the pens of some of the most learned, wise,
and best of men, it may be enquired why I have written, and what need there is
of publishing again on this subject?

ANSWER. First. Many may read this, who never have read, and probably never
will read what has been written by others.

SECOND. It is possible that I may make some improvement on the subject in the
view of some: But,

THIRD. If I have added nothing to the subject, yet my method of writing may
strike the minds of some, and do them good, when another's would not: Therefore,

FOURTHLY. It is possible, through Divine Grace, it may convince some persons
of these important truths, and be a mean of saving their souls.

FIFTHLY. Another reason why I publish this discourse is, that hereby I may
speak, preach, and do good when I am dead. "He being dead, yet speaks."

SIXTHLY. Some have requested that it might be published, and I cannot deny
them. -- For these reasons, I pray thee have me excused.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
JOHN VI. 44. and V. 40. "No man can come to me, except the FATHER, which has
sent me, draw him." "And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life."


WITHOUT any introduction, we may proceed from these important passages before
us, to make this doctrinal observation, viz.

THAT it is utterly impossible for any of mankind to come to CHRIST, and
receive that life and salvation, which he offers them as a free gift, without
the almighty drawing of GOD the FATHER.

BEFORE I proceed to the proof of this doctrine, I would a little explain it,
and the text out of which it naturally arises.

THIS inability, and impossibility of coming to CHRIST, seems to be fully
contained in our text.

"NO man can come," implies impossibility that any should come to CHRIST by any
means short of the Almighty drawing of the FATHER.

FOR there is no propriety in adopting the term cannot, or the phrase "No man
can come," if the obstruction could be removed by any means short of a new
creation. Or, in other words: If mankind could be made able or willing to come
to Christ, by any means short of Almighty power, exerted in drawing sinners to
Christ, it would not be proper to say, they cannot come.

THEREFORE, when the term cannot is used with propriety, it always means
impossibility, either through want of a natural power to do something that we
may be willing to do; or else because we are wholly unwilling, so as to render
it impossible to do the thing proposed, unless the unwillingness be removed by
Almighty power -- by a new creation.

THE inability which mankind labor under of coming to Christ, is one of the two
now mentioned: It is either natural or moral inability.

BY natural inability, we mean such a want of natural power and strength, as
renders it impossible to come to Christ or to do any thing else, although the
mind were willing.

BY moral inability, we mean such a degree of unwillingness to improve our
natural abilities in coming to Christ, or doing any other thing required, as
renders the doing of it impossible, unless that unwillingness be removed by
Almighty power.

THESE two kinds of inability are often and with propriety expressed by the
term cannot, both in the scriptures and in common language. And the one, or the
other, of these two kinds of inability, is undoubtedly referred to in our text:
" No man can come to me," etc.

AND now, that we may understand the nature of this inability, and search after
all those important truths contained in our text, we shall pursue the following
method: I. SHOW what it it is to come to CHRIST. II. SHOW in what sense mankind
are unable to come to CHRIST, or the true reason why no man can come to him,
except the FATHER draw him. III. CONCLUDE the subject by inferences, remarks,
and exhortation.


I. WE are to show what is implied in coming to CHRIST.

AND, it implies all the following particulars:

First, NOT motion of the body, or moving from one place to another; but an
exercise of the heart, in which the soul unites to CHTIST by love. We went away
from GOD by sin, and enmity of heart against him; and we can return to him, or
come to CHRIST, only in the exercise of love. When one stands at a distance
from another, and says come to me, he enjoins upon him bodily motion, that he
move from one place to another. But not so here. You may come to CHRIST in the
fullest sense of the term, and remain in the seats where you are. For when
Christ says, "Come unto me," he calls upon us to love him with the heart -- to
receive him by true love. And all that we can do, in external reformation and
amendment of life, while destitute of love, is not coming to CHRIST, nor taking
one step toward him. And the most awakened, convicted, and reformed sinner,
while destitute of love, is not a coming sinner, as some have supposed. But all
such are running away from CHRIST, as fast as ever, and will not receive, nor
come to him. And no one ever does come to him, nor toward him, but in the
exercise of true love. It implies too, that you love CHRIST supremely -- above
all -- more than father or mother, brothers or sisters, wife or children,
houses or lands; and that you view CHRIST as altogether lovely, the pearl of
great price, so that you can sell and forsake all that you have for him. No one
can come to CHRIST, nor be his disciple, nor love him at all, without such
supreme love as this. For thus it is written: "So likewise, whosoever he be of
you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple." Luke xiv.
33.
And, "He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me." Mat.
x. 37.
And again "If any man come to me, and hates not," that is, does not love me,
more than "his father, or mother, or wife, or children, yea, and his own life
also, he cannot be my disciple," Luke xiv. 26.
or truly come to me. This coming to CHRIST therefore implies, that we give up
our vain excuses: "I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see
it: I pray thee have me excused." "I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to
prove them: I pray thee have me excused." "I have married a wife, and therefore
I cannot come." Luke xiv. 17, 81, 19, 20.
But when the soul does come to CHRIST, he gives up all these excuses, as
fruitless and vain. And nothing appears to be important enough to detain him a
moment longer, from coming to CHRIST, and to his glorious feast of gospel
grace: But he forsakes his farm, his merchandise, his father and mother, his
wife and children, yea, and all that he has; and so comes to CHRIST in the
exercise of spiritual life and love.

Secondly, COMING to CHRIST implies believing on him -- that you receive his
testimony, and set to your seal that GOD is true." John iii. 33.
Coming to CHRIST, receiving him, and believing on him, or receiving his
testimony, are terms much of the same import. As it is written: "But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of GOD, even to them
that believe on his name." John i. 12.
His name is the LORD JESUS CHRIST. And all such as heartily believe in this
name, "That JESUS is the CHRIST," the anointed of GOD the FATHER; "That he will
save his people from their sins;" That he is the "LORD GOD," and owner of all
things, and thus receive his testimony in favor of GOD, and against themselves;
do by this believing, Come to CHRIST. "Unto you therefore which believe, he is
precious." 1. Pet. ii. 7.
And when you believe, and by believing, come unto CHRIST, you receive him,
unite and become one with him, as the branch is one with the vine.

Thirdly. COMING to CHRIST implies obedience. -- It is obeying the gospel of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST. The gospel says, "Come:" and he that does come, obeys
the gospel; and that obeying the gospel, is coming to CHRIST.

Fourthly. COMING to CHRIST implies humility -- that we become poor in spirit.
The proud and unhumbled, will not, and do not come to Christ for life. They
feel too rich and important. For the gospel salvation respects mankind, as
poor, in distress, in debt, and perishing with hunger. "The poor have the
gospel preached to them." Mat. xi. 5.
"Bring in hither the poor, the maimed, and the halt, and the blind^" Luke xiv.
21.
All who are heartily sensible, that this is their lost perishing state by
nature, and are thus poor in spirit, will come to CHRIST for life; and none
others will come. Therefore,

Fifthly. COMING to CHRIST implies a praying spirit -- that you are humble
enough to become beggars, and to ask for mercy, with the publican: "God be
merciful to me a sinner." Luke xviii. 13.
And this brings such into the condition of the promise: "Ask, and it shall be
given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For
every one that asks receives." Mat. xii. 7.8.
But, "The wicked through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after GOD,"
Psalm x. 4.
nor come to CHRIST.

Sixthly. COMING to CHRIST implies a willingness to be saved by sovereign
grace, through the merits of JESUS CHRIST, and to give GOD all the glory. "Not
unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but to thy name give glory." Psalm cxv. 1.
Thus, he who comes to CHRIST, gives up the idea of establishing his own
righteousness, and casts away this garment that he has made, as filthy rags,
that he may receive CHRIST as his righteousness, and be saved by grace alone.
As it is written; "By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of GOD." Ephesians. ii. 8.
But,

Seventhly, and Lastly. COMING to CHRIST implies true repentance, and hatred of
sin. And in that very act, by which men repent of, hate, and forsake their
sins, they do come to CHRIST. "For he shall save his people from their sins."
And all who hate sin, will love such a SAVIOR, and come to him for life. In a
word, he that comes to Christ, has the spirit of CHRIST dwelling in him. And in
the exercise of this spirit, he does justly, loves mercy, and walks humbly with
GOD. And thus in leaving his sins, he comes to Christ. All these things, and
many more, which might be mentioned, are implied in coming to Christ. We now
proceed,

II. To show, in what sense men are unable, and it is impossible for any one,
thus to come unto Christ; and the true and only reason why the drawings of the
Father are necessary. And,

First. WE shall show negatively, what is not the inability of sinners in
coming to Christ, and then positively what it is.

We shall all agree in this, that the inability of sinners in coming to Christ,
is not such as to render them excusable for not coming. Therefore,

Firstly. It is not for want of a natural power* When doing a thing is
connected with a (...) to do it, or he could do it if he be willing, then he
has natural power to do it. And when a man is willing to do a thing, and yet
cannot, we call this natural inability. But this is not the inability of
sinners to come to Christ. They could come, if they were willing. Therefore,
the impossibility there is of sinners coming to Christ, is not want of natural
power and ability. If this were the case, men could not be sinners, or blame
worthy for not coming. But they are not required to "Ascend into heaven, that
is, to bring Christ down from above; or to descend into the deep, that is, to
bring up Christ again from the dead. But what says it? The word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is, the word of faith which we
preach; that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart, that GOD has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved." Romans x. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
This shows in the clearest light, that Christ and his salvation are brought
near to mankind, and offered on the most easy terms. They are not left in
heaven, in the deep, nor any where out of our reach; but are brought near to
us, and offered as a free gift. "Behold I bring near my righteousness; it shall
not be far off; and I will place salvation in Zion, for Israel my glory." Isai.
xlvi. 12, 13.
And, "The gift of GOD is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans vi.
33.
-- Thus, when salvation is brought within our reach, and offered as a gift to
all who are willing to take it; then there can be no natural inability or
impossibility in the way of our receiving it. If Christ and his salvation be
"nigh thee, even in thy heart and in thy mouth," and nothing is required as a
condition of enjoying this salvation, but to confess with the mouth the Lord
Jesus, and to believe in the heart that God has raised him from the dead; then
salvation is offered on the most easy terms, and there can be no natural
inability in the way of receivivg it. This appears most evident, when we
consider, that there is no use of any natural abilities required in confessing
and believing, but those only which are actually employed in denying,
rejecting, and disbelieving the Lord Jesus: And we have as much natural power
to come unto Christ, by believing on him, as we have to reject and deny him by
unbelief. That is, by natural powers and faculties, we are fitted for moral
exercise; and we actually have moral exercise continually, either in loving or
hating; and we are as capable of coming to Christ by love, as we are of
departing from him by hatred. And this appears yet more evident, and is put
beyond all dispute, when we consider, that in sinners being made able to come
to Christ, and when they actually do come, there is no new natural abilities
given, but only a disposition to improve aright those natural abilities which
they before had.

THEREFORE, natural inability is not the reason why sinners cannot come to
Christ: For they actually have natural ability, and all the natural ability
which they have when they actually do come.

Secondly. THE reason why it is impossible for sinners to come to Christ, is
not that he is not a proper object of love. No, for he is "Altogether lovely"
-- "The chiefest among ten thousand." Sol. Song. v. 10.
If this were not so, and there were really no beauty in Christ, that we should
desire him, and we could not love him on this account, then we could not be
blameworthy. But Christ Jesus has every lovely qualification; and yet, no man
can love him, nor come to him, without the drawing of the Father.

Thirdly. THE reason why sinners cannot believe and come to Christ, is not want
of evidence to ground faith upon; not for want of evidence of the real
loveliness of Christ, and the certainty of those truths he requires us to
believe. No, for the loveliness of Christ's character, and the unquestionable
truth of his testimony, and all he requires us to believe, is held up to view
in the clearest light. So that he is really "The light of the world." John
viii. 12.
Sometimes we cannot love a person for want of evidence that he is lovely, nor
believe in him for want of evidence that he speaks the truth. In such a case,
there is no blame: But not so in this case. "For there are three that bear
record in heaven; and there are three that bear witness in earth," in favor of
Christ, and of the truth of all his testimony. Yet, it is impossible for
sinners to believe in him, or come to him, except the Father draw them. But,

Fourthly. THIS inability does not consist in want of conviction that Christ is
thus a proper object of love; and of the truth, reality, and importance of his
testimony, and of spiritual and divine things. Many, at least, through conviction
of conscience, or judgment, have thot that the testimony of Christ is true, and
that he is worthy to be loved by all men; and yet, no man can love him, nor
come to him, except he is drawn by God the Father.

Fifthly, THE ground of this inability is not want of motives to persuade men
to come to Christ. But there are the most powerful motives or reasons held up
to the view of sinners to engage them to come unto Christ and be saved.

ALL the inexpressible joys of heaven, and all the dreadful torments of hell,
are holden up to their view; and by the voice of the Almighty, are made to
thunder in their ears to give them warning, that they should come to Christ for
life, and flee from the wrath to come. And there is no proper motive, or
argument, but what is contained in the word and providence of God, and there
held up to the view of sinners, to come to Christ. Yet, there is a cannot,
which will eternally hinder them from coming to Christ, "Except the Father draw
them."

Sixthly. ALTHOUGH sinners cannot come to Christ; It is not because that satan,
or any other being overpowers them, so as to hinder them from coming, contrary
to their inclinations. Satan has no power to hinder any one from coming to
Christ, only by his artful devices, in persuading, flattering, and deceiving.
He promises all the riches and honors of this world, which he has no power to
give, if men will worship him, continue in his service, and neglect to come to
Christ, and receive his great salvation. But he has no power to force men,
contrary to their wills, to pursue after the riches, honors, and pleasures of
the world, and hereby to neglect coming to Christ, and receiving his free
salvation.

Seventhly. THE reason why sinners cannot come to Christ, is not that more
pleasure and happiness are to be enjoyed in sin, and in the service of satan
than in coming to Christ, and entering into the service of God. Satan tries to
keep people in his service, and is successful in it, by persuading them to
believe, that if they leave his service and become the servants of God, they
will loose all their pleasure and happiness. Yet, this is so far from being
true, that all the real happiness there is in the universe, among creatures, is
in the love and service of God. And "Wisdom's ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace." Prove. iii. 17.
And sinners have conviction that this is the case, even while they greedily
pursue the pleasures of sin, and cannot leave them to come to Christ, and enjoy
the most refined pleasures of religion. But,

Eigthly, and Lastly. The reason why no man can come to Christ, except the
Father draw him; is not that Christ, is not willing to receive all that will
come to him. For, he says, "come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest." And again "Him that comes unto me, I will in
no wise cast out."

Thus, we have been searching on every side, to find what the inability of
mankind in coming to Christ, does not consist in. And we now come to show
positively, what that inability really is, which hinders such multitudes from
coming to Christ, and renders it impossible for any man to come, except the
Father draw him. And,

Firstly. WHEN we read the latter part of our text, it is evident, beyond all
dispute, what that inability is, which is spoken of in the former part; that it
consists, wholly consists, in an obstinate and perverse will. "And ye will not
come to me, that ye might have life."

But why is the will thus opposed, and men so wholly unwilling to come to
Christ, and receive life at his hand?

Because we have set up for independency on God. And Christ has come to
re-establish God's authority over us; and claims to be a King. But, " We will
not have this man to reign over us." Luke xix. 14.
Therefore, we connot come to him, nor receive him, as our Lord and King. "Art
thou a King then?" "We have no King, but Caesar." "Who is Lord over us?"

Not only this; but Christ claims to be a prophet also; and we do not like his
instructions, we do not agree with him in sentiment. He declares the
righteousness of God, and testifies of the world that the works thereof are
evil; that we are of our father the devil, and his lusts we will do: He
declares himself to be the bread of life; and that except we eat his flesh and
drink his blood, we have no life in us. But we are ready to adopt the language
of the unbelieving Jews: "How can this man give us his flesh to eat?" This is
an hard saying, who can hear it?" John vi.
We cannot, we will not come to, nor receive such a prophet as this to teach
us. No, for we "Say to the seers, see not; and to the prophets prophesy not
unto us right things; speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits, get you
out of the way, turn aside out of the path; cause the holy one of Israel to
cease from before us." Isaiah xxx. 8.9.10.11.
We cannot endure that such a God as this, should be held up to our view. "Away
with him, away with him," for we will not have such a teacher as this.

And besides; Christ claims to be a priest, to make atonement for us. This
represents, that we have committed sins for which we can make no atonement
ourselves, and for which we deserve to die. Therefore, we cannot, we will not
receive such a priest as this.

Moreover; such an atonement as Christ has made, by his death and sufferings,
as an high priest, and the gospel which he preaches, represent us, as
"Wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked," lost and undone. But
we do not feel this to be our case; therefore we cannot, that is, we will not
come to him for life: we are no beggars. No: "Because thou say, I am rich
and have need of nothing; and know not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." Therefore, you cannot, you will not
come to Christ that you might have life. You want life, but while you do not
believe with the prodigal son, that you are perishing with hunger, and are not
" Poor in spirit," you will not have this want supplied. Your feeling rich in
spirit, your pride, will not suffer you to come to Christ, that you might have
life; and receive it of his hand, as a free gift, to a poor beggar.

AND besides all this; we are supremely in love with the world. "I have bought
a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it*" I have bought five yoke of
oxen, and I must go to prove them: I pray thee have me excused." I have married
a wife, and therefore I cannot come," " No man can come," because he loves his
farm, his merchandise, his wife, or something in the world above Christ. And by
cleaving to these things, all make light of the invitations of the gospel; and
no man can forsake them, and come to Christ. " And they would not come." Mat.
xxii. 3,
"And how can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only?" Ye cannot.

AGAIN; the will is thus, opposed, so that "No man can come to Christ except
the Father draw him," because all are sinners; wholly inclined to sin, and
unwilling to be saved from their sins. so that "In them, there dwells no good
thing." Hence no man can come, and no man will come to Christ, because he
"Saves his people from their sins," and will not save them in their sins. If
Christ would save people in their sins; all sinners would be able, and willing
to come to him, upon the first invitation, without any drawing, besides their
own inclinations. But now, they connot come to Christ, because they will not
leave their sins, nor consent to be saved from them. And if there were any good
thing in them; any thing but sin; or the least spark of virtue, and moral
goodness; it would lead them to Christ -- they could, and would then come to
him.

BUT because there is nothing in man by nature, that is morally good, any more
than there is in the devils and damned in hell; and because they are, "Of their
father the devil," therefore they cannot, they will not come to Christ. This,
and this only, is the great inability, which renders it impossible for sinners
to come to Christ, "Except the Father draw them."

AND now, as a further proof, that this is the inability of sinners, and the
true reason why they connot come to Christ; the following things are observed.

Firstly. WHEN sinners are drawn to Christ by the Father, and actually do come,
nothing is done to them, but to make them willing. As it is written: "Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy power." Psalm cx. 3.
The power of God is exerted only on the will, in drawing sinners to Christ.
Before this, "They would not come." But now they are willing, and do come. For,
being willing, is coming. And all inability is now removed, when the will is
bowed.

Secondly. ALL the offers of Christ and his salvation are made to all who are
willing. "The spirit and the bride say come, and whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely." "If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted,
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not." "If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land, but if ye refuse and
rebel, ye shall be devoured; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it."

THIS shows very plainly, that salvation is secured to all those, who are
willing to take it; and that there can be no inability in the way of enjoying
it, but an unwilling, and disobedient mind. If there were, or could be any
other inability, there would be no propriety in offering salvation to all, who
are willing to take it, without mentioning the other obstruction that might be
in the way.

Thirdly. THAT good, which the gospel offers, is promised to every one, who
will ask for it. "Ask, and ye shall receive." This shows, that there can be
nothing to hinder the enjoyment of Christ, and his salvation, except that
dislike of the heart, and opposition of the will, by which we refuse to ask,
and receive. "For every one that wills or desires this salvation, does ask for
it, and receives it. Hence, there can be no obstruction in the way of asking
salvation by Christ, but the dislike of the heart, or opposition of the will.

Fourthly. SINNERS being invited, and commanded to come to Christ, and obey the
gospel, implies that they have natural ability to come, and there can be no
inability, to come, except a rebellious will. Otherwise,

GOD would require according to what men have not: He would require obedience,
where he has not given natural power to obey; which would be unreasonable; and
is contrary to what God says he does, in requiring only according to "That a
man has:" This is, according to his natural abilities, and talents.

Fifthly. MEN's not coming to Christ, is represented as disobeying the gospel.
But, if sinners labored under any other inability of coming to Christ besides a
stubborn will; then, their not coming, could not be called disobedience to the
gospel.

Sixthly. THOSE who do not come to Christ, are represented in scripture, as
neglecting his "Great salvation." Heb. ii. 3.
But this neglect, necessarily implies contempt, making light of, and refusing
Christ and his great salvation, when it is brought within our reach, and all
other obstructions are removed out of the way, except this unwilling mind, by
which the salvation is contemned and refused.

Seventhly. AN everlasting curse is denounced in the scriptures against every
one who does not come to Christ, by true love. "If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be an athema, maranatha." 1. Cor. xvi. 22.
But this curse would be very unreasonable, if men labored under any inability
of coming to Christ by love, except their voluntary opposition to him; and
hating him with all their heart. "Ye have both seen and hated, both me and my
Father." And therefore you cannot, you "Will not come to me that ye might have
life." This cannot, and this will not, imply the same kind and degree of
inability. And the only reason why "No man can come to Christ, except the
Father draw him," is that the unwillingness is so great, that nothing less than
the drawing of the Father, in the day of his almighty power, can conquer and
make sinners willing to come unto Christ, and receive life through him. "And ye
will not come to me, that ye might have life."

THUS, if all that is done to sinners in drawing them to Christ, is making them
willing; and when they are willing, they do come: then all their inability lies
in a stubborn will.

AND if all the offers of Christ and his salvation, are made to all who are
willing to receive them; and when any are willing, they do receive them; then
all inability lies in the will.

AND if the gospel salvation is promised to every one, who will ask for it, and
all who are willing, do ask, and receive; then all inability of receiving this
salvation lies in the will.

AND if the invitations of the gospel necessarily imply, that there is no
natural inability in the way of receiving; then they certainly imply, that
nothing is in the way of enjoyment, except unwillingness to receive.

AND if our not coming to Christ, to the gospel feast, is disobeying the
gospel; then all inability to come, lies in a perverse will; for any other
inability, could not properly be termed disobedience.

AND if those, who do not come to Christ, are neglecters of his great
salvation, and make light of it; then certainly it is brought within their
reach, within the compass of their natural abilities, and nothing in them
prevents enjoyment, but a contemning, proud, and unwilling mind. They scorn the
thing. They make light of it, and neglect a great salvation, which is brot nigh
to them, and offered to their choice.

AND if an everlasting curse is fastened on every one who does not come to
Christ, by true faith and love; and if this curse can justly be inflicted, then
there can be no inability of coming to Christ, by true faith and love, except a
wicked and rebellious will.

THUS, we have found the Achan in the camp -- that sinners cannot come to
Christ, because they will not come, except they are drawn, or made willing by
God the Father, in the day of his almighty power.

AND now, if the Lord Jesus Christ justly sustains the office of a King, then
all are under obligation to obey him. And if our wills are thus opposed to him,
as we have proved, so that we cannot receive him, and "Will not have this man
to reign over us," then we violate our obligation, and are without excuse.

AND if Christ justly sustains the office of a prophet to teach us, of a priest
to atone for us, and a physician to heal us; then all men are under obligations
to receive him in these offices; and if our wills are so opposed, that we
cannot; then, why is not this inability most criminal and wicked?

AND if the testimony of Christ, as a prophet was righteous and good; then all
are under obligation to receive it, and set to their seal that God is true. And
if our wills are thus opposed to this testimony, because it is good, and no man
receives it, nor can receive it; then, why are we not guilty?

AND if Christ was holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners, made
higher than the heavens, and was God; then all are under infinite obligations
to come to him, to receive him, to love him with all the heart, and to obey him
as Lord and King. And if no man can come to him, nor receive him because he is
thus holy, and they are unholy; even to such a degree, that they will not have
this man, this King, this God, (...) reign over them; then, their inability,
their cannot, which all centers in a rebellious will, must be an infinite
crime, and no excuse. For, "Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life."
And because of this wicked will, "Ye cannot serve the Lord," nor come to
Christ; "For he is an holy God;" Josh. xxiv. 19.
and ye are unholy. "As it is written, there is none righteous, no not one;
there is none that understands and seeks after God. They are all gone out
of the way; they are altogether become unprofitable; there is none that does
good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher; with their tongues they
have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips; whose mouth is full
of cursing and bitterness: Their feet are swift to shed blood: Destruction and
misery are in their ways: And the way of peace have they not known: There is no
fear of God before their eyes." Romans iii. 10 -- 18.
In this infinitely wicked character, lies all the inability of sinners in
coming to Christ: And only by reason of this, it is impossible for any man to
come unto him. But, if any should here object, and say, that inability consists
partly in the understanding; we have an answer at hand. " Having the
understanding darkened." But how? "Being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of the heart."
Ephesians. iv. 18.
Only set the heart right; or renew the will, and the understanding will be
right also. "The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God; For
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned." 1. Cor. ii. 14.
Only let the minds of men become spiritual, and "Fools be of an understanding
heart;" then they can discern spiritual and divine things. In this view, the
"Knowledge of God," and "The things of the spirit of God," are connected with a
new heart. "I will give them an heart to know me." And, "Then shall ye
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, when thou
seek her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hid treasure." But how do
men seek silver? They seek it with love, and earnest desire after it. Their
wills are in this pursuit. Hence says the apostle, "They that will be rich,"
etc. But the natural man, who cannot know the things of the spirit of God, nor
understand the fear of the Lord, does not thus seek after it, as men seek
silver. His will is to opposed to it. And he is "Willingly ignorant;" and "Does
not like to retain God in his knowledge." In this view it is written, "How long
ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge?" Prove. i. 22.


THUS, all the ignorance and want of understanding there is in the "Natural
man," is because of this blindness of the heart, by which mankind will not
acquaint themselves with God, nor come to Christ, as a prophet to teach them.
And therefore it is, that among natural men, or those in a state of nature,
"There is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God." And,
when the heart is set right, and becomes spiritual, then the understanding is
enlightened, in the knowledge of God, and the things; of the spirit of God;
which things, the natural man cannot understand; because they are spiritually
discerned. "But he that is spiritual, judges all things." Now, he understands
the fear of the Lord, and finds the knowledge of God. And so far as the hearts
of men are set right with God, and they are willing to understand and do their
duty; so far, they are as capable of understanding the things of the spirit of
God, as they are to understand the arts and sciences, or any natural things.
These men can understand; even while their hearts are full of wickedness. Let
all the blindness in man be removed, which is occasioned by an evil heart; or,
let their hearts be wholly set right with God, and made spiritual; then all
inability to understand spiritual things, would be removed, and the
understanding in men, be as good, as that of Adam in innocence. Therefore, this
want of understanding in men, and the ignorance in them being occasioned by the
blindness of the heart, is no proof of any inability in them besides an evil
heart, or a rebellious will. But it is a farther proof, that all the inability
of sinners, in coming to Christ, lies in an evil and wicked heart, or, a
rebellious will; by reason of which, "There is none that understands, there
is none that seeks after God," and no man can come to Christ, "Except the
Father draw him." Having thus endeavored to show as clearly as possible, what
it is to come to Christ, and the true reason why no man can come to Christ
without the almighty drawing of God the Father, we now proceed,

III. To conclude the subject, by a few inferences, etc.

Firstly. We see the propriety of using the word cannot, to express moral
inability, or unwillingness. It is certainly used so in our text. "No man can
come to me," certainly means, that men are wholly unwilling; and is expressive
of moral character, even the total depravity, and wickedness of the hearts of
all men, by nature. If there were only some degree of unwillingness in sinners
to come to Christ; which might be removed by some means short of a new
creation, then it would not be proper to say they cannot come. But when the
hearts of men are "Full of evil," and in their fleshly mind there "Dwells no
good thing," so that through the total wickedness of the heart, their wills are
wholly opposed to coming unto Christ; and they will not come, by any means that
can be used with them short of a new creation, or the drawing of the Father;
then, with great propriety, we may say, they cannot come. Can we come, or do
any thing whatsoever, when the will is wholly opposed? Especially, if willing
to come to Christ, is coming, can we then come while we will not? No, for this
unwillingness implies that we do not come; or it will as certainly prevent our
coming, or doing any thing else, as if we had no natural power; and is as
properly expressed by the term connot.

Secondly. We see the propriety of exhorting men to do that which they cannot
do, in this sense. Natural inability in coming to Christ, or to do any thing
else, would excuse them, and render it improper to exhort them to come. But
when we have natural ability to come; and no inability besides unwillingness;
then we are proper subjects of command and exhortation; even although it be
impossible to obey, while thus unwilling, and by reason of this unwillingness.
No parent would ever excuse his child, or neglect to command him, because he
could not, or it was impossible for him to obey, only by reason of a stubborn
will. When the child says, I cannot do this, or that, which the parent knows he
has natural power to do, or that his cannot consists wholly in unwillingness;
he then repeats his commands, and adds his threatenings. And is there no
propriety in this conduct? Yet, there are some, who complain of preachers at
this day, saying; they will preach in the forenoon that men should come to
Christ, to the gospel feast; but tell them in the afternoon, that they cannot
come Well, is not Christ such a preacher? He invites them to come to him, and
in the same sermon, he tells them they cannot come, and they will not come to
him, "That they might have life." And if all the inability, the cannot,
consists in a perverse will, as we have seen; then, with the greatest propriety
he may invite, exhort, and command such impotent, unable, or unwilling sinners
to come to him; and threaten them with eternal death, if they do not obey. And
all this, whether you view it consistent or not, is in fact done by Christ. He
invites, and commands all to come to him; he says, "No man can come to me,
except the Father draw him;" and yet threatens them with eternal death, who
cannot, and who do not come to him, by faith and love. "He that believes shall
be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. Again: "If any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed." All this appears perfectly
consistent, when we admit the evidence exhibited from scripture, that this
inability is found only in sinners, and consists wholly in sin, in the total
depravity of the human heart; in its being destitute of every thing that it
morally good, and wholly under the influence of a stubborn, perverse, and
wicked will. "And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life." In this
view of things, ministers may, with the greatest propriety preach to sinners as
Christ did; and urge upon them the moving invitations of the gospel; the
impossibility there is that they should obey it, and come to Christ, "Except it
were given them from above," and yet press upon them their inexcusable
obligations to obey the gospel, and come to Christ, on pain of death; even the
second death. As it is written; "The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven,
with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and
to be admired in all them that believe." 2 Thessalonians. i. 7.8.9.10.


Thirdly. From what has been said, it appears evident, that the only ground of
the necessity of regeneration, or of almighty power to draw men to Christ, lies
in the total depravity of their heart, so that in them, "There dwells no good
thing;" not the least degree of willingness to receive, and come to Christ.
Hence the power of God, in regeneration, is exerted only on the will; in
forming that to repentance, love and obedience; or, in making men willing to
receive Christ and his great salvation. "Thy people shall be willing in the day
of thy power."

Fourthly. We learn, that as the inability of sinners consists in their
sinfulness, it can afford them no excuse; but renders them altogether criminal,
and inexcusable. And the more unable men are to come to Christ, by reason of
unwillingness, the greater is their criminality. And the greater power it
requires to make men willing and obedient, or to draw them to Christ, argues,
and proves, so much greater strength of unwillingness and sin. And if it
requires an almighty, creative power, even a new creation, to reconcile sinners
to God, and make, them come to Christ; it proves that their hearts are full of
evil, nothing but sin.

Fifthly. A wrong view of the inability of sinners, is one principal ground of
their security in sin. Many seem to make their inability to come to Christ, a
cloak for their great sin of unbelief. Hence they often ask, "If I cannot come
to Christ why am I blameworthy?" Let me vary the question a little. If I am so
unwilling, and so wicked, that I cannot love Christ, nor come to him, why am I
wicked at all? Or why am I to be blamed for that in which all my
blame-worthiness and wickedness consists? or for having such hatred to Christ,
the best of beings, that I cannot receive him? This question may be answered
thus: If I cannot come to Christ because I will not; then I am to blame for
this very reason, because I cannot. But if I cannot come when I am willing,
because I have not natural power, how am I then to be blamed? We answer, you
are not: And if you are willing, you have come already. But there is no such
inability in any man to free him from blame. Yet, this natural inability is
that for which many plead, and by which they mean to excuse themselves from
blame. Hence it is often said, I should be glad to come to Christ, if I could,
but I cannot. This implies, that the inability in the will is actually removed,
and there is yet an inability, which does both keep them from Christ, and free
them from blame. But this is a wrong view of inability; and serves only to keep
sinners at ease in their sins. Such therefore, as do not come to Christ by
faith and love; and yet imagine that they are willing to come, but cannot, are
stupid, unconvicted sinners, and never knew the plague of their own hearts. And
whenever they are made to see the plague of the heart, they will change their
voice, and say, we could come to Christ if we would, but the will not. That is,
we are now convicted that nothing is in the way of coming to Christ, but an
obstinate and perverse will; which leaves us without any excuse, or cloak for
our sin. As Christ says, "If I had not come, and spoken to them, they had not
had sin, but now, they have no cloak for their sin." If sinners really believed
this, and had thorough conviction of conscience, that their inability was their
crime, and no excuse, it would put an utter end to security, and make them cry
out with the distressed Jail- "What must I do to be saved?"

Sixthly. All pleas in favor of any inabilty to come to Christ, which do not
consist in a sinful unwillingness, betray the deceitfulness, and great
wickedness of our hearts. The language of all such pleas, are in favor of
independence, and show that we are determined to maintain it -- that being
unable to come to Christ, believe, and obey the gospel, we are under no
obligations -- and, that neither the law, nor the gospel can bind us to
obedience, when we "Cannot come," nor obey. Hence we are all excused, because
we cannot come to Christ, and obey the law, nor the gospel. And here, we may
rest secure, until God shall draw, and make us able, or willing to come.

Thus sinners in their own imaginations, have made the law void and of none
effect, and brot down all God's commands in the law, and gospel too, on a level
with their dispositions; so, that unless God make them willing, they are under
no obligation to obey. And here they rest; crying "Peace, peace, when there is
no peace;" but they are every moment exposed to be "Suddenly destroyed, and
that without remedy." Prove. xxix. 1.
And this destruction, "From the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power," is coming upon them, for that very inability, which is the ground
of their security: or because they "Cannot come to Christ," and "Obey not the
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; they shall be punished with everlasting
destruction," etc. How little ground is there then, or rather, there is no just
grounds, for this security of unbelieving sinners, on account of their
inability to repent and believe the gospel; or on any account whatsoever.
Therefore,

Seventhly. We see, "That God's law, and his right to command, remain in full
force," as some justly observe, I here refer my readers to Mr. West, Mr.
Smalley, and Mr. Spalding, on this subject of inability.
and as is fully expressed in the scriptures of truth, notwithstanding all the
inability of sinners to obey. God does not give up his right to command, nor
lessen his commands, either in the law, or gospel, in the least degree, on
account of any inability in men to obey them. But all that was required of Adam
in innocence, is now required of all his posterity -- that all should "Love the
Lord their God, with all their heart, and their neighbor as themselves." And
that they should be perfect, even as God is perfect. All this appears perfectly
reasonable, when we consider, that by the fall, men lost no ^^ability to obey,
except a willing mind. In all other respects, sinners are as able to keep the
law perfectly, as Adam was in innocence. Hence God's demands on sinners, in his
law, are fully kept up to view; and it curses "Every one that continues not in
all things written in the book of the law to do them." And gives no hope, that
this curse will ever be taken off, but only by hearty obedience to the gospel,
in coming to Christ for life; which sinners through unwillingness, never can do,
"Except the Father draw them." Notwithstanding the fall, sinners still maintain
their natural abilities to do well, to obey the law, and the gospel; and it is
still required of them to do it, by all the authority of God. Yet being prone
to evil, as the sparks are to fly upward, and wholly indisposed to do well;
they can do evil, are "Wise to do it; but to do good they have no might," "No
man can come to me," etc.

Eighthly. If the inability of mankind to be holy, or to come to Christ in the
exercise of faith and love, consists in the obstinacy of their will; then, it
is manifest, that there is no good reason, why they should not be called upon,
to come immediately to Christ, in the exercise of true repentance and faith.
And this is the sum of all gospel preaching. Testifying repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." "And they went out and preached that
men should repent." Mark vi. 12. and Acts xx. 21.


Such preachers therefore, and many such there are, who, on account of sinners'
inability to come to Christ immediately, in the exercise of holy faith and
love, are directing them to impenitent prayers and doings, in order to obtain
of God repentance and faith, in this way of duty, as they call it: Such I say,
"Yet not I, but the Lord," are "Teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men," and making "Void the commandments of God," by such vain traditions. For,
such directions as these, which can be obeyed without, and only without
repentance, are not found in the word of God. These commands to impenitent
doings, on account of inability to repent and believe now, are taught only by
the "Precepts of men;" and they do not hang on those two commands, of love to
God, and our neighbor; as do all the commands in the law, and the prophets.
Mat. xxii. 40.
For these directions, which we are speaking against, are to be performed
without love, without repentance and faith; on account of some inability in
sinners, to love and believe immediately. And is it not most evident that such
preaching has a direct tendency to confirm sinners in a belief, that their
inability is not their crime, but does really excuse them from obligation to
repent and obey the gospel, as soon as they hear it, or without delay? In this
view, and in this only, are impenitent sinners pleased with such directions.
For they feel, and they know, that all directions to impenitent prayers and
doings, are founded on their inability to be holy now, and have a direct
tendency to keep their obligation to immediate repentance and faith out of
view; and do confirm them in their vain excuse.

Such preaching therefore, has no tendency to awaken, convict, and convert
sinners; but directly the reverse. It tends to strip the minds of sinners, of
all true conviction of their sinfulness; and to strengthen the "Hands of the
wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way." Ezekiel. xiii. 22.
It tends to confirm sinners in a belief, that they are able and willing to do
their duty, and that in some good measure they perform it, even while they are
unable to repent and believe the gospel. And thus, sinners are encouraged in
believing a lie, that they can please God, and have their prayers heard and
answered without faith. And also, by such preaching, men are encouraged to go
about to establish their own righteousness, until they drop into hell. And so
long as sinners believe such preaching as this, it is impossible for them to
feel their need of the atonement and intercession of Christ, or the necessity
of praying by faith in his name, in order to have their prayers heard, and
graciously answered for his sake. For certainly, impenitent, unbelieving
sinners do not pray in the name of Christ, to whom they will not come. And if,
nevertheless, they can have their prayers heard, and a gracious answer to them,
even with the gift of repentance and faith; then Christ is dead in vain, and
his intercession is of no value. Therefore, all such directions to any prayers,
or to any doings, otherwise than in the exercise of faith, and all
encouragement that such faithless prayers will meet with acceptance, and a
gracious answer from God, are directly against Christ, and tend to destroy his
kingdom and the souls of men. But, you will ask; must not impenitent sinners be
directed to pray? They certainly must. "I will that men pray every where;" that
is, all men should pray. But how? "Lifting up holy hands without wrath and
doubting." "Repent" -- "and pray," says Peter, to Simon the sorcerer, who was
in the bonds of iniquity. And there is no such thing as praying in truth and
reality, or according to directions in scripture, but in the exercise of true
repentance and faith. And as the scriptures direct sinners to make no other
prayers than such as are of faith; so, it gives no encouragement that any other
prayers will be heard and accepted of God. "If I regard iniquity in my heart,"
as all impenitent sinners do, "The Lord will not hear me." "But let him ask in
faith, nothing wavering," or doubting. And he who does not thus ask in faith,
"Let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord."

Thus, " The end of the commandment," even of all the commandments in the law
and prophets, whether to pray or to do any other thing, " is charity," or love.
"Let all your things be done with charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned." "Do all to the glory of God."

And thus, all the prophets, apostles, and faithful ministers of Christ; "They
went out and preached that men should repent." "Testifying repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." Psalm lxvi. 18. 1. Tim. i. 5. 1.
Cor. xvi. 14. James i. 5, 6, 7. Acts xx. 21. Mark vi. 12. 1. Cor. x. 31.
This, and this only is gospel preaching.

Ninthly. We may remark, that the judgment day will convince all, that the
inability of sinners, in coming to Christ, is no excuse, but that it is that in
which all their sin consists.

Then, "Every mouth will be stopped," in all their excuses and self-justifying
pleas, "And the whole world will become guilty before God." Romans iii. 19.
Then, impenitent sinners will be doomed to "Everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power," because they could not
now come to Christ, and obey his gospel. That dreadful sentence will be
grounded on that inability, which they now plead, as an excuse, and cloak for
their sin. And with dreadful terror, all their refuges of lies will vanish at
once, and they will be forced to admit the truth of what Christ now tells them,
that "Now they have no cloak for their sin. John xv. 22.


Tenthly. In view of this subject, we see the necessity of eternal election.
You fight against this doctrine: But what is like to become of you, if this be
not true? You cannot, you will not come to Christ that you might have life. And
if God has not loved you first, "With an everlasting love," by which he
determined to draw you to Christ, how are you ever likely to come? If you
object against coming yourselves, and will not come; and object too, against
God's drawing you to Christ, according to his eternal purpose; by what means
then do you expect to come? Christ says, "Ye have not chosen me;" and if he has
not chosen you first, how is it possible that you should be saved? You say, "If
this doctrine of election be true, then if I am not elected I cannot be saved,
do what I will. But what will you do? Will you come to Christ? And will you
choose him, without being drawn by God's everlasting love, and without his
choosing you first? If you would, there would be no need of God's drawing you
by his eternal, everlasting, electing love. The election of God, by which, in
his everlasting love, he determined to draw sinners to Christ, is necessary
only because they will not come without it. Christ must choose you first,
because you have not, and will not choose him. He says, "Ye have not chosen me,
but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go, and bring forth
fruit, and that your fruit should remain." How then can any expect to be saved,
unless they are first chosen by Christ, since they have not chosen him? And, if
sinners are first chosen by, and in Christ, they were "Chosen in him before the
foundation of the world." But, "If I am not one of the elect, then I cannot be
saved." No, if you will not choose Christ, nor come to him; and, if he has not
chosen you, there can be no hope. If all sinners refuse, and none have chosen
Christ, nor ever will come to him except the Father draw them, then all the
hope there is, that any will ever come, and be saved, is from God's eternal,
electing love, by which he has determined to draw and save some. And for
sinners to refuse to come to Christ, and to choose him; and to object also
against his choosing them, is very extraordinary indeed. If you will not choose
Christ, and he has not chosen you, one would think, your case must be
desperate, and without hope. And since there is certainly no hope, that any of
mankind ever will come to Christ, or choose him, except the Father draw them;
then all the hope there is, that any will come, and be saved, is from the
eternal, electing love of God, by which he has determined to draw and save
some. "I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving
kindness have I drawn thee." Jerem. xxxi. 3.
"Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you." "We love him because he first
loved us;" even with his eternal, everlasting, or electing love. This is the
cause of our loving him. In this view it is said, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau
have I hated: That the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls" -- of him that calls, "According to his
purporse," even his eternal purpose by which he loved Jacob, and hated Esau,
while they were not yet born, and neither had done any good or evil. "According
as he has chosen us in him," that is, in Christ, "Before the foundation of the
world; that we should be holy." Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works; but according to his own purpose, and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began." "Being
predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things after the
counsel of his own will." "Elect according to the foreknowledge of God." "Whom
he did foreknow, them also he did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
his Son." "Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he
called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified."
"Insomuch that, if it were possible they shall deceive the very elect." "I know
whom I have chosen." "Knowing therefore, brethren, your election of God." "Make
your calling and election sure." "Even at this present time also, there is a
remnant according to the election of grace." "Shall send his angels, and gather
together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other."
But who are these elect? Is it Christ only? As some say, Christ is the elect.
But is it not certain that these also are elect souls, "Chosen in Christ,
before the foundation of the world?" "Speak and hold not thy peace," that is,
preach among this people. But what encouragement to preach if the doctrine of
election be true? Answer. "Speak and hold not thy peace," for this very reason,
to gather in the elect. "For I have much people in this city:" that is, many
elect souls. Acts xviii. 9.10.
"And as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed." Thus, "No man can
come to me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him." "And ye will not
come to me that ye might have life." But, all that the Father has given to me,
shall come to me." And thus, " The election has obtained it, and the rest were
blinded." Romans xi. 7.


These things make it evident, that the doctrine of election, is fully
contained in the word of God; and show also, the absolute necessity of this
eternal election of God, in order for the salvation of men, of sinners, who
cannot, who will not come to Christ without it.

And all those, who understandingly oppose, and hate this doctrine of election,
are evidently of that number, who "Will not come to Christ, that they might
have life;" but are building their hopes of life, on their own works; and are
found fighting against " Election of grace," merely because it is of grace, and
not of works. -- "And they would not come." Mat. xxii. 3.


We shall now close this subject, by an address and exhortation, I. To such as
have been made willing in a day of God's power; and, II. To all such, as yet
remain unwilling, and cannot come to Christ.


Firstly. You, who have been made willing, and have obeyed the gospel; may each
one for himself enquire in the words of the Apostle, "Who makes" me "To
differ?" and you may each one answer, with the same Apostle, "By the grace of
God I am what I am." You may ascribe it all to sovereign grace. God says by his
Prophet: "I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving
kindness have I drawn thee." You love him, and come to Christ, because he first
loved you; as he did Jacob, with an eternal, electing love: or, "According to
the election of grace." "By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God. Not of works, left any man should boast."
You have nothing to boast of, except the grace of God, which alone has made you
to differ from others, and kindly drawn you home to God, in Christ, by bowing
your stubborn will. In the day of God's gracious power; you have become his
willing people, and actually come to Christ, to his glorious feast of gospel
grace.

Therefore, be humble, and learn to pity others, who yet remain unwilling, and
boast not against them. And if they strive against that election of grace,
which you now believe in, and which has made you to differ; then remember,
that you must not strive with them. "The servant of the Lord must not strive,
but be gentle; in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledgment of the truth."

Secondly. Let such as yet remain unwilling, and cannot come to Christ, accept
the word of exhortation.

You have heard what is implied in coming to Christ; and the reason why "No man
can come except the Father draw him;" and the remark which have been made on
the subject.

Let us now pray, and beseech you, and "As tho God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead," seriously to consider, and lay these things to
heart, and to be "Reconciled to God," in coming to Christ his Son. Be entreated
to enquire, like the noble Bereans, "Whether these things are so." For, if
indeed they are so, then those, who cannot come to Christ, are involved in the
most dreadful and ruined state and condition. They cannot come to Christ,
because of a stubborn will, which renders them as wicked as devils. And
although our not coming to Christ is by reason of a rebellious will, which
renders us as full of sin as the devils; yet we ask, why are we to blame? Thus
you plead the greatness, and strength of your wickedness as an excuse, and
argument, that you are not blameworthy. Yet you are creatures, wholly
dependent on God, and in every respect under obligations to him, and to his
law; which like himself, is holy, just, and good: And which binds all creatures
to love him supremely; and curses every one that continues not in all things
written in the book of the law to do them."

Yet, know O sinners, who cannot come to Christ, that your carnal minds are
enmity against this glorious God; they are not subject to his law, neither
indeed can be. And your carnal minds render you so stubborn and rebellious,
that when Christ has come, and in obedience to this holy law of God, rendered
himself a proper object of your love and choice; yet, you hate both him, and
his Father, to such a degree, that you will not come to him, except the Father
draw you, by his Almighty power, in subduing your will. Yet you say, why am I
to blame? But I ask, why are you not to blame, or blameworthy? Your own
consciences tell you, as well as the scriptures, that your inability to repent
and come to Christ, is not such as to render you excusable for not coming.

It is not want of natural power, as we have seen; for this would excuse you.
It is not because Christ is not a proper object of love; for he is altogether
lovely. If he were not, you would be blameless in not receiving him.

Your inability is not want of evidence to ground your says and love upon. It
is not want of conviction of conscience of the truth of those things you are
required to believe, or that Christ is thus a proper object of love. For your
consciences tell you that he is, and that his testimony is true. It is not want
of motives, or arguments, to persuade you, even the most powerful motives, that
you do not come to Christ.

It is not because that satan overpowers you, so as to lead you to pursue after
the riches, honors, and pleasures of the world contrary to your wills. If so
you are not blameworthy. But you are willing captives to satan, the God of
this world. Your inability is not because there is more pleasure and happiness
in the service of sin and satan, than in the service of God. For your
consciences tell you, as do the scriptures also, that Wisdom's ways are ways of
pleasantness; (...) that in "Keeping God's commands there is great reward."
But, in sin, "Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful." Neither is your
inability found in the unwillingness of Christ to receive you, even all who are
willing to come to him. But, it is found only in your own unwillingness to come
to him -- it is found only in sinners, and in those who are full of evil,
nothing but sin, in whom "Dwells no good thing." "And ye will not come to me
that ye might have life." "He is despised and rejected of men." "And when we
shall see him, there is no beauty in him that we should desire him."

And now, is not this the real, and only inability of sinners in coming to
Christ? If so, why are they not to be blamed? And where can blame be found, if
not in those who are so full of contempt, and hatred against Christ, the best
of beings, that they will not receive him, and cannot come to him, by reason of
unwillingness; not ever be made willing, but by a new creation, by the drawing
of the Father*

Be persuaded then to receive conviction, that the inability of sinners to
repent, believe, and come to Christ by love, is found only in their own sinful
and perverse wills. By this, they not only refuse Christ, "And have not chosen
him," but even hate the doctrine, that he has chosen them; or that God has
distinguished some of mankind from others, by eternal election. Thus sinners,
in their distraction, not only neglect the great salvation; but they hate that
doctrine of God's electing love, by which he has determined to make some
willing to enjoy it, and which affords the only ground to hope, that the
inability of any one will ever be removed; or that any will ever come to Christ
and be saved. And all those, who cannot come to Christ, or have not chosen him,
will be equally opposed to his choosing them; that is, to the doctrine of
election by grace. But, says the objector, you have mistaken our meaning. We do
not object against God's choosing some to salvation; but that he should choose
a part, and not the whole. This looks like partiality; and makes God a
respecter of persons. Answer. This objection shows your hearts very plainly;
and makes it evident, that all opposition to particular and personal election,
is founded in a belief of the doctrine of universal salvation -- that God will,
or ought to save all men: And that if God has determined to save but a
"remnant, according to the election of grace;" this, makes him a respecter of
persons, and is derogatory to his character. Hence, it is often said, I had
rather be an universalist, than to believe the doctrine of particular, and
personal election.

And indeed, you are an universalist, if you do not believe in particular
election. For certainly, God has predetermined to save a part, and only a part
of mankind; or else the whole. And it is impossible to oppose the doctrine of
personal election, but only in a belief of universal salvation -- that God
will, or ought to save, not a remnant only, but the whole of mankind. Hence it
is, that the same texts of Scripture are commonly urged against particular
election, which the universalists improve to support the doctrine of universal
salvation, viz. such as these: "As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked." And again: "Who will have all men to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth," etc. Yet, in perfect
consistance with these, and all other passages of scripture, God says, "Although
the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant
shall be saved." "And even at this present time also, there is a remnant
according to the election of grace." And "Many are called, but few chosen." And
in all this, "I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: But in every
nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness is accepted of him."
Thus the doctrine of election still appears to be scriptural and good, and all
opposition to it involves the doctrine of universal salvation. For, if election
be true; then, the doctrine of universal salvation is not. And we oppose the
first, only to establish the second.

But, some may still object, and say; if this doctrine be true, then, if I am
not elected, I cannot be saved, although I should do well, and live a good and
holy life, and commit no sin all my days: And if I am elected I shall be saved,
let me do what I will, or if I do nothing.

Answer. If you thus live a good and holy life and commit no sin; but "Fear God
and work righteousness," then you will be accepted of him; and want of election
will not exclude you from salvation. For, by these holy exercises and forsaking
sin, you will come to Christ; and hereby make your calling and election sure.
But, these good works you will never do, unless God has "Before ordained, that
you should walk in them," and thus draws you by his "Everlasting" and electing
love. And if you do nothing, or do not walk in these good works, then you
cannot make your calling and election sure; nor ever be saved. For "He that
believes shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned." And he
that does nothing, will be damned also: For such an one does not believe, and
cannot come to Christ.

But, you will say, we do not yet see the propriety of using the word cannot,
to express unwillingness, and blame.

Answer. If holy beings " cannot do evil," because they are holy; then, it is
equally proper to say, that unholy beings cannot do good because they are
unholy and blameworthy.

If it be expressive of the infinite holiness and perfection of God, that he "
cannot lie" and it be impossible for God to lie; then it is equally expressive
of the highest degree of wickedness in men, that they cannot speak the truth,
nor love the truth; or that they cannot come to Christ, who is "the way, the
truth, and the life." And if he, who is born of God sins not, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God; and if this cannot is expressive of an holy,
virtuous, and praiseworthy character; then, it is equally expressive of a
totally sinful character, when it is said, the wicked " cannot cease from sin,"
and cannot come to Christ, who will save them from their sins. For, they love
their sins, so that they cannot forsake them. And they hate Christ, so that
they cannot come to him.

Truly, "Ye cannot serve the Lord." But why? "For he is an holy God," and ye
are unholy. If ye were not, ye could, and ye would serve the Lord, and come
unto Christ. You cannot come to him, receive him, nor love him, because he is
"holy, harmless, and undefiled; separate from sinners." But you are unholy,
defiled, separated from Christ, with sinners; and only by sin.

"Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken." But why?
"Behold, the word of the Lord is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in
it. He feeds of ashes; a deceived heart has turned him aside, so that he
cannot deliver his own soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand?" "Ye
stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears; ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye." Why then will you any longer plead not
guilty? And say if I cannot come to Christ, why am I blamed? Do you not see,
that God views you altogether sinful, and blame worthy, that you cannot serve
the Lord, that you cannot hearken, that you cannot deliver your own souls; and
that you cannot come to Christ? All this inability is contained in a deceived
heart, which has turned you aside, so that you cannot deliver your own souls,
nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand? You cannot come to Christ,
because you are stiff necked, and uncircumcised in heart, and ears; and hereby
ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, and will not come to Christ. Ye cannot, ye
will not come, because you are earthly, sensual, devilish. In this view of
inability, how is it possible for any to say, "I am not polluted," I have not
sinned; when this totally sinful character contains all our inability; and is
the whole reason on our part, why we cannot this day leave our sins, and come
to Christ by faith. And in this view, we see the propriety of Christ's looking
round on the unbelieving Jews, with anger; being grieved for the hardness of
their hearts: And that God should be "angry with the wicked every day;" and
threaten them with everlasting destruction for unbelief. Your inability is just
the same as that of the Jews. They could not come to Christ; they would not
receive him. "He came to his own, and his own received him not." And, because
they could not receive him, the things of their peace are now hidden from their
eyes; and they are going down to destruction, from one generation to another,
continually. All this is come upon them, because, when Christ would have
gathered them, and saved them, they would not. "Ye will not come to me, that ye
might have life." This had a primary reference to the Jews, although it is equally
true of all men, both Jews, and Gentiles, who are under sin. "No man can,"
because no man will, "Come to me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw
him." Now therefore, let us all receive conviction, that our inability to be
holy, to forsake our sins, and come to christ by faith, centers in a rebellious
will, and makes it evident that all, who cannot come to him, by faith and love,
are "Without excuse;" and "Have no cloak for their sin." And as you have heard
what it is to come unto Christ; let all be exhorted, and persuaded to accept of
his kind invitations, and come unto him: For he says, "Come unto me, all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and ye shall find rest to your souls." "And the
spirit and the bride say come. And let him that hears, say come. And let him
that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely." And whosoever "Cannot come," and does not accept of this moving
invitation, let him know and be assured, and remember, that he is of that
number who are characterised in our text, as unwilling, rebellions, and
self-destroying sinners. "And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life."
"They would not come." And therefore, I cannot come.

THE END.

