PADDY's RESOURCE. BEING A SELECT COLLECTION OF ORIGINAL AND MODERN Patriotic
Songs COMPILED FOR THE USE OF THE PEOPLE OF IRELAND. To which is added, ARTHUR
O'CONNOR's ADDRESS.

From the latest Edition -- with Corrections.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY R. WILSON, 149, PEARL-STREET; At the Request of a number
of Hibernians in THIS Country, who were desirous of having Copies of them. 1798.

CONTENTS.
The Exiled Irishman's Lamentation Page 1 Teague and Pat, Page 3 Union and
Truth, Page 4 Triumph of Truth, ibid. Freedom Triumphant, Page 6 The Tenth of
August, Page 7 Blaning Rush Light, Page 8 Saint Patrick's Delight, Page 10
Advice to Hibernians, Page 11 The New Irish Drum, Page 12 Liberty's Auspicious
Ray, Page 13 A Call to Irishmen, Page 14 The Sheepfold, Page 15 Honest Pat,
Page 17 Virtuous Warriors, Page 18 Charter of Brotherhood, Page 19 War, cruel
War, etc. Page 20 The Tree of Liberty, Page 21 The Unitedmen's March, Page 22
The Tender's Hold Page 23 The Jovial Friends, Page 25 The Rector's Creed, ibid.
The New Viva La, Page 27 Carmagnoles, Page 28 British Bachannals, Page 30 Man
is Free by Nature, Page 31 The Captive Negro, Page 32 The Exiled Patriot, Page
33 Grave digger's Address, Page 35 Brethren Unite, Page 36 Arthur O'Connor's
Address Page 38
Paddy's Resource, etc.
THE EXILED IRISHMAN's LAMENTATION.
Tune -- "Savourna Deilish."
GREEN were the fields where my forefathers dwelt, O;
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah! Ireland my darling! for ever adieu!.

Although our farm it was small, yet comforts we felt, O.
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
At length came the day when our leases did expire,
And fain would I live where before lived my sire;
B^^ ah! well-a-day! I was forced to retire.
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
Though all taxes I paid, yet no vote could I pass, O;
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
Aggrandized no great man -- and I feel it, alas! O;
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
Forced from my home; yea, from where I was born,
To range the wide world -- poor, helpless, forlorn;
I look back with regret -- and my heart strings are torn.
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
With principles pure, patrictic and firm,
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
To my country attached, and a friend to reform,
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
I supported old Ireland -- was ready to die for it;
If her foes ever prevailed, I was well known to sigh for it,
But my faith I preserved, and am now fore'd to fly for it.
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
In the North I see friends -- too long was I blind, O;
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
The cobwebs are broken, and free is my mind, O.
Erin ma vorneen! slan leat go brah!
North and South here is my hand -- East and West here my heart, O;
Let Us never be divided by any base art O,
But love one another, and never more part, O,
Boie yudh ma vorneen! Erin go brah! Victory to you my darling! Ireland for
^^er!

But bark! I hear founds, and my heart strong is beating
Boie yudh ma vorneen! Erin go brah!
Friendship advancing -- delusion retreating.
Boie yudh ma vorneen! Erin go brah!
We have numbers -- and numbers do constitute power;
Let Us WILL TO BE FREE -- and we re FREE from tha hour;
Of Hibernia's Sons -- yes -- we'll then be the flower.
Boie yudh ma vorneen! Erin go brah!
Too long have we suffered, and too long lamented;
Boie yudh ma vorneen! Erin go brah!
By courage undaunted it may be prevented.
Boie yudh ma vorneen! Erin go brah!
No more by oppressors let us be affrighted,
But with heart, and with hand, be firmly UNITED;
For by ERIN GO BRAH! -- it is thus we'll be righted!
Boie yudh ma vorneen! Erin go brah!
TEAGUE AND PAT.
Tune -- "Patrick's Day in the Morning."
DEAR PAT give attention unto what I now mention,
The times they are altered, now listen I pr^y;
With sedition and treason, and every such nonsense,
Arrah! PAT, sure they tell us we are all gone astray:
But hark you, dear PAT, these words have their meaning,
To humble poor PADDY, and to keep him down,
But if ever we wish to be a FREE NATION,
UNION, sure PAT, is our only salvation --
On Patrick's day in the morning.
Such tithes and such taxes, with laws to opprese us,
In any wise nation, sure never was known;
Under placemen, with pensions, and their vile intentions --
The poor man and widow reluctant does groan:
In bastiles and chains the true Patriot complains,
Their innocent lives they wish to betray;
Provldence will attend them, mankind will befriend them,
The virtuous and brave will ever commend them --
On Patrick's day in the morning
Long time they have prided to see us divided;
But now brightens up the happy new day,
When we with each other, like brother and brother,
With an IRISH SHILLELA these harpies will pay:
What think you dear PAT, can you guess what they are at?
They wish for to banish us out of the land;
But the Shamrock, victorious, triumphant and glorious,
We yet will extend it, like men we'll defend it --
On Patrick's day in the morning.
When TEAGUE and his Comrade were digging Potatoes,
And heard of the hubbub that happened that year,
French chains broken asunder, it made them much wonder,
They danced without brogues, and they gave them a cheer;
In transports of joy, they shook hands and did cry,
The time is approaching, we yet. WILL BE FREE;
When Pence and good will every bosom will fi^l,
(...) Paddy's Resource shall have it is free course --
On Patrick's day in the morning.
UNION AND TRUTH.
Tune -- "Ye vile Swinish herd in the sly of taxation."
WHEN brotherly love sha'l through Ireland prevail,
Then discord no more shall our bosom assail;
But the aged shall nourish the innocent youth,
In the life-cheering precepts of UNION and TRUTH.
Derry down, etc.

When religion unveiled in her primitive light,
Shall disperse the dark vapors of bigotry's night;
Then charity's hand shall man's stern visage smooth,
And impress there the smiles of kind UNION and TRUTH.
Derry down, etc.

When tythe-loving prelacy, feeble and old,
No longer the scepter of du'ness shall hold;
Then tyranny gnawed by his own poisoned tooth,
Shall expire at the feet of blessed UNION and TRUTH.
Derry down, etc.

No despotic vile laws shall chaste wedlock confine;
But our youths and our maidens shall lovingly join;
The soft voice of love shall our Islanders soothe,
And our Patriots rejoice in kind UNION and TRUTH.
Derry down, etc.

THE TRIUMPH OF TRUTH.
Tune -- "Morgan Rattler."
ARRAH! PADDY, dear boy my heart and my joy,
Tune up your HARP in the cause of our country;
With Republican glee still let us agree.
And gallantly plant the Tree of Liberty.
The people, you see, do now all agree,
In spite of the tribe that long divided them;
We'll throw off the yoke -- huzza! for the stroke,
Sure gramachree, PADDY, we'll have day about with them.
Tol, lol, etc.

Was Ireland Free, how snug I would be!
Myself and my neighbors would live so happily;
No tax would we pay, but what would defray
The expense of the nation, laid out honestly:
Till that time shall come, let dissentions be mum;
What signifies quarreling -- we are Irishmen;
All religious disputes hereafter be mute,
And UNITE to oppose the men first raised them.
Tol, lol, etc.

Hibernians, you see, like brothers should be,
And live like one family, happily and lovingly:
No artful knaves would the^^ make them slaves;
But all would be mirth and conviviality.
For the Rights of Man we'll join heart and hand,
The cause it is good, we never will fly for it;
Truth, I Will be bail, in the end must prevail --
By the holy St. PATRICK we'll fight till we die for it.
Tol, lol, etc.

Ye Irishmen bold, let truth now be told --
English influence long has enslaved us;
But now comes the time our nation will shine,
As Providence surely has assisted us.
Sweet FREEDOM appear and every heart cheer,
Relieving from chains those bound by iniquity;
Let Justice preside, our footsteps to guide,
And lead us to Peace and joyous tranquillity.
Tol, lol, etc.

FREEDOM TRIUMPHANT.
Tune -- "Boyne Water."
HE fourteenth of July, in Paris town,
There was a glorious battle;
(...) many a tyrant lay on the ground,
By ^annon that did rattle.
The people firmly did advance.
Which made their foes to wonder;
Their Country's rights they did maintain --
The Bastile tore asunder.
The tocsin's sound did soon resound,
All ranks did fly to arms --
Both young and old, as I am told,
Not fearing war's alarms.
The hue and cry, 'Live Free or die."
Was heard from each defender;
And VIVALA! was the tune they played,
To make their foes surrender.
French Soldiers then, like honest men,
Says, "Sure these are our brothers;
Why then should we not join to Free
Our Children, Wives and Mothers?
We need not be the least afraid,
We'll elect our own Commander;
For GOD will be our King this day --
FREEDOM's banner we fight under."
A standard then they did prepare,
LIBERTY's stripes they raised,
Which did inspire with electric fire,
Frenchmen so long enslaved --
With sword in hand they marched on,
Their foes they soon did scatter;
Both tyrants, crown, mitre and gown,
Their pikes, that day, did tatter.
From France now see LIBERTY's TREE,
It Is branches wide extending;
The swine to it for shelter run --
Full fast they are assembling --
They grunt and groan with hideous tone,
Against all base connivers;
They now UNITE and swear they will bite
Their most unfeeling drivers.
THE TENTH OF AUGUST.
Tune -- "Anacreon in Heaven."
THOUGH we praise the proud day which beheld mighty France,
Burst her Bastiles, and rise from servility's tomb;
Behold her with earth-shaking paces advance,
And pour her strong vengeance on tyranny's dome,
Though we praise that great day,
Which o'erturned lawless sway,
Yet a king still remained, FREEDOM's cause to betray --
But the day we have chosen saw monarchy fall,
And man's dearest blessings extended to all.
What are peers, princes, sovereigns, with all their gay band,
But "reptiles." maintained by the groans of the poor?
Like reptiles 'midst darkness, they harrass a land;
But if light beams around, the foul pests are no more;
And as beasts that love night,
When the ken glaring light,
Though burning for blood; dart away in a fright --
So at this awful moment, from LIBERTY's fire,
Growling death and dismay, man's oppressors retire.
As you luminous orb, the vast emblem of GOD,
Gilds alike the low cot and the tall dome of pride,
So, wherever pure LIBERTY makes her abode,
Her soul-lifting smiles will by all be enjoyed.
Shall the poor man be told,
That because he lacks gold,
His name among Freemen shall never be enrol'd?
No: -- perish such jargon, -- whate er be man's store,
He is man -- and pure FREEDOM can never ask more.
Oh.! be wise then, ye French -- be the world's mental sun,
And pour your strong light over all prejudiced nations;
"It Is for man, and man only, your work must be done,
Then on truth's lasting adamant lay your foundations.
Let talents and worth,
From their haunts be called forth --
Let these, and not gold, be respected on earth --
Yes -- show that it is worth and worth only you prize.
And then man, slighting wealth, may aspire to be wise,
On this glorious day, wi^h sublimity crowned,
And with spirit all fire, the Republic arose;
While perils and death have encompassed her round,
While, with arm strong as fate, she has vanquished her foes.
And though Britain's mean race,
To their lasting disgrace.
Still back a vile court, in a contest so base;
Yet the day will arrive -- and oh! speed it ye powers,
When FREEDOM, TRUE FREEDOM, and PEACE shall be ours.
THE BLAZING RUSH LIGHT.
Tune -- "The little far^hing rush light."
IN the gay demesnes of France, where the graces trip and, ship, sir,
A famous light arose which they call a WILL-O-WISP, sir:
This light it shone is clear (...) ^^nous bush light;
Yet the Emperor of (...) said it was but a rush light!
And he puffed at the rush light! he puff^d at the rush light!
And all that he could do, could not put out the rush light!
His crafty Prussion neighbor, rejoic^d at this resistance,
Affected for to lend his aid, but kep't aloof his distance.
For though he screwed the bayonet on, yet he resolved to push light --
And puny was the blast he blew in putting out the rush light!
He puff^d at, etc.
The Tygress of the North, so famed for spoil and plunder, sir,
Whose eyes can ^^^d forth lightning, with a voice as loud as thunder, sir.
With her petticoats raised such a wind as she surely thought must crush light;
Yet it only serves to fan the flame that issued from the rush light!
And she puff^d, etc.
Myn^^^^ Van (...) from Amsterdam, resolved to join the ranks, (...)
This light it spread so far and near, he feared it 'twould burn the banks, sir?
He swore in all his born days, he never yet saw such light --
And, retreating, blew, ^^^rthian blast, to put out the little rush light!
And he puff^d, etc
The Pope was much astonished to behold this scene of slaughter, sir:
And determined to extinguish it -- by a shower of holy water, sir:
He said, since he was born, he never yet saw such light;
And with bell, book, and candle, he cursed the little rush light!
And he puff^d, etc.
The Don he curled his whiskers, and the little king of Naples, sir,
Likewise the king of Turin -- and they did what they were able, sir;
With a host of foes from Tuscany, so determined to crush light,
Though all Italy was squalling it could not put out the rush light!
Though they puff^d, etc.
Experience teaches wisdom -- from wisdom virtue springs, sir,
And only in the people's love, security for kings, sir --
Wisely now the Don has learnt, to profit by example bright;
He sees he cannot extinguish -- so adds fuel to the rush light!
Now he fans up the rush light! he fans up the rush light!
With twenty sail joins RICHERY -- and blazing is the rush light!
Poor purblind cuckold JOHNNY BULL begins to fear a home, sir,
That the People will lead him a dance, 'cause under him they groan sir;
For FREEDOM^s Sons now form the line -- tyrants tremble at the sight,
The rush is dipped, the flame is caught, see it is spreading glorious light.
Huzza! for the rush light! -- Huzza! for the rush light!
JOHNNY BULL your wig's afire! blazing with the rush light!
SAINT PATRICK's DELIGHT.
Tune -- "Moll Roe."
OH! if you have a mind to gain FREEDOM,
Go travel the globe all around.
But the like of the old Irish nation,
In a corner is scarce to be found:
Oh! there you will find true hospitality,
Whiskey and friendship galore;
With "ERIN GO BRAH!" on Green Ribbons,
The Ladies so much do adore.
Musha whack, etc.
Was it not for our heavy oppressions,
How happy and snug would we be,
Our land is so fertile and pleasant? --
No poor at our doors we would see:
But our brave Irish heroes now feel it,
They sure^y will give it a blow;
With an IRISH SHILLELA we'll twig them --
Huzza! we will banish each foe.
Musha whack, etc.
Oh! St. PATRICK he was a true Patriot,
He made us (...) Island of Saints,
Driving off all ou^ obnoxious invaders,
And never shut his ears to complain's.
When yet I remind our ancest^^
The Sons of the great O's and MAC's,
Who virtuously fought for our Country,
And never once turned their backs.
Musha whack, etc.
You Ladies true friends to Hibernia,
The Rights of old Ierne maintain;
Futurity's history will mention
Your actions of honor and fame;
The Genius of Ireland defend you,
May FREEDOM soon brighten the day,
May her radiance to LIBERTY guide you,
And shield you from harm I pray.
Musha whack, etc.
ADVICE TO HIBERNIANS.
Tune -- "Dusky Night."
WHILE FREEDOM spreads her banner forth,
And bids her son's all join;
Why should not we like men of worth,
Make haste to form the line --
And banish tyranny,
And banish tyranny?
But ever we can our rights regain,
We must United be.
The trying period is at hand,
Which must decide the cause,
Whether we'll Free our native land,
Or yield to tyrant's laws.
Then Freedom's Sons beware
Then Freedom's Sons beware.
And never to great achievements run,
Till you yourselves prepare.
Pray who is yon with crowned head,
And scepter in his hand?
Has he the earth and mankind made,
That he should them command?
No; -- reason tells us plain --
No; -- reason tells us plain,
Of dust and ^h^^ he is made --
All mankind is the same.
Why should an ornament of pride,
Or a high-sounding name,
The Rights of man for ever hide,
And rob him of the same?
But the delusion^s past --
But the delusion's past,
The veil is drawn, the monster has
Appeared to view at last.
Then let us calmly wait the time,
And strike the final blow --
To punish traitors for their crimes,
And lay the tyrants low.
Hail! then, Hibernia's Isle!
Hail! then, Hibernia's Isle!
Thy gloomy night is near an end --
The day begins to smile.
THE NEW IRISH DRUM.
Tune -- "Prussian Drum."
THE fourteenth of July let us never forget,
When Frenchmen espoused fair LIBERTY'S cause --
The Sons of Hibernia remember it yet,
And boldly call out for a new code of laws.
Praised praised -- Heaven be praised,
The glorious day of UNION is come;
To shake the foundation of vile usurpation,
And tyrants to frighten with LIBETY's drum.
By the too's of oppression we long were divided,
Superstition and prejudice made us often bleed --
But when all in friendship are firmly UNITED,
From discord and bigotry then we'll be freed.
UNION, UNION, NATIONAL UNION,
Will banish corruption from the Irish shore;
So pleased and delighted, all parties UNITED,
Religious dissentions will then be no more.
Hail to the bright day let all Irishmen say,
When the Son^s of old PADDY like brothers will be,
Each face sweetly smiling no tongue ever beguiling,
But dancing and singing the sweet gramachree.
LIBERTY LIBERTY -- O! sweet LIBERTY!
Rally thy Sons round thy favorite TREE;
The Green Flag extended, come let us defend it,
UNITED, determined to die or live Free.
With taxes and tithes we have long been oppressed,
Placemen and pensioners for to support,
The hard earned pence of the laboring poor,
Is squanderd away by an English court.
Ireland, Ireland -- slumbering Ireland!
Under proud England how long will you groan?
Arise from your trance, turn your eyes toward France,
And by her example let us tyrants disown.
We often have been told -- but I Am sure it is a lie,
That England ought our mistress to be;
Though our Island is small, yet we are not afraid,
To fight for ourselves our Country to Free.
Thunder, thunder, Irish thunder!
These vile herd of miscreants we'll frighten away --
The Shamrock we'll raise it, all nations will praise it,
We will fraternize on that glorious day.
LIBERTY'S AUSPICIOUS RAY.
Tune -- "My ain kind deary."
IERNE, dear distracted Isle,
The day advance with hasty strides,
When you no more in pain shall toil,
Under ambitious England's pride --
UNITE in heavenly concord ALL,
And soon ye shall the yoke despise;
Then British tyranny shall fall,
And prostrate lie before your eves.
Your cause is just, you're not the first
Have broke the Bastile's massy gates;
The lingering captive's chains have burst,
Who lay immured in dark retreats.
Ah! hasten now the glorious day,
When tyrants all shall quake with fear,
When LIBERTY^s auspicious ray,
Shall place in light her sons most dear,
Ye dauntless few who lie immured
In gloomy vaults without relief,
Be patient -- victory's insur'd,
When virtue guides her noble chiefs,
Now tyrants, with a countless train,
Would fain support despotic power,
And troops, like waves upon the main,
Succeed each other every hour.
But Irishmen their power despise --
Go on -- pursue sweet UNION still,
Till order bright completely rise --
The glorious work you will yet fufill. --
Yes, generous Irishmen, ye shall
Leave to the world examples pure,
When peacemakers are laid in goal,
To till their lands you will be sure.
A CALL TO IRISHMEN.
Tune -- "Wolf at Quebec."
NOW Hibernians bold and brave,
Let us all combine and save
This, our Nation, from dire slavery.
For they rob us of our rights,
And till Irishmen U^^tes,
We need never expect to be FREE.
Let us pull those villains down,
Base minions of a crown,
To enslave us is all they desire;
And too well they did succeed,
But Hibernia shall be freed,
And fell tyranny shall soon expire.
Let us all our Freedom gain,
And our Liberty maintain,
That our motto henceforward may be --
LET HIBERNIA REST IN PEACE,
And EACH PARTY QUARREL CEASE --
LET ALL MANKIND UNITE AND BE FREE.
Let us cast away the yoke,
And our chains will soon be broke --
We will then be a nation once more:
Then our honor shall revive,
When they see we are alive --
Lo! fair FREEDOM approaches our shore.
THE SHEEPFOLD.
Tune -- "Dainty Davy."
WHILE tyrants grasp with greedy aim,
At aggrandizement, wealth and same,
The empty bublle of a name --
To please their vain ambition.
As Friends of Freedom we aspire
The RIGHTS of MAN for to require;
From this pursuit we'll never retire --
We'll banish vile oppression.
Should all the knaves on earth combine,
And all the powers of darkness join,
To aid them in their black design,
We'll scorn their opposition.
The splendid ornaments of state,
Are fallen to disgrace of late,
Tyrants begin to meet their fate,
Which they so well deserved;
They Are hasting to the mentioned place,
Where dwells the old tyrannic race,
To see their master face to face,
Whom they so long have served.
No doubt but they will be amply stored
With joys such as that place afford,
In presence of their sovereign lord
They Will surely be exalted.
Too long their galling yoke was borne,
Mankind in darkness lay forlorn;
But now the Lark proclaims the morn --
The Eastern sky does brighten --
And Reason's light, with splendid ray,
Dark prejudice does drive away,
And kindly ushers in the day,
And Mankind does enlighten.
To see the Wolves in sheep's array,
That led the simple flock astray,
And made of them an easy prey
By internal division.
But an inspir^d writer of old,
In holy Scripture has us told,
That all men shall be ONE SHEEPFOLD,
And under ONE GREAT MASTER
Proud and impious must he be
Who strives to frustrate Heaven's decree;
In spite of such base traitors, we
Will strive to haste it faster.
Until the Lion, Ox, and Bear,
The Wolf and Lamb like comrades dear,
Shall feed together without fear --
And none shall hurt his neighbor
HONEST PAT.
Tune -- "Girl I left behind me."
HIBERNIA's Sons, with hearts elate,
Who hate despotic slavery;
Now join with us, the cause is great,
Display your Irish brav'ry --
To crush those knaves that us enslaves,
Our guns shall roar like thunder,
And let them see that we'll not be,
By tyrants long kept under.
Old Granua groans, laments and moans
Sore goaded by oppressors;
We are her Sons, the only ones
Can be her sole redressors; --
She loudly calls to one and all,
To cut her chains asunder --
Her tyrants hear and greatly fear
That us they cannot keep under.
To miss this time would be a crime,
Whilst Europe is affrighted;
With warlike rage, now is the age
To see our country righted.
A thing tyrannic, struck by PAT,
To dust shall moulder under;
The hero's feet shall trample it --
For us they shall not keep under.
No Statesman great, Priest or Prelate,
Shall stop our bold conceptions;
When we are joined, with firmness bound,
We'll baffle their deceptions.
A bill of woe, by the junto,
Has passed through the House quick,
For to defil Hibernia's Isle,
And bind down honest PATRICK.
THE VIRTUOUS WARRIORS.
Tune -- "Roslin Castle"
HAIL! undaunted Hibernians, true offspring of light,
Whose hearts will not recoil, nor give back to the fight;
Whose minds are unshaken, whose breasts courage warms,
To try FREEDOM's cause by the strong dint of arms;
There Is a choice here before you, pray which will you take?
Will you stand by old Ireland and die for her sake!
Will you bring down oppression, or fall by it is grasp?
Will you fly from your brethren and leave them oppressed?
Vile oppressors, I am ready your minions to fight,
Your threats and bravadoes my mind shall not fright;
I have one life to loose -- I have laid it at stake,
I Am resolved -- and you will never my fortitude shake:
Why should heroes be backward their fate to receive,
Since all mankind must steep in a dark silent grave?
We have a great Creator who sees from on high,
And without his command not a Sparrow can die.
Do you think to affright me by weapons of death?
By power you may force me to yield up my breath;
Yet the high effervescence of glory I feel,
Condemning your action -- despising your steel.
What a glory it is for a warrior to fall,
By the thrust of a pil^^ or the force of a ball;
But what horrid disgrace from his country to fly,
Just because he a moment the sooner must die
You think Irishmen cowards -- the error you will see,
They will yet be a Nation -- they soon will be Free;
It will surely surprise you to see them stand forth,
The rabble of the South with the swine of the North.
Let us boldly press forward with hearts undismayed,
For what should we tremble -- or of what be afraid?
Let it never be recorded Hiberni^s would fly --
But stand firm by each other, and conquer or die.
THE CHARTER OF BROTHERHOOD.
Tune -- "Viva la."
BEFORE the glance of newborn FREEDOM,
Irishmen did first behold,
We lay blind, like captives bleeding --
Fly to arms ye heroes bold.
Viva la ye Northern heroes;
May the North and South agree;
Dread nor fear shall never scar us --
Viva la! we will be FREE.
The VOLUNTEERS were assembled,
And for LIBERTY declared;
But their leaders base dissembled --
Tyrants heavier chains prepared.
Viva la! etc.
For a while we then lay sleeping,
Injur^d still and discontent;
Loyal Patriots a^l were weeping --
Yet for LIBERTY was bent.
Viva la! etc.
UNION then became the charter,
Whereby we were to be saved;
Watched -- betrayed on every quarter --
Yet those dangers we have braved.
Viva la! etc.
Let us be as one, UNITED,
All in love and Brotherhood!
Let us never be affrighted,
Since, it is plain, our cause is good.
Viva la! etc.
May the Branch of FREEDOM flourish;
Say, in Ireland will it thrive;
Tyrants blood its root must nourish --
Numbers of them are alive.
Viva la! etc.
With your bodies form a rampart;
Plant it 'midst a shower of balls:
If you do no act in concert,
Then it is leaves decaying falls.
Viva la! etc.
If you stand by one another,
It will yield abundant shoots;
Then we trust, each loyal Brother,
Who survives, will taste the fruits.
Viva la! etc.
WAR, CRUEL WAR, AND STARVATION.
Tune -- "Bailinamoney."
I WILL tell you dear PAT, the whole news of the town,
That Is just come from London, that place of renown:
To open the session a great man came down,
When hundreds and thousands his coach did surround --
Crying "War cruel war and starvation,
Will sure be the fate of our nation;
Our blood and our treasure is wasting,
And BILLY goes on with the war."
The Swine, as BURKE call's them, did grunt and did groan;
"NO WAR," they cried out with a pitiful tone,
The state coach was broken -- some say with a stone,
Some say with an air gun^ and some say with non^
For war, cruel war, and starvation, etc.
The doors were close locked, the members were set,
The wise Lords and Commons together were met,
Some wrangled some jangled, and others did fret;
The devil himself never beheld such a set --
For war crue^ war and oppression,
Is carried from sesson to session;
I wish, that the devil was threshing
Them all into Botany-Bay.
The war it goes on, by my faith just to get
More thousands for slaughter, more millions of debt;
Disgrace on disgrace, my dear PAT is our lot,
Like the Bishop of Dol we may all go to pot, --
For war c^^^l war, and starvation,
Will sure be the fate of our nation;
Our blood and our treasure is weasting,
And BILLY goes on with the war.
THE TREE OF LIBERTY.
Tune -- "Roslin Castle."
THE great Reformation, approaching we hail!
Against statesmen and knaves truth and reason prevail's
With rapture the heroes of Liberty see!
Prepairing the soil of the globe for the tree.
Still hoping Liberty triumphant will sway,
Whilst the voice of the people hail the new day
And end the dark councils of traitors combined,
A downfall to tyrants and peace to mankind.
Ye Irish, for courage in battle renowned,
For freedom and riches -- A^as, empty sound!
Triumphant ye came from the field and the main,
To be conquered and plundered by statesmen (...)
Away with the splendour and pomp of a court
Our toil shall no longer the bubb^es support;
No longer the slaves of a statesman or king,
^^spir^^ by the Muses, of Freedom we si^
Ye trees of corruption in courts ye abo^r
The fruits ye produce are a course to the ground,
In the soil where ye slourish no others can grow,
But now see the axe at your root aims the blow,
Ever dear be the day, ever sacred the deed,
Ever dear be the day, on which milions were freed --
Yes, dear be the hour which restored reason's sway,
And filled royal robbers with rage and dimsay.
Still be firm, O Hibernians -- still nobly disdain,
And always the Rights of your country maintain;
Till with souls all aversion, mankind shall ^rise,
Burst the bands of oppression and please the ALLWISE.
Heav^n guard the People and their Rights that are dear,
May they crush all their foes wherever they appear;
And end the dark councils of traitors combined,
A downfall to tyrants and peace to mankind.
THE UNITED-MEN's MARCH.
YE SONS OF IRELAND awake to glory,
Hark! hark! what myriads bid you rise,
Your children, wives and grandsires hoary --
Behold their tears and hear their cries!
Shall hateful tyrants mischief breeding,
With hireling hosts, a ruffian band,
Affright and desolate the land.
Where Peace and Liberty lie bleeding!
To arms to arms ye brave,
The avenging sword unsheath,
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death.
Now now the dangerous storm is rolling,
Which treacherous kings confederate raise,
The dogs of war let loose are howling,
And lo! our towns and cities blaze!
And shall we basely view the ruin,
While lawless force with guilty stride,
Spreads desolation far and wide,
With crimes and blood his hands embruing?
To arms ye brave, etc.
With luxury and pride surrounded,
The vile insatiate despots, dare,
Their thirst of power and gold unbounded,
To mete and vend the light and air.
Like beasts of burden would they lo^d us,
Like gods would bid their slaves adore,
But Man is Man, and who is more?
Then shall they longer lash and goad us?
To arms, ye brave, etc.
O, LIBERTY! can man resign thee,
Once having felt thy gen^^o^s flame?
Can dungeons, bolts and ba^s confine thee,
Or whips thy noble spirit tame?
Too long the world has wept bewailing
That falsehood^s dagger tyarnts wield,
But FREEDOM is our SWORD and SHIELD,
And all their arts are unavailing.
To arms, to arms, ye brave,
The avenging sword unsheath;
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death.
THE TENDER's HOLD.
Tune -- "From night to morn I take my glass."
WHILE Landsmen wander uncontrolled,
And boast the rights of Freemen,
O! view the Tender's loathsome hold,
Where droop your injured Seamen;
Dragged by oppression's savage grasp,
From every dear connection?
'Midst putrid air O! hear them gasp,
And mark their deep dejection.
If Freedom be our birthright, say
Why are not all protected?
Why is the hand of ruffian sway
Against Seamen thus directed;
Is this your proof of Irish rights?
Is this rewarding bravery?
O! shame to boast your Tars' exploits,
Yet doom those Tars to slavery.
O! that ambition's callous train,
Who wish to shine in story,
Who tinge with blood the earth and main,
And call their havoc glory;
O! that these scourges of the world,
Who smile at man's undoing,
Might from their lordly seats be hurled,
And taste the cup of ruin.
Is Ireland free? -- ye vaunting crew,
Who oppose all reformation;
Deep in the tender's hold, O! view
The guardians of your nation:
Yes, view them thus in durance laid,
Though void of a^l transgression:
Then say, could Tussia's bloody jade,
Display more foul oppression?
But just returned from noxious skies,
And winter's raging ocean,
To land the sun burnt seamen flies,
Impelled by strong emotion;
His much loved Kate, his children dear,
Around him cling delighted,
When lo! the impressing fiends appear,
And every joy is blighted.
Mark then, ye minions of a court,
Who prate of Freedom's blessing;
Yet every hell-born war support,
And vindicate impressing;
A time will come, when things like you,
Mere baubles of creation,
No more shall make mankind pursue,
The work of devastation.
THE JOVIAL FRIENDS.
Tune -- "When bidden to the Wake or Fair."
MY jovial friends, with social glee,
The flowing can we'll quickly pass;
Each breast will warm to Liberty,
While whiskey crowns each sparkling glass,
A bumper filled, the toast shall be,
Give us death, or Liberty!
A bumper filled, the toast shall be,
Give us death or Liberty!
While GALLIA'S sons with martial fire,
And warm with patriot ardour glow;
While they to warlike deeds aspire,
And panting, long to meet the foe
To GALLIC arms by land and sea,
We'll drink success with three times three.
To GALLIC arms, etc.
May French exertions never cease,
Till Europe, shall reformed be,
And UNION, LIBERTY and PEACE,
Succeed Oppression's fell decree,
Then every Freeman's toast will be
Union, Peace and Liberty!
Then every Freeman's, etc.
THE RECTOR's CREED.
Tune -- "Black Joke."
A Rector I am, pray mind what I say,
In church every Suncay I preach and I pray,
With my black coat, And cravat so white.
Ye men of my parish I pray you take heed,
Till I give you a sketch of my time-serving Creed --
My Creed it is cash, and my stipend's salvation,
For which I Would destroy all the swine in the nation,
With my black coat, etc.
I believe in my church, I believe in my mense,
I believe that religion is all a romance,
With my black coat, etc.
I believe that the only two comforts of life,
Are counting my stipend, and kissing my wife;
I believe that the people were born to be slaves,
To be pilfer'd and plundered by us artful knaves,
With our black coats, etc.
I believe that my head is the storehouse of sense,
From which the pure gospel I freely dispense,
With my black coat, etc.
As it was forbid by an ancient divine.
To throw precious pearls to ignorant swine;
Complying with this, my ambition should be,
To keep them still bond slaves, ourselves being free,
With our black coats, etc.
I believe that my brethren all think me sincere,
For at church every Sunday I read a long prayer,
In my black coat, etc.
And if they want grunting I Will make the house ring,
For at grunting they know me to be quite the thing;
I Will sigh and I Will groan, turn my eyes up to Heaven,
For no other reason than the tithe that is given --
To buy black coats, etc.
And now my dear friends for the sake of connection,
I Will end my discourse with a word of reflection,
With my black coat, etc.
To believe as the great folks, for better for worse,
Is the only sure method of filling the purse:
Which method I Will follow in spite of detraction,
I Am sure of my pay while the court has protection,
From the black coats, etc.
I Am resolved my opinions shall be the same still,
With the court, whilst in power, let them be what they will,
With my black coat, etc.
Though they become Jews, I would join them in that,
My faith and religion I Would throw to the cat:
For my creed it is cash, and my stipend salvation,
For which I Would destroy all the swine in the nation,
With my black coat, And cravat so white.
THE NEW VIVA LA.
Tune -- "Willy was a wanting wag."
MUSE of energy and fire,
Stretch abroad thy bo^dest wing;
Freedom calls -- assume the lyre,
Freedom calls -- arise and sing.
Viva la! long live the PEOPLE,
Free from care and slavery;
Viva la! Hibernia!
MAN will surely soon be FREE.
Sing the captive's broken chain --
Sing the tyrant's withered arm;
Mad oppression storms in vain!
Freedoms breath has broke the charm.
Viva la, etc.
S^avery's Bastile reared its head.
Deep the strong foundation lay;
Lost in its tremendous shade
Nations mourn^d the absent day.
Viva la, etc.
All the ghastly regions round,
Stretched immense a hideous wild;
Mis^ry hop^d and ho^ror frown^d
Men despaired, and demons smiled!
Viva la, etc.
Sudden sounding, from afar,
Freedom's awful voice was heard,
Glorious as the morning star,
Soon Liberty herself appeared.
Viva la! etc.
Triumph shining in her eyes,
Beams of heavenly sp^endour shed,
Kindling up the glowing skies --
Darkness saw and midnight fled.
Viva la! etc.
Down the gothic structure then,
Thundered on the builder's heads --
Slaves beheld and sprung to men,
Tyrants saw and shrunk to shades.
Viva la! etc.
Storms and tempests, howling flew,
Desolation left the scene --
Gales of vernal fragrance blew,
Nature bloomed in flowery green. --
Viva la! etc.
Freedom still extend thy sway,
Boundless may thy influence run,
Universal as the day,
Everlasting as the sun.
Viva la! long live the PEOPLE,
Free from care and slavery;
Viva la Hibernia!
MAN will surely soon be FREE!!!
THE CARMAGNOLES.
Tune -- "Dainty Davy."
'TWAS in the year of Ninety-three,
The French did plant an olive tree,
An emblem of great Liberty,
And Patriots danced around it --
The tools of murder near and far,
The Sons of FREEDOM thought to scar --
But GALLIA taught new modes of war,
To tocsin it was sounded.
For was not I often telling thee,
The French could sight right heartily,
That Carmagnoles would make you flee --
But you would never mind me.
In Ninety-four a new campaign,
The tools of darkness did maintain --
But Fame^s bright sons soon formed in train,
And soon their foes confounded --
They gave to Flanders Liberty;
They dealt their shot so frank and free,
The Dutch and Austrians home did flee;
And left the Duke surrounded.
For was not I, etc.
On June the first, two fleets at sea
Did drub each other heartily,
While each side c^aim'd the victory,
And triumphed in their slaughter.
JEAN BON SAINT ANDRE was the boy
That fought and shav^d the French convoy --
JOHN BULL rang all his bells for joy,
Which caused the French great laughter
For was not I, etc.
Now see the great Batavian ine,
Emancipate with France combine --
May laurels green around them shine,
And may their sons long wear them --
May every tyrant shake with dread,
And tremble for his guilty head,
May regal toys in dust be laid,
And no man longer wear them.
For was not I, etc.
Old Church and King in close embrace,
The burden of the human race,
The PEOPLE tell you to your face,
That you will soon repent it --
For Kings in power and preaching drones,
The source of all our heavy groans,
Down from your pulpits and your thrones,
You Will tumble unlamented.
For was not I often telling thee
The French could fight right heartily
The Carmagnoles have made you flee,
So you may now believe me.
THE BRITISH BACCHANALS.
Tune -- "Green grows the rushes O^"
WHEN Frenchmen first attacked the crown,
And turned it topsy-turvy, O,
They knocked all cursed bastiles down --
The trick was cursed scurvy, O.
'Twas then we took up arms to fight,
To bring them to their senses, O;
But still the rogues maintain their right,
While we pay all expenses, O!
Push about the glasses, O --
Push about the glasses, O!
For what care we how things go on,
While blushing Nectar passes, O!
When Englishmen first went to war,
In thousands how we gathered 'em,
And sent 'em over to Flanders far: --
But there the Frenchmen lather'd 'em,
NOW LEOPOLD'S all-conq'ring Son,
Sent countless hordes to slaughter them,
And made the ragged rascals run; --
But, well-a-day! -- 'twas after them!
Push about the Glasses, O, -- etc.
Even let your snarlers take their scope,
We'll prove old England civi^, O!
And fight for either Turk or Pope,
Or their good friend -- the Devil, O!
Nor care we, if the war should yet,
Continue years full twenty, O!
Cause people all so saucy get,
When they have peace and plenty, O!
Push about the glasses, O, etc.
Those men, we find can battle well,
Whom once we counted Monkies, O;
And by a kind magic sp^^l,
Have proved their foes but Donkies, O!
Yet still these vengeful Pests of Kings,
Pursue the German Eagle O,
And have so clipped his gaudy wings,
He hardly now looks Regal, O!
Push about the Glasses, O, -- etc.
If Grunters henceforth dare to brag,
Of ^IBERTY or REASON O,
We'll then apply our new state gag --
And tuck 'em up for treason, O!
Then, let us all carouse and drink;
For 'till affairs grow riper, O
Folks must not say though they may think --
That JONNY, pays the piper O!
Push about the Glasses, O, -- etc.
MAN IS FREE BY NATURE.
Tune -- "Gilly Crankey."
WHY vainly do we waste our time,
Repeating our oppressions?
Come haste to arms, for now is the time
To punish past transgressions.
They say that kings can do no wrong;
Their murderous deeds deny it;
And since from us their power has sprung
We have a right to try it.
The starving wretch who steals for bread,
But seldom mee^ compassion --
Then shall a crown preserve a ^^ad
Of one that robs a nation
Such partial laws we all despise --
See Gallia's bright example;
The glorious scene before your eyes,
Let Us every tyrant trample.
Proud Bishops now we must translate
From senate, see and pensions
Virtue alone must teach the state,
In spite of king^s intentions.
Those despots long have trod us down,
And Judges are their engines;
Such wretches -- minions of the crown,
Demands a People's vengeance.
The golden age will yet revive,
Each man will be a brother;
In harmony we all shall live,
And share the earth together.
In Virtue's schoo^ enlight'd Youth
Will love his fellow creature:
And future ages prove this truth,
That MAN IS FREE BY NATURE.
THE CAPTIVE NEGRO.
Tune -- "Farewell Killeavy."
THE Negro with desponding heart,
And thoughts still streach^d across the main,
Unceasing toil, his ^estin^d part,
While fierce the sunbeams scorch the plain.
Appear^ appear fair FREEDOM,
And set the captive Negro free,
With scourges whipped, till bleeding,
By the enemies of Liberty.
When in some dungeon's solitude,
Deny^d of light to cheer the day,
Hi^ soul by wrongs still unsubdu'd,
The patriots wastes his life away.
Appear! appear! fair FREEDOM,
And set the captive Patriot free;
With scourges whipped till bleeding,
By the enemies of Liberty.
The Warrior first in FREEDOM's cause,
As champion of the human race,
Feels the rigor of despotic laws,
Will Not purchase mercy with disgrace.
Appear! appear! fair FREEDOM,
And set the captive Warrior free:
With scourges whit, till bleeding,
By the enemies of Liberty.
When the victim of fanatic zeal,
Lifts up his eyes to Heaven, and sighs,
Fearless of contempt, or fire, or steel,
The tyrant's power his mind denies.
Appear! appear! fair FREEDOM,
And set the captive victim free:
With scourges whipped, till bleeding,
By the enemies of Liberty.
THE EXILED PATRIOT.
Tune -- "La Belle Catharine."
COME, Freedom's chosen band,
Let us join heart and hand,
Thus we'll make a glarious stand,
And soon shall all be Free,
Hibernians al, at Freedom's call,
Straight repair to Virtues hall,
Free from fear there appear,
And still united be.
Come Freedom's chosen band,
Let us join heart and hand,
Thus we'll make a glorious stand,
And soon shall all be Free.
Though threat and menace be denounced,
Though ROWAN traitor is pronounced,
Yet let it never be renounced --
His crime was LIBERTY;
For Freemen born, all threats should scorn,
And in their minds will plant a thorn,
Who take such pains to rivet chains,
Least GRANU'S Sons be Free.
Come, Freedom's etc.
Let every heart with love rebound,
And every tongue ROWAN'S praises sound,
While thus by friendship we are bound,
The world it soon shall see;
None can affright when we Unite,
Our cause is good, our thoughts upright,
Though danger^s near, we scorn all fear,,
And burn for Liberty.
Come, Freedom's, etc.
Now show mankind that we are brave,
Like ROWAN struggle while we live,
Our country^s rights to save,
And then you will surely see:
Corruption fly, and influence die,
And g^adness on each face descry,
While traitors swing in hempen string,
Who clog our Liberty.
Come, Freedom's, etc.
Hibernia then shall raise her head,
When from her Isle corruption^s fled,
And view her Sons who nobly bled,
To make a^l hirelings flee!
So famed of o^d for courage bold,
Their rights they never did sell for gold,
But one and all at freedom's ca^l,
Established Liberty
Come, Freedom^s chosen band,
Let us join heart and hand,
Thus well make a glorious stand,
And soon shall all be Free.
THE GRAVE-DIGGER's ADDRESS TO THE PRINCE OF WALES.
Tune -- "Merrily danced the Quaker."
GO on, brave Prince, -- increase your debts,
They Will all be reimbursed;
So many friends do you support,
The rest are easy forced --
Go on, I say -- advance your cause.
You Will soon come to the crown, sir,
And then with wars and luxury
You Will make my pot boil brown, sir.
Yet merrily will the People dance,
And merrily will they caper,
Merrily will they all rejoice
When freed from such a creature,
An honor to the land you're sure,
To have in it blood royal;
And though the Peasant toils for you,
He Is hanged if not quite loyal.
Why then should God's anointed band
In luxury be bounded,
Then throw the public wealth away,
As if the nation found it.
Yet merrily, etc.
When men for liberty shall call,
You must like asses load them;
And then the smoother they will go,
When you incline to goad them:
They Will cry you're then a mighty prince
A noble benefactor,
And pliant to your will they will be,
As if you were protector.
Yet merrily, etc.
But now as to your King-chance, sir,
Indeed I would not buy it,
Or if I had it in my power
I would not like to try it.
I would as soon a Tinker be,
And buckle on my budget,
As live upon the starving poor,
And hear mankind begrudge it.
Yet merrily, etc.
Farewell great, noble, royal sir --
Your titles I Have forgot them,
But if I had them in my power,
I certainly would ROT them;
By ME, indeed, you should be praised,
Likewise your ROYAL DAD, sir,
For by his wars, and your excess,
I Have got a fat Churchyard, sir.
Yet merrily will the People dance,
And merrily will they caper;
Merrily will they all rejoice,
When freed from such a creature.
BRETHREN UNITE.
BY A LADY
Tune -- "God save the Rights of Man."
HIBERNIA lend an ear,
Cast away slavish fear,
In haste pursue;
While it is within your grasp,
Strip off the tyrant's mask,
That long the poisoned asp,
Hid from your view.
(...) is the time at hand,
(...) the crisis stand,
Let us Unite;
Too long our eyes were veiled,
Too long our Rights conceal^d,
Too long has power prevailed.
Brethren Unite.
Soon in a close embrace,
ALL the Hibernian race,
Tyrants shall view;
FOUR MILLIONS hand in hand,
Shall by each other stand,
And with one voice demand
Irishmen's due.
Ask, and you shall receive, --
Then be no longer slaves --
You shall be Free;
Catholic Brethren come,
WILL IT! -- the thing is done,
Plant in your native ground
Liberty's Tree.
Hail glorious Liberty!
That from proud royalty's
Ashes arise;
Let the enlightened rays,
Shine on our latter days,
And with a rapid blaze
Reach to the skies.
Teach with a radiant smile,
This highly favored Isle
Now to rejoice;
Let the dark mist of night
Sink to approaching light,
That bids our sons UNITE,
With a loud voice,
ARTHUR O'CONNOR's ADDRESS TO THE FREE ELECTORS of the COUNTY of ANTRIM.
Fellow-Citizens.
THE POST OFFICE is so immediately dependant on the Government, that any
anonymous production issuing from thence, must be looked on as coming from the
Administration itself; in this light I have viewed the anonymous paper which
has been so industrously distrubuted through the Post Offices of the North,
avowedly to deprive me of whatever share of your confidence I might have
gained, and in this light I have given it an answer. Had I treated it with
silent contempt, I should have hoped that its coming from an Administration
which had so deservedly forfeited the confidence of every Irishman who valued
the liberties of his country, would have insured me from suffering, in your
estimation, from the falsehood and calumny with which it abounds; but my respect
for those invaluable Censors, the Press and the Public Opinion, the conscious
integrity of my own heart, and the most perfect reliance on the virtue of the
cause I espouse, prompt me to seize any occasion which affords an opportunity
of vindicating it or myself from the aspersions of an Administration, whose
heaviest charge, in their wretched production, is, that at any time of my life
I had been the advocate of them or their measures. As the whole of the work is
one continued issue of misrepresentation and falsehood, a plain recital of facts
will be the best means of giving it a full refutation. After the question of
Regency, that memorable display of the infamy and principles of the factions of
Ireland, some of the most considerable of them were forced into IRISH
PARLIAMENTARY, PATRIOTISM, by being stripped of the wages of their prostitution,
I accepted a seat from my uncle Lord Longueville, in the chimerical hope that
this crash between the factions and the Government, might be improved to the
advantage of Ireland: but experience soon convinced me that nothing short of
the establishment of a NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, A TOTAL ^^NIHILATION OF THE
FACTIONS, AND THEIR U^URPATIONS, AND AN, ENTIRE AB^^^^TION OF RELIGIOUS
DISTINCTIONS, could restore to my country those Rights, and that Liberty which
had been so long a subject of traffic, under a regular organized system of
treason, and acting up to this conviction from the day I accepted the seat from
Lord Longueville, to the day I resigned it. I earnestly entreated him to
declare for a Reform of Parliament, and for the freedom of my Catholic
countrymen. The thanks which were given me by the delegates of the Catholics of
Ireland, for my defense of them and their cause, so early as 1791, and the vote
which I gave for their total emancipation, against Lord Longueville and the
Government, in the beginning of 1793, gives the lie to the assertion of
Administration, that I was not the advocate of Catholic Freedom until my having
spoke on that subject in 1795, and so wholly is it unfounded in truth, that I
have exerted myself in defense of the liberties of my country, because the
Government refused me a Commissioner's place, that al^ho Lord Longueville
repeatedly pressed me to let him procure me a Commissioner's place, I as often
resused it, assuring him that it was contrary to my principles to accept the
money of my impoverished countrymen, for the detestable treason of betraying
their Rights, their Industry, their Manufactures and Commerce; that for the
bribe of a British pander I should base^y contribute to aggrandize HIS country,
at the expense of every thing dear to MY OWN; whilst so far from bartering my
principles to better my fortune, that though Lord Longueville pressed me to
accept large sums of his own money, I declined them; and it is notorious he has
since disinherited me for the open avowal of my political sentiments on the
Catholic Question. Being forced, in my own vindication, to speak of myself, I
will leave you my fellow citizens, to judge of an Administration, that by
fa^shood and calumny, have attempted to widen a breach between me and
connections that were but too widely extended before; yet whilst they have
given me an opportunity of proving to you that no consideration could induce me
to abandon my principles, they shall never succeed in making me utter one
unkind expression of a man whose wishes to promote me in life, have left a
grateful remembrance their malice shall never efface. Abandoned Adminstration!
who have trampled on the liberties of my country, do you presume to accuse me
of dissuading my courtrymen from arming to oppose an invasion, which YOURS AND
YOUR ACCOMPLICE'S CRIMES HAVE PROVOKED? Is it that the unalienable rights of
freeborn men to make the^^ laws by delegates of their choice, should be
bartered and sold by usurpers and traitors, that I should presuade them to arm?
Is it that our markets, our manufactures, and commerce, should be sold to that
nation which appoints our Government, and dis^^^butes our patronage, that I
should persuade them to arm? Is it to support the GUNPOWDER BILL which deprives
them of arms, or the CONVENTION BILL, which aims at perpetuating the usurpation
of rights, by pr^scribing the only obvious and orderly means to regain them,
that I should persuade them to arm? Is it to support the suspension of the
HABRUS CORPUS BILL, which has destroyed the bulwark of liberty by withholding
the TRIAL BY JURY, that I should persuade them to arm? Is it to rivet the bolts
or to guard the dungeons of their fellow-citizeus, who, torn from their homes
and their families by Administration, vainly demand that TRIAL BY JURY, which
by proving their innocence must establish its gui^t, that I should persuade
them to arm? Is it that a vile pander of national honor and legislative duty
should be invested with uncontrouled power over the opinions and persons of an
injured, a gallant and generous people, that I should persuade them to arm? or
to crown a^l, is it under the auspic^s of the indemnified CARHAMPTON, I should
persuade them to arm? Go, Impotents, to the Catho^ics, whose elevated hopes of
all glorious freedom, you have been appointed to tauntingly blast and if they
should charge you with the crimes of your miss^^^, although you cannot plead
the having raised them to equal rights with their fellow-citizens, you can at
least boast that you have levelled those rights to the standard of Catholic
thraldom. Hence, then, contemptible Administration, from those you have
insulted and levelled, to those you have raised; go to the monopolists of the
representation of Ireland, and ask them to arm; go to those whom the
continuance of the system of corruption enables to live in affluence at the
expense of that poverty and misery their treason has caused, and ask them to
arm; go to those hussars of fees and exactions in the revenue, whose regular
pay bears no proportion to their pillage and plunder, and command them to arm;
go to attorneys and lawyers, who live by villainy, chicane and fraud, under a
system of complexity, finesse and fiction, at the expense and ruin of those who
are forced to employ them, and tell them they ought to arm; go to those swarms
of petty tyrants, perjured grand jury jobbers, army contractors ^tythe proctors
and land sharks, and tell them how necessary it is for them to be armed; go to
the ESTABLISHED clergy, who pocket those monstrous funds for instructing
nine-tenths of the nation, which should provide decent establishments for three
such countries as Ireland, and tell them to preach to the nine-tenths who are
excluded from this Glorious half of the constitution, to arm in its defense, or
ask them to blow the expiring embers of re^igious dessention, and I will leave
it to the inhabitants of Armagh, at lenghth recovering from delusion, to judge
of their zeal in this christian-like duty. These factions, and Administration,
are your natural a^ies; these are your strength; on these you may reckon, and
although as devoted to systems which should be abolished, as apostates to
national rights and national honor, they count but too high; thank Heaven they
are as insignificant in numbers as in strength to those that are found.
Although the old Volunteers have been discouraged, because they boldly threw
off the open avowed dominion of Britans and that these Yeomen corpa have been
raised to support the concealed deadly influence she has gained by corruption
and treason; although the old Volunteers have been rejected because they
extended the rights and liberties of their country, and that these corpse have
been set up to support la^^s sub^ersive (...) both; yet when the systematic
scheme of the British minister, and of those ^er^^in that have ^^stied about
the throne (...) fr^ms some new modelled des^^^^^^ (...) the ru^^^ of freedom,
by the erecting of barracks, those bills that have been passed year after year,
the late contempt of that only privilege of the commons which was left them,
the granting of money, and the correspondent conduct of their creatures in this
country shall have been developed to that degree which would make resistance an
indespensable duty, from my soul I believe that they would find themselves
widely mistaken in the support they will meet from many of these corpse they
have raised. Are the people of Ireland so weak as to convert a threatened
invasion from France into an expiation of the injustice, the crimes and
oppression by which the temptation to make it was caused? or shall an invasion
from France act like magic in changing the present ardent affection of the
people of Ireland for liberty, into an unbounded display of loyalty to a system
of corruption and treason, by which the most happily gifted nation on earth has
been made to contain more misery than any country in the creation? Away with
delusion! Are the people of Ireland sure that the factions and administration
who so earnestly press them to arise to repel the invasion of France, are not
Invaders themselves? Are we sure that their master maker, the Minister of
Britain, has not invested them with enormous funds of corruption to which our
wretchedness has been made to contribute. Are we sure that these funds have not
been distributed amongst traitors, in the heart of our Island, for betraying
the industry, manufactures and commerce of the people of Ireland, to aggrandize
those of Great Britain? Nay, are we not certain that every market in Great
Britain is shut against every species of Irish industry, with the solitary
exception of linen, whilst every manufacture of England has free access to
every market in Ireland, without any exception whatever? With these facts in
our view, what Irishman can doubt that to support the worst of invasions, the
invasion of Rights and of Commerce, 15,000 English and Scotch have not been
sent to invade us already? or can we be certain that the shambles of Germany
have not been resorted to, to invade us with more? Compare the few troops they
left us in the war against AMERICAN FREEDOM, when they had all Europe their
foe, with the numbers they have sent us this war against the freedom of France,
when they had all Europe their ally; compare the weakness of Ireland, divided
by religious dissension, when troops were so few, with that strength which
UNION has given, when troops are so many; we cannot but see with whom they seek
to contend. Could French invaders do worse than establish a system of pillage
and treason within, that they may pillage and plunder without? -- Could they do
worse than reject laws a unanimous people had sought, or than pass those they
detested; Could they do worse than commit the personal liberty of the people of
Ireland to two men without connection or interest in the country, without
responsibility or control? Could they do worse than withhold trials from Irish
citizens cast into dungeons, to the destruction of their health, and the ruin
of their property? Could they do worse than establish military Magistrates
throughout the nation, and indemnify those whose unfeeling souls had torn
hundreds of Irish citizens from every endearing connection in life, after
depriving their habitations of every privilege due to the residence of
freeborn men, consigned them to the flames, turning their wives and children
to beggary and famine, exiled their husbands to fight against that freedom
which they had robbed them on an element they disliked, and in a cause they
abhorred? or could any thing be more alarming to a people who valued liberty,
than the appointment of a man, that could require such an indemnification, to
be commander in chief of the army? or to crown all, could any invaders do
worse, that with powers to legislate for a limited time, under the form of
constitutional order, destroy the constitution itself?

In vain shall the accomplices of the author of carnage inveigh against French
fraternity, as long as Ireland exhibits so melancholy a picture of the
fraternity they have adopted themselves. I will not compare the systems of
fraternity in East or West Indies, adopted by England and France, but I will
compare the alliance which England had formed with France, she calls her
natural enemy, with that she dictates to Ireland, she calls her brother and
friend. In her a ^ance with France, (...) gave what she got, and reciprocity
was the equitable basis on which it wa^ made; whilst in her alliance with
Ireland, she has taken all she could have asked or demanded, and she has given
us Exclusion in grateful return. On this scale of British fraternity, set her
^^^clings boast of British connection -- On this scale of British fraternity,
may my country no more be cursed with the friendship of Britain! Too ^ong a
tyrant, she forgets her dominion has ceased -- Too long her slaves, we must
show her we are resolved to be (...)! Had she ceased to maintain power by the
accur^ed means of fomenting religious dissension; had she ceased to support
factions, usurpers and traitors: had she abandoned the false il^iberal notion,
that she gained more by our depression than by our exaltation; had she treated
us like brothers and friends, I may, with confidence, affirm, a more
affectionate generous ally never existed, that she would have found Ireland to
her. But if the existing fraternity, my fellow citizens, be the bonds by which
you wish a connection with Britain, I am not a delegate sit for your choice;
for though I stood alone in the Commons of Ireland, I would move the repeal of
every law which binds us to England, on those or on any such terms. I will
neither be conquered by England or France; nor are we any more bound to a
disadvantageous alliance to one than we are to the other; and before England,
the factions of Ireland and the Administration. I speak it, If it is more the
true interest of Ireland to form an alliance with France than with England, she
is free to adopt it. The jargon of standing or falling with Britain is false;
in the days that are past, we have always been DOWN -- it is time we should
seek to be UP! Rich in a population of 4,000,000 of a healthy intelligent
people -- rich in her fertile soil -- rich in her harbors and navigable rivers
-- rich in her favorable position between the old and new worlds -- rich in
her insular situation, without usurping dominion over any people upon earth;
what interest what cause, what pretext can the Administration of Ireland assign
for the blood and the wealth they have lavished, in a war commenced in
despotism, conducted in ignorance, and ending in ruin? With 800,000 gallant
citizens, able to arm, the English and Scotch have more to fight for in ^reland
than the Irish themselves, that we cannot be trusted with self-defence? when in
the unanointed Republics of Swiss, they can defy the invasion of Germany, of
France, and Sardinia, those, warlike and powerful nations by which they are
bounded by that law which obliges every Citizen from 13 to 60 years old, to be
provided (...), why cannot Ireland defy the whole world by a (...) obligation?
Why (...) the Gunpowder Act, which disarms our people, been passed? The answer
is (...) for

(...)
