map of Pennsylvania, etc. A Map of PENNSYLVANIA DELAWARE NEW JERSEY and
MARYLAND, with the Parts adjacent.


THE History of Pennsylvania, IN NORTH AMERICA, FROM THE Original Institution
and Settlement of that Province, under the first Proprietor and Governor
WILLIAM PENN, in 1681, till after the Year 1742; WITH AN INTRODUCTION,
RESPECTING, The Life of W. PENN, prior to the grant of the Province, and the
religious Society of the People called Quakers; -- with the first rise of the
neighboring Colonies, more particularly of West-New-Jersey, and the Settlement
of the Dutch and Swedes on Delaware. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A brief Description of
the said Province, AND OF THE General State, in which it flourished,
principally between the Years 1760 and 1770. The whole including a Variety of
Things, Useful and interesting to be known, respecting that Country in early
Time, etc. With an APPENDIX.

Written principally between the Years 1776 and 1780, BY ROBERT PROUD.

"PULCHRUM EST BENEFACERE REIPUBLICAE, ETIAM BENEDICERE HAUD ABSURDUM EST, VEL
PACE VEL BELLO CLARUM FIERI LICET."

Sal. Catalin. "SED CUM PLERIQUE ARBITRENTUR RES BELLICAS MAJORES ESSE QUAM
URBANAS, MINUENDA EST HAEC OPINIO."

Cic. Off. VOLUME II.

Philadelphia: PRINTED AND SOLD BY ZACHARIAH POULSON, JUNIOR, No. 106,
Chesnut-street, Nearly opposite to the Bank of North America. 1798.

THE HISTORY OF PENNSYLVANIA.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Governor Gookin arrives. -- The Proprietor's letter by him to his friends. --
Assembly's address to the Governor. -- Names of the members of Assembly. --
They continue their for (...) animosity. -- The Governor's answer; to which
(...) Assembly reply. -- The Council's address to the Governor. -- The Assembly
displeased with the Council, and present a remonstrance of grievances to ^^e
Governor. -- Evil tendency of these disputes; and dangerous effects of party
spirit. -- The Governor's speech to the Assembly, containing a military
^^quisition in 1709.

GOVERNOR GOOKIN, arrived at Philadelphia, 1709.
in the first month, March, O. S. The Proprietary, in a letter to his friends,
The Proprietor's character of Governor Gookin.
in the province, recommended him, as a person of years, experience and
moderation, as well as of good character, example and abilities; and descended
of a good family in Ireland; and that, having taken leave of a military life,
and his nat^^^ country, he came with intention, if he found the place agreeable
to his expectation, to settle, and spend the remainder of his life and fortune
in the province. This letter, which he sent by Governor Gookin, is as follows,
viz.

London, 28th. 7th. month, 1708. Dear Friends and Brethren,
MY ancient love, if you can believe it, reaches to you, as in times past, and
years, that are gone, even, in the divine root and principle of love and life,
that made us near to one another, above all worldly considerations; where our
life, I hope, is hid with Christ, in God, our Father; so that, when he appears,
we shall also appear with him, in glory; and in the meantime, through us, to
those that love and wait for his appearance, as the desire of nations; that we
may glorify God, his and our everlasting Father, in our bodies, souls and
spirits, in temporal and eternal affairs; being indeed none of our own;
forasmuch as we are our own, we are none of the Lord's; a great mystery, but a
great truth, and of absolute necessity to witness, to be of the number of the
chosen nation, the peculiar people, and royal priesthood of Christ, and his
glorious kingdom.

Oh! my dear friends, let all below this keep on the left hand; and wait to
feel those blessed things, to inherit right hand; and in faith and courage, cry
aloud to the Lord, for his renewing and refreshing power, that may revive and
reform his work upon your hearts and minds; and our humility, meekness,
patience, self-denial and charity, with a blameless walking, may plainly
appear, and manifest the work of God upon our hearts, to those that are
without; which is not only the way to bring up the loiterers, and gather in the
careless ones, to their duty, but fetch home and bring in, the strangers, and
the very enemies of the blessed truth, to confess and acknowledge that God is
in you, and for you, of a truth.

Now, my dear friends, as to outward things, I have sent a new Governor, of
years and experience; of a quiet, easy temper; that, I hope, will give offense
to none; nor too easily put up any, if offered him, without hope of amendment.
The Queen very graciously approved of him, at first offer, and gave him her
hand to kiss; and, at last, being introduced by the Earl of Godolphin, Lord
High Treasurer of Great Britain, at Windsor, she added, "Sir, I wish you a good
journey, and shall be ready to serve you." He is sober, understands to command
and obey, moderate in his temper, and of what they call a good family: his
grandfather, Sir Vincent Gookin, having been an early great planter in Ireland,
in King James the first, and the first Charles's days; and he intends, if not
ill treated, to lay his bones, as well as substance among you; having taken
leave of the war, and both England and Ireland to live amongst you; and as he
is not voluptuous, so, I hope, he will be an example of thriftiness. In short,
he has instructions, as much to the virtue, justice and peace of the country,
as I can express myself, or you desire, for your comfortable living; pray,
therefore, receive him kindly, and express it, by a modest subsistence; or,
rather, give it me, to give him, or, how you please.

The Lord Lovelace, Governor of New York, and a promising one indeed, presses,
and the Admiral's orders, for sailing, are gone down; the wind fair, and
Governor Gookin leaves me tomorrow.

I earnestly beseech you to assist James Logan, and who else the Trustees, for
the payment of the money here advanced, shall nominate, not only to get in, but
turn into money, the best you are able, that I may come honorable to you, and
speedily; which I hope to do, as soon as you, and these friends here, think
fit. Let me have this pledge of your love, and it shall be a lasting one, to
advise and assist you for the expediting the matter; for be assured, I long to
be with you; and, if the Lord bring me and mine well there, I hope not to
return on almost any terms, at least not without your advice and satisfaction;
for care of you, and settling plantations for my poor minors; for planters, God
willing, they shall be, in their father's country, rather than great merchants,
in their native land; and to visit friends throughout the continent, at least,
their chiefest business.

In the first love I leave you and yours, and all the Lord's people amongst
you; my family and affairs, to the merciful providence and orderings of our
great and gracious God, that welcomed us, in poor America, with his excellent
love and presence, and will, I hope, once more, and remain your loving and
faithful friend,

WILLIAM PENN.
Herewith comes your school charter.




Note. This was the charter of the Friends' public grammar school, in
Philadelphia, before mentioned; though it was neither the first nor last of
that institution.




The Assembly was sitting at the time of his arrival, and immediately presented
him with the following congratulatory address, viz.

The Address of the Representatives of the freemen of the province of
Pennsylvania, The Assembly's address to Governor Gookin.
in assembly met, the 9th. day of the month called March, 1708-9, presented to
Charles Gookin Esquire by the Queen's royal approbation, Lieutenant Governor of the
said province, etc.
May it please the Governor,
HAVING this opportunity, we can do no less than congratulate thy seasonable
accession to this government, and render our most grateful acknowledgments to
the Queen, for her gracious acceptance of the Proprietary's nomination of thee,
to supply his absence, and to him, for constituting a person of so fair a
character, furnished, as we hope, with a full resolution, as well as power, to
redress the grievances, and remove the oppressions, that this poor province
has, for some time, labored under, occasioned by the irregular administration
of the late Deputy Governor; who was too much influenced by evil counsel; to
which the miseries and confusion of the state, and divisions in the government,
are principally owing.

We are ready to represent such of those public grievances, as are laid before
us, or occur to our knowledge, in particular articles, and bring them to a
proper examen; but, perceiving by thy message to the house yesterday, that thou
art not ready, at this time, to proceed with us to business, we shall take
leave only to mention some of those things, of which the public weal of this
country loudly calls for a most earnest application and speedy redress.

In the first place, we are to lay before thee, that of the false alarm in May,
1706; wherein the late Governor was chief actor; and for which he is highly
chargeable; having shot at the Queen's subjects, putting many of the
inhabitants of this town in danger of their lives, and forced great quantities
of powder and lead from the owners, and gave it to such as wasted it, when he
knew there was no occasion to use it; whereby he deprived the place of what
ammunition might be ready for those, that had freedom to make use of it, for
their defense, in case of an attack.

The next is that notorious act of hostility, he committed by firing shot at
the Queen's subjects passing by Newcastle, in the river, upon their lawful
trade, to and from this port.

We mention these, as they are, in our opinion, offenses of a deep dye, and
committed against the Queen's crown and dignity, as well as against the peace,
and ought to be charged upon him, before he departs this province; but the
method of the prosecution against him we submit to thy prudent care and
discretion, and we shall be ready to do what is proper on our parts.

That the Treasurer Viz. S. Carpenter.
of the last tax has refused to comply with the directions of the Assembly, in
paying the public debts, according to the respective orders drawn upon him, and
signed by the Speaker; and that the Collectors of the said tax, who neglected
their duty, in gathering the same, have not been obliged thereunto, according
as the act of Assembly, in that case, directs, and more particularly the
Collector of the city and county of Philadelphia.

That the courts of judicature of this province have been, and are, erected by
ordinances of the Governor and Council, against the advice, and without the
assent of the Assembly; which we complain of, as a great oppression and
aggrievance to the people, we represent, and desire the same may be speedily
redressed, and the bill prepared for the establishing courts, with other useful
bills, ready to be presented to the Governor, may be considered.

We are given to understand that thou brought some commands from the Queen to
this government, as well as instructions from the Proprietary, relating to the
public, which, with a copy of thy commission, and the royal approbation, we
desire may be communicated to this house, at our next meeting, which we intend
on the twentieth day of the next month, and shall adjourn accordingly, unless
it be thy pleasure to call us sooner; which we shall be ready to comply with,
not only in expectation of a speedy redress of our grievances, but to settle by
law, how money shall be paid upon contracts made, before the new currency of
money takes effect.

Signed by order of the House, DAVID LLOYD, Speaker. The names of the Members
of this Assembly, elected on the first day of October, 1708, were, For
Philadelphia county.
David Lloyd, Speaker, Joseph (...), John Ro^e^^s, France Rawle, Joshua
Carpenter, Griffith Jones, Francis Cook, John Cook.
Bucks county.
William Paxon, William Biles, Joshua Hoopes, Henry Paxon, Samuel Dark, Samuel
Beak^, Ezra Cr^asda^^, Thomas Milborn.
Chester county.
Daniel Williamson, Samuel Levis, Henry Lewis, Richard Hayes, John Hood, Thomas
Pearson, William Bartram, Daniel Hoopes.
City of Philadelphia.
Abraham ^^ckley, William Lee.




Thus, by the Assembly's very first address to Governor Gookin, were the former
animosities continued; for the principal and ruling members of the house were
still the same, who had so long been accustomed to complain of grievances, if
not to exaggerate, or imagine some things of that kind; insomuch, that, though
they had sufficient reason to complain of part of Evans's conduct, in proper
time and place, The Assembly show more of temper than prudence, etc.
yet their manner of mentioning some things under the name of oppression and
grievance, and in demanding, or urging, for others, such a mode of
satisfaction, as the nature of their case rendered impossible to obtain in the
province, particularly those respecting Evans and his administration; which,
perhaps, would have been more prudently dropped, with the removal of their
cause, seemed to show more their temper of mind, than prudence: but Evans's ill
or imprudent conduct had made such deep impression on their minds, and disposed
them so much to a discontented and angry disposition, that in some of their
representations* they appear not only to have exaggerated what might truly be
called grievances, but also complained of some things as such, which, in
reality, and according to the laws and constitution, could not properly come
under that name.

The Governor's reply to the Assembly's address is contained in his first
speech to the house, on the 13th of the next month, April, as follows, viz.

Gentlemen,
It would have proved a much greater satisfaction to me, The Governor's answer
to the Assembly's address.
if at this first time of my speaking to you, I had nothing to take notice of,
but what I myself might have to lay before you; but your address, presented to
me in March last, when you sent me notice that you were sitting, will, before
we proceed to any other business, require some answer; in which I will be plain
and short, as the matter will bear.

I thank you, gentlemen, for your congratulations, and do assure you, that I
come with full resolutions, on my part, to employ the power, with which the
Proprietary has thought fit to honor me, and her Majesty has graciously
pleased to approve of, to render the people of this government as happy and
easy as is possible for me, in all things, that shall concern their true
interest, and be to their real advantage. I have enquired what might be meant
by those aggrievances, oppressions and confusions, which you complain of, and
whatsoever I shall meet with, that deserves those names, shall have my ready
concurrence to remove them, as far as they shall appear; but must say, that, I
believe, one effectual method to free all people from the apprehensions of
grievances, will be, to lay all former animosities and jealousies aside, and,
for the future, apply themselves to such business as they are concerned in, for
the public, with a freedom and openness of temper, and an unbiassed inclination
to promote the common good, without any other particular view: if we should be
so fortunate as to take example from her Majesty's glorious administration of
her dominions at home, and that of her parliament, we should not fail of being
extremely happy.

As to those two past actions of my immediate predecessor, of which you
complain, I can only inform you, that they were both well known in Britain,
before I left it; and that I had no directions to make any enquiry into them;
and that, upon the best advice I can receive here, I find they will not
properly fall under my cognizance, in the station I am placed in, and therefore
cannot think it fit to concern myself with them.

But I am obliged to observe to you that the Council of the province, now with
me, think themselves very unjustly treated by the mention you have made of
them, if they (as it is generally understood) be intended by the evil counsel,
of which you have taken notice; and therefore, will take the liberty to
vindicate themselves, as you will see, by their application to me; to which I
refer you.

The charge against the Treasurer,* I find, is occasioned by his and the
Council's understanding the act of Assembly, by which the money, that comes
into his hands, has been granted, somewhat differently from what the present
and late Houses of Representatives have done: he pleads the law, as his best
direction; and you cannot but agree, that it is fit that this alone (I mean the
law) ought to determine the matter. As far as I have hitherto been able, I have
pressed the collection of the taxes, and shall continue the best of my care,
until they be finished.

The method of establishing courts, by the Governor and Council, was also well
understood in Great Britain, and was approved of there, as being grounded on
unquestionable powers, granted the Proprietary. The bill formerly proposed by
the Assembly, for that purpose, which is now before the board, has not been
allowed of; but seeing the present establishment, which was drawn, as I am
informed, according to the plan laid down in that bill, carries some
inconveniences with it, and requires an alteration, I shall be ready to agree
to any other reasonable bill, that you shall hereafter propose, for settling
courts of judicature, in such a regular method, as may be a lasting rule for
holding them.

I have no instructions, gentlemen, from her Majesty, that will concern you;
those from the Proprietary being to myself, as occasion offers, and where it
may be proper, I shall acquaint you with the particulars. I have ordered copies
of my commission, and her Majesty's approbation, to be prepared and delivered
to you.

I should now propose to your serious consideration some other matters of the
highest importance, without which government cannot long subsist; as a due
provision for the support of it, and for the security of the people; but what I
shall principally recommend to you, at this time, is the latter part of the
last paragraph of your address, viz. To prepare a bill for settling by law, how
money shall be paid, upon contracts made, and to be made, before the new
currency of money takes effect: This, as I find, by the great uneasiness of the
people, is a matter that will require a very speedy provision, and, therefore,
hope you will find such just and equal methods for it, as neither the debtors,
on the one hand, nor creditors, on the other, may suffer by the alteration; to
which I desire you may forthwith proceed, with as little loss of time as is
possible; after which we may have opportunity to enter into consideration of
such other matters, as may naturally fall before you.


The Assembly reply to the Governor, etc.
The Governor's speech produced an answer from the Assembly, on the 14th; in
which, besides insisting on what they had before advanced, they distinguished
what they meant, in their address, when they said, "The late Governor was too
much influenced by evil counsel," by expressly throwing the whole blame on
James Logan, and some other persons, who were not of the Governor's council.
They moreover promised to make due provision for the support of government; and
agreed to consider and prepare the bill, which the Governor recommended, as a
very necessary part of their business; and then they hoped and expected a
redress of their grievances.

The following is the Council's address to the Governor, in reference to the
evil counsel, mentioned in the address of the Assembly, and replied to in the
Governor's speech, but, in order of time, it precedes the Assembly's answer,
viz.

The Council's address to the Governor.
To the honorable Charles Gookin, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the province of
Pennsylvania, and counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex, on Delaware.
May it please the Governor,
WE, the members of Council for the said province, who attended the board,
during the administration of the late Lieutenant Governor, upon viewing the
address presented by the Assembly on the 9th day of March last, think ourselves
obliged to observe, that, in the first paragraph of it, complaining of
aggrievances and oppressions, which, they say, this province has, for some
time, labored under, occasioned by the irregular administration of the late
Deputy Governor, they have thought fit to add these words, who was too much
influenced by evil counsel; to whom the miseries and confusions of the state,
and divisions in the government, are principally owing.

It was long, may it please the Governor, before we could induce ourselves to
believe, that men, so well acquainted with the characters of most of us, in our
several stations, in the country, could possibly intend us by the charge,
until, by the observations of others, we were forced to take a nearer notice of
the expressions; upon which we are sorry to find, that the word counsel, as
there used, together with the general construction of the sentence, seems not
to admit of any other interpretation, but that to us principally is owing
whatever the Assembly has thought fit to complain of, or, can reduce, under the
general terms they have used: if they will disavow any such intention, we shall
crave no other satisfaction; but, if not, we must then desire, that they, and
all men concerned in these affairs, may know,

That, notwithstanding the Proprietary and late Lieutenant Governor, according
to the established rules in all governments whatsoever, from the most polite,
to the most barbarous, nations in the world, finding themselves under a
necessity of having a Council about them, to advise with, in affairs of
government, have thought fit to choose us for that service, in which, according
to our several solemn engagements, we have acquitted ourselves, to the best of
our judgments and abilities, yet not one of us receives, or ever expects, any
other advantage by it, than the satisfaction of having discharged our duties to
the country we live in, and to advance the prosperity and happiness of it, as
much as may lie in our power. We have no salaries, nor allowance, paid us by
the country for this, nor offices of profit, to encourage us; what we do is at
our own expense of time, trouble and charge, and upon our own estates is all
our dependence, which, giving us as good an interest in the country, as others
can pretend to, and being out of the reach of any possible views different from
the good of the whole, no man, without a manifest violence to his reason, can
imagine but that we are as much concerned, and, therefore, would be as careful
to prevent and divert any miseries, confusions, or divisions, that may threaten
the province, as any other set of men whatsoever; so that this charge, from
the Assembly, if levelled against us, is not only unjust, but will be judged,
we believe, exceedingly ungrateful, by all that impartially consider us, and
our circumstances, among our neighbors.

After this general accusation, involving us in all things, that have been
irregularly committed, or, that any person can think so to have been, they
enumerate four particulars, which they call aggrievances. To the two first we
have nothing to say; and we hope no man can believe, that any one of us was so
much as privy to them, much less that we advised them; we here solemnly
declare, each for himself, that we did not. The other two we acknowledge
ourselves to be concerned in, and shall always justify: that is, first, That we
advised the Treasurer to take his directions from the law alone, and without
regard to the partial order of the assembly to the contrary, to make his
payments in equal portions; which, we hope, cannot be accounted a grievance:
and in the next, To prevent the greatest of all possible grievances, the want
of public justice, of which, by the measures taken by the Assembly of that
time, the country was long deprived; we advised the Governor to make use of the
powers, with which he was unquestionably vested, to open the courts again, and
to restore the courts of justice to the oppressed country; which had long
languished through the want of it, until they could be otherwise established.
Men unacquainted with affairs of this kind, and who must take their information
from others, may be imposed on by persons of design, and believe that to be
irregular, which, in itself, is a most wholesome and necessary act; but we can,
with assurance, affirm, that we had full satisfaction, from men of the best
abilities, that what we advised and concurred in this matter, was regular, just
and legal.

Upon the whole, may it please the Governor, though on the one hand, we shall
be exceedingly unwilling to have any misunderstanding with the representatives
of the people, well knowing it to be an unhappiness, that all reasonable
measures should be taken to prevent; yet, on the other, we shall not, by any
contrivances, be diverted from discharging the trust reposed in us, during our
continuance, in this station, with honor and justice, to the best of our
abilities; but, from time to time, shall offer to the Governor such advice as
we shall judge most conducive to the general good of the province; in the
welfare of which we are so nearly concerned, in our several private interests;
and in the meantime, hope we may justly expect to be secured from calumny and
misrepresentation.

EDWARD SHIPPEN, SAMUEL CARPENTER, JOSEPH GROWDON, JASPER YEATES, SAMUEL FINNY,
WILLIAM TRENT, CALEB PUSEY, RICHARD HILL.
With an exception to what is said of offices of profit, though I enjoy none,
as a member of Council, I sign this.

JAMES LOGAN.
Philadelphia, April 13, 1709.

The Governor having laid this representation of the Council before the
Assembly, The Assembly displeased with the Council, etc.
it produced an address to him, by way of answer, from the House. In this they
blamed the Council, for seeming to apply to themselves, in general, what was
meant by the words, evil counsel; of which, they said, they had given their
explanation before, in their answer to the Governor's speech. The Council's
address is dated prior to the Assembly's answer to the Governor's speech, etc.
They were displeased at the Council's declaring, they had nothing to say,
respecting the two particulars of Evans's conduct, mentioned in the Assembly's
address, viz. That of the false alarm, in 1706, and the affair at Newcastle. As
to the other two points, in regard to the Council's advising the Treasurer and
the Governor, as they acknowledged themselves to have done; the Assembly
appeared incensed at the Council's presuming to do the former, as it was not
properly their office; and they censured them for opposing the late Assembly,
in their advice to the Governor, on the bill of courts, and their assenting, at
the same time, to the Governor's ordinance, for carrying into execution the
same thing, and so nearly in the same manner, that the said bill was intended
to do; in short, they were angry that the Council should present (in their
words, patronize) such an address, so opposite to the views and drift of the
House, and declared, they considered it, as an indignity offered to them, as
well as to the late Assembly.

After this was laid before the Governor, the Assembly presented a
remonstrance, complaining of diverse particulars, in the province, The Assembly
present a remonstrance of grievances, etc.
which they styled grievances, and requesting his concurrence to remove and
redress the same: some of which seem to have been either trifling, mistaken, or
aggravated, and to show more the temper of the House, than real grievances; the
rest have already been mostly mentioned.

The resentment of David Lloyd, the Speaker, Enmity between Lloyd and Logan too
much the cause of these proceedings, etc.
against James Logan, and the too ready devotion of the House to his humor,
are represented to have had too much place, in some of these transactions. It
is scarcely to be doubted that there was real occasion, in some cases, to
complain of grievances, which demanded proper attention and relief; but the
word grievance, was become common, and so often used, that its proper
application seems not always to have been sufficiently attended to; for it is
certain, that by too much indulging a disposition and habit of complaint, it
has sometimes remarkably affected the imaginations of men, and magnified, in
appearance, what was but small, in reality; and there have been instances,
wherein it has so far prevailed as to induce the mind entirely to mistake one
thing for another, and to create a firm belief of the absolute existence of
what, in truth, had no being.

There are but few things, for which an apology may not be made, and plausible
reasons given; Apology for the Assembly's conduct.
and it may reasonably be alleged that the views and intentions of some of
these Assemblies, in thus carrying their disagreement with the Executive, in
some cases, to such extreme, were good; and consequently mistake, or excess, in
their conduct, might be the more excusable; for it is not to be denied that
some good effects to the province, in reality, resulted from these proceedings.
Be that as it may, it ought likewise to be remembered, that no wrong action can
justify the intention; Though not to be justified in everything, etc.
nor can any profitable consequence alter the nature of an unwarrantable
design; and however laudable, or just, the general views of some of these
Assemblies may be alleged to have been, who carried affairs to such extremity,
yet it sufficiently appears, that under the allegation of grievances, some of
them too much gratified their animosity; and that, in part of these
controversies, at least, they cannot, in every thing, be fully justified,
notwithstanding certain good consequences may from them have arisen to the
province; which is no certain proof that they might not have been the cause, or
means, of preventing greater advantages from arising to it, besides too much
endangering those, which they already enjoyed.

They did not sufficiently consider the tendency of such disputes, etc.
But whatever were their real motives, they seem not to have duly considered the
end, to which the nature of such continued discontents might finally tend, and
the consequence of rendering the government more uneasy and disagreeable to the
Proprietary, Vid. antea.
than was really and absolutely necessary: for the disposal of it to the crown,
to which, as before hinted, he had such strong and various inducements, at a
time, when measures were in agitation for reducing all the Proprietary
governments to regal ones, would soon have freed him from all his difficulties,
respecting the government of the province, and would have effectually enabled
him to discharge all his debts and encumbrances, principally occasioned on its
account; from which, so far as appears, he had too much reason to complain, as
he did, of his small, inadequate and discouraging returns; besides the nature
of these disagreements, and continued endeavors to diminish his power and
interest in it, as appeared in the proposed bill of courts, and the attempts of
the Assembly to turn his quit-rents to the support of his Deputy, The Assembly,
in their address to Governor Evans, in 6 mo. 1708, says,

"We know, that when the province was granted to the Proprietary, he had power,
at his pleasure to convey any part, or parts thereof; and to erect manors, and
to reserve such rents, customs and services, as he should think fit; in
pursuance whereof, he sold lands to a great value, and reserved rents,
sufficient, in a moderate way, to maintain him, or his Lieutenant, answerable
to their station," etc.

And afterward, in their reply to the Governor's answer to the above, etc.
(part of which see in the notes before, etc.) they again say,

"Where is the extravagance of what we mentioned on this head? Is it, because
we said, That the rents reserved are sufficient, in a moderate way, to maintain
the Proprietary or his Lieutenant, answerable to their station? We see no cause
to decline saying so still: and what, if we add, That we desire the Proprietary
would be content to live upon his rents; and that fines, forfeitures, escheats,
and other profits and perquisites of government should be employed for the
common good, and public service of the government, it would not be without
precedent?" etc.

"We are not willing to suppose, when the Proprietary was favored with the
royal charter, and by virtue thereof assumed the government of this province,
and entitled himself to royal mines, escheats, fines, forfeitures, and other
profits (which, in their nature, are the rights of the crown, and, as such,
ought to be employed for the common good) that he intended to deck himself, or
his Deputy, with these Jewels, and not have directed them, and other supplies,
given for the support of government, to be employed for the good of the public,
as revenues of that nature ought to be, but we rather conclude, the contrary."

[Votes of Assembly, vol. ii.]
were further and great inducements for him to endeavor to diminish his
difficulty and trouble on its account; Vid. postea.
more especially when it was in his power, in such an easy and effectual
manner, to accomplish it; to which it also appears, by his private letters, yet
extant in his own hand writing, he was sometimes so much disposed, that had he
not studied what he was persuaded was the particular interest and real good of
the province, before his own precarious gain, and present quiet, he would,
before this time, have put the same in execution: for it was most probable, and
he appears to have been fully of opinion, that the inhabitants of the province
could not have been advantaged, or bettered, by such a change of government, in
those times, but the contrary; provided they rightly understood their present
privileges, and knew how to make a proper use of them; for otherwise liberty
and privilege become pernicious. That is, they had more liberties and
privileges, or means of rendering themselves happy, under the Proprietary, by a
prudent and proper use of them, than could reasonably be expected, immediately
under the crown; but, on the contrary, too great a mis-use of these, either by
contention, or otherwise, might possibly render the regal government, or
greater restraint, more beneficial, or better and happier, for a people to
disposed; for the effects of privilege and liberty, in any case or situation,
can only be happy or beneficial from a proper use of them.


The wisest councils sometimes err, etc.
But absolute, or unlimited, perfection is not to be expected in human nature;
and if the wisest councils of men sometimes err, how much more may a young
Assembly of honest, or well meaning, colonists be reasonably supposed liable to
mistake their own real interest, under the most plausible views of any, in thus
contending for what they thought the rights and privileges of the people? who,
in a legislative capacity, had not yet arrived at that maturity of judgment,
and prudence of action, which length of time and experience alone can give?

After having presented their remonstrance, the House adjourned; and at their
next meeting, on the first day of the fourth month, the Governor made them the
following speech, viz.

Gentlemen,
The Governor's speech to the Assembly.
The Queen, for the good of her subjects of the provinces, has fitted out an
expedition, with great expense, for the retaking of Newfoundland, and for the
conquest of Canada, and has entrusted Colonel Vetch with her Majesty's letters
to the respective Governors, and instructions to agree on proper measures, for
putting her Majesty's designs in execution. Boston, Rhode Island and
Connecticut have outdone her Majesty's expectations; and I hope we shall not be
wanting in our duty.

The quota for this province is one hundred and fifty men, besides officers, to
be victualled and paid, as those of the other governments; the charge, I
suppose, will amount to about four thousand pounds.

Perhaps it may seem difficult to raise that number of men, in a country where
most of the inhabitants are obliged, by their principles, not to make use of
arms; but, if you will raise, for the support of government, the sum demanded,
I do not doubt getting the number of men, whose principles allow the use of
them, and Commissioners may be appointed for disposal of the country's money;
that the people may be satisfied, that the money is applied to no other use,
than this expedition.

I must recommend to you the present circumstances of the three lower counties;
you are not now falsely alarmed; Newcastle seems the only place, proper to make
any defense; I find them ready and willing to do any thing, in their power, for
the good of the country, and look on themselves as a frontier to you, though a
weak one; and if they perish, in all probability, your destruction will not be
far off; therefore, in my opinion, it is your interest, that they be furnished
with all things necessary to oppose the enemy.

I have only to add, that, as all private affairs ought to be postponed to her
Majesty's immediate service, so it will not consist with my duty to hearken to
any proposals (...) ^ter into any business with you, till he^ (...) ^y's
commands be complied with; and, th^^^^ore, desire you will give this affair all
possible dispatch.

CHAPTER XIX.
Observations on the nature of the Governor's requisition; and the design of
settling Pennsylvania by the Quakers; who are principled against war. -- The
Assembly's conduct, on the occasion; who vote a present to the Queen. -- The
Governor not satisfied with their offer; and they adjourn. -- Proceedings of
the next meeting of Assembly. -- They agree to augment the sum, voted before to
the Queen; and request the Governor's concurrence to diverse bi^ls. -- Further
dispute between the Governor and Assembly; with reasons of the former for not
agreeing with the latter; upon which they remonstrate to the Governor, and are
much displeased with the Secretary, James Logan. -- Proceedings between the
Governor, and the next Assembly, consisting principally of the same Members. --
Their proceedings against James Logan. -- His petition to them. -- They are
disappointed in their design against him by the Governor. -- The Secretary goes
to England, etc.

1709.
IT cannot be supposed, but that the nature of this requisition must have
created a difficulty with a people, who, by their religious persuasion, were
not permitted to bear arms, nor to be actively, or immediately, concerned in
promoting military affairs; and such, at this time, were the inhabitants of the
province, in general. It may likewise be here observed, that it does not appear
reasonable why this principle of the Quakers against war, The Quakers
principles against war not to be so much blamed as they are by some, etc.
and the evil consequences arising from it, when duly considered, should be an
objection, so very material, as some persons make it, against any class or
description, of people, in the general community, whose profitable industry,
and beneficent conduct, in all other respects, render them of so much the
greater utility, and real benefit to the public and common good, even, in this,
and every other department; and that more especially in these latter, more
improved, or refined ages of the world, since war is become more a trade, or
study of a certain class of men only, and more restricted to, and managed by, a
part of the general community, appropriated to that purpose, than it was
formerly, in the more barbarous state of mankind, when every one went to war,
capable of bearing arms, while now it is experienced that the far greater part
of the people, in all the most civilized states, are better, or more preferably
employed, in promoting and procuring the necessary support of the whole
community, at large: it would be a very great impropriety, to blame any one
member of the human body, which is confined, or appointed to one particular
office, for not performing that of another; for which it is neither qualified,
nor intended, by the Author of human nature: the body politic consists of many
parts, or members, as well as the human; and their offices, in a well regulated
state, are as various: They are more consistent with humanity, than the
contrary etc
wisdom is no less requisite than strength; and the arts of peace, with the
labors of the industrious colonist, are, at least, as necessary as those of
war; which would soon make but a very sorry figure, in any nation, without
those means, which are the effects of the former. Can any thinking and
reflecting mind be so unacquainted with the excellency of those qualities,
which distinguish the rational from the irrational creation, as not to be
sensible, that it is better by wisdom, or good policy, to prevent war, than by
force of arms, and the art military to support, or only to suspend it? For it
is impossible, that the application of a thing, by which, in reality, that same
thing solely exists, and is kept alive, should put an end to it, or entirely
take away its existence. War is certainly the greatest punishment in the world,
that the Almighty has assigned for the wickedness of the human race; and it is
the departure of mankind from their true interest, and real good alone, which
makes it necessary; consequently, as a principle of thinking and acting gains
ground, or increases, in the world, which approaches nearest to the standard of
truth, and takes away the cause of punishment, in the same proportion, must the
necessity and practice of this evil decrease in it.

Absurd objections against the Quakers of Pennsylvania.
But, of all people those appear to have the least reason to make this objection
a subject of complant against the Quakers of Pennsylvania, who, knowing their
principle, in this respect, nevertheless, in preference to all the rest of the
colonies, and, even, to all the rest of the world, which were before them,
equally free for their choice, have removed from various distant parts, and
settled among them; yet many such have been known in this province! But, which
is still more remarkable, that people professedly of a different way of
thinking, in this particular, should, in greater numbers, and much more
abundantly, flock into Pennsylvania, from abroad, than into any other of the
colonies besides; and yet this has been the real case here, both in later
years, and also in the more early times of the province: which certainly showed
a very distinguishing preference, which, in reality, was thereby given to the
Quakers and their principles, notwithstanding the high absurdity, which any of
those people, who have thus made Pennsylvania their choice, may since have
exhibited, by declaiming against them on this account: for it cannot be
reasonably supposed they were ignorant that this country, and the government of
it, could not possibly have been granted, at first, to the Quakers, on account
of their fighting principles, or that they should defend it with arms, by any
who properly knew them, notwithstanding they were empowered, or entrusted, so
to do, if they chose it; but, on the contrary, for those other qualifications,
at least, not less necessary and beneficial, Intention of the grant and
government of Pennsylvania, etc.
for the support and real happiness of any country, of which the King and
government, at that time, were fully sensible the Quakers were possessed;
because, in a nation, where sufficient numbers of fighting men are not wanting,
on occasion, and may, at any time, be had for money, to defend all parts of its
dominions, and where no man, by the laws, is compelled to fight, who pays his
equivalent to the support of the government, there would be no absolute
necessity, neither was it intended, in the grant of the province, and of the
powers of governing it, under the crown, to take these peaceable people from
that proper attention, which was due to the department, in which they were
placed, for the general good, in their civil capacity; nor, on that account, to
oppress any one part of the community, for the sake of the other's advantage,
unequally.

This appears to have been the principal end and design of the British
government, at first, respecting this province, notwithstanding those demands
of a military nature, which, either from a mistaken notion of thereby more
effectually serving the public utility, or from other views, different from the
real nature and original design of the first settlement and constitution of
Pennsylvania, have since been made from it; not sufficiently adverting to the
natural, advantageous, and more excellent consequences, which absolutely, and
of necessity must always ultimately arise from the principle, practice,
industry, and virtue of such a people, to the general community, in proportion
to the small number of those, who hold this principle, as the Quakers do;
Number of Quakers never likely to be very great, etc.
a number, which, in all probability, if we may judge of the future by the
past, from the nature and effect of such a principle, as held by them, whether
viewed in a favorable, or unfavourable light, will never be very large.
Consistent with the nature and principle of this favor, or indulgence to the
Quakers of Pennsylvania, in great measure, and with the same design, was that
afterward granted by the British government to the Moravians; who have since
removed into, and settled in the province, etc. By the stat. 22. Geo. 2, C. 30.
encouragement is given to the Moravians, to settle in the plantations in
America, by allowing them to take a solemn affirmation in lieu of an oath, and
dispensing with their not being concerned in military affairs, on payment of a
rate assessed.


The Assembly having considered the Governor's speech, diverse of the Members
consulted a number of their principal constituents, and Members of Council,
being Quakers, on the occasion; The Members of Council, consulted on this
occasion, being all Quakers, and of the principal men in the province, were,
Edward Shippen, Samuel Carpenter, Joseph Growdon, Caleb Pusey, Samuel Preston,
Isaac Norris, and James Logan, etc.
which the House mentioned, in their address, or answer to the Governor; in
which they declared,

"That were it not, that the raising of money to hire men to fight (or kill one
another) was matter of conscience to them, and against their religious
principles, they should not be wanting, according to their abilities, to
contribute to those designs." They expressed their regard and loyalty to the
Queen, and their prayer for the long continuance of her reign, and concluded,
"That, though they could not, for conscience sake, comply with the furnishing a
supply for such a defense, as the Governor proposed, yet, in point of gratitude
to the Queen, The Assembly vote a present to the Queen,
for her great and many favors to them, they had resolved to raise a present
of five hundred pounds," etc.

By this mode of business they appear to have made, or intended, For the
general support of the government.
a distinction between granting supplies for the support of government, in
general, or, for its mixed purposes and uses collectively, and that of
contributing for the military alone; Being not answerable for the application
etc
besides their not being answerable for the application particularly, or for
the duty of the executive part of the government: whereby it may be supposed,
they thought they acted conscientiously, according to their religious
principles, in contributing their proportion of what is absolutely due to the
general support of government, or supreme authority, according to the practice
of the primitive Christians: the benefit and protection of which they e^^^^ed
in common with others, and as they were not actively concerned either in
directing or executing that authority; which was out of their line of duty;
though this their mode ultimately answered equally the Governor's request, or
intention.

To this they added, in their address, "That they humbly hoped he would be
pleased to accept this, as a testimony of their unfeigned loyalty, and thankful
acknowledgment, for her grace and clemency toward them, and the rest of her
subjects; and though the meanness of the present were such as was unworthy of
the favor of her acceptance (which indeed, said they, was caused not through
want of good will, and loyal affection, but by inabilty and poverty, The
Assembly plead poverty, etc.
occasioned by great losses, late taxes misapplied, The Assembly, in their
reply to the Governor's answer to this address, express, in the following
words, what they meant by misapplication of taxes, viz.

"And to explain what we mean by misapplying of taxes, we must acquaint thee,
that about three years ago, a tax was laid on this province of two pence half
penny per pound, and an impost and excise, upon some goods imported and
retailed, which was appropriated to certain uses, viz, eight hundred pounds,
with half the impost, to the support of government; this the late Lieutenant
Governor received, with other perquisites, which ought to be applied to the
support of government, as the late Assembly signified to him, in August last,
whereunto we refer; the money, so appropriated, has notwithstanding the express
words of the act, been kept, or misapplied by him; and he refused to give the
last Assembly any account thereof," etc,


lowness of the staple commodities of the country, great damp upon trade, and
their neighbors noncompliance with the Queen's proclamation for reducing the
coin) yet they hoped she would be graciously pleased to regard the hearty and
cordial affections of them, her poor subjects, instead of a present of value;
and to prevent misapplication thereof, they had agreed, that it should be
accounted part of the Queen's revenue.

"They, therefore, humbly entreated the Governor to put a candid construction
upon their proceedings, and represent them favorably to their gracious
sovereign, the Queen; to whom they trusted they should ever approve themselves
(though poor) her most loyal and dutiful subjects," etc.

The Governor not content with the sum offered etc.
The Governor was dissatisfied with this answer, principally on account of the
smallness of the sum; and, in reply, represented the urgent necessity of their
further exerting themselves, on the occasion. But the Assembly pleaded their
poverty and inability, and adhered to their resolve of presenting the Queen
with L. 500, requesting the Governor duly to consider the nature of such a
refusal, and of his interposing between them and their Sovereign, in such a
case.

He urges them to give a larger sum, etc.
The Governor again, in his turn, pressed their compliance to a more generous
contribution, declaring, his present conduct, in the affair, to be his
indispensible duty, in consequence of the Queen's letter; and of the utmost
importance to them, to secure her favor, and disappoint those, who desired a
dissolution of the present government.

After this several messages and answers passed between the Governor and
Assembly, on the subject, but without any effect; for the House, being
determined to adhere to their resolve, They adhere to their resolve.
concluded it to be their opinion, that, as the Governor had refused to give
his assent to their proposal of raising the L. 500, above mentioned, and to
proceed to other business, till it was now too late, in the season, to sit
longer, at present, they would therefore adjourn, till the harvest was over.

Of this the Governor, being informed, by a written message from the House, it
produced further altercation, or dispute between them; the Governor being
determined to proceed to no other business, till that of the Queen was first
issued; and the House declaring, they would not agree to the Governor's
proposal of raising money, either directly, or indirectly, for the expedition
to Canada, for the reasons they had given; yet they continued their resolution
of raising L. 500, as a present to the Queen, and intended to prepare a bill
for that purpose, at their next meeting, on the 15th day of August next; The
Assembly adjourn.
to which time they adjourned.

The Governor convened the Assembly before the time, to which they had
adjourned; and, in a speech, he told them, "That their enemies, Purport of the
Governor's speech, etc.
having plundered Lewistown, watered in the bay, and sounded it, as they passed
along, gave alarming apprehensions of a nearer visit; and that he demanded some
provision to be immediately made, in case of emergency." -- "That the chiefs of
several Indian nations, being in town, a supply was immediately requisite, to
make them a suitable present; that the importance of their friendship, and the
easy terms of maintaining it, were sufficiently evident;" -- "That, of the
money, which had been appropriated for that use, now nothing remained, for a
present to them; and that, though money could not so suddenly be raised, as the
case required, yet they might find means to procure credit, so as that they
might not go away empty." -- "That there was no manner of provision for the
Governor's support; That the Proprietary, on whom the Assembly had too often
had expectation, in the case, had, by his late hard treatment, from some, whom
he had too far trusted, been entirely disabled (were it in itself reasonable)
to continue any such provision; consequently their immediate resolution was
absolutely necessary to contribute what was proper in this point; otherwise
they must expect a change that would prove more chargeable."

Part of the Assembly's answer, etc.
The Assembly expressed their concern for what had happened at Lewistown; and
that the Governor was already acquainted how far the generality of the people
of the province could oppose such an attempt. They admired, that, after such
large sums, raised for the support of government, they were notwithstanding
left so unprovided, as the Governor had represented; and they earnestly
requested his assistance, to call the late Governor and Secretary to account,
for the money, which, they said, should have been applied to the use of the
public. They agree to augment the sum voted before, etc.
To the L. 500, which they had already voted, they agreed to add L. 300 more,
for the other necessary expenses, besides L. 200, toward the Governor's
support. They intimated their expectation of his concurrence to redress their
grievances, and recommended to his consideration a number of bills, prepared by
former Assemblies, and agreed to by the present; of which one was for
establishing courts, These bills were about eleven or twelve, in number; their
titles were, 1. For establishing courts of judicature, in the province. 2. For
regulating and establishing fees. 3. For confirming patents and grants, and to
prevent law suits. 4. For empowering religious societies, towns, etc. to buy,
hold and dispose of land, etc. 5. Of privilege to a freeman. 6. To oblige
witnesses to give evidence, and to prevent false swearing. 7. To prevent the
sale of ill ^anned leather. 8. That no public house or inn, within the
province, be kept without license. 9. Against menacing, and assault and
battery. 10. To prevent disputes, which may hereafter arise about dates of
conveyances, and other instruments and writings. 11. For the more effectual
raising of levies, in the several counties of the province, and the city of
Philadelphia, and appropriating the same. 12. For the priority of the payment
of debts, to the inhabitants of this province.
etc. to all which they desired to have his concurrence, or to know his
objections.

The Governor, in reply, Purport of the Governor's reply.
acknowledged he was made sensible, that many inhabitants of the province could
not, in any case, bear arms, so he did not propose it to them, but only a
necessary supply in money, without engaging any man against his religious
persuasion. That, in regard to what they had said respecting Colonel Evans and
the Secretary, he could not well understand it; the former having affirmed, he
received only what was directly allowed by the Assembly, for his own support,
and thought himself not at all accountable for it; and that the Secretary
seemed to admire what should induce the House to name him, upon that occasion;
there being none of it payable to him, but for his own services as an officer.
That he thanked them, for taking his support into their consideration, hoping
future provision of that kind would be made more easy; and that he would
readily agree to any thing, consistent with his duty, and the trust reposed in
him.

That, respecting the bills, The Governor cannot agree to any bill against the
Proprietors power or interest, etc.
the Proprietary was not at all against establishing courts by law, yet his
instructions would not permit him to agree to those points, in the bill, which
broke in, either upon his powers in government, or his just interest; why such
a bill should interfere with these, he could not see; but as he was willing to
agree to a bill, for the ease and security of the people, in that respect,
properly regulated, and, on his part, to do his duty, so he hoped they would be
careful to offer him nothing that he could not assent to, without a violation
of his honor and trust, etc. he recommended their reviewing the bills, passed
by the former Assemblies; and thanked them for the provision, which they had
made for the Indians: which concluded the sessions.

The Assembly persist in their former demands.
The Assembly, at their next sitting, in August, notwithstanding the Governor's
recommending them to conduct their proceedings so far conformable to the
powers, he had to oblige them, that their labors might not be in vain, and his
pointing out to them the exceptionable parts of the bill of courts, etc. still
remained tenacious of their own method, and adhered to their former claims.
Upon which, at their next meeting, on the 28th of September, he sent them a
written message, which concludes with the following paragraph.

Part of a message from the Governor.
"But now, gentlemen, I must be so plain as to tell you, that, though I have
been very desirous to see all these matters brought to a ripeness, that they
might actually be passed into laws, yet, until I see the country as ready to
discharge their duty, in providing for my support, in the administration,
independent of any supply from the Proprietary, who, as I told you before,
cannot now (were it even reasonable) spare any part of his estate here, to that
purpose, I shall account myself very unjust to the duty I owe myself, if I
concur in any other public act, in legislation, though truly inclinable to do
all, for the advantage of the public, that can reasonably be expected from me:
but a Governor cannot lie under a greater obligation to the people, than they
do to him; nor can that be accounted a free gift from them, which is but their
indispensible duty; for, at this time, there is no support for a Governor, in
this government, but what must be granted by an act of an Assembly. You have
told me, that you had voted five hundred pounds to the Queen, three hundred
pounds for the service of the public, and two hundred pounds to me; and you
have lately informed me, that when I had passed the other acts, the Speaker
would present a bill to me, for raising that money. It is possible when the
others were passed, the Speaker might do so; but, can it, in reason, be
expected, that, while you show so unprecedented and unusual diffidence, on your
side, that you would not so much as let me see the bill, but in private, nor
allow, that it should, upon any terms, The Assembly allow not their bill to be
communicated to the Council, etc.
be communicated to the Council, with whom I am to advise, (though you cannot
but be sensible, that, should I design it, yet it is not in my power to pass a
bill into a law, until the Speaker has signed it) which is usually done at the
time of passing it. Could it be expected, I say, that I should pass all that
you desired of me, and then depend on your presenting that bill? Or, can it be
thought reasonable, or, for the security of the public, that I should pass an
act, for raising and applying eight hundred pounds, for several uses, besides
those two hundred pounds, said to be granted to me, without taking proper
advice upon it, of those, whom the discharge of my duty, as well as my
inclinations, obliges me to consult, in all public matters; nor that I should
have it in my power to object to, or alter, any part of the whole bill, after
it is presented? No, gentlemen, as I have no designs, but what are plain and
honest, so I must expect a suitable treatment; and, therefore, I now desire you
faithfully to lay before the people, whom you represent, and to whom you are
returning, what I have here said to you; and, upon this occasion, assure them
from me, that unless they take care to grant a requisite support, and in such a
manner, The Governor refuses further to act, unless he is supported, etc.
as is fit to be accepted, I shall not at all think myself concerned to attend
the affairs of the public, in legislation; and what measures the Proprietary
will find himself obliged to take at home, I have formerly sufficiently hinted
to you; but as I shall not be wanting, on my side, to concur in any thing, that
is reasonable, so I hope, the next time I meet the representatives of the
people, we shall have such confidence in each other, and they will so far
consider their duty, and take such methods, for effecting business, that all
things necessary may be concluded to our mutual satisfaction, for the true
advantage and benefit of this province."

The Governor restrained from passing any bill without consent of the Council,
etc.
By this plain declaration of the Governor, the Assembly easily perceived, to
their great mortification, that, by reason of the Proprietary's instructions,
the Governor could not pass any bill, without the advice, or approbation of his
Council; which, how reasonable soever it might appear, in itself, was deemed to
have no foundation in the royal charter; by which the whole power of
legislation was understood to be vested in the Governor, and the
representatives of the people. This the House observed in their remonstrance to
the Governor, the next day, declaring, that had they known he was so
restricted, they would neither have given him, nor themselves, so much trouble,
as they had done: they likewise complained of some other matters, that were not
redressed: Their greatest resentment against James Logan, etc.
but their greatest resentment appears, in this remonstrance, to be against the
Secretary, James Logan; against whom is exhibited, in a very angry manner, a
long complaint; representing him as the grand obstacle of their proceedings;
and, that, though they had endeavored to reduce him within proper bounds, yet,
by reason of his great influence with the Governor and Proprietary, he was now
advanced above their power, obstructed all their public transactions, that did
not please him, treated the Members of the House with insult and abuse, and, in
effect, was the chief cause of their grievances and calamities.

In October next following, The old Assembly mostly re-chosen.
the same Members of Assembly were mostly re-elected, and David Lloyd again
chosen Speaker: to whom the Governor, in his speech, on the 17th, after having
mentioned diverse other affairs, before the former Assembly, unfinished, and
further pressed their making due provision for the support of the lieutenancy
of the government, a duty, which, he said, was so incumbent upon them, that
without it, no government could have a being; he thus expressed himself:

"Gentlemen, you are met for no other end, Part of the Governor's speech to the
Assembly.
than to serve the country, whom you represent; I hope, therefore, you will
study all possible means, that may contribute to the real happiness of that:
which, I believe, you will find, may be much promoted by improving a good
understanding between you and me, in our respective stations.

"I would not willingly look back upon some of the proceedings of the last
House, only from thence I must give you a necessary caution, to dwell less,
than has been done, on that general language of evil counsel, or counselors,
generally used, as an artful method, to strike at the counseled; but, with me,
I believe, without occasion; or, that of grievances and oppressions, words, by
God's blessing, understood by few, (I find) in this province, who form them not
in their own imaginations; for I assure you, gentlemen, if we are not as happy
as the circumstances of the place will admit, it lies much in your power to
make us so; of which I hope you will consider, and use your endeavors
accordingly, with a full resolution to remove whatever may stand in the way.

"I have already said, that I would not look back to the proceedings of the
last House; but the Secretary has found himself so much aggrieved by their
remonstrance, that he has presented, for my perusal, a long defense; in which I
shall not think myself any further concerned, than to observe to you, that, to
my surprise, he has charged the Speaker of that House with some proceedings,
which, if true, will require your consideration, and some further measures to
be taken upon them; for which reason, I have ordered him to lay a copy of them
before you; and I must say, if that representation be well grounded, I cannot
see that, under this government, such a person can be accounted fit for that
station; but, at present, I shall no further enquire into it, only recommend to
you, to proceed with diligence, in whatever is incumbent on you, in your
stations, as well in this, as in all other matters, that may concern the
welfare of the public, and honor of this government, as now established."

The Assembly give an answer the next day.
This the Assembly answered the next day; telling the Governor, that, among
other things, they also had under consideration the making provision for his
support; and, after having made some angry reflections against the Secretary,
whom they considered, in great measure, as the cause of the misunderstanding
between them and the Governor, Part of their answer.
they said: -- "But, may it please the Governor, we beg leave to observe, that
the duty incumbent on us, to contribute to this general support of the
lieutenancy, is grounded upon a condition precedent; so that the people,
according to the fundamental rules of the English government, are not obliged
to contribute to the support of that administration, which affords them no
redress, when their rights are violated, their liberties infringed, and their
representative body affronted and abused: hence it is, that that branch of the
legislative authority seldom move to give supplies till their aggrievances are
redressed, and reparation made, for the indignities they meet with from the
other branch of the same authority.

"We are very sensible that the end of our meeting is to serve the country; and
we assure the Governor, there shall be nothing wanting, on our parts, to
promote it, and improve a good understanding between him and us, in our
respective stations: but let not the language of the representatives of the
people, about evil counselors, grievances and oppressions, be irksome to the
Governor; for we shall not answer the true end of our meeting, nor discharge
our duty and trust to those, that sent us, if we be silent, and not insist upon
redressing those things, that are amiss, with a resolution to use our
endeavors to remove what appears to stand in the way.

"We have, with all the application, this short time could allow, informed
ourselves of the proceedings of the late Assemblies, and find no just grounds
for the Governor to suppose that their complaints of evil counsel or
counselors have been used as methods to strike at him; but, we believe, it was
their care, as we find it to be ours, that the Governor may not be imposed on,
or prevailed with, to adhere to evil counsel, and render his actings
inconsistent.

"We suppose it needless to be more express, than the late Assembly have been,
to demonstrate what an enemy the Secretary has been to the welfare of this
province; and how abusive he has been to the representatives of the people; so
that we can do no less than repeat the request of former Assemblies, to have
him removed from the Governor's Council; which we doubt not will be a most
effectual means to improve a good understanding between thee and us.

"If the Governor will look back, and duly consider the complaints and
remonstrances of the late Assemblies, it will appear, that grievances and
oppressions are words, which are formed upon just complaints; and for which the
country wants redress; so that what the Governor supposes, on that head, is not
candid toward the representatives of the people.

"May it please the Governor, whatever might be the occasion, or design, of the
last clause, in thy speech, we are of opinion, it was not well timed; for if
the Secretary's charge, against our Speaker, had any weight, it should have
been propounded as an objection against the Assembly's choice of him, for
Speaker: but, after thou had declared thy approbation of their choice, that
thou should be prevailed upon so far to patronize the Secretary's insinuation
against the Speaker, as to make it a part of thy speech to us, before we had
seen, or heard, the charge, we can do no less than resent it, as an indignity
offered to this House; for, though we are men, that cannot be much meaner in
the Governor's eye, than we are in our own esteem, yet we must put him in mind,
that, since the royal charter commits this part of the legislative authority to
our care, we ought to have the regard, due to our stations."

After this the Governor went to Newcastle; and in the mean time the Assembly
adjourned. On their meeting again, about the beginning of November, the
Secretary, James Logan, intending for England, presented to them a petition,
This petition was as follow:

To the House of Representatives of the province of Pennsylvania;
The petition of James Logan, Secretary of the said province, in most humble
manner shows,
THAT, whereas the Assembly of this province, chosen the first day of October,
1706, thought fit (as is well known to you) in the month of February, in the
same year, to exhibit to the then Lieutenant Governor, certain articles of
impeachment against me; copies of which have been industriously diffused
abroad; and, since that time, other complaints have also been presented; and
upon the presumption, that those accusations might be true, diverse applications
have been made, by the last Assembly, to the present Lieutenant Governor,
requesting that I might be removed from his Council, etc.

Yet, so it is, may it please the House, that not one of these articles, or
complaints, have ever, to this day, been duly heard, or, at any time, so
proved, or, even, rendered intelligible, as that, according to justice, I might
have the opportunity of answering them, or speaking in my own justification,
notwithstanding I had, by several repeated instances, earnestly pressed to
obtain that favor; by which means, and the endeavors, that diverse persons,
highly disaffected to me, have used to calumniate me, among the inhabitants of
the province, I have been most grievously injured and oppressed; now, inasmuch
as, for some months past, it has been generally known, that I am speedily to
undertake a voyage for Great Britain, whither the Proprietor's affairs do, at
present, urgently call me; and being, by the late Assembly's most bitter
remonstrance against me, laid under a greater necessity than ever, to clear
myself of the several unjust imputations, that have been thrown on me, lest any
person, in those distant places, to which I am to repair, and to which the
Assembly's papers have been solicitously transmitted, should be so far imposed
on, as to believe that those accusations, without any trial, have really some
weight in them; which, upon a trial, notwithstanding, I have no cause to doubt,
but will totally disappear: I, therefore, humbly beseech this House, that, for
rendering me the relief, that is due to the great wrongs, I have sustained,
they would be graciously pleased to order all those, who have appeared against
me, the severest and most implacable, of my enemies, whoever they be, to
proceed in prosecuting me, with their utmost zeal and ardour; that the very
worst of my failings, in public affairs, may be drawn in the most legible
characters, and exposed without mercy, to the eyes of all men; to the end that,
in beholding them, they may fully know the extent of my crimes; and thereupon
regard me, as I shall be found to deserve, and not otherwise.

But, because the time of my departure now draws nigh, I must, therefore,
further beseech the House, that this prosecution may be carried on, within such
a convenient time, as is consistent with the shortness of my intended stay;
and, particularly, that it may not extend beyond the twelfth of this instant;
that being the utmost (as far as I can at present judge) that I shall be able
to attend it; and, I hope, will prove a sufficient time, to dispatch all that
is necessary to such a trial; within the compass of which space, I have been
well assured, the Governor will be ready, on his part, to hear whatever shall
be alleged against me, and as far as in him lies, give such judgment
thereupon, as to justice shall belong. And I do further earnestly request the
House, that they will be pleased to order, that, as speedily as may be, I may
have full copies of all the petitions, that have been exhibited against me, to
any of the past Assemblies, and that I may be favored with an opportunity of
comparing them with the originals: For your special favor in all which,

Your humble petitioner shall, as in duty bound, etc. JAMES LOGAN.
November the 1st, 1709.


requesting that preparation might be made for his trial, The Secretary
petitions the Assembly for his trial, etc.
upon the impeachment of a former Assembly, in the year 1706. They, therefore,
fell upon his case, and took into consideration his defense; and his charge
against their Speaker, David Lloyd, mentioned in the Governor's speech. They
carried their resentment so far, They issue out a warrant to apprehend the
Secretary, etc.
in the affair, that they actually issued out a warrant to the high Sheriff of
the city and county of Philadelphia, signed by the Speaker, for apprehending
the Secretary, and for committing him to the county gaol of Philadelphia,
founded on what they thus expressed, in the said warrant, viz. "For his
offense, in reflecting upon sundry Members of this House, in particular, and
the whole House, in general, charging the proceedings of this Assembly with
unfairness and injustice." The following is a copy of the warrant, or order,
for apprehending the Secretary.

At the Assembly held at Philadelphia the 25th day of November, 1709.
The House of Representatives did yesterday adjudge James Logan, for his
offense, in reflecting upon sundry Members of this House in particular, and the
whole House in general, charging the proceedings of this Assembly with
unfairness and injustice.

These are, therefore, in the behalf of the said House of Representatives to
require and charge thee to attach the body of the said James Logan, and him
take forthwith into thy custody, within the county gaol of our lady the Queen,
for the county of Philadelphia, under thy charge, and him therein safely to
detain and keep, until he shall willingly make his submission, to the
satisfaction of this House, or of such order as this House shall take for the
same, during the continuance of this present Assembly; and this shall be thy
sufficient warrant in that behalf.

Given under my hand, this twenty-fifth day of November, 1709. DAVID LLOYD,
Speaker.

To Peter Evans, Esquire Sheriff of the city and county of Philadelphia.


But, by a supersedeas from the Governor, the execution thereof was prevented,
Their design frustrated by the Governor, etc.
to the great displeasure of the Assembly; as appears by their resolves, in the
minutes of the House; wherein they assert, "That this measure of the Governor
was illegal and arbitrary. The following is a transcript of what the Governor
directed to the Sheriff, on this occasion; which further shows the extremity of
this proceeding, viz.

(L. S.) CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor of the province of
Pennsylvania, etc.
To Peter Evans, Esquire, High Sheriff of the city and county of Philadelphia.
WHEREAS, the Members chosen to serve in Assembly, for this province, as
appears by certain resolves, and diverse expressions used by them, on this
occasion, as I am credibly informed, have threatened to take into custody James
Logan, Secretary of this province, and a Member of Council for the same; and
thereby would prevent his intended voyage toward Great Britain; whither the
Proprietor's affairs do call him, in which he is now ready to embark,
notwithstanding it has never appeared that any Assembly in this province are,
in themselves, vested with any authority to attach any person, who is not of
their own house, and much less a Member of Council: nor is there any
jurisdiction yet, for the trial of such as they account offenders against them:
and notwithstanding, at the time of making the said resolves, they were not
legally an Assembly, nor, for the future, can be such, until I shall see cause
to call them. [Note, this is said on account of their having dropped their
adjournment.] Now, to prevent any disorder, that may arise from such undue and
irregular proceedings, I do hereby require and strictly command you, the said
Sheriff, that you suffer not the said James Logan to be any wise molested by
virtue of any order, or pretended order, of Assembly, whatever; and, in case
any of the said Assembly, or others, under pretense of any authority derived
from them, shall attempt to attach, or molest, the said James Logan, in his
person, I do hereby command you to oppose such attachment, and that you, by all
means in your power, take effectual care that the peace of our sovereign lady,
the Queen, be kept, and all offenders against the same be opposed, or
committed, as rioters; for which this shall be your sufficient authority.

Given under my hand, and seal of the said province, at Philadelphia, 28, 9hr.
1709.




The temper and disposition of the House now were such, that, after this, it
does not appear any further transactions passed between the Governor and this
Assembly.

But the Secretary, by reason of his useful abilities, and faithful services,
to the Proprietary, was so thoroughly fortified in both his and the Governor's
esteem and confidence, that he was above the power of his opponents; The
Secretary Logan, proceeds to England, and disappoints their views, etc.
he prosecuted his voyage to England; and with such perseverance and ability
vindicated himself, and so far succeeded against the violence of the
opposition, that he not only survived the storm, and continued in his offices,
but also was afterward President of the province; and discharged the office
with much reputation to himself and satisfaction to the public, as will
hereafter appear; and after a wise recess of many years from the cumber of
public affairs, at last, in the year 1751, honorably finished his days, in a
happy tranquillity.

CHAPTER XX.
Party spirit endangers the government and constitution. -- The Proprietor's
letter to the Assembly, respecting their late transactions. -- An entire new
Assembly elected in October 1710. -- Names of the Members. -- Harmony between
the Governor and this Assembly productive of more agreeable and better
consequences, etc. -- Proceedings of the Legislature in consequence of an
express from England, received by the Governor, relating to an expedition
against Canada. -- The Queen's letter of instructions to him. -- The colony
thought to be over-rated in the requisition; yet the Assembly vote two thousand
pounds for the Queen's use. -- The next year produces a change in the Assembly.
-- The Proprietor, in his letters, desires to serve the country, etc. -- The
Proprietor agrees to dispose of the government to the Queen; and is seized with
an apoplexy. -- Wine and rum imported in 1712. -- Settlement of New Garden and
London Grove, in Chester county. -- Samuel Carpenter. -- The Governor's writ
for summoning the Assembly. -- Altercation between them.

WHILE human nature is subject to infirmity, 1709.
and so long as some men are wiser and better than others, will the actions of
mortals, whether good or bad, have different constructions put upon them, and
be attended with approbation and contradiction, according to their believed
importance, and the various mediums, through which they are seen: this province
appears to have been never entirely without a discontented and murmuring party
in it, from the beginning, Party in the province in early time, etc.
or, at least, from very early times; who thought it their duty and interest
constantly to oppose the Proprietary, in all cases indiscriminately, where
either his power, or interest, was concerned; and though frequently but small
and weak, yet they were sufficiently able to embarrass the public proceedings,
and endanger the general tranquillity, according as time and opportunity
offered: these, for a number of years past, having, by continual complaints of
great and numerous grievances unredressed, worked up the minds of many
well-disposed persons, in the province, into the belief of the reality of more
of this kind than ever existed in it, thereby occasioned hard thoughts of the
Proprietary, and somewhat of an unworthy treatment, even, from some of his
friends; insomuch, that, for a considerable time, they had obtained a majority
in the Assembly, and visibly acted in the extreme against him.

The increase of this opposition seems principally to have arisen from the
Proprietary's absence, his not seeing with his own eyes, Party increased by the
Proprietor's absence, etc.
and trusting his affairs too much to deputies; to which the nature and
necessity of his situation and circumstances, in these times, particularly
obliged him; as fully appears by many of his private letters, during the latter
part of his life, largely expressing his ardent and longing desire to live and
die in this country; consequently some things, in his province, were not in
that order, which could have been desired, though far from being as they were
represented; which, in such a new, young and unexperienced government, in a
colony composed of such an heterogeneous mixture of people of different
humors, opinions and interests, and in a land of so great liberty, as this
then was, so much the more required the presence of an able and constant hand,
to manage and redress; though, in the whole, compared with others, it was
manifestly in a very happy, thriving and flourishing condition.

From hence, however, his adversaries, And endangers the government and
constitution, etc.
and the discontented party, took occasion to magnify what was amiss; and, as
it is an easy matter to persuade people that they are aggrieved, more
especially when under such a variety of difficulties as is common and natural,
at least in some degree, to any new settlement of this kind, they, therefore,
influenced many of the well-meaning to join in the opposition; which was now
carried on with a high hand; though, it is, with great reason, apprehended,
diverse of these neither designed, nor saw, the consequence, to which their
proceedings naturally and ultimately tended; which, at length, about this time,
produced the following severe and expostulatory letter from the Proprietary to
the Assembly, viz.

London, 29th 4th mo. 1710. My old Friends,
It is a mournful consideration, and the cause of deep affliction to me, that I
am forced, The Proprietor's letter to the Assembly in 1710.
by the oppressions and disappointments, which have fallen to my share in this
life, to speak to the people of that province, in a language, I once hoped, I
should never have occasion to use. But the many troubles and oppositions, that
I have met with from thence, oblige me, in plainness and freedom, to
expostulate with you, concerning the causes of them.

1710.
When it pleased God to open a way for me to settle that colony, I had reason to
expect a solid comfort from the services, done to many hundreds of people; and
it was no small satisfaction to me, that I have not been disappointed in seeing
them prosper, and growing up to a flourishing country, blessed with liberty,
ease and plenty, beyond what many of themselves could expect; and wanting
nothing to make themselves happy, but what, with a right temper of mind, and
prudent conduct, they might give themselves. But, alas! as to my part, instead
of reaping the like advantages, some of the greatest of my troubles have arose
from thence; the many combats, I have engaged in; the great pains, and
incredible expense, for your welfare and ease, to the decay of my former
estate; of which (however some there would represent it) I too sensibly feel
the effects; with the undeserved opposition, I have met with from thence, sink
me into sorrow; that, if not supported by a superior hand, might have
overwhelmed me long ago. And I cannot but think it hard measure, that, while
that has proved a land of freedom and flourishing, it should become to me, by
whose means it was principally made a country, the cause of grief, trouble and
poverty.

For this reason I must desire you all, even, of all professions and degrees,
for although all have not been engaged in the measures, that have been taken,
yet every man, who has an interest there, is, or must be, concerned in them, by
their effects; I must, therefore, I say, desire you all, in a serious and true
weightiness of mind, to consider what you are, or have been, doing; why matters
must be carried on with these divisions and contentions, and what real causes
have been given, on my side, for that opposition to me, and my interest, which
I have met with; as if I were an enemy, and not a friend, after all I have done
and spent, both here and there: I am sure, I know not of any cause whatsoever.
Were I sensible you really wanted any thing of me, in the relation between us,
that would make you happier, I should readily grant it, if any reasonable man
would say it were fit for you to demand; provided you would also take such
measures as were fit for me to join with.

Before any one family had transported themselves thither, I earnestly
endeavored to form such a model of government, as might make all, concerned in
it, easy; which, nevertheless, was subject to be altered, as there should be
occasion. Soon after we got over, that model appeared, in some parts of it, to
be very inconvenient, if not impracticable; the numbers of members, both in the
Council and Assembly, were much too large; some other matters also proved
inconsistent with the King's charter to me; so that, according to the power
reserved for an alteration, there was a necessity to make one, in which, if the
lower counties were brought in, it was well known, at that time, to be on a
view of advantage to the province itself, as well as to the people of those
counties, and to the general satisfaction of those concerned, without the least
apprehension of any irregularity in the method.

Upon this they had another charter passed, nemine contradicente; which I
always desired might be continued, while you yourselves would keep up to it,
and put it in practice; and many there know much it was against my will, that,
upon my last going over, it was vacated. But after this was laid aside (which
indeed was begun by yourselves, in Colonel Fletcher's time) I, according to my
engagement, left another, with all the privileges, that were found convenient
for your good government; and, if any part of it has been, in any case,
infringed, it was never by my approbation. I desired it might be enjoyed fully.
But though privileges ought to be tenderly preserved, they should not, on the
other hand, be asserted, under that name, to a licentiousness: the design of
government is to preserve good order; which may be equally broke in upon by the
turbulent endeavors of the people, as well as the overstraining of power, in a
Governor. I designed the people should be secured of an annual fixed election
and Assembly; and that they should have the same privileges in it, that any
other Assembly has, in the Queen's dominions; among all which this is one
constant rule, as in the parliament here, that they should sit on their own
adjournments; but to strain this expression to a power, to meet, at all times
during the year, without the Governor's concurrence, would be to distort
government, to break the due proportion of the parts of it, to establish
confusion in the place of necessary order, and make the legislative the
executive part of government. Yet, for obtaining this power, I perceive, much
time and money has been spent, and great struggles have been made, not only for
this, but some other things, that cannot, at all, be for the advantage of the
people to be possessed of; particularly the appointing of Judges; because the
administration might, by such means, be so clogged, that it would be difficult,
if possible, under our circumstances, at some times, to support it. As for my
own part, as I desire nothing more than the tranquillity and prosperity of the
province and government, in all its branches, could I see that any of these
things, that have been contended for, would certainly promote these ends, it
would be a matter of indifference to me how they were settled. But seeing the
frame of every government ought to be regular in itself, well proportioned and
subordinate, in its parts, and every branch of it invested with sufficient
power to discharge its respective duty, for the support of the whole, I have
cause to believe that nothing could be more destructive to it, than to take so
much of the provision, and executive part of the government out of the
Governor's hands, and lodge it in an uncertain collective body; and more
especially since our government is dependent, and I am answerable to the crown,
if the administration should fail, and a stop be put to the course of justice.
On these considerations I cannot think it prudent, in the people, to crave
these powers; because not only I, but they themselves, would be in danger of
suffering by it; could I believe otherwise, I should not be against granting
any thing of this kind, that were asked of me, with any degree of common
prudence and civility. But, instead of finding cause to believe, the
contentions, that have been raised about these matters, have proceeded only
from mistakes of judgment, with an earnest desire, notwithstanding, at the
bottom, to serve the public (which, I hope, has still been the inducement of
several concerned in them) I have had but too sorrowful a view and sight to
complain of the manner, in which I have been treated. The attacks on my
reputation, the many indignities put upon me, in papers sent over hither, into
the hands of those who could not be expected to make the most discreet and
charitable use of them; the secret insinuations against my justice, besides the
attempt, made upon my estate; resolves past in the Assemblies, for turning my
quit-rents, never sold by me, to the support of government; my lands entered
upon, without any regular method; my manors invaded, (under pretense I had not
duly surveyed them) and both these by persons principally concerned in these
attempts against me here; a right to my overplus land, unjustly claimed by the
possessors of the tracts, in which they are found; my private estate
continually exhausting, for the support of that government, both here and
there; and no provision made for it by that country; to all which I cannot but
add, the violence, that has been particularly shown to my Secretary; of which
(though I shall, by no means, protect him in any thing, he can be justly
charged with, but suffer him to stand or fall by his own actions) I cannot but
thus far take notice, that, from all these charges, I have seen, or heard of,
against him, I have cause to believe, that had he been as much in opposition to
me, as he has been understood to stand for me, he might have met with a milder
treatment from his prosecutors; and, to think that any man should be the more
exposed there, on my account, and, instead of finding favor, meet with enmity,
for his being engaged in my service, is a melancholy consideration! In short,
when I reflect on all these heads, of which I have so much cause to complain,
and, at the same time, think of the hardships I, and my suffering family, have
been reduced to, in no small measure, owing to my endeavors for, and
disappointments from, that province, I cannot but mourn the unhappiness of my
portion, dealt to me from those, of whom I had reason to expect much better and
different things; nor can I but lament the unhappiness, that too many of them
are bringing on themselves, who, instead of pursuing the amicable ways of
peace, love and unity, which, at first, hoped to find in that retirement, are
cherishing a spirit of contention and opposition; and, blind to their own
interest, are oversetting that foundation, on which your happiness might be
built.

Friends, the eyes of many are upon you; the people of many notions of Europe
look on that country, as a land of ease and quiet, wishing to themselves, in
vain, the same blessings, they conceive you may enjoy: but, to see the use you
make of them, is no less the cause of surprise to others, while such bitter
complaints and reflections are seen to come from you, of which it is difficult
to conceive, even, the sense or meaning. Where are the distresses, grievances,
and oppressions, that the papers, sent from thence, so often say, you languish
under! while others have cause to believe, you have hitherto lived, or might
live, the happiest of any, in the Queen's dominions?

Is it such a grievous oppression, that the courts are established by my power,
founded on the king's charter, without a law of your making, when upon the same
plan you propose? If this disturb any, take the advice of other able lawyers on
the main, without tying me up to the opinion of principally one man, whom I
cannot think so very proper to direct in my affairs (for, I believe, the late
Assembly have had but that one lawyer amongst them) and I am freely content you
should have any law, that, by proper judges, should be found suitable. Is it
your oppression that the officers fees are not settled by an act of Assembly?
No man can be a greater enemy to extortion, than myself: do, therefore, allow
such fees as may reasonably encourage fit persons to undertake these offices,
and you shall soon have (and should have always cheerfully had) mine, and, I
hope, my Lieutenant's concurrence and approbation. Is it such an oppression,
that licenses for public houses have not been settled, as has been proposed? It
is a certain sign you are strangers to oppression, and know nothing but the
name, when you so highly bestow it on matters so inconsiderable; but that
business, I find, is adjusted. Could I know any real oppression, you lie under,
that is in my power to remedy (and what I wish you would take proper measures
to remedy, if you truly feel any such) I would be as ready, on my part, to
remove them, as you to desire it; but according to the best judgment, I can
make of the complaints, I have seen (and you once thought I had a pretty good
one) I must, in a deep sense of sorrow, say, that I fear, the kind hand of
Providence, that has so long favored and protected you, will, by the
ingratitude of many there to the great mercies of God, hitherto shown them, be,
at length, provoked to convince them of their unworthiness; and, by changing
the blessings, that so little care has been taken, by the public, to deserve,
into calamities, and reduce those, that have been so clamorous, and causelessly
discontented, to a true, but smarting sense of their duty. I write not this,
with a design to include all; I doubt not, many of you have been burdened at,
and can, by no means, join in the measures that have been taken; but while such
things appear under the name of an Assembly, that ought to represent the whole,
I cannot but speak more generally than I would desire, though I am not
unsensible what methods may be used to obtain the weight of such a name.

I have already been tedious, and shall now, therefore, briefly say, that the
opposition, I have met with from thence must, at length, force me to consider
more closely of my own private and sinking circumstances, in relation to that
province. In the mean time, I desire you all seriously to weigh what I have
wrote, together with your duty to yourselves, to me, and to the world, who have
their eyes upon you, and are witnesses of my early and earnest care for you. I
must think there is a regard due to me, that has not of late been paid; pray,
consider of it fully, and think soberly, what you have to desire of me, on the
one hand, and ought to perform to me, on the other; for, from the next
Assembly, I shall expect to know what you resolve, and what I may depend on. If
I must continue my regards to you, let me be engaged to it by a like
disposition in you toward me. But, if a plurality, after this, shall think
they owe me none, or no more, than for some years I have met with, let it, on a
fair election, be so declared, and I shall then, without further suspense, know
what I have to rely upon. God give you his wisdom and fear, to direct you, that
yet our poor country may be blessed with peace, love and industry, and we may
once more meet good friends, and live so to the end; our relation, in the
truth, having but the same true interest.

I am, with great truth, and most sincere regard, your real Friend, as well as
just Proprietor and Governor,

WILLIAM PENN.


What reply was made to this letter does not appear; but notwithstanding what
might have been thought deficient, or amiss, on the Proprietary's side, the
serious nature of it could not but affect the considerate part of the Assembly
with more regard for the father of their country, now, in his declining age,
and for his difficult situation, occasioned originally and principally on
account of it, or, for the real advantage of the colony, than they had, for
some time past, exhibited; seeing it plainly hinted to what their proceedings
necessarily tended, and the means, though not expressed, which he should soon
be obliged to use, without an immediate alteration of the Assembly's conduct,
relative to him and his interest. The consequence thus far appears, that, at
the next annual election of the Members of Assembly, in October, 1710, there
was not one of those Members returned, An entire new Assembly elected.
who served in the preceding year, but an entire new House* of which Richard
Hill was chosen Speaker. The names of the Members of this Assembly, elected on
the 1st of October, 1710, were:

For Philadelphia county.
Edward Farmar, William Trent, Edward Jones, Thomas Masters, Thomas Jones,
Samuel Cart, Jonathan Dickinson, David Gifling.
Chester county.
Nicholas Pile, Joseph Baker, William Lewis, John Wood, Nathaniel Newlin,
Ephraim Jackson, Caleb Pusey, Isaac Tailor.
Bucks county.
Abel Janny, John Clark, Stoffeld Vansand, John Hough, Thomas Stevenson, Samuel
Baker, Jeremiah Langhorn, William Biles.
City of Philadelphia.
Richard Hill, Isaac Norris.



The Governor, in his speech to the House, on the 16th of the month, Part of
the Governor's speech to the new Assembly.
told them, "That he did not doubt it was obvious to every one's understanding,
why he could not agree with the last Assembly; but, as he took them to have
different sentiments, they might promise themselves, that his ready assent to
all bills, drawn up for the public good, would not be wanting; and that, as he
had often expressed his resolution of settling among them, he could have no
aims, contrary to the interest of the people: that thus a confidence might be
established in each other, he hoped, they would cheerfully proceed with their
bills, and make such provision for the support of the government as consisted
with the character, that the province justly bore, in all her Majesty's
dominions. He concluded with recommending them to dispatch, and cautioning them
to avoid the expense of a long sitting; a practice, that some former
Assemblies, by giving way to, had left a debt upon the country, that, perhaps,
they would not very easily discharge."

Harmony between the Governor and this Assembly, etc.
The harmony, which subsisted between the Governor and this Assembly was
productive of much more agreeable and satisfactory proceedings, and salutary
effects, in the public transactions of the government, than had been, for some
years before; and many laws were mutually agreed on, and passed during the
winter.

In the summer of the year 1711, 1711.
Governor Gookin, having received an express from England, Expedition to
Canada, etc.
respecting the expedition against Canada, convened the Assembly, and
acquainted them therewith, and the preparations of the northern colonies, for
that end.

He recommended them to exert themselves, suitably on the occasion, not to be
behind their northern neighbors, in answering the Queen's expectation, and to
enable him to raise and support the quota of men, assigned this province, or
else, that they would make an equivalent; and he laid before the House certain
papers, with the Queen's instructions to him, relative to the affair; which
last were as follows:

Anne R.

Trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. The Queen's letter of instructions
to the Governor.
Whereas, we have sent our instructions to our Governors of New York and New
Jersey, and of the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, relating to an
expedition, we design to make against the common enemy, the French, inhabiting
North America. And whereas, We have directed our said Governors, and Francis
Nicholson, Esquire, to communicate to you such part of our said instructions,
as relates to the province, under your command. Our will and pleasure is, that
you d^ in all things, conform yourself to the said instructions. And we do
hereby command you to be aiding and assisting in carrying on the said
expedition: and, in order thereunto, that you do meet our said Governors, and
the said Francis Nicholson, at such place, and at such time, as they shall, for
that purpose, signify unto you; and that you put in execution such things, as
shall then be resolved to be acted and done, on your part; in doing of which,
we do expect you to use the utmost vigor and diligence; and for so doing this
shall be your warrant: So we bid you farewell.

Given at our court, at St. James's the one and thirtieth day of February,
1710-11, in the ninth year of our reign. By her Majesty's command, H. ST. JOHN.

To our trusty and well-beloved, the Governor, or Lieutenant Governor, or
Commander in Chief, for the time being, of our province of Pennsylvania, in
America.

The congress of Governors, or council of war, met accordingly at New London,
in Connecticut, where the several quotas, or proportions, expected from each
colony, were fixed; but by reason of the short space of time, and great
distance, Governor Gookin could not attend it, nor properly represent the state
and ability of the province; and the Assembly of Pennsylvania thought the
colony over-rated: The Indians a constant expense to Pennsylvania, etc.
for this province particularly was constantly at a considerable expense, for
the preservation of the friendship of the Indians, in such manner, as was very
important and interesting to all the neighboring governments, and the general
utility; they nevertheless voted two thousand pounds, to be raised upon the
inhabitants of the province, for the Queen's use, by a tax of five pence half
penny per pound, on estates, and twenty shillings per head, on single freemen:
and a bill for that purpose was passed by the Governor.

In the Assembly, elected October, 1711, there was a considerable change of
Members; and David Lloyd's name again appears among them; but Richard Hill was
chosen Speaker.

The Governor, in a speech to the House, this winter, expressed, That the
Proprietary, The Proprietor desires to serve the people of the province, etc.
in his letters to him, had signified his desire to serve the people of this
province, and left it to themselves, to think on the means, that might best
conduce to their own quiet and interest: at the same time, offering his ready
concurrence to any thing of that nature, which they should propose, consistent
with the honor and interest of the crown, of the Proprietary, and of the
public welfare; and recommending to their consideration, that, as to himself,
he had been above three years engaged in the affairs of the province, and
almost so long in it; that what he had received from the public, appeared by
the acts of the last Assembly; which was far short of what the Proprietary gave
him to expect from the people.

The House, in answer, thankfully acknowledged the Proprietary's kind regard,
and desires to serve them, with the Governor's offered and ready concurrence to
what should contribute to that end. They promised to take care of the
Governor's support; and accordingly, afterward agreed on such provision for
the same, as was to mutual satisfaction.

The year 1712 was remarkable for two things, 1712.
respecting Pennsylvania; the first was, an agreement for the sale of the
government of it, The Proprietor disposes of the government to the Queen;
and the territories, to Queen Anne, by the Proprietary; the most probable
inducements for which have already, in part, been mentioned: for though a
temporary alteration was made the last year in the Assembly's conduct,
respecting him, yet it appears, in this manner, he thought it most prudent to
extricate himself from the debt and difficulties, in which the province had too
much involved him. The second was, And is seized with an apoplexy, etc.
a failure of those mental faculties, in the Proprietary, which, during most of
his life, had shone so bright, and been so beneficent to many people, both in
Europe and America, by means of a distemper, supposed to be an apoplexy; which
deprived him, in part, of his former abilities, and rendered him incapable of
public business, and consequently disabled him from executing a surrender of
the government, according to agreement.

Governor Gookin, in his speech to the Assembly, on the 15th of October, this
year, of which Isaac Norris was Speaker, thus hinted the former of these
affairs, Purport of the Governor's speech to the Assembly.
expressing, That the Proprietary, in a letter to a Member of the Council, had
signified his intentions of surrendering the government, in a few months: in
consequence of which he had reason to believe, he should not be continued
Governor under the crown; he declared his readiness to serve them, during the
short time he should probably be in the administration; and he requested them
to take effectual measures, to have ready, when called for, the sum granted by
the late Assembly; that the debts incurred, on account of the Indian treaties,
be immediately discharged, and that the Indians, then in town, be well
satisfied; who had proposed, in behalf of the Five Nations, to establish a free
and open trade between them, in Pennsylvania, for the future. He declared,
that, as to himself, he had but a melancholy prospect; that, after all he could
hope for, and his administration over, he should find himself a great loser, by
coming to Pennsylvania; which, as they probably would be the last Assembly,
that he should meet, he recommended to their serious consideration, especially
the expense of his return.

The House, in answer, acquainted the Governor, That, it being inconvenient, at
that season, for them to attend in Assembly, Purport of the Assembly's answer.
they intended to adjourn, and appoint a committee, to inspect the public
accounts of the province, in the mean time, and to prepare matters for the
better dispatch of business, at their next meeting; and recommending the care
of the Indians to the Governor and Council, according to the law, in such
cases, after the Governor had signified his approbation of their proposed
adjournment, They adjourn.
the House accordingly adjourned.

In October, 1713, 1713.
Joseph Growdon was Speaker of the Assembly; and on the 15th of the month, the
Governor, in a speech, informed them, Part of the Governor's speech.
That the government was not yet surrendered, and probably would not very
shortly; that, being still invested with the proprietary powers, he was ready
to use them for the welfare of the people, in all their reasonable
expectations; and that, he took this opportunity to give the country his thanks
for Note. (...) the printed votes of Assembly, this year, appears the following
account of the wine and rum, imported into the province* taken from the naval
officer, and laid before the House, on the 6th of the 1^th mo. (Feb.) 1712-13;
which may give some idea of this branch of trade in the province, at that time.
viz.

Wine imported since the 25th of March, 1711.
Pipes 441 from the place of growth. Hhds. 13 Qr. Casks 23 Pipes 48 Elsewhere.
Hhds. 2 Qr. Casks 2

Rum imported, ut antea.
Hhds. 574 Tierces 360 Barrels 183 Kilderkin 1 Gallons 200 Pipe 1 Casks 19
Puncheons 2 Groce Bottlec 4

Note. In the year 1712, John Lowdon, John Miller, Michael Light-foot, James
Starr, Thomas Garnet, and other Friends or Quakers, settled in New Garden, in
Chester county. The first of these, John Lowdon, died at Abingdon, Philadelphia
county, in 1714. He came from Ireland, about the year 1711, was an eminent
preacher among the Quakers, traveled much in that service, and was much
esteemed and beloved.


the care taken for his support, 1714.
in the administration, by the last Assembly, and hoped its continuance.

David Lloyd again Speaker of the Assembly, etc.
In October 1714, David Lloyd was again chosen Speaker of the Assembly; and
notwithstanding, in the beginning of their year, they had several sessions, yet
nothing material was concluded between them and the Governor: they, therefore,
on the 26th of the first month, adjourned themselves to the latter part of
September, 1715; but before that time, early in the spring, the Governor
summoned them, by the following writ:

The Governor's writ for summoning the Assembly.
CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor of the province of Pennsylvania,
etc.
To the Sheriff, etc. Pennsylvania, ss.
WHEREAS the Assembly of this province, in the month of March last, diverse
matters of the greatest weight and importance before them, which required to be
dispatched, for the public good and safety, notwithstanding thought fit,
without my consent or approbation, to adjourn themselves to the latter end of
their yearly sessions; by which means Notes.

Names of the members of Council present, May 16th, 1712.
Edward Shippen, Joseph Growdon, Samuel Carpenter, Thomas Story, James Logan,
Richard Hill, Isaac Norris, Samuel Preston, Jonathan Dickinson, Robert Ashton.
In the year 1713, died Samuel Carpenter, of Philadelphia, the Treasurer of the
province; and was succeeded in his office by Samuel Preston, appointed by the
Assembly.

Samuel Carpenter arrived very early in the province, and was one of the most
considerable traders and settlers in Pennsylvania; where he held, for many
years, some of the greatest offices in the government; and through a great
variety of business he preserved the love and esteem of a large and extensive
acquaintance. His great abilities, activity and benevolent disposition of mind,
in diverse capacities, but more particularly among his friends, the Quakers, are
said to have rendered and distinguished him as a very useful and valuable
member, not only of that religious society, but also of the community in
general.


means, the expectations of all good people, who depended on a suitable
provision to be then forthwith made, to answer the several exigencies of the
government, became entirely disappointed. The great inconveniences of which
must still continue unremedied until another Assembly be chosen, unless they
are called together before the time of their said adjournment. These,
therefore, are (by an^ with the advice of the Council) to require and command
you, that you forthwith summon all the representatives, chosen in your county,
for the said Assembly, that they meet me, at Philadelphia, the second day of
May next, to proceed to the dispatch of the said affairs, and such other
matters as I may have occasion to lay before them; and without delay make
return of this writ into the Secretary's office.

Given under my hand and lesser seal of the said province, at Philadelphia, the
sixteenth day of April, Anno Domini 1715.

The Assembly met, in pursuance of this writ, which appears to throw some
reflection on the manner of their adjournment. Ill humor and altercation,
which, during the latter part of the preceding year, had been gaining ground
between the Governor and the Assembly, Ill humor between the Governor and the
House.
appeared now again too much to prevail between the different branches of the
Legislature.

The Governor addressed the House with a reprehensory speech, blaming their
adjournment to near the end of their year, without his consent, The Governor
blames the House, etc.
or knowledge; their leaving the great exigencies of government unprovided for;
their being the cause of so long obstruction of the administration of justice,
with its consequences, by their refusing to accommodate the bills, prepared for
that purpose, so that it might be in his power to pass the same; which might
easily have been done; and their neglect of making provision, for his support,
so immediately necessary, and justly due to him, etc.

The Assembly throw the blame on the Governor, etc.
The Assembly, in their turn, throw the blame upon the Governor, for his
refusing to pass the bills, as they had prepared them, to answer the exigencies
of the province, and the support of the administration. They, notwithstanding,
afterward so far agreed, But they accommodate matters, etc.
that the Governor passed a considerable number of laws before the end of the
month. Note. In the year 1714, Francis Swain, John Smith, Joseph Pennock,
William Pusey, and other Friends or Quakers, settled at London Grove, in
Chester County.


CHAPTER XXI.
The Assembly's address to the Governor respecting tumults, etc. in
Philadelphia, with his answer. -- An Indian treaty held in Philadelphia, in
1715. -- The Governor intends to go home. -- The Assembly's address to King
George the First. -- The Governor disagrees with both the Council and Assembly.
-- Names of the Members of Assembly and some of the Council. -- The Assembly's
representation to Governor Gookin, containing a variety of things, in 1716.

IN the summer of this year, 1715.
(1715) there was complaint made in the House, of frequent and great tumults,
raised in Philadelphia, Complaint of tumults, etc.
under the pretense of supporting and abetting of one Francis Philips, who had
been indicted for high crimes and misdemeanors; upon which the Assembly
presented to the Governor the following address, viz.

To CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the province of Pennsylvania,
etc. The Assembly's address to the Governor thereupon.

The address of the representatives of the freemen of the said province, in
General Assembly met, the 10th day of June, 1715.
May it please the Governor,
We were in hopes, that the opening of the courts of justice might have been a
means to put a stop to those tumults, which frequently happened in this city,
since the beginning of our session, so that our meeting now would have been to
crown our labors with a general satisfaction.

But, to our great disappointment, we understand, by credible information, that
some of those who occasioned those tumults, in order to annoy their opposite
party, are now levelling their malignity against the Magistrates of this city
and county, and endeavoring to prevail with the Governor to be of opinion,
that here is no power to bring to trial a certain clergyman, who is charged by
indictment, at the King's suit, for committing fornication, against the King's
peace, and the law of this province, etc.

Note. The following Indian treaty, may show the manner of treating with these
people about this time; omitting the marks or figures of the different belts,
which were in the margin of the original. At a Council at Philadelphia, 14th
June, 1715.
Present, the honorable Charles Gookin, Lieutenant Governor, Joseph Growdon,
Griffith Owen, James Logan, Richard Hill, Isaac Norris, Robert Ashton.


The chiefs of the Delaware and Schuylkill Indians, in a visit to the Governor,
etc met in the court house, at Philadelphia; Sassoonan being their head, and
Opessah, the late Shawanese king, with his companions attending him; and then
opening the Calamet, with great ceremony of their rattles and songs, it was
offered by Sassoonan, the king, to the Governor and Council, and to all others
of the English there met; and afterward it was also offered by him to all his
Indians; and then with the same ceremony was put up again.

Then Sassoonan rose, and spoke to the Governor, and said, "That the Calumet,
the bond of peace, which they had carried to all the nations round, they had
now brought hither; that it was a sure bond and seal of peace amongst them, and
between them and us; and they desired, by holding up their hands, that the God
of heaven might be witness to it, and that there might be a firm peace between
them and us for ever."

To which the Governor answered;

That he was very glad to see them retain so strong a sense of that firm peace,
which was settled between William Penn, the Founder and Chief Governor of this
country, at his first coming into it, in behalf of himself, and all his people,
with them and all theirs; that they were sensible we had always preserved it
unviolated, on our side; and were glad we had reason to say, they had done the
same, on theirs; that we d^sired nothing more, than that the great God, who
made heaven and earth, and all living creatures, and who knew the thoughts, and
saw all the actions of men, to whom they applied, should be witness of what now
passed between us; and, that this renewal of the same bond of peace might be
recorded between them and us, for ever.

With which speech they expressed themselves greatly satisfied.

Sassoonan added, that hearing of some murmurs among some of themselves, to
prevent any misunderstanding, they came to renew the former bond of friendship:
-- That William Penn had, at his first coming, made a clear and open road, all
the way to the Indians; [by this meaning a friendly communication] that they
desired the same might be kept open; and that all obstructions should be
removed; of which, on their side, they will take care.

He then presented a belt of Wampum, and added to the same effect:

That they desired the peace, which had been made, should be so firm; that they
and we should join hand in hand so firmly, that nothing, even the greatest
tree, should be able to divide them asunder.

After this, they, seeming to wait for an answer, were desired to proceed, and
to deliver what they now had further to say; and that answers and returns, for
binding the friendship, on our side, would be made to them altogether.

Sassoonan accordingly proceeded and said, That their late king Skalitchi
desired of them that they would take care to keep a perfect with the English,
and that they should be joined as one; that the Indians should be half English,
and the English make themselves as half Indians, that they might the better be
as the same.

He further added, laying down a second belt, That, as the fathers have been in
peace, so they desired that their children ^^d our children still, as they
should be born, and come into the world (...), might be brought up in the same
union; and that it should be continued between their and our posterity, from
generation to generation for ever.

He added, That, in the last council, which they held with us, they spoke
concerning the sun; by whose influence they had lived in warmth and plenty,
from the beginning; that they now desired the same happiness might be continued
to them with us, in the firmest peace; and that it might last as long as the
sun should endure: that when any clouds interpose between them and the sun, it
brings coolness, and is unpleasant; the same will be, if any cloud should arise
between them and us; and, therefore, they desire, if any thing of that kind
appear, it may be dissipated, without delay.

He laid down a third belt, and continued in the same strain, desiring as
before, that they might still enjoy the warmth of the sun, and our friendship
together; that then they should want no necessaries of life, but enjoying all
the comforts of it, with their wives, and might repose themselves with them in
peace and safety, without any disturbance.

This he delivered in behalf of all our Indians, on this side Susquehanna, who
are all concerned with him in this treaty; and this was all he had to say on
this subject.

He then began again, and laying down a bundle of deer skins, said, That now
they would discourse of matters of trade between them and us; that hitherto it
had been like a house with two doors, one for them, the other for the English;
but the goods were placed in the dark; so that they were wholly ignorant how
they had been dealt with, or how they should trade.

He repeated the same, laying down a second bundle of skins, and desired they
might be informed of the terms, they might trade upon, that if occasion were,
they might, at any time, send their wives, and be out of danger of being
cheated.

He added a third bundle of deer skins, complaining how hard it was upon them;
for that they knew not what they were to expect for their goods, and that they
could scarce purchase ours.

Laying down a fourth bundle, being skins and furs, he desired, that we might
be as people, eating all of the same dish, and so they might be dealt with, as
if they were our own people.

Presenting a fifth bundle, he said, that formerly they exactly knew the prices
both of our goods and theirs; but now they varied so much, there was no
understanding them.

With a sixth bundle, he said, That through this uncertainty, he wore himself
such ragged breeches, that he was ashamed to show them, and desired this
inconveniency might be remedied.

Offering a seventh, he complained that they were often imposed on by the
weight of our money, when they came to sell, that we certainly knew the value
of theirs; but they could not understand ours; and, therefore, desired that
this great inconveniency might also be remedied.

He offered an eighth, informing, that Opessah (formerly king of the Shawanese,
but now abdicated) lived at a great distance, and entertained them with
victuals and provisions, when they went that way; and therefore they desired,
that when he should come among us, he might be received as one of themselves,
with the same openness, that he received from them.

Having ended their discourse, they were told, that tomorrow they should
receive answers to all they had said; and were, for the present, dismissed.

Orders were given to the Mayor of Philadelphia, Isaac Norris, and the
Secretary, to take an account of the presents, now made, and their value; and
that goods should be provided, to be ready in the morning; and the said
presents were found to consist of,

45 Raw Fall Deer skins, with. 138 lb. at 9 d L.5 3 6 8 Summer ditto, 16 at 13 13
53 Dressed 57 at 26 7 2 6 84 Whole Foxes, at 18 d 6 6 12 Racoons, at 12 d 12 3
Ordinary Fishers, at 3 s 9 L. 21 11

At a Council held in Philadelphia, 15th June, 1715.
Present, the honorable Charles Gookin, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, Griffith
Owen, James Logan, Richard Hill, Isaac Norris, Robert Ashton.


Presents having been prepared, according to order, and the Indians being met
and seated, the Governor ordered the interpreter to inform them, "That their
visit, on so friendly a design, as still further to strengthen the bond of
Peace between us, was very acceptable; that we doubted not but they would think
themselves, and their children from generation to generation, obliged to keep
inviolable those firm treaties of peace, which had been made, and which we had
kept, and were resolved ever to keep firm, on our side; and hope none of them
have any cause to murmur: if they knew of any, they are desired to mention it
freely.

That the great Queen of England, who had, for so many years, reigned with
great success, was now dead, and was succeeded by a King, who has been a great
General, in the wars, is a wise King, and has more dominions, than any King of
Great Britain ever had before him; that under him, as well they (the Indians)
as we, his other subjects, may live in the same peace, that we have enjoyed any
time before; that our Proprietary, their Friend, William Penn, is still living,
though but weak in health.

That, as to the complaints, they made concerning trade, the Governor is sorry
he cannot give them a more entire satisfaction in it, and remove every
hardship, which they lie under; but that all trade is uncertain; our own wheat
the last year, yielded twice the price, it does this; all our goods, which they
buy, are brought from England, whither we also send theirs; that sometimes a
habit, which is in fashion one year, is laid aside the next; and accordingly
the skins, of which they are made, will be of a higher or lower value. It is
the same with all our other merchandise, as with those which they buy; their
only security and safety will be, to trade with the honestest men, and those of
the best reputation, and prefer those who will give the most; that this is our
rule, in all our business, and they must do the same.

That Opessah has long been under a league of friendship with us; and though he
has now left those Indians, among whom he formerly lived, yet we shall show him
the same friendship as ever; and shall depend upon the same from him; and that,
upon this further recommendation from them, he will think himself as one of
them, and under the same bond with them; and, therefore, we desire, that, as he
lives at a great distance, and may see many foreign Indians, he will, from time
to time, inform us, if he hears of any thing, which may concern us; and this we
desire, and shall expect and depend on from him, and all his friends there; as
also that, if they know any thing now of any late motions to or from the
southward, they would acquaint us.

Concerning which, being particularly asked, Opessah affirmed, he knew nothing.

The Governor further ordered, they should be told, That all the sober English
very much lamented that they could not guard themselves better against liquor;
that they should send their young men abroad to hunt, and, at their return,
should sell their goods for such things as would be of real service to them,
and not throw it all away for that destructive liquor rum; which robbed them,
not only of their goods, but of their lives also

All which being delivered together with the presents, which were provided,
Pokehais, in the name of the rest, expressed their satisfaction and thanks, for
the savours now showed them."

The presents were

16 Stroud matchcoats at 19 L. 15 4 10 Duffil ditto 106 5 5 6 Blankets, 134 4 6
Shirts, 86 2 11 50 lb. Powder, 4 10 100 lb. Lead and 100 at 3 d each 2 10 12
doz. Pipes. 4 6 L. 32 4 6



We desire the Governor to consider, that fornication, and such like offenses,
which, in other places, may be of ecclesiastical connusance, are, by the laws
of this province, made triable in the quarter sessions; and as our laws are, by
the royal charter, to be inviolably observed; so the Governor and Magistrates
are bound in duty to cause the same to be put in execution: therefore we are of
opinion, that whoever does, or shall, assert, or endeavor to incense, or
persuade, the Governor, or any other, that the court of quarter sessions, as by
law established, has no cognizance of the said offenses, are, and shall be,
deemed enemies to the Governor, and government, of this province.

And now, may it please the Governor, to take speedy care, by such ways and
means, as may be effectual, to discourage and suppress the said tumults, and
disperse all tumultuous gatherings of people, in this city; and more especially
those, who shall endeavor to weaken the hands of the Magistrates, in the
discharge of their duty, or shall speak, or act, in derogation to their
authority, or shall, in any wise, attempt to screen, or rescue the said
malefactor from the course of justice.

As we have been, and hope, shall be, willing to support the government, so we
are earnestly concerned, that the King's subjects may be protected under thy
administration; and for that end we do insist that thou will be pleased to
cause the laws to be duly put in execution; and to countenance, and not
discourage, the Magistrates and officers, in the discharge of their duties;
that so the people may be reduced to their former obedience, and application
for redress elsewhere prevented.

We also desire that persons be commissionated, and courts called, for speedy
trial of those criminal causes now depending.


To this the Governor, by a message, returned the following answer:

Gentlemen,
The Governor's answer.
The tumults, that have hitherto happened, I have immediately endeavored to
quell; and I hope with good effect; the courts are now opened; the
administration of justice is restored; and if any should be so audacious as to
oppose the Magistrates, they should not want my countenance and assistance to
suppress the attempt: I am sorry it should be surmised to the Assembly by any,
that those who show a malignity to the magistracy could have grounds of hope to
prevail with me to favor them; on the contrary, they shall find (if there be
any such) that I shall exert all the authority with which I am invested, to
support the proprietary powers of government, and the Magistrates, in the
execution of the laws, and full discharge of their duty.

The commissions, that are not yet issued, will be forthwith expedited.


Joseph Growdon was chosen Speaker of the Assembly, elected in October, 1715.
At the first meeting of this Assembly, in the same month, The Governor
inintends to go home, etc.
the Governor in his speech, acquainted them with his intention of going home,
in the spring; on which account he had writ to the Proprietary for his leave,
and to some other persons of note, to procure him the King's license of absence
for twelve months; this notice he gave them, that they might dispatch such
necessary business, while he was with them, as could not be done without a
Governor present.

1716.
Queen Anne having deceased the last year, this Assembly drew up, and sent to
England, the following address to King George, on his accession to the throne,
viz.

The Assembly's address to King George.
To GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc.
The humble address of the representatives of the freemen of the province of
Pennsylvania, in Assembly met, the first of the month called May, 1716.
Gracious Sovereign,
Though by diverse concurring causes, and particularly the great indisposition
of our Proprietary and Governor in chief of this province, The Proprietary, as
before deserved, had, in the year 1712. been so affected, as to his health,
(supposed to be by an apoplexy) that, in a great treasure, from that time
forward, he became more and more incapable of public business, till his death,
in 1718.
we have been hitherto, to our great trouble, prevented the opportunity of
expressing to the King our sincere joy, for his happy and peaceable accession
to the throne of his ancestors, and thereby securing to all his protestant
subjects the full enjoyment of their religious and civil rights; yet none could
be more sensible of the great blessing, nor express a warmer zeal for his
service, in their earliest approaches, than, at all times since, has filled our
thankful breasts; and although we had not the desired advantage of expressing
these our sentiments, yet we became the easier under that disappointment, by
accounting the majority of this province included in that general application,
made by their friends at London, in behalf of the whole community, wherein our
thoughts, 1716.
with their own, were most truly represented.

Such has been the King's goodness, not only expressed in his first generous
royal declaration, and repeatedly since, from the throne, but more powerfully
exerted through a most wise and steady administration, in pursuing every
measure, that might contribute to the safety and happiness of his people; in
making the known laws the invariable rule of his government; in restoring the
honor of the British nation abroad; and in procuring for his subjects such
advantages, in commerce, as could scarce be hoped for, after they had been so
unhappily given away, that, even, the remotest parts of the King's great
dominions feel the benign influences of his paternal affection to the whole,
and are laid under doubled obligations to make the utmost returns of gratitude,
as well as obedience, for their happiness, under his auspicious reign.

It is, therefore, the more surprising, that there should be any of the British
race, within that Island, so lost to all sense of their own interest, as well
as their engaged duty to a Prince of the most conspicuous and most consummate
virtues, as to express the least uneasy murmurs, much less to rise in an open
and unnatural rebellion; for the suppression of which, by the great wisdom and
vigilance of the King, and his ministry, and faithfulness of his servants, we
do, with hearts full of the sincerest gratitude and joy, return our most humble
acknowledgments to the Fountain of infinite goodness and mercy, that has so
eminently appeared in the support of the royal throne, established on the
lasting foundation of justice, and to the confusion of all the detestable
machinations, vainly formed against it.

As for us, our known principles are so essentially interwoven with the
protestant interest of Great Britain, and our greatest concerns do so entirely
depend on the preservation of thy person, and royal issue, long to reign over
us, that we cannot possibly separate our own welfare from the indispensible
duty of showing ourselves with the most hearty affection, thy loyal and most
obedient subjects.

That confusion and disapointment may attend all the wicked devices of thy
enemies; that the minds of thy people may be composed, and universally inspired
with the same spirit of love and obedience, as that, wherewith we now approach
thy throne; and that the watchful providence of Almighty God may always attend
the King, and confirm the wisdom and justice of his rightful government over
us, is the most sincere and unfeigned desire of the King's humble and dutiful
subjects.

Signed by order of the House, JOSEPH GROWDON, Speaker.


In October following, Richard Hill was chosen Speaker of the new Assembly;
during whose sessions not much of public importance, in a legislative capacity,
for the benefit of the province, seems to have been transacted: The Governor
disagrees with both the Assembly and Council.
-- for the Governor, about this time, appears to have differed, in sentiment,
not only with the representatives of the people, in his refusing to qualify
Quakers for Magistrates, and in other important affairs, but he also disagreed
with the Council. The names of the Members of this Assembly were,

For Philadelphia county.
Richard Hill, Speaker, Isaac Norris, William Trent, Jonathan Dickinson,
Chester county.
David Lloyd, John Blanston, jun. Henry Hayes, Joseph Pennock,
Bucks county.
Jeremiah Langhorne, Thomas Stevenson, John Sotcher, Joseph Bond,
For Philadelphia county.
Thomas Masters, Joseph Redman, Clement Plumstead, William Fishbourn.
Chester county.
David Harry, John Maris, John Worrell, Henry Oburn.
Bucks county.
Joseph Kirkbride, Thomas Stackhouse, John Swift, James Carter.
City of Philadelphia.
George Roach, Benjamin Vining.
Among the names of the Members of Council, about this time, appear to be,

James Logan, who was also Secretary, Samuel Preston, likewise Treasurer,
Robert Ashton, also Prothonotary of the common pleas at Philadelphia, Joseph
Growdon, Caleb Pusey, Griffith Owen.
The Judges of the Supreme court were,

William Trent, Jonathan Dickinson, and George Roach.




He had repeatedly charged the present Speaker of the Assembly, who was then
also Mayor of the city of Philadelphia, and James Logan, the Secretary of the
province, men in high office and trust, with disaffection to the King; of which
they complained to the Assembly; but he refused to give either them or the
House any satisfaction, or proofs, for what he had asserted.

The Assembly, therefore, declared it their opinion, that the said charge was
without any ground, or reason to support it, and seemed to be intended to
render these persons obnoxious to the King and government.

But these, and some other matters of complaint, more fully appear in the
following representation which was presented to the Governor, in the ninth
month this year; and a duplicate of it sent to Great Britain, viz.

To CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the province of Pennsylvania,
etc.
The Assembly's representation to Governor Gookin.
A representation of the freemen of the said province, in General Assembly met,
the third of the ninth month, 1716.
May it please the Governor,
When our Proprietary and Governor in Chief, first obtained a grant of this
province from the crown, and a numerous colony of industrious people settled
therein, we are well assured it was his inclination, as well as visible
interest, to render them as safe as possible, under his administration.

And, as his religious persuasion, as a dissenter from the established Church
of England, was well known, and therefore those of the same profession made a
great part of the first adventurers with him, it cannot be doubted but that he
would ever think himself obliged to provide that they should enjoy, in
Pennsylvania, at least, equal ease and privileges with any other English
subjects of the same rank, in any of the King's dominions.

Accordingly when necessitated to be absent from us, as he has, for the most
part been, he took care, from time to time, to appoint such persons, to be his
deputies, in the government, in whose moderation and tenderness toward his
friends, as well as loyalty to the crown, and justice to all its subjects, he
believed he might confide.

When the Governor, therefore, first brought over the Proprietary's commission
of deputation, for the government, we could not doubt but that, being the
Proprietary's choice, and acting solely by powers, derived from him, he would
steadily pursue the measures, that had generally been taken, from our first
settlement, and endeavor to make all the subjects of the crown, under the
Proprietary's government, equally secure and easy.

On this expectation, confirmed by the Proprietary's letters of recommendation,
the Assemblies, not doubting the Governor's good intentions toward them,
freely discharged what was incumbent on them, and it is hoped, in no small
measure, to the Governor's satisfaction.

Nor while the Proprietary's health, and former abilities happily continued,
had the inhabitants much reason to complain, but that the Governor made the
Proprietary's directions, from home, as far as they could be obtained, and the
advice of those, the Proprietary had instructed here, the rule (in great
measure) of his conduct, in what related to the Proprietary's interest, or
government, and to the privileges of the people.

But whether it be now owing to the discontinuance of those orders and
directions, which has followed on the late great and melancholy change, in the
Proprietary's health, or to some unhappy advice from others, or to any new
formed views, we know not; but this House of Representatives, soon after their
first meeting, finding the Governor had, at length, so far lost sight of the
obligations he lay under to his principal and constituent, as to enter on
measures inconsistent with his interest, and our constitution, and the
liberties of the people, we judged it our indispensible duty to apply to the
Governor for redress; who declaring his opinion to be such as would not admit
of any, we desired, with due submission, that he would be pleased to suffer the
reasons of that opinion to be argued before him; but finding, to our trouble,
that all our endeavors were in vain, we think ourselves obliged, in the
discharge of the trust reposed in us, fully to represent the fatal
consequences, as well as the unreasonableness, of those measures, to the end
that a proper relief may be obtained; without which the greater part of the
inhabitants of this province must be rendered miserable; which we humbly offer,
as follows:

Those, who accompanied the Proprietary in the settlement of this colony, being
chiefly (as has already been observed) of those called Quakers, who, lying
under some hardships, in their native country, because, for conscience sake,
they could not comply with the laws there, for taking oaths, expected that, by
virtue of the powers of legislation, granted by the crown, to the Proprietary
and them, they might, after the hazard and toil of their removal hither, be
capable of enjoying the privileges of English subjects, without violation of
their religious principles.

Accordingly the Proprietary and Assemblies provided laws, by which those
people might be enabled to hold any offices (there being but few others at that
time, to fill them) or to give evidence in any case whatsoever.

Some disputes afterward arising on this subject, the late Queen, by her
order, in Council, dated the 21st of January, 1702, was pleased to extend to
this province, the affirmation allowed to the Quakers, in England, by the
seventh and eighth of William the Third, not only for the purposes intended by
that in England, but also for the qualification of Magistrates and officers;
and the same being from thence applied to other cases, this order, on the
repeal of our own acts, in a great measure, supplied what was necessary, in
this point, for the administration of justice.

But the act of parliament itself being near its expiration, it was found
necessary, as well on that, as some other considerations, to establish, by an
act of the province, the qualifications of officers, and the manner of giving
evidence, by affirmation; and the Governor (upon the Assembly's performing the
conditions proposed them) passed acts for that, as well as other purposes, to
answer the exigencies of the government.

That the said affirmation-acts should have full force, according to the
intention of them, of such importance to the ease and security of the whole
province, that it could scarcely be supposed, any person amongst us, who
professed, even, the most slender regard for the people's welfare, would
attempt to deprive them of the advantages thereof.

It is, therefore, the more surprising, that the Governor himself (from whose
station, and the trust reposed in him, by our Proprietary, the most tender
concern for the safety and well-being of all his Majesty's subjects, under his
care, might reasonably be expected) should be the principal, if not the first,
person, in the government, who would render the intention of those acts void to
us, though passed by himself into laws so lately before, by publicly declaring
his opinions, in such manner, as would render the said acts repugnant to the
laws of England, and repealed by the act of parliament of the first of his
present Majesty; in pursuance of which opinion, he has refused to qualify such
persons for offices, that could not take the oath, according to the law of
England.

The consequence of which is, that, as no Quaker in Great Britain, is
qualified, or permitted, to give evidence, in any criminal causes, or serve on
any juries, or bear any office, or place of profit, in the government; so,
should the same hold, in this colony, not only the great number of the first
adventurers, with their descendants, of the same profession, are to be wholly
excluded from having any part, or share, in the administration of justice, and
the execution of the laws of the country, (which, as it would be a general
inconveniency, so would it throw the burden too heavily on a few of the
inhabitants) but, what is of no less importance, for the security of those of
other professions, the greatest outrages and barbarities, against any person,
may be committed, in the face of any number of Quakers, and the malefactors,
though brought to trial, must escape with impunity, for want of legal evidence,
if that of the Quakers is not to be so accounted; of which the Governor cannot
forget a very memorable instance, when (at a time, that unhappily there was no
act of the province, for an affirmation, but the Queen's order was thought
sufficient, during that interval, for all but capital cases) it is presumed a
murderer escaped the sentence, that was due to him, for want of such evidence,
as was esteemed legal, though more than one Quaker appeared in court, who were
witnesses to the fact.

But, besides these inconveniences, however great, there remains one further
consequence of that construction of the act, which, perhaps, the Governor is
not sufficiently advised of; which is, That, if no Quaker, in Great Britain,
nor the Plantations, can bear any office, or place of profit, in the
government, some may judge it a natural inference, that the Proprietary himself
is equally affected by it; and then all powers derived from him, as well those
lodged in the Governor, by his deputation, as the magistracy and inferior
officers, fall together.

Having thus far pointed out the destructive consequences of that opinion,
should it fully take place in this province, we judge it, in the next place,
incumbent on us, in duty to the Governor, and for the discharge of the trust,
reposed in us, by those we represent, to offer to the consideration of the
Governor, and all others concerned, such reasons as have occurred to us, in our
enquiry into this head; which we hope (with submission) will render it
incontestibly evident that the affirmation-acts of this province are in full
force; and are neither repealed, nor affected by any act of parliament, that
has come to our knowledge; but that the Governor is obliged to take care that
the same be equally, with any other act, put duly in execution.

By the same royal charter of King Charles the Second, by which this province,
with license to transport an ample colony thereunto, was granted to our
Proprietary, and the Governor in Chief, the said King grants to him and his
heirs, etc. power to make laws jointly with the people; and directs the force
and limitation of them, in the following words, as they stand in diverse parts
of the said charter, but are here collected, viz,

We, reposing special trust and confidence in the fidelity, wisdom, justice and
provident circumspection of the said William Penn, for us and our heirs and
successors, do grant free, full and absolute power, by virtue of these
presents, to him and his heirs, and their deputies and lieutenants, for the
good and happy government of the said country, to ordain, make, enact, and,
under his and their seals, to publish any law whatsoever, for raising of money,
for the public uses of the said province, or for any other end, etc. by and
with the advice, assent and approbation of the freemen of the said country, or
the greater part of them, or of their delegates, etc. and the same laws duly to
execute unto and upon all people within the said country, and limits thereof;
which laws, so as aforesaid to be published, our pleasure is, and so we enjoin,
require and command, shall be most absolute and available in law: and that all
the liege people and subjects of us, our heirs and successors, do observe and
keep the same inviolably in those parts, so far as they concern them, under the
penalties therein expressed, or to be expressed, Provided nevertheless, That
the said laws be consonant to reason, and be not repugnant, or contrary, but as
near as conveniently may be, agreeable to the laws, statutes and rights of this
our kingdom of England. And our further will and pleasure is, That the laws for
regulating and governing property, within the said province, as well for the
descent and enjoyment of lands, as likewise for the enjoyment of succession of
goods and chattels, and likewise felonies, shall be and continue the same as
they shall be, for the time being, by the general course of the law, in our
kingdom of England, until the said laws shall be altered by the said William
Penn, his heirs and assigns, and by the freemen of the said province, their
delegates, or their deputies, or the greater part of them. And to the end that
the said William Penn, his heirs, or others, the planters, owners, or
inhabitants of the said province, may not, at any time hereafter, by
misconstruction of the powers aforesaid, through inadvertency, or design,
depart from that faith, and due allegiance, which, by the laws of this our
realm of England, they, and all our subjects, in our dominions and territories,
always owe unto us, our heirs and successors, etc. Our further will and
pleasure is, That a transcript or duplicate of all laws, which shall be, as
aforesaid, made and published, within the said province, shall, within five
years after the making thereof, be transmitted and delivered to the Privy
Council, for the time being, of us, our heirs and successors; and if any of the
said laws, within the space of six months, after they shall be so, as
aforesaid, transmitted and delivered, be declared by us, our heirs and
successors, in our or their Privy Council, inconsistent with the sovereignty,
or lawful prerogative of us, our heirs, or successors, or contrary to the faith
and allegiance due, by the legal government of this realm, from the said
William Penn, or of the planters, or inhabitants of this province; and that
thereupon any of the said laws shall be adjudged and declared to be void, by
us, our heirs or successors, under our, or their privy seal, that then, and
from thenceforth, such laws, concerning which such judgment and declaration
shall be made, shall become void, otherwise the said laws, so transmitted,
shall remain and stand in full force, according to the true intent and meaning
thereof.

Pursuant to these powers, the said acts of this province, for an affirmation,
were made and published. And though a considerable part of the five years,
limited in the charter, is yet unexpired, the same have been duly transmitted;
nor have we heard any thing, but that they are, or may be, well approved of;
having reason to hope, that they contain nothing, for which (according to the
tenor of the said royal charter) they ought to be declared void; and,
therefore, are of as full force, as absolute and available, and to be observed
and kept as inviolably as any law whatsoever, that can be enacted in this
province, and ought accordingly to be as duly executed by the Governor, to the
full extent thereof.

But the Governor, in answer to a resolution of this House of the 18th of
October last, which was, That the royal charter makes the acts of this province
most absolute and available in law, until repealed by the King, is pleased to
say, That he joins with the Assembly, in this resolve, provided the laws are
not repugnant to the laws of England; and by the following paragraph, in the
same answer, which is, That he allows the laws of the province had settled the
qualifications of Magistrates and other officers, until the publication of the
act of King George, relating thereto, he has, at last, thought fit to give so
much under his hand, as his opinion, the natural construction whereof is, that
the said affirmation-acts of this province (being the subject then in hand)
were repugnant to the laws of England, and repealed by the said act of
parliament.

But this we humbly offer, That, if it must be termed repugnant, because it
differs from, or is not the same with, the act of parliament, then the clause
of the royal charter, which grants power to the Governor and Assembly here to
alter the laws of England, for the descent of lands, enjoying estates, and
punishing felonies, in the province (as is above recited from the said charter)
appears to be useless and vain.

But it is further to be considered, That, as the term repugnant, always
implies an absolute opposition, or contrariety, in matter, it cannot be said
that an act of this province, which enables those, called Quakers, to serve in
offices, upon juries, and to be evidence, in all cases (the circumstances of
the country requiring that it should be so) is contrary to an act of Great
Britain, which enables them only to give evidence in civil cases; these two
differ, it is true, and so it was certainly considered and expected, at the
time of the royal grant, that our acts might, in some measure, differ from
those in England; otherwise those in England would suffice; and no such power
for altering them needed to have been granted: on the contrary, the act of this
province, pursuant to the directions of that royal charter, is as nearly
agreeable, as to our convenience may be, to the statute provided for Quakers,
in Great Britain.

But the Governor, we presume, could not intend, by his answer, That this act,
at the time of passing it, was repugnant to any of the laws of England, though
it differed from them, for in that, certainly, he could not have given it his
sanction; it must, therefore, be meant, that it is become repugnant only since
the supposed publication of the British act, which he conceives repealed it;
or, to state what can be alleged on that head, in its full force, and the
plainest terms it will bear, that the act of the first of king George,
entitled, An act for making perpetual an act of the seventh and eighth years of
the reign of his late Majesty, King William the Third, entitled, An act, That
the solemn affirmation and declaration of the people called Quakers, should be
accepted instead of an oath, in the usual form, etc. extends to this province
that act of King William, by these words in the last clause of it, viz.
Provided always, That so much of this act, as relates to the affirmations to be
made by the people called Quakers, shall be extended to that part of Great
Britain, called Scotland, for ever, and to the plantations belonging to the
crown of Great Britain, for five years, etc. Therefore, that, as the Quakers
are not permitted, by that act, in Great Britain, to hold offices, serve on
juries, or be evidence in criminal cases, so, by its being extended to the
plantations, they are as effectually disabled there, and that all acts of this
province, for qualifying Quakers, in these cases, are, by the superior force of
this act of parliament, repealed, and made utterly void.

But when the language of the act itself comes to be considered, the whole
seeming force of this objection will, we presume, entirely disappear; the
clause of limitation, in the seventh and eighth of William the Third, is in
these words: "Provided, and be it enacted, That no Quaker, or reputed Quaker,
shall, by virtue of this act, be qualified or permitted, to give evidence, in
any criminal causes, to serve on any juries, to bear any office, or place of
profit, in the government, any thing in this act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding." Upon which we conceive that Brigadier Hunter, Governor, under
his Majesty, of the provinces of New York and New Jersey, has (in a case
parallel with ours) observed, in his printed declaration on that subject, under
the title of, "An answer to what has been offered, as argument against the
validity and force of an act of Assembly, entitled, An act, that the solemn
affirmation and declaration of the people called Quakers, etc. passed in the
province of New Jersey, in the thirteenth year of the reign of Queen Anne, to
be of such force, as to be worthy our recital: in which, after he has observed,
in general, in the following words: -- "Into what a woeful condition must the
plantations be plunged, if such laws as shall, by a Legislature lawfully
constituted by virtue of letters patent, under the broad seal, be enacted for
the good government and ease of the subjects there, shall, by implication, or
construction, be deemed to be repealed!" etc. he is pleased to say, that act of
Assembly is not so much as, by implication, repealed; for the words of that
act, upon which they lay the stress of the argument, are these, Provided, that
no Quaker shall, by virtue of this act, be qualified, etc. Now I know no
Quaker, continues that gentleman, that pretends he is, or can, by virtue of
that act, be qualified; but I believe every Quaker thinks that he is, or may
be, qualified by an act of Assembly, entitled, An act, that the solemn
affirmation and declaration of the people called Quakers, etc. passed in the
province, and sent home, etc. It is as plain as words can make it, that that
act, of the seventh and eighth of King William, has no negative, but upon
itself, and consequently cannot be alleged in bar to any laws already enacted,
in the plantations, or even such as may be enacted; for, by these letters
patent, which gave a being to this government and Legislature, all such laws,
as shall be enacted by the Governor, Council and Assembly, are declared to be
in full force, from the time of enacting.

The same worthy gentleman and Governor is further pleased, in the said print,
to publish an instruction from the late Queen, in whose reign that act of
Assembly was made, directing him to pass such an act in New Jersey; by which
instruction her Majesty was pleased further to declare her will and pleasure,
"That such of the people called Quakers, as shall be found capable of serving
in her Council, the General Assembly, and in other places of trust and profit,
in New Jersey, and accordingly be elected, or appointed, to serve therein, may,
upon their taking and signing the declaration of allegiance to her Majesty, in
the form, used by the same people, in England, together with a solemn
declaration of the true discharge of their respective trusts, be admitted by
the Governor to any of the said places or employments." And he adds, "That the
same instructions are, word for word, also contained in his present Majesty's
instructions to the Governor, dated the first of July, 1715. By which it
appears, that both the late Queen was, and his present Majesty is, willing that
the people called Quakers, immediately under their government, in New Jersey,
should enjoy the full privileges, which are craved here, as due to the people,
we represent, by their charteral rights, under the government of our
Proprietary, William Penn.

To this we may add what has also been observed, on the same subject, by the
Chief Justice of New Jersey, in his speech, delivered at the supreme court, in
May last, at Burlington, which is also printed; wherein he clearly gives his
opinion in law, very nearly in the same terms, the Governor had done before,
and then proceeds, in these words, viz.

The act of parliament of Great Britain is an enlargement of the Quakers
privileges to what it never was before; it makes that perpetual to them, in
England, which before was temporary and expired, or near expiring, by its own
limitation, carries the same into that part of Great Britain, called Scotland,
where it was not before, and makes it perpetual there, and into the
plantations, generally, for five years. This does no way hinder, but that, by
virtue of the act of Assembly of the province (which is a municipal law
thereof) the Quakers, or reputed Quakers, are qualified to be of juries and
evidence, and bear offices of trust and profit, in the government; nor, but
that they may be so qualified hereafter, by any other law, hereafter to be
made, for that, or the like purpose, although by virtue of that act of
parliament, they are not so qualified.

Having thus far stated this point, we shall now leave it; but that we are
obliged to give the sense of this House to that part of the Governor's answer
to our resolves, in which he is pleased to say, That though he was of opinion
he could not be safe in giving any qualification but an oath, yet by a dedimus
they, (the officers and witnesses) might have been qualified, as the law
directs.

On which we must humbly observe, That though it may be very certain a dedimus
potestatem, duly issued by the Governor, is no less sufficient, in law, for
administering qualifications to any officer, than the Governor's act, in his
own person; which, notwithstanding, the Governor has not of late, that we know
of, condescended to, but refused to admit such of those called Quakers, as, by
virtue of the Proprietary's charter to the people, were elected to serve in
certain offices, until that more remarkable case of the last qualification of
the Mayor of Philadelphia; yet no such dedimus will answer the exigencies of
this government, should the Governor's opinion obtain: for should it be taken
for granted, that the affirmation-act of this province is actually repealed by
the act of parliament, then all such qualifications will be construed illegal,
whether given by himself, or other persons, empowered by him. And as the Judges
of the supreme court have rendered their reasons to the House, for their not
proceeding to try the criminals, now in the respective gaols of this province,
viz. That they cannot think it prudent to proceed, by virtue of the Governor's
commission to them, in opposition to his opinion, in so tender a point, as the
lives of his Majesty's subjects: The names of these Judges were, William Trent,
Jonathan Dickinson and George Roach.
so all others must be discouraged in cases of such vast consequence; for no
dedimus will make that act sufficient, that is in itself illegal.

It has, by this time, we hope, clearly appeared, from what has been offered,
That the opinion of the Governor is (with submission) neither founded on law
nor reason; but from hence we cannot but desire the Governor may be induced
more seriously and maturely to consider how unaccountable and astonishing it
must appear to mankind, that, while such persons as Governor Hunter, who holds
his commission directly from the crown, is accountable to no other principal,
nor under obligations to any called a Quaker, as a superior, has thought it
necessary, in the discharge of his trust, to publish his reasons, in such a
manner, for removing mistakes, and allaying the disturbances from thence
fomented; at the same time, though such an example be set to us, at no greater
distance, than the other bank of Delaware, our Proprietary, William Penn's
Lieutenant, in the province of Pennsylvania, should be drawn into measures so
injurious, not only to the interest of his principal, from which he derives his
power, but to the very being of the constitution, over which he is entrusted to
preside. We heartily wish we could, by any construction, find other causes, to
which these procedures might be imputed, than a formed design; but we are
justly alarmed at some other late proceedings of the Governor, which, as they
have naturally fallen under our notice, we think ourselves also obliged, in
duty, to represent:

When the House had chosen their Speaker, and the Governor, without any
objection, approved their choice, they proceeded to take the usual
qualifications as the law, in that case, directs; but upon the rumors, that
had been spread, of persons disaffected to his present Majesty, that this House
might give the utmost expressions, they could, of their loyalty, they, by a
message to the Governor, requested to know, if besides what they had taken as
usual, the Governor had any directions from Great Britain, or any other
qualification to offer to the House; to which, he was pleased to answer, he had
not: the House notwithstanding resolved to neglect no part of their duty, but
to give all the assurances of their loyalty, in their power, thought fit
unanimously to take and subscribe the test, called the abjuration, every one,
in the way prescribed to them by the several acts of parliament, according to
their religious persuasions, and then proceeded to the business before them.

But being informed that the Governor had, at diverse times, and to sundry
persons, charged the present Mayor of the city of Philadelphia, now Speaker of
the House, as a person disaffected to his Majesty, King George; and that he
further alleged, the only cause of difference betwixt him and the said Mayor,
was, because the Governor would not agree to proclaim the Pretender, or words
to the same effect; the House conceived themselves obliged, in duty to his said
Majesty, to enquire into the grounds of this heinous charge, that, in case
there should be any found* they might purge themselves of the scandal.

Accordingly, having, in a committee of the whole House, taken full proofs,
that the Governor had so charged the Speaker, and finding, by the same
evidence, that he had, in the same manner, also charged James Logan, Secretary
of the province, they, by a message, desired of the Governor, that he would be
pleased to lay before the House his grounds for these accusations; but he
returned no other answer, than, "That he thought himself not obliged to render
any reasons to the House for his accusation, but would do it at the board at
home;" and the Members, sent on the message, could not persuade him to give any
reasons here.

The House thereupon judged it still the more incumbent on them to enquire
fully into the matter; and accordingly they, by a written message, informed the
Governor, That, being under a deep concern, on all occasions, to show their
loyalty, as faithful subjects, to King George, they could, by no means, think
themselves discharged of their duty, without further enquiring into the truth
of the report, which they had received, and acquainted the Governor with, which
affected their Speaker and another person, bearing considerable offices and
trusts, in the government; and finding the Governor's answer to the last
message, concerning the same, not satisfactory, they further acquainted him,
that the House intended immediately to resolve into a committee, in order to
enquire into that matter, and that the said committee would be desirous to
receive from the Governor, or any other person, any information concerning the
same, in order to proceed to the extent of what is their duty, and purge the
House of any Member, or Members thereof, that may appear, or shall be found
guilty of disloyalty to the King, or disaffection to his government, under
which the House unanimously declared themselves extremely happy, and well
satisfied.

But the Governor, though another message was sent to him, to crave his answer,
could not be prevailed on to give any, but that he had nothing to lay before
them; the House notwithstanding, while formed into a committee for that
purpose, proceeded to make the utmost enquiries, in their power; but could not
find the least ground to suspect the persons charged, or to believe the
accusations, against them, had any manner of foundation.

Now what sentiments can be formed of such a conduct, in a person, acting in so
exalted a station, the House must acknowledge themselves to be at a loss to
determine! But the House would consider it, as no small happiness to the whole
province, could they be assured that the Governor had no design, by his
representations to any board, at home, to raise a merit to himself, on the ruin
of others; who, could they be heard there, and f^lly known, might be found as
faithful and loyal, in their stations, to the present establishment and
succession, as any of the King's subjects whatsoever.

Had the Governor believed the Speaker to be such a person, as he has thought
fit to render him, it was doubtless incumbent on the Governor to except against
him, when first presented by the House, in that station, or had he suspected
either the Speaker, or any other Member, to be disaffected to the King, it
might be no less expected, that he should have recommended to the House, the
further qualification of the abjuration, as a test to them: but, if the Speaker
of the House of Representatives of Pennsylvania, and others acting in the great
trusts, are to be rendered to the ministry, or to any board, as persons so
notoriously disaffectd, as the Governor's charges imply, and this without the
least proof offered here, though so importunately, and yet dutifully solicited,
it will force all thinking persons on apprehensions, that there is more
intended by it, than can safely be acknowledged here, where things and persons
are better known, than can possibly be at such a distance, as the other side of
the ocean.

Having proceeded to such a length, on these two important subjects, we should
now choose to bring this representation to a period, but that the Governor's
written answer to another message from the House exacts our notice; in which he
is pleased to say, That he is given to understand, (for which he thinks fit to
quote the language of former Assemblies, and some of the Council) that this
House did not design to make laws, nor raise any money this session, but upon
terms inconsistent with the Governor's duty and safety to comply with. To which
the justest reply we (...) present, return, is, That this House came (...)
^ther with no other views, than to discharge (...) duty, in all respects, to
the best of their skill a^^ power; and they have nothing to crave of the
Governor, but what they firmly believe is not only his duty, but for his honor
and safety, to grant them: they would willingly have proceeded to enquire what
further laws may be necessary for the well-being of the province, in general,
the Governor having told us, in his speech, That, if we should have any other
bills to offer, that might be for the interest and tranquillity of the people,
he should be ready to pass them, and promised himself, that he would make a
return suitable to their circumstances, and the advantages they will receive by
them: but, in his next written message, he informed the House, "That he
disagreed from both the Council and Assembly, in his opinion, upon a point of
such importance to the security, as well as tranquillity of the people, that no
bill of ours can be of more to us:" the purport of which was, that he declared
(in opposition to both Council and Assembly) that one of the last laws, he
himself had passed, which most nearly affected us, was void, and this by
construction only; we could not, therefore, find any encouragement from the
Governor's proposals to us, to think any other bill, we could offer, was worth
the soliciting, and much less deserving, a further consideration.

To this we must not omit adding, That we find judgment was given against one
Hugh Lowdon, at the court of common pleas, in September last, whereupon the
said Hugh Lowdon, giving way to the greatest resentment and rage, vowed
revenge, at the utmost hazards, against the aforesaid Speaker and Secretary
(being two of the Justices of that court) and having furnished himself with
pistols, waylaid them, at their doors, and meeting the Speaker, the same
night, he presented at him a pistol laden with bullets; although, by the
overruling hand of Providence, no further mischief ensued. As this attempt
could not but raise a horror in the hearts of all good men, we find the said
Lowdon was bound over to the court, now sitting, and indictments were sound
against him, for the same; at which the Governor, instead of protecting the
Magistrates, in the discharge of their trusts, has now thought fit to grant
Noli Prosequi's, in the said Lowdon's favor, in the same manner he had
formerly done, for one Francis Phillips (that scandal to his order) when
indicted and prosecuted for notorious crimes, after all the neighboring clergy
had disowned him. Which proceedings, as they rendered the administration
contemptible, so we also justly fear they will encourage ill-minded men to the
same attempts, in hopes of the like favor.

But, to sum up the whole, we can truly say, we are extremely troubled, that we
cannot enjoy the same happiness, that most of our neighbors respectively do,
of seeing our Governor take such measures, as should, by an agreeable force,
sway the people's inclinations, to render him easy, in all respects; which can
be effected by no means so powerfully, as first rendering them easy, in the
enjoyment of those privileges, which they have an undoubted right to: and we
are but too well assured, that the only cause of a failure herein, is the
Governor's mistake, since the Proprietary's indisposition, in the choice of his
advisers; who, whatever views they may, at present form, will, at length, be
found the sole occasion of all the disappointments, that may fall to the
Governor's portion; for, even, though acting by commission, immediately from
the crown, he would have the same injured people to deal with.


Thus far this representation: what follows of it is chiefly a number of law
cases, adduced in confirmation of the opinion of the House; which may be seen
at length, in the printed votes of the Assembly of the province.

CHAPTER XXII.
Governor Gookin takes his last leave of the Assembly, being superseded by Sir
William Keith. -- Governor Keith's first speech to the Assembly, with their
answer and his reply. -- Governor and Assembly concerned at the great influx of
foreigners. -- Dr. Griffith Owen. -- Address of the Governor and Assembly to
the King. -- Great harmony between the Governor and Assembly. -- William Penn's
death and character, etc.

1717.
IT does not appear that Governor Gookin made any reply to this representation;
but that, in the first month, 1716-17, by a written message to the House, The
Governor Gookin takes his last leave of the Assembly, etc.
he took his last leave of them, in full assurance, that he should soon be
superseded; and, without making any further reflection on them, or their
conduct, he recommended to their consideration the charge of his returning to
seek another employment; declaring, that the uncertainty of his being provided
for at home; the thoughts of what he had left, to serve the Proprietary and the
province, and the disappointments he had met with, so filled his mind, that
they would excuse his not saying any more.

The Assembly gave him two hundred pounds, on the occasion; and on the first of
May next following, Governor Gookin is superseded by Sir William Keith
he was superseded by Sir William Keith; who, by summons, convened the
Assembly, on the 19th day of the sixth month, 1717.

Sir William Keith was a man of popular address, and acquainted with the art of
gaining the affection of the people; which, Sir William Keith was a man of
popular address, etc.
after so much altercation and tedious dispute between the Assembly and the two
preceding Governors, Evans and Gookin, had so much the more effect, and
rendered his administration both the more acceptable and useful to the
province. The following was his first speech to the Assembly, on the twentiety
day of the sixth month, August, O. S.

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Assembly,
Being informed, upon my arrival here, Governor Keith's first speech to the
Assembly.
that the season of harvest, then at hand, could not well permit you to meet
me, in your representative capacity, until that busy time be over; I did, out
of a tender regard for your interests, then delay the satisfaction I still
proposed to myself, in meeting with this present Assembly; and I will always
endeavor to make the time, you must necessarily bestow on the public service,
as easy and pleasant to yourselves as, I hope, it will be profitable and
satisfactory to the country in general.

If an affectionate desire, to oblige and serve the people of this province,
can qualify me, in their good opinions, for the station wherein I am now
placed, I may then expect that the country's and the Governor's interest will
be effectually established upon one bottom, as that he, who truly wishes well
to either, cannot but find himself engaged to serve both; and you yourselves
may easily infer the warmth of my inclinations toward the service and
prosperity of this country.

First, From the expensive application, last year, by which I carefully
introduced to his royal highness, the Prince of Wales, then Regent, the humble
address of the Assembly to the King, in such manner, as freely to obtain his
royal highness's most gracious assurance, that the people called Quakers, were
a body of loyal subjects, for whom the King had great regard; and that his
highness was sorry the King was not then present to receive so good an address;
but that the Quakers might, at all times, depend on his highness's good will,
to serve them, in any thing, they had to ask of his royal father.

Then, the diligence, wherewith I obtained, at a considerable charge, the
commission of Governor, without any other certain prospect, or advantage, but
only that I should be thereby enabled more effectually to serve you.

And, lastly, by the great fatigue I have undergone, since my arrival here,
that no opportunity might be slipped, to encourage virtue, and promote the
general good of your country; but these considerations are trifles, compared
with the indispensible obligation, that is of necessity upon you, to support
the dignity and authority of this government, by such a reasonable and discreet
establishment, as the nature of the thing, and your own generosity will direct.

And whatsoever you shall think sit to do, in that kind, pray let it no longer
bear the undeserved and reproachful name of a burden upon the people; but
rather let your Governor be enabled to relieve the country from real burdens,
by putting it in his power to direct a better economy, and more frugal
management of such taxes, as would answer the uses, for which they are
intended, if not squandered by the barefaced partiality and unprofitable
expense of the officers appointed to assess and collect the same.

Gentlemen, I doubt not, but you will take the first opportunity, under a new
administration, to examine the state of your laws, in order to revive some,
that are obsolete, (...) expired; and to make such alterations and additions,
as shall be found necessary, for perfecting the constitution, and good order of
government, in this province.

For that end, I am, on my part, ready to concur with you, in every thing,
which you can possibly desire, or expect, from a Governor, who conscientiously
intends to observe, and steadily resolves to pursue the duty of his office.


On the twenty-second, the Assembly presented him the following address, viz.

The address of the freemen of Pennsylvania, The Assembly's answer to the
Governor's speech.
in Assembly met, in answer to the Governor's speech of the twentieth instant.
May it please the Governor,
We gladly embrace this first opportunity to congratulate the Governor's happy
and safe arrival to us, with an eye to that good Providence, which preserved
him and his family from pirates; who, at that time, much infested our coast;
some of whom (as we are informed) waited with hopes of his falling into their
hands.

This House, maturely considering the Governor's speech, find themselves
obliged, in duty, to make grateful acknowledgments, for the Governor's tender
regards to the interest of the public.

The Governor's affectionate desire, to oblige and serve the people of this
province, does, and shall, meet with dutiful returns, in all matters, that come
before us; and this House will contribute all, in their power, to preserve the
interest of the Governor and people upon one bottom.

And as we must acknowledge the people of this province to stand highly obliged
to the Governor's application and care, in presenting to the Prince, then
Regent, the humble address of the Assembly of this province, so we gladly take
this occasion to confess the warmth of our hearts, in loyalty, duty and
affection to the King, and royal family, and entreat the Governor, upon all
occasions, so to represent us.

We cannot but express the pleasure, and great satisfaction of this House, in
that the Proprietary has been pleased to place, and his Majesty to approve of,
so worthy a gentleman, in commission over us; and hope our behavior, and that
of all the people of this province, will always be such as may preserve the
good inclinations of the Governor to serve the country; an instance whereof we
have in the fatiguing journeys he has taken, in the late hot season, to
promote the good of those under his government.

As the Governor was pleased to defer calling us, for the sake of harvest, so
we crave leave to observe to him, that seed time being just at hand, it will be
a great inconveniency to many of the Members to stay long at this season, so
that we do not undertake, at this sitting, to enter upon an examination of our
laws, or any business that will require length of time, but, depend upon the
Governor's resolves and good intentions to oblige the people, by concurring
with any thing, they can reasonably desire, for their service.

We, on our part, being fully satisfied, in our duty of supporting, as far as
in us lies, the dignity and authority of this government, have at this time
voted, nemine contradicente, that the sum of five hundred pounds shall be given
to the Governor, and paid out of the first public money, that shall arise, by
any means, in the treasury; and to make it more certain, are now preparing a
bill, which will be offered to the Governor, for augmenting the public stock.


To this address the Governor made the following reply, viz.

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Assembly,
I received a very affectionate address from your House; for which I heartily
thank you; Governor Keith's reply.
and the generous acknowledgment, you have been pleased to make of my late
endeavors to serve this country, cannot but greatly encourage me diligently to
carry on the same public service, in all its parts.

Your dutiful expressions of loyalty and affection to the King and royal
family, shall be carefully represented by me to his Majesty, and his servants,
in the ministry; and while the spirit of unanimity, and so amiable a temper,
with respect to government, is continued and preserved amongst you, I will take
upon me to say, that you may be firmly assured of the King's favorable
countenance, and gracious condescension, in all our applications to the throne.

Gentlemen, since you have observed to me, that it will be inconvenient for you
to enter upon any business now, which may detain you from your urgent affairs,
at this time, in the country, I cannot but condescend that you may make such an
adjournment, as you think will best suit with the season of the year; for I
shall still have a great regard to the opinion, as well as the advantage and
ease, of so good an Assembly.


The Assembly, elected in October, 1717, chose William Trent, Speaker. About
which time, Many foreigners arrive in the province.
the great influx of foreigners, Many of the Mennonists, etc. appear to have
arrived in Pennsylvania, about this time, from Germany, etc.

In the latter part of the year 1717, died Dr. Griffith Owen, of Philadelphia.
He came to Pennsylvania among the early settlers; and was said to be of great
and eminent service among them, in diverse capacities. As a preacher among the
Quakers he was highly esteemed, being an active, exemplary, and very u^eful
member of that religious society. In the civil department his merit and
abilities raised him to several public stations; wherein he acted with judgment
and integrity, being long one of the Governor's Council, etc. But his practice
as a Physician, in which he was very knowing and eminent, rendered him of still
g^^ater value and importance, in the place where he lived; with these qual^^ies
(...) preserved the ^^^cerity and meekness of a true Chri^tian, and died (...)
beloved by (...) acquaintance of people of different ranks and societies.


into the province, created such apprehensions, that Governor Keith, in his
speech to the House, after recommending their revising and amending their laws,
The Governor concerned at the great influx, etc. of foreigners.
proposed to their consideration, whether some regulation might not be
necessary, in regard to the unlimited numbers of these foreigners coming
without license from the King, or leave of the government? On which affair, the
Assembly, in their reply, likewise expressed their concern, with the jealousies
and uneasiness, raised in the minds of the inhabitants, respecting the
inconveniences, that might attend their settlement, in too large numbers
together, in one place, or promiscuously among the Indians. They desired the
Governor's sentiments thereon; and that he would either appoint a committee of
the Council, to join with one of the Assembly, on this business, or otherwise,
as he thought proper.

This the Governor approved of, but, as he had lately wrote to the Secretary of
state, on the affair, the further consideration of it was, for the present,
deferred, in expectation of advice from England: and being desired by the
Assembly to give them his assistance, in the revisal of their laws, he
willingly and obligingly agreed to their request.

1718.
In the spring of the year 1718, Sir William Keith proposed to join with the
House, in the following address to the King; which was drawn up by him, and
laid before the Assembly, for their concurrence; to which, with some
alteration, 1718.
or amendment, and an exception to the style of it, The customs peculiar to the
Quakers, as a religious people, have already been mentioned in the
introduction; and, according to one of these customs, I find, in the printed
votes of the Assembly, on this affair, the following observation, viz. "The
style of the said address being in the plural term, (you) and the majority of
the Assembly being of the people called Quakers, the House entirely agree to
the matter and substance of the said address; but except only against some part
of the style."
they acceded; and it being signed by the Governor, and Speaker of the
Assembly, was accordingly forwarded to Great Britain, viz.

To the King's most excellent Majesty.
The humble address and representation of the Governor and General Assembly,
Address to the King, by the Governor and Assembly.
of your Majesty's province of Pennsylvania, met, at Philadelphia, the (...)
day of May, 1718.
Most gracious Sovereign,
We, your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects and servants, being filled
with a dutiful and just sense of that tender care and concern, which your
Majesty has, on every occasion, been pleased to express, for the peace and
prosperity of all your people, do, with profound humility and submission,
presume to address your sacred Majesty, in behalf of your Majesty's good
subjects, the people of this province, whom we have the honor, at this time,
to represent, in a legislative capacity.

May it, therefore, please your Majesty to know, that, in the year 1681, this
colony was settled by a considerable number of English subjects, called
Quakers, under the care, encouragement and direction of William Penn, Esquire,
our Proprietary and Governor in Chief.

That the persecution, which, in those days, prevailed against Protestant
dissenters, in England, was the principal motive and reason, why the first
settlers of this country removed the^^ estates and families hither, where they
might quietly and peaceably enjoy that innocent liberty of conscience, which
they conceived to be every man's natural right.

That, by the unwearied application, industry and expense of the inhabitants,
this colony is now increased to a considerable body of people, whereof the
majority continue to remain in the society of Friends, called Quakers.

That, such being the peculiar and distinguishing circumstance of this, from
any other colony, under his Majesty's dominions, in America, the offices of
government must, of necessity, be supplied, and the powers executed, by those
of the Quaker's persuasion, intermixed with such others, as are to be found
here, in the communion of the Church of England, and good Protestant subjects,
well affected to your Majesty, and your government.

That the happy influence of your Majesty's most equal and just administration,
every where, has perfectly united our hearts and minds to contribute our utmost
endeavors, for carrying on the business of the government of this province, in
such manner, as may be most agreeable and acceptable to your Majesty, and your
ministry, at home.

That, for this end we have labored, more generally of late, to regulate the
proceedings, in our courts of judicature, as near as possibly could be done, to
the constitution and practice of the laws of England.

That, from many years experience, we are not only convinced that the solemn
affirmation allowed in Great Britain, to the people called Quakers, does, in
all respects, and in every case, here, answer the legal and essential purposes
of an oath, but also the growing condition of this colony, which brings great
numbers of people yearly from Europe, to reside among us.

The multitude of pirates abroad, and other loose vagrant people, who are daily
crowding in, to shelter themselves under the peaceable administration of this
government; and the absolute necessity there is to punish such, as shall dare
to oppose, and break through, the known laws of society and humanity, lays us
under the greatest obligations, with security to our lives, as well as the just
maintenance of your Majesty's royal authority over us, not to reject or
despise, the solemn affirmation, allowed to the Quakers; without which, we
humbly beg leave to assure your Majesty, judges, juries, nor evidences,
sufficient, could never yet be found here, in the most criminal and notorious
cases.

That formerly, it having been found impracticable to keep and preserve the
public peace, within this government, any other way, than by admitting the
solemn affirmation, in all cases whatsoever, to have the same force and effect
in law, as an oath, upon a representation thereof to the board of trade, the
late Queen Anne, by an order, in council, dated the 21st of January, 1702-3,
was pleased to direct, in the alternative, viz. "That all persons, acting in
any judicial, or other, offices, within this province of Pennsylvania, and
three lower counties upon Delaware, should be obliged to take an oath, or, in
lieu thereof, the solemn affirmation allowed, in England, to the people called
Quakers, and that, in all their public and judicial proceedings, the said
judges and officers shall be obliged to administer the oaths, appointed by law,
or the said attestation.

That the Quakers, in general, having approved themselves to be an industrious
and quiet people, most heartily attached to your Majesty's royal person and
government, your loyal subjects of that persuasion, in this province, do humbly
hope that your Majesty will vouchsafe to indulge their tender consciences, in
the case of oaths, with the same freedom, that has been granted to them by your
royal predecessors, and thereby we shall be effectually enabled to perform our
respective duties, in preserving your Majesty's peace, within the jurisdiction
of this province, and to enforce the just regard and obedience, due unto your
royal authority, as becomes, may it please your Majesty, your Majesty's most
loyal, most faithful, and most obedient subjects and servants.


This affair of the solemn affirmation of the Quakers, appears not to have been
finally settled, or fixed, to the satisfaction of the province, and according
to that right, which the inhabitants of it thought themselves justly entitled
to, till the year 1725; which will be mentioned hereafter in its proper place.

At the conclusion of this session, near the approach of harvest, Governor
Keith, in his speech to this Assembly, The Governor praises the Assembly, etc.
highly complimented them, on account of the valuable and wholesome laws,
"which (says he) were composed with so much care, by your diligent application,
and the great temper, and perfect unanimity, wherewith the public affairs had
been carried on, through all the parts of the administration of the government,
for the last twelve months; which, he further declared, must, by that time,
have convinced all reasonable men, among them, of the many and great
advantages, that such a harmony secures to the commonwealth; at the same time
assuring them of his fixed resolution, according to the utmost of his capacity,
to act, in every respect, for the general good and interest of the province.

On the 30th day of the 5th month, William Penn's death, etc.
(July) 1718, at Rushcomb, near Twyford, in Buckinghamshire, in England, died
the truly honorable Proprietary and Founder of the province of Pennsylvania,
William Penn, aged about seventy-four years. He had, in the year 1712, as
before mentioned, been seized with some fits of the apoplectic kind; which, for
the last six years of his life, had so affected his mental faculties,
especially his memory, as to render him, in great measure, incapable of public
business; which, with the gradual decline of his strength of body, continued to
increase, till the last period of his days: during which time, nevertheless, he
is said to have been mostly sensible, intelligent, and, by his behavior and
expressions, at different times, to those, who were present with him,
manifested, that he retained, till his death, the happy enjoyment of that
divine and mental felicity, which resulted from the nature of his religion, and
manner of life.

Much of his character may be seen in the preceding sketch of his life, Of his
character, etc.
and in this Historical Account of Pennsylvania: a life of universal
benevolence, and good actions, to mankind, in general, both in a religious and
civil capacity. But the most lasting memorial of his great utility to the human
race is his literary works, first printed in two folio volumes, and his
flourishing and happy province of Pennsylvania. The former being instructive,
in the paths of virtue, and true felicity, to future generations; and the
latter, an excellent example, for surrounding countries, and succeeding ages,
to imitate, of the happy effects of a wise and generous plan of liberty, and a
prudent religious toleration, among a virtuous people.

As to himself, I find expressed of him, by those, who had the best opportunity
of being acquainted with his true character and real merit, Particular
properties.
That he was a person endowed with great penetration and forethought; and a
most sincere lover of truth and sincerity (which, in no small degree, is also
manifest from the short sketch of his life and transactions, given in the
preceding part of this work). He had great natural abilities, and much acquired
knowledge; which he ever rendered subservient to the great interests of
religion and virtue. He was chaste and circumspect, yet pleasant in
conversation; and of an engaging and obliging disposition and behavior. He
exhibited to the world a bright and amiable example, wherein the most excellent
qualities of the accomplished gentleman, and real Christian united; and, in
different countries, ranks and conditions of men, appeared a shining instance,
that piety and virtue are not incompatible with a fine understanding.

Religious benefit.
Besides, being divinely qualified, he was a very able and excellent instrument,
in the hand of divine Providence, in removing much of that superstitious
bigotry and ignorance, which, for ages, had overspread, and, even, till his
time, remained, in a very remarkable manner, to cover the minds of all ranks of
people; and, by introducing, in their stead, especially among the higher class
of men, a more liberal, and rational, way of thinking, on religious subjects;
and in what relates to the best improvement of the human mind, and its truest,
and most lasting interest.

Moreover, actuated by the same principles, and induced by the same motives, of
universal benevolence and improvement, in the condition of the human race, he
has, in the much admired, and long conspicuous effects of his civil polity and
government, Political ^^ility.
eminently exemplified to the world, how happy it is possible for mankind to
live here, on earth, if the fault is not their own; a glorious example, and
worthy of all imitation! wherein it is most manifest, that, contrary to the
common course of human affairs, war, violence and injustice have, in an
extraordinary manner, given way to the happy and glorious means of peace, and
of Christian perseverence in patience, equity and beneficence to mankind;
insomuch, that if the fable of the golden age was ever verified, or a
paradisical state introduced on earth, in reality, it has been universally
acknowledged, they must have borne the nearest resemblance to that of
Pennsylvania!

In his printed works themselves are exhibited the manner of his writing and
the nature of his compositions: his style is free and sweet, Printed works.
yet strong and nervous; without affectation, and not labored with a tedious
formality of expression; which before had been so customary and fashionable, in
the nation; but his periods are generally short, yet full, flowing and
agreeable, that he insensibly gains upon his reader; and while he allures his
attention, he adds profit to delight: but ornament of speech was the least part
of his study; the grand objects of his concern were the nature and importance
of his subjects; which, though some of them respected particular times, persons
and things, were generally the most interesting, that could possibly employ the
attention of the human mind.

Should any persons be disposed to censure him, Of William Penn's government.
on account of some of his Lieutenant Governors, or, the want of still further
advantages, which, they may apprehend, were in his power to have granted the
province, it may be observed, That it is not so much the possession, as the
proper use, of any thing valuable, which renders people happy; and the
perversion thereof causes their mi^ery; that the state and condition of human
nature is such, as will only bear what may be called blessings to a certain
degree; beyond which they become the contrary: "Est modus in ^obus; sunt certi
denique fines;
Quos ultra, citraque nequit consistere rectum." (...) There is a medium in
things, or a certain boundary fixed; (...), or out of which, the line of
rectitude cannot exist."

Hor.

Hor. In forming a proper judgment of this nature, the considerations, on both
sides of the question, ought to have due weight.

Proportionate power and means necessary for actions.
First, Not only what may be desirable and useful for the governed, but also
the power, and proper requisites of government itself, ought to be duly
considered; for no valuable effect can reasonably be expected, without the
possession and preservation of suitable power, ability and means, in the
efficient, to perform it: these, in a limited proprietary under the crown, with
the terms and obligations, upon which they were held of superior power, ought,
in forming a just estimate, His actions great, compared with the means, etc.
in this case, to be compared with the valuable and happy effects, which were
really experienced, in consequence of the power and authority, with which he
was, in this restricted capacity, invested: for there is great and sufficient
reason to suppose, that, had he, contrary to what he actually did, pursued a
conduct, agreeable to the partial interest of some, or the contracted minds of
others; or, had he acted from views of that impracticable equality, or
ungovernable liberty, which the Eutopian imaginations of some shallow
projectors, and ^ash schemers, might endeavor to promote, who, by attempting
too much, lose all, many would never have so happily experienced, nor the world
have seen, the glorious effects of his excellent management, for so long a
space of time.

Secondly, In forming such a decision, the clamours of some of the Assemblies
ought not to be the sole criterion, to judge by; Clamours of some of the
Assemblies against William Penn, mistaken, etc.
particularly, in their contending for more power than, it is most manifest,
was ever intended them, or, from the best rational principles, judged to be for
their real benefit; clamours, in great measure, either groundless, mistaken, or
magnified, for particular purposes; and of dangerous, or, at least, of
uncertain consequence, both to the Proprietary and themselves; and probably
impossible for him safely to comply with: for it is most certain, that it was
not always in his power to do as he pleased; and his ever being a friend to
rational, or ^^ue, liberty, was never questioned; but he very well knew, that
power, unduly proportioned, in the different parts of government, weakens its
force* frustrates its design, and, without prudence, judgment and unanimity,
soon destroys its own existence.

Thirdly, A just and proper estimate and comparison should be made, The
greatness of his actions to be compared with his means and ability, etc.
not only of the restricted power, and overruled authority of the Proprietary,
but also of the smallness of his fortune, or the narrowness of his
circumstances, with the greatness of his actions; his long and assiduous labor
and attention, his great expense and patience, both in effecting and preserving
what he effected, in regard to the province, as originating in a just debt, due
to his father, ought not only to have due place, in such an account, but also
the numerous and various acts of both public and private beneficence, should be
truly estimated; in which, it is most certain, he was continually, and in an
extraordinary manner, engaged for the general and particular good of mankind,
in Europe, besides his founding the province of Pennsylvania, and effectually
providing for such advantage, freedom and prosperity of its inhabitants, as no
other person, that we know of, had done for any country; with the nature and
deficiency of his returns from thence; It may be noted, that the great expense
and trouble, which the province cost William Penn, and for which himself never
received at equivalent, have, since his death, been amply rewarded to his
family, or heir^, by a very great increase of the income from thence, to his
children and posterity.
which, instead of producing him a real benefit, proportionate, or similar, to
what he had done for that province, afford no small argument in his favor, and
as little honor to such as may be most disposed to cavil, in this respect,
that, in the latter part of his life, when, it might reasonably be thought he
ought to have reaped different fruits from that department of his labors, See
his letter to the Assembly, anno 1710.
he should have any real occasion to say, or lament, as he did, that those,
which he received from thence, were actually the cause of grief, trouble and
poverty! Some of William Penn's obstacles to further beneficence, etc.
Moreover, how much he stood on his terms with the different interests at
court, is a circumstance of no small moment; with the changes in the
government, at that time, in England, especially at the revolution: for there,
it is manifest, as well as elsewhere, he was not without adversaries; and those
not the least powerful and dangerous. Likewise the difficulties, consequent on
a vast expense, was another obstacle in his way to further good service, and
his wonted liberality; in which it is well known his great generosity, in
settling and encouraging the colony, had, in a particular manner, involved him,
to the great reduction of his private estate, so liberally, and most evidently
spent for a more public and general benefit; but, it is to be regretted, that
the ingratitude of some people is too liable to misconstrue, slight, or
undervalue, the kindest beneficence, though, in its consequences, to themselves
very considerable, while they think any more may be had. Besides, the
embarrassment of his private affairs, in which, during the latter part of his
time, an ungrateful agent is said to have involved him, was another great
disappointment, and heavy encumbrance, with which he had to struggle; and which
rendered the preserving of the province* for his posterity, still more
difficult; but, in some of these cases, his great interest among his friends,
the Quakers, in England and Ireland, is said to have been of singular service
to him.

As to what few small irregularities and deficiencies, really existed in the
government, His absence mostly the cause of what was really amiss in the
province.
or management of the province, unmagnified by his adversaries, or mistaken
friends, which, at any time, wanted proper redress, or assistance, they were
principally owing to his absence from it; which, it is certain, was very much
against his mind, and chiefly occasioned by the necessity of his circumstances,
the unsettledness of the government in England, together with the attempts of
his enemies, and his great beneficence to his province, with his small and
discouraging returns from thence.

From these and similar considerations, it will be easy to perceive the nature
of some of his difficulties, and the obstructions to such further public
service, as might have been desired, in a person of his disposition, rank and
station; which may account for part, at least, of the exceptionable conduct of
some of his Deputy Governors; for whose office it was no easy matter to procure
proper, and, in every respect, suitable persons; Suitable deputy Governors not
easily to be had, etc.
as appears in the resignation of Thomas Lloyd; and, in his more than once,
even, offering to the Assembly themselves the choice of naming the Deputy
Governor, or his Representative, during his absence! a very remarkable
condescension! which Governors, though so much blamed, and doubtless some of
them justly, in some things; yet, in such a limited sphere, as they acted in,
they were not so much unjustifiable, Their conduct in the administration not so
blamable as some imagined.
in their general conduct, as a partial view of their administration might
suggest; which, in the main, there is great reason to apprehend, would either
not have been prudent, safe, or possible, for the Proprietary, in his then
present circumstances, to have contravened, in such manner, as some seem to
have expected he ought to have done; for the very maintaining, and immediate
preservation of the government, and consequently of the privileges of the
province itself, at that time, undoubtedly depended more on much of the same
conduct, which these seem to have judged so exceptionable, on the part of the
Proprietary, or of his Deputy Governors, than they appear to have apprehended:
instead of which, such a change of the government, as would then most probably
have been effected, either by a resumption, or disposal, of it, to the crown,
(which, in consequence of the attempts of his and its enemies, at home, and
also of the opposition and liberties, used in the province, against his long
sinking interest there, appeared likely to ensue) would, beyond all
controversy, have been of much greater importance, and of such fatal effect to
what was contended for, in the province, or the extension of its excellent
privileges, in the manner desired, and that, even, to the discontented party in
it, in some respects, as certainly ought to silence every attempt of
detraction, The Proprietor's conduct above the power of envy and detraction,
etc.
and the narrowness of party spirit, against such exalted and true merit, and
the general good conduct of the Proprietary; whose wise counsels, and worthy
actions, so far transcended and over-balanced every little failing, and human
weakness, that could possibly be alleged against him, even, by an enemy; from
which no mortal man, on earth, is, at all times, entirely free: these, in such
a case, should not be retained long in our minds; but the virtues, and
excellent services, of such illustrious and worthy persons ought to be had in
everlasting remembrance: services, which, being immortal here on earth, crown
their agents with deathless praise, and eternal felicity; and place them beyond
the power of envy and detraction; where, besides that serenity of mind, which
arises from the sense of a life well spent, their companion in this mortal
state of existence, they also enjoy that glorious eternity, in the happy
mansions above, which Cicero, in his treatise, entitled, Somnium Scipionis,
declares to be the portion of all true and genuine Patriots: "A certain place,
in heaven (says he) is assigned to all, who preserve, or assist their country,
or increase her glory; where they are to enjoy an eternity of happiness. For
nothing is more acceptable to that God of Gods, who governs the system of the
world, and directs all human occurrences, than those councils and assemblies of
men, that, being united by social laws, from thence are termed states; of these
the governors and preservers, having proceeded from thence, do thither again
return." "Omnibus, qui patriam conservaverint, adjuverint, auxerint, certum
esse in caelo definitum locum, ubi beati aevo sempiterno fruantur; nihil enim
est illi principi Deo, qui omnem hunc mundum regit, quod quidem in terra fiat,
acceptius quam concilia caetusque hominum jure sociati, quae civitates
appellantur; harum rectores and conservatores hinc profecti, huc revertuntur."

Cic. Somnium Scipioni^.


CHAPTER XXIII.
How William Penn left his estate and property at his decease. -- Part of his
last will. -- State of his agreement with Queen Anne, for the sale of the
government, etc. -- Jonathan Dickinson. -- Governor and Assembly's conduct, on
hearing of the Proprietor's decease. -- Names of the Members of Assembly. --
The late Proprietor's eldest son, William, claims the government, etc. -- But
afterward, John, Thomas, and Richard Penn, the younger branch of the family,
became the sole Proprietors, etc. -- Conduct of the Governor and Assembly,
respecting said claim. -- The Indians of Pennsylvania attacked by some foreign
Indians. -- Proceedings of the Governor and Assembly. -- William Trent. --
Vincent Caldwell. -- William Baldwin. -- Governor Keith, with the Assembly's
consent, establishes a court of chancery, etc. -- Names of the masters in
chancery. -- The Governor endeavors to prevent ill consequences among the
Indians. -- Account of a treaty held by Sir William Keith, with the Indians at
Connestogo, in Pennsylvania, in 1721.

1718.
THE late Proprietary left his estate, in England and Ireland, amounting to the
yearly value of L. 1500 sterling, How William Penn left his estate, etc.
and upwards, to William Penn, his eldest surviving son and heir, by Gulielma
Maria, his first wife, and to the issue of that marriage; which, at the time of
making his last will, in 1712, besides his said son William Penn, and his
daughter Laetitia, appears to have consisted of three grand children, Gulielma
Maria, Springett and William, the children of his son William. He could,
therefore, make no provision, out of the said estate, for the payment of his
debts, which were very considerable; nor for his widow, and his offspring by
her; which are mentioned, in his last will, to be, John, Thomas, Margaret,
Richard, and Dennis, all minors.

It is observable that his estate in Europe, about this time, was esteemed of
more value, than all his property in America, especially under its then present
encumbrance (the mortgage of 1708 not being yet entirely discharged At, or soon
after the Proprietary's decease, the only surviving, (...) at least, active
mortgagees, appear to have been, Henry Gouldney, Joshua Gee, John Woods, Thomas
Oade, and John Field.
) and as he left it by his last will and testament, made on the sixth of April,
1712; wherein both the province, and the government of it, are left and devised
in the following manner, viz.

"My eldest son being well provided for by a settlement of his mother's, Part
of the Proprietor's last will, etc.
and my father's estate, I give and devise the rest of my estate, in manner
following. The government of my province of Pensilvania and territories
thereunto belonging, and powers relating thereunto, I give and devise to the
most honorable, the earl of Oxford, and earl Mortimer, and to William, earl
Powlett, so called, and their heirs, upon trust, to dispose thereof to the
Queen, or any other person, to the best advantage they can, to be applied, in
such manner as I shall hereafter direct. I give and devise to my dear wife,
Hannah Penn, and her father Thomas Callowhill, and to my good friends, Margaret
Lowther, my dear sister, and to Gilbert Heathcote, physician, Samuel
Waldenfield, John Field, and Henry Gouldney, all living in England, and to my
friends, Samuel Carpenter, Richard Hill, Isaac Norris, Samuel Preston, and
James Logan, living in, or near Pensilvania, About the same time, the four
following trustees, named in his will, were likewise deceased, viz. Margaret
Lowther, Samuel Waldenfield, Gilbert Heathcote, and Samuel Carpenter.
and to their heirs, all my lands, tenements and hereditaments, whatsoever
rents, and other profits, situate, lying and being in Pensilvania, and the
territories thereunto belonging, or elsewhere in America, upon trust, that they
shall sell, and dispose of, so much thereof, as shall be sufficient to pay all
my just debts, and from and after payment thereof, shall convey to each of the
three children of my son, William Penn, Gulielma Maria, Springett and William,
respectively, and to their respective heirs, 10,000 acres of land, in some
proper and beneficial place, to be set out by my trustees aforesaid. All the
rest of my lands and hereditaments whatsoever, situate, lying, or being in
America, I will, that my said trustees shall convey to and amongst my children,
which I have by my present wife, in such proportion, and for such estates as my
said wife shall think fit; but before such conveyance shall be made to my
children, I will, that my said trustees shall convey to my daughter Aubrey,
Laetitia.
whom I omitted to name before, 10,000 acres of my said lands, in such places,
as my said trustees shall think fit. All my personal estate, in Pensilvania,
and elsewhere, and arrears of rent due there, I give to my said dear wife, whom
I make my sole executrix, for the equal benefit of her, and her children. In a
codicil to his will, in his own hand writing, it is further expressed, as
follows, viz.

"Postscript, in my own hand, as a further testimony of my love to my dear
wife, I, of my own mind, give unto her, out of the rents of America, viz.
Pennsylvania, three hundred pounds a year, for her natural life; and for her
care and charge over my children, in their education; of which she knows my
mind; as also, that I desire they may settle, at least, in good part, in
America, where I leave them so good an interest, to be for their inheritance
from generation to generation; which the Lord preserve and prosper, amen."


"

William Penn, prior to, or about the time of, making his last will, had
offered the government of Pennsylvania for sale to Queen Anne; He had agreed to
dispose of the government to Queen Anne, etc.
to whom afterward an agreement was actually made, for disposing of the same,
for L. 12,000; of which sum, on the 9th of September, 1712, or soon after, he
received one thousand pounds, in part of payment. But after this, and before a
surrender of the said government was effected, he was, by sickness, rendered
incapable of executing the same; so that the government, at the time of his
decease, still remained to be vested in the aforesaid earls, in trust, by
virtue of his will, and as therein abovementioned is expressed: but it appears,
that upon his eldest son, and heir at law, William Penn's claiming the
government of the province, after his father's death, and upon the question
arising, whether, what was, as aforesaid, devised to the said earls, to be
sold, should, as, at present circumstanced, be accounted part of the real, or
personal, estate of the testator, William Penn, (the latter, by the will, being
the property of the widow) the earls, therefore, The Trustees for the
government decline to act, etc.
declined to act, in their trust, or assign over the same, without the decree
of the court of chancery, for their indemnity; which decree, the lords,
commissioners, of the treasury declared, was absolutely necessary, with an
effectual conveyance to the King, before the residue of the said L. 12,000
could be paid to the executrix Hannah Penn. In the bill, afterward presented
in chancery, on this occasion, besides what is therein mentioned, respecting
other matters, and the mortgage of 1708; whereby William Penn conveyed all, or
the greatest part, of his said estate, in America, to Henry Gouldney, of
London, to Joshua Gee, Silvanus Grove, John Woods, of the same place, and to
Thomas Callowhill* Thomas Oade, and Jessery Pennel of Bristol, and John Field
of London and Thomas Cuppage of Lambslown, in Ireland, and their heirs, by way
of mortgage, for L. 6,600, it is more particularly represented, or exhibited:

First, That the late William Penn's eldest son, or heir at law, claimed the
government of Pennsylvania, after his father's decease.

Second, That before William Penn made his last will, he had proposed and
offered his powers of government, and government, of the province and
territories to be sold and surrendered to Queen Anne; and about the time of his
making his said will, such proposal was referred to the consideration of the
Commissioners for trade and plantations, and the then Attorney General; upon
whose report thereon to the Queen, she resolved to accept a surrender and
conveyance thereof, from William Penn, and to pay him L. 12,000, for the same,
within the space of four years, from the date of such surrender and conveyance;
to which he consented. In the mean time, while the Attorney General was
preparing the proper deeds and instruments, for this purpose, the Queen agreed
to advance to William Penn L. 1,000, in part of the said L. 12,000, which sum
of L. 1,000, by a warrant, under the Queen's sign manual, bearing date, at her
court, at Windsor Castle, the 9th day of September, 1712, ordering the then
Lord High Treasurer to pay the same to William Penn, he actually soon after
received; but before the surrender was perfected he was taken ill, and became
incapable of executing it.

Third, As to what was devised, in the said will, to the three earls, it is
represented, in the above mentioned bill. That they were trustees therein, only
for the widow Hannah Penn, the executrix, and residuary legatee, of William
Penn, the testator's personal estate; the agreement, aforesaid, between the
Queen and William Penn, for sale of the government, for L. 12,000, by the
Queen's directing the payment of L. 1,000, part thereof, to William Penn, and
his receiving the same, in pursuance of said direction, being, in part
executed* on both sides, whereby all that was agreed to be sold, and the money
raised by such sale, are made to be a part of, and to fall into, the personal
estate of the said testator, William Penn, in respect to these different claims.

Fourth, And, that, upon the question, whether, what was, as aforesaid, devised
to the said earls, to be sold, should be accounted part of the real, or
personal estate of the testator William Penn, the said earls declined to act,
in their trust, or to assign over the same, without the decree of the court of
chancery, for their indemnity; which decree, the lords, commissioners, of the
treasury insisted was absolutely necessary, with an effectual conveyance to the
King, before the residue of the said L. 12,000 could be paid to the executrix,
Hannah Penn, etc."




The news of the long expected death of the Proprietary appears not to have
reached Pennsylvania, till after the election, and first sitting of the
Assembly, in October, 1718; of which Assembly Jonathan Dickinson was chosen
Speaker; Jonathan Dickinson came from Jamaica, with his wife and family, in the
latter part of the year 1696. He was, with other passengers, on board the same
vessel, in their passage to Pennsylvania, shipwrecked in the gulf of Florida;
and being driven on shore, suffered in a very extraordinary manner, among the
Indians, in that part of America; of which there is extant a particular printed
account, entitled, "God's protecting providence man's surest help and defense,"
etc. written by himself. He was one of the people called Quakers, a merchant of
considerable fortune, and possessed a large estate, in Philadelphia, where he
lived after his arrival aforesaid. He was entrusted with a great share of the
administration of justice, in Pennsylvania, being both the Speaker of the
Assembly, and Chief Justice of the province. He bore a generally good
character, was universally much beloved, and died in the year 1722.
to whom Governor Keith, in his speech to the House, on his being presented to
him, for his approbation, thus expressed himself.

Mr. Speaker,
The modesty and candor of your deportment, for many years, in public
business, has, The Governor's address to the Speaker
at this time, in the two most eminent stations, justly determined the choice
both of the city and country, in general, and this flourishing city, in
particular, upon you, sir.

And, from this beginning, I promise myself, that, by your prudent example and
conduct, they will, at last, be persuaded heartily to unite, in all such
matters as plainly tend to the honor and advantage of the province, etc.


But when the melancholy account arrived, The Governor's conduct on the news of
the Proprietor's death.
though it was provided by a law of the province, that, on the death of the
Proprietary, the Lieutenant Governor, for the time being, should continue the
government, as usual, till further order, from the King, or from the heirs of
the said Proprietary, or Governor in Chief, yet Sir Willam Keith immediately
thereupon, not only consulted the Council, who were unanimously of opinion,
that his continuing the administration of the government, in all its parts, was
both warranted and directed by the said law, but he also laid the minute of the
Council thereon, before the Assembly, at their next meeting, in the 10th mo.
requesting their sentiments on the same. The House, after mentioning their deep
sorrow at the Proprietary's death, highly approved of both the Council's
advice, and the Governor's conduct, in the affair, and heartily thanked him for
his care of the public welfare. The names of all the Members of this Assembly
were,

For Philadelphia county.
Robert Jones, Edward Farmar, Richard Hill, William Fishbourn, Clement
Plumsted, Morris Morris, Jonathan Dickinson, Spkr. Matthias Holston.
Chester county.
David Lloyd, Richard Hayes, Nathaniel Newlin, John Wright, James Gibbons,
Henry Lewis, William Lewis, Henry Oburn.
Bucks county.
William Biles, Thomas Stevenson, Jeremiah Langhorne, John Sotcher, Joseph
Bond, William Paxton, Joseph Kirkbride, John Swift.
City of Philadelphia,
Israel Pemberton, Isaac Norris.



The heir at law, William Penn, junr. claims the government, etc.
It was before hinted, that notwithstanding the plain terms of the late
Proprietary's last will, his eldest son, then living, or heir at law, William
Penn, junior, after his father's decease, laid claim to the government of the
province; which claim was continued by his eldest son Springett, after the
death of his father William Penn, the younger; who is said to have died at
Liege, about the year 1720.

1719.
The conduct of Governor Keith, and the provincial Assembly, respecting this
claim, appears by the speech of the former to the House, in the 3d mo. 1719,
with their answer, as follows, viz.

Gentlemen of the Council, Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Assembly,
The Governor's speech to the Assembly, on the occasion.
According to my promise, I have called you together, in order to acquaint you,
that I lately received a commission from the honorable William Penn, Esquire as
our Governor in Chief, with instructions to publish his accession to the
government, by advice of the Council, in the most solemn manner; which said
commission and instructions, with the minute of Council thereupon, I have
ordered to be laid before you.

Since that I have seen the probate of the late Proprietary's last will and
testament, in the hands of Mr. Secretary Logan, whereby the powers of
government, over this province, seem to be devised in trust, after a peculiar
manner; and I am told these differences are not likely to be speedily adjusted.

Gentlemen, my duty to the crown unquestionably obliges me, while in this
station, at all times, to use my utmost diligence, in preserving the good order
and peace of the government, and to keep the King's subjects of this colony,
firm in their allegiance, and dutiful obedience, to his most excellent Majesty,
and our Sovereign Lord King George; to the end, therefore, that this may be
done, with the greatest cheerfulness and unanimity, and likewise, that all due
respect might be paid to Mr. Penn, and every other branch of the late
Proprietary's family, I must desire that you will assist me with your opinions
and advice; which, I doubt not, will have the same weight with all parties
concerned in Britain, as you may be assured, it will ever have with me.

I have received a message from the Indian Chiefs of Conestogoe, by a letter to
Mr. Secretary Logan; which informs us, that our Indian hunters had been
attacked, near the head of Potowmack river, by a considerable body of southern
Indians, come out to war with the Five Nations, and the Indian settlements of
Susquehanna. They have killed several of our people, and alarmed them all; so
that the careful attention and vigilance of this government was never more
called upon than at this juncture; and much will depend upon your unanimous and
speedy resolutions to support the administration, in all its parts.


To this the Assembly returned the following answer, viz.

To the honorable WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the province of
Pennsylvania, The Assembly's answer to the Governor's speech.
etc.
The address of the representatives of the freemen of the said province, in
Assembly met, in answer to his speech of the seventh instant.
May it please the Governor,
The memory of the honorable William Penn, our late Proprietary and Governor
in Chief, being dear to us, we cannot but have a just and due regard to his
family, and should account it our happiness to be governed by a branch thereof,
under the most auspicious reign of our royal Sovereign, King George.

And since the Governor has been pleased to show so great a regard to the
advice of the representative body of the freemen of this province, as to
consult them, in a matter, which so highly concerns them, we must acknowledge
is a great condescension, and an additional instance of his known affection to
this colony, with kind inclinations to preserve the public peace and weal of
this government.

The contents of those instruments and writings, which the Governor was pleased
to lay before this House, brought us under a very deep concern, how to assist
him with advice, suitable to the present emergency; for we find the first part
of the Proprietary's will seems to vest a trust in the noble lords, there
named, in order to accomplish the treaty of surrender of this government to the
crown, which was begun by our late Proprietary.

And though that trust may occasion various opinions in law and equity, yet
that does not so much affect us, as the want of ascertaining the terms, which
we have been always given to expect would accompany the surrender, in favor of
the people called Quakers, who embarked with the said Proprietary, in the
laudable design of this considerable addition of the British empire; and,
therefore, think it our duty, at this juncture, to claim those rights and
favors, which have been promised us.

The Governor well knows that the present administration of this government,
since the Proprietary's decease, is supported by a law, confirmed by her late
Majesty, Queen Anne; and by virtue thereof, is to continue till further order
from the King, or the heirs of the said late Proprietary and Governor; and
notwithstanding the great regard, the Governor has to the commission, sent him
by the said Proprietary's heir at law, yet since that heir seems not, by the
aforesaid will, invested with the powers of government; but the devise thereof,
made to the said Lords, being allowed by his own council to be good; and since
it does not appear that commission is attended with the necessary requisites,
directed by acts of parliament, for qualifications of persons concerned in such
stations, and security of plantation-trade, we conceive it will contribute to
the peace of this government, and be safe for the Governor, that he, for the
present, forbear to publish the said commission; and hope there will be no just
occasion given, if the Governor should wave superseding the powers given him by
the said heir at law, until he receive the pleasure of the said trustees, or
has the Lord Chancellor's decree, for his direction; the rather, because we
understand that an amicable suit is depending in chancery betwixt the
executrix, and heir at law, in order to settle both their claims to this
government. We heartily join with the Governor in his good resolutions, to
preserve the good order and peace of the government, and loyalty of his
Majesty's subjects, in this colony.

As touching the attack lately made upon our neighboring Indians, we hope the
Governor has already taken proper measures in that affair, toward quieting
their minds, and will use his utmost endeavors to prevent such incursions upon
them, for the future, by due representations to the neighboring governments,
and persuasions to our Indians, not to give further provocations, but that they
will fall in with more peaceable inclinations; as the same will contribute to
their ease and safety, and obtain the friendship and protection of this
government; and this House gives the Governor assurance, that the necessary
charges thereof shall be provided for; and that it is their full purpose, to
support the administration, to the best of their power.

Signed by order of the House, JONATHAN DICKINSON, Speaker.


Whether it was in consequence of the above mentioned amicable suit, which was
then depending in chancery, between the heir at law, and the executrix, The
government was afterward settled in favor of the younger branch of the family
etc.
Hannah Penn, or otherwise, the affair of the government appears to have been
afterward settled in favor of the younger branch of the family: the different
parties, in the mean time, mutually agreeing to unite in the necessary
appointments and management of the government of the province, till the said
suit, dispute, or agreement, should be determined, or decided: so that not only
the province itself, which, by virtue of the late Proprietary's last will, was
vested in his widow, and other trustees, for the use of her children by him,
but also the government of it, afterward descended to John, Thomas and Richard
Penn, the surviving sons of the younger branch of the family, thenceforward the
Proprietaries.

In October, 1719, William Trent William Trent, after this, was Chief Justice
of New Jersey, and had been Speaker of the Assembly of that province.

Trenton, upon Delaware, on the Jersey shore, about 30 miles above
Philadelphia, took its name from him; he being a considerable trader there,
when the place was first laid out for a town. He was esteemed as a gentleman of
respectable character; and died in December, 1724.


being chosen Speaker of the new Assembly, the Governor presented them with the
royal assent to, A very important law confirmed.
and perpetual confirmation of, a very important law to the province, which had
been passed by him, in May, 1718, entitled, "An act for the advancement of
justice, and more certain administration thereof." The success of which, he
assured them, was chiefly owing to the perfect harmony and good correspondence,
that had hitherto subsisted between him and the representatives of the people.
To whom the House in reply, expressed their lasting obligations to the
Governor, for his extraordinary diligence, in so speedily getting the royal
approbation to the said law, for his care and services, on other occasions, and
his affection for the inhabitants of the province.

In the spring of the year 1720, 1720.
Sir William Keith, in a message to the Assembly, then sitting, after
mentioning some other things, made the following proposal, viz.

"Upon some representations, that have been made to me, that a court of equity,
or chancery, Governor Keith proposes to establish a court of chancery.
was very much wanted, in this government, I thought proper to consult the
opinions of gentlemen learned in the law, and others of good judgment; who all
agree, that neither we, or the representative body of any of his Majesty's
colonies, are invested with sufficient powers to erect such a court, or that
the office of Chancellor can be lawfully executed by any person whatsoever,
except him, who, by virtue of the great seal of England, may be understood to
act as the King's representative, in the place; but the opinion of your House,
of what may be with safety done, for your country's service, in this case,
shall principally direct my conduct."

To which the Assembly agree.
The Assembly agreed to the necessity of such a court; only, in their address
thereupon, they requested, that such Members of the Council, as had heard the
same cause, in any inferior court, might be exempted from being assistants in
the said court. Hence, from the encouragement, given him by the Council and
Assembly, Governor Keith soon afterward established a court of chancery, in
Pennsylvania, by the following proclamation, viz.

The Governor's proclamation for a court of chancery.
By Sir William Keith, Esquire Governor of the province of Pennsylvania, and the
counties of Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, upon Delaware, A PROCLAMATION:
Whereas complaint has been made, That courts of chancery, or equity, though
absolutely necessary, in the administration of justice, for mitigating, in some
cases, the rigor of the laws, whose judgments are tied down to fixed and
unalterable rules, and for opening a way to the right and equity of a cause,
for which the law cannot, in all cases, make a sufficient provision, have,
notwithstanding, been too seldom regularly held, in this province, in such
manner as the aggrieved Note. On the 10th of March, 1720, died Vincent
Caldwell, of Marlborough, in Chester county, an eminent and highly esteemed
preacher among the Quakers: he came to Pennsylvania in 1699, and retained a
good character till his death.

In the next following year* ^^lled William Baldwin, of Bucks county, an
eminent preacher in the ^^me religious society, and in great esteem both among
them and others.


subjects might obtain the relief, which by such courts ought to be granted.
And whereas, the representatives of the freemen of this province, taking the
same into consideration, did, at their last meeting in Assembly, request me,
that I would, with the assistance of the Council, open and hold such a court of
equity, for this province: to the end, therefore, that his Majesty's good
subjects may no longer labor under these inconveniences, which are now
complained of, I have thought fit, by and with the advice of the Council,
hereby to publish and declare, that with their assistance, I propose (God
willing) to open and hold a court of chancery, or equity, for the province of
Pennsylvania, at the court house of Philadelphia, on Thursday, the 25th day of
this instant, August; from which date the said court will be, and remain,
always open, for the relief of the subject, to hear and determine all such
matters, arising within this province aforesaid, as are regularly cognizable
before any court of chancery, according to the laws and constitution of that
part of Great Britain, called England; and his Majesty's Judges of his supreme
courts, and all other, whom it may concern, are required to take notice hereof,
and to govern themselves accordingly.

Given at Philadelphia, the tenth day of August, in the seventh year of the
reign of our Sovereign Lord, George, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, annoque Domini 1720. WILLIAM KEITH. Note. In the
chancellorship of Sir William Keith, the following persons appear to have been
masters in chancery, and mostly Members of the Council, viz.

James Logan, Jonathan Dickinson, Samuel Preston, Richard Hill, Anthony Palmer,
William Trent, Thomas Master, Robert Ashton, William Ashton, John French,
Andrew Hamilton, Henry Brook, William Fishbourne, Thomas Graeme, and Evan Owen.

Note. This court of chancery, afterward in Governor Gordon's time, came to be
considered as so great a nuisance, that it was, therefore, then entirely laid
aside.





1721.
Of the Assembly, which was elected in October, this year, Isaac Norris was
Speaker; and the usual good harmony appears to have continued between the
different branches of the Legislature.

Disagreement among the Indians, etc.
It has already been observable, from what passed between the Governor and the
Assembly, in the beginning of the year 1719, that the disagreement which
happened about that time, between the southern Indians, and those of
Pennsylvania and more northward, appeared to demand the attention of the
government, to prevent further ill consequences; accordingly, in the year 1721,
as the dispute still continued, and seemed to increase between them, further
endeavors and suitable means were used for that salutary purpose.

Governor Keith goes to Virginia, and holds a treaty with the Indians, etc.
The Governor, in the spring, made a journey into Virginia, on this occasion;
and also held a treaty, in Pennsylvania, with the Indians of different nations,
after his return: of which the following is an extract, from the printed
account of it, published at that time, in Philadelphia, entitled, "The
particulars of an Indian treaty, at Conestogoe, between his Excellency Sir
William Keith, Bart. Governor of Pensilvania, and the deputies of the Five
Nations," etc. whereby appears the method of managing these people at that
time, viz.

Extract from the account of the treaty.
"The Indian village of Conestogoe (says the account) lies about seventy miles
distant, almost directly west of the city; and the land thereabouts being
exceeding rich, it is now surrounded with diverse fine plantations, or farms;
where they raise quantities of wheat, barley, flax and hemp, without the help
of any dung.

"The company, who attended the Governor, consisted of between seventy and
eighty horsemen; many of them well armed, etc.

"And, at his return from Conestogoe, he was waited upon, at the upper ferry of
Sculkil river, by the Mayor and Aldermen of this city, with about two hundred
horse, etc.

"On the 5th of July, Governor Keith's treaty with the Indians at Conestogoe.
the Governor arrived at Conestogoe, about noon; and in the evening, went to
captain Civility's cabin; where four deputies of the Five Nations, and a few
more of their people, came to see the Governor; who spoke to them by an
interpreter, to the following purpose, viz.

"That this being the first time that the Five Nations had thought fit to send
any of their Chiefs to visit him, he had come a great way from home to bid them
welcome; that he hoped to be better acquainted, and hold a further discourse,
with them, before he left the place.

"They answered, That they were come a long way, on purpose to see the
Governor, and to speak with him; that they had heard much of him, and would
have come here before now; but that the faults, or mistakes, committed by some
of their young men, had made them ashamed to show their faces; but now, that
they had seen the Governor's face, they were well satisfied with their journey,
whether any thing else was done, or not.

"The Governor told them, That tomorrow morning he designed to speak a few
words to his brothers and children, the Indians of Conestogoe, and their
friends, upon Susquehanna; and desired that the deputies of the Five Nations
might be present, in council, to hear what is said to them.

"Conestogoe, July 6th, 1721.
"Present, Sir William Keith, Bart. Governor. Richard Hill, Jonathan Dickinson,
Caleb Pusey, and Col. John French, Esqrs James Logan, Esquire, Secretary.
"The Governor spoke to the Conestogoe Indians, as follows, viz.

"My Brothers and Children,

"So soon as you sent me word, that your near friends and relations, the Chiefs
of the Five Nations, were come to visit you, I made haste, and am come to see
both you and them, and to assure all the Indians of the continuance of my love
to them.

"Your old acquaintance and true friend, the great William Penn, was a wise
man; and, therefore, he did not approve of wars, among the Indians, whom he
loved; because it wasted and destroyed their people; but always recommended
peace to the Indians, as the surest way to make them rich and strong, by
increasing their numbers.

"Some of you can very well remember since William Penn, and his friends, came
first to settle among you, in this country: it is but a few years, and like as
yesterday, to an old man; nevertheless, by following that great man's peaceable
counsels, this government is now become wealthy and powerful, in great numbers
of people. And though many of our inhabitants are not accustomed to war, and
dislike the practice of men killing one another; yet you cannot but know, I am
able to bring several thousands into the field, well armed, to defend both your
people and ours, from being hurt by any enemy, that durst attempt to invade us.

"However, we do not forget that William Penn often told us, that the
experience of old age, which is true wisdom, advises peace; and I say to you,
that the wisest man is also the bravest man: for he safely depends on his
wisdom; and there is no true courage without it.

"I have so great a love for you, my dear brothers, who live under the
protection of this government, that I cannot suffer you to be hurt, no more
than I would my own children. I am but just now returned from Virginia; where I
wearied myself, in a long journey, both by land and water, only to make peace
for you, my children, that you may safely hunt in the woods, without danger,
from Virginia, and the many Indian Nations, that are at peace with that
government. But the Governor of Virginia, expects, that you will not hunt
within the great mountains, on the other side of Potowmack river; being a small
tract of land, which he keeps for the Virginia Indians, to hunt in: and he
promises that his Indians shall not come any more on this side Potowmack, or
behind the great mountains this way, to disturb your hunting. And this is the
condition I have made for you; which I expect you will firmly keep, and not
break it on any consideration whatsoever.

"I desire that what I have now said to you may be interpreted to the Chiefs of
the Five Nations present: for as you are a part of them, they are, in like
manner, one with us, as you yourselves are; and, therefore, our counsels must
agree, and be made known to one another: for our hearts should be open, that we
may perfectly see into one another's breasts. And that your friends may speak
to me freely, tell them I am willing to forget the mistakes, which some of
their young men were guilty of, amongst our people. I hope they will grow wiser
with age, and hearken to the grave counsels of their old men; whose valor we
esteem, because they are wise; but the rashness of their young men is
altogether folly."

"At a council held at Conestogoe, July 7th, 1721.
"Present, Sir William Keith, Bart. Governor. Richard Hill, Jonathan Dickinson.
Caleb Pusey, and Col. John French, Esquires. James Logan, Secretary, with
diverse gentlemen.
Sinnekae's Nation.
Ghesaont Awennoot.
Onondagoe's Nation,
Tannawree Skeetowass.
Cayoogoe's Nation,
Sahoode Tchehughque.
"Smith, the Ganawese Indian, Interpreter from the Mingoe language to the
Delaware.

"John Cartlidge, Esquire, and Mr. James le Tort, Interpreters from the
Delaware into English.

"Ghesaont, in the name, and on the behalf of all the Five Nations, delivered
himself, in speaking to the Governor, as follows:

"They were glad to see the Governor, and his Council at this place; for they
had heard much of the Governor, in their towns, before they came from home; and
now they find him to be what they had then heard of him, viz. their friend and
brother, and the same as if William Penn were still amongst them.

"They assure the Governor and Council, that they had not forgot William Penn's
treaties with them; and that his advice to them was still fresh in their
memories.

"Though they cannot write, yet they retain every thing, said in their
councils, with all the nations they treat with; and preserve it as carefully in
their memories, as if it was committed, in our method, to writing.

"They complain, that our traders, carrying goods and liquors up Susquehanna
river, sometimes meet with their young people, going out to war, and treat them
unkindly, not only refusing to give them a dram of their liquor, but use them
with ill language and call them dogs, etc.

"They take this unkindly; because dogs have no sense, or understanding:
whereas they are men, and think that their brothers should not compare them to
such creatures.

"That some of our traders calling their young men by these names, the young
men answered; "If they were dogs, they might act as such;" whereupon they
seized a cag of liquor, and ran away with it."

N. B. This seems to be told in their artful way, to excuse some small
robberies, that had been committed by their young people.

"Then laying down a belt of wampum upon the table, he proceeded and said,

"That all their disorders arose from the use of rum, and strong spirits; which
took away their sense and memory; that they had no such liquors among
themselves; but were hurt with what we furnished them; and therefore desired
that no more of that sort might be sent among them.

"He produced a bundle of dressed skins and said,

"That the Five Nations faithfully remember all their ancient treaties; and now
desire that the chain of friendship, between them and us, may be made so
strong, as that none of the links can ever be broken.

"Presents another bundle of raw skins, and observes,

"That a chain may contract rust with lying, and become weaker; wherefore, he
desires it may now be so well cleaned, as to remain brighter and stronger, than
ever it was before.

"Presents another parcel of skins and says,

"That, as, in the firmament, all clouds and darkness are removed from the face
of the sun, so they desire that all the misunderstandings may be fully done
away; so that when they, who are now here, shall be dead and gone, their whole
people, with their children and posterity, may enjoy the clear sunshine of
friendship with us for ever; without any thing to interpose, or obscure it.

"Presents another bundle of skins, and says,

"That, looking upon the Governor, as if William Penn was present, they desire,
that, in case any disorders should hereafter happen between their young people
and ours, we would not be too hasty in resenting any such accident, until their
council and ours can have some opportunity to treat amicably upon it; and so to
adjust all matters, as that the friendship between us may still be inviolably
preserved.

"Presents a small parcel of dressed skins, and desires,

"That we may now be together as one people; treating one another's children
kindly and affectionately, on all occasions.

"He proceeds and says,

"That they consider themselves, in this treaty, as the full plenipotentiaries
and representatives of the Five Nations; and they look upon the Governor, as
the great King of England's representative: and, therefore, they expect that
every thing now stipulated will be made absolutely firm and good, on both sides.

"Presents a bundle of bear skins, and says,

"That having now made a firm league with us, as becomes our brothers, they
complain that they get too little for their skins and furs, so as they cannot
live by their hunting; they desire us, therefore, to take compassion on them,
and contrive some way to help them, in that particular.

"Presenting a few furs, he speaks only as from himself, to acquaint the
Governor,

"That the Five Nations having heard that the Governor of Virginia wanted to
speak with them, he himself, with some of his company, intended to proceed to
Virginia, but do not know the way, how to get safe thither.

"On the 8th of July, the Governor and his Council, at the House of John
Cartlidge, Esquire near Conestogoe, having advised upon, and prepared, a proper
present, in return for that of the Indians, and in confirmation of his speech,
according to custom, in such cases, which consisted of a quantity of strowd
match-coats, gun powder, lead, biscuit, pipes and tobacco, adjourned to
Conestogoe the place of treaty."

"At a Council, held at Conestogoe, July 8th, 1721. P. M.

"Present, the same as before; with diverse gentlemen attending the Governor,
and the Chiefs of the Five Nations; being all seated in council, and the
presents laid down before the Indians, the Governor spoke to them, by an
interpreter, in these words:

"My Friends and Brothers,

"It is a great satisfaction to me, that I have this opportunity of speaking to
the valiant and wise Five Nations of Indians, whom you tell me, you are fully
empowered to represent.

"I treat you, therefore, as if all these nations were here present; and you
are to understand, what I now say, to be agreeable to the mind of our great
Monarch, George, the King of England, who bends his care to establish peace
amongst all the mighty nations of Europe; unto whom all the people, in these
parts, are, as it were, but like one drop, out of a bucket, so that what is now
transacted between us, must be laid up, as the words of the whole body of your
people and our people, to be kept in perpetual remembrance.

"I am also glad to find that you remember what William Penn formerly said to
you. He was a great and a good man: his own people loved him; he loved the
Indians, and they also loved him. He was as their father; he would never suffer
them to be wronged; neither would he let his people enter upon any lands, until
he had first purchased them of the Indians. He was just, and therefore the
Indians loved him.

"Though he is now removed from us; yet his children and people, following his
example, will always take the same measures; so that his and our posterity will
be as a long chain, of which he was the first link; and when one link ends,
another succeeds, and then another; being all firmly bound together in one
strong chain, to endure for ever.

"He formerly knit the chain of friendship with you, as the chief of all the
Indians, in these parts; and lest this chain should grow rusty, you now desire
it may be scoured, and made strong, to bind us, as one people, together. We do
assure you, it is, and has always been, bright on our side; and so we will ever
keep it.

"As to your complaint of our traders, that they have treated some of your
young men unkindly, I take that to be said only by way of excuse for the
follies of your people, thereby endeavoring to persuade me, that they were
provoked to do what you very well know they did; but, as I told our own
Indians, two days ago, I am willing to pass by all these things; you may
therefore be assured, that our people shall not offer any injury to yours; or,
if I know that they do, they shall be severely punished for it. So you must, in
like manner, strictly command your young men, that they do not offer any injury
to ours. For when they pass through the utmost skirts of our inhabitants, where
there are no people yet settled, but a few traders, they should be more careful
of them, as having separated themselves from the body of their friends, purely
to serve the Indians more commodiously with what they want.

"Nevertheless, if any little disorders should, at any time, hereafter arise,
we will endeavor that it shall not break, or weaken, the chain of friendship
between us: to which end, if any of your people take offense, you must, in that
case, apply to me, or to our chiefs. And when we have any cause to complain, we
shall, as you desire, apply to your chiefs, by our friends, the Conestogoe
Indians: but, on both sides, we must labor to prevent every thing of this
kind, as much as we can.

"You complain, that our traders come into the path of your young men, going
out to war, and thereby occasion disorders among them; I will, therefore, my
friends and brothers, speak very plainly to you, on this head.

"Your young men come dawn Susquehanna river, and take their road through our
Indian towns and settlements, and make a path between us and the people,
against whom they go out to war. Now, you must know, that the path, this way,
leads them only to the Indians, who are in alliance with the English; and
first, to those, who are in a strict league of friendship with the Governor of
Virginia; just as these, our friends and children, who are settled among us,
are in league with me and our people.

"You cannot therefore make war upon the Indians, in league with Virginia,
without weakening the chain with the English: for, as we would not suffer
these, our friends and brothers of Conestogoe, and upon the river, to be hurt
by any persons, without considering it, as done to ourselves; so the Governor
of Virginia looks upon the injuries, done to his Indian brothers and friends,
as if they were done to himself. And you very well know, that, though you are
five different nations, yet you are but one people; so as that any wrong, done
to one nation, is received as an injury, done you all.

"In the same manner, and much more so, it is with the English, who are all
united under one great King, who has more people, in that one town, where he
lives, than all the Indians, in North America, put together.

"You are in league with New York, as your ancient friends, and nearest
neighbors; and you are in league with us, by treaties, often repeated, and by
a chain, which you have now brightened. As, therefore, all the English are but
one people, you are actually in league with all the English governments, and
must equally preserve the peace with all, as with one government.

"You pleased me very much, when you told me, that you were going to treat with
the Governor of Virginia. Your nations formerly entered into a very firm league
with that government; and, if you have suffered that chain to grow rusty, it is
time to scour it; and the Five Nations have done very wisely to send you there
for that purpose.

"I do assure you, the Governor of Virginia is a great and a good man; he loves
the Indians, as his children, and so protects and defends them; for he is very
strong, having many thousand Christian warriors under his command; whereby he
is able to assist all those, who are in any league of friendship with him.
Hasten, therefore, my friends, to brighten and strengthen the chain with that
great man; for he desires it, and will receive you kindly. He is my great and
good friend; I have been lately with him; and since you say, you are strangers,
I will give you a letter to him, to inform him of what we have done, and of the
good design of your visit to him, and this country.

"My friends and brothers, I told you two days ago, that we must open our
breasts to each other; I shall, therefore, like your true friend, open mine yet
further to you, for your good.

"You see that the English, from a very small people, at first, in these parts,
are, by peace amongst themselves, become a very great people amongst you, far
exceeding the number of all the Indians, we know of.

"But while we are at peace, the Indians continue to make war upon one another;
and destroy each other, as if they intended that none of their people should be
left alive; by which means you are, from a great people, become a very small
people; and yet you will go on to destroy yourselves.

"The Indians of the south, though they speak a different language, yet they
are the same people, and inhabit the same land, with those of the north. We,
therefore, cannot but wonder, how you, that are a wise people, should take
delight in putting an end to your race: the English, being your true friends,
labor to prevent this. We would have you strong, as a part of ourselves: for,
as our strength is your strength, so we would have yours to be as our own.

"I have persuaded all my brethren, in these parts, to consider what is for
their good; and not to go out any more to war; but your young men, as they come
this way, endeavor to force them. And because they incline to follow the
counsels of peace, and the good advice of their true friends, your people use
them ill, and often prevail with them to go out, to their own destruction. Thus
it was, that their town of Conestogoe lost their good King, not long ago; and
thus many have been lost. Their young children are left without parents; their
wives without husbands; the old men, contrary to the course of nature, mourn
the death of their young; the people decay, and grow weak; we lose our dear
friends, and are afflicted. And this is chiefly owing to your young men.

"Surely, you cannot propose to get either riches, or possessions, by going
thus out to war: for when you kill a deer, you have the flesh to eat, and the
skin to sell; but when you return from war, you bring nothing home, but the
scalp of a dead man; who, perhaps, was husband to a kind wife, and father to
tender children, who never wronged you; though, by losing him, you have robbed
them of their help and protection; and, at the same time, got nothing by it.

"If I were not your friend, I would not take the trouble of saying all these
things to you; which I desire may be fully related to all your people, when you
return home, that they may consider in time, what is for their own good. And,
after this, if any will be so madly deaf and blind, as neither to hear nor see
the danger before them, but will go out to destroy, and be destroyed, for
nothing, I must desire that such foolish young men would take another path, and
not pass this way, amongst our people, whose eyes I have opened; and they have
wisely hearkened to my advice. So that I must tell you plainly, as I am their
best friend, and this government is their protector, and as a father to them,
we will not suffer them any more to go out, as they have done, to their
destruction. I say again, we will not suffer it; for we have the counsel of
wisdom amongst us, and know what is for their good. For though they are weak,
yet they are our brethren; we will therefore take care of them, that they be
not misled with ill counsel. You mourn when you lose a brother; we mourn, when
any of them are lost; to prevent which they shall not be suffered to go out, as
they have done, to be destroyed by war.

"My good friends and brothers, I give you the same counsel, and earnestly
desire that you will follow it, since it will make you a happy people. I give
you this advice, because I am your true friend; but I much fear you hearken to
others, who never were, and never will be, your friends.

"You know very well, that the French have been your enemies, from the
beginning; and though they made peace with you twenty-two years ago, yet, by
subtle practices, they still endeavor to ensnare you. They use arts and
tricks, and tell you lies, to deceive you; and if you would make use of your
own eyes, and not be deluded by their jesuits and interpreters, you would see
this yourselves: for you know they have no goods of any value, these several
years past, except what has been sent to them from the English of New York, and
that is now all over. They give fair speeches, instead of real services; and
as, for many years, they attempted to destroy you in war, so they now endeavor
to do it in peace; for when they persuade you to go out to war against others,
it is only that you may be destroyed yourselves; which we, as your true
friends, labor to prevent; because we would have your numbers increase, that
you may grow strong, and that we may be all strengthened in friendship and
peace together.

"As to what you have said of trade, I suppose the great distance, at which you
live from us, has prevented all commerce between us and your people. We believe
those, who go into the woods, and spend all their time upon it, endeavor to
make the best bargains they can, for themselves; so, on your part, you must
take care to make the best bargains you can with them. But we hope our traders
do not exact; for we think that a strowd coat, or a pound of powder, is now
sold for no more buck skins than formerly. Beaver, indeed, is not, of late, so
much used in Europe; and, therefore, does not give so good a price; and we deal
but very little in that commodity. But deer skins sell very well among us; and
I shall always take care that the Indians be not wronged. But, except other
measures be taken to regulate the Indian trade every where, the common method
used in trade will still be followed; and every man must take care of himself;
for thus I must do myself, when I buy any thing from our own people; if I do
not give them their price, they will keep it; for we are a free people. But if
you have any further proposals to make about these affairs, I am willing to
hear and consider them; for it is my desire that the trade be well regulated to
your content.

"I am sensible rum is very hurtful to the Indians; we have made laws, that
none should be carried amongst them; or, if any is, that it should be staved,
and thrown upon the ground; and the Indians have been ordered to destroy all
the rum, that comes in their way, but they will not do it; they will have rum;
and when we refuse it, they will travel to the neighboring provinces and fetch
it; their own women go to purchase it, and then sell it amongst their own
people, at excessive rates. I would gladly make any laws to prevent this, that
could be effectual; but the country is so wide, the woods are so dark and
private, and so far out of my sight, if the Indians themselves do not prohibit
their own people, there is no other way to prevent it; for my part, I shall
readily join in any measures, that can be proposed, for so good a purpose.

"I have now, my friends and brothers, said all, that I think can be of
service, at this time, and I give you these things here laid before you, to
confirm my words, viz. Five coats, twenty pounds of powder, forty pounds of
lead, for each of the Five Nations; that is, twenty-five coats, one hundred
pounds of powder, and two hundred pounds of lead, in the whole; which I desire
may be delivered to them, with these words, in my name, and on behalf of this
province: I shall be glad to see often some of your chief men, sent in the name
of all the rest; and desire you will come to Philadelphia, to visit our
families, and our children born there, where we can provide better for you, and
make you more welcome; for people always receive their friends best at their
own houses. I heartily wish you well on your journey, and good success in it.
And when you return home, I desire you will give my very kind love, and the
love of all our people, to your kings, and to all their people.

"Then the Governor rose from his chair; and when he had called Ghesaont, the
speaker, to him, he took a corronation medal of the king, and presented it to
the Indian in these words:

"That our children, when, we are dead, may not forget these things, but keep
this treaty, between us, in perpetual remembrance, I here deliver to you a
picture, in gold, bearing the image of my great master, the King of all the
English: and when you return home, I charge you to deliver this piece into the
hands of the first man, or greatest chief of all the Five Nations, whom you
call Kannygooah, to be laid up and kept, as a token to our children's children;
that an entire and lasting friendship is now established for ever, between the
English, in this country, and the great Five Nations."

CHAPTER XXIV.
The Governor's concern to promote the country's benefit, etc. -- Anthony
Morris. -- Proceedings in consequence of the barbarous murder of an Indian. --
Names of some Members of Council about this time. -- Diverse useful laws passed,
with some of their titles, etc. -- Increase of law suits. -- Names of the
Members of Assembly. -- Regulation of bread and flour. -- Paper currency scheme
first introduced in 1722. -- Advocated by the Governor, and favored by the
generality of the people; but disliked by some. -- Sentiments of several
gentlemen and merchants, relating to a paper currency, presented to the
Assembly. -- Answer to these sentiments, etc. -- Governor Keith's judgment, on
the same subject, in writing, to the Assembly. -- Reply to the answer to the
above sentiments, etc.

OF the Assembly, elected in October, 1721, 1721.
Jeremiah Langhorne was Speaker; to which Assembly, in the winter, the
Governor, in his speech, Governor Keith expresses his concern and scheme for
the public good.
having intimated the necessity of their united and diligent application to
restore the planter's credit, without discouraging the merchant, by whose
industry alone, says he, "Their trade must be supported with a sufficient
currency of cash," thus further expressed himself: "My mind is so fully bent
upon doing this province some effectual service, that I have lately formed the
design of a considerable settlement amongst you, in order to manufacture and
consume the grain; for which there is, at this time, no profitable market
abroad; and although this project will doubtless, at first, prove very
chargeable and expensive to me, yet, if it meets with your approbation, and the
good will of the people, I am well assured it cannot fail of answering my
purpose, to do a real service to the country, and every interest and concern of
mine shall ever be built on that bottom," etc.

The house was highly pleased with the Governor's (...) for the public good;
The (...) ^bly acknowledge the Governor's regard, etc.
"His zeal to restore the planter's credit, with his just care of the merchant,
who, of late, with others equally, had laid under the greatest disadvantages of
want of a sufficient currency of cash, as appeared to them, from the melancholy
complaints of the people, declaring they would readily fall in with any scheme,
that should appear to them conducive to a remedy." They gratefully acknowledged
his patriotic design to manufacture and consume the grain of the country, and
heartily thanked him for his good condescension, and repeated offers of advice
and assistance, for the public utility.

Proceedings respecting the murder of an Indian.
"In the spring of the year 1722, an Indian was barbarously killed, within the
limits of the province, somewhere above Conestogoe. This murder was supposed to
be perpetrated by one or two Note. Anthony Morris of Philadelphia, died on the
24th of October, 1721. Anthony Morris obiit.
He came over among the settlers of West Jersey, about the year 1680, and fixed
his residence at Burlington for several years. Afterward he removed to
Philadelphia; where he resided during the remainder of his life. He is said to
have been of (...) service, among the first, or early, settlers, in diverse
respects, both in a public and private capacity; being a preacher among the
Quakers, and a man of general good esteem till his death, for near forty years
in the country, etc.

His son Anthony Morris appears to be a Member of Assembly, this same year; a
person of good esteem, character and utility to his country, and in the
religious society of the Quakers, of which he was esteemed a valuable and
useful member till his death, in the year 1762.


persons, of the name of Cartlidge. The Governor, 1722.
having commissioned James Logan, and Col. John French, two of his Council, to
go to Conestogoe, to enq^^^e into the affair, after their return, at the
request of the Assembly, laid their report of it before them. The House, in
their address to the Governor thereon, expressed their utmost concern on this
affair: they gratefully acknowledged, and highly commended the Governor's
prudent conduct, and steady administration of justice; but more especially at
that time, on an occasion of the greatest importance to the peace and safety of
the government, by his empowering two gentlemen of his Council so able and
prudent, on the present emergency; "Whose wise conduct (said they) is very
conspicuous from their report laid before the House by the Governor;" "That, at
the relation of the dismal circumstances, they were filled with horror and
surprise, that, after so long continuance of the peace, first settled by the
honorable Proprietary, William Penn, with the Indians, any breach should be
now made by those, under the name of Christians, to the reproach of that name,
and danger of the safety and peace, both of this province and others."

They earnestly requested the Governor to persist in his laudable endeavor, to
bring the aggressors to condign punishment, with all possible speed, lest, by
delay of justice, the Indians should be induced to withdraw their allegiance to
the crown of Great Britain, and affection from this government, and be provoked
to do themselves justice, in a manner, that might be of most dangerous
consequence: "That he would advise with his Council, in making treaties with
them; for, (said they) as they are some of the principal inhabitants of this
government, we have no reason to doubt but (...) will be concerned for the good
of the same." Among the Members of Council, about this time, appear to be,

Richard Hill, Samuel Preston, Anthony Palmer, Robert Ashton, Isaac Norris,
Thomas Masters, William Ashton, John French, Andrew Hamilton, also Attorney
General, James Logan, likewise Secretary.



They further pressed the maintaining the ^eague of friendship, first made by
their worthy Proprietary, as a thing of the greatest importance, that could
possibly come before them; and therefore, they unanimously recommended the
execution of strict justice, as the best and most effectual means for that end;
the want of which, in the apprehension of that vindictive people, had produced
sad and fatal consequences to other provinces; they likewise proposed to the
Governor's consideration some particulars, to be immediately done, in the
affair; and mentioned the repeated request of the Indians, that strong liquors
should not be carried, nor sold, among them; with the petition of sundry
inhabitants of the province, to the same import; which the laws hitherto made,
in that case, had not been able to prevent; they, therefore, requested the
advice and assistance of the Governor and Council therein, etc.

The Governor thanked them for the great satisfaction, which they expressed,
with his conduct and administration; and declared, "That he had carefully
endeavored to follow the late honorable Proprietary's steps in such affairs;
to keep the natives always in a lively and perfect remembrance of his love to
them, and to build all their treaties of peace with them, upon the same
principles and maxims of good policy, which he used and maintained when he was
here himself." He likewise assured the House, that he had, at that time, all
the probability, which the nature of the case would admit of, for settling
matters again (...) Indian nations, (...) that just, firm and (...) foundation,
which the House so earnestly desired and recommended to him. He acknowledged
the insufficiency of the laws, to restrain people from carrying too great
quantities of rum, and selling it among the Indians, thereby debauching and
cheating them; which, he said, he had complained of to former Assemblies.

Great pains were taken, in this affair; an Indian messenger, Satcheecho, was
dispatched to the Five Nations; the suspected persons were committed to prison;
and the Governor, with two of the Council, met and treated with the Five
Nations, at Albany, respecting it; besides the presents, which were made to the
Indians. The Five Nations desired that the Cartlidges should not suffer death;
and the affair was, at length, amicably settled.

Among the wholesome laws, passed by the Governor, this year, Several wholesome
laws passed this year, etc.
for improving the produce of the province, meliorating its staple commodities,
then in bad credit, at foreign markets, and for other purposes; there was one
also entitled, "An act to prohibit the selling of rum, and other strong
liquors, to the Indians, and to prevent abuses, that may happen thereby." Among
these laws were: 1st, "An act for encouraging the making good beer, and for the
consumption of grain in the province." 2d, "An act to prevent the exportation
of flour, not merchantable." 3d, "An act for laying a duty on Negroes imported
into this province." 4th, "An act for encouraging and raising of hemp, in this
province," etc.


Joseph Growdon was Speaker of the Assembly elected in October, 1722. The names
of the Members of this Assembly were,

For Philadelphia county.
Samuel Carpenter, senr. Francis Rawle, Matthias Hols^^n, John Swift, Robert
Jones, Anthony Morris, Hugh Evans, Benjamin Vining,
Bucks county.
Joseph Growdon, William Paxton, William Biles, John Sotcher, Joseph Kirkbride,
junr. George Clough, Thomas Canby, Thomas Yardly,
Chester county.
Samuel Lewis, junr. Joseph Pennock, David Lewis, William Pile, Daniel
Williamson, Israel Tailor, Nathaniel Newlin, Isaac Tailor.
City of Philadelphia.
John Kearsley, Charles Read.

The Governor, in his speech to this Assembly, on the first of the 11th month,
having passed an encomium on the great harmony and unanimity, which had
subsisted between him and the former Assemblies, with the means, and happy
consequences thereof, took occasion thence to recommend to them, among other
things, that they would direct their enquiry, to find out, from whence it
proceeded, that such a multiplicity of expensive and vexatious law suits had
been, of late, commenced in their courts, beyond what was usual, or known, in
the province before. Respecting the article of law suits, which the Governor
mentioned to the House, the committee of grievances, on the same month, made
their report, as follows, takes from the printed votes:

"We have examined the Sheriff's docquet, and find that,

From September, 1715, to September, 1716, the number of writs are 431, From
September, 1717, to September, 1718, 588, From September, 1719, to September,
1720, 627, From September, 1721, to September, 1722, 847, From September to
December, 1722, 250.




The Governor's remarks on the increase of law suits, etc.
"Because, says he, if this sudden change should appear to arise only from the
increase of trade and riches, it is well; but, if from any other cause
whatsoever, I conceive it will be attended with dangerous consequences to the
body of the people, whom you represent; and, in such case, it will require your
immediate application." He also observed, "That, for the sake of the whole
country, who must live by the product and manufacture of grain, it was
absolutely necessary, that the making good bread and flour, be so regulated, as
to recover their lost credit, in the market, in the West Indies; upon which
their whole traffic entirely depended:" He concluded with expressions of the
warmest zeal, to join with them in whatever means should be found necessary to
ease the present burdens of the people, and to relieve their complaints.

The House, in answer, as kindly acknowledged the Governor's care, and constant
inclinations, for the good and prosperity of the province; and, joining with
them, in sentiment, respecting the necessary things, which he recommended to
their consideration, they undertook the regulation and improvement of some of
the law proceedings; especially respecting attachments; and several laws were
passed, for these purposes.

About this time the province appears to have been under great difficulties,
Scheme for a paper currency first introduced into Pennsylvania, 11th mo. 1722.
respecting the decay, or discouragement, of its trade and credit, and the want
of a sufficient medium, or currency, of cash; for the relief of which diverse
proposals were made; and among the rest, that of paper money, or paper bills of
credit, was now introduced; which occasioned considerable debate, between men
of different sentiments, respecting it.

The Governor was a strong advocate for a paper currency, and took great pains
to promote it; with whom appeared to join the generality of the people. But
diverse, who were considered as persons of most property, judgment and weight,
in the province, did not like the scheme: but then their dislike was chiefly
founded on the difficulty of preserving the said currency from depreciation; Of
the introduction of the paper currency.
which they saw, had, in general, occasioned mischievous and fraudulent
consequences, in other provinces; together with some modes, which were
proposed, of issuing and conducting the same; so that their opposition was not
so much entirely against a paper credit, properly guarded and conducted, as
against fraud, or those modes of forming and managing it, which had been so
ruinous in other places, or such as they judged would be equally pernicious, if
adopted here. Hence, in the 11th month this year, when the scheme was under
consideration of the Assembly, Isaac Norris and James Logan, in the name and
behalf of several gentlemen and merchants, presented the following sentiments
thereon, in writing, to the House, viz.

To the honorable House of Representatives of the province of Pennsylvania. A
few days after this the following paper was laid before the House, in answer to
these sentiments of several gentlemen and merchants, in relation to a paper
currency, viz.

To the honorable House of Representatives of the province of Pennsylvania, in
Assembly met, the 24th of January, 1722-23.
May it please the honorable House,
We beg leave to lay before you some considerations, in answer to the
sentiments of several gentlemen and merchants, in relation to a paper credit
which they were admitted to present, the tenth instant.

First, It is but just to concede to their notion, that this province is
dependent on, and derives all its powers from, Great Britain; and that it is
the highest wisdom, in our Legislature, to direct themselves by the same
prudent measures, as far as our circumstances with theirs may agree.

Secondly, It is by them alleged, that when the nation was distressed by war,
and their coin generally debased, yet the parliament would not advance their
currency, on any account; and that they renewed it, at the same fineness, to
pass at the former rates; and they have unalterably kept to the same. And
further, that twelve hundred thousand pounds made good to private persons all
their loss, received from exchanging their clipped and debased coin, for the
new milled money, delivered at par: to which we say, that we know (by what
authority soever it was, or is done) that since, if not then, the coin has
been (particularly the gold) often raised and lowered; and that the twelve
hundred thousand pounds did make good all the loss in the kingdom, for the
debased coin, is an assertion, we doubt not, but there are many, in Great
Britain (and some here) can inform those gentlemen otherwise.

Thirdly, In concurrence with the sentiments of these gentlemen, in their third
paragraph, we humbly recommend it to our legislators, that our bills be
established upon so just a foundation, that, while in being, they may still
continue of the same value with real money, according to the rates, at which
they are first issued.

Fourthly, If those bills cannot be procured, where they are to be issued, for
a less pledge or security, than gold, or silver, would be, the easy terms of
refunding them will not lessen their value; for the stamp of authority has its
own laws, as unalterable in themselves, as those of interest, or increase, are
in usury; and which, such as are versed in those affairs, as carefully consider.

Fifthly, The schemes most commonly talked of, for lending out sums to be
discharged by annual payments, equal to, or not much exceeding the interest,
for a certain number of years, without paying any principal, are not partial
and unjust, nor destructive to the public credit; for the pledge secured is
more than an equivalent to the sum received, and the interest given is not
inconsiderable, even, of the lowest rated schemes. To whom are they partial and
unjust, since no method is proposed, or contrived, for any particular man, or
men, excluding others? The benefit is to be general; and though the necessities
of the poor chiefly call for the succor, yet it is more within the compass of
the rich to be thereby favored; because they have plenty of pledges: let them
not, then, complain of partiality, or injustice, through their own negligence.
How are such schemes destructive to public credit, since the public is capable
of yielding so much relief to a necessitous people, without hurting itself? No,
the design is laudable, and greatly becomes our generous patriots. But,
perhaps, there are some, that are partial to themselves, although they seem to
speak in defense of the public, affording us room to guess, they would have no
money borrowed, but of private persons, and begrudge the borrowers of the
public, the gain of near thirty pounds, according to the exquisite calculation
of those gentlemen; because they themselves know, that such an advantage is not
equal to the sweet incomes of usury.

Sixthly, All such projects are not exceedingly weak and unjust; for what man,
had he money by him to lend, would refuse it, on sufficient security? And if he
does lend it, on such security, where can we suppose the lender's loss to be?
Or, wherein is the paper credit lessened, when there is more than its value to
support it? Their supposing it to be lent to all, is an amusement; and the
tribunal is easy to be erected, to find out persons of worth, from those that
are worth nothing; and the poor (who, they say, have as little merit as any)
may have a chance to get it by labor, by the employers having something to pay
both to their own, and the poor man's advantage: and thus a way may easily be
found for dispensing the public favors. We presume to add, to these great and
rich men (and, therefore, according to their account, sober and industrious
men) that we humbly hope a medium, in business, will run us from the loose way
of luxury, idleness and folly, which often, happens from being non-plus'd in a
regular dispatch of affairs, for want of pay, when due.

Seventhly, This currency, or paper money, will not fall in value, it raised on
a good foundation, as recommended in the third article. The rise of silver is
alone owing to the avarice of the possessor; who, knowing there is no other
currency (and that too, at this time, extremely scarce) they have imposed on
the necessities of the people, by advancing it near two shillings in the pound;
but it is not improbable that our bills, being always capable of purchasing our
country produce, their value being equal to silver, will again reduce it to its
stated worth, and be a^ satisfactory to the kind lender, who, (according to
them) relieved the borrower in distress, or sold him land, or goods, at the
real value, at the time of lending, or sale.

Eighthly, Those do not deceive themselves, who, because gold and silver may be
had, at New York, or other places, in exchange for their paper money, suppose
that the one is as good as the other. It is a received maxim, that the value of
any thing is in proportion to what it will purchase: now paper bills will, at
this time, and would formerly, purchase, in New York, goods cheaper than cash
will, at Philadelphia; and it is obvious that some other reason may have
occasioned the rise of silver and gold there; since we have here advanced, at
least, six pence per ounce, on silver, beyond the rate ascertained by act of
parliament, without any such motive as paper money.

These being premised on the general heads, what next follows is in answer to
their three conclusive points.

1st. If the whole sum struck be so small, that it will not answer the absolute
and immediate necessities of those who have real securities to give, it will
not (we humbly conceive) be sufficient to pass from hand to hand, for a
currency.

2d. That which is a benefit to any person, for five years, will be a further
benefit, for a longer term; and, perhaps, the fixing it to a short date may
abridge some persons from effecting what they might accomplish for their own
good, and the country's advantage, in more time. The difficulty of exchanging
worn out bills for new, in an office to be erected for that purpose, we doubt
not the care and ability of this Assembly to surmount, and render practicable.
And, if our laws can continue in force no longer than five years, without the
royal approbation, yet we presume a law so beneficial to the subject here, so
concurrent to the practice of neighboring colonies, and no ways repugnant to
the laws of England, will, when duly represented at home, not want that
approbation.

3d. We confide in this, that the wisdom of this honorable House needs no
direction, in the care to be taken, of sinking the paper currency in course,
and in a just manner; for we esteem you (and not these gentlemen petitioners)
to be proper judges of the methods hitherto discoursed of.

These observations, may it please this honorable House, on the sentiments of
those gentlemen, we humbly offer to your consideration, and pray your
favorable construction.


Soon after the preceding answer was delivered to the House, it was followed by
a paper, in reply to it, containing, the further sentiments of the gentlemen,
merchants, etc. on the same subject, viz.

To the honorable House of Representatives of the province of Pennsylvania.
Further sentiments, etc.
In the important affair of a paper credit, now under the consideration of your
House, it is to be hoped that all honest men, amongst us, think of it from the
same principles, and with the same inclinations, viz. to promote the true
interest and reputation of this colony.

Upon these views alone we lately took the liberty to petition your honorable
House, to be heard upon the subject, and the next day exhibited our sentiments,
in writing, drawn into several heads, and built, on such solid foundations of
truth, that we are well assured they cannot be shaken.

Yet, as the opinions of men are extremely various, and great pains have, of
late, been taken here, to instill and strengthen popular errors, on that
subject; we find diverse of these drawn up, in a paper, lately presented to, and
received by, the House; containing, as it says, some considerations, in answer
to our said sentiments, but truly consisting, in a great measure, of those
common mistakes, which have unhappily occasioned such differences in opinion,
even, among the well-meaning, who, we presume, all aim at the public good.

The more clearly, therefore, to manifest these popular deceptions, to prevent
the unhappy consequence, that may attend their obtaining further place, and
more effectually to establish the truth and certainty of those heads, we before
presented, we humbly beg leave to offer the following observations, on the
several parts of that paper, with some further sentiments, on the whole matter;
which, we hope, will be interpreted according to their true intention, that is,
to serve the public, in which we are all jointly embarked.

The design of what we then exhibited to the House (as is evident from all the
parts of it) was not to oppose a paper credit, but to show the danger of ill
concerted schemes, and to point out, as far as was then proper, what we
conceived to be the most effectual measures, for answering all the just ends,
proposed by such a credit.

In the three first articles was represented how much it became us, as a
government depending on Britain, to copy after the great examples, their
parliaments have set before us; particularly these two cases of keeping our
coin constantly to the same rates, and supporting the credit of our bills, when
issued, equivalent to such money.

To the first of these, those, concerned in that paper, are obliged to concede.

To the second they answer with a gross mistake, and an unbecoming trifling:
for, it is positively true, that since the great reformation of the English
coin, in 1696, there has not been the least alteration in it; guineas, which,
till lately, never were a legal tender, were limited that year, that they
should not, under a penalty, be received at more than twenty-two shillings
each. But no sooner did silver, the true lawful money of the kingdom, circulate
freely again, which, by the great diligence of the several mints, they did,
within six months after; but the people refused to take them at more than
twenty-one shillings and six pence, as formerly; at which rate they have
constantly continued, till the mines of America, especially of Brasil,
producing much more gold than silver, in value, the first has fallen, in
Europe; on which, to prevent the exportation of silver, they are, by a late act
of parliament, reduced to twenty-one shillings; and at that rate, at length,
made a legal tender, that is, lawful money of the nation. If foreign gold, or
silver, be meant, which are only merchandise, and rise, as the demand is for
exportation, these are entirely out of the question. To the other part, where
they allege, that the twelve hundred thousand pounds did not make good all the
loss, in the kingdom; we say, that our informations are as good as any can
pretend to, in this province.

That sum, on large trials, made in the exchequer, of the moneys received the
year before, was judged sufficient to make good the whole loss; and all, who
brought in their money, within the time limited, had it made good to them. It
is true, some persons disaffected to the government, and others fond of their
hoards, forbore, and suffered accordingly, but the great care of the
parliament, and therefore the truth of our assertion, are from hence equally
clear.

The third head, which is the greatest point, of keeping up our bills to the
same value with real money, according to the rates, or which they are, at
first, issued, is also conceded, in general terms; and the just foundation
mentioned, is all that is contended for.

But what is advanced in the fourth and fifth articles, is the grand popular
error, that endangers a disappointment, in that great end proposed. For no
stamp of authority can give an intrinsic worth, where it really is not.
Experience, whose instructions, even the weakest may reach, will show us, that
bills of credit have been issued in no place on this continent, where they have
not, sooner or later, sunk below the value, at which they were, at first, made;
and yet they all had as powerful a stamp of authority as any we can give. We
are now upon putting in practice a project of the same kind; it is, therefore,
the more highly ^ncumbent on us, prudently and advisedly to consider, in time,
by what means the inconveniences, that have attended others, in theirs, may be
prevented in our undertaking.

The first remark, we offered, on this head, was from this foundation, that, if
the public, by their terms of issuing their bills, show they estimate them
(...) less than they would real money; all mankind, but especially the trader,
whose business it is to exchange his commodity for its real value, w^^^
naturally be taught to do the same. The greatness of the security ma^es no
manner of difference, unless the borrower of the bills should be obliged, for
one hundred pounds lent in them, to repay, upon that security, the like sum of
gold or silver, and not in the same specie; for should one, upon lending any
rarity, of no great intrinsic value, take a security of one hundred pounds, to
have it returned, this would not add to the real worth of the thing lent,
though it showed, the lender resolved to have it restored to him; or, if a man
should assign the bond of another person of dubious credit, for one hundred
pounds due, for the consideration of fifty pounds only, to be paid by the
assignee, in twelve months, to the assignor; and for the payment of the fifty
pounds, should take a mortgage, or security, worth five hundred pounds, this
indeed will make the debt of fifty more certainly good, but will not add one
farthing to the value of the bond assigned, in the same manner, if a person be
possessed of fifty pounds, in bills of credit, though there be a security of
one or two hundred pounds given for them, in the office, by the borrower, of
the first taking of them out, should these bills, for the same reasons, that
have prevailed in Boston, and other places, in the li^^ case, sink in their
value, and become worth less than forty pounds, while in that person's hands,
the security given will, in no manner, compensate that loss to the possessor;
for neither he, nor even the public, can have any satisfaction from the
security; because, if the borrower returns the bills again, when due from him,
though they should not then be worth twenty pounds of that coin, by which they
were first rated, his security will be entirely discharged by the payment. This
is most evident and plain to any man of reason, who will make use of it: but
persons overrun with the common notions, depending on the applause of such as
are ready prepared to give it to every thing, favoring their own opinions, may
think it sufficient for answering the most certain truth, barely to deny it,
and confide in the numbers, that are to support their assertions; which we
conceive has been the only motive to those persons, who drew up, or presented
the paper, now under consideration; but the unhandsome reflections, that are
cast, in that part of it, shall, for the present, be waved, and referred to the
close of this, as a more proper place.

In our fifth and sixth heads we asserted, that such schemes as were then
commonly talked of, were partial, weak and unjust; as they were intended to
make grants very beneficial to the first borrower, but injurious to the others:
that all would equally covet the same advantage; but that, from the nature of
the thing, all could not possibly partake of it; unless the quantity of the
bills were so ^ast as to render them of little, or no value. The truth of all
which is so clear and plain, that it would be little less than a mockery to
human reason, to offer arguments for supporting what, if understood, is
self-evident. But this is now entirely out of time, the wisdom of the Assembly
having admitted none of those schemes, there guarded against, and it will be
difficult to find a reason for offering that part of the paper to the House,
after all the votes, that have been passed on this affair, unless it be to
prepare, with an extreme modesty, for another push, to overset all that has
hitherto been voted.

Their whole answer to the seventh head is grounded on another great mistake,
in the cause of the rise of silver amongst us; which is truly thus: In the year
1709, when the act of parliament, for reducing our coin, took place, silver was
our common currency; gold being then but rarely seen; but as it was judged
necessary (seeing the act was silent in it) to make that also, as well as
silver, pass current by weight, at some determinate rate; and being, at that
time, worth four pounds an ounce, or four shillings per penny weight, in
Britain, it was advanced in the same proportion with silver, ( viz. one third)
to five shillings and four pence per penny weight; but because this sum could
not be so divided by twenty-four, as to render it practicable to reckon single
grains by farthings, without a fraction, it was, by common consent, raised to
five shillings and six pence, that a grain might be accounted at two pence
three farthings. This seeming small difference, with the advance given in
England by the East India company for Spanish silver, wrought so great a change
in our currency, that our payments were mostly made in gold, New York and
Britain gradually exhausting our silver; insomuch that, even, nine or ten years
ago, five per cent. advance was given, in gold, in exchange for Spanish silver;
though afterward, upon a greater importation of the latter, this difference,
for some time, abated; but gold having still further fallen in value, in
Britain, the disparity has again further increased; for accounting pieces of
eight, only at five shillings and four pence per ounce, which is under a medium
for their common price; and gold at three pounds eighteen shillings, which is
near its present, or late value, in England; a^ ounce of Spanish silver is
truly equivalent to seven shillings and six pence, in gold, at five pounds ten
shillings per ounce, as we rate it. It is therefore, neither avarice, nor
sharping, that has occasioned this advance, in the exchange of these two
metals, but the essential difference, in their intrinsic value, at the market,
to which they are carried; which is estimated by rules, that ever will prevail
among competent reasoners on the basis of trade; though such, as go beyond
their last, will meddle with matters out of their sphere, are incapable of
comprehending them.

But, from hence a sure rule may be taken, in relation to paper that by so much
as the value of public bills sink, by so much will gold and silver rise, in
proportion to their intrinsic worth; as we find our silver has done, in
proportion to our gold; and the constant standard, to measure this by, will be
the exchange between the English colony, where they are made current, and Great
Britain. From hence the loss on bills is to be estimated in all places, where
they pass: the exchange in New York, before the bills fell, viz. in 1716, was
fifty per cent. and in Boston, not long before; but since 1717, the year they
uttered their last great quantity of bills, it arose to sixty-five per cent.
and in Boston, it is now near one hundred and fifty per cent. as in Carolina,
it is from five to six cents advance on one hundred pounds sterling.

The answer to the eighth is of a piece with the rest, a presumptuous denial of
a positive truth, that is in itself incontestible; for the language of the New
York bill runs thus, viz. for a bill of twenty shillings; "This bill, of two
ounces ten penny weight of plate, due from the colony of New York to the
possessor thereof, shall be equal, in value, to Seville pillar, or Mexico
plate," etc. And yet that very bill shall, at this time, purchase very little
more, (if any thing) in pieces of eight, than two ounces. It is, therefore,
undeniably true, that such a bill is not equivalent to two ounces and a half of
such plate; because, being fallen from its first intended value, it will not
purchase so much: and it is really surprising how any men, in direct
contradiction to common sense, can amuse themselves and others with such
groundless notions. The price of goods at New York, whether cheaper or dearer,
than at Philadelphia, is out of the question; unless it could be alleged, that
a bill of twenty shillings will purchase as much of those goods, as can be
bought with the real weight of two ounces and a half of Spanish silver; which
the boldest assertor will scarce venture to affirm.

We further beg leave to observe, on their answer to the three last articles:

First, That to supply the want of a medium for commerce is the honest
intention of the proposal for bills of credit, and not to discharge the debts
of those who want means, from the public, to get clear of them.

Secondly, All bills, bonds, etc. on an equal security, are the more valued,
the sooner they become due; and the sooner public bills are to sink, the
greater will be their credit. It is true, that the longer the time is, the more
easy it may seem to the first borrower; but, in the whole course of the bills,
after their second payment, this will but diminish their credit. If eight years
be preferable to five, because of the length of the time, the same argument may
be urged for sixteen or twenty.

Thirdly, It is extremely mannerly (we grant) to leave it entirely to the
Assembly, to consider the manner of sinking the bills; but this complaisance,
it is doubted, is more owing to an unconcernedness in that point, when, or
whether ever, they sink, provided they are once obtained, than to any real
modesty; otherwise, it was certainly a breach of that, after the House had
voted both the sum and the time, not to acquiesce in their wisdom, but to
solicit an enlargement.

We pay as great a deference, may it please the House, to the legislative
authority, as any others; yet we well know their wisdom will influence them to
lend constantly an open ear to all necessary hints from without doors, that may
contribute any advantage to the important affairs, brought from time to time,
under their consideration.

From hence it is, that we shall yet crave liberty to offer our further
sentiments, not only in relation to a paper credit, but upon some other points,
that nearly concern the prosperity of this colony.

Such bills, we find, have been issued in America, on two different,
foundations; the one has been to raise a large sum immediately, on the credit
of future taxes, duties, etc. by which they were to be regularly sunk in time;
the other to be lent out on securities, and to be sunk by the borrowers
repaying them into the treasury. Those of New York and South Carolina were by
the first method, and those of New England. and Rhode Island, by the second.

In Carolina they were obliged, for the defense of their town and country,
against some threatened invasions, to raise an immense sum, for so small a
colony, vastly exceeding the occasions they had for a currency, especially
since their rice, which foreigners come to carry away, will purchase most of
the goods they want; and this sunk the credit of their bills to the low state
they were depressed to. In New York, their first bills, raised by the same
method, viz. by anticipating the duties, by which they were to be sunk again,
kept up their credit; and, because of the certainty of their terminating, and
the quantity being moderate, for a place of such large and extended commerce,
they continued of equal value with their current silver, until the year 1717,
when they issued another large sum* and for a longer term; upon which their
credit immediately fell to a disparity with their real money.

Farther to the castward, their bills being issued on loans only, by which
method they cannot be called in, with so much certainty, they consequently fell
more than one third below the value, at which they were first struck; and the
same may be expected from the like measures to happen here; for seeing very few
borrowers are found to discharge their mortgages to private persons, in time,
and according to contract, it will be expected that the public, to whom such
loud cries are raised, for succor to the distressed, will rather be more
indulgent, than rigorous, to their humble suppliants.

It will, therefore, be evident, that to keep up the credit of bills, the
quantity must be moderate, and should be somewhat under a sufficiency for a
circulating currency, that we may, as they do in New York, contrive means to
supply ourselves with some quantities of cash, which is real treasure in a
country, while bills are no more than borrowing from one another without adding
one penny to the wealth or stock of the colony; and next, that a certainty of
their being sunk in a reasonable time, will principally contribute to support
that credit.

It was observed before, in the last article, presented by us, to the House,
that such measures ought to be taken for this, as shall render it absolutely
necessary for the public, that the bills shall be sunk regularly.

It is therefore, upon the whole, with all due submission, proposed to the
consideration of the House, whether it may not be rather requisite to retrench
the quantity, last voted, than to augment it, as some desire; considering that
ten pounds of that currency will probably circulate more and faster than twenty
or thirty of gold or silver; because the latter has a constant intrinsic value,
while the other, more subject to change, and designed only for a medium of
commerce, will be more briskly shifted from hand to hand, to answer that
pupose? and whether the following methods of applying it may not render it more
serviceable; viz. that, seeing the public is now, by the Treasurer's account,
besides some other sums not yet settled, above one thousand six hundred pounds
in debt, and the support, for the ensuing year, is yet to be provided for, a
sum of about three thousand pounds, to be paid out of the bills, to be sunk, by
an excise, or such other method as the House shall best approve of, for
returning that sum, in three, four or five years, as shall be judged most
convenient.

That a sum, sufficient to finish the prison and workhouse of Philadelphia, be
lent out of the bills of the city and county, to be returned into the treasury,
by a yearly tax on the inhabitants, not exceeding one penny per pound, till the
said sum be discharged; the present taxes of three pence per pound being too
heavy, in these difficult times, for the public to bear.

That the rest be lent out, as is already proposed to the House, on good
unquestionable securities, at the interest agreed on; but, for the better
assuring their sinking, that all public moneys, raised by any taxes, excise, or
duties whatsoever, be paid into the respective treasuries only in that specie,
to be there sunk; and the full value of such public moneys be made good out of
the sums, paid in by the borrowers, whether in coin, paper, or country produce,
to answer the ends, for which the same was raised; by which means the bills
must necessarily be sunk, and the payments be duly made by the borrowers,
without any excuse or savor.

That, for the more effectual support of the credit of the bills, sixpence in
the pound be allowed to the person, who pays them in, as public money, to be
made good out of the interest, paid by the borrower.

These measures, may it please the House, it is believed, will very much
contribute to answer the just ends, proposed by the bills, with the least
injury, or loss, to the receivers.

The reflections, in this last paper, as well as others, which have
industriously been rendered popular, shall be answered, by showing, from the
state of the country, how destructive to its true interest that spirit is, to
which too many appear to have resigned themselves, that those, who are
sincerely well affected to the public, may, with a more distinguishing
judgment, observe the measures, by which our common interest may be most
effectually promoted; for which end, we beg leave to add the following remarks,
viz.

That this small colony, consisting, at present, only of three counties, and of
no extraordinary soil, situate but on one side of one navigable river; is,
therefore, inferior, in natural advantages, to all others around us; and having
no produce, but what other colonies, more commodiously situated, not only rival
us in, but, of late, have outdone us, we cannot, therefore, equally flourish
with others, unless we compensate these natural defects, by such improvements,
in industry, and other good qualities, as may deservedly acquire us a
reputation.

That the husbandman and merchant are the principal supporters of the colony,
from whom all other kinds of business, among us, receive their encouragement;
the one raising the produce, and the other exporting it by navigation.

That, by the common methods of our trade, for want of a vent abroad, for our
wheat, and what is manufactured from it, we can never become considerable; and
therefore it is necessary that the countryman should endeavor for some other
improvements, and the merchant labor to find out new channels for commere, by
pursuing it in all the branches, that may lie open to us, in other countries;
for both these will ever, in reality, have a natural dependence on each other.

That it is an unhappiness to this country, that there are not more wealthy men
in trade, who, by large stocks, could force such an extended commerce, as in
New York and Boston; for by these means more shipping, and therefore, more
workmen and people would be employed; and both a greater exportation and
consumption of the country produce, to the encouragement of the farmer, would
be occasioned by it.

That it has ever been accounted a great advantage to a country, to have men in
it, who can supply others with money, in their necessities, on such terms as
the laws approve; for, from such opportunities, the industrious and ingenious,
who, for want of something in their hands, might be ever tied down to poverty,
may find means to raise themselves (as many have done) to fortunes and a
capacity of being extremely useful; from hence many have received vast
advantages, by compassing bargains, that otherwise they must, forever have gone
without. In short, there is nothing more equitable than that the active and
industrious should, for a moderate consideration, have the use of other men's
stocks, who either for want of skill, or inclination, cannot employ it
themselves.

That the wealth of a country consists of the riches of its inhabitants, and
the richer any country is, the better it is for a poor man to live in. All
these being unquestionable truths, it is as astonishing to consider, while we
have scarce one man in the country, that can be accounted rich, when compared
with diverse in other colonies; while the province really suffers for want of
more men of ability, to promote its interest, and enlarge its commerce; on
which great numbers of the people have their dependence; while money can scarce
be had on any terms, to lend, or borrow, and seldom ever could be obtained on
loan, but by entreaty, and with solicitation; it is astonishing, we say, to
consider how it is possible, that there should be any amongst us, who, is
despite of common sense, will suffer themselves to be misled into such a spirit
of malignity, as, in direct opposition to the interest of the whole, to insult
and abuse those few, in the place, who are the most capable of promoting that
interest; to return reproaches for what was obtained by prayer; and under the
endearing appearance of popularity, to strike at the very sinews of a country's
strength, and the evident means of its prosperity; in which all would,
according to their ranks, be more or less partakers.

We humbly crave the House's excuse for these observations, which the unhappy
prevailing humor of the time (as the honorable House, from the last, and
other applications, cannot but be sensible) has rendered necessary, for
rectifying the distempered notions of the misguided. On which no better advice
(we conceive) can be recommended to such persons, than that of the apostle,
viz, "To fellow after the things, which make for their peace; to study to be
quiet, and to do their own business," etc. as he has recommended. Romans xiv chapter
19 ver. 1 Thessalonians. iv chapter 11 (...).

Although it is true, we are, at present, very poor, yet love and unity appear
not less wanting among us, than money; and while we are applying to the
Legislature for means to supply the one, if we could be so happy as to join in
the other, it would mere effectually render it easy to this honorable House to
provide for our public necessities, which, that we may, is the earnest desire
of their most faithful friend.




Sentiments of diverse gentlemen and merchants, etc.
Being admitted, upon our address to the House, presented yesterday, to exhibit
any further sentiments, in relation to a paper credit, now vigorously pressed
to be established by law; we accordingly offer the following heads, which may
be supported by solid arguments, when the House thinks fit to require them.

First, Of the institution of the paper currency.
That as this province derives all its powers from, and is wholly dependent on
the kingdom of Great Britain, it will be the highest wisdom in our Legislature,
upon all exigencies, to direct themselves by the same prudent and just
measures, which the parliaments of that kingdom have always pursued, in the
like cases; in whom nothing has been more conspicuous than a most strict care,
that no subject should lose by the coin, or public credit, of the kingdom.

Secondly, That as, when the nation was most grievously distressed, in the time
of a dangerous and expensive war, by a general debasing of their current coin,
the parliament would hearken to no proposal (though many were made) for
relieving the state, by raising the new minted money to a higher value; but,
under the vastest difficulties, renewed it, at the same weight and fineness, to
pass at the former rates; which they have unalterably kept to. And further, by
the sum of twelve hundred thousand pounds, made good to private persons all the
loss of exchanging their clipped and debased coin, for the new milled money,
which was delivered out at a par to them: so the like justice and prudence
requires, that no further alteration, than what the parliament has made here,
should, on any terms, be admitted, in the value of our gold and silver, but
that it still continue, as it now passes.

Thirdly, That, as the parliament, as often as they found it necessary to issue
bills of credit, called exchequer bills, or notes, took the utmost ca^e to keep
them equal in value with silver, by giving the Bank of England, when they fell
into any discount, vast sums of money, to receive those bills, as their own,
and to exchange them with ready cash, on the demand of the bearer: so it
appears absolutely necessary, that if bills of credit be raised here, due care
should be taken (since we can have no such banks, in this province, as are in
Europe, whose rules are to pay down ready money for their bills, upon demand)
to establish them on so just a foundation, that, while in being, they may still
continue of the same value with real money, according to the rates, at which
they are at first issued.

Fourthly, That, if those bills be issued on any easier terms to the receiver,
than gold, or silver would be, if it were to be paid, or lent, out of the
treasury, by how much easier these terms are, by so much, at least, will the
bills fall in value; for credit has its own laws, as unalterable in themselves,
as those of motion, or gravity, are, in nature, and which, such, as are versed
in these affairs in Europe, as carefully consider.

Fifthly, That the schemes most commonly talked of, for lending out sums, to be
discharged by annual payments, equal to, or not much exceeding, the interest,
for a certain number of years, without paying any principal, are partial and
unjust, and would be destructive to public credit; bacause the consideration
given is not an equivalent to the sum received.

For instance, should one hundred pounds be lent out, to be discharged, by the
payment only of eight pounds annually, for sixteen years; were such an annuity
to be bought, according to the known rules for purchasing estates, it would
here be worth no more than seventy pounds sixteen shillings and three pence, in
ready money; nor is an annuity for nine pounds ten shillings per annum, for
twelve years, worth more than seventy-one pounds twelve shillings. In either of
these cases, the borrower, could he discharge debts of that value with it,
though he were to pay the annuity in gold and silver, would gain near thirty
pounds by the loan, but no other person would feel the least advantage by it;
now, if no man would let out his own money on these terms, none ought to desire
it so of the public; the credit of which is of vastly greater importance, than
any private persons; because a failure, in that, affects the fortune of every
individual, in his money, the medium of his commerce and dealing.

Sixthly, That all such projects are either exceedingly weak, or unjust; for
the paper money is to be lent either to all, who shall desire it, on a tender
of the security, proposed, or to some only: if to all (as it is natural for all
men to desire what they may gain by) it will be impracticable to strike enough,
to answer all demands; or, if it were struck, it would, because of its
quantity, become of little, or no value; if to a few only, what tribunal can be
erected, to judge and distinguish, who of the King's subjects, are to be
admitted to the favor, and who to be rejected? If the poor only are to be the
objects, they have not security to give, or, if they had, perhaps they have as
little merit as any: commonly people become wealthy by sobriety and industry,
the most useful qualifications in a commonwealth, and poor by luxury, idleness
and folly. What rules then can be found, for dispensing the public favors?

Seventhly, That by these schemes, the more the currency, or paper money falls
in value (by which word falling, is meant the rising of gold, silver, English
goods, and all other commodities, in nominal value, which is the certain proof
of the other's falling) the greater is the borrower's advantage; for the more
easily will he pay his annuity; so that he may happen, by virtue of the act, to
discharge, with the value of twenty pounds, a debt of one hundred, due to the
man, who, perhaps, kindly lent him the money, to relieve him in distress, or
honestly sold him his land, or goods, at their real value, at the time of
lending, or sale.

Eighthly, That all those deceive themselves, who, because gold and silver may
be had at New York, or other places, in exchange for their paper money, suppose
that the one, therefore, is as good as the other, unless the silver can be had
at eight shillings per ounce, or the gold at six shillings per penny weight, at
New York, as they were rated at the first striking of their bills; but when
their silver brings from nine to ten shillings per ounce, and their light
pistoles pass at twenty-eight shillings, or higher, then bills are truly so
much fallen in value, as the others are advanced. So, in Carolina, silver is to
be purchased for their bills, but it is at thirty shillings per ounce, though
they were struck, as is said, at seven shillings only!

These being premised as general heads, what next follows, is to point out what
are conceived to be the only means of supporting the credit of such a currency,
if issued.

First, That the whole sum struck be but small, and just sufficient to pass
from hand to hand, for a currency.

Secondly, That it be not continued for any longer time; for the paper will
wear out, and it will not be so easy to exchange it for new, as some have
imagined; which, it is much to be doubted, will be found impracticable:
besides, the sooner it is to expire, the more easily will people be satisfied
to take it. But further, our laws can continue in force no longer than five
years, without the royal approbation.

Thirdly, That care be taken to force the sinking of it in course, and in a
just manner, by measures, that shall render it absolutely necessary for the
public to have it sunk; which, it is conceived, none of the methods hitherto
discoursed of will effect. These heads, may it please the House, are what we
have, at present, humbly to offer to your consideration, on this subject.


A few days after this was presented to the House, the Governor also delivered
them his sentiments, in writing, on the same subject, as follows:

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Assembly,
Governor Keith's sentiments on introducing (...) paper currency.
I have, at your request, very carefully considered the resolutions of the
House, upon your journals, relating to public credit; and also some things,
which, I find, have been offered to you, upon the same subject.

Credit may, no doubt, be compared to the mathematics, in so far as both
sciences will admit of deducing solid conclusions from self-evident and clear
principles; and yet, by the subtilty of an artist, truth, or falsehood, in
either of them, is often so wrapped up and involved, that it is lost unto, or
misapprehended by the plainest, and, generally speaking, much the honestest
part of mankind.

But the common necessity, and general interest of the whole body of the
people, being a subject of importance, on which we ought to speak plainly, and
act freely, I shall, without any preamble, or disguise whatever, communicate my
thoughts to you, in the simplest, and most intelligible manner, that I can.

First, If it be true, that the riches and prosperity of this province chiefly
depend on the manufacture of provisions, and the exchanging of that
manufacture, with other things, to advantage, it will also be true, that
whatever increases the one, and, at the same time, encourages the other, will
justly deserve the name of a public good; and the majority of those, employed
in such manufacture and exchange, have thereby a right to be considered as the
body of the people, whom you represent.

Secondly, It is evident, that, where there is no public debt, and a real
value, in lands, to be pledged, paper money may, if there is occasion for it,
be struck to advantage, without any risk at all; for though, perhaps, it may
contribute to hurt some weak people, in the ill management of their private
affairs, yet, while any unfrugal person is lost to the community, and is
succeeded by one more industrious than he, the public cannot suffer by such a
change.

Thirdly, If, in the case of a paper currency, among us, it should happen to
follow (as it may be supposed it will) that silver and gold will be kept up for
remittances to Great Britain, we shall then have no other means of dealing with
one another, but the paper: should the quantity, therefore, be less than is
necessary to circulate our home trade, in its natural course, usurers and
sharpers would have the same opportunity as they have now, to lie at catch for
bargains, and make a monopoly of trade, by engrossing the current money into
their hands.

Fourthly, The very essence and nature of credit, as well as the practice and
experience of the greatest banks in Europe, directs all such bills to be issued
at something less than the common interest, for that is, in effect, a premium
by the public, to encourage their circulation: and whosoever is pleased to say,
that the bank of Amsterdam loses credit, by lending money at two per cent. or
the bank of England, by lending money at four per cent. shall scarce prevail
with me to think the assertion worthy of any answer.

Fifthly, I am not of opinion with those gentlemen, who are pleased to allege,
that the value of silver, at New York, which, in the month of September last,
was from eight shillings and six pence to eight shillings and nine pence, is
occasioned by their paper; for, in this province, where there never has been
any paper yet, from five to ten per cent. has, for several years, been given in
exchange for silver. And as to their computation of gold, the gentlemen,
perhaps, have not had occasion, of late, to be informed, that the heaviest
pistoles, in York, go at no more than twenty-eight shillings, and smaller, or
cut gold, at the common standard value, in that province; where, it is
believed, the people could not possibly carry on half the quantity of their
present trade and business, without the help of paper.

Sixthly, I must also take leave to differ, in opinion, with those, who,
without enquiry, and by wholesale, are pleased to condemn all schemes of
lending money, to be discharged by annual payments; for I truly think that
method will not only suit the different circumstances and convenience of the
people best, but, in all respects, will prove the safest and most profitable,
as well as equal; and my reasons for it, are these:

1st. Whatever quantity be issued, if one fifth, sixth, or tenth part, of the
sum, according to the time, for which it is to last, must necessarily come into
office every year, it may be lent out again, at five per cent. for any time,
within the term, to such persons as had no place, or opportunity, to come into
the first loan: by which means all the frightful, odd things, mentioned in the
gentlemen's sixth observation, will presently vanish; for every man, in this
case, according to his ability, may, if he thinks fit, share in that advantage;
which the public most generously and prudently offers to the necessities of the
people.

2ndly, If so great a share of the whole comes in yearly to the office, in
order to be lent out again, it will, in a great measure, prevent engrossing,
and help the circulation considerably; it will also give more frequent
opportunity of discovering frauds, and gradually increase the public stock and
revenue of the bank; and by that means it will demonstrably sink the original
sum, within the time prefixed; that is to say, the paper, at the end of that
term, will either be found in the office, or its value in cash, ready to pay
what shall then happen, by accident, to be yet abroad.

Seventhly, If too great a security is demanded for the loan of public money, I
think, it will, in a great measure, frustrate the design of relieving many of
the middling, or most industrious, sort of the people; wherefore, it is my
opinion, that one half of the value of ground rents may very safely be lent to
those, who are willing and able to give such security.

Eighthly, If, upon further consideration, you find that the sum intended may
be issued to better advantage, for a longer time, I think the objection, that
our acts can only subsist five years, without being approved, is of no weight;
for, besides, that it would not be very civil, to suppose that the legislative
authority here would deliberately go upon any act of that importance, or
indeed, of any kind, which we had the least cause to suspect would be
disagreeable to his Majesty, or the sentiments of his ministry: we know very
well, it is in his Majesty's royal power and prerogative, to repeal and make
void, at any time, all acts of Assembly, to be made, or passed, in America:
and, for my part, if I did not, in my conscience, believe that the act, now
proposed, would be made on such a rational, just and equal foot, as would
rather claim his Majesty's gracious favor, in assenting to it, than render it
obnoxious to his impartial justice, I should neither have given myself nor you
this trouble.

Gentlemen, these are most frankly and sincerely my present sentiments of the
matter before you; and, as I do not find myself inclined to dispute, and much
less to show any stiffness, or obstinacy, in an affair of such a general
concern, I shall very much rely on your diligent circumspection and care, for
the good of your country, being still ready and willing to give you all the
assistance in my power.

WILLIAM KEITH.
January 22, 1722-23.

CHAPTER XXV.
The Assembly's conduct in the affair of a paper currency. -- Dr. Douglas, etc.
on paper money, in New England. -- Further account of the Pennsylvania paper
currency, till 1749. -- Governor Keith a lover and solicitor of popularity,
violates his instructions from the Proprietary, which causes party dispute,
etc. -- Reasons given for and against the same by the Governor and David Lloyd,
on one side, and by James Logan, for the Proprietary family, on the other. --
Names of the Members of Assembly, elected in 1725; and of some Members of
Council about that time. -- The widow Penn's answer to the remonstrance of the
Assembly relating to said instructions. -- Disputes afterward relative to
Proprietor's instructions. -- William Allen. -- Thomas Lightfoot.

IN this important affair, the Assembly proceeded with the utmost caution and
circumspection; 1723.
The Assembly proceed with great caution, etc.
for having both the examples and mistakes of the other colonies before their
eyes, they saw the principal thing, which they had to guard against, was the
depreciation of their bills; Dr. Douglas of Boston, in his summary historical
and political, etc. of the British settlements in North America, Boston,
printed, 1749; in his remarks on the paper currency in New England, says,

"I have observed that all our paper money-making Assemblies have been
Legislatures of debtors, the representatives of people, ^ho from incogitancy,
idleness and profuseness, have been under a necessity of mortgaging their
lands; lands are a real permanent estate; but the debt, in paper currency, by
its multiplication, depreciates more and more; thus their land estate, in
nominal value, increases, and their debt, in nominal value, decreases; and the
large quantity of paper credit is proportionably in favor of the debtors, and
to the disadvantage of the creditors, or industrious* frugal part of the
colony: this is the wicked mystery of this iniquitous paper currency.

"A public credit paper currency (says he) is a great promoter of expeditions.
1. These bills, to defray the charge, are soon expedited, but with a consequent
distant, but certain ruinous effect. 2. This affluence of paper credit invites,
or encourages people to borrow, and run in debt, beyond what they can
extricate," etc.

Again the same author says, "The colony of Massachusett's Bay was the leader
of paper currencies, in the British plantations, and have now, at length (1749)
carried this fraud to the utmost, even, beyond North Carolina," etc.

The following table of depreciation, etc. in Massachusetts, of their said
currency, and that of the present exchange of the other colonies, etc. with
London, in 1748, are taken from the same author, viz. Dr. Douglas, etc. viz.

"Table of depreciation, etc. in Massachusetts.
Periods. Exchange with London. One ounce silver. A. D. 1702 133 per cent
sterling 610 1705 135 7 1713 150 8 1716 175 93 1717 225 12 1722 270 14 1728 340
18 1730 380 20 1737 500 26 1741 550 28 1749 1100 60

"Present exchange, 1748, with London of the other colonies," etc.

For L. 100 strg. New Eng. cur^y. 1100 N. York 190 E. Jersey 190 W. Jersey 180
Pennsylvania 180 Maryland 200 Virginia 120 to 125 N. Carolina 1000 S. Carolina
750 Barbados 130 Antego 170 to 180 St. Christophers 160 Jamaica 140

Governor Hutchinson, in his history of Massachusetts Bay, observes, "In 1702,
68 was equal to an ounce of silver. In 1749, 50 was judged equal to an ounce of
silver. I saw a five shilling bill, which had been issued in 1690 (when the
first bills of credit, that were ever issued in the colonies, were occasioned
by a New England expedition against the French, etc.) and was remaining in
1749, and was then equal to eight pence only, in lawful money; and so retained
but about one eighth of its original value -- In 1749 bills of credit were
abolished; and unless the evils, which they occasioned, should be forgotten,
the government, it must be presumed, will never issue any more."

Governor Hutchinson's history of Massachusetts, etc.
which nothing could so much effect as an over-quantity, defect of solid
security, and of proper provision to recall and cancel them; so in this, their
first experiment of the kind, they issued only L. 15,000, on such terms as
appeared most likely to be effectual to keep up their credit, and gradually to
reduce and sink them. For which purpose the act, among several others, was
passed by the Governor, on the second day of the first month (March) 1722-33.
Two acts passed this year, for emitting L.45,000.
But, from the advantage, which was soon experienced by this emission, together
with the insufficiency of the sum, the government was induced, in the latter
end of the same year, to emit L. 30,000 more, on the same terms.

But, that it may appear, Further account of the paper currency in Pennsylvania.
with what caution this province, in early time, advanced in this affair, it
may not be improper, in this place, to observe, upon a requisition afterward
from the government, in Great Britain, in the year 1739, to have the state of
the paper currency, with the rates of passing, buying and selling gold and
silver, in the British colonies, from the year 1700, to that time, laid before
the parliament: the Assembly of Pennsylvania, therefore, in November 1739, drew
up and delivered to Governor Thomas, the following report, which exhibits the
further account of this affair, to the said year, viz.

"An account of the several acts, passed in the province of Pennsylvania, for
creating, or issuing, paper bills, or bills of credit, with the account of
those bills, and the value thereof, in money of Great Britain; and the
provision made for sinking, of discharging the same, together with the sum of
bills, that have been sunk, or discharged; also the sum of bills subsisting, or
passing in payment, at this time, with the amount of the value thereof, in
money of Great Britain.

"In the year 1723, two acts were passed, for creating the first bills of
credit, by which forty-five, thousand pounds were issued; and for the effectual
discharging, or sinking, the said bills, it was therein provided and enacted,
that a real estate, in fee simple, of double the value of the sum lent out,
should be secured in an office, erected for that purpose; and that the sums, so
lent out, should be annually repaid into the office, in such equal sums, or
quotas, as would effectually sink the whole capital sum of forty-five thousand
pounds, within the time limited by the aforesaid acts; which sum, being
computed in silver, as it was then received, and paid, among us, and reduced to
sterling money of Great Britain, amounts to L. 29,090 13 4; With the above
report of the state of the paper currency of Pennsylvania was likewise, at the
same time, the following account of the rates of gold and silver coin delivered
to the Governor, as drawn up by the same committee of the House, who made the
abovesaid report, viz.

An account of the several rates of gold and silver coin, and what prices they
were accounted, received, taken and purchased at, and sold for, by the ounce;
and what rates gold and silver coin, are purchased at, and sold for, by the
ounce, at this time.

From the year 1700, to the year 1709, gold was received and paid, at five
pounds ten shillings per ounce; and silver at nine shillings and two pence per
ounce.

From the year 1709 to the year 1720, gold was received and paid, at five
pounds ten shillings per ounce; and silver at six shillings and ten pence half
penny per ounce.

From the year 1720 to the year 1723, gold was received and paid at five pounds
ten shillings per ounce; and silver coin was purchased with gold, at seven
shillings and five pence per ounce.

From the year 1723, to the year 1726, gold was purchased and sold at six
pounds six shillings and six pence per ounce, and silver at eight shillings and
three pence per ounce.

From the year 1730 to the year 1738, gold was purchased at sold at six pounds
nine shillings and three pence; and silver at eight shillings and nine pence
per ounce.

And now in this present year 1739, gold is purchased and sold at five pounds
nine shillings and three pence by the ounce; and silver at eight shillings and
six pence per ounce.

Submitted to the correction of the House, by Isaac Norris, Thomas Leech,
Abraham Chapman, James Morris, John Kearsley, Israel Pemberton.

Philadelphia, November 23, 1739.


but in the year 1726, the sum of L. 6,110 5^ part of the capital sum of
forty-five thousand pounds, by virtue of the two aforesaid acts, being totally
sunk and destroyed, the province found themselves greatly straightened by means
thereof, and likely to become subject to many disappointments and losses, for
want of a sufficient medium in trade, if the remaining quotas, or payments,
should continue to be sunk, according to the direction of the acts; therefore,
an act was then passed for continuing the remaining sum of L. 38,889 15, for,
and during the term of eight years, by re-emitting, or lending out again, the
quotas, or sums, to be paid in, by the respective borrowers, on the same
securities and provisions, as were directed by the former acts.

"The bills of credit, emitted in the year 1723, being thus reduced by the
sinking of the aforesaid sum, and the inhabitants of the province growing
exceeding numerous, through the importation of foreigners, and others settling
among us; by which means the trade became greatly enlarged; and the
difficulties still increased, and the province found themselves under the
necessity of making an addition to those bills of credit; and accordingly, in
the year 1729, the further sum of thirty thousand pounds was then created, and
issued upon the same security of real estates, in f^e simple, to be mortgaged
in double the value of the sum lent; and to be paid in by yearly quotas, and
sunk and destroyed, as the former acts, passed in the year 1723, had provided
and directed in the case.

"In the year 1731, the acts, for issuing bills of credit, passed in the year
1723, being near expired, and the annual quotas remaining due, on the said
acts, by virtue thereof, being at this time, to be sunk and destroyed, which
would unavoidably have involved the merchants, as well as farmers, in new
difficulties, and laid the province under a necessity of making new acts of
Assembly, for emitting more bills of credit in lieu thereof, an act was then
passed for continuing the value and currency of those bills, for the term of
eight years, by lending out the same, as they became due, with the same
provisions, and on the same real securities, provided for, and directed by, the
former acts.

"The amount of the bills of credit, in the present year 1739, by virtue of the
several aforesaid acts, amounting only to L. 69,889 15, from the daily increase
of the inhabitants, and the continued importation of foreigners, among us,
being found by experience, to fall short of a proper medium, for negociating
our commerce, and for the support of government, an act was passed for creating
and issuing a farther sum of eleven thousand one hundred and ten pounds five
shillings, and for continuing the whole amount of our bills of credit, for a
short time of years, under the same real securities, and with the same
provisions and limitations, as directed by the former acts; by means of which
additional sum, the whole amount of the bills of credit, current in the
province, is at this time eighty thousand pounds: which sum being computed, as
now purchased here, and reduced to sterling money of Great Britain, makes L,
50,196. Yet, notwithstanding merchants and others have given some advance, to
purchase gold and silver, we are assured, from experience, that difference
arises only from the balance of our trade, with Great Britain, being in our
favor, by means of the far greater quantity of English goods imported into
this province, since the creating and issuing our bills of credit; for the
adventurers advancing the price of their commodities, and, encouraged by
meeting with a ready sale, became great gainers, while wheat, flour, and all
the valuable produce of the province, continued at, or near, the usual prices,
and are, at this time, to be purchased with our bills of credit, as low, or
lower, than has been almost ever known, when gold and silver were the medium of
our trade; and all tradesmen, hired servants, and other laborers, have always
been, and are still, paid at the same rates, and no more, for their labor,
than they formerly received, before the creating, or issuing, our bills of
credit." To the above account, respecting the paper currency of Pennsylvania,
it may be added, That, by another report of the House of Assembly, made in the
year 1749, it appears, that no more was issued till the year 1746; that, in the
year 1745, an act of Assembly was passed for continuing the currency of the
aforesaid L. 80,000 for sixteen years; during the first ten years whereof, the
whole sum to be kept up, by lending out, or re-emitting, the yearly quotas, or
payments, as they became due: and after the expiration of ten years, one sixth
part of the whole sum to be paid in yearly and sunk, or destroyed; That, in the
year 1746, an act was passed, giving L. 5,000 to the king's use, to be sunk in
ten yearly payments, of L. 500 each; so that the whole amount of bills of
credit, current in the province at that time (1749) was only L.85,000 then
equal to L. 53,333 6 8 sterling money of Great Britain: which sum, in the said
report, is asserted to be much too small, to carry on the trade of the
province; which, of late years had very much increased; but that nevertheless
it was of great utility and advantage, as far as it went; that their payments
at that time, were made to Great Britain, chiefly in gold and silver; which for
several years, had passed current in the province at 86 per ounce for silver,
and L. 6 5 per ounce for gold, etc.

Votes of Assembly, Vol. iv. page 119.


In October 1723, David Lloyd was elected Speaker of the Assembly, and in the
year next following William Biles was in the same office; during which time,
the usual cordiality and harmony appear to have subsisted between the two
branches of the Legislature.

The Governor, Sir William Keith, Governor Keith a solicitor of popularity, etc.
appears manifestly, not only in his administration, but also in his general
conduct, to have been a great solicitor of popularity; and he both possessed
and practiced those arts, 1724.
which seldom fail to please the popula^ (...) which, in persons of ability are
no less dangerous, in the extreme, to which there is the greatest temptation,
than they are really necessary, when kept within due bounds, and properly
tempered, to execute any good and important design in public affairs: this
appears to have been so far the case, with respect to Governor Keith, that,
though his exerting himself, at all events, to please those he governed, and
his harmonizing so very much with the Assembly, were productive of diverse
advantages, and much benefit to the province, yet his views of raising and
supporting himself upon the foundation of popular applause, carried him to such
an extreme, that, the more firmly to establish himself in the favor of the
people, from whom he drew his support, he neglected those who advanced him to
the station, which he filled, and broke through the terms, on which he had
engaged in the government, by rejecting the advice of the Council and the
Proprietary's friends, Governor Keith disregards his instructions etc.
and by acting contrary to the instructions of his principal; the absolute
observance of which was the compact of his lieutenancy; this was, "That he
should pass no laws, nor transact any thing of moment, relating to the public
affairs, without the advice and approbation of the Council." This instruction,
which, on his appointment to the government, he had obligated himself
inviolably to observe, he, now encouraged by the Assembly, held to be illegal,
and persisted in his not being bound by any restraint of that nature. In the
votes of Assembly vol. ii. page 427, among the Members of Council, who, in
February 1717-18, appear first to have resented, or signified their
dissatisfaction with, Governor Keith's paying so little regard to that board,
were, Isaac Norris, James Logan, Richard Hill, and Jonathan Dickinson.


Governor Keith's conduct causes much dispute, etc.
This conduct of Governor Keith, in the latter end of the year 1724, caused much
dispute, in the province, tending unhappily further to divide, and make an
incompatibility of interests between the proprietaries and the people; which,
in reality, were so nearly and intimately connected and interwoven, that, in
all the public proceedings, they ought ultimately ever to have been regarded as
one: the managers, or chief actors, in this controversy, were principally the
Governor and David Lloyd, on the one side, and on the other, James Logan, the
Secretary, and agent to the Proprietary's family. The following is an extract
from the instructions of the widow, Hannah Penn to Governor Keith, dated,
London, May 20, 1724, viz.

"The powers of legislature being, at present, lodged solely in the Governor
and Assembly, without so much as a negative reserved to the Proprietary, when
absent, it is of the highest importance, for our security, as well as for that
of the country, that matters of legislation should be carried on with the most
mature advisement and deliberation; for it never was intended that every new
Governor should, with an Assembly annually chosen, proceed to make what new
laws they should think proper, to be transmitted directly to the king's
ministers, without any other check: it has, therefore, been more surprising to
see thee (from whom it would have been least expected) to be the first author
of so dangerous an invention, which entirely takes off the security, which the
Proprietary ever had, and absolutely required of his former deputies, "That
nothing should be transacted by them, with any Assembly, but with the just
occurrence and approbation of his friends, in Council:" therefore, for remedy
of this grievance, it is required, that thou advise with the Council, upon
every meeting, or adjournment of the Assembly, which requires any deliberation,
on the Governor's part; that thou make no speech, nor send any written message,
but what shall be first approved in Council, if practicable, at the time; and
shall return no bills to the House, without the advice of the Council; nor pass
any whatever into a law, without the consent of a majority of that board; that
the minutes of Council be regularly kept, and those of the preceding Council he
read and approved at the next meeting, and shall always remain in the
possession of the Clerk of the Council," etc.




The Governor, with those, The Governor's reasons for his conduct etc.
who opposed the Proprietary interest being the more numerous, and who now,
upon this occasion, began again more particularly to distinguish and exert
themselves, advanced, That the power of legislation, was, by the royal charter,
solely and entirely vested in the Proprietary, or in his Deputy, with the
representatives of the people; that, as the latter, or the delegates of the
people, in their legislative capacity, were so far from being liable to be
bound, or restrained by any instructions, from their constituents, that their
acts were absolutely binding upon them; so, neither has the former, or the
Proprietary, any just authority to lay restrictions upon his Deputy, (whose
acts are also equally binding upon his principal) to hinder him from acting, as
he pleased, in conjunction with the other part of the legislature; and
consequently all instructions of this nature were void in themselves; that,
moreover, by the present charter of privileges, granted by the Proprietary to
the people, the Council was no part of the legislature; and, therefore, had no
right to interfere, in acts of government, so as to be a restraint upon the
Governor therein. "The following extracts, from what was then advanced on this
side of the question, may further show the nature of the dispute, and of the
principal arguments used, etc.

Governor Keith, in his defense, etc. votes of Assembly, vol. ii. page 438,
says, "Wherefore, I shall conclude this paper with a short and plain state of
the proprietary right, as well as the people's privileges, as they are
ascertained and contained in that royal grant, which, without the unanimous
consent of all the parties, or a legal forfeiture incurred, cannot be varied,
and therefore all subsequent charters, commissions, instructions, etc. and even
acts of Assembly, not yet approved of by the crown, which appear to be
inconsistent with the terms of the said royal grant, must, so far as they are
so, be understood to be void, and of no force.

"The royal charter, with respect to the Proprietary and the people jointly,
may be considered as the terms, or condition of that bond of friendship, and
mutual interest, entered into between the Proprietary and the first purchasers
and settlers of this colony, and their heirs and assigns for ever; and as, in
all matters of government, the Proprietary is always to be represented, either
by himself, or his Deputy Governor, so is the people to be represented by
themselves, or their delegates, lawfully chosen and convened, according to the
direction of the said charter; and these two representations, from time to
time, do, without the intervention of any other person, or thing, evidently
compose the whole legislative power, or General Assembly of this province.

"Now all men, who have yet formed to themselves any intelligible ideas of
government, must know, that legislative power cannot be restrained in acts of
legislature, even by its constituents; for as the acts of the people's
representatives, or delegates, do most certainly bind the whole people, whom
they represent, so do the acts of the Deputy Governor bind his principal, whom
he represents in a legislative capacity."

David Lloyd, in his vindication, etc, votes of Assembly, vol. ii. page ^44,
says, "The Proprietor had power to make Deputies and Lieutenants; in which case
(as it is in all other cases, where a Deputy may be appointed) the law says, he
has full power to do any act, or thing, which his principal may do; and that is
so essentially incident to a Deputy, that a man cannot be a Deputy, to do any
single act or thing; nor can a Deputy have less power than his principal; and
if his principal make him covenant, that he will not do any particular thing,
which the principal may do, the covenant is void and repugnant," etc.

Governor Keith again says, you will understand from what is observed, that the
present Council of this province cannot legally be understood to be any other
than a Council of state, to advise, and to be present, as solemn witnesses to
the Governor's actions," etc.

Governor Keith's answer to the widow Penn's instructions, Ibid. Among the
arguments advanced by James Logan, on the other side of the question, are the
following, viz.

"There is not one word in the whole charter, that directs the manner of
passing bills, into laws; it is express and absolutely grants the Assembly a
power to prepare bills, but without any restriction to forbid the preparing of
any elsewhere: and what is yet more remarkable, in the direction of the style,
the word advice is left out, though commonly used in all acts of parliament,
and in the acts of Assembly, in other places. All which clearly shows that the
Proprietary's intention, in that charter, was not to bind up himself, nor
Lieutenants from advising and consulting with others, in legislation. It also
further shows his resolution to guard, in the language of the charter, against
those, who, a little before that time, had started up, in opposition to him,
and his interest, and sought to turn his kindest grants of favor, to serve the
unkindest purposes against him, that they might from thence have no manner of
just pretense against his further proceedings, in taking the best precaution he
could, for his, and the country's security, during his absence.

"And, in order to this, he immediately, by letters patent, under the great
seal, bearing even date, with the charter, viz. the 28th of October, 1701,
established a Council, to consult and assist the Proprietary himself, or his
Lieutenants, or Deputies, with the best of their advice and counsel, in public
affairs, and matters relating to the government, and to the peace, well-being
and safely of the people thereof; and in the absence of the Proprietary, or
upon the Liuetenant's death, or incapacity, to exercise all and singular, the
powers of government, etc. And though he was then about to leave in the
lieutenancy, a gentleman of known honor, sincerity and integrity, viz. Andrew
Halmilton, yet he obliged him, by his instructions, as he afterward did, the
succeeding Governors, Colonel Evans, and Colonel Gookin, to act in all things
of moment, relating to the public (and surely none will exclude legislation
from that list) by the advice and approbation of the Council; which those
gentlemen, in these points, as strictly observed. And the present Governor
(Keith) may remember that he not only received the like instructions with his
commission, but for some reasons, best known to those who required it, was
obliged in the penalty of one thousand pounds sterling to observe them; and, to
leave the less room for dispute, they were also put upon record, at his first
arrival; which I mention, only because these precautions are the first of the
kind, I have known," etc.

Logan's memorial, votes, vol. ii. page 421.


The Proprietary's friends, on the other hand, alleged the reasonableness and
justice of the thing, Reasons of the Proprietor's friends against the Governor,
etc.
and the absolute necessity of such a Council, or of the Council's having such
a check on the Deputy Governor, both for the safety of the Proprietary, and,
even, the further security of the people; besides the constant practice of the
first, or late Proprietary, William Penn, and its consistency with the nature
of an English constitution: -- For, said they, in all the royal governments,
the Governors are the King's deputies, or representatives; and there is not one
of them in America, who is not bound by similar, and much more extensive
instructions, in reference to their respective Councils, notwithstanding their
office of deputy, and representative capacity; -- That, in the absence of the
Proprietary, who is so greatly interested in whatever concerns the public
affairs, for a Lieutenant and temporary Governor, perhaps, of some distant
country, and with little, or no solid connections, in the province, to be left
to act, in government, entirely as he pleases, in respect to his principal,
without any check whatsoever from a Council, composed of such of his friends as
are inhabitants of the first character and property in the province, and thence
so much the more interested in its welfare, was in such an important station,
very unsafe not only for the Proprietary, but also unreasonable and unjust, to
expect it; and, even, if duly considered, less secure to the people themselves;
that, by the royal charter, "The full and absolute power of legislation was
vested in the Proprietary, or in his Deputy, with the advice, assent and
approbation of the freemen, or their delegates, etc. to be assembled for that
purpose, in such sort and form, as to said Proprietary and them shall seem
best; but that the Assembly, by the present charter of privileges, agreed on
between the Proprietary and people, in 1701, are not authorized to advise, (a
part required of the freemen by the royal charter) but only to enact; -- That,
for this purpose, etc. the Council was established by the Proprietary, William
Penn, as most reasonable, just and necessary; which, in its very nature, could
not possibly be injurious, but might be, as it had been, in many cases,
beneficial to the country, as well as a security to the Proprietary himself;
and that moreover, it was most evidently more consonant to the nature of an
English constitution.

The Governor strenuously maintained the debate, and persisted in his conduct,
The Governor persists till he is superseded, etc.
till he was superseded in the government by Patrick Gordon, in the summer of
the year 1726: The names of the Members of Assembly, elected in October, 1725,
were,

For Philadelphia county.
Evan Owen, Matthias Holston, Francis Rawle, Anthony Morris, John Swift, Job
Goodson, Edward Farmar, L. C. Sprogle.
Bucks county.
Jeremiah Langhorne, William Biles, Joseph Fell, Abraham Chapman, Christian
Vanhorne, Matthew Hughes, Benjamin Jones, Thomas Watson.
Chester county.
Thomas Chandler, David Lloyd, Speaker, William Webb, John Wright, Samuel
Hollingsworth William Pusey, George Ashton, William Paschall.
City of Philadelphia.
John Kearsley, Thomas Tress.
Note. About the time of Governor Gordon's arrival, in 1726, and afterward,
the following names appear among those of the Members of Council, viz.

James Logan, Richard Hill, Isaac Norris, Samuel Preston, Anthony Palmer,
Robert Ashton, William Fishbourne:

D. Lloyd, Speaker of the Assembly. D. Lloyd, R. Hill, R. Ashton, Judges.
Joseph Growden, Attorney General. Samuel Preston, Provincial Treasurer, etc.

before which time, in the month of March preceding, James Logan, in order to
terminate the dispute, presented to the Assembly, a paper, in which he thus
expressed himself, viz.

"James Logan never alleged that the Council of this province under the
present constitution, James Logan to the Assembly, etc.
is a part of its legislative authority; or, that, as a Council, 1725.
they are otherwise concerned in it, than in conjuction with the Governor, at
the board or, in committees, conferences, by his appointment and direction; or
that an act, passed by the Governor and Assembly, without the Council, is not
of as much force, as if it had their concurrence and approbation: but, even,
David Lloyd himself has fully acknowledged their part in it, in these words of
his print, viz. that he never knew any so senseless, as to say, that the
Governor is excluded (by law or charter) of having a Council, to advise and
assist, in legislation; beyond which no man ever asserted they have a right, in
this province.

"And whether the Proprietary can lay his Deputy under restrictions, is now
rendered fully intelligible to every capacity, by the Governor himself, in
reducing the case to this narrow point, viz. "That the greatest of Deputies can
break their instructions; and that they are liable to be removed for it;"
beyond which the matter will not bear a further argument.

"All other attempts, therefore, to labor these points, can only tend to
continue dishonorable disputes, in the government, and engage the whole
country in quarrels, that can no otherwise affect it, than by involving it in
reproach, and heaping provocations on the Proprietary's family."

By the widow Penn's answer to the Assembly's remonstrance of the 20th of March
1724-5, The name of the Members of this Assembly, elected in October, 1714,
were,

For Philadelphia county.
Anthony Morris, Job Goodson, Morris Morris, Francis Rawle, John Swift, Samuel
Hudson, Edward Farmar, Matthias Holston.
Bucks county.
William Biles, Speaker, Jeremiah Langhorne, Joseph Fell, Christopher Vanhorne,
Matthew Hughes, Thomas Watson, Benjamin Jones, Abraham Chapman.
Chester county.
Moses Key, Joseph Pennock, William Webb, William Pile, Thomas Chandler, Elisha
Gatchell, John Parry, John Crosby.
City of Philadelphia.
John Kearsley, Thomas Tross.

on this affair (which remonstrance is mentioned, but not inserted, in the
printed votes of the House) both the design of the Proprietaries, by these
instructions, and also the views of the persons, who were primarily and
principally concerned in thus representing the same, as contrary to the
charteral rights of the province, are further intimated, as follows, viz.

To the Representatives of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met.
It gave me no small concern, The widow Penn's letter to the Assembly, in 1726.
when I received the remonstrance of the 20th of March, 1724-5, from the late
House of Representatives of the freemen of the province of Pensilvania, with
their resolution, that some part of a private letter of instructions, sent by
me to the late Deputy Governor, This letter was written after the appointment
of Governor Gordon, and was probably sent by him.
was contrary to the liberties and privileges, granted by charter to the people
of that province; and my concern was the greater, when I considered, that, as
their happiness had ever been the peculiar care of my late husband, in his life
time, so the continuance of it has been no less the desire of myself, and the
whole family, ever since his death. I purposed long ere this time to have
answered that remonstrance, but finding my sincere intentions to preserve peace
and unanimity, in the province, had been manifestly perverted, to the great
disquiet of the people; and that too by those, whose duty it was to have acted
another part, I was willing to lay hold of a more favorable opportunity, (when
you might be left to your own prudent deliberations, without being influenced
to misinterpret the good intentions of the family toward you) to assure you,
that, if, at any time, I fall short of doing any thing, that may advance your
interest and reputation, it must proceed only from my not having it in my
power. And as to that part of my letter, which was made use of to procure that
remonstrance, I do acknowledge it was designed as a cautionary direction, or
limitation, upon the acting Governor; but without the least apprehension that
it could ever have been construed, by the Assembly, as any design upon the
liberties of the freemen of Pensilvania: because the Council, according to its
constitution, either is, or ought to be, composed of persons of the best
circumstances and abilities, residing and inhabiting within the said province;
and whose interest must, without all doubt, be the same with your own, and that
of the people, whom you represent. Nor was this instruction any other, but, in
effect, the same with what had ever been given, by my late husband, your
Proprietor, to all his Deputy Governors: and (without mentioning the unhappy
occasion given, for writing that letter) I was the rather induced to renew this
instruction, because by the proceedings of your own House, but a few years ago,
it appears, the then Assembly expressed a very particular concern at the Deputy
Governor's declining to take the advice of the Council, upon the bills, sent to
him, from their House, to be passed into laws: Governor Gookin, vid. page 91,
etc.
and, therefore, I must conclude, that, if in this, you had been entirely left
to have followed the resolutions of your own judgments, you would have
continued of the same sentiments, and have judged it a very necessary
instruction, at that time, all circumstances considered; (but more especially
if you had been aware of what has happened but too plainly since) that this
very remonstrance was obtained with design to wrest the government out of the
hands of the Proprietor's family; and by that means, at once, to deprive you of
those valuable privileges, secured to you, as well by the royal charter,
granted to the late Proprietor, as by the several grants and laws, made by him,
under the same; for the preservation of which you express so just a concern:
and I do assure you, it is not easy for me to say, whether for your safety, or
my own, I am better pleased that this attempt upon the rights of our family,
and your privileges, has proved unsuccessful: and, without saying any more of
that piece of management, I hope, we shall, all of us, learn to cultivate and
maintain so entire an agreement, and mutual good understanding, as may preserve
us from ever becoming a prey to designing men; who, it is evident
(notwithstanding their fair pretenses) consider none of us in any other light,
than to serve their own ends and purposes, even, though at the expense of all
that is valuable to us. My age, and low state of health make it tedious and
difficult for me to apply my thoughts to business; and, therefore, I shall add
no more, but that the Governor, Governor Gordon.
appointed by my grandson, Springett.
with the concurrence and consent of the family, is, for his prudence, well
recommended to us here, and has, in charge, from us, as much as lies in his
power, to do every thing, which he lawfully may, to make you a happy people;
which we apprehend to be the surest way to advance the interest of our family,
in Pensilvania, as well as most agreeable to my own inclination and desires.

HANNAH PENN.
London, 20th April, 1726.

To conclude the subject of the right, lawfulness, or propriety of Proprietary
instructions, Further disputes about Proprietary instructions etc.
or of this kind of restrictions, in this case, though it take us beyond the
present time, it is observable, that the government of Pennsylvania was
absolutely as much the property and estate of the Proprietary, under the crown,
as the soil thereof, and both of them intimately connected; consequently during
the absence of the Proprietary, rules, instructions and restraints from him to
his Deputies, to act by, respecting that property became as proper and
necessary, as the directions from any employer to his agent, whose acts are
obligatory upon his principal, can be justly supposed to be, notwithstanding
which it has been long complained and contended in the province, since that
time, "That the power given to the Deputy Governors of Pennsylvania, by the
royal charter, of making laws, with the advice and consent of the Assembly, for
public uses, etc. according to their best discretion is taken away by the
Proprietary instructions enforced by penal bonds, and restraining the Deputy
from the use of his best discretion," etc. to this the Proprietaries, Thomas
and Richard Penn, by their agent, Ferdinand John Paris, in November, 1758, thus
answer:

Answer of the Proprietaries on this subject
"As long as instructions are constantly given to every person entrusted with
the government of any British colony; (and bonds also required from every such
person, for observance of such instructions) as long as instructions are
constantly given to all persons whatsoever, executing, even, the regal
government of his Majesty's kingdoms, during the royal absence; as long as
these Proprietaries are repeatedly commanded, by the crown, William Allen obiit.
Note. In the summer 1725, died William Allen, the father of William Allen, who
was afterward Chief Justice of Pennsylvania; he had been an eminent merchant
of Philadelphia, a considerable promoter of the trade of the province, and a
man of good character and estate.

Thomas Lightfoot.
In the same year, 1725, died Thomas Lightfoot, of New Garden, in Pennsylvania,
in an advanced age: he came from Ireland in 1716, was an eminent preacher among
the Quakers, and much beloved for his piety and virtue.


upon the nomination of each successive Lieutenant Governor, to give
instructions to such Lieutenant; and as long as a Lieutenant Governor may, by
his misbehaviour (if left entirely to his discretion) bring the Proprietaries
estate and franchises into danger; so long the Proprietaries must contend to
give instructions to, and take bonds from, their Lieutenant Governors."

CHAPTER XXVI.
Affirmation, etc. instead of an oath, established in Pennsylvania. -- Forms of
the declaration of fidelity, abjuration and affirmation of the Quakers in
Pennsylvania. -- Quaker's grateful address to the King, on the occasion. --
Conduct of the Quakers in England on a similar affair. -- Custom of the Quakers
appearing in courts of justice with their hats on their heads interrupted and
restored, -- Their address to the Governor and his compliance with their
request, on this occasion. -- His too great popularity creates faction in the
province, and he is superseded in the government by Patrick Gordon, in 1726. --
Governor Gordon's administration. -- Robert Fletcher. -- State of Pennsylvania
about this time. -- Its trade and produce, etc.

1725.
THE use of an affirmation, instead of an oath, in all cases, Of the affirmation
act, established in Pennsylvania.
was one of those privileges, for the enjoyment of which Pennsylvania was first
settled by the Quakers; and which they had enjoyed uninterrupted for above
twenty years, with the happy effects of the consequence thereof, in the
province. But after the resumption of the government, on the laws being
revised, in 1700 and 1701, the law respecting the manner of giving evidence,
with diverse others, were remitted to Queen Anne, in Council, in 1705; when the
said law was repealed; not with design to deprive the Quakers there of the said
privilege, but solely on account of its making the punishment, for false
affirming, greater than the law of England required, for false swearing; as
appears by the Attorney General Northey's opinion thereon.

The repealing of this law occasioned much difficulty among the Quakers, in the
province; and diverse attempts were made, from time to time, for reviving the
aforesaid privilege, but without success, till the year 1725, when an act,
prescribing the forms of declaration of fidelity, abjuration and affirmation,
instead of the forms before required, having been passed in the province, was
ratified by the King, in Council; and thereby became perpetual.

The Quakers, in New Jersey, were, And in New Jersey etc.
for a considerable time, subject to similar difficulties, upon the same
account; though the equity of their right to an affirmation, in their own form,
was as old as the constitution; and, in fact, the settlement of the province
primarily depended upon the enjoyment of that religious and civil liberty, The
form of the declaration of fidelity.

"I, A. B, do solemnly and sincerely promise and declare, that I will be true
and faithful to king George; and do solemnly, sincerely and truly profess,
testify and declare, that I do, from my heart, abhor, detest and renounce, as
impious and heretical, that wicked doctrine and position, that princes,
excommunicated, or deprived, by the pope, or any authority of the sea of Rome,
may be deposed, or murdered, by their subjects, or any other whatsoever; and I
do declare, that no foreign prince, person, prelate, state, or potentate, has,
or ought to have, any power, jurisdiction, superiority, pre-eminence, or
authority, ecclesiastical, or spiritual; within the realm of Great Britain, or
the dominions thereunto belonging."

The form of the abjuration, or the effect of the abjuration oath.

"I, A. B, do solemnly, sincerely and truly acknowledge, profess, testify, and
declare, that king George is lawful and rightful king of the realm of Great
Britain, and all others his dominions and countries thereunto belonging; and I
do solemnly and sincerely declare, that I do believe the person pretending to
be prince of Wales, during the life of the late king James, and since his
decease, pretending to be, and taking upon himself the style and title of king
of England, by the name of James the Third; or of Scotland, by the name of
James the Eighth; or the style and title of king of Great Britain; has not any
right, or title, whatsoever to the crown of the realm of Great Britain, nor any
other, the dominions thereunto belonging. And I do renounce and refuse any
allegiance, or obedience to him; and I do solemnly promise, that I will be true
and faithful, and bear true allegiance to king George, and to him will be
faithful against all traitorous conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made against his person, crown and dignity: and I will do my best
endeavor to disclose, and make known to king George, and his successors, all
treasons, and traitorous conspiracies, which I shall know to be made against
him, or any of them. And I will be true and faithful to the succession of the
crown against him, the said James, and all other persons whatsoever, as the
same is, and stands, settled by an act, entitled, An act declaring the rights
and liberties of the subject, and settling the succession of the crown to the
late queen Anne, and the heirs of her body, being Protestants; and as the same,
by one other act, entitled, An act for the further limitation of the crown, and
better securing the rights and liberties of the subject, is and stands settled
and entailed after the decease of the said late queen, and, for default and
issue of the said late queen, to the late princess, Sophia, electress and
duchess dowager of Hannover, and the heirs of her body, being Protestants. And
all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, promise and declare,
according to the express words, by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation,
mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And I do make this
recognition, acknowledgment, renunciation and promise heartily, willingly and
truly."

The form of administering the solemn declaration, or affirmation, was, by a
question asked, as follows, viz.

"Do thou, A. B, solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm," etc.
(here the proper words are to succeed, relative to the matter) and the
affirmant's answer, or assent, is to be expressed by saying, yea, or yes."

Laws of Pennsylvania.
of which this was a part; yet means were found to put a considerable
interruption to this just and reasonable privilege; which, at length, finally
terminated in the act of the first year of George the Second; which act was
confirmed, and rendered perpetual, by the King in Council, on the 4th day of
May, 1732.

Of the affirmation act, etc.
The Assembly of the province of Pennsylvania, in the year 1725, and also the
Quakers, from their yearly meeting, at Philadelphia, separately, to manifest
their gratitude for the royal confirmation of the affirmation act of
Pennsylvania, addressed the King, on the subject; These addresses were
delivered to the king by Joseph Wyeth, Joshua Gee and John Estaugh, Quakers;
one of whom made the following speech on the occasion, viz.

May it please the king,
These two addresses, transmitted to us from Pennsylvania, are, one from the
Assembly of that province, the other from our Friends, called Quakers, in their
private capacity.

Thy dutiful subjects do, in both these, express their humble and thankful
acknowledgments for the king's gracious goodness to them, in giving the royal
sanction to an act of that Assembly; whereby they are replaced in a privilege,
they had as first planters of that colony. What we beg, is, that the king will
be graciously pleased to accept, from us, these, their dutiful addresses.


The king's answer.

"I shall be always pleased to do you service."

The following extract, is taken from "An epistle of caution to Friends, in
general, relating to the solemn affirmation: from a meeting of the people
called Quakers, held in London, the 2nd of the first month, 1721-2, and is here
inserted, to show, in part, the sense, and conscientious sincerity of that
people, in England, on a similar occasion, viz.

Dear Friends and Brethren,
This meeting, under a weighty sense of the great favor, which it has pleased
the Lord to incline the heart of the king, and those in the government, to
grant us; by passing into a law, a form of solemn affirmation, which will
remove the conscientious scruples, that many Friends lay under, (and thereby
enable all to follow their lawful occupations, trades, and civil concerns,
without let, or hindrance, on any account) does find a concern to recommend to
all Friends, in their quarterly, monthly, or particular meetings, where this
law does, or may extend:

That they, in an especial manner, have a watchful eye and oversight of their
several members, that this great favor be not abused, or misused, by any
professing truth with us.

Our blessed Lord, and Lawgiver, Jesus Christ, told his disciples, "Ye are the
light of the world; a city, that is set on a hill, cannot be hid." And in every
age, as many as do walk in obedience to his gospel, must unavoidably be so; the
daily cross and self-denial, which he does enjoin, (those sure tokens of a
Christian disciple) are public marks, which are easily seen, and readily
observed, by those, with whom we have occasion of business, or concern; and our
transacting thereof with uprightness, justice and moderation will show that we
have an awful regard to our Lord Jesus Christ, whom we acknowledge and declare
to be our great Lawgiver and Example.

The great end and design of the new covenant, grace and truth, which is come
by him, is to draw men into obedience to his law, written in the heart; by
which only the inside can be made clean; and according to the degrees of
obedience to this divine law, which the apostle calls, The law of the spirit of
life in Christ Jesus, the proper effect thereof will appear; that is, the
inside will be made clean also. Hereby truth, justice, righteousness and
charity will shine forth in the words and actions of such; and then may be
truly applied to them that saying of Christ; a city, that is set upon a hill,
cannot be hid.

Beside the inward engagements of this divine law, to speak and act according
to truth, there is, at this time, also an outward engagement, which the
government has laid upon us, not only by the favor of this act, but also by
the manner, wherein they have conferred it: for, in the preamble, it is said;
it is manifest that the said people called Quakers, have not abused the liberty
and indulgence, allowed them by law. Which testimony of the Legislature
concerning the use of the late solemn affirmation, upon twenty-five years
experience, ought, at least, to stir up all Friends to great watchfulness and
care, in the use of this further ease and relief; that this testimony may be
continued, and thereby confirm the government in their favorable sentiments
concerning us.

And as this signal indulgence may draw the eyes and observation of many people
upon us, it may be expected, among these, some will look on us with an evil
eye, watch for our halting, and seek occasion against us, upon any misuse, or
abuse, of this legal privilege, which any, professing truth with us, or but
bearing the name, should fall into, or commit.

First, therefore, that there may be no misuse of this favor, we do earnestly
desire and entreat, that the several meetings do advise and exhort Friends,
that they watch against all vexatious and trifling causes of difference; and
not, for any such cause, implead, or commence suits of law, upon the
encouragement of this solemn affirmation, for that would certainly be a
perverting the good design of the government, in the granting thereof, and must
be deemed a great misuse of this privilege.

Secondly, That there be no abuses thereof committed, we do, in like manner,
entreat and desire, that Friends may be exhorted and advised, when any just and
valuable occasion does require any to make use of this affirmation, that such
Friend, or Friends, be very considerate, and sure of the truth of what they are
about to affirm; for where property, or liberty are concerned, a false or
corrupt evidence in very injurious, and may prove destructive; beside, it
ought, on all occasions, to be remembered, that, a false witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not escape; and that the command,
thou shall not bear false witness, is as well in the gospel as in the law; and
that all liars shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone. To these inward obligations, on the conscience, to truth-speaking,
there is also added the outward guard of pains, penalties and forfeitures, to
be inflicted on such as shall lawfully be convicted of wilful and corrupt
perjury.

We cannot omit also to remind you, that should any, under our name, so far
depart from the righteous law of God, as herein to become guilty, they will
thereby contract to themselves perpetual infamy, and to the body, whereof they
may pretend to be members, very great scandal and reproach; and such instances
repeated might provoke the government to deprive us of this great benefit; how
great would be the load of guilt on any, who should be the occasion thereof!

Let it be also considered, that the ground of our petitioning and soliciting
this further case and relief, was a conscientious scruple, to swear at all, at
the same time to be guilty of false affirming, and while they pretend to great
degrees of purity, to fall short in common honesty! It is indeed among the
highest degrees of hypocrisy, a crime abhorred by God and man! etc.

To all these particulars (several of them being here omitted) we think it
necessary to add, and very earnestly and tenderly to recommend to all Friends,
that, as much as may be, they do avoid all disputes and differences, with their
neighbors; and, as much as possible, follow peace with all men; and, in a
particular manner, we do press, that all disputes and differences, between
Friends, be avoided; or, if any do happen, that earnest endeavors be used, by
accommodation, or equitable and impartial reference, to end them, without going
to law; that so the rebuke of the apostle may not necessarily be applied to
any, "Now, therefore, there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law
with one another."

Dear Friends, these things, in Christian concern of mind, we have represented,
in order that all may be stirred up to a humble and faithful walking, not, as
knowing that any will fall short, in the above particulars, but, beloved, we
are persuaded better things of you; and things that accompany salvation, though
thus we speak.

Signed by appointment, and in behalf of the said meeting, by (...)



the address of the latter was, as follows, viz.

To our Gracious Sovereign, George, King of Great Britain, etc.
The humble address of his Protestant subjects, Quakers address to the king,
etc.
called Quakers, from their yearly meeting, held at Philadelphia, in the
province of Pennsylvania, the 21st day of the 7th month, 1725.
In an humble sense of the many* blessings and virtues, which flow from the
Divine Being, dispensed to the nations and people, over whom he has been
pleased to establish so gracious a prince, great, in his goodness and love to
his people, great, in the benignity of his reign, which reaches to the most
distant of his subjects, and great, in the sight of the nations round about.

If any of the present age should yet, through wantonness or wickedness, shut
their eyes, and not see, or be thankful for such happiness, ages to come will
look upon it with admiration; and kings may set before them the example;
posterity may mark it in their annals; and if ever again attempts should be
made upon true liberty and the laws, princes may find the mistake and dishonor
in such endeavors, in former times, and remark thy reign, as the way to true
grandeur.

We have great cause, among the rest of our fellow subjects, to express our
affection and duty to our sovereign, and to be, as we truly are, particularly
thankful for the royal assent to an act of this province, entitled, An act for
the prescribing forms of declaration of fidelity, abjuration and affirmation,
instead of the forms heretofore required in such cases.

This benevolence of our king, in a matter, which so nearly touches the
conscience, makes deep impressions on our hearts; but to the Almighty, who sees
them, do we earnestly pray for the long continuance of his reign, and that an
increase of blessings may be showered down on his person and throne, and that
his posterity, may be established therein.


The Quakers of Pennsylvania, Their gratitude exhibited in this address, etc.
though this was their indubitable right, as a part of their first purchase, in
the original settlement, it is plain, looked upon their being replaced in the
enjoyment thereof, as a great favor; and so far were they from thinking it
unnecessary to express it, that they declared it, their duty thus gratefully to
acknowledge it: which, with their continued care and practice afterward, not
to abuse the same, showed as much a disposition worthy of such favor and
beneficence, on the one hand, as it exhibited, on the other, a regard for the
justice and happiness, due to that people, in those, who were possessed of
power: such actions will ever remain an obligation on their posterity, so long
as they continue in the profession of the same principles, and duly regard the
example of their forefathers, to incite their circumspection, in both their
religious and civil ^onduct, with all dutifulness and fidelity to the
government, ^^der which they partake not only of the common protection, but
also enjoy such particular indulgence.

The Quakers privilege of appearing in courts, in their own way, in
Pennsylvania,
With the restoration of the enjoyment of this privilege to the Quakers, in
Pennsylvania, may be mentioned that of another, viz. the liberty of appearing
covered, or, with their hats on their heads, (according to their usual custom
every where) in all courts of judicature: which this people, in that province,
likewise considered as one of their charteral, or legal and indubitable rights,
however small, trifling, or humoursome, it may appear to those persons, who, by
their conduct, while, at the same time, they may thus represent, or make light
of the ceremony of the hat, absurdly render it an affair of so very great
importance, as scarcely on any terms whatsoever, to bear, or dispense, with an
emancipation from the use of it, in any people!

The institution of a court of chancery, in the province, in the year 1720, has
been already mentioned. At this court, in which Sir William Keith was
President, John Kinsey, a Quaker and a lawyer of eminence, who was afterward
Chief Justice of Pennsylvania, was, in the year 1725, obliged, in the way of
his business, to attend; where appearing with his hat on his head, Is
interrupted, etc.
according to the usual manner of that people, the President ordered it to be
taken off; which, was accordingly done. His friends the Quakers, took the
affair under consideration; and soon after, at their quarterly meeting, in
Philadelphia, appointed a committee to wait on the Governor; and, in a
respectful manner, to request him to continue the privilege, to which the
Quakers conceived themselves legally entitled, of appearing in courts, or
otherwise, in their own way, according to their religious persuasion; an
address, being accordingly prepared, was presented to the President, Governor
Keith; which, with the entry made thereon, by his order, in the court of
chancery, and certified by the Register, is as follows, viz.

To Sir William Keith, Baronet, Governor of the province of Pennsylvania, etc.
The humble address of the people called Quakers, by appointment of their
quarterly meeting, held in Philadelphia, for the city and county, 2nd of the
2nd month, 1725.
May it please the Governor,
The Quakers address to Governor Keith thereon.
Having maturely considered the inconveniences and hardships, which we are
apprehensive all those of our community may be laid under, who shall be
required, or obliged, to attend the respective courts of judicature, in this
province, if they may not be admitted, without first having their hats taken
off, from their heads, by an officer; as we understand, was the case of our
friend, John Kinsey, when the Governor was pleased to command his to be taken
off, before he could be admitted to speak, in a case depending, at the court of
chancery, after that he had declared, that he could not, for conscience, comply
with the Governor's order to himself, to the same purpose; which, being
altogether new and unprecedented, in this province, was the more surprising to
the spectators, and as we conceive (however slight some may account it) has a
tendency to the subversion of our religious liberties.

This province, with the powers of government, was granted by king Charles the
Second to our Proprietor, who, at the time of the said grant, was known to
dissent from the national way of worship, in diverse points, and particularly in
that part of outward behavior, of refusing to pay unto man the honor, that
he, with all others, of the same profession, believed to be due only to the
Supreme Being; and they, on all occasions, have supported their testimony, so
far as to be frequently subjected to the insults of such as required that
homage.

That the principal part of those, who accompanied our said Proprietor, in his
first settlement of this colony, with others of the same profession, who have
since retired into it, justly conceived, that, by virtue of said powers,
granted to our Proprietor, they should have a free and unquestioned right to
the exercise of their religious principles, and their persuasion, in the
aforementioned point, and all others, by which they were distinguished from
those of other professions; and it seems not unreasonable to conceive an
indulgence intended by the crown, in graciously leaving the modelling of the
government to him and them, in such manner, as may best suit their
circumstances; which appears to have been an early care in the first
Legislators, by several acts, as that for liberty of conscience; and more
particularly, by a law of the province, passed in the 13th year of king
William, chap. xcii, now in force: it is provided that, in all courts, all
persons, of all persuasions, may freely appear, in their own way, and,
according to their own manner, and there personally plead their own cause, or,
if unable, by their friends; which provision appears to be directly intended to
guard against all exceptions to any persons appearing in their own way, as our
friend did, at the aforesaid court.

Now, though no people can be more ready, or willing, in all things essential,
to pay all due regard to superiors, and honor the courts of justice, and those
who administer it, yet, in such points as interfere with our conscientious
persuasion, we have openly and firmly borne our testimony, in all countries and
places, where our lots have fallen.

We must, therefore, crave leave to hope, from the reasons here humbly offered,
that the Governor, when he has fully considered them, will be of opinion with
us, that we may justly and modestly claim it, as a right, that we, and our
friends, should at all times, be excused, in the government, from any
compliances against our conscientious persuasions, and humbly request, that he
would, for the future, account it as such to us, thy assured well-wishing
friends.

Signed by appointment of the said meeting, RICHARD HILL, RICHARD HAYES, MORRIS
MORRIS, ANTHONY MORRIS, EVAN EVANS, JOHN GOODSON, ROWLAND ELLIS, REESE THOMAS,
SAMUEL PRESTON, WILLIAM HUDSON.

The 10th May, 1725. The Governor complies with their request, etc.
On consideration had of the humble address, presented to the Governor, this day
read in open court, from the quarterly meeting of the people called Quakers,
for the city and county of Philadelphia, it is ordered, that the said address
be filed with the Register, and that it be made a standing rule of the court of
chancery, for the province of Pennsylvania, in all time to come, that any
practitioner of the law, or other officer, or person whatsoever, professing
himself to be one of the people called Quakers, may and shall be admitted, if
they so think fit, to speak, or otherwise officiate, and apply themselves,
decently unto the said court, without being obliged to observe the usual
ceremony of uncovering their heads, by having their hats taken off, and such
privilege hereby ordered and granted to the people called Quakers, shall, at no
time hereafter, be understood, The Governor's order, etc. respecting the manner
of the Quakers appearing in court, etc.
or interpreted, as any contempt, or neglect, of the said court, and shall be
taken only as an act of conscientious liberty, of right, appertaining to the
religious persuasion of the said people, and agreeable to their practice, in
all civil affairs of life.

BY SIR WILLIAM KEITH, Chancellor.




Governor Keith, by his popular behavior and administration, which, in many
cases, had been highly beneficial to the province, had so far interested
himself in the favor of many of the people, Governor Keith much in favor with
the people.
that upon intelligence of his intended removal from the government, by the
Proprietary family, they were much displeased, and petitioned the Assembly to
make him a gratuity: they, even, after his removal, chose him for a Member of
Assembly, and he accepted the office.

But whatever might have been his motives for his popular conduct, in the
government, Pennsylvania indebted to his administration,
and how far soever he may be thought reprehensible, in studying to gratify
those, whom he governed, more than was just and prudent, yet, it is most
certain that the real interest of the province of Pennsylvania was much
indebted to his care and management, while in that office.

But after he was superseded by Patrick Gordon, His dishonorable conduct, etc.
in the summer of the year 1726, he resided some time in the province, using
all means in his power, to divide the inhabitants, embarrass the
administration, The following is an extract from a paper, which appears to have
been written by James Logan, in the third or fourth year of Governor Gordon's
administration, viz.

"When the Governor, last year, in the greatest emergency, that ever was known
in this province, summoned the Assembly to meet, and assist him, in that
strait, all the Representatives of Chester and Bucks counties, and one of
Philadelphia, duly came, while eight others, though all in town, at the time,
on presence they wanted one Member, obstinately and cruelly refused to join
them, in hopes of disabling them to make a House; because the seventeen wanted
one-third of one Member, to make up two-thirds of the whole, (the quorum.)
Those seventeen, however, in compassion to the distressed country, proceeded to
give the Governor the necessary assistance; yet would do nothing more; and the
next assembly fully confirmed what they had done." MS.


and distress the Proprietary family; till at length, 1726.
having thereby rendered himself odious to the people, as he had done before,
to the Proprietaries, Governor Keith is at last rejected by them whom he had
courted etc.
he returned to England; and it is said, at last he died poor, in London, about
the year 1749: which, though it reflect not much honor on those, who so highly
approved of, and loudly declared themselves to have been extraordinarily
benefited by his public conduct, in the administration, if it was in their
power to have prevented his being in such a situation, is nevertheless,
perhaps, an instance of the general and natural consequence and folly of too
great a dependence on popular favor.

Governor Gordon first meets the Assembly, etc.
Patrick Gordon appears to have first met the Assembly of Pennsylvania, in the
beginning of the 6th month, 1726, though he arrived in the province, with his
family, some time before. But during the fore part of his administration, for
two or three years, the public transactions were not a little disturbed, or
obstructed, by the faction created by Sir William Keith; who, as before
observed, was chosen a Member of Assembly, at the next election, in October, of
which David Lloyd was Speaker.

Governor Gordon's administration in general, etc.
But Governor Gordon's administration, in general, was distinguished with
moderation and prudence, through a great variety of public and important
transactions; in which a general good harmony subsisted between the different
branches of the Legislature; and, during a happy time of general tranquillity,
both at home and abroad, many wholesome laws were made, great improvements
carried on, and trade considerably increased; insomuch that about this time,
the author of a publication, called by Anderson, in his historical deduction of
commerce, etc. a judicious tract, entitled, "The importance of the British
plantations in America to these kingdoms, etc. considered," London, printed,
1731, speaks thus therein of this province, viz.

"That Pennsylvania which has not any peculiar staple, (like Carolina, State of
Pennsylvania about this time.
Virginia and Maryland) and was begun to be planted so late as 1680, should, at
present, have more white inhabitants in it, than all Virginia, Maryland and
both the Carolinas, is extremely remarkable! And although the youngest colony,
on the continent," [Georgia, etc. was not yet planted] "they have, by far, the
finest capital city of all British America; and the second in magnitude. The
causes usually assigned for this vast increase of white people, in so short a
time, are these, viz. first, their kind treatment of the Indians, their
neighbors; hereby rendering that province absolutely safe from their attempts.
Some, indeed, have gone so far, as to assert, that they are the only British
colony that have treated the poor native Indians with humanity: for, that no
other British colony admits of the evidence of an Indian against a white man:
nor are the complaints of Indians against white men duly regarded, in other
colonies; whereby these poor people endure the most cruel treatment, from the
very worst of our own people, without hope of redress! And all the Indian wars,
in our colonies, were occasioned by such means. Secondly, the excellency of
Pennsylvania's laws; whereby property is effectually secured to all its Note.
Robert Fletcher of Abington, in Pennsylvania, died in August, Robert Fletcher
obiit.
1726. He had filled several public stations with honor and integrity; and is
said to have had a clear character, was much respected by most sorts of people,
and made a happy exit, at last, as his deathbed expressions, in manuscript,
testify. His death was accounted a great and public loss, but more especially
to his friends, the Quakers, and his neighbors.
inhabitants. Thirdly, the unlimited toleration for all manner of religious
persuasions, without permitting any claims to ecclesiastical power, to take
place. All men, who are Protestants, are indifferently eligible to the
magistracy and Legislature, let their private opinions be what they will,
without any religious test."

1731.
Respecting Pennsylvania's product, commerce, and benefit to Great Britain,
about this time, (1731) the same author further says, viz.

Articles of trade and produce of Pennsylvania, anno 1730, etc.
"The product of Pennsylvania, for exportation, is wheat, flour, Governor Gordon
in a speech to the Assembly, in the first month 1731, says,

"I have understood, that when this colony was young, and had but little
experience, it exceeded all its neighbors, in the fineness of its flour and
bread, and goodness of its beer; which are the only produce of our grain; the
regulations, which have already been made, in the two first, have greatly
contributed to their improvement, as well as the repution of the province; and
it will become the Legislature to continue their care and concern, in a point
of such consequence to the whole community," etc.

Vol^s, etc.
biscuit, barrelled beef and pork, bacon, hams, butter, cheese, cider, apples,
soap, myrtle-wax candles, starch, hair-powder, tanned leather, bees wax,
tallow-candles, strong beer, Governor Gordon in a speech to the Assembly, in
the first month 1731, says,

"I have understood, that when this colony was young, and had but little
experience, it exceeded all its neighbors, in the fineness of its flour and
bread, and goodness of its beer; which are the only produce of our grain; the
regulations, which have already been made, in the two first, have greatly
contributed to their improvement, as well as the repution of the province; and
it will become the Legislature to continue their care and concern, in a point
of such consequence to the whole community," etc.

Vol^s, etc.


linseed oil, strong waters, deer-skins, and other peltry, hemp (which they
have encouraged by an additional bounty of three half pence per pound weight,
over and above what is allowed by act of parliament) some little tobacco,
lumber [ i. e. sawed boards, and timber for building of houses, cypress wood,
shingles, cask-staves and headings, masts, and other ship timber] also drugs,
of various sorts (as sassafras, calamus aromaticus, snake-root, etc.) lastly,
(adds our author) the Pennsylvanians build about 2,000 tons of shipping a year
for sale, over and above what they employ in their own trade; which may be
about 6,000 tons more. They send great quantities of corn to Portugal and
Spain, frequently selling their ships, as well as cargo; 1731.
and the produce of both is sent thence to England; where it is always laid out
in goods, and sent home to Pennsylvania." "They receive no less than, from
4,000 to 6,000 pistoles from the Dutch isle of Curacoa alone, for provisions
and liquors. And they trade to Surinam, in the like manner, and to the French
part of Hispaniola, as also to the other French sugar islands; from whence they
bring back molasses, and also some money. From Jamaica they sometimes return
with all money and no goods; because their rum and molasses are so dear there.
And all the money they can get, from all parts; as also sugar, rice, tar,
pitch, etc. is brought to England, to pay for the manufactures, etc. they carry
home from us; which (he affirms) has not, for many years past, been less than
L. 150,000 per annum. They trade to our provinces of New England, Virginia,
Maryland and Carolina, and to all the islands in the West Indies, (excepting
the Spanish ones) as also to the Canaries, Madeira and the Azores isles;
likewise to Newfoundland, for fish; which they carry to Spain, Portugal, and up
the Mediterranean; and remit the money to England; which, one way or other, may
amount to L. 60,000 yearly; but without their trade to the French and Dutch
colonies, in the West Indies, they could not remit so much to England; neither
could they carry on their trade with the Indians if they did not take off the
rum and molasses, as well as sugars of those colonies, in part of payment of
the cargoes they carry thither."

CHAPTER XXVII.
Thomas Penn, one of the Proprietaries, arrives in the province from England in
1732. -- Assembly's address to him, with his answer. -- Boundaries between
Pennsylvania and Maryland agreed on; with a description of the same. -- Dr.
Douglas's ^ccount of this affair, etc. -- John Penn, the eldest ^roprietor
arrives in the province in 1734. -- The Assembly's address to him, with his
answer. -- Lord Baltimore attempts to obtain of the king the territories, and
such part of Pennsylvania as were supposed to be within the grant to his
ancestors; upon which the Assembly address the king; and John Penn returns to
England. -- Assembly's address to him, on his departure, with his answer. --
Death of John Penn and Governor Gordon. -- Administration of the Council, James
Logan, President. -- Names of some Members of Council. -- Benjamin Franklin,
etc. -- Disturbances from Maryland, on the borders of Pennsylvania. -- Expenses
of Indian affairs. -- Arrival of Governor Thomas. -- His administration. --
Part of Andrew Hamilton's speech to the Assembly, on the cause of
Pennsylvania's prosperity, at his taking leave of the House, as Speaker, etc.

1732.
IN the month of August 1732, Thomas Penn, one of the Proprietaries from
England, arrived in the province; where he continued a number of years. On the
15th of the month the Assembly presented him with the following address, viz.
Thomas Penn arrives in the province, etc.


To the honorable Thomas Penn, Esquire, one of the Proprietaries of the
province of Pennsylvania.
The humble address of the Representatives of the freemen of the said province,
The Assembly's address to him etc.
in General Assembly met.
May it please our honorable Proprietary.
At the same time that we acknowledge the goodness of Divine Providence in thy
preservation, we do most sincerely cong^^tulate thee upon thy safe arrival into
the province of Pennsylvania.

Our long and ardent desires to see one of our honorable Proprietaries amongst
us, are now fulfilled; and it is with pleasure we can say thou art arrived at a
time, when the government is in perfect tranquillity; and that there seems to
be no emulation amongst us, but who shall, by a peaceable and dutiful
behavior, give the best proof of the sense, they have of the blessings,
derived to us, under our late honorable Proprietary your father, whose
goodness, to his people, deserves ever to be remembered with gratitude and
affection.

Be pleased to accept of our best wishes for thy health and prosperity; and
give us leave to say, as no discouragements, nor any artifices of ill men, have
hitherto been able to deter the good people of Pennsylvania from a firm
adherence to your honorable family, so we shall always, to the utmost of our
power, support and maintain that government, under which we do, with all
gratitude, acknowledge, we enjoy so many valuable privileges.


To which the Proprietor returned this answer, viz.

"That he heartily thanked the House for their affectionate address; The
Proprietor's answer.
and that, as he looked upon the interest of Pennsylvania, and that of his
family, to be inseparable, the House might assure itself, that it should be his
study to pursue those measures, which had rendered the name and government of
his father so grateful to the good people of this province."

Boundaries fixed between Pennsylvania and Maryland.
In the year 1732, on the 12th of May, was signed by John, Thomas and Richard
Penn, the Protaries of Pennsylvania, a commission, directed to Governor Gordon,
Isaac Norris, Samuel Preston, James Logan and Andrew Hamilton, Esquires, and to
James Steel and Robert Charles, gentlemen, appointing them, or any three, or
more of them, commissioners, with full power, on the part of the said
Proprietaries, for the actual running, marking and laying out, the boundary
lines, between both the province and territories of Pennsylvania and Maryland,
according to articles of agreement, indented, made and concluded upon, the 10th
of May, in the same year, between Charles, Lord Baltimore, the Proprietary of
Maryland, and the above mentioned Proprietaries of Pennsylvania. Dr. Douglas,
in his summary of the British settlements, in North America, speaks thus* on
this subject: ( Boston printed, 1753) viz.

"As the controversy of long standing, concerning the boundaries, between Lord
Baltimore of Maryland, and the Penns of Pennsylvania, has made much noise; we
shall insert a short abstract of the same, for the amu^^ment of the curious."

Lord Baltimore's royal grant of Maryland was about 50 years prior to Mr.
Penn's grant of Pennsylvania; but in Baltimore's grant there was an exception
of lands belonging to the Dutch, which are, at present, the three lower
counties upon Delaware river; when Mr. Penn took possession, he found one Dutch
and three Swedes congregations.

The grand dispute was concerning the construction of the expression 40 degrees
of latitude; Maryland ^rant 1632 says, to the 40th degree of latitude, which
the Maryland side of the (...) construe to be, to 40 degrees complete;
Pennsylva^i^'^ grant, 1681, says, to begin at the beginning of the 40th degree,
which the Pennsylvania side construe to be just after the 39th degree is
completed; thus there was a dispute of the extent of one degree of latitude,
or 69 English miles.

"Considering that Maryland grant was prior, and that the Maryland people had
made considerable improvements by possessions, within that degree of latitude,
the affair was compromised seemingly in favor of Maryland, by a written
agreement, May 10th 1732, "and that, in two calendar months from that date,
each party should appoint commissioners, not more than seven, whereof three or
more, of each side, may act, or mark out the boundaries aforesaid, to begin, at
furthest, sometime in October 1732, and to be completed on, or before, 25th
December, 1733, and when so done, a plan thereof shall be signed, sealed and
delivered by the commissioners and their principals, and shall be entered in
all the public offices in the several provinces and counties; and to recommend,
to the respective Legislatures, to pass an act for perambulating these
boundaries, at least once in three years.

"The party defaulting to pay to the other party, on demand, six thousand
pounds sterling; accordingly the commissioners respectively appeared; but, upon
some differences, in opinion, the boundaries were not made in the time limited;
the failure was in Lord Baltimore's side, who alleged, that he had been
deceived in fixing cape Henlopen 20 miles south westerly of the western cape of
Delaware bay; whereas cape Henlopen is the western cape itself; the Penns
affirm that the western cape is cape Cornelius, and cape Henlopen is about
(...) miles southwardly of it, according to the Dutch maps, and descriptions,
published about the time, when Lord Baltimore obtained his grant.

"Because of nonperformance, the Penns, 1735, exhibited a bill, in the
chancery of Great Britain, against Lord Baltimore, praying that the said
articles may be decreed to subsist, and be carried into execution, and that any
doubts arisen may be cleared by said decree.

"After tedious delays, at length, May 15, 1750, the Lord Chancellor decreed
costs of suit against Baltimore, and that the articles of May 10th 1732, be
carried into execution; and that before the end of three calendar months, from
May 15th, two several proper instruments, for appointing commissioners, not
more than seven of a side; any three, or more, of a side, may run and mark the
boundaries, to begin sometime in November next, and to be completed on, or
before, the last day of April, 1752, to be signed, etc. recorded, etc. and
enacted, etc. as per agreement of 1732, above related.

"Lord Chancellor decreed concerning the late disputes, 1. That the center of
the circle be fixed in the middle of the town of Newcastle. 2. That the said
circle ought to be a radius of 12 English miles. 3. That cape Henlopen ought to
be deemed at the place, laid down in the maps annexed to the articles of 1732.

"The commissioners, appointed by each party, met at Newcastle, November 15,
1750; they agreed on a center in Newcastle, from whence the 12 miles radii are
to proceed; but a dispute arose concerning the mensuration of these 12 miles.
Lord Baltimore's commissioners alleged that these miles ought to be measured
superficially; the Penns' commissioners alleged, that, considering the various
inequalities of the ground, such radii could not extend equally, consequently,
from them no true arch of a circle could be formed, and insisted upon
geometrical and astronomical mensuration: thus the proceedings of the
commissioners stop^; and they wrote to their respective principals for further
instructions, relating to that point, and adjourned to April 25, 1751.

Douglas's sammary, etc.
And an instrument of the same tenor and date, was executed by the said Lord
Baltimore, directed to Samuel Ogle, Charles Calvert, Philemon Lloyd, Michael
Howard, Richard Bennit, Benjamin Tasker and Matthew Tilghman Ward, Esquires,
appointing them, or any six, five, four or three of them, commissioners, for
the same purposes, in the part of the said Charles, Lord Baltimore.

In which articles of agreement, between the said Proprietaries, published in
Philadelphia, in 1733, respecting the limits and boundaries between the two
provinces, including those of the territories of Pennsylvania, it is mentioned
to the following purport, viz.

That a due east and west line shall be drawn from the ocean, beginning at cape
Hinlopen, Boundaries between Penn and Baltimore.
which lies south of cape Cornelius, upon the eastern side of the Peninsula;
and thence to the western side of the Peninsula, which lies upon Chesapeak bay,
and as far westward as the exact middle of that part of the Peninsula, where
the said line is run.

That from the western end of the said east and west line, in the middle of the
Peninsula, a strait line shall run northward, up the said Peninsula, till it
touch the western part of the periphery, or arch, of a circle, drawn twelve
English statute miles distant from Newcastle, westward toward Maryland, so as
to make a tangent thereto, and there the said strait line shall end.

That from the northern end of the last mentioned strait line, drawn northward,
a line shall be continued due north, so far as to that parallel of latitude,
which is fifteen English statute miles due south of the most southern part of
the city of Philadelphia.

That in the said parallel of latitude, fifteen miles due south from
Philadelphia, and from the northern end of the last mentioned north and south
line, a line shall be run due west across Susquehanna river to the western
boundary of Pennsylvania; or so far, at present, as is necessary, which is only
about twenty five miles westward of the said river, etc.

All which lines to be the boundaries between the respective provinces of
Maryland, and Pennsylvania, including the territories of the latter.

Notwithstanding this agreement, the performance was long delayed, or
obstructed, Boundaries not finally finished till 1762, etc.
by altercation, or disputes, between the parties, about the mode of doing it,
said to have been occasioned principally by the Proprietary of Maryland: in
consequence of which the inhabitants on the Pennsylvania side, near where the
boundary line ought long before to have been ascertained and marked out, were
sometimes exposed to unreasonable demands from Maryland claims, and
disagreeable, or ill treatment of that government, for want of the same: for it
was not finally executed till the year, 1762; when these families, or
Proprietaries, agreed to employ two ingenious mathematicians, Charles Mason,
and Jeremiah Dixon, after their return from the cape of Good Hope; where they
had been to observe the transit of Venus, in the year 1761, finally to settle,
or mark out the same; which was accordingly performed by them; and stone
pillars erected, to render the same more durably conspicuous.

In October, 1734, John Penn, the eldest of the Proprietaries, and a native of
Pennsylvania, The Proprietor John Penn arrives in the province.
arrived in the province from England; whom the Assembly, on the 16th of the
month, presented with the following address, viz.

To the honorable John Penn, Esquire, one of the Proprietaries of the province
of Pennsylvania, etc.
1734.
The address of the representatives of the freemen of the said province, in
General Assembly met. The As^embly's address to (...)

May it please the Proprietary,
Excited by affection and gratitude, we cheerfully embrace this opportunity of
congratulating thee on thy safe arrival to the place of thy nativity. When we
commemorate the many benefits, bestowed on the inhabitants of this colony, the
religious and civil liberties, we possess, and to whom these valuable
privileges, under God and the king, are owing, we should be wanting to
ourselves, and them that we represent, did we not do justice to the memory of
thy worthy ancestor, a man of principles truly humane, an advocate for religion
and liberty.

What may we not hope for from the son of so great a man, educated under his
care, and influenced by his example! May his descendants inherit his virtues as
well as his estate, and long continue a blessing to Pennsylvania.

Signed by order of the House, ANDREW HAMILTON, Speaker.


To which address he returned the following answer, viz.

"Gentlemen,
The Proprietor's answer.
"I return you my hearty thanks for this affectionate address. The kind regard
you express for the memory of my father is most agreeable to me; and, as it was
always his desire, so it is strongly my inclination, to do every thing in my
power, that can promote the happiness and prosperity of this province."


1735.
Lord Baltimore attempts to get the lower counties, etc.
In the summer of the year 1735, Governor Gordon received accounts from England,
that application had been made to the king by the Lord Baltimore, Proprietor of
Maryland, for obtaining a grant, or confirmation, 1735.
of the three lower counties on Delaware, and a part of Pennsylvania, as lands
within the descriptive part of the charter, granted to his ancestors; and that
his application had been opposed both by a petition, presented to the king, by
Richard Penn, Esquire, one of the honorable Proprietaries of Pennsylvania, and
also by a representation from the people called Quakers, in England, in behalf
of the province and territories, The Assembly address the king on the occasion.
etc. upon which occasion the Assembly of Pennsylvania drew up an address to
the king, in the month of June this year.

This affair seems to have hastened the return of the Proprietor John Penn, to
England; who soon after this time left the country; upon which, about the
middle of September, the Assembly presented him with the following address, viz.

To the honorable John Penn, Esquire, The Assembly's address to John Penn, on
his departure for England.
one of the Proprietaries of the province of Pennsylvania.
The humble address of the Representatives of the freemen of the said province,
in General Assembly met.
May it please the Proprietary,
That just esteem and grateful sense, which the people of this province have
always retained for the memory of thy honorable father, our late Proprietary
and Governor, raised in them the strongest desires to see some of the
descendants of that great man among us.

As his wise example gave us just reason to hope, so it was our daily wishes,
that his virtues, as well as his estate, might descend to his posterity. And it
is with pleasure we can now say, it was not in vain we promised ourselves from
thee that affection and regard, which is natural for a good man to have for the
place of his nativity.

That humility, justice and benevolence, which has appeared in thy conduct,
since thy arrival here, has very deservedly gained thee the esteem and
affections of the people; and we do, with truth, say, thy leaving us at this
time, gives an universal concern to the inhabitants of this province.

May thy voyage be prosperous, and thy success equal to the justness of thy
cause; and may we soon have the happiness of seeing thee return a blessing to
thy native country: and give us leave to hope, that, thou will, upon every
occasion, join thy favorable sentiments toward the people of this place, with
those of thy honorable brother, who, by his stay here, will have frequent
opportunities of doing what will always endear your honorable family to the
freemen of Pennsylvania.


To which the Proprietary returned the following answer, viz.

"Gentlemen,
John Penn's answer.
"I am very sensible of the concern you express for me, and am obliged to you
for this kind address. I am glad of this opportunity of seeing the
Representatives of the freemen of Pennsylvania, at my departure; and you may be
assured I shall make it my particular care to do every thing in my power, that
may advance the interest of this my native country.


John Penn, of whom the inhabitants of Pennsylvania appear to have conceived a
favorable opinion, John Penn dies in 1746, etc.
and great expectations, never returned; but died unmarried, in October, 1746;
and by his will, lest all his part of the province, which consisted of two
shares, or half of the whole, to his brother Thomas, who, from that time
forward, with the youngest brother Richard, became the sole Proprietaries.

Governor Gordon, 1736.
after a prudent and prosperous administration of about ten years, Governor
Gordon dies, etc.
died in the summer 1736; when consequently the government devolved on the
Council, James Logan being President; a person of experience and ability. Among
the names of the Member of Council, in February, 1735, I find, James Logan,
Clement Plumstead, Ralph Ashton, Thomas Griffitts, Samuel Preston, Thomas
Laurence, Samuel Hasel, Charles Read.

Note, Dr. Douglas, in his summary, etc. says,

"Major Gordon died in October, 1736, and Mr. Logan was, in course, President,
for a short time; but was soon superseded by Colonel Thomas, a planter of
Antego. Mr. Logan died much lamented, November, 1751. After nine years
government, Colonel Thomas resigned, in 1747; and was succeeded by James
Hamilton, Esquire," etc.

Note, Benjamin Franklin, afterward the famous Dr. Franklin of Philadelphia,
is first mentioned as being chosen clerk to the Assembly, in October, 1736; for
which office he petitioned the House in succession to Joseph Growdon.




President Logan, James Logan President of the Council, etc.
during the time of his Presidentship, as well as both before and after it, in
conjunction with the Council, appears to have had occasion, among other things,
to exert his abilities, in the management of Indian affairs; among which people
he had great influence. In which time likewise the claims of Maryland upon the
Pennsylvanians, who were settled near the place where the boundary line ought
to have been marked out before this time, and the disturbances arising from the
government and people of Maryland on that account, gave much uneasiness and
trouble to diverse inhabitants who were settled within the bounds of
Pennsylvania; but in general, during his administration, the public affairs
seem to have been well conducted, for about the space of two years, Governor
Thomas arrives in 1738.
till the arrival of George Thomas, Esquire, in the summer of the year 1738,
who succeeded in the government.

Governor Thomas appears to have been a man of abilities and resolution, but,
in some things, Governor Thomas's administration, etc.
did not sufficiently understand the nature and genius of the people, over whom
he presided: in the forepart of his administration his conduct seems to have
been satisfactory to the country; 1738.
but afterward, the war commencing between England and Spain, about the year
1740, his manner of urging some military demands, with which the Assembly,
being chiefly Quakers, on account of their religious principles, could not
comply, seems to have introduced so much altercation and dispute between them,
for some years, as to render the administration disagreeable to both, though
the Assemblies, at that time, were not averse to grant money for the general
use of the crown; which they then did, at different times, to a considerable
amount. During these times, when England was at war with Spain, afterward
joined by France, the Assembly in 1741, granted for the king's use L. 3,000,
and in 1746, L. 5,000 more, besides some other payments of a similar nature; as
the indemnifying of masters, whose bound servants had enlisted, etc.

Besides, the expenses on Indian affairs, paid out of the provincial stock by
the Treasurer and Trustees of the loan office, from the year 1733 to 1751, were
L. 8,366, which make L. 464 annually, on an average of 18 years, during a time
of great tranquillity with them.

Votes of Assembly, Vol. 4. page 195.


Governor Thomas first meets the Assembly, etc.
He first met the Assembly of Pennsylvania in the sixth month, 1738; and in his
first speech to the House, on the 8th of that month, informed them, he had been
appointed to the government above a year before; but his embarkation was
impeded by unexpected delays, made by Lord Baltimore's objecting against the
Proprietaries of Pennsylvania appointing a Governor over the three lower
counties, etc. which objection, after some time, was disregarded, and his
appointment both over the province, and the said counties, approved by the king.

1739.
In the sixth month, 1739, the Speaker of the Assembly, Andrew Hamilton, in his
speech, when he took leave of the House, on account of his age and infirmities,
etc. expressed himself in the following manner, respecting the happy
constitution and prosperity of Pennsylvania, in these times, viz.

"I would beg leave to observe to you, Part of Andrew Hamilton's last speech to
the Assembly, on the causes of Pennsylvania's prosperity, etc.
that it is not to the fertility of our soil, and the commodiousness of our
rivers, that we ought chiefly to attribute the great progress, this province
has made, within so small a compass of years, in improvements, wealth, trade,
and navigation, and the extraordinary increase of people, who have been drawn
hither, from almost every country in Europe; a progress, which much more
ancient settlements, on the main of America, cannot, at present, boast of; no,
it is principally, and almost wholly, owing to the excellency of our
constitution; under which we enjoy a greater share both of civil and religious
liberty than any of our neighbors.

"It is our great happiness, that, instead of triennial Assemblies, a
privilege, which several other colonies have long endeavored to obtain, ours
are annual; and, for that reason, as well as others, less liable to be
practiced upon, or corrupted, either with money or presents. We sit upon our
own adjournments, when we please, and as long as we think necessary; and we are
not to be sent a packing, in the middle of a debate, and disabled from
representing our just grievances to our gracious sovereign, if there should be
occasion; which has often been the fate of Assemblies in other places.

"We have no officers, but what are necessary; none but what earn their
salaries, and those generally are either elected by the people, or appointed by
their representatives.

"Other provinces swarm with unnecessary officers, nominated by the Governors;
who often make it a main part of their care to support those officers,
(notwithstanding their oppressions) at all events. I hope it will ever be the
wisdom of our Assemblies to create no great offices nor officers, nor indeed
any officer at all, but what is really necessary for the service of the
country, and to be sure to let the people, or their representatives, have, at
least, a share in their nomination, or appointment. This will always be a good
security against the mischievous influence of men holding places at the
pleasure of the Governor.

"Our foreign trade and shipping are free from all imposts, except those small
duties, payable to his majesty, by the statute laws of Great Britain. The taxes
which we pay, for carrying on the public service, are inconsiderable; for the
sole power of raising and disposing of the public money for the support of
government, is lodged in the Assembly; who appoint their own Treasurer; and to
them alone he is accountable. Other incidental taxes are assessed, collected
and applied by persons annually chosen by the people themselves. Such is our
happy state, as to our civil rights.

"Nor are we less happy, in the enjoyment of a perfect freedom, as to religion.
By many years experience we find, that an equality among religious societies,
without distinguishing any one sect with greater privileges than another, is
the most effectual method to discourage hypocrisy, promote the practice of the
moral virtues, and prevent the plagues and mischiefs, that always attend
religious squabbling.

"This is our constitution; and this constitution was framed by the wisdom of
Mr. Penn, the first Proprietary and Founder of this province; whose charter of
privileges, to the inhabitants of Pennsylvania, will ever remain a monument of
his benevolence to mankind, and reflect more lasting honor on his descendants,
than the largest possessions. In the framing this government, he reserved no
powers to himself, or his heirs, to oppress the people, no authority, but what
is necessary for our protection, and to hinder us from falling into anarchy;
and therefore (supposing we could persuade ourselves, that all our obligations
to our great lawgiver, and his honorable descendants, were entirely cancelled,
yet) our own interests should oblige us carefully to support the government, on
its present foundation, as the only means to secure to ourselves and our
posterity, the enjoyment of those privileges, and the blessings flowing from
such a constitution, under which we cannot fail of being happy, if the fault is
not our own.

"Yet I have observed, that, in former Assemblies there have been men, who have
acted in such a manner, as if they utterly disregarded all those inestimable
privileges, and (whether from private pique and personal dislike, or through
mistake, I will not determine) have gone great lengths in risking our
happiness, in the prosecution of such measures, as did not at all square with
the professions, they frequently made, of their love to our government.

"When I reflect on the several struggles, which many of us, now present, have
had with those men, in order to rescue the constitution out of their hands,
which, through their mistakes (if they really were mistakes) was often brought
on the brink of destruction, I cannot help cautioning you, in the most earnest
manner, against all personal animosity, in public consultations, as a rock,
which, if not avoided, the constitution will, at some time or other, infallibly
split upon." Andrew Hamilton, Esquire, of Philadelphia, died in the latter end
of the summer 1741. He had served in several considerable stations both in the
government of Pennsylvania, and the lower counties, with honor, integrity and
ability. He was a lawyer of great note for many years; and acquired much
reputation, in that line, particularly in Zenger's famous trial, at New York,
etc.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
Conduct of Governor Thomas, respecting the enlisting of indented, or bought
servants, for soldiers, in the province, during the war between England and
Spain, about this time. -- Names of the Members of Assembly. -- Speech of John
Wright, a Magistrate of Lancaster county, to the Grand Jury. -- Assembly's
address to Thomas Penn, on his departure for England, with his answer, in 1741,
etc. -- Memorial of John Wright. -- Of Robert Jordan. -- Riotous election in
1742, with observations. -- Indian affairs well managed in Governor Thomas's
administration. -- He resigns the government in 1747. -- Names of Members of
Council about this time. -- Succeeding administration and Governors. --
Memorials of John Kinsey, Israel Pemberton, Michael Lightfoot, and John Smith.
-- Conclusion.

1740.
DURING the administration of Governor Thomas, Governor Thomas countenances
enlisting bought servants, etc.
it is observed that the enlisting of indented or bought servants, for
soldiers, The number of bought and indented servants, who were thus taken from
their masters, as appears by the printed votes of the Assembly, were about 276;
whose masters were compensated by the Assembly for their loss sustained
thereby, to the amount of about L. 2,588.

The names of the Members of Assembly, elected in October, 1740, are,

For Philadelphia county.
Thomas Leech, John Kinsey, Speaker, Robert Jones, Isaac Norris, Edward Warner,
Joseph Trotter, James Morris, Owen Evans.
Bucks county.
John Hall, Mark Watson, John Watson, Abraham Chapman, Benjamin Field, Thomas
Canby, junr. Mahlon Kirkbride, Jeremiah Langhorne.
Chester county.
Thomas Chandler, Joseph Harvey, James Gibbons, William Hughes, Samuel Levis,
John Owen, Jeremiah Starr, Thomas Tatnall.
Philadelphia city.
Israel Pemberton, John Kearsley.
Lancaster county.
Thomas Linley, John Wright, Thomas Ewing, Anthony Shaw.

was first permitted to be carried into execution, in the province, before the
act of parliament, in that case, was made; which being disagreeable and
injurious to many of the inhabitants, and contrary to ancient usage, John
Wright, one of the people called Quakers, a worthy Magistrate of Lancaster
county, 1741.
and a Member of Assembly for the same, having spoke his mind freely against
it, in the Assembly, was, therefore, with diverse others, dismissed from his
office, as a Judge, by a new commission which came out for Lancaster without
his name; before which, having got intelligence of the intention, he came to
the court, in May, 1741, and took his leave thereof, in a valedictory speech,
which was printed, and as it is in part indicative of that time, and informing
in some cases, it is here inserted below in the notes. "The speech of John
Weight, one of the Magistrates of Lancaster county, to the court and Grand
Jury, on his removal from the commission of the peace, at the quarter sessions,
held at Lancaster, for the said county, in May, 1741.

"Published by order of the Grand Jury." "As a new commission of the peace, for
this county, is, I suppose, Speech of John Wright, Esquire, etc.
now to be published, in which my name, and some of my brethren, are, I
presume, left out; I desire your patience and attention a few moments, while I
give the last charge to the Grand Jury, which I shall (...) do, from this
place, and take leave of my brethren, the Justices, and my friends, the good
people of the country, as a Magistrate.

"I have, for upwards of twenty years, borne a commission of the peace, in
Chester and Lancaster counties, under the respective Governors of this
province; and have lived in familiar friendship and good understanding with all
of them, until of late.

"About twelve years ago, under the mild and peaceable administration of
Governor Gordon, I was one of those, who were instrumental in procuring this
part of the province to be erected into a separate county, and have
contributed, according to my small ability, to have rule and order established
and preserved amongst us. I have always attended the courts of judicature;
except when want of health, or the service of my country, in some other
station, required my absence; and it has been my lot repeatedly to give the
charge to the gentlemen of the Grand Jury, from this place.

"I am now an old man; too old, if both opportunity and inclination should
invite (which I am well assured never will) ever to take the burden upon me
again; and, therefore, am willing to make you a few observations on power and
government, and the present posture of affairs here.

"I shall pass over the original of the English constitution; the several steps
and gradations, by which it has rose to the p^rity and perfection, it is at
this day; the many attempts, which have been made to invade it, and the blood
and treasure, which have been spent, in defense of that constitution, and those
liberties, which render the English nation so famous throughout the world.

"And, first, I observe to you, gentlemen of the Grand Jury, that the privilege
of trials, by juries, is counted older than the English government, and was not
unknown to the ancient Britons: juries are looked upon as an essential felicity
to English subjects; and are put in the first rank among English liberties: the
reason given is this; because no man's life shall be touched, for any crime
(out of parliament) unless he be thought guilty by two several juries; and
these juries, being substantial men, taken, from time to time, out of the
neighborhood of the person accused, cannot be supposed to be biased; whereas,
it is observable, that Judges are made by prerogative; and many have been
preferred by corrupt ministers of state; and may be so again; and such advanced
as will serve a present turn, rather than those of more integrity, and skill,
in the laws.

"Juries are of two kinds, and are commonly distinguished by Grand and Petit
Juries; the former, which you are, have larger power than the other, as very
plainly appears by the qualification, which you have taken. Your power extends
to all offenses within the county; and your office is principally concerned in
two things, presentiments and indictments; the difference of which is this, the
first is, when you, of your own knowledge, or enquiry, take notice of some
offense, crime, or nuisance, to the injury of the public, which you think ought
to be punished, or removed, and give notice to the court, in writing briefly,
of the nature of the thing, and the person's name and place: this is called a
presentment, and differs from an indictment, in these two respects; first, in
that it is not drawn up in form: whereas indictments are generally drawn up and
presented to you, by the Attorney General and the witnesses qualified to attend
you; and when you have examined them, you either indorse, that it is a true
bill; or, that it does not appear, to you, sufficient grounds for the
accusation, that the person's life, estate, or reputation, should be brought in
question; all which is understood, by indorsing the word ignoramus. From hence
it appears that you are appointed, as well to be guardians of the lives,
liberties, estates, and even, reputations of the innocent, as to be a means of
bringing offenders to justice. And, as you are endued with a sufficient portion
of understanding, to know what offenses are representable by you, I shall not
enumerate them; having already said, they are generally under your notice; but
shall rather recommend to you, and your successors, a steady care, both for the
security of the innocent (for by you malicious prosecutions may be cropped in
bad) and for bringing offenders to the justice of the law; that by their public
shame and suffering, they and others may be deterred from the like offenses,
for the future.

"The office of a civil Magistrate, or Justice of the Peace, is an office of
high trust, and ought to be executed with great care, circumspection, and good
conscience. Magistrates may be looked upon as Ministers under God, invested
with some branches of power, for the public benefit, viz. To be a terror and
scourge to evil doers, and a praise to them who do well; and while they lead
lives exemplary of this, and in their public actions, have this principally in
view, distributing justice impartially, with clean hands and pure hearts, their
post is truly honorable, and they are highly worthy of regard. But if they
unhappily deviate from this rule, if they are found in the practice of those
crimes, which they ought to punish and suppress, if they pervert justice for
bribes, and oppress the poor and innocent, they, therefore render themselves
highly unworthy of an office of so great a trust.

"I was always a friend to power, well knowing that good and wholesome laws,
duly executed, are so far from being a restraint upon true liberty, that they
are only as regulating springs to the passions, and productive of it; and our
worthy Founder, and first Proprietor tells us, "That he composed his frame of
government with a view to support power in reverence with the people, and to
secure the people from the abuse of power:" and these two are generally
observed to attend each other, as causes and their effects. And a noted
professor of the law, in this province, some years ago, when he espoused the
cause of liberty, and loaded with age and infirmities, took a long journey in
defense of it, has these words on power; "It may justly be compared to a great
river, which, while kept within due bounds, is both beautiful and useful; but
when it overflows its banks, it is then too impetuous to be stemmed; it bears
down all before it, and brings destruction and desolation where it comes."

"If, then, these are the ill effects of lawless power, every wise man ought to
be on his guard, to prevent them, by keeping up the banks of liberty, and
common right, the only bulwark against it.

"It was in defense and support of this great bulwark, against the attempts of
power, under a pretense of serving his majesty, but done in such a manner as, I
apprehend, cannot be supposed (...) ever intended, or expected, by our most
gracious sovereign; whose distinguishing character is, to protect and not to
oppress; and whatever burden the necessity of the times requires to be laid on
the subjects under his immediate and just administration, is laid equally and
impartially; I say, it was to the opposition, given by the House of
Representatives, to the manner, in which these attempts were made, and the just
concern and dislike showed thereto, that we may impute the late changes, made
in the commissions of the peace, throughout the province, whatever other
pretenses they may be glossed with.

"For this cause, my friends and countrymen, for the cause of English liberty,
for standing in the civil defense of right and property, are we dismissed; and
I rejoice, and am heartily glad, that I have been one of those, who are thought
worthy of displeasure.

"And now, to conclude, I take my leave, in the words of a Judge in Israel,
"Here I am, witness against me; whom have I defrauded; whom have I oppressed;
or, of whose hands have I received any bribe, to blind my eyes therewith? And I
will restore it."

"May the Prince of Peace, who is the King of kings, protect the people of this
province, from domestic foes and foreign enemies! is my hearty desire; and so I
hid you all farewell."

Respecting this same John Wright, it may be further observed, in this place,
that he died about the year 1751, in Lancaster county, where he had lived, in
the eighty-fourth year of his age.

Memorial of John Wright.
It is recorded of him, "That he was born in the year 1667, in Lancashire, in
England, of religious and reputable parents; who were among the early
professors of the doctrines held by the people called Quakers, and lived and
died highly esteemed members of that community. He was educated with a view to
the practice of physic; but he declined pursuing it; and entered into trade,
till the year 1714; when he removed with his family, into Pennsylvania, well
recommended by certificate, from his friends, the Quakers, in that part of
England, both as to his moral character, and as a preacher, in the society;
with whom they had, for many years, lived in strict amity.

"Soon after his settlement in the province, his principles and conduct
recommended him to the notice of the public: he was a Representative to the
General Assembly, for Chester county, and many years one for Lancaster county.
In his station as a Judge, for the last county, he was noted for a prompt,
honest plainness, and candor, and an inflexible integrity; one instance of
which appears in the cause and manner of his dismission from that office, in
1741, as above mentioned.

"He continued to attend the Assemblies, till broken health, and an advanced
age, rendered such attendance difficult, and sometimes impracticable; although
the people among whom he lived, from a long experience of his services, and
regard to him, would not be prevailed on by himself, or his family, to name
another in his stead, for that station; but continued to return his name till
he died.

"Through every station in life, his good will to mankind, his love of peace
and good order, and his endeavors to give them a permanent footing, in his
neighborhood, and in the country, in general, were known to be his delight and
study: his sense of religion, and the testimony he bore to it, were free from
intemperate zeal, yet earnest, and attended with life and spirit, influenced by
the love of God, and benevolence to his whole creation; such he continued, with
his understanding clear, his mind calm, cheerful and resigned, to the advanced
period of old age, when he expired without a groan,"

On the 19th of October, 1742, died Robert Jordan of Philadelphia; Death and
memorial of Robert Jordan.
a person of note, and an eminent preacher, among the Quakers; in which service
he had traveled much in diverse countries: accounts say of him, that he was
justly esteemed and beloved, not only by those of his own religious society,
but also by others, both of high and low rank, who had the pleasure of his
acquaintance: that he was generous in his sentiments, free and communicative,
yet very circumspect, in his conversation and behavior; and carried with him
through life, the evident characteristics of a good man, and a minister of
Christ.




Thomas Penn, one of the Proprietaries, being about to return to England, The
Proprietor Thomas Penn going for England;
the Assembly, in the sixth month, 1741, presented him with the following
address, viz.

May it please the Proprietary,
The Assembly's address, on the occasion.
Gratitude to the first Founder of our present happy constitution, the regard
paid to his merit, and the hopes of continued obligations from his descendants,
united the desires of many of the inhabitants of this province to see one of
them, at least, settled within it: this was evident in the joy, which
discovered itself in the minds of all sorts and degrees of men, on thy arrival
among us.

In transacting of public affairs (as in those, which are private) a diversity
of sentiments may have appeared, sometimes among ourselves, sometimes perhaps
with our Proprietaries; and yet, as our different sentiments have been the
result of honest minds, whose determinations (though possibly mistaken) were
intended for the public good, it ought not, nor has, erased those ties of
gratitude, which we desire may ever remain between the descendants of our late
worthy Proprietary, and the freemen of this province.

The welfare of the inhabitants of this colony, and that of our Proprietary
family, seem to us mutually to depend on each other, and therefore, it is not
to be wondered at, that we are so desirous of their residence among us: it
being reasonable to think, we are most secure from any attempts on our
liberties, when the administration of government, and the management of the
public affairs of the province, are under the immediate inspection of those,
whose interest it is to preserve our constitution from any encroachments.

These considerations, as we are informed the Proprietary is determined to
leave us, afford not the most pleasing reflections; but, as we presume, the
affairs of the family render it necessary, and are in hopes, that either he
himself, or some other of our Proprietaries, will, in a little time, return, it
behooves us to acquiesce under it. Whatever little differences in opinion may
have happened, we hope the Proprietaries will believe the freemen of this
province retain that regard, which is due to them; and would be glad of any
proper opportunity of demonstrating it: and such is our confidence in the
Proprietary family, that, if any attempt shall be made to the prejudice of
those rights (which under our gracious king, we now happily enjoy) they will to
the utmost of their power, oppose it, and thereby lay us under like obligations
for the continuance of those privileges, which we readily own are due to their
worthy ancestor, for bestowing them.

As the welfare of this province has so near a dependence on that of our
Proprietary family, our interest and duty enjoin our particular concern for
them; give us leave, therefore, on this occasion, to express our hearty desires
for thy prosperous voyage, and safe return among us.


To this address the Proprietary answered, as follows:

Gentlemen,
I thank you for the regard shown to my family, in this address, Thomas Penn's
answer to the Assembly's address.
and for your good wishes for my prosperous voyage.

As I am very sure both my brothers and myself have the true interest of the
inhabitants of this province very much at heart, you may rest assured, we will
oppose any attempts that may be made on their just rights, which we think it is
our indispensible duty to support.

The affairs of my family now call me to England; and I cannot, at our parting,
better evidence my regard for you, than to recommend it to you to act, in your
station, as good subjects to the king, really sensible of the benefits, you
enjoy, under his mild and equal administration; and that you will take such
measures for the defense of this province, as the present posture of affairs
abroad require, in which you will have all the assistance from the Governor,
that can be expected from a gentleman in his station, who has no view, but the
king's honor, and the security of your constitution.

August 20, 1741.

Thomas Penn becomes the chief Proprietor, etc.
Thomas Penn, after this, on the death of his brother John, in 1746, became the
principal Proprietor, and possessed of three fourths of the province. He lived
the longest of the three brothers; but he appears never to have been very
popular, 1742.
in the province: he is said, in general, to have conducted himself rather too
much reserved toward the people, and too nearly attached to certain views, for
his private interest, in reference to the province; which are things opposite
to popularity. Besides, the imprudence of some persons in the province, in
order to show their dislike at some part of his conduct, which did not please
them, tended to create and increase a similar disposition, where the contrary
ought the more to have been cultivated and cherished; but, in general, he was a
person of a worthy character, and of moderate principles.

In the fifth year of Governor Thomas's administration, in October, 1742, at
the annual election, A riotous election, etc.
for the Members of Assembly, in Philadelphia, happened such an instance of the
unwarrantable effect of party spirit, as, at that time, made a lasting
impression on the minds of many of the inhabitants.

The greatest blessings, Blessings may be changed into curses, etc.
when perverted to wrong purposes become the greatest curses to mankind; and
the very sources of happiness and prosperity, by mistake and abuse, are changed
into the causes of infelicity, and the most pernicious evils; even, liberty
itself, than which nothing is more desirable, when carried beyond a certain
point, degenerates into licentiousness; and, from its effects, producing the
worst kind of tyranny, is, of all evils, frequently rendered the most
destructive to the human race; for, as one beast of prey devours another, so
men, whatever refined notions they may otherwise possess, or pretend to, when
restrained neither by law nor conscience, are more pernicious, and that often
to their own species, than the worst of savages, or, even, the most ravenous of
the brutal kind! It is thus that men originally, by their own actions and
depravity, lose that true liberty, to which they would otherwise be entitled;
and the human species is thereby brought into vassalage to their own folly. Too
great liberty is the cause of too great restraint upon it; and every extreme is
the source of the contrary; may this never be the case of Pennsylvania!

Liberty had drawn many different kinds of people to Pennsylvania, etc.
Liberty, which had long been conspicuous in the province, and of which the
early inhabitants had, in general, so long showed themselves worthy, by not
making an improper use of it, had drawn great numbers of various sorts of
people into the country; many of whom were persons of very different principles
and manners from those of the generality of the more early settlers, and many
of their successors and descendants. Hence, in succeeding years, certain
symptoms of an approaching change, in this valuable blessing, began to grow
more and more conspicuous, through the formation and increase of party, among
many of the later inhabitants, joined and instigated by diverse others; and, in
their elections for Members of Assembly, to foment the spirit of opposition
against the old interest, and the defenders of the established constitution of
the province, and the descendants of the early settlers, who were principally
concerned for its preservation, being chiefly Quakers, to a higher degree, than
had ever been known before.

The most remarkable and unwarrantable instance of this nature, that I find on
record, Account of the riot in 1742, etc.
in this province, was this, which I have mentioned, in the year 1742; when a
large number of sailors, from the shipping in the river Delaware, during the
time of election (not being any way interested, or, of right, concerned
therein) armed with clubs, suddenly and unexpectedly appeared, in a tumultuous
manner, and formed a riot, at the place of election, knocking down a great
number of the people, both Magistrates, Constables and others, worthy and
reputable inhabitants, who opposed them; and, by violence having cleared the
ground, several of the people were carried off, as dead!

This was repeatedly done, upon the return of the electors; till, at last, many
of the inhabitants, being enraged, took measures to force them into their
ships, and near fifty of them into prison; but they were soon discharged:
occasioned by party leaders, etc.
for it afterward appeared, that they had been privately employed, in this
work, by some party leaders; it being then in time of war, when consequently
party spirit, which is so nearly allied to it, and, in the extreme, ends in the
same, was encouraged to make greater efforts, to distract the public
proceedings, and under this Governor's administration, by more ways than one,
to divert the established form of the constitution, from its peaceable order
and course, into that of its opposite nature; in which an increasing party
here, since that time, though generally under the most specious and plausible
pretenses, have ever appeared to take delight: for change is grateful to the
human race; and, probably, no government of mankind is, at all times, entirely
free from factious spirits; 1743.
and a large number will always be found, especially where much liberty
abounds, which is only proper for the wise and good, whose interest, as well as
pleasure, it will ever be to favor revolutional consequences.

Of Governor Thomas's administration.
During Governor Thomas's administration, the Indian affairs, seem mostly to
have been well managed, and harmony continued with that people; which has
always been a matter of great importance, as well as expense to this province.
Among the names of Members of Council (who with the Governor, always had the
chief management of Indian affairs) in the year 1742, I find, James Logan,
Clement Plumsted, Samuel Hassell, Abraham Tailor, Samuel Preston, Thomas
Lawrence, Ralph Ashton, Robert Strettell.


Note. In November, 1747, Anthony Palmer being President, I find mentioned of
the Members of Council, Thomas Lawrence, William Till, Robert Strettell, Joseph
Turner, Thomas Hopkinson, Samuel Hassell, Abraham Tailor, Benjamin Shoemaker,
William Logan.


In July, 1749, the honorable James Hamilton being Governor.

Council.
Thomas Lawrence, Abraham Tailor, Benjamin Shoemaker, Thomas Hopkinson, Richard
Peter's, Samuel Hassell, Robert Strettell, Joseph Turner, William Logan,

But, as before observed, his ardour, in pressing some things of a military
nature, appears to have introduced unprofitable altercation between him and the
Assembly, during part of his administration; which naturally tends to
disappointment and dislike, between parties of such opposite and fixed
principles, and so very different views of advancing the public utility, as
those of Governor Thomas, and the Assemblies of Pennsylvania were, at that
time; Governor Thomas resigns the government in 1747, etc.
but afterward, for diverse years before his resignation, which was in the
summer of the year 1747, a much better understanding existed between them.

In consequence of Governor Thomas's resignation, the administration, as usual,
1748.
devolved on the Council, Anthony Palmer being President, till November, 1748;
when James Hamilton, Governor Hamilton arrives, etc. in 1748.
of Pennsylvania, arrived Governor from England; a gentleman of considerable
fortune in the province, and well esteemed by the people: he was the son of
Andrew Hamilton, before mentioned as a lawyer of note, in Philadelphia; and who
likewise had held several eminent public offices, in the government, with
reputation.

Governor Hamilton continued till his resignation in October, 1754; when he was
succeeded, Governor Morris, etc. 1754.
in the government, by Robert Hunter Morris of New Jersey, son of Lewis Morris
who had been Governor of that province. Note. In May, 1750, died at Burlington,
in West Jersey, Death and memorial of John Kinsey, etc.
of an apoplectic fit, John Kinsey of Philadelphia. He was an eminent lawyer;
and, during the last seven years of his life, Chief Justice of Pennsylvania;
which station he held with an unblemished integrity; and with so much
reputation, that, even, the chief part of the lower courts followed him there.
He had been many years a Member and Speaker of the Assembly of New Jersey;
where he distinguished himself with so much zeal and true patriotism, as
greatly endeared him to the people of that province. On his removal to
Philadelphia, in 1730, he was soon chosen into the Assembly there; of which he
was Speaker during the last ten years of his life successively; except a month,
or two, when he, being on an embassy to an Indian treaty, held at Albany, John
Wright, before mentioned, officiated in his stead.

He had very much practice and success in the law, and was, for some time,
Attorney General, his long experience and great ability, in the management of
public affairs, his skill in the laws, and readiness for communicating his
knowledge therein, often without see or reward, and his tenderness to his
friends, the people called Quakers, by whom he was deservedly esteemed a
valuable member, in their religious society, with the exercise of many civil
and social virtues, are said to have rendered his life very useful and
valuable, and his death much lamented, as a great and universal loss to these
provinces.

Israel Pemberton, of Philadelphia, died on the 19th of January, 1754, Israel
Pemberton.
in the 69th year of his age. He was the son of Phineus Pemberton, one of the
first, or very early, settlers of Pennsylvania, and many years an honorable
Member of the provincial Council, in the early time of the province. This his
son Israel was born in Pennsylvania, in 1684; he was many years one of the most
considerable merchants of Philadelphia; and a representative for that city, in
General Assembly, nineteen years successively. He was one of the people called
Quakers; and accounts of him say, that he was a man of a calm, even and
cheerful disposition of mind; which, being improved by an early acquaintance
with the principles of the religion which he professed, rendered his whole life
a^ instructive example of the Christian virtues: that he was much beloved and
esteemed by his friends the Quakers, for his many and long continued good
services, in that society, and universally respected by all others of his
acquaintance, for his steady conduct, manly behavior, open sincerity, and
quiet, inoffensive life and conversation, preferring a compliance with his
known Christian duty before all other considerations; that he was generous,
charitable and humane; and among the first in most public contributions, and
acts of real beneficence.

Michael Lightfoot.
Michael Lightfoot of Philadelphia, died in December, 1754. He came from
Ireland, and settled in New Garden, Chester county, in Pennsylvania, about the
year 1712. He was an eminent preacher among the Quakers; and traveled much in
that capacity, in diverse countries, both in Europe and America; being highly
esteemed by those of his own religious society, as a bright and exemplary
gospel minister, and of great service in that vocation: in general, he is said
to have been a man of an amiable and unblemished character. After he removed to
Philadelphia, during the last eleven years of his life, he held the office of
provincial Treasurer for Pennsylvania; which he discharged with much honor and
integrity.

John Smith
John Smith of Burlington, in New Jersey, son of Richard Smith, formerly of the
same place, and brother of Samuel Smith, author of the history of that
province, (of a family originally from Yorkshire, in England) died on the 26th
day of the third month, 1771, in the 49th year of his age. As he was a person
of an amiable character, good example, and public utility, not only in the
province of New Jersey, but also in that of Pennsylvania, it may, therefore,
not be improper, in this place, to mention respecting him; that, being brought
up to mercantile affairs, he lived several years in Philadelphia as a merchant,
having married Hannah, the daughter of James Logan, Esquire, a woman of good
and amiable qualities; by whom he had several children. After her death, in the
year 1762, he retired to Burlington, the place of his birth; having been a very
useful and valuable member of society, and served several years in the
provincial Assembly of Pennsylvania, with good ability, reputation and
integrity; besides, being much engaged in the affairs of his own religious
community of the people called Quakers, in Philadelphia; by whom he was highly
esteemed and beloved, for his good sense, liberal and generous sentiments,
agreeable and instructive conversation, his extensive abilities, and generally
beneficent life, and kind services; which were so very considerable, as to
leave lasting impressions, on the minds of his friends and acquaintances, in
that city, and to render his memory dear to many.

After his removal to Burlington, he was appointed, by mandamus from the king,
one of the Council for New Jersey; in which office he continued to be useful to
the public; and, at the same time, particularly serviceable in his own
religious society, till the time of his sickness and death.

He was endowed with great conciliating abilities; and the preservation of
peace and concord, among mankind, was much the subject of his attention and
delight.

He was engaging, open, friendly and undersigning, in his address and
behavior; of a cheerful and benevolent disposition of mind; well skilled in
the laws of his country; and very ready, generous and serviceable, in giving
his advice and assistance.

In his religious character, he exhibited an excellent example of true
practical Christianity, free from all affectation and narrowness of mind. He
was, in several relations, one of the best of neighbors and of men.

He had a turn to literature, and though he was not favored with much of a
learned education, yet, as he was a person of good natural parts, much reading,
and conversed with all ranks of men, in his own country, he writ several
pieces, to good advantage, on different, but generally the most interesting
subjects, of a religious, moral and civil nature; some of which have been
published for general benefit.




1756.
In the year 1756, William Denny from England, succeeded Governor Morris;
William Denny Governor, etc.
and continued in the administration till 1759: at which time he was succeeded
by James Hamilton, second time Governor; And James Hamilton a second time etc.
who continued till 1763.

In the year 1763, 1763.
John Penn, son of Richard Penn, one of the Proprietaries, succeeded Governor
Hamilton, in the administration, Succession of Governors.
and continued till 1771; when the government devolved on the Council, James
Hamilton being President, for a short time; till in the latter part of the same
year, Richard Penn, brother of John Penn, Richard Penn Governor.
arrived from England, invested with the powers of government.

Richard Penn was superseded in the administration by his brother John Penn,
who now, John Penn, second time Governor.
after his father's death, in 1771, became a Proprietary, and second time
Governor of the province, in the latter part of the year.

CONCLUSION.
THUS far appears the manner of the rise, colonization, increase and happy
establishment of the flourishing province of Pennsylvania; which, by means of
the very remarkable industry, honesty, moderation, and good policy of the first
and early colonists and their successors, from a wilderness, became as a
fruitful field, and a very valuable and important addition to the British
interest in America, without any expense to the parent country. This being
written about the year 1778 or 1779, in a time of great confusion, contention
and uncertainty, in this part of America, alludes, in the conclusion, to a
probable, or apparent future change, etc.


The enjoyment of that rational freedom of thinking, and religious worship,
with a just and equal participation of natural and civil rights, which, in the
populousness, and general polity of Europe, seemed to be either too much lost,
or, at least, too partially distributed, was the compact of settlement; and the
restoration and fruition of that peace and tranquillity, which the wickedness
and folly of the human race had so much banished from the world, by the more
effectual encouragement and promotion of primitive truth and simplicity, in the
actions and manners of men, in a way, that seemed best to those concerned, and
so far as the state of human nature would admit, were the chief views and
motives to the undertaking.

That these were the real principles, upon which the constitution and
government of Pennsylvania were primarily founded, it is sufficiently known and
manifest, from the best documents, and confirmed by a series of most certain
facts, as given, though defectively, in the preceding history, and in the
following view of the general state of the province, between the years 1760 and
1770: that its great and rapid increase, its happy and flourishing condition
since, down to the present time, have been principally owing to the influence
of these same principles, in degree still prevailing, future time will further,
and more fully demonstrate, whenever the unhappy reverse thereof shall take
place; which now seems to be fast approaching: by whose contrary effects will
then still more clearly appear, in contrast, both the cause and means of the
extraordinary, and so long continued prosperity, and unparalled felicity, for
which this province has been long so justly famed, above all other countries,
at least, in America, if not in the whole world: a state, in some respect, so
nearly resembling that of those saturnian times, in Italy, which, we are told
formerly produced the golden age, and so far actually realizing ancient fable,
that to its inhabitants, perhaps, before any other people, on the surface of
the globe, might particularly, and with great propriety, have been applied the
exclamation of the poet Virgil, "Felices nimium sua si bona norint, Agricolee!"
as well as that of Milton, respecting the state of the first parents of
mankind, -- "and, O! yet happiest, if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more."


But all things have their time; and both kingdoms and empires, as well as
smaller states, and particular persons, must die; "finis ac ab origin pendet;"
yet folly often shortens their duration, as wisdom and virtue prolong their
more happy existence: and we may plainly see men frequently and greedily
embrace the former, for the latter, and with great zeal and confidence often
pursue their own misery, under a strong persuasion of the contrary: for, as the
human body, when in its most plethoric state, and in the greatest appearance of
health and vigor, is often then most in danger, or nearest a sudden change, so
the late and present extraordinary prosperity, the increasing, flourishing and
happy state of this country, at present, above others, may probably be a
prognostic, or sign, of its being in a more critical situation and danger.

For so long as the fatal delusion, which, we are told, originally rendered
mankind unhappy, still continues, though in different degrees, and various
appearances, to except entirely from its baneful influence no part of the human
race, every condition, in this world, will be subject to mutability; but then
the remedy has ever been equal to the disease; for the Creator and Supporter of
the world, whose peculiar attribute it is, to produce good out of evil, has
placed within the power and choice of mankind, those means of recovery from all
evil, which are, at least, adequate to the nature and extent of it; and
sometimes places special examples before the eyes of the human race, like this
of Pennsylvania, to show them the absolute possibility of a still superior
bliss, and more exalted felicity, than is commonly experienced in the world,
not only in an individual, but also in a collective, or national, and more
universal capacity.

A VIEW OF THE Province of Pennsylvania, AND OF THE State in which it
flourished, chiefly between the years 1760 and 1770: COMPREHENDING FOUR PARTS.
I. A general description of the soil and face of the country, with the most
considerable mountains and rivers, both in that and the adjacent provinces;
including something of the nature of the weather, and peculiarity of the
seasons, etc.

II. Of the chorography, present produce, trade, improvements, inhabitants,
Philadelphia, other towns, and the internal police of the province.

III. Of the Indians, or Aborigines, of Pennsylvania and its vicinity, etc.

IV Of the religious state of the province.

To give a full and minute account of every particular, which might properly be
ranged under these several heads, would exceed the bounds of my present
intention, which is only to exhibit a short and comprehensive view of such
parts thereof as truth and candor may be able to furnish from certain
knowledge, and such information as may be best depended on with such brief
observations as may naturally and properly arise from the subjects, in a
summary manner.

PART I.
The seasons and temperature of the weather. -- Nature of the land and soil,
etc. -- Face of the country in general; as the mountains, valleys, plains,
rivers, and creeks, etc.

Seasons and weather in Pennsylvania.
THAT greater degree of siccity in the temperature of the air, which prevails
more on continents, than islands, or smaller tracts of land, surrounded by
water, is observable in Pennsylvania. For the weather, round the year, is much
dryer here, than in Great Britain, notwithstanding the more violent changes, in
this country, when they happen. The winters are longer and more severe; the
summers hotter and dryer; the springs very short; the autumn long and mild; but
notwithstanding the length and severity of the winters, they are generally more
clear, agreeable and healthy, than in England; but the summers less so, by
reason of their great heat and sudden changes; which cause dysenteries,
lingering and putrid fevers, with other dangerous distempers, in the latter
part of summer, etc.

Temperature of the air, etc.
The temperature of the air, and the nature of the weather, are much governed by
the particular and variable winds, which prevail most in the different seasons:
some of which have a very remarkable and sudden influence thereon, especially
those in winter; which, during that part of the year, blow more from the
west-northerly, than from any other quarter. These winds seldom sail to produce
a clear sky, and a remarkable sharp cold, even, in every season of the year: as
those from the south-westerly are distinguished for producing haziness and
warmth or heat in summer. But the eastern winds are frequent, and as much
observed to bring on haziness, fogs, or clouds, and wet or falling weather, as
the former are, for their respective cold and heat, with their peculiar
dryness; and they are observed in later years to be more common and prevalent
than formerly represented to have been.

Hence that temperature of the seasons, Extremes of heat and cold, with their
consequences, etc.
which is more peculiar to the insular, than to the continental parts of the
world, and so remarkable in Great Britain, is not experienced here, by reason
of the heats and colds being more intense, and sudden, often occasioned by the
quick and uncertain shifting of the wind; which have a surprising effect on
vegetation, and even on animal life itself, both to accelerate, and sometimes
increase them, as well as to shorten their duration: for, as the vegetables are
drawn up in a rapid manner (like plants under glasses, or in a very warm
exposure, in colder climates) by the great and sudden heats, in the beginning
of summer; whereby the very ground, more especially that which is higher than
the rest, and most exposed to the sun, and parching dry winds, appears
frequently, in a short time, to be exhausted of its virtue and goodness, or
deprived of that fructifying quality, which nourishes plants and herbage: so
they are often as suddenly cut down by the succeeding frosts, or destroyed by
the severe cold, or want of moisture. And notwithstanding the spring commences
at Philadelphia near a month later than about London, yet the harvest in
Pennsylvania is a month earlier than in England; which renders that season very
short in the former.

Violent gusts of thunder, wind and rain, are frequent in the warm seasons,
with sudden cold after them, and a north west wind; which more often are
consequent upon the intense heats. The snows are frequently very deep, in
winter, and the frosts so intense, that it has not been very uncommon for the
large river Delaware, even, where it is near a mile broad, to be frozen over in
one night, so as to bear people walking upon the ice in the morning; which
river sometimes, in the winter season, for several weeks together, even,
opposite to Philadelphia, is as much frequented with loaded carriages of all
sorts, bringing country produce upon the ice to the city, as any part of terra
firma. Thomas Makin, before mentioned, in his Descriptio Pensilvania, anno
1729, speaks in the following manner, on the situation and temperature of
Pennsylvania, viz.

"Zonae terra subest alternae, ubi veris and aestus
Autumni gelidae sunt hyemisque vices.
Hic ter quinque dies numerat longissimus horas,
Cum sol in cancro sidere transit iter.
Hic tamen interdum glacialis frigora brumae
Et calor aestivus vix toleranda premunt.
Saepe sed immodicum boreale refrigerat aestum.
Flamen, and australis mitigat aura gelu.
Hic adeo inconstans est, and variabile caelum,
Una ut non raro est aestus hyemsque oie
Saepe prior quamvis nitido sit sole serena
Postera sit multis imbribus atra dies.
Vis adeo interdum venti violenta ruentis,
Ut multa in sylvis sternitur arbor humi."
"Cum fera saevit hienis glacie fluviaiis and unda
Atque latet tellus undeque tecta nive;
Circumelusa ratis, si non foret a^chora, fixa est,
Dum rigidum solvat mitior aura gelu,
Et quamvis boreas gelido ha^^hatur ab arcto,
Inturbata tamen ^umi^is unda silet
Usque adeo interdum suit hic durable frigus,
Trans fluvium vidi plaustra onerata vehi.
Hic tamen interdum totius tempore brumae
Navibus haec am^is pervia proebet iter:
Cymbaque remigio velox, veloque frequenter
Advehit and revehit qua via ducit onus.
Usque adeo incerta est, hic and variabilis aura
Alternasque vice^ (...) and censius (...)."
"Beneath the temperate zone the land does lie,
Where heat and cold a grateful change supply.
To fifteen hours extends the longest day,
When sol in cancer points his fervid ray.
Yet here the winter season is severe;
And summer's heat is difficult to bear:
But western winds often cool the scorching ray,
And southern breezes warm the winter's day.
Yet often though warm and fair the day begun,
Cold storms arise before the setting sun:
Nay, often so quick the change, so great its power,
As summer's heat, and winter, in an hour!
So violent the wind, that often the ground
With rooted trees is covered wide and round!"
"When stormy winter whitens all below,
When woods and plains are hid in ice and snow,
The ships with icy chains are anchored fast,
Till the dissolving spring return at last;
Though boreas rage, and stormy tempests blow,
The streams are silent and not seen to flow;
Sometimes the ice so strong and firm is sound,
That wagons pass as on the solid ground.
But yet so temperate are some winters here,
That in the streams no icy chains appear;
And all the season boats and shipping may
With oar and sail divide the liquid way;
So various and uncertain is the clime
For heat and cold extreme, in little time," etc.



Duration of animal and vegetable life in Pennsylvania, etc.
And experience demonstrates that the tenderness of a texture, either of the
animal or vegetable kind, formed and nourished under so great a degree of heat,
as predominates here in summer, is not so well able to bear these great
changes, as it would otherwise be; for strangers, who remove hither from
colder, or more northern latitudes, are observed generally to bear them better,
at first, than the natives of the country, or such as have lived long in it;
and the lives of both animals and vegetables, as they mostly arrive sooner at
maturity, are generally of shorter duration, than in some of the more northern,
or temperate climates; hence, in winter, every green thing of the gramineous
kind appears to be entirely dead; and that beautiful verdure, which, in
England, remains to adorn the ground round the year, is not to be seen here, in
that season; and the effect of these great and sudden changes, even, in the
human species itself, in various respects, is, in proportion, no less
conspicuous, in this country. Dr. Douglas, in his summary historical and
political, etc. of the British settlements in America, before mentioned,
observes,

"As New England lies in the leeward of the westerly extended continent of
North America, the winds (being generally westerly) glading continually along
this vast tract of land, much heated in summer, and much cooled, or frozen, in
winter, occasion the country to be much hotter in summer, and much cooler in
winter, than in Great Britain: reciprocations, but not to extremes, are
salutary to the constitution, where the transitions are gradual; thus we may
observe in nature, that for the benefit of the earth's produce, there is a
reciprocation of summer and winter, day and night, etc In countries where the
seasons are upon the extremes, in summer and winter, as in New England,
constitutions do not wear well, analogous to the timber and plank of a ship
between wind and water. Longevity appears mostly in island countries, where,
with a small latitude, or variation, the temperature of the air continue.




Nature of the land and soil, etc.
In a province of so large extent as that of Pennsylvania, the nature and
quality of the land and soil must consequently be various; yet much more of a
similarity, in this respect, runs through the whole of it, at least, so far as
at present cultivated, than is to be found in the same extent, any where in
England.

If the lands be divided into three parts, or kinds, according to the present
application, use and suitableness of them, viz. grazing, arable and barren, or
least useful, the first is but a very small proportion; and there is not much,
that may properly be called very rich, or good grass land, in it (I mean so far
as at present improved) when compared with that of some other countries,
excepting near rivers, creeks, and runs of water; where in the valleys, and
such low places as are enriched by the floods and washing down of the soil,
from the hills and uplands, and longest retain moisture, the land is the most
fertile, and commonly appropriated to grass: but then these places generally
are more unhealthy, being very subject to agues, intermittent and slow fevers,
while in the more elevated, poor and barren situations, which are less
profitable to the cultivator, the inhabitants mostly enjoy a clearer air, and
better state of health.

The second sort of land, which is far the greatest part of what is, at
present, improved, is rather of a poor, shallow, or middling kind of soil; but,
as much of it is of a strong, clayey, or loamy nature, and in some places
abounds with limestone, it is mostly very capable of improvement, even after it
has been much worn out by bad management, and is, for the most part, very
suitable for grain; to which use it is chiefly applied, so far back in the
country as improvement has hitherto advanced.

Of the third kind of land, in the province, which is of very little, or no
value, it is difficult to ascertain the quantity; but, in diverse places of the
more remote and mountainous parts, no small proportion of the land is so
broken, stony, rocky, or barren, as to be either from its present situation,
not worth improving, or otherwise entirely incapable of culture; some places
scarcely producing any tree, or vegetable, whatever; and others, at best, only
those of the most dwarfish, or shrubby kind.

Face of the country, mountains, rivers, etc.

All the land situated south-westward of Hudson's or North River, See Lewis
Evans's analysis, etc
to the north boundary of Carolina, in latitude 36, may be divided into
different and regular stages; in which the first object to be observed, is a
remarkable rief or vein of rocks, of the talky, or isinglass kind, arising
generally a little higher than the adjoining land, and extending from New York
city south-westerly, by the lower falls of Delaware, at Trenton; by those of
Schuylkill, a little above Philadelphia; of Susquehanna, a few miles above the
head of Chesapeak bay; and of Gunpowder and Palapseo rivers, in Maryland; of
Potomack, Rapahannock, and James River, in Virginia; and of Roanoak in North
Carolina.

This is supposed to have been a former maritime boundary of this part of
America, and forms a very regular curve. The land between this rief and the
sea, from the Navesink hills, near Shrewsbury, in East Jersey, south westward
along the whole coast, Lower Plains.
may be denominated the Lower Plains; which consists of soil, washed down from
above, and of sand, accumulated from the ocean.

Where these plains are not penetrated by rivers, they are white sea sand,
about twenty feet deep, and entirely barren. But the borders of the rivers,
which descend from the uplands, are rendered fertile by the soil washed down by
the floods, and mixed with the sand, gathered from the sea: the substratum of
sea mud, shells, and other foreign subjects, are a sufficient confirmation of
this supposition.

Hence for forty or fifty miles inland from the sea shore, excepting as above,
all the space from the Navesinks to Cape Florida, is entirely barren, where the
wash, from the upland, has not enriched the borders of the rivers; or where
some ponds, or defiles, have not furnished proper support for the growth of
white cedars.

Vein of clay, etc.
There is commonly a vein of clay seaward of the Isinglass Rief, from three to
four miles wide; which is a coarse fuller's earth; and, with a proper mixture
of loam, is excellently well adapted for bricks: at, or near, which vein of
clay, that part of Pennsylvania, which is nearest the sea, or from about
Trenton, on Delaware, to the borders of Maryland, in general commences; and
Philadelphia is partly situated upon it.

From this rief of rocks, over which all the rivers fall, (as before mentioned)
to that chain of broken hills, commonly called the South Mountain, there is a
space of very uneven ground, extending, in different places, fifty, sixty, or
seventy miles, and rising sensibly on advancing further inland; which space may
be denominated the upland. The upland etc.
This consists of veins of different kinds of soil and substrata, for some
scores of miles in length; and, in some places it is overlaid with little
chains of hills. The declivity of the whole gives a great rapidity to the
streams of water; where the violent gusts of wind and rain, to which the
climate, in hot seasons, is very subject, have washed, or wore, it much into
gullies, and carried down the soil, to enrich the borders of the rivers, in the
lower plains. These steep inequalities render much of the country not easily
capable of culture; whereby it is likewise impoverished, by reason of the
almost continual washing away of the richer mould, that covers the surface.

The South Mountain is not in ridges, South Mountain, etc.
like the Endless Mountains, so called, but in small, broken, steep, stony
hills; nor does it run with so much regularity. In some places it gradually
diminishes to nothing, not appearing again for some miles; and, in others, it
spreads several miles in breadth. Between the South Mountain, and the high
chain of the Endless Mountains, (often for distinction, called the North
Mountain, and in some places, the Kittatinni and Pequelin) there is a valley of
pretty even good land, from eight to ten or twenty miles wide, which is perhaps
some of the best land, if not the most considerable quantity of it, that the
English at present, (about the year 1753, when most of these observations, on
the face of the country, were made and published by Lewis Evans of
Philadelphia) are possessed of, or have improved; it runs through New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia; and is every where enriched with limestone.

The Endless Mountains, Endless Mountai^s etc.
which is the Indian name translated, and expressive of their unknown (...),
are the next in order, and make the fourth stage. They are not confusedly
scattered, in lofty peaks, over-topping one another, but stretch in long
uniform ridges, scarce half a mile perpendicular, in any place, above the
intermediate valleys. (...) ^ome place^ (...) toward the Kaats-Kill mountains,
near the head of Delaware river, in New York government, and the head of
Roanoak, in the south west part of Virginia, they appear to terminate; but, in
a little space, they spread out again into new branches, apparently as
extensive as before. The further chain, or Allegenny ridge of mountains, keeps
mostly on a parallel with the Isinglass Rief, and terminates in a rough, stony
place, at the head of Roanoak and New River, on the borders of Virginia, and
Carolina. The more easterly chains, as they run further southward, trend, or
spread themselves more and more westerly; whereby the upland and rich valley,
before mentioned, are so much wider in Virginia, than further north; and which
causes them to meet and intersect the Allegenny mountains.

Some chains of these mountains are single narrow ridges; as the Kittatinni;
some spread two or three miles broad, on the top; others steep on one side, and
extend with a long slope, on the other; and the steeper they are, the more
^^ky; but they are every where woody, where the soil is proper and sufficient
to support the trees. Toward the further ridges, north eastward, the mountains
consist of rich land; and in some places, they are only as large as broad
banks, three or four miles across. In the way to Ohio, by Franks Town, in
Pennsylvania, being past the Allegenny mountains, the ground is rough, in many
places, and continues so to the river. Laurel Hill, etc.
Near this place the Laurel Hill springs from the mountains, and continues,
though not large, in a very regular chain, it is thought, to the Ouasioto
mountain, or the southern branches of the Ohio. For though the Allegenny is the
most westerly, on the west branch of Susquehanna river, in Pennsylvania, yet it
is far from being so in Virginia. Except the further ridges, last mentioned,
there is but little good land in the mountains; and not one-tenth part is
capable of culture; Not much good land in the mountains, etc.
but what small quantity there is, consists of extreme rich soil, in lawns on
the river sides; being so much rich mud subsided there, and commonly gathered
above falls, formerly in drowned lands, and now drained, by the rivers wearing
channels through the rocks.

To the north westward of the Endless Mountains is a country of vast extent,
and, in a manner, as high as the mountains themselves. The abrupt termination
thereof, near the sea level, as, on the west side of Hudson's, or North river,
below Albany, appears like a very high mountain. Upper Plains.
For Kaats-Kills, though of more lofty stature than any other mountains, in
these parts of America, are but the continuation of the plains, on the top; and
the cliffs of them, in the front, they represent toward Kinderhook. These
upper plains consist of extraordinary rich land, and extend from the Mohocks
river through the country of the Confederate, or Six Nation, Indians. Their
termination northward is at a little distance from lake Ontario, near latitude
43; but where it is westward is unknown; for those most extensive plains of
Ohio are part of them, which continue to widen, as they extend further
westward, even far beyond the Mississippi; and their boundary southward is a
little chain of broken hills, about ten or fifteen miles south of the river
Ohio.

The Delaware and Susquehanna, Of the tide in these rivers, etc.
rivers of Pennsylvania, at, or near their heads, approach, as is supposed,
within less than thirty or forty miles of Hudson's, or New York river: and so
near to the former does the tide flow up the last mentioned river; whereas the
Delaware runs, perhaps, about one hundred ^^d fifty miles, and the Susquehanna,
probably near two hundred miles, down their channel ^ before they meet the
tide; which phenomenon (...) ^sily explained, when it is considered, that the
^elaware and Susquehanna have their heads in these plains, and Hudson's, or
North River, has the tide at the foot, or bottom of them.

The flat country, lower plains, which lies between the falls and the sea, is,
for the most part, well watered with beautiful bays, rivers and creeks,
navigable for all sorts of vessels. Salt marshes, etc.
All the creeks on Delaware bay, the verges of the sounds, which extend along
the sea coast, and some creeks in Virginia, and toward the head of Chesapeak
bay, on the west side, are bordered with salt marshes; some a mile or two wide.

Advantage of the hilly ^ountry, etc.
Those parts of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, between the
Isinglass Vein, and the North Mountain, slope toward the sea with great
declivity; whereby the rivers and rivulets have great rapidity, and are
excellently well adapted for all sorts of mills, turned by water; a great
advantage to some of these middle colonies, where bread and flour are the
staple of commerce. In the Endless Mountains the rivers are generally stony and
rapid; and, in some places, where interrupted with riefs of rocks, not yet worn
to the level, they fall in cataracts; and above such places they are generally
dead and slow, or spread in ponds, and drown the surrounding lands. In the
elevated flats, which form the country of the Confederate, or Six Nation,
Indians, and on the Ohio, the rivers are generally easy in their currents; and
as that country is of vast extent, they are large and excellently accommodated
for inland navigation.

Part of the east end of lake Erie is said to be within the bounds of
Pennsylvania; Lake Erie, etc.
it being supposed to be rather south of, or within, the 42d degree of north
latitude, and between four and five degrees of longitude west from
Philadelphia. It is a beautiful fresh water lake; is said to have a fine sandy
shore on the north, as well as in many places on the other sides of it,
especially toward the south east part, bordering on Pennsylvania. The weather
and temperature of the air is accounted more moderate there, than at lake
Ontario, (at whose east end is Oswego, in latitude 43 17 N.) and the other
great lakes; which are all situated further north; See Carver's travels, etc.
it extends perhaps two hundred and fifty miles east and west, and near sixty
or seventy north and south; it communicates with the lake Ontario, on the north
east part of it, by the straits cataract of Niagara; and on the north west,
with the lake Huron, by a strait called by the French Detroit, passable by
large vessels.

The water, or straits of Niagara, Straits and fall of Niagara.
at the place of the famous and stupendous fall, or cataract, of that name, is
said to run from S. S. E. to N. N. W. where the rocks, which form the great
fall, extend in a semicircle one thousand and eighty feet across it. This fall
is asserted to be one hundred and thirty-seven feet perpendicular; and to be
sometimes heard at the distance of fifteen leagues: most of the water, which
runs from these large lakes, on the N. W. viz. Lake Superior, See P. Kalm's
travels, etc.
Lake Michigan, Lake Huron, and Lake Erie, passes this fall, in its way to Lake
Ontario, and from thence to the river St. Lawrence.

Hudson's, or North River, Hudson's or North River.
at whose entrance stands the city of New York, in north latitude 40 42, has
the tide and a good depth of water, for sloops, to Albany, near one hundred and
fifty miles, into the upland, in a north direction; and opens communication
with the inland parts of the continent, of very great importance; while all the
rivers south-westward, as before observed, are navigable by sea vessels in the
lower flats only.

Delaware river, etc.
Delaware river, which divides Pennsylvania from New Jersey, from its head, in
latitude about 42 north, down to Trenton falls, with all its curves and
windings, forms a general course nearly north and south, but a little westward,
of above one hundred and fifty miles; and in that space is said to have
fourteen considerable rifts, principally below Easton, in Northampton county;
yet all passable at times, in the long flat boats, used in the navigation of
these parts; some of them carrying from five to six hundred bushels of wheat.
The worst rifts, or those called falls, are fourteen miles above Easton; and
from thence, in different places; for the space of thirty miles, down to
Trenton; yet these are all surmounted in freshes, or in floods, by the boats,
as far as from the Menesinks. The north station point, on the east side of
Delaware, from which the line, which divides the government of New York from
New Jersey, is drawn, to Hudson's, or New York, river, is in north latitude 41
40, and above the Menesinks.


West branch of Delaware.
The west branch of Delaware, called the Lehi, which goes off at Easton, and
waters the county of Northampton, is but inconsiderable, compared with the
north east branch, already described. From Trenton, where the river meets the
tide, to Philadelphia, the Delaware runs about thirty miles, navigable for sea
vessels; and from Philadelphia to the sea, it is above one hundred miles, along
the course of the river and bay; first, in a south west, and then in a south
east direction; the river is near a mile broad at the city of Philadelphia.

Sculkil river, etc.
Sculkil is a fine branch of the Delaware; into which it falls about four miles
below Philadelphia; and up which the tide flows about five miles above the
city, to the falls; three or four miles above which falls are others; all
passable with large boats, in freshes, down to the city. From these falls to
Reading, in the county of Berks, for forty or fifty miles into the interior
parts of the province, through the counties of Philadelphia and Berks, it forms
a fine gliding stream, easily set against, or overcome, with poles; as the
bottom is generally even; and in moderate seasons, will furnish fifteen or
sixteen inches of water, at least, in the shallowest places, all the way: it is
capable of much improvement, for the advantage of both town and country. Or
Schuil-Kill (i. e. hidden creek, or channel) called also Skoolkill; and by the
native Indians, Manijunk, according to an old Swedish MS.


There are besides a considerable number of navigable streams, or creeks, which
run into the Delaware, both on the Jersey and Pennsylvania sides of it, both
above and below Philadelphia; which afford an easy conveyance of country
produce to that, city; but, in general, they are navigable only with small
vessels, for a short distance into the country.

Delaware bay is said to be sixty miles long, Delaware bay, etc.
from the capes to the entrance of the river at Bombay Hook; and so wide in
some places, that a ship, in the middle of it, cannot be seen from the land. It
opens into the Atlantic Ocean south east, between cape Hinlopen on the west,
and cape May, on the east; these capes are about eighteen miles distant from
each other; the former in the territories of Pennsylvania, and the latter in
New Jersey. Of the streams, which empty into this bay, Maurice river, in New
Jersey, is accounted one of the largest; and is said to be navigable for
vessels of one hundred tons fifteen miles, and for shallops, or small vessels,
ten miles further.

This bay and river are said to have been named from the title of -- West, Lord
de la war, Governor of Virginia, about the year 1611; but the Indian name,
according to an old Swedish manuscript, was Poutaxat.

Susquahanna river etc.
Susquahanna river rises beyond the north boundary of Pennsylvania, from two
small lakes, in about 43 north latitude, and eastward of Philadelphia, in the
government of New York; it runs thence a considerable way southward, and then
south westward, in a very crooked, or winding course, into the interior parts
of Pennsylvania, then turning eastward, it continues in a south east direction,
till it enters Maryland; whence, proceeding a few miles, within that province,
it afterward falls into the upper part, or head, of Chesapeak bay, after a
course of, perhaps, about two hundred and fifty miles, being above a mile wide
in some places near its mouth; but much of it shallow, in proportion to its
breadth. It is navigable for canoes quite from the lakes, at the head of it, to
the falls of Conewago, in York county. There are no falls in the upper part of
the river, till about three miles below Wioming, in Northumberland county; but
from thence to Conewago there are several. The falls of Conewago are the worst;
and below these are several others. By reason of these falls this large river
has no continued inland navigation to near its mouth; nor for sea vessels above
(...) miles from the head of the bay.

The most considerable branches of the Susquahanna are Owege, Tohiccon or
Cayuga, Senashe, or West Branch, Juniata, Swatara, Conewago, and Codorus, which
waters Yorktown; and Conestogo, which runs by, or near, Lancaster. Tohiccon
promises well for a good navigation with canoes, to near the head Note. Owege
is in north latitude 41 55.

Shamokin near the junction of the East and West Branches of Susquehanna, is in
latitude 40 40.


of Allegenny river; it being a large and gentle stream. The West Branch is
said to be shallow and rapid, but has scarce any falls in it. Juniata, which
runs through Cumberland county, is said to be a fine navigable stream for a
great distance.

The large and beautiful bay of Chesapeak may properly be called the bay of
Susquahanna, Chesapeak bay, etc.
though all the large rivers of Maryland and Virginia likewise empty themselves
into it. This bay is said to be near one hundred leagues in length, to the sea;
and in some places near twenty miles broad, interspersed with islands, and
navigable for large ships, the whole length of it.

Between this bay and that of Delaware, Peninsula between the bays, etc.
is situate the peninsula, which is composed of the three lower counties on
Delaware, or the territories of Pennsylvania, on the east, and part of
Maryland, on the west and south, with that part of Virginia, on the most
southern part of it, which is called Accomac, etc.

The length of this peninsula north and south, from the most southern point of
cape Charles, in latitude about 37 12 to the head of Chesapeak bay, near
latitude 39 35, is probably about one hundred and seventy miles; its breadth
near Lewistown, or cape Hinlopen, is about seventy miles; but from thence it
decreases in breadth both northward and southward; so that opposite to Reedy
Island, or near the head of Chesapeak, it is only about twenty-five miles broad.

The many navigable waters, or creeks, Navigable creeks, etc. See Lewis Evans's
analysis, etc
on each side of this peninsula, which run into their respective bays, on the
east and west, are of great advantage here; some of which are described, as
follows:

Large sloops may pass to Snow Hill, on Pokomoke river, or creek, which runs
into the lower part of Chesapeak bay; the portage is five miles from thence to
Sinepuxen sound, on the sea, where ships may come.

Shallops may go up Nanticoke river, from the lower part of the same bay, near
twenty miles into the Delaware counties; the portage from thence to Indian
river, which runs into the sea below Lewis Town, is about thirteen miles, and
to Broad Creek twelve.

Choptank, in Maryland, is navigable for shallops to the bridge, about six or
seven miles within the Delaware counties; and the portage to Motherkill, which
runs into the middle of Delaware bay, is fifteen miles.

From Chester or Newton, river, in the same province, to Salisbury, on Duck
creek, which runs into the Delaware, below Reedy Island, the portage is
thirteen miles: and from Sassafras river there is another portage to the same
place, thirteen miles also.

From Frederick town to Sassafras river, in Maryland, where good ships may
come, there is a portage to Cantwell's bridge, on Apoquiminy, which runs into
Delaware near Reedy Island, fourteen miles.

From Bohemia river, in the same province, where large flats, or small shallops
may come, the portage to Cantwell's bridge, being low ground, is only eight
miles. N. B. This is much frequented; and as the ground, in this place, is very
low, so that a canal may be easily made here at a small expense, in proportion
to the certain and great advantage, which might arise; whereby a navigable
communication to Philadelphia, from Maryland and Virginia, with the western
parts of Pennsylvania, might be effected without going to sea; which
undoubtedly would raise the value of the lands in these provinces, and advance
their commercial interest by increasing the markets for their produce, and
giving a spring to industry, etc.
All these creeks, which run into the Delaware, will receive large shallops,
but no larger vessels.

Christeen and Brandywine creeks, etc.
From the head of Elk river, where shallops may come from the upper part of
Chesapeak bay, in Maryland, the portage is twelve miles to Christeen bridge, in
Newcastle county; from which place Christeen creek is navigable, by the south
side of Wilmington, to Delaware river; and is capable of sea vessels of above
one hundred tons burden several miles above Wilmington; a little below which
place before it enters the Delaware, it is joined by the Brandywine; a creek,
which has its course on the north side of Wilmington, distant about a mile from
Christeen, and extends into the interior parts of Chester county, in
Pennsylvania, This creek is not navigable above the rocks, or falls, two or
three miles distant from its mouth, and nearly opposite to Wilmington, where it
has a good bridge over it, on the road to Philadelphia, distant about
twenty-seven miles; but this stream is not the less useful, in this corn
country, Mills of Brandywine, etc.
for the many excellent grist mills, situated upon the sides of it, especially
near Wilmington, called the Brandywine mills; where the tide, with convenient
shipping, come up to the very doors of diverse of them.

This creek and that of Wissahiccon, which runs into Sculkil, a little above
Philadelphia, And of Wissahiccon.
are noted for the best, and most numerous grist mills, either in this
province, or any other part of British America, within the same extent of
country; and which, perhaps, are not inferior in quality to any in the world.

Potowmack river, Potowmack river.
which runs into Chesapeak bay, and divides Maryland from Virginia, is very
broad, and navigable for large ships, as far as Alexandria, about perhaps one
hundred miles from the bay; and is likely in future to become a very important,
if not the sole water carriage from the country about the head of Ohio, to the
ocean, in this part of America.

Allegenny and Ohia rivers.
Allegenny river takes its rise near latitude 42 northward of Pennsylvania, and
about two or three degrees of longitude west from Philadelphia; afterward it
runs many miles within that province, first south-westerly to Venango, and then
more southerly to Pittsburg, where being joined by the Monongahela, a very
large stream, it thence takes the name of Ohio, and turning westerly proceeds
to the Mississippi. But both these names, Allegenny and Ohio, originally
signify the same thing, in different Indian languages; Ohio in the Seneca, and
Allegenny, in the Delaware Indian language, (...) ^ick^ (...) ^nal, (...)
signifies the Fine, or Fair River; and the whole stream, from its head, to its
junction with the Mississippi, was so denominated by these re^^ective Indian
nations.

When the winter snows thaw, in the sp^^n^ this river is said to rise, in some
places, more than twenty feet perpendicular; but scarce ever overflows its high
banks. It keeps a great uniformity of breadth, gradually increasing from two or
three furlongs, at Pittsburg, to near a mile; and still growing so much larger
before it reaches the Mississippi, that its breadth, depth and easy current are
supposed to equal those of any river in Europe, except the Danube. Note.
Shanoppin's town, an Indian settlement on the Allegenny, near Pittsburg, is
said to be in north latitude 40 26 and is supposed to be about five degrees of
longitude west from the Delaware at Philadelphia, the extent of Pennsylvania
east and west.

The north east branch of the Allegenny is said to interlock with the Cainga
branch of Susquehanna.




PART II.
The chorography, -- division into counties, -- principal towns -- produce and
chief staple of the country, with its great increase and variety. -- Trade and
commerce. -- Present inhabitants; their great increase, etc. -- City of
Philadelphia. -- Other considerable towns, etc. -- Internal police, and courts
of judicature in Pennsylvania, with the public officers in 1772.

HAVING thus far given a general account of the soil, face of the country,
mountains, rivers, etc. besides the geographical description of the province,
in respect to its situation and extent, as expressed in the royal charter, and
in the dispute between Penn and Baltimore, in the preceding history, by which
its real extent, north and south, appears to be no more than about one hundred
and fifty-seven miles, instead of two hundred and eight, as intended by
charter, and about two hundred and sixty east and west, it may be proper, in
the next place, to exhibit a sketch of the divisions, into which the settled or
improved and located part of it is formed, etc.

The settled, and located part of Pennsylvania, which, perhaps, is near
two-thirds of the province, is now divided into eleven counties; and each of
these again is subdivided into a number of townships. Number and names of the
counties in Pennsylvania.
The counties situated between the rivers Delaware and Susquahanna are called
the counties of Philadelphia, Bucks, Chester, Lancaster, Berks, and
Northampton; the counties on the west side of Susquahanna are those of York,
Cumberland, Bedford, and Westmoreland; which is the last established, and
extends westward as far as Pittsburg, inclusive, or to the western boundary of
the province; which boundary, though not yet absolutely fixed, is supposed to
be so far west, at least, or near that place: these, with the county of
Northumberland, situated on both sides of Susquahanna, northward, and upon the
forks of that river, are all the counties, which are yet ascertained: but the
more northern, and north west parts of Pennsylvania, being not yet taken up, or
purchased from the Indians, remain still in their possession, though they are
here supposed to be included in the exterior back counties.

The three first mentioned counties of Philadelphia, Bucks and Chester, with
those of Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, on Delaware (which last are already
described in another place) were laid out and named by the Proprietary William
Penn, in conjunction with the first and early purchasers, when he was the first
time in the country. The boundaries, or division lines, of the three former,
are said to have been fixed according to his mind, or direction, signified to
some of his friends, before he left the province, and afterward confirmed by
the provincial Council, on the first day of the second month, 1685. "At a
council held at Philadelphia first of second month, 1685, present, Thomas
Holme, President, and nine others: the line of separation between the countries
of Philadelphia and Bucks, and of Philadelphia and Chester, were now confirmed,
according to the Proprietary's intention signified to some of his friends while
here.

"The county of Chester was to begin at the mouth, or entrance of Bough Creek,
upon Delaware river, being the upper end of Tenecum island; and (...) up that
creek, dividing the said island from the land of Andrew Boon^ and company; from
thence along the several courses thereof, to a large creek, called Mill-creek;
from thence, along the several courses of the said creek, to a west-south-west
line; which line divides the liberty lands of Philadelphia from ^^veral tracts
of land, belonging to the Welsh and other inhabitants; and from thence
east-north-east, by a line of marked trees one hundred and twenty p^^^hes, more
or less; from thence north-north-west by Haverford township one thousand
perches, more or less; from thence east-north-east by the land belonging to
John Humphrey, one hundred and ten perches, more or less; from thence
north-north-west by the land of John Eckley, eight hundred and eighty perches,
more or less; from thence continuing said course to the bounds of Sculkil
river; which said Sculkil river afterward to be the natural bounds.

"The line between Bucks and Philadelphia counties was more particularly set
forth in a proclamation, agreed on at a council, held the eighth of the second
month, this year, Thomas Lloyd, President.

"To begin at the mouth of Poetquessing creek, on Delaware river, and to go up
thence along the said creek, and by the several courses thereof to a south west
and north east line; which said line divides the land belonging to Joseph
Growdon and company, from Southampton township; from thence by a line of marked
trees, along the said line one hundred and twenty perches, more or less; from
thence north west by a line of marked trees; which said line, in part, divided
the land, belonging to Nicholas Moore from Southampton and Warminster
townships, confirming said line so far as the said county shall extend." MS.

Note. Adjoining, or near, the lower side of Poetquessing creek, on the side of
the Delaware, is an elevated piece of ground, said to have been first intended
for the situation of the city, till maturer considera^i^n determined the place
for that purpose where Philadelphia now stands. MS.




The south east boundary of these three counties is the river Delaware;
Boundaries of the countries of Philadelphia, Bucks and Chester.
which river likewise is the north east limit of Bucks county, as the circular
line, drawn twelve miles distant from Newcastle northward and westward from the
river Delaware, with part of the north boundary of Maryland, is that of the
county of Chester, on the south. They are now bounded on the west, and north
west, by the counties of Lancaster, Berks and Northampton.

These three counties, of which Philadelphia is in the middle, Bucks on the
north east, and Chester on the south west of it, extend about seventy miles in
length, north east, Their situation, etc.
from the Maryland line, to the Delaware, on the upper, or north east side of
Bucks county, and about forty miles in breadth, north westward from the
Delaware, at Philadelphia, to their north west boundary, which has ^^^^ly a
north east, and south west direction. Chester county is considerably the
largest of the three; Bucks is smaller than that of Philadelphia, but there is
not much difference in the size and extent of these two counties, though the
l^tter contains many more inhabitants than any other county in the province, on
account of the city of Philadelphia being within its limits. The capitals of
the other two counties are the old borough towns of Bristol in Bucks, and
Chester in Chester county; both situated on the river Delaware; the former
about twenty miles north east, and the latter fifteen miles south west from
Philadelphia, being noted for several good inns, for the accommodation and
entertainment of travelers; but they both have appeared in late years, to be
on the decline; and the county courts, for Bucks county, have for some years
past, been held at Newtown, in the said county.

Lancaster county, etc.
Lancaster county, which before was the north west part of Chester county, was
established by law, in the year 1729; bounded by Octoraro creek, which running
into Susquahanna, divides it from Chester county, and by part of the Maryland
line, on the south; and on the eastward, by a line running from the north
branch of the said creek, north easterly, to the river Sculkil: it is now
limited at about sixty miles in length north west and south east, and in
breadth north east and south west, about thirty miles; having the river
Susquahanna on the south west and north west, and the county of Berks on the
north east of it. Its capital is the borough of Lancaster, situated about one
mile from Conestogo creek, which runs into Susquahanna river. It is about
sixty-six miles west from Philadelphia, and consists of about seven hundred
dwelling houses, besides other buildings; but this county contains several
other considerable towns.

York county, etc.
York county, on the west side of Susquahanna, was established by law in 1749;
when it was separated from Lancaster county, and bounded northward and westward
by a line run from the river Susquahanna, along the ridge of the South
Mountain, till it intersects the Maryland line; southward by the said Maryland
line; and eastward by the river Susquahanna; which divides it from Lancaster
county. This county is almost of a triangular form; whose longest side, next
Maryland, is about sixty miles; the other two sides about fifty miles each. It
now has Cumberland county on the north west. Its capital is York town,
containing about four hundred dwelling houses, situated on Codorus creek which
runs into Susquahanna, and is about eighty-six miles westward from Philadelphia.

Cumberland county, westward of Susquahanna, Cumberland county, etc.
and north-westward of the county of York, was divided from Lancaster county,
and established by law in 1749; then bounded northward and westward by the
line, or boundary, of the province, and eastward partly by the river
Susquahanna, which divides it from Lancaster county; and by the county of York,
and the Maryland line, or boundary on the south; it now has Bedford county, on
the west, and part of Northumberland on the north of it. It is of an irregular
figure extending about seventy miles in length north and south, and in breadth
east and west about fifty in the broadest, and twenty miles in the narrowest
part. Its chief town, Carlisle, is about one hundred and twenty miles
north-north-west from Philadelphia, situated near Conedogwinet creek; which
runs into Susquahanna: it is a good town, but not so large as York, or Reading.

Berks county, Berks county, etc.
which before was included in the north part of the counties of Philadelphia,
Chester and Lancaster, was established by law in 1752; being then bounded and
divided from these counties by a line at the distance of ten miles south west
from the western bank of the river Sculkil, opposite to the mouth of a creek,
called Monocacy; thence north west to the extremity of the province; and south
east, till it intersects the line of Chester county; then by a right line,
crossing the river Sculkil, to the upper, or north westward, line of M'Call's
manor; then along the said line to the extremity thereof; and continuing the
same course to the line dividing Philadelphia and Bucks counties; then along
the said line north west to the extent of the county aforesaid.

This county, at present, has that of Lancaster, on the south west,
Northumberland on the north west, Northampton on the north east, and those of
Philadelphia and Chester on the south east. It is about fifty miles long north
west and south east, and thirty broad north east and south west. Its principal
town is Reading, situated on, or near, the river Sculkil, about fifty-six miles
north west from Philadelphia. "In the year 1751 it contained one hundred and
thirty dwelling houses, besides stables and other buildings, one hundred and
six families, three hundred and seventy-eight inhabitants, though about two
years before it had not above one house in it." It is now near three times as
large, and contains about as many houses, etc. as York.

Northampton county, etc.
Northampton county, which before was included in the north west part of Bucks
county, was divided from it, and established by law in 1752: it was then
bounded and separated from the said county of Bucks, by the upper, or north
westward line of Durham tract, to the upper corner thereof; then by a right
line south westerly, to the line dividing Philadelphia and Bucks counties, and
then by that line to the extremity of the province. But this county, at
present, has that of Northumberland on the north west, and Berks on the south
west of it; and it is bounded by the Delaware, on the south east and north
east. It extends in length, north east and south west about seventy miles, and
is perhaps forty miles broad, north west and south east. Easton is its capital
town, situated in the forks of Delaware, about sixty miles north from
Philadelphia.

The other three are frontier counties, in the back parts of the province, next
the Indians: they were laid out but very lately, and, as yet, are but thinly
inhabited, and little improved, being the most remote from the capital of the
province.

The natural, Produce of Pennsylvania.
or original produce of Pennsylvania, in regard to animals and vegetables, or
trees and fruits, as well as the original inhabitants, etc. has already, in
part, been mentioned, in William Penn's account of them, in the preceding
history: maize, or Indian corn, is an original; and strawberries, with grapes,
of various kinds, grow natural in the woods, as well as mulberries, etc. Deer,
among the quadrupeds, and wild turkeys, among the winged tribe, were formerly
very plentiful, but now scarce, etc.

But most kinds of European grain and fruits, as well as domestic, or tame
animals, have been naturalized here; some of the fruits have been meliorated by
the change, while others degenerate. But the principal staple of Pennsylvania
and its vicinity, is wheat, flour, rye, Indian corn, etc. which will appear in
the following account of exports from the port of Philadelphia, where the trade
of the province principally centers.

The ground abounds with iron ore, in many places, as well as with marble and
limestone, etc. in others; from the former of which, great quantities of pig
and bar iron, castings, etc. are made both for exportation and home use. But
the woods have hitherto been still more remarkable for their abundance of
timber, not only for home consumption, and ship building, but also for the
various articles, exported under the name of lumber, etc. in which it is said
there are above seventeen different species, or varieties, of oak alone, etc.

Produce and staple of Pennsylvania.
It is supposed that, at least, two-thirds, if not three-fourths, of the
cleared, or improved lands, at this time, are arable. The soil, in general,
being naturally more adapted for grain, than grass; wheat, rye and Indian corn
suit it well. Other grain, as barley, oats, etc. being here mostly of inferior
quality to those of some other parts of the world, are more seldom raised in
very considerable quantity, in this province: Indian corn and buck-wheat
supplying the use of these in diverse respects.

The country abounds with excellent mills, turned by water, for various
purposes, but chiefly for grinding of grain; for which it is well adapted, by
reason of its uneven surface, many hills, rivulets, or creeks, so that
generally more flour and bread, in latter years, have been exported from hence,
than wheat, or grain, unmanufactured: besides, the quantity of flaxseed
annually raised here, and shipped to Ireland, has been very considerable; as
well as that of barrelled pork, to the West Indies, and other markets, etc.

Its increase, etc.
The gradual increase of a part only of the principal staple of Pennsylvania,
appears by the following account of the annual value of wheat, flour and
flaxseed alone exported from the port of Philadelphia in the years mentioned,
taken from the journals of Assembly and other authentic documents, viz.

In 1731, when wheat was 26 per bushel, and flaxseed about 48 L. 62,584 0 1 In
1749, when wheat was 53 per bushel, and flaxseed about 108 L. 148,104 4 11 In
1750, when wheat was 4 per bushel, and flaxseed about 10 L. 155,174 19 6 In
1751, when wheat was 310 per bushel, and flaxseed about 66 L. 187,457 11 1 In
1765, when wheat was 53 per bushel, and flaxseed about 93 L. 422,614 0 0 In
1772, See the exports of the two last years further on in page 269 and 271. In
1772, the flour alone consisted of 282,872 barrels, averaging about 2 Cwt.
each, here computed at six bushels per barrel. But if the flour be estimated at
20 per Cwt. the value of that one article alone will be L 565,744, exclusive of
the other article of bread, wheat and flaxseed, which, with the Indian corn
exported that year, will make the whole amount, in these articles, above L.
700,000, in 1772.

Note. The quantity of grain, flour and bread only (including Indian corn)
exported from British America, in the year 1774, as published in the
Pennsylvania journal of July 5th, 1775, when reduced to bushels, amounted to
about five millions and an half, proportioned nearly, as follows:

From Virginia above 1,000,000 bushels. Maryland near 600,000 Philadelphia
above 2,100,000 New York near 1,500,000 Quebec 350,000 Total 5,550,000 bushels.

It may be further noted, that the quantity of corn exported from England, upon
an average of 19 years, preceding 1765, according to the accounts said to be
laid before the parliament, and preserved in the tracts on corn trade, is
730,000 quarters, or 5,840,000 bushels which, at L. 1 1 s 3 d 1-2 sterling per
quarter, amounts to L. 776,720 sterling per annum.

"By the best calculations, the corn which is exported is only about the six
and thirtieth part of what is raised in the nation, for an average of the last
sixty-eight years.

Tracts on corn trade, etc. page 144. "In the year 1750 were exported 1,500,220
quarters of corn from England, or above twelve millions of bushels; which
quantity exceeds that of the seed one-twelfth part.

"The export is bare one thirty-second part of the consumption, and one
thirty-third part of the growth, including the seed, and near one-third of the
seed itself, supposing it only one-tenth of the growth.

"The import has been one five hundred and one and seventieth part of the
consumption, and one-eighteenth part of the export, and never equalled but a
very small part of the growth," etc.

Universal magazine for December, 1776.
when wheat was 56 per bushel, and flaxseed about 8 L. 571,050 0 0
In which account it is manifest that the value of these exports was nearly
trebled every twenty years.

The export from Philadelphia in 1774, in grain, flour and bread alone, was
computed to be equal to about 2,170,000 bushels; of which 140,000 bushels
consisted of Indian corn, the whole at five shillings per bushel, amounts to L.
542,500, in value; and if the quantity of flaxseed was equal to that of the
next preceding year, it would make the whole value amount to above L. 600,000,
in these particular articles alone, at a very moderate computation.

Grass lands, etc.
The grass lands in the first settled, or old counties, are but a small
proportion, and are chiefly situated on the sides of rivers, creeks and
rivulets, or moist places, where, at times, they are partly overflowed, being
mostly very rich, and produce abundance, but of a rapid growth. Of this kind
are the large quantities of fine low meadows, near and about Philadelphia;
which, being secured by banks from the tides and floods of the Delaware, and
the creeks which run into it (by which they were formerly overflowed, and
tendered useless) are of very great and extraordinary advantage to that city.

Fruits.
Large orchards of apple trees are propagated in almost every plantation; which
every where produce great quantities of fine, large, well flavoured fruit; and
in some places peaches are so common and plentiful, that the country people
feed their hogs with them; likewise cherries, of various kinds, Liquors,
are no less abundant and good. But, though cider is the common drink of this
country, and very plentiful and easy to be procured, yet it is not made by the
inhabitants to such perfection as it is capable of. Besides, Lisbon and Madeira
wines, among the higher rank, and West India rum and spirits are much drank, in
mixture, by the people in general. And sometimes a kind of weak beverage is
used, made of a mixture of molasses, etc. which is called molasses beer. Malt
liquor, which among the first settlers, was more common, is made in some of the
principal towns, in small quantity. It has long been at times more or less an
article of exportation from Philadelphia. And the use of tea, coffee and
chocolate, etc. is very common.

But the liquors of the native growth and produce of the country, and
provisions, etc.
exclusive of what are imported from abroad, are, in general, but mean, or
scarce and inferior, compared with the provisions, which are good and
plentiful. This seems to arise, at least, in part, from too much neglect in
this particular, occasioned by getting rum and spirits at such exceeding low
rates from the West Indies, which has rendered malt liquor, though more
wholesome, and profitable for the country, less used than formerly, in the
early time of the province, in proportion to the number of people,
notwithstanding it is so great a grain country.

Besides, though grapes grow spontaneously, in great variety and abundance,
almost every where in the woods, etc. being natural to the country, and
laudable attempts have been made in making wine from them, yet not much has
hitherto been done in it to very considerable advantage. And as mulberry trees
are no less plentiful and natural to the soil than the grape vine, so silk has
already been attempted in Pennsylvania and New Jersey with much promising
success.

It is not my intention, as before mentioned, to give a minute, but only a
general account of the state of the province, at the time specified, so I shall
observe the same conduct in regard to its trade and produce, Trade and produce,
etc.
etc. which as exhibited in page 265, has manifestly trebled in value every
late twenty years; yet, not to mention the particulars of its surprising
increase, many and great improvements and manufactures, now here commenced and
carrying on, especially in and about Philadelphia, where many sugar houses have
been lately erected, and large quantities of excellent loaf sugar are made to
great perfection; which before was all imported; and glass is now (about the
year 1770) manufactured in its vicinity, etc. it may be proper to give, at
least, some idea of them in later years, by inserting the following account and
estimate, One year's native exports of Pennsylvania.
as it was published, in the Pennsylvania chronicle, in March, 1767, of the
particulars of one year's exports, from the port of Philadelphia, of the
product and manufacture of the province and its neighborhood, Note. In the
same year, the exports from New York were said to be 15,981 tons and
five-eights, computed at L. 251,932, exclusive as above excluded.
viz.

"Account of goods exported from the port of Philadelphia, between the 5th of
April, 1765, and the 5th of April, 1766.
367,522 bushels of wheat, 40 bushels=1 ton=9,188 tons at 5 3 per bushel, L
96,474 148,887 barrels of flour, 9 barrels=1 ton=16,543 tons. at 15 per Cwt.
251,246 34,736 barrels bread, 16 barrels=1 ton=2,171 tons. at 15 per barrel,
32,565 609 barrels of beef, 12 barrels=1 ton=50 tons at 60 per barrel, 1,827
6,647 barrels of pork, 12 barrels=1 ton=555 tons at 70 per barrel, 23,257 3,912
thousand staves, equal to 7,824 tons at 6 l per thousand, 23,472 358 thousand
headings, equal to 716 tons at 8 l per thousand, 2,864 2,114 thousand shingles,
equal to 200 tons at 20 per thousand, 2,114 60,205 bushels Indian corn, 40
bushels=1 ton=1,505 tons at 3 per bushel, 9,030 Bar iron, 882 tons at 26 l per
ton, 22,932 Pig iron, 813 tons at 7 l 10 s per ton, 6,097 1,644 boxes soap,
equal to 20 tons at 25 per box, 2,055 1,202 boxes candles, equal to 15 tons at
25 per box, 1,502 97 thousand hoops, equal to 20 tons at 70 per thousand, 339
164 cwt. tobacco, equal to 8 tons at 20 per cwt. 164 783 thousand feet boards,
equal to 1,566 tons at 76 per thousand, 2,740 1,288 barrels beer, 8 barrels=1
ton=161 tons at 30 per barrel, 1,932 238 kegs starch, equal to 6 tons at 35 per
keg, 416 12,094 hhds. flaxseed, 4 hhds.=1 ton=3,023 tons at 70 per hhd. 42,329
64 chests furs and skins, equal to 8 tons at 100 l per chest, 6,400 35 barrels
bees wax, equal to 4 tons at 25 l per barrel, 875 199 firkins lard, equal to 7
tons at 20 per firkin, 199 1,501 firkins butter (half Irish) equal to 20 tons
at 40 per firkin, 1,400 5,430 tons new vessels, including iron work, etc. 6 l
10 s per ton, 35,295 45,306 tons. L 567,521

"Besides logwood, fustic, mahogany, naval-stores, rice, and sundry other
articles of European, West India, and North American produce, exported from
hence; exclusive of cordage, for the use of new vessels, etc. provisions for
ships' use, staves for dunnage, and many other small articles."

Great increase of the trade of Pennsylvania, etc.
But the annual increase of the trade and produce, till about the year 1775, was
so great, that it was supposed, by the best judges, they doubled, at least,
during these last ten years; insomuch that all the exports of every kind to
Great Britain, and other markets, were computed at near L. 1,200,000, or above
L. 700,000 sterling, value per annum, upon an average of three years, ending
December, 1773; after which time, for the two next succeeding years, they
continued still greatly to increase: and the imports from Great Britain alone,
in manufactures, and other merchandise, into the port of Philadelphia
(exclusive of those from the West Indies, etc. in rum, sugar, molasses, etc.
which were very great) at above L. 600,000 sterling per annum, upon the same
average, at the same time.

An account of the former of which, taking into consideration the large home
consumption of Note. In the votes of Assembly, vol. iv. page 272, is exhibited
the gradual increase, and sterling value, of the whole exports from England
(exclusive of linen, etc. from Scotland and Ireland) to Pennsylvania, in the
following years, as,

In the year 1723 they amounted to L. 15,992 19 4 1730 48,595 7 5 1737 58,690 6
7 1742 75,295 3 4 1747 82,404 17 7 1751 1^0,917 15 1

In another account, said to be no less authentic, and taken from the Custom
House books, the exports and imports from and to England exclusive of Scotland,
etc. to and from Pennsylvania, in value of pounds sterling, appear to be,

Exports. Imports. In the year 1761 L. 206,199 L. 38,099 1762 284,152 38,228
1763 435,191 36,258 1764 363,368 25,148 1765 327,314 26,851


the same and other articles, in this populous province and its vicinity, at
the same time, may furnish a general idea of its trade and produce, etc. viz.
"An Aggregate and Valuation of the Exports from the port of Philadelphia, from
5th of January, 1771, to 5th of January, 1774, with the number of vessels and
tonnage employed therein, annually distinguished, etc.
1771. 1772. 1773. No. square rigged vessels, 361 370 426 No. sloops and
schooners, 391 390 370 Amount of tonnage, 46,654 46,841 46,972 Barrels of
flour, 252,744 284,872 265,967 Barrels of bread, 38,320 50,504 48,183 Bushels
of wheat, 51,699 92,012 182,391 Bushels Indian corn, 259,441 159,625 179,217
Barrels beef and pork, 5,059 3,849 8,587 Barrels of hams, 778 782 1,062 Tons of
iron, 2,358 2,205 1,564.16 Barrels of tar, 2,693 4,877 5,677 Barrels of pitch,
214 543 264 Barrels turpentine, 3,143 1,569 1,722 M. feet plank and board,
1,724 4,075 3,309 M. staves and heading, 6,188 5,867 5,114.1 M. hoops, 195 978
124.5 M. shingles, 1,937 1,765 5,254 Ho. walnut logs, 63 204 79 Feet of
mahogany, 108,441 142,962 63,255 Tons lignum vitae, 24 42 30 Chests deer skins,
93 164 37 Tons of logwood, 169 425 195 Pounds of furs, 290 1,200 40 Tons pot
ashes, 161 66 13 Cwt. brown sugar, 1,185 1,598 2,578 Pounds loaf sugar, 79,116
51,408 84,240 Gallons molasses, 52,611 19,681 39,403 Gallons rum, 204,456
247,635 277,693 Tons of wine, 24 118 172 86 Tons of oil, 22 42 45.88 Barrels of
fish, 5,128 5,776 6,430 Bushels flaxseed, 110,412 85,794 68,681 Pounds bees
wax, 29,261 50,140 64,546 Boxes spermaceti candles, 683 1,004 514 Boxes tallow
ditto, 873 1,078 1,165 Boxes soap, 2,936 3,831 3,^47 Kegs of lard, 399 734 ^^^
Boxes chocolate, 479 385 306 Cwt. coffee, 501 296 1,639 Bushels salt, 64,468
42,80^ 39,^92 Pounds cotton wool. 2,200 5,840 25,070 Barrels of beer, 1,236
1,798 1,395 Pounds of leather, 29,970 40,725 31,696 Pounds of rice, 258,3^5
834,974 998,400 Kegs of starch, 349 1,033 700 Sterling value annually
calculated.
1771. 1772. 1773. L. 631,554 14 10 L. 784,254 4 2 L. 720,135 13 7

The average sum is L. 711,974 17 6 sterling.

Note. The barrels of flour mentioned in the preceding aggregate, etc. averaged
about two hundred each: they are since by law fixed at one hundred and three
quarters each; hence the average number of the said barrels of flour, for these
three years, is about 306,000 of our present barrels; and in 1772 the export
was above 325,000 of the same kind of barrels, etc.

Note. The following is an estimate, or value, of all the exports and imports,
from and into Great Britain, etc. and all its several continental governments,
or colonies, in America, respectively distinguished, as taken from the
Pennsylvania journal, of September 7th, 1774; which is there said to be on an
average of three years; which years are most probably those mentioned in the
preceding agregate, etc. viz.

Amount of commodities exported from Great Britain to
Hudson's Bay, L. 16,000 Newfoundland, from Britain and Ireland, 2^3,000
Canada, 105,000 Nova Scotia, 26,500 New England, 395,000 Connecticut, Rhode
Island, and New Hampshire, 12,000 New York, 531,000 Philadelphia, 611,000
Virginia and Maryland, 865,000 North Carolina, 18,000 South Carolina, 365,000
Georgia, 49,000 Pensacola, 97,000 St. Augustine, 7,000 L. 3,370,900 Imported
into Great Britain, etc. from
Labrador, L. 49,000 Hudson's Bay, 29,000 Newfoundland, 345,000 Canada, 105,000
Nova Scotia, 38,000 New England, 370,500 Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New
Hampshire, 114,500 New York, 526,000 Philadelphia to Great Britain and other
markets, 705,500 Virga. and Marld. to do. 1,040,000 North Carolina to do.
68,350 South Carolina to do. 395,666 Georgia to do. 74,200 Pensacola, 63,00^ L.
3,927,706

Note. How far this account may be depended on, I shall not pretend to say,
seeing some parts of it, at least, seem to be very imperfect; for in the same
journal for July 5th, 1775, the quantity of wheat alone exported from Quebec,
in the year 1774, is said to be three hundred and fifty thousand bushels (but
supposed by some to have been much more) no other exports from thence being
mentioned; so that in the export from Canada the great fur and skin trade of
that country appears not to be properly noticed, etc.




Places of trade with Pennsylvania, etc.
The principal part of these exports, which, by the merchants of Philadelphia,
are sent to Great Britain, Ireland, the West India ^slands, New England, but of
late years more to Portugal, Spain, up the straits, and other places, is
carried in their own shipping, built here; which is frequently sold with the
cargoes: the produce of all which is sure to center in Great Britain, in pay
for the manufactures and merchandise imported here from thence; except perhaps
what is returned higher in wines of Lisbon, Madeira, Canary, or Western
Islands, West India produce, with salt and other necessaries, for the use of
the country, and consumed in the province and its neighborhood.

The present inhabitants of Pennsylvania, Inhabitants.
exclusive of the few Indians, still remaining in the remote, or back parts, of
it, consist mostly of such people as have removed thither from Europe, and of
their descendants; and still many of them have connections there; hence they
are generally in the practice of the customs and manners of the different
countries, from which they originally came, according to their rank in life. Of
those which constitute the different religious societies, such as appear to be
least known, and most remarkable, either have been already, or will hereafter,
be mentioned in the proper place.

Besides the great numbers of the first and early colonists, as well as since,
from Great Britain, and the large importations of people from Ireland into this
province, both in early and latter times, those from Germany have been so
great, Germans, etc.
that it is supposed near one-third, at least, of the inhabitants, at this
time, consists of the last, and their descendants: the counties of Lancaster,
York, Berks, and Northampton being principally settled by them, and they are
very numerous, even, in the city and county of Philadelphia, as well as in the
others.

In the summer of the year 1749, twenty-five sail of large ships arrived with
German passengers alone: which brought about twelve thousand souls, some of the
ships about six hundred each; and in several other years near the same number
of these people arrived annually; and in some years near as many annually from
Ireland. By an exact account of all the ships and passengers annually, which
have arrived at Philadelphia, with Germans alone, nearly from the first
settlement of the province, till about the year 1776, when their importation
ceased, the number of the latter appears to be about thirty-nine thousand; and
their internal increase has been very great. Cumberland county is mostly
settled by the Irish, who abound through the whole province. The Germans seem
more adapted for agriculture, and the improvement of a wilderness, and the
Irish for trade, etc. The former soon get estates in this country, where
industry and parsimony are the chief requisites to procure them, etc.

Negroes.
The Negroes, or black people, it is supposed, are less numerous in Pennsylvania
and New Jersey, than in most of the other colonies, in proportion to the number
of other inhabitants; the Legislature, at different times, having used the best
endeavors in their power, to discourage and prevent the impolitic and inhuman
practice of the introduction or importation, of them; a practice, which has
long prevailed in this part of the world, both in its nature and manner, not
only the great opprobrium of Christianity, but even the shameful disgrace of
human nature itself!

But there is another class of people, whose numbers here, Refuse of other
countries, etc.
in latter years, have annually so much increased as apparently to portend
consequences no less dangerous and unhappy to the public good, in some
respects, than those last mentioned, as they are more capable of it, and those
very consequences manifestly a present advantage to them; I mean such as flee
from justice, in other countries, and convicts from Great Britain and Ireland;
who frequently find the way hither, after they are landed in other places, to
the no small detriment of the honest part of the community; besides the
dangerous consequences, which may justly be dreaded from so large, and long
continued collection of such kind of people together; which at present seems to
demand the public attention more than it has done.

About the year 1759, or sometime before, Number of inhabitants, etc.
the number of families in the province was computed at twenty thousand, by a
very moderate computation; See "An historical review of the constitution and
government of Pennsylvania," etc. London, printed in 1759, in the appendix:
written against the Proprietaries, etc.

This is the lowest or most moderate computation that I find; for otherwise, as
published in Benjamin Martin's general magazine, etc. for July, 1755, their
number is then asserted to have been 250,000, which in 1775, twenty years
after, being doubled, would make 500,000, etc.

Note. In the following account of the taxables, from time to time, in the
different counties, taken from the tax books and votes of Assembly, it is to be
observed, that the frontier counties usually paid no taxes for several years
after they were instituted (in latter years on account of Indian disturbances,
etc.) and therefore some of them are not here included.

Taxables. 1. City and county of Philadelphia, in 1720 contained 1,195 1740
4,850 1751. 7,100 The city 2634 in 1760 8,321 County 5687 in The city 3751 in
1771 10,455 County 6704 in 2. Bucks county in 1752 3,012 1760 3,148 1771 ^,177
3. Chester county in 1732 2,157 1742 3,007 1752 3,951 1760 4,761 1771 5,484 4.
Lancaster county in 1738 2,560 1752 3,951 1760 5,635 1771 6,608 5. York county
in 1749 1,466 1751 2,05^ 1760 3,302 1771 4,426 6. Cumberland county in 1749 807
1760 1,501 1771 6,521 7. Berks county in 1760 3,016 1771 3,202 8. Northampton
county in 1760 1,989 1771 2,793

Note. The town of Lancaster in 1752, being about twenty years old, contained
three hundred and eleven taxables.

Note, The land tax of eighteen pence in the pound, in 1771, amounted to about
L. 27,600, and the excise, in the same year, L. 5,000; of which the city and
county of Philadelphia paid about L. 14,000.


and considering the very great increase, diverse ways, since that time, the
whole number of people in Pennsylvania, about the year 1770, may probably be
near two hundred thousand, at least, or somewhere between two and three hundred
thousand.

For the number of taxables, from time to time, Number and increase of
taxables, etc.
in the province, as appears by the tax books, and journals of Assembly, may be
pretty nearly ascertained: and it is probable, by these accounts, that, in the
year 1731, they did not exceed nine or ten thousand at most; in 1751, they were
about twenty-one thousand; and in 1771, between thirty-nine and forty thousand;
nearly doubling every twenty years; so computing the increase of the whole
twenty thousand families, with the fresh immigrants, which were very numerous,
in the same proportion, and allowing seven persons to a family, they would, in
1770, amount to about two hundred and fifty thousand; the taxables being, by
this computation, nearly one in six, rendered so numerous by reason of the
poll-tax, etc. And the three lower counties of Newcastle, Kent and Sussex on
Delaware might probably contain between twenty and thirty thousand more.

City of Philadelphia in 1770.
The city of Philadelphia, which has been so much, and deservedly admired for
its excellent plan, the regularity of its streets, and its great and rapid
increase and improvement, it is supposed, for several years last past, has been
augmented with above two hundred new dwelling houses annually, including the
suburbs north and south of it, along the side of the river Delaware; where its
buildings now extend about two miles in length; but it is not built, perhaps,
much above half a mile westward from the river, along High Street, in the
middle, or broadest part of it.

The houses are mostly built of brick, and covered with shingles of cedar, very
uniform, plain and neat; though both good marble, and other stone, are
procured, within fifteen miles from the city, by water carriage, and by land
near the same distance. They are mostly three stories high, besides the garrets
and cellars, more especially in the interior parts of the town; and for the
most part it is well paved, watered, lighted, and cleaned; and the general fuel
is wood. But too much of a similarity is said, by some, to prevail in the
structure of this city; and the eye is not delighted with that variety here,
which sometimes is observable in smaller places.

The number of houses erected upon the plan of the city, exclusive of public
buildings, stores, Number of houses and inhabitants.
workhouses, etc. in December, 1769, were three thousand three hundred and
eighteen; those of the northern suburbs, five hundred and fifty-three; and in
the southern suburbs, six hundred and three; in all four thousand four hundred
and seventy-four dwelling houses; which, at the most moderate computation,
being multiplied by six, gives twenty-six thousand eight hundred and forty-four
inhabitants; but they were supposed to average nearer seven to a family, which
makes thirty-one thousand three hundred and eighteen, in the city and suburbs
of Philadelphia at that time, when it was not above eighty-seven years old; and
for the next following four or five years, it continued to increase with still
greater augmentation. The gradual increase of the dwelling houses in this city
and suburbs, at different times, in later years, when they were numbered,
appears by the following account, viz.

In the year 1749 they amounted to 2,076 1753 2,300 1760 2,960 1769 4,474 1777
^,460

Note. Above a year before the last period, building in Philadelphia, by reason
of a particular circumstance, being interrupted, had entirely ceased.




As to the original plan of the city, which has already been described in
another place, though most of it is still retained in the late improvements,
yet, in some parts of it, the intention of the great Founder is said to be
departed from; and it is too much cut up into small and confined spaces, by
narrow lanes and alleys, Some nuisances, inconveniences, and abuses, etc.
not suitable for the heat of the climate, nor proper for the health of the
inhabitants; for the benefit of whom, in crowded cities, as much free and open
air is requisite as can possibly be obtained. Besides, along the water side,
where there ought to be a wide public street, or quay, continued the whole
front of the city, for the free and uninterrupted use of the citizens; besides
wharves, extending further into the water, and other convenient space, for
shipping and landing of merchandise, and properly accomodating the general
trade, etc. private persons are permitted to build and place obstructions close
to the river. Add to these, the principal street in the city is shamefully
obstructed by a courthouse in the middle of the most crowded part of it, and
by other buildings erected for butchers shambles, and holding a market; now
long experienced to be the most inconvenient and improper place that could be
appropriated for that purpose in such a crowded and increasing city, as well as
contrary to the original intention, which designed all the public streets for
high ways without obstruction, or interruption; though in early time, it might
have been otherwise, in regard to convenience, when the place was small, and
the people few. These inconveniences, and abuses, not to say public nuisances,
and impediments to the salubrity of the city, with their growing consequences,
if it continues to increase as it has done, and they not removed, and better
provision made, future time will indoubtedly be more sensible of. The health
and convenience of large cities are of the greatest importance, and above all
calculation of expense, etc. An enlargement of the limits of this city north
and south, with a more proper division into regular wards, for its better
government and regulation, merit public attention* and a further provision of
suitable and convenient open and vacant spaces of ground for public buildings,
market places, grave yards, public, spacious, airy walks planted with trees and
fenced in, and protected from all nuisances, in every part of the city-plan and
vicinity, for the greater convenience and healthiness of the people, are among
the further improvements to be wished for: -- too much neglected in early time,
as well as in later years, etc.


The public buildings in this city, at this time, Public buildings, etc.
are mostly plain, yet some of them elegant; but, in general, they are adapted
more for real use and convenience, than ornament. The state-house, where the
General Assembly, and Supreme Court, of the province, are held, is a plain, but
elegant and spacious edifice, for the time in which it was built, about the
year 1732: it stands on the south side of Chesnut-street; and with its wings
and appendages, on each side of it, occupies the whole extent of a square of
near four hundred feet, between Fifth and Sixth-streets from Delaware. The
prison and work house, at the corner of High Street and Third-street, are
strong and spacious buildings, but have nothing very remarkable in their
architecture.

Of houses for worship, that of the Episcopalians, Houses of worship.
or Church of England, in Second-street, called Christ's Church, is looked upon
as the most elegant; the rest are generally more adapted for use and
convenience, than show. The Quakers have four houses for public worship in the
city; of which they constantly, at the appointed times for worship, occupy
three; the fourth is used on particular occasions. The Episcopalians have
three; the Presbyterians, four; the Baptists, one; the Moravians, one; the
Roman Catholics, two; the Methodists, one; the German Lutherans, two; and the
German Calvinists, one; likewise the Swedish Lutherans, one, in the lower
suburbs, at Wicocoa.

Schools and seminaries of learning, etc.
Besides the numerous private schools, for the education of youth, in this city,
there are two public seminaries of learning, incorporated by charter, and
provided with funds; the first, in order of time, is that of the Quakers,
already mentioned in another place; incorporated by the first Proprietor,
William Penn; the corporation consists of fifteen persons, chosen by
themselves; they have their monthly meetings, for the care and management of
the institution; and their regular visitations of the various schools, under
their direction and notice. The Quakers have one school in the city besides
these under their care, at their sole expense, for teaching Negro children only.


Besides the schools in other parts of the city and county of Philadelphia,
under their care, they have a convenient and handsome building, elegantly
situated, in the east side of Fourth-street, near Chesnut-street; where,
besides reading and writing, are taught grammar and the languages, with the
most useful parts of mathematical learning, in different apartments, under
their proper masters; where also is kept a library, for the use of the
institution: but this seminary, in some respects, has not been improved, or
advanced, according to the original intention, or to as great utility as it is
capable of.

The second is the College and Academy of Philadelphia, of a much later
standing, College and Academy of Philadelphia.
and not existing as such, before the year 1749; but greatly improved of late
years; and is likely, if its present prudent management be continued, to become
hereafter, the most considerable of the kind, perhaps, in British America: the
corporation consists of twenty-four members, called Trustees; they have a large
commodious building, on the west side of Fourth-street, near Mulberry-street,
where the different branches of learning and science are taught, in the various
parts of the institution.

In this city are erected two large and elegant edifices, for charitable uses,
Pennsylvania Hospital, etc.
but not yet completed; the Pennsylvania Hospital, and the House of Employment
for the poor of Philadelphia; it is supposed there are not other two
institutions of the kind equal to them, in any of the British colonies in
America, for the number of persons annually relieved, the spacious, convenient
and healthy accommodations, and general good management, in every department;
in the former, which had its first rise so late as in the year 1751, there have
been cured and relieved above four hundred persons annually; Extract from the
state of the accounts of the Pennsylvania Hospital, as adjusted by the
managers, from the votes of Assembly, and inserted in the Pennsylvania
chronicle in January, 1768, viz.

"From an exact list of the names and cases of the patients, it appears, there
have been four hundred and fifty-eight poor diseased persons admitted into the
hospital, within the year ending the 4th of the 5th month (May) 1767; of whom
fifty nine were lunatics, or other unhappy objects, deprived of right reason.

And there have been discharged, cured 273 relieved 16 for irregularity 11 at
their own request 6 at the request of their friends 6 died 37 355 Remain in the
house 103 Total 458

"And diverse had medicines and visits of the physicians, as out-patients, whose
cases were not proper, or necessary, to admit them into the house."


and in the latter, which is of still later standing, House for the poor, etc.
about four hundred indigent people, and helpless objects of charity have been
constantly provided with suitable employment, or comfortable living and
accommodations. The managers of these institutions are annually chosen by the
contributors, according to acts of Assembly, by which they are incorporated:
both of them were first promoted chiefly by the Quakers, and still continue
under the management principally of the same people.

Other institutions, etc.
There are other institutions and companies, in this city, formed either for the
good order and security of it, or other patriotic purposes; as, that for the
insurance of houses from loss by fire; with a number of fire companies, or
associations, to prevent and extinguish fire in it: the society for the relief
of poor and distressed masters of ships, their widows and children; the
American philosophical society, etc. for promoting useful knowledge; the
library company of Philadelphia; the society for promoting the culture of silk,
etc.

City corporation, etc.
The corporation of the city itself, for its internal government and police, has
been already mentioned, in the account of its original institution by the first
Proprietor William Penn, in 1701. It consists of a Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen,
and Common Council, by the name of, "The Mayor and Commonalty of the city of
Philadelphia," etc. They are chosen by the corporation; and the number of
Aldermen and Common Council-men is not limited: the nature, constitution,
power, and office of the corporation are described in the city charter in the
appendix.

Besides the city of Philadelphia, there are several considerable towns in the
province, exclusive of the capitals of the counties, already mentioned; some of
which have their stated market days, and regular markets for provisions, etc.

Germantown, in Philadelphia county, about six miles north of the city, with
which it is nearly coeval, and noted for its manufacture of stockings, by the
German settlers and their descendants, who principally inhabit it, consists
chiefly of one street, several miles in length, different parts of it having
different names, irregularly built of stone, dug out of the ground where the
houses stand; in a high and healthy situation, with distances, or vacant
spaces, in some places, between the houses; it affords a pleasant retreat in
summer to diverse inhabitants of Philadelphia; and contains more houses and
people than any other town in the province, Philadelphia and Lancaster excepted.

Wilmington, in Newcastle county, Wilmington.
which appears to be no older than about thirty or forty years (anno 1772) is
now next to Philadelphia, in trade and populousness, on or near the Delaware;
and in late years, has far exceeded Newcastle, which has long seemingly been on
the decline, Note. Wilmington was first laid out, for a town, and settled
principally by the Quakers, etc. of whom, in the year 1738, I find, William
Shipley, Joshua Way, Thomas West, David Ferris, Joseph Hews, Edward Tatnal, and
others, had a religious meeting fixed here. MS.

The large numbers of Europeans, which have flocked into Pennsylvania, who had
been used to towns, especially from Germany, seem to have been one cause of so
many considerable towns suddenly starting up in this province of late years;
but they are less adapted to agricultural employment, than to that of
manufacturing; hence they generally here either soon decline, or cease to
increase; except upon navigable waters, and supported by foreign trade, or
manufacturing, etc.

Lebanon in Lancaster county (as well as many other towns in the province) is
now in a very flourishing state; it was laid out about the year 1759, and now
in 1772, is said to contain above two hundred good dwelling houses, many of
them large, and well built of stone, dug out of the ground where they stand,
and principally inhabited by Germans, etc.


though the courts, etc. are still held at the latter place; from which it is
only six miles distant, northward, and about twenty-eight south west from
Philadelphia. It is situated on an elevated and hilly declivity, descending to
Christeen creek; which so far, at least, is navigable for vessels of two
hundred tons burden, and runs into the Delaware at a small distance; from
whence, to a spectator, passing on the said river, this town, by reason of its
particular and elevated situation, exhibits a pleasant appearance.

Of the internal Police, and Courts of Judicature in Pennsylvania.
The nature and manner of the government, by a Governor and provincial
Assembly, as expressed in the last charter of privileges, given in the year
1701, with the powers granted to the Proprietary, William Penn, in the royal
charter of 1681, upon which the former is founded, have already been mentioned,
in the preceding history; and, therefore, in this place, need no repetition.
According to which charter of privileges, there are two negatives in the
Legislature; that of the Governor, and that of the Assembly, or Representatives
of the people.

Governor's Council, etc
The Council, as before observed, are no part of the Legislature, otherwise than
by advising the Governor, in his negative, etc. they are chosen by the
Proprietary, or Governor, and are properly called the Governor's Council. The
acts of legislature run thus, in the presidency of a Deputy Governor, who is
appointed by the Proprietary, with the royal approbation, viz. "Be it enacted
by the honorable -- Esquire, Lieutenant Governor of the province of
Pennsylvania, and of the counties of Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, on Delaware
river; by and with the consent of the Representatives of the freemen of said
province, in General Assembly met." The Governor's salary, which is a free
gift, or in the power of the people, was never permanently fixed by law; but of
late years, has generally been about L. 1,000 currency per annum, besides the
perquisites, which amounted to a considerable sum.

The Assembly, by charter, is elected on the first day of October annually, by
the freeholders, Provincial Assembly.
in each county. The qualifications, by law, for an elector and elected, is a
freeman, resident in the county, for two years, at least, having fifty acres of
land, well seated, or otherways worth, in real or personal estate, or both
jointly, the value of fifty pounds currency; which, if required, must be
declared on oath or affirmation. But the number of the members, and mode of
elections, are fixed, altered and regulated by act of Assembly, pursuant to the
powers granted by the said charter. They have for many years, before the last
frontier counties were added, or till about the year 1771, consisted of about
thirty-six; of which number, the city of Philadelphia returned two; each of the
oldest counties, of Philadelphia, Bucks and Chester, eight; that of Lancaster
four; and the later (and in those times, much thinner inhabited) counties of
York, Cumberland, Berks and Northampton, returned the rest.

The Sheriffs and Coroners are usually elected at the same time with the
Representatives, Sheriffs and Coroners.
by county elections; the people elect two for each office; out of which the
Governor chooses one; who, in the same manner, may be re-elected for three years
running; but after three years, cannot be re-elected, unless after the
intervention of three years out of office; and then he is capable of a new
election.

County Commissioners and Assessors.
The County Commissioners, for managing of the public affairs of their
respective counties, are three, and the Assessors are six, in and for each
county; of the latter the whole number is annually chosen, at the same time,
with the Assembly, Sheriffs and Coroners, according to act of Assembly; the
former, or the Commissioners, continue in office for three years; of whom, one,
or the oldest Commissioner, is changed, or goes out, and another is elected in
his place every year, in each county.

Juries.
Juries are all returned by the Sheriff, excepting in particular cases, but not
often; there may be a struck jury, by consent of parties; and that must be in
the presence of the Judges, the Sheriff and the parties.

Justices of the Peace.
Justices of the Peace are all of the Governor's appointing, and sit in Quarter
Sessions, conformable to the laws and institutions of England.

Register General.
The Register General is appointed and commissioned by the Governor, according
to act of Assembly, for the probate of wills, and granting letters of
administration. His authority extends all over the province; but is executed by
a Deputy, in each respective county, except at Philadelphia; where he is
obliged to reside himself.

Courts of Judicature.
The power of establishing all the Courts of Judicature, in Pennsylvania, was
granted, by the royal charter, to the Proprietary. They were accordingly, for
some time, erected and held by ordinances of the Governor and Council; but they
were afterward established by laws of the province.

The Courts of Judicature, for the administration of justice, as established by
law, within the province, consist of,

Supreme Court.
1. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, held in Philadelphia, twice every year,
by any two of the three Justices, or Judges, of the said court. Of these
Judges, who are commissioned by the Governor severally, by distinct patents,
one is distinguished, in his commission, by the name of Chief Justice; the
others, by that of second and third Judge, or Justice; and none of them can sit
judicially in any inferior court: every of which Justices having full power to
issue forth writs of habeas corpus, certiorari and writs of error, etc.

This court is empowered to hear and determine all causes, by writ of the same
court, Its power, etc.
removed from the courts of Quarter Sessions, and Common Pleas, in the several
counties, and from the city court: to reverse, or affirm, the judgments of the
inferior courts: to examine and punish all officers of courts, for default,
etc. to award process for levying fines: and if occasion require, to go the
circuit twice every year, to try the issues in fact, in the counties, from
whence the cause was removed: the Judges of this court have power to deliver
the jails of persons, committed for treason, murder, and other felonies of
death; and to hear and determine all such felonies, committed in the out parts
of the province, by a jury of the city of Philadelphia; especially felonies
committed by Indians, etc. But from the final sentence of this court, as well
as from that of the Courts of Admiralty, and all other courts, within the
province, is reserved the right of appeal to Great Britain.

2. The Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace and Gaol Delivery, held
in each county, Court of Quarter Sessions.
four times in a year, by any three, or more, of the Justices, nominated and
authorized by the Governor; and special, or private, sessions, as often as
occasion requires, pursuant to their commissions, etc. any of which Justices
has power in or out of sessions, to take all manner of recognizances, etc.

Court of Common Pleas.
3. The County Court of Common Pleas, held four times annually, at the same
places, in each county where the Quarter Sessions are kept, by at least, three
of the justices thereof, commissioned by the Governor; who are empowered to
hear and determine all pleas, suits and causes, civil, personal, real and mixed,
etc.

The Judges of the Common Pleas are the Justices of the Peace in each
respective county: when the Quarter Sessions are finished, they continue to sit
(in most of the counties) in quality of the Judges of Common Pleas, by
commission from the Governor.

Orphans' Court,
4. The Orphans' Court, held by the Justices of the Quarter Sessions, in each
county, in the same week, in which the sessions are held; or, at any other time
as they see occasion.

Its power, etc.
They are empowered to call to account any person, who is entrusted with, or any
wise accountable for, any estate, belonging to any orphan, or person under age;
(and even administrators of intestate estates) to oblige the Register General,
or his Deputies, to transmit to their court, copies of such writings, as relate
to estates of orphans, or minors; to oblige administrators to give better
security; and upon neglect thereof, or if the administrator has imbezzled the
decedant's estate, by their sentence to revoke his letter of administration; to
oblige as well an executrix, that is married to another husband, without
securing the minors' portions, as also all other executors, to give security
for the payment, or delivery, of the legacies, or shares of estates belonging
to minors, and for their maintenance and education: to admit minors to choose
guardians, and to appoint guardians for such as, by the common law, are
incapable of choosing; to direct the putting out minors apprentices: to send
their attachments, for contempt, and force obedience to their orders, by
imprisonment, or sequestration of lands and goods: finally, to settle the
accounts of administrators, and to make distribution of the surplusage of the
estate; and to settle and discharge the accounts of bonds of guardians, and
other persons, entrusted with minors' estates.

5. The Mayor's Court, held in Philadelphia, Mayor's Court.
by the Mayor, Recorder, and, at least, two Aldermen of the city, quarterly, by
charter, for hearing and determining all crimes and offenses, committed in the
said city: but the power of hearing and determining all felonies of death is,
by law, vested in the Judges of the Supreme Court.

Besides these are the Court of Admiralty, Admiralty Courts.
for the province of Pennsylvania, and the counties of Newcastle, Kent and
Sussex, on Delaware; and the Court of Admiralty, in case of appeals, for the
provinces of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia; held
in Philadelphia only, agreeable to the direction in the Judges' commission.

The courts for the respective counties are held, Places where the county
courts are held.
1, at Philadelphia, for the county of Philadelphia; 2, at Newtown, for that of
Bucks; 3, at Chester, for the county of Chester; 4, at Lancaster, for that of
Lancaster; 5, at Yorktown, for the county of York; 6, at Carlisle, for the
county of Cumberland; 7, at Reading, for the county of Berks; 8, at Easton for
the county of Northampton; 9, at Bedford, for Bedford county; 10, at Sunbury,
for Northumberland county; and 11, at Pitsburg, for Westmoreland.

In the year 1772, in the administration of Richard Penn, Governor under the
Proprietaries Thomas and John Penn, the principal offices, in the province of
Pennsylvania, were held, as follows:

Officers of government, etc. in 1772.
Members of the Proprietaries' and Governor's Council.
James Hamilton, Joseph Turner, William Logan, Richard Peter's, Lynford Lardner,
Benjamin Chew, Thomas Cadwallader, James Tilghman, Andrew Allen, Edward
Shippen, junior.
Provincial Secretary, and Clerk of the Council, Joseph Shippen, junr. Speaker
of the House of Assembly, Joseph Galloway, Clerk of the Assembly, Charles
Moore, Treasurer of the province, Owen Jones, Agent for the province, in Great
Britain, Benjamin Franklin.
Judges of the Supreme Court.
William Allen, Chief Justice, John Lawrence, Second Judge, Thomas Willing,
Third Judge.
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court, etc. Edward Shippen, junr. Attorney
General, Andrew Allen, Register General, etc. Benjamin Chew, Master of the
rolls, etc. William Parr.
Proprietaries' officers for land affairs, etc.
Secretary of the land office, James Tilghman, Receiver General and keeper of
the great seal, Edmund Physic, Auditor General, Richard Hockley, Surveyor
General, John Lukens.
Principal officers for the customs, for the port of Philadelphia.
Collector, John Patterson, Comptroller, Zachariah Hood, Naval officer, Richard
Hockley, Surveyor and searcher, David Drummond, etc.
Court of Admiralty for the province of Pennsylvania, and counties of
Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, upon Delaware.
Judge, Edward Shippen, junior, Register, Richard Peter's, junior, Marshal,
Judah Foulke.
Court of Admiralty, in case of appeals, for the provinces of New York, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia.
Commissary, Honorable Jared Ingersol, Deputy Commissary, James Biddle,
Register, Philip How, Deputy Register, John Smith, Marshal and Sergeant at
Mace, Arodi Thayer.
About this time the number of Aldermen, for the city of Philadelphia,
consisted of twenty persons, and the Common Council of thirty six.

PART III.
The Indians. -- Uncertainty of their origin. -- Boundaries of the Six Nations,
with their dependencies, and the Indians on Ohio, etc. -- Account of the Six
Nations, their customs and properties, etc. -- Of those of Pennsylvania; their
general turn of mind, propensities, customs and habits. -- Speech of an Indian
chief in answer to a Swedish missionary. -- Their religious sense of the Deity.
-- Conrad Weiser's letter on the subject. -- Account of some religious Indians
in 1760, etc. -- Infraction of the peace between the Indians and the people of
Pennsylvania, about the year 1754. -- Massacre of the Conestogoe Indians, etc.
-- Causes of the Indian war. -- Means of the ensuing peace in 1764,

Uncertainty of the origin of the Indians, etc.
AS to the origin of the Indians, or aboriginal inhabitants of America, in
general, there is nothing on record, but mere modern conjecture; which varies
according to the different opinions and fancies of those, who have thought and
writ on the subject, and endeavored to account for the first peopling of that
continent. It is, perhaps, as improbable for a people, who have not the
knowledge of letters, to derive their original from those, who were possessed
of that useful and necessary science, and not to retain it among themselves
afterward, as it would be nugatory to pretend to give an account thereof,
without the means, absolutely necessary for that purpose? Therefore, without
saying any thing of their original, or troubling the reader with conjectures,
how this country first began to be inhabited by mankind, let it suffice here to
observe, in general, Probably a different species of mankind.
that these people appear to form a distinct species of the human race, as well
as the Negroes, and some other kinds of people, in the world: this is so
manifestly visible, from an entire uniformity, among them, of certain marks and
characters, peculiar to their persons and features, that they are thereby as
sufficiently distinguished from all the rest of mankind, into a different, or
distinct species, or variety, of rational beings, as the various species of
some of the particular genera of the irrational animals and plants are
characterized by their respective and peculiar properties and phenomena. Dr.
Douglas of Boston, in his summary, etc. says, "The American aboriginal Indians
are impubes and imberbes," etc. This is asserted by many others; but however it
may be in regard to some of that people, later observation assures us, that
this is not the case, at least, with all of them.


The Indians, called the Six Nations, The Six Nations, etc.
have held sovereignty over all the Indians, both in this and the neighboring
provinces, for a long series of years; and as a similarity of their customs
prevails much among those, who are subject to them, so previous to an account
of the Indians of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, as they were found and observed
by the first and early European or English settlers among them, whose
description or observation, may be most depended on, as nearest the truth, it
may be proper to say something further respecting these nations, though they
have not, at present, their residence within the limits of these provinces.

The Six Nations first entered into an alliance with the English, on the
capture of New York from the Dutch, in 1664; which has remarkably continued
ever since. The limits of their lands, or country, included all the nations and
tribes, which were subject to them, either by conquest, of otherwise; they
extended from the south part of lake Champlain, Extent of their territories,
etc.
in latitude 44, on the north of New York government, to the borders of
Carolina, in latitude 36, comprehending all Pennsylvania, and the adjacent
countries. The Six Nations themselves are seated between the 42d and 43d degree
of north latitude, north eastward of Pennsylvania, within the bounds of New
York government, and on the rivers which run into lake Ontario.

Manner of bounding their countries.
The Indians generally bound their countries, or territories, by large wide
spaces of land, not by lines, or marks. Their numbers are small, in proportion
to the land they possess. They fix their towns commonly on the borders of great
rivers, on account of the rich lawns, for planting their corn: the intermediate
ground they reserve for hunting; which equally serves them for that purpose and
a frontier.

Manner of naming their nations and tribes.
Their nations and tribes are generally distinguished and denominated by the
names of the rivers and creeks, or other noted places, of their residence;
which original names they commonly still continue to retain after their removal
to other places. The tribes, which composed their nations, were frequently in
proportion to the number and importance of the creeks, that ran into the rivers
which bore their nations. The Delawares so called from the river Delaware, by
the English, but by themselves in their own language, Lenelenoppes, or the
original people, consisted of the Assunpink (Stony creek) Indians; Rankokas,
(Lamikas, or Chichequaas) Mingoes, Andastakas; (Christeen creek, near
Wilmington) Neshaminics, in Bucks county; Shackamaxons, about Kensington, near
Philadelphia; Mantas, or Frog Indians, about Burlington, and a creek of that
name, in Gloucester county, which runs out of Jersey into the Delaware, a
little below Philadelphia, etc.

Since the conquest and subjection of diverse of the Indian nations and tribes,
by the Six Nations, Their change of residence, etc.
particularly after the Europeans became acquainted with them, (during which
time they appear to have been continually decreasing in number) many of their
places of residence have been changed for others, by the direction and order of
their conquerors, or superiors; especially to make room for the settlement of
the Europeans, etc. Hence, after the Susquahannocks were exterminated, the
upper parts of the river Susquahanna were allotted to the Nanticokes, from the
eastern shore of Maryland; to the Tuteloes, from Meherin river, in the south of
Virginia; and to the Delawares, among which last are included the Menesinks,
from above the forks of Delaware, and the Mandes, or Salem Indians, etc. and as
the country becomes more inhabited by Europeans and their descendants, the
Indians move still further back into the wilderness, etc.

Among the most noted nations, Noted nations formerly in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania.
which sometimes formerly inhabited New Jersey, and the first, or most early
settled parts of Pennsylvania, are said to have been the Narraticongs, on the
north side of Rariton river, the Capitinasses, the Gacheos, the Munseys, the
Pomptons, and some of the Five Nations, before the sixth was added; which was
that of the Tuscororas, on account of a similarity in their language to that of
the Five Nations, indicating them to have been originally of the same stock,
etc.

The Indians on Ohio chiefly consist of the hunters of the several nations
round, Nations on the Ohio, etc.
under the protection or subjection of the Six Nations, as, the Delawares,
Sha^anesse, W^^^^is (called by the French, Ilionois) and their own several
nations, The following summary of the Indian Nations, etc. westward of the
Ohio, is extracted from an account or computation, said to have been made by
themselves, and by George Croghn, Deputy of Sir William Johnson, Agent for
Indian affairs, delivered to General Stanwix about the year 1759.

Nations. Residence. Fighting men. 1. Delawares, On the Ohio, Beaver Creek, and
other branches of Ohio; and on Susquahanna, etc. 600 2. Shawanese, River
Scioto, a branch of Ohio; 400 miles below Pitsburg. 300 3. Choctaws,
Mississippi, above New Orleans, 2,000 4. Lazar, Ohio, from its mouth toward
Wabash, 400 5. Ilionois, Mississipi, above the mouth of Ohio, The French raised
good wheat here.
400 6. Waugweonghtannes, On the Wabash, 200 7. Twightwees, Miame River, 300 8.
Pianguishaws, Head of Wabash, 300 9. Wayondots, Fort de Troit, and Chenundea,
etc. 300 10. Ottowas, Chepowas, Putawatimes, Methominys, or Shockeys, nations
confederate, like the Six Nations, on the west side of Lake Erie, partly in
sight of Fort de Troit, 2,000 11. Nottoweasses, (called by the French, Le Zue)
on a river parrellel with the Mississippi, in a country of 2,000 miles extent;
sometimes called Welsh Indians, 10,000 12. Musquakees, On the Mississippi, 200
13. Sagasey, Lower down the Mississippi, 200 14. Webings, Lower down the river,
etc. these three mostly destroyed by the French, 200 15. Onasoys, called by the
French Le grand Zue, on White Creek, a branch of the Mississippi, 4,000 16.
Linways, Mississippi, 1,000 17. Missury, Mississippi, opposite the Ilionois
country, 400 18. Kekopos, about 80 miles beyond Fort de Troit, 600 The whole
number of fighting men in these nations at that time 23,400 In which account
the following are not included, viz. Cherokees, to the southward, fighting men
supposed near 1,500 Creeks, or Chicasas near as many, 1,500 Mingoes, or Five
Nations, with the several small tribes, incorporated among them, as the
Nanticokes, Menesinks, etc. amounting to above 1,500 Total 27,900 If the
fighting men be computed at one in fire of all the inhabitants, this account
will make the whole number 139,500

Besides, "In an historical account, printed in Philadelphia, of the expedition
against the Ohio Indians, in 1764, under the command of Colonel Bouquet, there
is a list of the Indian nations of Canada and Louisiana, said to be from good
authority, and that the account may be depended on, so far as a matter of this
kind can be brought near the truth; in which it is asserted, there are
fifty-six thousand five hundred and eighty fighting men, of such Indians as the
French were connected with, in Canada and Louisiana." MS.

If the rest of the inhabitants in these countries be computed in the same
proportion as above, they will amount to 282,900.


etc.

The Six Nations greatly diminished, etc.
The Six Nations, sometimes called Mingos, and Confederates, as their name
denotes, called by the Dutch, Maquaas, or Mahakuase, and by the French,
Iroquois, were so greatly diminished in the the year 1757, that they were then
supposed to consist only of about twelve hundred fighting men. "They consist
(says Colden in his history of them) of so many tribes, or nations, joined
together by league, Governor Colden's history of the Five Nations, etc.
or confederacy, like the United Provinces, and without any superiority of one
over the other. This union has continued so long, that the Christians know
nothing of the original of it. The people in it are known by the names (...)
Mohawks, Oneydoes, Onondagoes, Cayugas, Senekas, and Tuscaroras. "The Indians,
situated northward of Pennsylvania, or between thence and the lakes, etc. have
been otherwise described since, as consisting of three leagues; the Senekas,
Mohawks and Onondagoes, who are called the fathers, compose the first; the
Oneydas, Cayugas, Tuscaroras, Nanticokes and Coneys (which are united into one
tribe) and the Tateloes, compose the second league; and these two leagues make
up what is called the Six Nations; the third league is formed of the
Chihohocki, (or Delawares) the Wanami, the Munseys, Mohiccons and Wappingers."


"Each of these nations is again divided into three tribes, or families, Their
distinction.
who distinguish themselves by three different arms, or ensigns, viz. the
tortoise, the bear, and the wolf; and the sachems, or old men, of these
families, put this ensign, or mark, of their family, to every public paper,
when they sign it.

Government and police.
"Each of these nations is an absolute republic, and is governed, in all public
affairs, by its own sachems, or old men; the authority of these rulers is
gained by, and consists wholly in, the opinion the rest of the natives have of
their wisdom and integrity. They never execute their resolutions by force, upon
any of their people. Honor and esteem are their principal rewards; as shame,
and being despised, their punishments. They have certain customs, which they
observe, in their public transactions, with other nations, and in their private
affairs among themselves; which it is scandalous for any among them not to
observe; and these always draw after them either public or private resentment,
whenever they are broken.

"Their leaders and captains, in like manner, obtain their authority by the
general opinion of their courage and conduct, and lose it by a failure in these
virtues.

"Their great men, both sachems and captains, are generally poorer than the
common people; for they affect to give away and distribute all the presents and
plunder, they get in their treaties, and in war, so as to leave nothing to
themselves. There is not a man in the ministry of the Five Nations, Their free
and independent state, etc.
who has gained his office otherwise, than by merit; there is not the least
salary, or any sort of profit, annexed to any office, to tempt the covetous or
sordid; but, on the contrary, every unworthy action is unavoidably attended
with the forfeiture of their commission; for their authority is only the esteem
of the people, and ceases the moment that esteem is lost. Here we see the
natural origin of all power and authority, among a free people; and whatever
artificial power, or sovereignty, any man may have acquired, by the laws and
constitution of a country, his real power will be ever much greater, or less,
in proportion to the esteem the people have of him. "All affairs, which concern
the general interest, are determined in a great assembly of the chiefs of each
canton, annually held, at Onondago, the center of their country, (in north
latitude 42 55). Upon emergencies they act separately; but nothing can bind the
league, but the voice of the general convention."

Smith* history of New York.


"The Five Nations think themselves, by nature, Their high opinion of
themselves, etc.
superior to the rest of mankind, and call themselves Ongue-honwe, that is, men
surpassing all others. This opinion, which they take care to inculcate into
their children, gives them that courage, which has been so terrible to all the
nations of North America; and they have taken such care to impress the same
opinion of their people on all their neighbors, that, on all occasions, they
yield the most submissive obedience to them." "The Tuscaroras, after the war
they had with the people of Carolina, fled to the Five Nations, and are now
incorporated with them; so that they now properly indeed consist of Six Nations.

"There is one vice, Drunkenness common to the Indians, etc
which all the Indians have fallen into, since their acquaintance with the
Christians; of which they could not be guilty before that time, that is,
drunkenness. It is strange how all the Indian nations, and almost every person
among them, male and female, are infatuated with the love of strong drink; they
know no bounds to their desire, while they can swallow it down; and then
indeed, the greatest man among them scarcely deserves the name of a brute.

"They never have been taught to conquer any passion, but by some contrary
passion; and the traders, with whom they chiefly converse, are so far from
giving them any abhorrence of this vice, that they encourage it all they can,
not only for the profit of the liquor they sell, but that they may have an
opportunity to impose upon them. And this, as they chiefly drink spirits, has
destroyed greater numbers, than all their wars and diseases put together.

The history of the Five Nations obscure, etc.
"As to the history of the Five Nations," (says Smith, in his history of
New York) "before their acquaintance with the Europeans, it is wrapped up in the
darkness of antiquity. It is said that their first residence was in the country
about Mont-real; Ville Marie, in the isle of Mont-real, in the river St.
Lawrence, is in north latitude 45 27.
and that the superior strength of the Adirondacks, whom the French call
Algonquins, drove them into their present possessions, lying on the south side
of the Mohawks river, and the great lake Ontario. Toward the close of those
disputes, which continued for a great series of years, the Confederates gained
advantages over the Adirondacks, and struck a general terror into all the
Indians. The Hurons, on the north side of lake Erie, and the Cat Indians, on
the south side were totally conquered and dispersed. The French, who settled in
Canada, in 1603, took umbrage at this success, and began a war with them, which
had well nigh ruined their new colony.

Their language, etc.
"As to the language of these people (says the same author) except the
Tuscaroras, all the Six Nations speak a language radically the same. It is very
masculine and sonorous, abounding with gutturals, and strong aspirations, but
without labials. "They have but few radical words; but they compound their
words without end; by this their language becomes sufficiently copious, and
leaves room for a good deal of art, to please a delicate ear. Sometimes one
word, among them, includes an entire definition of a thing; for example, they
call wine, Oneharadesehoengtseragherie, as to say, a liquor mode of the juice
of the grape. The words expressi^g ^^ings, lately come to their knowledge, are
all compounds: they have no labials in their language; nor can they pronounce
perfectly any word, wherein there is a labial; and when one endeavors to teach
them to pronounce these words, they tell one, they think it ridiculous, that
they must shut their lips to speak. Their language abounds with gutturals, and
strong aspirations; these make it very sonorous and bold* and their speeches
abound with metaphors, after the manner of the eastern nations."

Governor Colden, etc.
Its solemn, grave tone is owing to the generosity of its feet, as may be
observed in the following translation of the Lord's Prayer; in which is
distinguished the time of every syllable, by the common marks, used in prosody.

The Lord's Prayer, in the language of the Six Nation Indians.
Soungwauncha, caurounky^auga, te^hse^e^taroan, Pater noster, in the Indian
language.
saulwonyousta, e^s a, sawane^you, okttauhsla, e^hnauwoung, na, caurounky^auga,
nugh, wonshauga, ne^attwhnsalauga, taugwaunautoronoantoughsick,
toantangwle^e^whyoustaung, chne^e^yeut, chaquatautale^ywhyoustaunna, toughsau,
taugwaussare^nah, tawantottnaugaloughtoungga, nasawn, sachautaugwass,
conte^hsalohaunzai^kaw, e^sa, sawaune^you, e^sa, sashautzta, e^sa,
soungwasoung, chnnauhaungwa, auwn.

"The extraordinary length of Indian words, and the guttural aspirations
necessary in pronouncing them, render the speech extremely rough and difficult.
The verbs never change in their terminations, as in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew;
but all their variations are prefixed. A strange transposition of syllables of
different words, Euphonia gratia, is very common in the Indian tongue: of which
I will give an instance: o^gilla, signifies fire, and cawa^u^nna^, great, but
instead of joining the adjective and substantive, to say great fire, cawa^u^nna
o^gilla, both words would be blended into this one, co-gi^lla-wa^u^nna.

"The dialect of the Oneydos is softer than that of the other nations, and the
reason is, because they have more vowels, and often supply the place of harsh
letters with liquids. Instead of R, they always use L. Rebecca would be
pronounced Lequecca.

Their art and method of public speaking, etc.
"The art of public speaking is in high esteem among the Indians, and much
studied. They are extremely fond of method, and displeased with an irregular
harrangue, because it is difficult to be remembered. When they answer, they
repeat the whole, reducing it into strict order. Their speeches are short, and
the sense conveyed in strong metaphors. In conversation they are sprightly, but
solemn and serious in their messages relating to public affairs. Their speakers
deliver themselves with surprising force, and great propriety of gesture. The
fierceness of their countenances, the flowing blanket, elevated tone, naked
arm, and erect stature, with a half circle of auditors seated on the ground,
cannot but impress on the mind a lively idea of the ancient orators of Greece
and Rome.

Belts and strings of wampum, etc.
"At the clause of every important part of a speech, ratifying an old covenant,
or creating a new one, a belt is generally given, to perpetuate the remembrance
of the transaction. These belts are about four inches wide, and thirty in
length. They consist of strings of conque-shell beads fastened together. These
beads, which pass for money, are called by the Indians, Wampum, and by the
Dutch, Sewant. Six beads were formerly valued at a styver (one penny sterling.)
There are always several poor families at Albany, who support themselves by
coining this cash for the traders." Ibid.

-- "They treasured these belts, when delivered to them in treaties, and kept
them as records of the nation, to have recourse to upon future contests; which
ceremony, at said treaties, being omitted, all they said passed for nothing."

Smith's History of New Jersey.


Of the Indians of Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
Indians of Pennsylvania and New Jersey
THE Indians of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, like the Six Nations, observed the
greatest decorum in their councils and public transactions, and in all their
discourses and conversation; their language, like theirs, being lofty and
sententious: very seldom, or never, Smith's history of New Jersey
more than two held a discourse at one and the same time, in any one company,
though never so large; in which they never interrupted or contradicted each
other, while speaking, but always waited in silence till he, that was speaking,
had finished what he had to say, before an answer was returned, or any other
speech attempted; all the rest remaining in profound silence till their turn,
without either murmur or whisper.

As to their persons, Their persons, etc.
they are generally more upright and strait, in their limbs, than Europeans
are; their bodies strong, but more adapted to endure hardships than to sustain
labor: they are very rarely crooked or deformed. Their features are regular;
their countenances sometimes fierce, in common rather resembling Jews than
Christians; the color of their skin, a tawney, reddish brown, or copper
color: they all have long, strait, black hair on their heads, which they
grease, and make it shine, with bear's fat, especially the women, who tie it
behind in a large knot, and sometimes in a bag. They are hardy, lean, and
squalid, and the whole manner of their lives uniform. They sometimes paint, or
streak, their faces with black, when in mourning; but with red, when their
affairs go well. It is said, they have no beards, but whether it be so
universally or not, among them, it is certain they have an aversion to hairs
growing on their faces; for they always pull them out by the roots, when any
appear, etc.

Though they are much given to mirth, Their general turn of mind and love of
liberty, etc.
yet they are sometimes grave, even to sadness, upon common, and more so upon
serious occasions. They are very generous and liberal of what they have; not
easily provoked to anger; nor soon appeased when incensed. But liberty, in the
fullest extent, is their ruling passion; to this every other consideration is
subservient. Their children are so trained up, as to cherish this disposition
to the utmost; they are very much indulged, seldom chastised with blows, and
but rarely reproved, or checked. They leave their children's faults for their
own reason to correct, when they are grown up; which, they say, cannot be very
great, before it arrives at some degree of maturity. They abhor what appears to
have a slavish motive to action, as inconsistent with their notion of freedom
and independency; even strong and importunate persuasion is industriously
avoided by them, as bordering too much on dependency, and a kind of violence
offered to the will; they dread flavery more than death. They never liked to be
asked their judgment twice upon the same thing.

Their customs, employments, etc.
Their property was little, and their anxiety to increase it was less; "An
Indian, in answer to this question, "What did the white people mean by the
word, covetousness? was told by another person, That it signified a desire of
more than a man had need of; That is a strange thing, replied the Indian.
their intercourse naturally free and unfettered with ceremony. No ideas of
state and grandeur; no homage of wealth, office, birth, or learning; no pride
of house, habit, or furniture; very little emulation of any kind, to interrupt;
these common causes of the violation and preventions of friendships had no
place with them. They were constant and steady in their attachments to each
other, and, in many instances, far exceeded what might be expected. Their chief
employment was hunting, fishing and fowling; making canoes, bowls, and other
earthen ware; in all which they were ingenious, considering the means used.
Their women's business principally consisted of planting Indian corn, parching,
or roasting it, pounding it to meal, in mortars, or breaking it between stones,
making bread, and dressing victuals. They also made mats, ropes, hats, and
baskets (some very ingeniously) of wild hemp, and roots, or splits of trees.
Besides these and their toil of hunting, they had but few exercises to fatigue
them; and this they sweetened with frequently meeting in companies, to feast,
dance, and make merry; in short, a life of dissipation and ease, of uncertainty
and want, of appetite, satiety, indolence, and sleep, seemed to be the sum of
their character, and the summit, to which their wishes aspired."

In their customs and employments, they were very loving to one another, taking
great care of each other in sickness, while hopes of life remained, but
afterward sometimes remiss. If a company of them came to a Christian's house,
and the master of it gave victuals to one of them, and none to the rest, that
one divided what was given him into equal shares among his companions. If
Christians visited them, they served them first, with the best of their
victuals. Their times of eating were commonly the morning and evening; their
seats and tables, the ground. They lived much on maize, or Indian corn, roasted
in the ashes, sometimes beaten and boiled with water, called homine: they also
made an agreeable cake of the ground corn, and raised beans and peace; but the
woods and rivers afforded them the chief part of their provisions.

They were great observers of the weather, by the moon; they delighted in fine
clothes; and were uneasy and impatient, in sickness, for a remedy: for which
they commonly drank a decoction of roots, in spring water; forbearing flesh
meat, excepting of the female only, when in such case they used any. They were
naturally reserved, apt to resent, to conceal their resentments, and retain
them long; but they were liberal and ge^^rous, kind and affable to the English.
They were punctual in their bargains; and observed this so much in others, that
it was very difficult for a person, who had once failed in this particular, to
get any dealings with them afterward; they were strict observers of property;
yet, to the last degree, thoughtless and inactive in acquiring or keeping it.
They did justice to one an^^her, for crimes among themselves, in a man^ (...)
peculiar to them; even murder might be (...) by feasts, and presents of wampum:
the price of a woman killed was twice as much as that of a man; because, said
they, she bred children, which men could not do. When sober, they rarely
quarrelled among themselves. They lived to sixty, seventy, and eighty years,
and more, before rum was introduced among them, but seldom so long afterward.

Their houses, dress, etc.
Their houses, or wigwams, were sometimes many together, in towns; but mostly
moveable, and occasionally fixed near springs, or other waters, for convenience
of hunting, fishing, basket-making, etc. built of poles, laid on forked sticks
fixed in the ground, with bark, flags, or bushes, on the top and sides; having
an opening to the south, and their fire in the middle. In the night they slept
on the ground, with their feet toward the fire. Their clothing was a coarse
blanket, or skin, thrown over their shoulders, which covered to the knee, and a
piece of the same tied round their legs; with part of a deer skin sewed round
their feet, for shoes. When a company traveled together, Mode of traveling,
etc.
they generally followed each other, in a row singly, and in silence; scarcely
ever two being seen abreast, or by the side of each other: the man went before
with his bow and arrow; the woman followed after, not uncommonly with a child
on her back, and other burdens besides; the woman generally carrying the
luggage.

Their young men married at sixteen or seventeen years of age, Their marriages,
births, and burials.
if before that time they had given a sufficient proof of their manhood, by a
large return of skins. The girls married at about thirteen or fourteen, but
resided with their mothers, for some years after marriage, to hoe the ground,
bear burdens, etc. The young women were originally* very modest, but
distinguished themselves, when at a marriageable state, or age, with a kind of
worked mats, or red, or blue bays, interspersed with small rows of white and
black wampum, put round the head, down to near the middle of the forehead. Both
the young and old women were highly offended at indecent expressions, unless
corrupted with strong liquor. Their marriage ceremony was sometimes thus: --
the relations and friends being present, the bridegroom delivered a bone to the
bride, and she gave him an ear of Indian corn; meaning, that he was to provide
flesh meat, and she, bread. It was not unusual, notwithstanding, to change
their mates upon disagreement; the children went with the party that loved them
most, the expense being of no moment to either; but in case of difference, or
disagreement, on this head, the man was allowed the first choice, when the
children were divided, or when there was but one; but, for the most part,
agreeable to the Indian rule, in such cases, partus sequitur ventrem, the
children, or young, go with the mother; which is as reasonable among them, as
among cattle, since the whole burden of bringing up falls on her. They commonly
washed their children in cold water, Management of their children, etc.
as soon as born; and to make their limbs strait, they tied them to a board,
and hung them on their backs, when they traveled. Their children usually
walked alone at nine months old. From their infancy they were formed with care
to endure hardships, to bear derision, and even blows, patiently -- at least,
with a composed countenance.

Their small knowledge of numbers appeared in their manner of counting, which
was by tens, that is, Their skill and ingenuity in some things, etc.
two tens, three tens, four tens, etc. but when the number was above their
comprehension, they pointed to the stars, to the hairs of their head, etc. and
they kept reckoning of time by moons. Their ingenuity appeared in several of
their mechanic inventions and performance; as, in their manner of pointing
their arrows, with a sharp, flinty stone; and in their making of their axes, of
the same materials, for cutting their wood; which are often found, and dug up
in the fields, with other kinds of their implements. They got fire by rubbing
certain pieces of wood together of different sorts, turning the end of a hard
piece upon the side of one which was soft and dry. By the means of fire and
their stone axes, they felled large trees, and afterward scooped them into
bowls and other utensils. They were very studious in observing the virtues of
roots and herbs, by which they usually cured themselves of diseases, both by
outward and inward applications; besides which they frequently used sweating
and the cold bath. Their manner of sweating the patient was, first, to enclose
him in a narrow cabin, in the (...) of which was a red hot stone; this being
frequently wetted with ^^^er, made a warm vapor; with which and his own sweat,
the patient being sufficiently wet, was immediately, in this condition, brought
to the nearest creek, or river, and plunged into it. This was repeated as often
as was thought necessary; and sometimes was said to have performed great cares;
but at other times killed the patient, notwithstanding the ^ardy natures of the
Indians, especially in the small pox, and other European diseases.


Their government.
Their government, in these parts, was monarchical and successive, or
hereditary; but mostly on the mother's side, to prevent a spurious issue; that
is, the children of him who reigns will not succeed, but his brother by the
mother, or the children of his sister; whose sons were to reign; and after
them, the male children of her daughters; for no women inherited.

Notwithstanding this mode of succession of their kings, yet, for extraordinary
reasons, it was sometimes altered; of which appears an instance in S. Smith's
history of New Jersey, in the case of the old king Ockanickon, who died at
Burlington, in that province, about the year 1681: before his death he altered
the succession; and instead of Sheoppy and Swampis, who, in regular order, were
to have succeeded him, he, for reasons in his speech there given, appointed his
brother's son, Jahku^^^^ to succeed him, giving him some excellent advice on
the occasion. This king, as there related, soon after this, made a good and
pious exit; and his remains were interred in the Quakers' burying ground, at
that place, being attended to the grave with solemnity by the Indians, in their
manner, and with great respect by many of the English settlers; to whom he had
been a true friend.

That formality, which, in the European style, Of their religion, etc.
or acceptance of the term, constitutes what is commonly called religion,
seems to have made but little appearance among them, though probably they had
some customs no less irrational and ridiculous, in the eye of reason; but they
were acquainted with the principle of justice and truth; which, by their
conduct, they demonstrated, in a high degree, so far as the most judicious
among the first and early English settlers observed, and inform us. And it were
to be wished that what notions they had of a Deity, and their actions relative
to their duty to him, had not, in part, been misrepresented by any; who, by
attempting to give an account of what they did not, or could not, fully
understand, have supplied that deficiency with conjectures, perhaps without
design of misrepresentation, and thereby, in some things, disguised, or
obscured, what was really known respecting some of them, in this case.

The Indians averse to European customs, etc.
It is well known they were very much averse to European religion and customs,
unless in such things as they could comprehend, and clearly understand were for
their real benefit; yet, in this, sometimes their passions prevailed over their
better understanding; instance, their drunkenness, etc. But though the hoped
and desired success did not so fully attend the labors bestowed on them, and
the means used, both by William Penn himself, in person, and by diverse others
of the more pious and early settlers, whose good example was very remarkable,
with the later endeavors since continued, to inform the judgment of the
Indians, in these provinces, in religious affairs, to acquaint them with the
principles and advantage of Christianity, to restrain them from some things,
acknowledged by themselves to be manifestly pernicious, particularly from
abusing themselves with strong liquor, by law, as well as advice, etc. so much
as might reasonably have been wished, or expected; yet these very labors and
means were far from being useless, or entirely without good effect; for the
consequence declared that the Indians, in general, were sensible of the kind
regard paid them, and of the good intended thereby; which they showed and
proved by their future conduct, and steady friendship; as appears in the
preceding history, though they generally refused, in a formal manner, to
embrace European manners, religion and opinions: "For, governed by their own
customs, S. Smith.
and not by laws, creeds, etc. they greatly revered those of their ancestors,
and followed them so implicitly, that a new thought, or action, seldom took
place among them."

They are thought (says William Penn) to have believed in a God and
immortality; See William Penn's account of the Indians.
and seemed to aim at a public worship: in performing this, they sometimes sat
in several circles, one within another; the action consisted of singing,
jumping, shouting, and dancing; which they are said to have used, mostly as a
tradition from their ancestors, rather than from any knowledge, or enquiry of
their own into the serious parts of its origin.

They said the great King, who made them, dwelt in a glorious country to the
southward; and that the spirits of the best should go thither, and live again.
Their most solemn worship was a sacrifice of the first fruits; in which they
burned the first and fattest buck, and feasted together upon what else they had
collected. In this sacrifice they broke no bones of any creature, which they
ate; but after they had done, they gathered upon together, and burned them very
carefully. They distinguished between a good and evil Manetta, or Spirit;
worshipping the former for the good, they hoped; and, it is said, some of them,
the latter, that they might not be afflicted with the evil, which they feared;
so slavishly dark are some of them represented to have been in their
understandings! But whether this last be true, in a general sense, or peculiar
only to some parts, it was certainly not the case at all among the Indians
within the limits of these provinces, or, at least, very much concealed from
the first and early settlers of them.

But in late years it is less to be admired that the Indians, in these
provinces, and their vicinity, Reasons for the Indians' aversion to
Christianity, etc.
have shown so little regard to the Christian religion but rather treated it,
as well as its professors, with contempt and abhorrence, when it is duly
considered what kind of Christians those generally are, with whom they mostly
deal and converse; as, the Indian traders, and most of the inhabitants of the
back counties of this and the neighboring provinces, who have chiefly
represented the professors of Christianity among them, for many years! The
trade between the English and the Indians, in later years especially, has been
mostly carried on by the vilest, and most abandoned part of the community: the
Indians have long had but very little opportunity to converse with any other
kind of Christians, besides these, who go most among them: from the lives and
conduct of these they judge of Christianity, and European manners, etc. This is
mentioned in a treatise, printed in London, in 1759, as one cause, among
others, of the first war, that commenced with them in Pennsylvania, about the
year 1754; wherein is likewise expressed; "It would be too shocking to describe
the conduct and behavior of the traders, when among the Indians, and endless
to enumerate the abuses, the Indians had received and borne from them, for a
series of years. Suffice it to say, that several of the tribes were, at last,
weary of bearing. And as these traders were the persons, who were, in some
part, the representatives of the English among the Indians; and by whom they
were to judge of our manners and religion, they conceived such invincible
prejudices against both, particularly against our holy religion, that when Mr.
Sergeant, a gentleman in New England, took a journey, in 1741, to the
Shawanese, and some other tribes, living on Susquahanna, and offered to
instruct them in the Christian religion, they rejected his offer with disdain.
They reproached Christianity. They told him the traders would lie, cheat, and
debauch their women, and even their wives, if their husbands were not at home.
They said further, that the Senecas had given them their country, but charged
them withal, never to receive Christianity for the English," etc.
viz. such of the lowest rank, and least informed, of mankind, who have flowed
in from Germany, Ireland, and the jails of Great Britain, and settled next
them, as well as those, who flee from justice in the settled, or better
inhabited parts of the country, and retire among them, that they might be out
of the reach of the laws, etc. the least qualified to exhibit favorable ideas
of this kind; but it is most certain they have done the contrary; insomuch
that, it were to be wished the cause of the late unhappy Indian war within the
limits of these provinces, did not take its rise, in no small degree, from the
want of common justice, in the conduct of too many of these people toward
them: for notwithstanding the general ignorance of the Indians in many things,
especially of European arts and inventions, yet in things of this kind they
rely more on experience, than theory; and they mostly formed their judgment of
the English, or Europeans, and of their religion and customs, not from the
words, but from the actions and manners of those, with whom they most conversed
and transacted business. The following has been printed in Pennsylvania, as a
genuine speech of an Indian chief in that province; but whether it be really
so, or not, it certainly contains arguments, which have been used by some of
these people, and, in this place, may serve, in part, to give some idea of
their sentiments on the subject: it is thus first introduced, viz.

"In, or about the year of our Lord, 1710, a Swedish Missionary preached a
sermon, at an Indian treaty, held at Conestogoe in Pennsylvania; in which
sermon he set forth original sin, the necessity of a Mediator; and endeavored,
by certain arguments, to induce the Indians to embrace the Christian religion.
After he had ended his discourse, one of the Indian chiefs made a speech in
reply to the sermon; and the discourses, on both sides, were made known by
interpreters. The Missionary, upon his return to Sweden, published his sermon,
and the Indian's answer, Having wrote them in Latin, he dedicated them to the
university of Ups^l. and requested them to furnish him with arguments, to
confute such strong reasoning of the Indians. The Indian speech, translated
from the Latin, is as follows," viz.

"A speech delivered by an Indian chief, in reply to a sermon, preached by a
Swedish Missionary, in order to convert the Indians to the Christian religion.

"Since the subject of his (the Missionary's) errand is to persuade us to
embrace a new doctrine, perhaps it may not be amiss, before we offer him the
reasons, why we cannot comply with his request, to acquaint him with the
grounds and principles of that religion, which he would have us abandon.

"Our forefathers were under a strong persuasion, as we are, that those, who
act well, in this life, shall be rewarded in the next, according to the degree
of their virtue: and on the other hand, that those, who behave wickedly here,
will undergo such punishments hereafter, as are proportionate to the crimes
they were guilty of This has been constantly and invariably received and
acknowledged for a truth, through every successive generation of our ancestors.
It could not have taken its rise from fable; for human fiction, however
artfully and plausibly contrived, can never gain credit long, among any people,
where free enquiry is allowed; which was never denied by our ancestors; who, on
the contrary, thought it the sacred, inviolable, natural right of every man, to
examine and judge for himself. Therefore we think it evident that our notion,
concerning future rewards and punishments, was either revealed immediately from
heaven, to some of our forefathers, and from them descended to us, or, that it
was implanted in each of us, at our creation, by the Creator of all things.
Whatever the methods might have been, whereby God has been pleased to make
known to us his will, and give us a knowledge of our duty, it is still, in our
sense, a divine revelation.

"Now we desire to propose to him some few questions. Does he believe that our
forefathers, men, eminent for their piety, constant and warm in the pursuit of
virtue, hoping thereby to merit everlasting happiness, were all damned? Does he
think that we, who are their zealous imitators, in good works, and influenced
by the same motives as they were, earnestly endeavoring, with the greatest
circumspection, to tread the paths of integrity, are in a state of damnation?
If these be his sentiments, they are surely as impious as they are bold and
daring.

"In the next place, we beg that he would explain himself more particularly
concerning the revelation he talks of. If he admits no other, than what is
contained in his written book, the contrary is evident, from what has been
shown before: but, if he says, God has revealed himself to us, but not
sufficient for our salvation; then, we ask, to what purpose should he have
revealed himself to us in any wise? It is clear, that a revelation,
insufficient to save, cannot put us in a better condition, than we should be
in, without any revelation at all. We cannot conceive that God should point out
to us the end, we ought to aim at, without opening to us the way to arrive at
that end. But, supposing our understandings to be so far illuminated, as to
know it to be our duty to please God, who yet has left us under an incapacity
of doing it, will this Missionary, therefore, conclude that we shall be
eternally damned? Will he take upon him to pronounce damnation against us, for
not doing those things, which he himself acknowledges were impossible by us to
be done? It is our opinion that every man is possessed of sufficient knowledge
for his salvation. The Almighty, for any thing we know, may have communicated
the knowledge of himself to a different race of people, in a different manner.

"Some say, they have the will of God in writing: be it so; their revelation
has no advantage above ours; since both must be equally sufficient to save;
otherwise the end of the revelation would be frustrated. Besides, if they be
both true, they must be the same in substance; and the difference can only lie
in the mode of communication He tells us there are many precepts in his written
revelation, which we are entirely ignorant of But these written commands can
only be designed for those, who have the writings; they cannot possibly regard
us. Had the Almighty thought so much knowledge necessary to our salvation, his
goodness would not long have deferred the communication of it to us; and to
say, that, in a matter so necessary, he could not, at one and the same time,
equally reveal himself to all mankind, is nothing less than an absolute denial
of his omnipotence. Without doubt he can make his will manifest, without the
help of any book, or the assistance of any bookish man whatever.

"We shall, in the next place, consider the arguments, which arise from a
consideration of Providence. If we are the work of God, (which I presume will
not be denied) it follows from thence, that we are under the care and
protection of God: for, it cannot be supposed that the Deity should abandon his
own creatures, and be utterly regardless of their welfare. Then, to say, that
the Almighty has permitted us to remain in a fatal error, through so many
ages, is to represent him as a tyrant: how is it consistent with his justice,
to force life upon a race of mortals, without their consent, and then damn them
eternally, without ever opening to them a door of salvation? Our conceptions of
the gracious God are more noble; and we think that those, who teach otherwise,
do little less than blaspheme. Again, it is through the care and goodness of
the Almighty, that from the beginning of time, through many generations, to
this day, our name has been preserved, unblotted out by enemies, unreduced to
nothing. By the same care we now enjoy our lives; are furnished with the
necessary means of preserving those lives. But all these things are trifling,
compared with our salvation.

"Therefore, since God has been so careful of us, in matters of little
consequence, it would be absurd to affirm, that he has neglected us, in cases
of the greatest importance. Admit, that he has forsaken us, yet it could not
have been without a just cause. Let us suppose, that an heinous crime was
committed by one of our ancestors, like to that, which we are told, happened
among another race of people; in such case, God would certainly punish the
criminal, but would never involve us, who are innocent, in his guilt. Those who
think otherwise must make the Almighty a very whimsical, ill-natured being.
Once more, are the Christians more virtuous? or, rather, are they not more
vicious, than we are? If so, how came it to pass, that they are the objects of
God's beneficence, while we are neglected? Does the Deity confer his favors
without reason, and with so much partiality? in a word, we find the Christians
much more depraved, in their morals, than ourselves; and we judge of their
doctrine by the badness of their lives."




Indians not destitute of a sense of God and true religion.
For, however ignorant and averse to European refinement, and ways of thinking,
on religious subjects, the Indians, in general, might appear to have been, yet,
as in all other nations of mankind, it is most certain there were some among
them of a more exalted way of thinking, and enlightened lightened
understandings, who, notwithstanding the great absurdities, among the
generality, were not without some degree of a just sense and acknowledgment of
the providential care and regard of the Almighty Creator over the human race,
both in a general and particular capacity, and, even, of divine grace and
influence on the human mind, and that independent of foreign information, or
instruction: of this their immediate sense and understanding of mental objects,
which, is most manifest, many of them possessed, even of the highest nature,
are very demonstrative; besides, part, at least, of their traditions, from
their ancestors, whose prime original, so far as it is founded in truth, must
necessarily have first arisen from the divine Intelligence, though communicated
in different degree to different parts of the human race, and though much of
such tradition may be mixed with imagination and absurdity.

Religion of the Indians.
The following letter of Conrad Weiser to a friend, respecting the Indians, on
this subject, is informing. The author was born in Germany, and was many years
Indian interpreter for the province; and consequently was well acquainted with
these people: he was highly esteemed by both the English and Indians, as a
person of integrity, skill and ability, i^ the discharge of diverse important
trusts, which had been committed to him by both parties, for a long series of
years: the letter translated from the German language, is thus expressed, viz.

Esteemed Friend,
Conrad Weiser's letter respecting it.
I write this, in compliance with thy request, to give thee an account of what I
have observed among the Indians, in relation to their belief and confidence in
a Divine Being, according to the observations I have made, from 1714, in the
time of my youth, to this day, (about the year 1746).

If, by the word religion, people mean an assent to certain creeds, or the
observance of a set of religious duties; as, appointed prayers, singings,
preaching, baptism, etc. or, even, Heathenish worship, then it may be said, the
Five Nations, and their neighbors, have no religion. But, if, by religion, we
mean an attraction of the soul to God, whence proceeds a confidence in, and
hunger after, the knowledge of him, then this people must be allowed to have
some religion among them, notwithstanding their sometimes savage deportment.
For we find among them some tracts of a confidence in God alone; and, even,
sometimes, though but seldom, a vocal calling upon him: I shall give one or two
instances of this, that fell under my own observation.

In the year 1737, I was sent, the first time, to Onondago, at the desire of
the Governor of Virginia. I departed in the latter end of February, very
unexpectedly, for a journey of five hundred English miles, through a
wilderness, where there was neither road nor path, and at such a time of the
year, when creatures (animals) could not be met with, for food. There were with
me a Dutchman and three Indians. After we had gone one hundred and fifty miles
on our journey, we came to a narrow valley, about half a mile broad, and thirty
long; both sides of which were encompassed with high mountains; on which the
snow laid about three feet deep: in it ran a stream of water, also about three
feet deep; which was so crooked, that it kept a continued winding course from
one side of the valley to the other. In order to avoid wading so often through
the water, we endeavored to pass along on the slope of the mountain; the snow
being three feet deep, and so hard frozen, on the top, that we could walk upon
it: but we were obliged to make holes in the snow with our hatchets, that our
feet might not slip down the mountain; and thus we crept on. It happened that
the old Indian's foot slipped; and the root of a tree, by which he held,
breaking, he slid down the mountain, as from the roof of a house; but happily
he was stopped in his fall, by the string, which fastened his pack, hitching on
the stump of a small tree. The other two Indians could not go to his aid, but
our Dutch fellow-traveller did; yet not without visible danger of his own life.
I also could not put a foot forward, till I was helped; after this we took the
first opportunity to descend into the valley; which was not till after we had
labored hard for half an hour with hands and feet. Having observed a tree
lying directly off, from where the Indian fell, when we were got into the
valley again, we went back about one hundred paces, where we saw, that if the
Indian had slipped four or five paces further, he would have fallen over a rock,
one hundred feet perpendicular, upon craggy pieces of rocks below. The Indian
was astonished, and turned quite pale; then with outstretched arms, and great
earnestness he spoke these words: "I thank the great Lord and Governor of this
world, in that he has had mercy upon me, and has been willing that I should
live longer." Which words I, at that time, put down in my journal: this
happened on the 25th of March, 1737.

In the 9th of April following, while we were yet on our journey, I found
myself extremely weak, through the fatigue of so long a journey, with the cold
and hunger, which I had suffered; there having fallen a fresh snow about twenty
inches deep, and we being yet three days journey from Onondago, in a frightful
wilderness; my spirit failed, my body trembled and shook; I thought I should
fall down and die; I stepped aside, and sat down under a tree, expecting there to
die. My companions soon missed me; the Indians came back, and found me sitting
there. They remained awhile silent; at last, the old Indian said, "My dear
companion, thou have hitherto encouraged us, will thou now quite give up?
remember that evil days are better than good days: for when we suffer much, we
do not sin; sin will be driven out of us by suffering: but good days cause men
to sin; and God cannot extend his mercy to them; but contrariwise, when it
goes evil with us, God has compassion upon us." These words made me ashamed;
I rose up, and traveled as well as I could.

The next year I went another journey to Onondago, in company with Joseph
Spanhenberg and two others. It happened that an Indian came to us in the
evening, who had neither shoes, stockings, shirt, gun, knife, nor hatchet; in a
word, he had nothing but an old torn blanket, and some rags. Upon enquiring
whither he was going, he answered to Onondago. I knew him, and asked him how he
could undertake a journey of three hundred miles so naked and unprovided,
having no provisions, nor any arms, to kill creatures, for his sustenance? He
answered, he had been among enemies, and had been obliged to save himself by
flight; and so had lost all. This was true, in part; for he had disposed of
some of his things among the Irish, for strong liquors. Upon further talk, he
told me very cheerfully; "That God fed every thing, which had life, even, the
rattle snake itself, though it was a bad creature; and that God would also
provide, in such a manner, that he should get alive to Onondago; he knew for
certain that he should go thither; that it was visible God was with the
Indians, in the wilderness; because they always cast their care upon him; but
that, contrary to this, the Europeans always carried bread with them." He was
an Onondago Indian; his name was Onontagketa; the next day we traveled in
company; and the day following I provided him with a knife, hatchet, flint, and
tinder, also shoes and stockings, and sent him before me, to give notice to the
council, at Onondago, that I was coming; which he truly performed, being got
thither three days before us.

Two years ago I was sent by the Governor to Shamokin, on account of the
unhappy death of John Armstrong, the Indian trader, (about 1744). After I had
performed my errand, there was a feast prepared; to which the Governor's
messengers were invited: there were about one hundred persons present, to whom,
after we had, in great silence, devoured a fat bear, the eldest of the chiefs
made a speech, in which he said, "That, by a great misfortune, three of their
brethren, the white men, had been killed by an Indian; that nevertheless the
sun was not set, (meaning there was no war); it had only been somewhat darkened
by a small cloud, which was now done away; he that had done evil was like to be
punished, and the land to remain in peace: therefore he exhorted his people to
thankfulness to God; and thereupon he began to sing with an awful solemnity,
but without expressing any words; the others accompanied him with their voices:
after they had done, the same Indian, with great earnestness, or fervor, spoke
these words; "Thanks, thanks, be to thee, thou great Lord of the world, in that
thou have again caused the sun to shine, and have dispersed the dark cloud; --
the Indians are thine.


Account of some religious Indians in 1760.
One more instance may be mentioned on this subject, which has come under my own
observation and personal knowledge. In the summer of the year 1760, a number of
religious Indians paid a visit to the Quakers in Philadelphia, on a religious
account. They were mostly of the Minusing tribe, and came from a town called
Mahackloosing, or Wyalusing, on, or near the east branch of Susquahanna river,
in Pennsylvania, about two hundred miles north westward from the city. Their
chief man, whom the rest of the company styled their minister, was named
Papunehung, or Papounan; and their interpreter, Job Chillaway, an Indian.

On their arrival, they waited on Governor Hamilton, to pay him their respects,
and to deliver three prisoners, whom they had redeemed; having themselves
absolutely refused to join with the other Indians, in the savage war, which
raged about that time; though their visit was principally on a different
account.

They had a public conference with the Governor, in the state-house, on the
occasion, in the presence of many citizens; wherein Papounan expressed the
design of their visit was principally to the Quakers, on a religious account;
that they desired to do justice, to love God, and to live in peace; requesting,
at the same time, that none of his company should be permitted to have any
spirituous liquors, etc. He refused the presents, offered by the Governor, and
gave him the reasons; further saying: "I think on God, who made us; I want to
be instructed in his worship and service; I am a great lover of peace, and have
never been concerned in war affairs; I have a sincere remembrance of the old
friendship between the Indians and your forefathers, and shall ever observe
it." After mentioning some other things, and expressing himself further on the
view, or design, of their visit, on a religious account, he said, "Though what
he had mentioned respecting religious affairs might appear trivial to some, who
thought different from him, yet he was fixed in his mind respecting them; that
their young men agreed with him, and wanted to love God, and to desist from
their former bad course of life;" further declaring, "I am glad I have an
opportunity of mentioning these several affairs in the presence of such a large
auditory of young and old people; the great God observes all that passes in our
hearts, and hears all that we say one to another," etc. The notes, etc. on the
occasion, were taken from the ^nterpreter by Secretary Peter's.

He then finished with a solemn act of public thanksgiving and prayer to God,
with great devotion and energy, in the Indian language (not being able to speak
nor understand English). The unusualness, force and sound of the Indian
language, on such an occasion, with the manifest great sincerity, fervor and
concern of the speaker, seemed to strike the whole auditory in an uncommon
manner, as well as the Indians themselves; who, all the while, behaved with a
gravity and deportment becoming the occasion, and appeared to unite heartily
with him, in his devotion.

They were kindly treated by the Governor, and remained in town afterward
several days, visiting and conferring with diverse of the Friends, or Quakers,
and attending their religious meetings, while they staid; who behaved toward
them in a kind, hospitable and friendly manner. They repeatedly expressed their
great dislike and abhorrence of war, as arising from a bad spirit, admiring
that the Christians were such great warriors, rather than lovers and
cultivators of peace, etc. They kept themselves entirely from strong liquor,
and uniformly observed a sober, orderly and commendable behavior, often
expressing their satisfaction with what they heard from the Friends.

From the account, they gave of themselves, they had been of this mind for
several years before this time; and, as far as appeared, and was understood by
those they visited, principally from an immediate sense of divine goodness,
manifested in their minds, without any instrumental means, preaching, or
information from other persons; yet, it was but lately, that in a more especial
manner they had been thus disposed, and that Papounan had been induced to
preach among them; in which service he was afterward joined by two or three
other Indians. They appeared very earnest and sincere in promoting true piety;
which they represented, according to their apprehension of it, to be the effect
of an internal operation of the divine influence on the mind; whereby it became
changed from a bad to a good state: this they emphatically expressed by the
heart becoming soft, and filled with good, etc.

The interpreter gave the following a count of Papunehung's change, or
conversion, viz. "He was formerly a drunken man; but the death of his father
bringing sorrow over his mind, he fell into a thoughtful, melancholic state; in
which his eyes were turned to behold the earth, and consider the things which
are thereon; from seeing the folly and wickedness, which prevailed, his sorrow
increased; and it was given him to believe, there was a great power, which had
created all these things. Upon which his mind was turned from beholding this
lower world, to look toward him, who had created it; and strong desires were
raised in his heart after the further knowledge of his Creator: nevertheless
the Almighty was not yet pleased to be found, or known, by him. But his desires
increasing, he forsook the town, and went into the woods, in great bitterness
of spirit. He was missed by the other Indians, who feared some casualty might
have happened to him, but after searching for him, he was not found. At the end
of five days it pleased God to appear to him, to his comfort; and to give him a
sight not only of his own inward state, but also an acquaintance, or knowledge,
into the works of nature: so that he apprehended a sense was given him of the
virtues and natures of several herbs, roots, plants, trees, with the different
relation they had one to another; and he was made sensible that man stood in
the nearest relation to God, of any part of the creation. It was at this time
that he was more particularly made sensible of his duty to God. He came home
rejoicing, and endeavored to put in practice what he apprehended was required
of him," etc.

These Indians made a second visit to the Quakers in the next following summer,
on the same account, and behaved in the same regular and becoming manner as
before. They maintained an orderly public worship, in their way, at stated
times: at some of which they were visited by several of the Friends.
Papunehung, their chief preacher, in his discourses, at such times, principally
advised and exhorted them to circumspection, and brotherly love, in their
conduct; that it might be manifest they retained a true sense of their
Creator's goodness and favor continued to them; and in his public prayers and
addresses to his Maker, he acknowledged, and returned thanks for, his mercy, in
still affording them a sense of his compassion and loving kindness, requesting
a continuance and increase thereof; that they might jointly know, in the end, a
place of rest, where love would prevail and have the dominion. When they were
not dispersed, as in their hunting season, it appeared, they constantly met in
this manner, in the morning, before sunrise, and in the evening, after sunset.

The purport of more of Papunehung's expressions was, "That it was an affair of
much sorrow to him, that men should make so bad use of the breath of life,
which God had breathed into them; and which ought continually to be improved to
his honor, and the mutual benefit of mankind; that it was not well to speak of
things, which related to the Almighty, only from the root of the tongue;
(meaning, in a superficial, or insensible, manner) but, in order that such
words should be good, they must proceed from the good principle in the heart;
that he had, for many years, felt the good spirit in his heart; but, wanting to
try and prove it, in order to come to some certainty, he remained in an
unsettled state, till about four years ago, when he received an assurance, that
this love was good, and that he needed no further enquiry about it; and being
past all doubt, that this was the right way, he had endeavored to walk
steadily therein since that time; this spirit was a spirit of love; and that it
was his daily prayer, that it might continually abide with him. That when he
felt it prevalent in his heart, he was so directed, as to speak what was right,
and prevented from saying any wrong thing; that by reason of men not keeping to
this love, which their Maker has given them, in their hearts, the evil spirit
gets possession there, and destroys all that is good in them; and this is the
cause why men dislike one another, grow angry with, and endeavor to kill, one
another; but when we follow the leadings of the good spirit, it causes our
hearts to be tender, to love one another, to look upon all mankind as one, and
so to become as one family," etc.

That strict amity between the Indians and the first and early English settlers
of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and their successors, for above seventy years,
with the means of fixing and preserving that friendship, have already been
occasionally mentioned in the course of the preceding history. It was about the
year 1754, when a very different conduct began to exhibit itself, in some of
the Indians, Commencement of the Indian war in 1754, etc.
situated north westward of the settled parts of Pennsylvania, very contrary to
what before had been the uniform practice of that people, in this province.

Hostilities commenced; and many of the frontier inhabitants suffered, in
consequence of a savage war. The affair was considered as very extraordinary,
and caused much speculation in such persons, as were but little acquainted with
the nature and management of Indian affairs, about that time, in the province;
that these people, who had ever showed themselves kind and steady friends Note.
Besides Papunehung and his company, there were some other sober, religiously
disposed Indians, who came to Philadelphia about this time, from a place about
fifty miles above Wyalusing; of these Samuel Curtis, of the Nan^^^^ke tribe,
was one. He had formerly been addicted to strong liquor, but was now reformed
by means of Papunehung's ministry, become a sober man, and after some time, a
preacher among his people.
to the English, for such a long series of years, as ever since their first
arrival in the country, should now become their enemies, and join with the
French against them: and many, who had been continually flocking into the
province, in later years, having from their inexperience and ignorance, too
despicable an opinion of that people, and treating them accordingly, were by
this conduct foolishly enraged against the whole species indiscriminately;
insomuch that, in the latter part of the year 1763, calling to their aid the
madness of the wildest enthusiasm, with which, under pretense of religion,
certain most furious zealots, among the preachers of a numerous sect, in the
province, could inspire their hearers, to cover their barbarity, a number of,
not improperly named, armed demi-savages, inhabitants of Lancaster county,
principally from the townships of Paxtang and Donnegal, and their
neighborhood, committed the most horrible massacre, that ever was heard of in
this, or perhaps, any other province, with impunity! The following extract is
taken from an authentic publication, printed at that time in Philadelphia,
entitled, "A narrative of the late massacrees, in Lancaster county, of a number
of Indians, friends of this province," etc. viz.

"These Indians were the remains of a tribe of the Six Nations, settled at
Conestogoe, and thence called Conestogoe Indians. On the first arrival of the
English in Pennsylvania, messengers from this tribe came to welcome them, with
presents of venison, corn and skins; and the whole tribe entered into a treaty
of friendship with the first Proprietary William Penn; which was to last as
long as the sun should shine, or the waters run into the rivers.

"This treaty has been since frequently renewed, and the chain brightened, as
they express it, from time to time. It has never been violated, on their part,
or ours, till now. As their lands, by degrees, were mostly purchased, and the
settlement of the white people began to surround them, the Proprietor assigned
them lands on the manor of Conestogoe, which they might not part with; there
they have lived many years, in friendship with their white neighbors, who
loved them for their peaceable, inoffensive behavior.

"It has always been observed, that Indians, settled in the neighborhood of
white people, do not increase, but diminish continually. This tribe accordingly
went on diminishing, till there remained in their town, on the manor, but
twenty persons, viz. seven men, five women and eight children, boys and girls.

"Of these Shehaes was a very old man, having assisted at the second treaty,
held with them by Mr. Penn, in 1701; and ever since continued a faithful friend
to the English; he is said to have been an exceeding good man, considering his
education, being naturally of a most kind, benevolent temper.

-- "This little society continued the custom they had begun, when more
numerous, of addressing every new Governor, and every descendant of the first
Proprietary, welcoming him to the province, assuring him of their fidelity, and
praying a continuance of that favor and protection, which they had hitherto
experienced. They had accordingly sent up an address of this kind to our
present Governor ( John Penn, Esquire) on his arrival; but the same was scarce
delivered when the unfortunate catastrophe happened, which we are about to
relate.

"On Wednesday, the 14th of December, 1763, fifty-seven men, from some of our
frontier townships, who had projected the destruction of this little
commonwealth, came all well mounted, and armed with firelocks, hangers and
hatchets, having traveled through the country in the night to Conestogoe
manor. There they surrounded the small village of Indian huts, and just at
break of day, broke in upon them all at once. Only three men, two women, and a
young boy were found at home; the rest being out among the neighboring white
people; some to sell their baskets, brooms and bowls, they manufactured, and
others on other occasions. These poor defenseless creatures were immediately
fired upon, stabbed and hatcheted to death! The good Shehaes, among the rest,
cut to pieces in his bed! All of them were scalped, and otherwise horribly
mangled. Then their huts were set on fire, and most of them burnt down.

"The Magistrates of Lancaster sent out to collect the remaining Indians,
brought them into the town, for their better security against any further
attempt; and, it is said, condoled with them, on the misfortune, that had
happened, took them by the hand, and promised them protection.

"They were put into the workhouse, a strong building, as the place of
greatest safety.

"These cruel men again assembled themselves; and hearing that the remaining
fourteen Indians were in the workhouse at Lancaster, they suddenly appeared
before that town on the twenty-seventh of December. Fifty of them armed as
before, dismounting, went directly to the workhouse, and by violence broke
open the door, and entered with the utmost fury in their countenances. When the
poor wretches saw they had no protection nigh, nor could possibly escape, and
being without the least weapon of defense, they divided their little families,
the children clinging to their parents; they fell on their faces, protested
their innocence, declared their love to the English, and that, in their whole
lives, they had never done them injury; and in this posture, they all received
the hatchet! Men, women and children, were every one inhumanly murdered in cold
blood!

"The barbarous men, who committed the atrocious fact, in defiance of
government, of all laws human and divine, and, to the eternal disgrace of their
country and color, then mounted their horses, huzzaed in triumph, as if they
had gained a victory, and rode off unmolested!

"The bodies of the murdered were then brought out, and exposed in the street,
till a hole could be made in the earth, to receive and cover them. But the
wickedness cannot be covered, and the guilt will lie on the whole land, till
justice is done on the murderers. The blood of the innocent will cry to heaven
for vengeance.

"Notwithstanding the proclamations and endeavors of the Governor, on the
occasion, etc. [continues the narrative] "The murderers having given out such
threatenings against those that disapproved their proceedings, that the whole
country seems to be in terror, and no one durst speak what he knows; even, the
letters from thence are unsigned, in which any dislike is expressed of the
rioters.

"But it seems these people (being chiefly Presbyterians) think they have a
better justification -- nothing less than the word of God. With the scriptures
in their hands and mouths they can set at naught that express command, "Thou
shall do no murder," and justify their wickedness by the command given Joshua,
to destroy the Heathen! Horrid perversion of scripture and of religion! to
father the worst of crimes on the God of love and peace!

"The faith of this government has been frequently given to those Indians, but
that did not avail them with people who despise all government," etc.

So far had the infection spread, which caused this action, and so much had
fear seized the minds of the people, or perhaps both, that neither the printer
nor the writer of this publication, though supposed to be as nearly connected
as Franklin and Hall were at that time, and men of the first character in their
way, did not insert either their names, or places of abode, in it!

It was printed while the insurgents were preparing to advance toward
Philadelphia; or on their way thither: it appeared to have some effect, in
preventing the threatened consequences, by exciting an exertion of endeavors,
in the citizens, for that purpose; and being a relation of real facts, though
writ in a hurry, it was never answered or contradicted.


and under the notion of extirpating the Heathen from the earth, Massacre of
the Conestogoe Indians, etc.
as Joshua did of old, that these saints might possess the land alone, they
murdered the remains of a whole tribe of peaceable, inoffensive, helpless
Indians, who were British subjects, young and old, men, women and children,
situated on Conestogoe manor, in the same county; where they had been placed by
the government, in former time; and had ever since continued in strict and
inviolable friendship with the English; being then far within the settled parts
of the province, and entirely innocent, as to the war: of whom mention has
already been made, in the preceding history, respecting their last compact with
William Penn, in the year 1701; and in the treaties held with them since by
Governor Keith, etc.

"The bloody scene was completed in the town of Lancaster itself; where the
remainder of the tribe, which had escaped the first slaughter, taking refuge,
declaring their innocence, and crying for mercy and protection, were through
the connivance, if not the encouragement, of the Christian-professing
Magistrates, and other principal persons of that town, all inhumanly butchered,
in cold blood, even infants at the breast, by the same party of armed ruffians,
at midday, without opposition, or the least molestation! -- to the lasting
infamy of the inhabitants of that place, who had power sufficient to prevent
it!"

With hands imbrued in innocent blood, and taking courage from their unopposed
success and cruelty, the insurgents now greatly increased in number, and
proceeded toward Philadelphia, with avowed intention to cut off a party of
innocent and friendly Indians there; consisting of those of Wyalusing, before
mentioned, and some others; who had thrown themselves under the protection of
the government, to the number of about one hundred and forty. By their conduct,
they appeared to depend on the secret assistance of a number of their brethren,
the same kind of saints, in that city; who, afterward, by many of them
advocating their cause and proceedings, with other strong symptoms, appeared to
have been, either, in some manner, privately connected with them, or concerted
and directed the whole tragical and bloody insurrection.

This lawless banditti advanced, in many hundreds, armed, as far as Germantown,
within about six miles of the city, threatening death and slaughter to all, who
should dare to oppose them; and, in all probability, they would have effected
their bloody purpose, had they not met with such a proper and vigorous
opposition from the government, and the inhabitants of Philadelphia, as they
seemed not to expect; which put a stop to their career. But so far was the
contagion spread, and so deeply had the spirit of faction infected the minds of
many, that the weakness of the government was not able to punish these
murderers, nor to chastise the insurgents! a sorrowful presage of an
approaching change in that happy constitution, which had so long afforded a
peaceable asylum to the unjustly oppressed and distressed, by means of the
great influx and increase of such kind of people into it, of later years, as
experience has abundantly demonstrated a rod of iron is more proper to rule,
than such a mild establishment, as is better adapted to promote the prosperity
of the virtuous and good, than properly to chastise the most profligate of
mankind; more calculated to make men happy, than to punish the wicked and
ungovernable, according to their demerits.

But there were many in the province, who very well knew the cause of this
revolt of the Indians, and of the sorrowful consequences of it; which, it was
not in their power, at that time, to prevent. The management of Indian affairs
was put into new hands; and after the death of James Logan, James Logan, who
died in 1751, was the Proprietary's Secretary, and principal Agent, or
commissioner, for land affairs, for near forty years.
if not some time before, a very different conduct was too much practiced
toward that people, from that which formerly had never failed to gain and
preserve their friendship and alliance.

The Quakers, whom the Indians regarded from the beginning, above any other
people in the province, were excluded from the Proprietary agency, to which the
management of their affairs was chiefly committed; though they were, for the
above reason, of all persons the most proper to be concerned, or to act, in it.

But there were several causes, which administered to the unhappy rupture,
which may be seen, Causes of the Indian war, etc. in 1754, etc.
as mentioned in a treatise, published in London, in 1759, written in
Pennsylvania, entitled, "An enquiry into the causes of the alienation of the
Delaware and Shawanese Indians, from the British interest," etc. And, in the
whole, it is certain they had been too much neglected; of which the French,
then at war with the English, made their advantage.

The principal causes of the quarrel and alienation of these Indians were
asserted to be,

First, The abuses committed in the Indian trade; which had been, more or less,
of long continuance, and very difficult to be properly regulated, or redressed;
though doubtless a great part of them might have been better guarded against,
and prevented, than they really were. Governor Thomas, in a message to the
Assembly of Pennsylvania, in 1744, says, "I cannot but be apprehensive that the
Indian trade, as it is now carried on, will involve us in some fatal quarrel
with the Indians. Our traders, in defiance of the laws, carry spirituous
liquors among them, and take the advantage of their inordinate appetite for it,
to cheat them of their skins, and their wampum, which is their money, and often
debauch their wives into the bargain. Is it to be wondered at, then, if, when
they recover from their drunken fit, they should take some severe revenges? If
I am rightly informed, the like abuses of the traders in New England, were the
principal causes of the Indian wars there; and at length obliged the government
to take the trade into their own hands. This is a matter, that well deserves
your attention, and perhaps, will soon require your imitation."

The author of the enquiry into the cause of the alienation of the Indians,
etc. above mentioned, further observes on this part, "It would be too shocking
to describe the conduct, and behavior of the traders, when among the Indians,
and endless to enumerate the abuses, the Indians had received and borne from
them, for a series of years, suffice it to say that several of the tribes were,
at last, weary of bearing," etc.

At a treaty, held with the Ohio Indians, at Carlisle, in Pennsylvania, by
Commissioners, appointed by Governor Hamilton, in the year 1753, the former say,

"Brother Onas (which means Pen, the name given by them to the Governors of
Pennsylvania) your traders now bring scarce any thing but rum and flour; they
bring but little powder and lead, and other valuable goods. The rum ruins us.
We beg you would prevent its coming in such quantities, by regulating the
traders. We never understood the trade was to be for whisky and flour. We
desire it may be forbidden, and none sold in the Indian country; but that, if
the Indians will have any, they may go among the inhabitants, and deal with
them for it. When these whisky traders come, they bring thirty or forty cags,
and put them down before us, and make us drink; and get all the skins, that
should go to pay the debts, we have contracted for goods, bought of the fair
trader; and by these means we not only ruin ourselves, but them too. These
wicked whisky sellers, when they have once got the Indians in liquor, make them
sell their very clothes from their backs. In short, if this practice be
continued we must be inevitably ruined; we most earnestly, therefore, beseech
you to remedy it."

In the report of these Commissioners to the Governor, on their return from the
treaty, they conclude as follows, viz.

Thus, may it please the Governor, we have given a full and just account of our
proceedings, and we hope our conduct will meet with his approbation. But, in
justice to these Indians, and the promises we made them, we cannot close our
report without taking notice, that the quantities of strong liquors, sold to
these Indians, in the places of their residence, and during their hunting
season, from all parts of the counties, over Susquahanna, have increased, of
late, to an inconceivable degree, so as to keep those poor Indians continually
under the force of liquors, that they are thereby become dissolute, enfeebled
and indolent, when sober, and untractable and mischievous in their liquor,
always quarrelling, and often murdering one another: that the traders are under
no bonds, nor give any security for their observance of the laws, and their
good behavior; and by their own intemperance, unfair dealing and
irregularities, will, it is to be feared, entirely estrange the affections of
the Indians from the English, deprive them of their natural strength and
activity, and oblige them either to abandon their country or submit to any
terms, be they ever so unreasonable, from the French, These truths, may it
please the Governor, are of so interesting a nature, that we shall stand
excused in recommending, in the most earnest manner, the deplorable state of
these Indians, and the heavy discouragements, under which our commerce with
them, at present, labors, to the Governor's most serious consideration, that
some good and speedy remedies may be provided, before it be too late.

RICHARD PETER'S, ISAAC NORRIS, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.

November 1, 1753.

The General Assembly of the province, in February, 1754, in a message to the
Governor, lament the state of the Indian trade, in terms similar to this
report, and took some measures to remedy it, etc.

See votes, etc. Vol. 4, page 287.


Secondly, Their being, as they insisted in later years, unjustly deprived, or
dispossessed, of part of their lands. As the Proprietary by patent, was
absolute Proprietor, so by a law of the province, all other persons were
precluded from purchasing lands of the Indians, within its limits, etc.

In the minutes of conferrence, held with the Indians by Governor Denny, etc.
at Easton in Pennsylvania, in November, 1756, upon the Govenor's requesting of
the Indians, to know the cause of their uneasiness, and hostile conduct,
Teedyuscung, king, or chief, of the Delawares, and who there represented four
nations, mentioned several; among which were the instigations of the French;
and the ill usage, or grievances, they had suffered both in Pennsylvania and
New Jersey. When the Governor desired to be informed what these grievances
were, Teedyuscung replied, "I have not far to go for an instance; this very
ground, that is under me, (striking it with his foot) was my land and
inheritance; and is taken from me by fraud: when I say this ground, I mean all
the land, lying between Tohiccon creek and Wioming, on the river Susquahanna. I
have not only been served so in this government, but the same thing has been
done to me, as to several tracts in New Jersey, over the river." The Governor
asked him, what he meant by fraud? Teedyuscung answered, "When one man had
formerly liberty to purchase lands, and he took the deed from the Indians for
it, and then dies; after his death his children forge a deed like the true one,
with the same Indian names to it; and thereby take lands from the Indians which
they never sold; this is fraud: also, when one king has land beyond the river,
and another king has land on this side, both bounded by rivers, mountains and
springs, which cannot be moved; and the Proprietaries, greedy to purchase
lands, buy of one king what belongs to another; this likewise is fraud."

Then the Governor asked Teedyuscung, whether he had been served so? He
answered, "Yes; I have been served so in this province; all the land extending
from Tohiccon, over the great mountain, to Wioming, has been taken from me by
fraud; for when I had agreed to sell land to the old Proprietary, by the course
of the river, the young Proprietaries came, and got it run by a strait course,
by the compass, and by that means, took in double the quantity, intended to be
sold," etc.




Thirdly, The death of Weekweely, or Wekahelah, the Delaware chief, who was
hanged in New Jersey, many years ago, which they could not forget, and say, it
was only for accidentally killing a man. S. Smith, in his history of New
Jersey, gives the following very different account of this affair, viz.

"The fact was, this Weekquehela was an Indian of great note and account, both
among the Christians and Indians, of the tribe that resided about South River,
(near Shrewsbury in East Jersey), where he lived with a taste much above the
common rank of Indians, having an extensive farm, cattle, horses, negroes, and
raised large crops of wheat; and was so far English, in his furniture, as to
have a house well provided with feather beds, calico curtains, etc. He
frequently dined with governors, and great men, and behaved well, etc but his
neighbor, captain John Leonard, having purchased a cedar swamp of other
Indians, to which he laid claim, and Leonard refusing to take it on his right,
he resented it highly, and threatened that he would shoot him; which he
accordingly took an opportunity of doing, in the spring, 1728, while Leonard
was, in the day time, walking in his garden, or near his own house, at South
River aforesaid; for which he had a legal trial, and was executed for actual
murder."

But the Indians of the Six Nations, at a meeting in Lancaster, with Governor
Denny, etc. May 29th, 1757, say thus,

"Brothers, some years ago, in the Jerseys, one of the head men of the
Delawares had been out a hunting. On his return, he called to see a gentleman,
a great friend of his, one of your people; whom he found in the field; when the
gentleman saw him, he came to meet him. It was rainy weather, and the Delaware
chief had his gun under his arm; they met at a fence, and as they reached out
their hands to each other, the Delaware's gun went off, by accident, and shot
him dead. He was very much grieved, went to the house, and told the gentleman's
wife what had happened; and said, he was willing to die, and did not choose to
live after his friend. She immediately sent for a number of the inhabitants:
when they were gathered, some said, it was an accident, and could not be
helped; but the greatest number were for hanging him; and he was taken by the
Sheriff, and carried to Amboy, where he was tried and hanged.

"There was another misfortune that happened: A party of Shawanese, who were
going to war against their enemies, in their way through Carolina, called at a
house, not suspecting any harm, as they were among their friends: a number of
the inhabitants rose, and took them prisoners, on account of some mischief
which was done there about that time; suspecting them to be the people who had
done the mischief; and carried them to Charlestown, and put them in prison,
where the chief man, called The Pride, died. The relations of these people were
much exasperated against you, our brothers, the English, on account of the ill
treatment you gave their friends; and have been continually spiriting up their
nations to take revenge.

"Brothers, you desired us to open our hearts, and inform you of every thing we
know, that might give rise to the quarrel between you and our nephews and
brothers: -- That, in former times, our forefathers conquered the Delawares,
and put petticoats on them; a long time after that, they lived among you, our
brothers; but, upon some difference between you and them, we thought proper to
remove them, giving them lands to plant and hunt on, at Wioming and Juniata, on
Susquahanna; but you, covetous of land, made plantations there, and spoiled
their hunting grounds; they then complained to us, and we looked over those
lands, and found their complaints to be true.

"At this time they carried on a correspondence with the French; by which means
the French became acquainted with all the causes of complaint they had against
you; and as your people were daily increasing their settlements, by these means
you drove them back into the arms of the French; and they took the advantage of
spiriting them up against you, by telling them, "Children, you see, and we have
often told you, how the English, your brothers, would serve you; they plant all
the country, and drive you back; so that, in a little time, you will have no
land: it is not so with us; though we build trading houses on your land, we do
not plant it; we have our provisions from over the great water."

"We have opened our hearts, and told you what complaints we have heard, that
they had against you; and our advice to you is, that you send for the Senecas
and them; treat them kindly, and rather give them some part of their fields
back again, than differ with them. It is in your power to settle all the
differences with them, if you please."

Minutes of Indian Treaties.


Fourthly, The imprisonment of some Shawanese warriors, in Carolina, in time of
peace; where the chief man of the party died.

Fifthly, The instigations of the French; who made an artful use of their
complaints, or discontents, etc. to incite them against the English in the late
war, etc.

These were the chief causes, though there were others, alleged both by the
Delawares, the Shawanese, and the Six Nations, in the diverse treaties, held
with them, by the government of Pennsylvania, in different parts of the
province, between the years 1755 and 1763: wherein, as they are printed, may be
seen, in part, as well as in the definitive treaty of Colonel Bradstreet with
them, Causes and means of the peace in 1763 and 1764.
near lake Erie, in 1764, how a reconciliation was effected: I say, in part;
for the Quakers, who, as before observed, had the least share in these public
transactions, as to appearance, being, contrary to ancient custom, excluded
from the Proprietary agency, by which all treaties and public transactions with
them, in the province, were directed and managed, more especially respecting
land affairs; which appeared to be the principal cause of the quarrel, were
nevertheless, in fact, the prime movers of the peace, and the first and chief
promoters of redressing the Indians' wrongs, or complaints, so far as in them
lay, in their restricted capacity: they formed a society among themselves,
particularly for that good purpose, called The friendly association, for
gaining and preserving peace with the Indians, by pacific measures; See their
printed address to Governor Denny, etc. in 1757, in the Appendix, No 7.
constituted trustees, and had a treasurer; and by a voluntary contribution
among themselves, of many thousand pounds, to which diverse well disposed
persons, among the more religious Germans, liberally contributed (an expense,
which ought to have been, either from a different quarter, or, at least, of a
more general, and public nature) which, with the Governor's consent, or
approbation, first had, they applied in such prudent manner, by presents, and
redressing their grievances, together with their way of friendly behavior and
sincerity, which the Indians had long experienced, they disposed them to
hearken to terms of peace and reconciliation, made way for the succeeding
treaties, with their recovery and return from the French interest, etc. which
afterward ensued; as, in part, appears in the aforesaid treatise, or enquiry,
etc. as well as in the printed Indian treaties; and in the journals of
Christian Frederick Post; which last, as they are somewhat curious and
informing in the nature of Indian affairs, are, therefore, inserted in the
appendix. S^^ Appendix, No. 8 and 9.


For, to pretend to conquer those savages, when united in opposition, by a
regular army, in the woods, without something of this nature, would be as
absurd as the attempt of the giants, in the fable, to effect, by mere strength,
what would more properly and only be attainable by the means of wisdom and good
policy; according to the speech of the Scythian Ambassador to Alexander the
Great; and the truth of the Roman adage, "parum fit bellum foris, nisi sit
consilium domi," (...) br^ad is to little ^^rpose, unless prudent measures us
in its fullest extent, is no less applicable, in dealing with this people,
than it was formerly experienced to be, by the greatest conquerors and rulers
of the world, in their management of other nations.

PART IV.
Religious state Pennsylvania. -- Variety and harmony of the religious sects in
the province. -- Their proportion in Philadelphia. -- Mennonists, -- Dunkards,
-- Swenckfelders, -- Moravians. -- Conclusion. -- Thomas Makin's account of
Pennsylvania, in a Latin Poem, in 1729, addressed to J. Logan.

IT has already been observed that the civil constitution of Pennsylvania was
originally founded on such a generous plan of liberty, that the freedom allowed
by it, of thinking on religious subjects, Religious liberty one cause of
Pennsylvania's improvement, etc.
and of worshipping the Almighty, according to the best of men's
understandings, without being deprived either of their natural rights, as men,
or of their civil liberties, as subjects of government, on that account, has
not a little contributed to the great and rapid increase and prosperity of the
province, above any other of the British colonies in America; and, in
proportion to its age, and other circumstances, rendered it far superior, in
real worth and importance; so, in giving an account of its general state, after
the conclusion of the war, in 1761, some representation, at least, of the
various religious societies, or sects, of which its inhabitants mostly consist,
becomes proper and necessary.

There is a greater number of different religious societies in this province,
than, perhaps, Numerous sects in Pennsylvania.
in any other, throughout the British dominions besides; and in regard to
disputes, on religious subjects, and the consequences of an universal
toleration of all the varieties of opinion, in religion, though so widely
different, and so contrary and opposite to one another, elsewhere much dreaded,
it is apprehended there is not more real harmony any where known, in this
respect, even, under the most despotic hierarchies, than in Pennsylvania. Here
are the Quakers, Names of diverse of them.
who were principally the first settlers, and, in effect, the makers of the
province; and who, in general, are already described, in the Introduction: The
number of religious visits from the preachers of this society, in Great
Britain, and other places in Europe, but chiefly from England, in the service
of the gospel, to this country, and their society in America, between the years
1661, and 1771, as appears by their own records, was about 132; exclusive of
those, who, from Europe had settled in America, and traveled in that service;
who were many, etc.
The Episcopalians, according to the manner of the Church of England; and the
German and Swedish Lutherans: The Presbyterians and Independants, of various
kinds, or sects; and the German Calvinists: The Church of Rome and the Jews:
The Baptists of different kinds; with those among the Germans, called
Mennonists, and Dunkards, or Dumplers; the Moravians and Swenckselders; besides
the Aborigines of America, etc.

Their harmony and concord one with another.
All these, for a considerable series of years, have, in general, from the
example of the Quakers, who were providentially the cause of that liberty,
which they all there enjoy, and who appear never to have persecuted any other
people, for religion, maintained such harmony and concord among themselves, as
approaches nearer to that universal love and charity, which Christianity
teaches, and which its votaries, in general, profess, at least, in theory, than
has ever been known to arise from any contrary conduct, or intolerant
authority, so predominant in many other countries.

For, notwithstanding their seeming so extremely to differ one from another, in
religious sentiments and customs; and that some of their opinions and practices
doubtless are very absurd, and probably more or less so under every profession,
or form; in which an absolute uniformity is not to be expected, in the human
race; Uniformity of mind, like that of the body, not to be expected, etc.
neither is it more reasonable to be so, than that men should all be of one and
the same size, age, understanding and capacity; yet by the constitution of the
civil government, as they are not here permitted to oppress one another, on
that account, so, in general, among the more thinking and intelligent, in every
sect, or society, a firm persuasion seems to prevail, that they all have one
and the same thing, happiness, in view; and that their difference arises from
opinion and custom only, respecting the mode of obtaining it; which notion has
such a tendency to moderate and temper their way of thinking on religious
matters, as, in great measure to occasion that forbearance and charity, which
appears in their conduct to each other; a surer characteristic of true
Christianity, and best Philosophy, than the practice of many, who make great
profession of superior seize of science and knowledge, and who show much
greater zeal for what they esteem to be truth, and place more stress on
opinion, creeds, or beliefs, than in practice and charity, than is to be found
in Pennsylvania.

The Quakers, in the city of Philadelphia, Of the Quakers, etc.
compose, probably, about one seventh part of its inhabitants. The rest of that
society at present have their residence principally in the first, or older
counties of Philadelphia, Bucks, Chester, Newcastle, etc. and in the year 1770,
they had between sixty and seventy meeting houses, for divine worship, in the
province, and lower counties on Delaware. But of late they have been much
exceeded in number by other societies, complexly taken, though they generally
are esteemed among the wealthiest, and most substantial of the inhabitants.

The Church of England has several places of worship in the city, as before
mentioned, in the description of it and its public edifices; Of the different
religious societies, etc.
(page 279) and also in diverse other parts of the province; and the German
Lutherans have large congregations in Philadelphia, Lancaster, etc. but the
Presbyterians and Independants are supposed, by far, to be more numerous than
any other particular religious society, taking in the Dutch, or German
Calvinists; several of the back counties being principally peopled by them;
they have flowed in, of late years, from the north of Ireland, in very large
numbers, besides their great internal increase and still greater industry, than
that of many others, to make proselytes. The proportion, which the number of
each religious society, in Philadelphia, bears to each other, may, in some
manner, appear from the number of burials, in each of them annually, taken from
the printed bills of mortality, for the following ten years successively, viz.

Years, 1765 1766 1767 1768 1769 1770 1771 1772 1773 1774 Church of Eng. 217
107 118 126 211 160 136 181 216 191 Swedish Luth. 35 28 26 14 40 24 10 26 16 26
Presbyterians, 123 108 93 83 125 105 115 111 176 126 Quakers, 177 100 107 89
151 102 93 144 158 150 Baptists, 25 30 24 27 20 19 12 15 20 14 German Luth. 158
14^ 131 108 212 126 123 218 225 15^ German Calvin. 53 76 35 38 81 98 35 71 82
58 Roman Catholics 51 32 35 26 52 31 39 47 53 39 Strangers, 295 220 160 210 181
244 320 340 360 208 Negroes, 139 96 109 80 87 62 104 120 96 47 Total, 1273 943
838 801 1160 971 1007 1273 1402 1012

Note. In the year 1759, according to the said bills of mortality, printed
annually, were 1406 funerals in Philadelphia, of which those in Christ Church
parish only were 272; of whom 106 died of the small pox (three only inoculated)
of the Quakers 171; of other societies 490; of strangers 326; of Negroes 147;
in all 1406. Increase of funerals that year 618.

Which great mortality that year, as well as in some other years, appears to
have arisen principally from the small pox, before inoculation had taken much
place, and was so well understood as since; which distemper, that year, in
proportion to those who died of it in Christ Church parish, must have carried
off, in the whole, between 5 and 600, etc.




The Roman Catholics have a chapel in Philadelphia, and another at Lancaster; a
number among the Germans are also of that community. The Jews are but few, and
those chiefly in the city. The English Baptists are not very numerous in
Pennsylvania; they have a meeting house in the city, and some others in
different parts of the country: they appear, in general, especially of late
years, to differ very little, both in principle and practice, from the
Presbyterians, save in those of baptism only. Morgan Edwards, in his printed
account of the Baptists of Pennsylvania, in 1770, divides them into British and
German; of the ^^rmer he makes about 650 families, and 3252 persons, at ^ive to
a family (supposing every family to be totally composed of Baptists) who have
18 meeting houses: the Germans he divides into Dunkards and Mennonist^, which
see under their proper heads.

Note. He makes their whole number, b^^^ Germans and British, amount to 9525,
etc.

Note. Those called Seventh Day Baptist^, are almost extinct, etc.




It has already been mentioned that some Germans very early settled in
Pennsylvania; Great number of Germans, etc.
but that afterward they flocked into it, in much greater numbers; insomuch
that, of late years, it is supposed near one-third part of the inhabitants of
the province consisted of these people, and of their descendants. They have
mostly been of the lower rank, but very industrious, useful, and well adapted
for the improvement of a wilderness, under proper government and restriction.

There are several different professions of religion among them, in the
province; some of which appear more remarkable than others, for a simplicity of
manners, and less known to many; of such, therefore, I shall more particularly
give such brief account, as partly I find of them, and partly according to my
own observation: first,

Of the Mennonists.
THE Mennonists of Pennsylvania take their name from Menno Simon, of the
Netherlands, Of the Mennonists
one of the leaders of that society or sect of the Baptists, in the sixteenth
century; who took their rise in Germany soon after, or about, the time of the
reformation. But, it is said, they themselves derive the origin of their
religious profession and practice from that of the Christian Church, in
Thessalonia, in the time of the Apostles, etc.

Among the articles of their faith, in which they appear to be very rigid,
using great plainness in speech and dress, are, in substance, the following,
viz.

Some articles of their faith.
1. Of God. They confess one only God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

2. Of Baptism. They confess baptism into faith; but no infant baptism.

3. They confess an eucharist, to be kept with common bread and wine, in
remembrance of the sufferings and death of Christ.

4. Of Marriage. They confess a wedlock, of two believing persons; and no
external marriage ceremony, by punishment of excommunication, etc.

5. Of taking Oaths. They confess that no Christian may take an oath; or, in
his evidence go beyond yea and nay, though he have the truth on his side; but
must rather choose to die.

6. Of bearing Arms. No Christian must, in any wise, withstand with arms, or
take the sword, etc.

In their claim to antiquity, they have suffered much persecution, etc.
They say their church has always from the beginning (though under almost
continual oppression and persecution) insisted on the above confession, with
many other articles, even, from the time of the Apostles; from which the
violence of persecution and death, which at different times they endured, never
could compel them to depart; instancing the ten persecutions, till 310 years
after Christ; and afterward till the year 1210, etc. when great numbers of
them suffered death, chiefly in Europe, for not admitting infant baptism* but
only a baptism into their faith, in their own mode, and likewise for refusing
to take an oath and bear arms; and for adhering to other articles of their
faith; for which they suffered such heavy persecutions, that they were reduced
to a small number, till the time of the reformation, when, from the year 1520
to 1530, they began to flourish again, to the no small mortification of the
Romish clergy; who gave them the name of Anabaptists; and used their
endeavors, first, by persuasion, to draw them over, and then by a terrible
persecution, throughout all the emperor's dominions, by banishments, prisons,
torture, They are persecuted in Germany
and death, in various modes; all which they encountered, and suffered with
inflexible fortitude, rather than depart from their tenets. That this
persecution began in 1524, and continued about one hundred years. Of which they
give many cruel instances, particularly in Austria, at Hemb^rn, and in the
Palatinate about Alsom; where, in the year 1529, several hundreds of them were,
in a short time, by the count Palatine, Mennonists persecuted in Switzerland,
etc.
executed by fire and sword. And after this they suffered in Switzerland;
particularly at Enrich and Bern; where several of their teachers were beheaded;
of whom one Haslebacker is mentioned thus to have suffered at the latter place;
and many of them are said to have been starved to death by hunger.

Though these Mennonists of Pennsylvania appear to be a species or sect, They
disclaim the conduct at Munster, etc.
of those who went under the general name of Baptists, or Anabaptists formerly
in Germany and the Netherlands, yet, in both their writings and practice, they
seem highly to disapprove or reprobate and condemn, the wild actions and
extravagances, done at Munster, etc. by these people in 1533, in opposition to
the magistracy and government; in consequence of which many thousands of
persons lost their lives, in different parts of Germany.

They moreover say, that in the seventeenth century, they suffered severe
persecution in Switzerland, and some other places; They suffer again in
Switzerland, etc.
and that in the year 1670, some of their society were chained together, and
sent to the galleys, on account of their religion; others shipped and banished
their country, being branded with the mark of a bear (the arms of the canton):
that, in the year 1710, a barge, full of these prisoners, was carried down the
Rhine, to be transported beyond the sea; but when they came to Holland, the
government of that republic declared, they would have no such prisoners in
their country; and they set them all at liberty.

Many of these people, who were dispersed in diverse parts of the German
provinces, especially in the Palatinate, and places adjacent, having met
together, entered into conditions, and, by paying a great tribute, They obtain
a temporary relief, etc.
they obtained an exemption from taking oaths, from bearing arms, and from
having their children baptized; and gained the liberty of upholding public
worship, in their own way: but notwithstanding this, they were grossly imposed
upon and abused, for the exercise of their consciences; being, in time of war,
obliged to have their houses filled with wicked crews of soldiers, and to
endure many other grievances and distresses. These things caused their looking
out for another country; and, in time, a way was opened for their removal to
Pennsylvania.

William Penn informs them of Pennsylvania, etc.
William Penn, both in person and writing, published in Germany, first gave
them information that there was liberty of conscience in Pennsylvania; and that
every one might live there without molestation. Some of them about the year
School, others in 1706, 1709 and 1711, partly for conscience sake, and partly for
their temporal interest, removed thither; where they say, they found their
expectation fully answered, enjoying liberty of conscience, according to their
desire, with the benefits of a plentiful country. With this they acquainted
their friends in Germany; in consequence of which many of them, in the year
1717, etc. removed to Pennsylvania.

The Mennonists are settled chiefly near Lancaster, and in some parts of the
neighboring counties. Their present residence and general character.
They are sober, industrious people, of good economy, sound morals, and very
useful members of the general community; and are supposed to consist of several
thousand persons, within the province. Morgan Edwards, in his account before
mentioned, ranks the Mennonists among the Baptists of Pennsylvania: he says,
they have there 42 meeting houses, and consist of 4050 persons; that they
derive their name from that of Menno Simon, a native of Witmars, born in 1505;
that they have, in this province, and some other places, deviated from the
practice of Menno, in the mode of their baptism, by declining that of dipping,
etc.
Their articles of faith, respecting oaths and war, are founded on the same
principles, as those of the Quakers, in these points, viz. the plain and
absolute prohibition thereof, as understood by them, in the New Testament.

Of the Dunkards, or Dumplers.
THOSE people, in Pennsylvania, called Dunkards, Tunkers, or Dumplers, are
another species of German Baptists. Dunkards more singular, etc.
They are singular in some of their opinions and customs; and perhaps more so
in their manner of living, and personal appearance, than any others of that
name in the province, particularly those who reside at a place, called by them,
Ephrata, in Lancaster county.

They also hold it not becoming a follower of Jesus Christ to bear arms, or
fight; because, Their opinion on fighting and swearing.
say they, their true master has forbid his disciples to resist evil; and
because he also told them, not to swear at all, they will by no means take an
oath; but adhere close to his advice, in the affirmation of yea and nay.

Of the origin of the Dunkards,
As to their origin, they allow of no other, than that, which was made by Jesus
himself, when he was baptized by John in Jordan. They have a great esteem for
the New Testament, valuing it higher than the other books; and when they are
asked about the articles of their faith, they say, they know of no others but
what are contained in this book; and therefore can give none.

and of their present society, etc.
The rise, or collection of their present society they s^en^ to date about the
year 1705; many of them were educated among the German Calvanists, but lest
them, and, on account of their religious way of thinking and practice, several
being banished from their homes, and otherwise persecuted, they resorted to
Swarzenan, in the county of Witgensteen and Creyfield, in the duchy of Cleves,
belonging to the king of Prussia; where they had liberty of meeting, without
being disturbed. To these places they collected from several parts; as from
Switzerland, Strasburg, the Palatinate, Silesia, etc,

They assume their present form, etc.
They agreed on their exterior form of religion at Swarzenan aforesaid; the
manner of their baptism of immersion, or plunging into water (from whence the
name Dumpler, in their language) instead of the vulgar method of sprinkling,
was established among them; as being not only more consistent with that, which
Christ himself suffered from John the Baptist, but also more agreeable to the
practice of many of the primitive Christians.

Manner of their holding the eucharist, etc.
They hold what is called the Eucharist, in commemoration of the sufferings of
Christ, at night, as, they say, Christ himself kept it; washing, at the same
time one another's feet, agreeable to his example and command. They meet
together to worship on the first day of the week, in confidence of his promise,
who said, "Where two or three are gathered together, in my name, there am I in
the midst of them:" but those at Ephrata keep the seventh day of the week, for
sabbath: they profess a spiritual worship; and they have been remarkable, at
the place last mentioned, for their f^^e singing at their devotion. They say,
they have suffered great persecution in Europe; They have suffered persecution,
etc.
of which they give particular accounts; and as appears in a manuscript, from
which part of this account of them is taken.

They removed from the places before mentioned into Pennsylvania, When they
removed to Pennsylvania,
chiefly between the years 1718 and 1734; a few of them still remaining at
Creyfield in Friezland.

They are a quiet, inoffensive people, Their character, residence, etc.
not numerous, Morgan Edwards aforesaid, ranks these people also among the
Baptists of Pennsylvania; and makes them consist of 419 families, 2095 persons,
at 5 to a family; and 4 meeting houses, in different parts of the province.
and seemingly, at present, on the decline, especially at Ephrata before
mentioned* where they have a kind of a monastry, about fifteen miles distant
from Lancaster, and sixty miles west north west from Philadelphia.

Here more particularly they dress in a kind of uniform, consisting of a
triangular, or round, Their dress and manner of living, etc. at Ephrata.
white, and sometimes gray cloth, or linen cap, on the head, a little similar
to a bonnet; with a loose garment of the same stuff and color, hanging over
them; in imitation of the fashion of the eastern Christians formerly. They wear
their beards, and have a solemn steady pace, when they walk, keeping right
forward with their eyes fixed on the ground, and do not usually turn to give an
answer, when asked a question. Their burying place here they call the Valley of
Achor; and here it has been their custom to live on a common stock, composed of
the fruits of all their labors, and we gifts of such as join them. They eat no
flesh, drink no wine, use no tobacco, nor sleep on beds, in this place, as
other people do; and the men and women live in different apartments, or, in
separate large houses, containing many distinct apartments; and it has been
their practice, for those of each house, to meet every two hours, both day and
night, to join in prayer; but, it is said, they have lately abated of this
rigor.

Their whole method in this place seems to be a kind of monastic life, much
according to its original simplicity; and if any of them marry, after they come
hither, such are not permitted to live longer here, but still remain members of
the society; and, in general, another of their customs it, to receive no
interest for money lent, on pain of excommunication, etc.

Of the Swenckfelders.
Swenckfelders.
THE people, who bear the name of Swenckfelders, in Pennsylvania, are so called
from Caspar Swenckfeld, of Ossing; who, at the time of the reformation, in the
sixteenth century, was a teacher of note. He was born in Silesia, and of noble
birth. Vid. Godfried Arnold's hist. of the church.
The sect, which he gathered, was from the beginning tolerated, under several
of the German emperors, in their arch-dukedom of Silesia, especially the
principalities of Taur and Lignitz, for about two hundred years successively,
and in several other places, though not without envy of the Romish clergy, who
instigated some of the inferior Magistrates so much to distress them about the
years 1590 and 1650, as to cause what they thought a pretty severe persecution.
After this they enjoyed peace till the reign of the emperor Charles the Sixth.
But about the year 1725, through the instigation of the clergy, they were again
molested; wherefore, despairing of obtaining the continuation of their former
tranquillity, in that country, for which they had endeavored in vain, most of
(...), after frequent ^^^^ions, (...) ^rassed and persecuted in Germany
appearing before the clergy, arrests and imprisonments, heavy fines, and
penalties, threats and menaces, taking away their children to catechize, and
instruct them in the Roman Catholic doctrine, constituting Roman Catholic
executors, for the widows, and guardians for orphans, and many other hard
proceedings, which they endured, found themselves obliged to leave their real
estates and habitations behind them, and emigrate to some other country.

They found a place of shelter in Upper Lusatia, in Saxony, under the Senate of
Gorlitz: as also unexpectedly under Count Zinzindorf, which they enjoyed about
eight years; after which this toleration was discontinued.

They then enquired for another place of safety, under some of the Protestant
princes of Germany, but upon considering the great uncertainty of the long
continuance of any toleration there, and having got intelligence of the
province of Pennsylvania, and of the privileges there enjoyed, etc. they
resolved to remove thither. Some of them came over in the year 1733, but the
greatest part in 1734, and some families afterward. The following translation
of an Edict of the king of Pr^ssia, to recall these people into his dominions,
indicates the importance and utility they were thought to be of to his country,
viz.

EDICT,
Concerning the re-establishment and collocation of the so-called
Schwenckfeldians, in Silesia, and other provinces of his royal majesty.
De dato Scelowitz, the 8th day of March, 1742.
We, Frederick, by the grace of God, king of Prussia, marckgrave of
Brandenburg, arch-chamberlain and elector of the holy Roman empire, etc.

Be it known to all to whom these presents may come; whereas we do hold nothing
to be more contrary to the nature and reason, and the principles of the
Christian religion, than the forcing of the subjects consciences, and to
persecute them, about any other dissenting doctrines, which do not concern the
fundamental principles of the Christian religion; so we have most graciously
resolved* the so-called Schwenckfeldians, who were exiled, out of an imprudent
(...) of religion, to the irreparable damage of the commerce and country, again
to recall them, into our sovereign duchy of Nether Silesia. We have,
therefore, thought fit to assure all those, by these presents, who confess
themselves to be of the said doctrine, upon our royal word, that they shall and
may safely return, not only into our sovereign duchy of Nether Silesia, but
also into all our provinces, peaceably to live and trade there; since we do not
only receive them into our special protection, but also will give them all
necessary supply, for the promoting of their commerce; and to all them, who,
several years ago, were deprived of their habitations and effects, in our
country of Silesia, in case they are not paid for by the new possessors, they
shall be restored without any reward Such as will settle in our villages shall
have farms assigned them, and care be taken to meet with good employment; and
they that will fix their abode in towns, shall, besides several ordinary free
years, have places assigned them gratis, to the building of their houses: for
which purpose they only need to apply to our military and domainen chambers. We
do, therefore, command our superior colleges of justice and finance, as also
all mediate primes, lords, magistrates, etc. carefully to observe the same In
witness whereof, we have signed this present Edict, with our hand, and caused
our royal seal to be affixed.

FREDERICK OF (...), Count of Mun^^^n. (L. S.)
Done at Scelowitz, March 8th, 1742.




Their opinion on oaths and war, etc.
In regard to oaths and war, they agree with the Mennonists, and give the same
reasons, as they and the Quakers, in these respects: they say, they have been
much misrepresented, and charged with neglecting the use of the sacred
scriptures, and those religious ceremonies, called sacraments. The first of
which charges they deny, as entirely untrue; their disuse of the second, they
say, has not, nor does happen from contempt, but merely from conscientious
motives. They, and their (...), Schwenckfeldius, are charged with sundry other
things, which, they say, will appear entirely untrue to any, who will be at the
trouble of searching the theological works, left by him.

Residence and character.
These people are not numerous in the province, they are settled chiefly in the
county of Berks, and are an industrious, frugal people, of exemplary morals,
and a general good character.

Of the Unitas Fratrum, or United Brethren, commonly called Moravians.
IT is said, the first emigration of the Moravians, from Moravia, First design
of the Moravians in quitting their country, etc.
a country adjacent to Bohemia, from which they were named, was with a view of
going to Pennsylvania, for the sake of an uninterrupted enjoyment of civil and
religious privileges; but, having found a place of retreat, in Upper Lusatia,
which they thought would be agreeable to their minds, they, for a time, fixed
their residence there.

After this, in the year 1733, the colony of Georgia was talked of in Holland;
which induced their ordinary, Count Zinzindorf, to correspond with the English
resident, at Copenhagen, upon that subject; in consequence of which the
Brethren concluded to send some of their people thither; and agreed with the
trustees, among other things, that they should be exempted from taking an oath,
and bearing arms. But afterward, perceiving that this gave umbrage to some
persons, from whom they did not expect it, they resolved to pursue their former
intention, and to go to Pennsylvania, which they accordingly performed, Time of
their removing to Pennsylvania.
in the years 1739 and 1740; where, applying themselves to agriculture, they
have since made considerable settlements, especially on the western branch of
Delaware river, called Lehi, in Northampton county, at a place named by them,
Bethlehem, with the circumjacent villages and farms of Nazareth, Guadenthal,
Friedenshal, and elsewhere.

Their settlements about Bethlehem, though so lately begun, are superior, in
some respects, Their settlements about Bethlehem, etc.
to any in the province. Here their excellent skill, industry, regular
management and economy have been very conspicuous and remarkable. The town
itself, is pleasantly situated upon a hill, or elevated ground, on the north
side of the Lehi, with a fine descent to the river. It consists of private
houses, improved and ornamented by diverse large and spacious buildings, of a
more public, or general kind, for the use of the society, which are called
quoir houses: these are distinctly appropriated for the use of the different
pa^^ of their community, at that place; as, for the children, single men,
single women, widows, and widowers, etc. separated in these large houses;
besides the congregational inn, which has been reputed one of the best in
Pennsylvania, for the entertainment of strangers, etc.

Customs and economy, etc.
They are very methodical in their customs, and exhibit great skill and
perseverance in what they undertake; aiming in common life, to make themselves
agreeable, to avoid singularity, and to approve themselves honest, in the
hearts of all people; though in part of their dress, especially the female sex,
in these places, they appear to use a particular, plain uniform; and their mode
of language, or discourse, seems to be somewhat affected, or peculiar to
themselves.

They have, from time to time, received succors from Europe, and are now
increased to a considerable number. Besides these settlements, they have a
meeting house in Philadelphia, and another at Lancaster, besides their fine
settlement at Litz, Their other settlements, etc.
in Lancaster county. They have likewise made settlements in the government of
New York and New Jersey, and on the river Dan, which runs into the Roanoake, in
North Carolina.

In Pennsylvania, at present, the Moravians, or United Brethren, consist of a
mixture of some English, and other people, from different countries, besides
Germans and aborigines of America; for they likewise have a number of the
Indians, in the province, under their care and tuition.

They use great variety of music, at their devotion; and have strong
picturesque representations of Christ's passion, etc. in their place of
worship, at Bethlehem; and, as a remarkable policy seems to run through their
whole system, Remarkable policy in their system, etc.
whereby it appears, in some cases, adapted to operate, in the strongest
manner, on the human passions; so, in the more civil part of their constitution
and transactions, in this province, an admirable order and economy, to more
than common perfection, has been very conspicuous.

But their method of educating their children and youth, to answer the end
designed, Education of their youth.
has been more so; and perhaps, exceeded by no other people in the province: an
affair of very great importance, in whatever view we take it: the lowest, or
most ignorant and uninformed part of the rational creation, perhaps, does not
excel the most knowing and sagacious of the brutal kind, so much as one part of
the human species exceeds the other, in superior knowledge, wisdom and
felicity, by means of an early and good education, a wise and virtuous
institution of youth, in its most extensive acceptance? For, though God has
given talents to men, yet it is in their power to improve or debase them, and
to apply them to proper or improper objects, by the means which God has given;
and how much this depends on education, information and early habit, is
sufficiently manifest to such as are enough acquainted with the subject, and
with mankind.

As to the religious tenets, or creed, Rule of their doctrine, etc.
of the Moravians, they acknowledge the Bible to be their only rule, Vid. A
compendious manual, etc.
"In the most simple sense, and in every respect; and that so perfectly, that
while disputants are solicitous to seek and find, or make, that to be sense
there, which they have heard, the Brethren receive all, according to the
letter; nay, all that is written therein is truth to them, even, that part,
which is looked upon by others, as contradictory, without being first
explained."

Their bishops, teachers, etc. by an established rule, at stated times, every
week, wash the feet of all, they call to the Lord's Supper; in performing which
they are methodical, and use a particular ceremony, Their great industry, etc.
etc. But their zeal and industry for propagating the gospel in foreign
nations, which never heard it before, has been very remarkable and
extraordinary for these latter times, etc.

Of the origin of their religion, etc.
They date their religion, as most religious societies do, from the first
establishment of true religion in the world, in general terms. They do not
pretend to any warrantable account of their origin; having, as they imagine,
the fate of most other institutions; that is, to be lost in uncertainty; but,
that their congregation flourished in the 15th century, at Litz, i. e. fifty
years before the reformation, and was then a Sclavonian congregation, which
sprung from the old Bulgarian Christians; that George Podebrad, regent of
Bohemia, who, as they say, partly from his own motion and love, and partly at
the intercession of the archbishop of Prague, being in the like circumstances
with him, established at Litz, on the borders of Bohemia, a congregation, to
serve God in quietness and peace, without being so easy a prey to the Roman
Catholics; to whom the king and primate of the realm were outwardly gone over.
This they did so much the rather, as those Brethren differed from the
Taborites, in the principle of defending religion by the force of arms;
professing prayer, in spiritual things, to be the best weapon of Christians,
against their enemies.

Foreign places of residence, etc.
They are said originally to have consisted of scattered Bohemians and
Moravians; but the Waldenses, as they imagine, taking refuge among ^^^m,
lea^ned their language, and, in a while, became loft in their nation; that
gaining ground, they became a people, considerable enough to be denominated a
national, or more properly, a general church; for it consisted of subjects,
under several different princes; that they sought protection, and gained
settlements, in Poland, England, Prussia, Wertemburg, and Saxony; that Poland,
by degrees, became their chief residence; that, in England, the Walloons,
Germans, nay, all foreign Protestants, were disposed by Edward the Sixth, under
their bishop, John a Lasco, as superintendant of all foreign Protestants; that
in time, it becoming too tedious to distinguish them by the different names of
the countries, to which they belonged, they assumed the general name of Unitas
Fratrum, or United Brethren, comprehending all their different divisions, under
that denomination.

By this name they were acknowledged by Great Britain in the year 1737 and
1739; and by several other nations and states about the same time. In the
latter of which years they received a general toleration, by an act of the
British parliament, They are favored by the British parliament, etc.
encouraging them to settle in the American plantations, etc. by allowing them
to take a solemn affirmation, instead of an oath, and dispensing with their not
being concerned in military affairs, on payment of a rate assessed, etc.

CONCLUSION.
Conclusion respecting variety of religious opinions, etc.
AS it is not my intention to say any thing further, respecting the more
generally well known forms of the other religious societies, in the province,
which, at different times, have resulted from a variety of opinion, on the
subject of religion, I shall, therefore, only observe, that, so long as
different degrees of light and knowledge are communicated to men, while custom
and education vary among them, and while the capacity and opportunity to
receive instruction are unequal and various in individuals, according to their
different abilities and situations in the world, so long it cannot reasonably
be expected that all people should see or think exactly alike, or possess an
uniformity of understanding, in objects merely intellectual, more especially
such as are only known to exist in opinion, or belief: for as our bodies differ
in shape, size and capacity, and vary in their properties and qualities, so is
it in respect to the minds of men* which are as various as the flowers of the
field; and, when duly considered, have no less real beauty, in their variety:
it is as unreasonable to expect, or attempt, an absolute uniformity of the one
as of the other; and compulsion, in such case, would be no less tyrannical and
absurd, than the use of Procrustes's bed; for the nature of all sects, in
religion, is to keep up the difference.

But, as wisdom is better than strength, and the cause above the effect, so the
power of reason and persuasion alone, on the intelligent and rational mind, is
the most adequate and proper to rectify the erroneous, or less informed
understanding, in objects entirely of a mental or intellectual nature; in which
a difference of thinking may not be inconsistent with reason and truth; for
perhaps, as light and knowledge increase and advance among mankind, the greater
will be the variety of sentiment? Which, so long as it is free, may have the
more effectual tendency to discuss and discriminate truth from error, and that
not incompatible with an unity of principle, even, in religious subjects;
provided that men, instead of wickedly making religion an engine of power, for
one part of the community to oppress the other, would keep within the bounds of
mental pursuits only, in their pretensions to things of this kind, and clear of
all selfish and ambitious news, artifice, and party-design; this has ever been
instanced in the wisest and most civilized nations, and in the progress of arts
and sciences. For, though the first principles of things are but few, and these
all ultimately terminate in unity, yet like the rays of light, from the solar
luminary, which reflect an infinite variety of appearances, and so much the
more, the less they are obscured and obstructed, so the greater the diversity
of effect from these principles, the more is the eternal wisdom displayed, in
any one part of the creation.

In regard to the final issue of the various opinions of a religious nature,
among mankind, with their Creator, and of the many different customs arising
from them, (than the lowest and most absurd of which, as well as the most
rational and sublime, perhaps, nothing shows more the weakness of the human
race, and its absolute dependence on a Superior Being) why may we not conclude,
that, as a person of superior wisdom and sagacity, or of better information
than others, sometimes observes and considers the disagreements and disputes,
between persons of different judgment, or education, and inferior knowledge,
but of sincere mind and intention, whether in the low and common affairs of
life, or on things of a superior and mental nature, on which they seem so
widely to differ in opinion, that, by their manner of managing their arguments,
or disputes, they would probably never agree; nay, instead of uniting*
sometimes their opposition of sentiment may render them so much the more
positive and tenacious of their different opinions, as to become highly
incensed against each other (which is often the case with the more ignorant)
because they do not understand the subjects of dispute all alike; yet, by his
greater penetration and understanding of the affair in dispute, he plainly
perceives they all mean, or intend, the same thing, in the main; and their
views all center to one point, or what appears to them right, (though if left
to themselves they would probably never agree) that they all are proportionably
right; and, when properly understood, differ only either in circumstantials, or
on account of their various degrees of understanding and conception, or
according to such information as each is possessed of, or by reason of the
different mediums of education and custom, through which they see; whence he
may pity their ignorance, and perhaps blame their animosity, which arises from
it; but cannot justly censure them for any thing, that is providentially out of
their power: so, who will deny that the great Creator of mankind, who sees and
knows all things, looks down upon his creatures, whom he has proportionably
endowed with reason, and the proper means of answering the end of their
existence, and, in his great wisdom, beholds how zealous they are to please
him, and obtain felicity; which they all aim at, according to the different
degrees of knowledge, capacity and ability afforded them? I say, who will
venture to deny, notwithstanding their great disparity, disagreement, seeming
inconsistency and the many contrary customs, used by men, for that purpose
(diverse of which to one another, and not without reason, may appear very absurd
and improper for the end designed thereby); that in his wisdom and mercy, which
are over all his works, he commiserates all, (...) the most wise, affectionate
and true parent of his offspring? For, according to the divine model above, it
is in degree here below; as wisdom (which is the real sent of the Almighty)
prevails, ignorance vanishes; and as that superior happiness, and true
Christian charity, which are the consequences of the former, gain ground, among
men, in the same proportion must mankind necessarily approach to, or partake
of, the supreme love and perfection; which ever take place of all violence,
cruelty and wrath, the infernal dregs, and genuine offspring of the latter;
whose habitation is only in the regions of darkness and sorrow, the reward of
false conception and error; which never can be the situation of the perfectly
happy, the end of all true religion.

Extract from two short Latin poems, inscribed to James Logan, Esquire, by
Thomas Makin; one of which is dated 1728, the other 1729; the former is
entitled, "Encomium Pennsylvaniae;" the latter, which is here principally
retained, "In lauds Pensilvaniae poema, seu, descriptio Pensilvaniae:" found
among James Logan's papers, many years after his disease: they seem to have
been written chiefly for amusement in his old age, etc.
DESCRIPTIO PENNSYLVANIAE, ANNO 1729.
Haec habet, and regio memorabile nomen, habebit
Auctior auctoris tempus in omne sui;
Qui fuit illustri proavorum stemmate natus,
Sed virtute magis nobilis ipse sua.
Praecipue illustrem sua se sapientia fecit;
Vixit apud claros dignus honor viros:
Qui quamvis obiit, tamen usque memoria vivet;
Nomini^ atque sui fama perennis erit.
Semer honos nomenque suum laudesque manebunt,
Hujus, qui terrae nobilis auctor erat.
Haec sua Proprietas; hinc Pennsylvania primum,
Haec fuit ex domini nomine dicta sui.
Rege sibi Carolo concessa suisque Secundo,
Pro claris meritis officioque patris.
Zonae terra subest alternae, ubi veris and aestus,
Autumni gelidae sunt hiemisque vices.
Hic ter quinque dies numerat longissimus horas,
Cum sol in cancro sidere transit iter.
Hic tamen interdum glacialis frigora brumae
Et calor aestivus vix toleranda premunt.
Saepe sed immodicum boreale refrigerat aestum
Flamen, and australis mitigat aura gelu.
Hic adeo inconstans est, and variabile caelum,
Una ut non raro est aestus hiemsque die.
Saepe prior quamvis nitido sit sole serena,
Postera sit multis imbribus atra dies.
Vis adeo interdum venti violenta ruentis,
Ut multa in sylvis sternitur arbor humi.
Hanc sera gens Indi terram tenuere coloni;
Moribus at nunc est mitior usque bonis;
Pacis amans, Anglis concordi faedere juncti;
Cura quibus pactam non violare fidem.
Hi fugiunt rixas, and noxia semina litis,
Et leges ultro justitiamque colunt.
Hi spernunt arts, durum fugiuntque laborem;
Hos vacuos curis libera vita juvat.
Hi venatores sylvas and tesqua frequentant,
Quaerentes ubi sit praeda reperta ferae;
Unde sibi pelles, epulaeque parantur inemptae;
Utile sunt pelles, merx pretiosa bonum.
Devia rura diu long lateque pererrant,
Et been nota sibi semper ubique via est.
Durior interea exercet vigilantia nuptas;
Officium quibus est farra parare domi.
Hae bajulant fa^^es graves humerisque pusillis,
Et longum faciunt nunc patienter iter;
Nunc findunt lignum, fissoque ex vimine corbes
Texunt; has urget sedulus usque labor:
Nunc hae corna legunt, and humi nascentia fragra;
Nunc pisces capiunt insidiis and aves.
Indorum juvenes ullum gustare liquorem
Non licet (exemplar nobile) praeter aquam.
Mollibus in lectis Indi requiescere nolunt,
Nunc humus est lectus, nunc sibi nuda teges.
Pellibus antiquo, qui more fuere ferinis
Induti, nunc est gausape vestis iis.
Semper and incedunt capitis velamine nudi,
Sed sutae pelles crura pedesque tegunt,
Et quamvis cutis est fuscae color omnibus idem,
Forma decora tamen corporis estque vigor.
Hi lenocinium sugiunt and scorta pudici;
Faedera conjugii non violare solent.
Hos docet ore loqui facilis natura diserto;
Linguae grande loquens est idioma suae.
O gens Indorum, vos terque quaterque beati!
Nulla quibus requiem sollicitudo vetat!
Non regio haec Indos armis subigendo tenetur;
Sed certa emptori condition data est,
Vivitur hic igitur tuto sine militis usu;
Et sibi securus propria quisque tenet.
Hic locus est multis felix, ubi sedibus aptis,
Sors optata dedit, non sine pace frui.
Dira sed infelix, heu! bella N^v' Anglia sensit,
Indis quie semper gens malifida fuit.
Sed semel hic rumor mendax clamavit, ad arma,
Incola cui nimium credulus omnis erat.
Haec malesana die fuit acta, tragaedia quadam,
Cum convenerunt undique turba frequens*
Scilicet ut major fieret commotus in urbe,
Notior and multis rumor ubique foret;
Usque adeo fuit hac confusus in urbe tumultus,
Ut neque tunc leges, ordo nec ullus erat,
Hic removere sua instanti properabat ab host,
Ille nihil contra jussit ab urbe vehi.
Sed quodcunque sibi voluit dementia talis
Haec damno multis est memoranda dies:
Vespere sed tandem fuit hoc stratagema retectum;
Fabula tunc istam finiit acta diem.
Fertilis hic frugum tellus, optataque rerum
Usibus humanis copia semper adest.
Hic been cultus ager laetis ornatur aristis,
Et solito messis tempore fervet opus.
Quaevis sylva feris, etc piscibus amnis abundat;
Fertque suum fructus quaelibet arbor onus.
Hic oviumque greges errant, armenta b^umque,
Errat and hic proles multiplicata suum.
Hic saliunt damae, lepores, celeresque s^iuri,
(Quae sunt immunis praeda cuique ferae)
Hic latet in sylvis ursus, panthera, lupusque,
Qui pecus innocuum saepe vorare solent.
Hic habitat latebras furto notissima vulpes;
Callida quae praedam nocte dieque capit,
Rarior at nunc haec proles inimica futura est,
Quae segetive nocent, lanigerove gregi.
Lex fuit hic etenem tales been cauta necandi,
Erret ut in sylvis tutius omne pecus.
Amphibia hic and non desunt animalia quaedam,
Terra quibus vitam praebet and unda parem;
Merx quorum pelles tantum venalis habetur;
Utile non aliquod turpe cadaver habet.
Hic avis est quaedam dulci celeberrima voce,
Quae variare sonos usque canendo solet.
Hic avis est quaedam minima and pulcherrima plumis,
Sugere quae flores usque volando solet.
Unde fugam muscae in morem properare videtur,
Ta^quam non oculis aspicienda diu.
Hic avis est quaedam rubro formosa color,
Gutture quae plumis est maculata nigris.
Hic avis est repetens, Whip, Whip, Will, voce jocosa;
Quae tota verno tempore nocte canit
Hic and aves aliae, quotquot generantur ab ovis,
Scribere jam quarum nomina inane foret.
Innumerae volitare solent hic saepe columbae;
Unde frequens multis obvia praeda datur.
Hic aestate solet tanquam aere gaudeat alto,
Tollere se ex summis saepe acipenser aquis.
Qui salit ac resilit toties, (mirabile visu)
In cymbas ingens praeda aliquando cadit.
Regius hic piscis minime precious habetur;
Rarior est at ubi, carior est and ibi.
Fossores varias hic invenere fodinas;
Unde metalla patent, quae latuere diu.
Floribus hic sylvae variis ornantur and herbis;
In quibus and virtus and medicina latet.
Hic muscae quaedam tanquam lampyrades alis,
Aestiva nitidis undeque nocte volant.
Hic lapis est (Magnes) quo non pretiosior ullus,
Per latum nautis, qui mare monstrat iter.
Hic lapides linum Asbestus.
pars assimilare videtur,
Quae non exusta est, nec fit in igne minor
Sed merx praecipue, regio quam praebet emendam,
Est venale quidem semper ubique bonum:
Scilicet omne bonum Cereris quod copia praebet;
Quodque onus hic multis navibus esse solet.
Hujus fama loci multos alicunde vocavit,
Libertas quibus est dulcis amorque lucri.
Hue alienigenae veniunt, venientque quotannis,
Omnibus usque adeo libera terra placet.
Censibus hic nemo nimium vexatur iniquis;
Unusquisque rei pro ratione licet.
Hic venatori sylvas licet ire per omnes;
Quamque capit praedam vendicat esse suam.
Omnibus hic etiam capiendi copia pisces,
Retibus aut hamis quolibet amne datur.
Qualis in Europa concessa licentia non est,
Commoda ubi curat quisque tenere sua.
Per maris huc primum venere pericla Britanni;
Deinde ahi patriam deseruere suam.
Adveniunt multi, Germuna and Hibernica proles,
Quos huc saepe nimis navis onusta vehit,
Hanc terram sibi non acquisivere Britanni;
Si licet externis omnibus esse locum.
Sed quanto fit agri major cultura quotannis,
Hinc tanto rerum copia major erit.
Arboribus scissis tellurem scindit arator;
Nascitur hinc sparso semine laeta seges.
Dulcis aquae per rura fluunt hic undique fontes,
Unde pecus gaudet pingue levare sitim.
Florida limosae fiunt hic prata paludes;
Terra ferax est, quae nuper eremus erat.
Legislatores, electi ad jura quotannis,
Convenient quoties constituenda libet.
Publica nostra salus aequo moderamine legum
Servatur; leges dant que cuique suum.
Quisque suo meritas hic dat pro crimine paenas;
Lex parcit nullis intemerata reis;
Atque Magistratus just recteque gerendi
Quique potestatem jusque minister habet.
Sed licet imprimis ideo lex ipsa statuta est,
Puniat ut vitium, justitiamque colat;
Heu! quoties virtus legis corrumpitur auro,
Pauperis and, quovis judice, causa perit!
Eloquar, an sileam? si quando pecunia desit,
Lex perit, and nihili justus habetur inops!
Si tibi lis fuerit cum quovis aurea dante
Plurima (creed mihi) munera, victus eris!
Aerea cum Danaen inclusam turris haberet,
Semper ut infelix innuba virgo foret;
Quam facile tegulas prorumperet aureus imber!
Quid non vis* auri vincit, amorque Jovis?
Non ergo mirum est hominum si vendere leges
Auri non aequus pectora cogat amor.
Cum fera saevit hiems glacie, fluvialis and unda,
Atque latet tellus undique tecta nive;
Circumclusa ratis, si non foret anchora, fixa est,
Dum rigidum solvat mitior aura gelu.
Et quamvis Boreas gelido bacchatur ab arcto,
Inturbata tamen fluminis unda silet.
Ludere jam cessat summis acipenser ab undis,
Atque alii pisces ima profunda petunt.
Sed glacie rupta or secta.
lino piscator and hamo,
Ex alto pisces gurgite saepe capit.
Usque adeo interdum fuit hic durabile frigus,
Trans fluvium vidi plaustra onerata vehi.
Hic tamen interdum totius tempore brumae
Navibus haec amnis pervia praebet iter:
Cymbaque remigio velox, veloque frequenter
Advehit and revehit qua via ducit onus.
Usque adeo incerta est hiac and variabilis aura,
Alternasque vices frigus and aestus habet.
Pulchra duos inter sita stat Philadelphia rivos;
Inter quos duo sunt millia longa viae.
Delawar hic major, Sculkil minor ille vocatur;
Indis and Suevis notus uterque diu.
Aedibus ornatur multis urbs limite longo,
Quae parva emicuit tempore magna brevi.
Hic plateas mensor spatiis delineat aequis,
Et domui recto est ordine juncta domus.
Quinque sacrae hac aedes una numerantur in urbe,
Altera non etiam distat ab urbe procul.
Ex quibus una alias est quae supereminet omnes;
Cujus nondum ingens perficiatur opus.
Praecinit hic sacros divina melodia psalmos:
Et vox totius succinit inde chori.
Elevet hoc hominum mentes, and mulceat aures,
Sed cor devotum psallit in aure Dei.
Basis huic posita est excelsae firma futurae
Turris, ubi dicunt era sonora fore.
Hic in gymnasiis linguae docentur and arts
Ingenuae; multis doctor and ipse fui.
Una schola hic alias etiam supereminet omnes
Romano and Graeco quae docet ore loqui.
Hic spatiosa or speciosa.
domus tantae been convenit urbi,
In qua quotidie venditur omne penus.
Hujus and e summis majori voce quotannis
Electus praetor regulus urbis adest.
Hic portus multis statio est been nota carinis,
Curvo ubi dente tenax anchora mordet humum.
Hic mercaturae faciunt plerique periclum;
Quisque sibi lucrum quaerit ubique suum.
Artisices adsunt etiam, quos exigit usus,
Qui sese excercent qualibet art sua.
Multa per hos pendent omnes insignia vicos,
Quod venale domum monstrat habere merum.
Nunc sub nave canunt hilares encomia vini
Nautae; nunc tutos anchora fixa tenet:
Nunc sub sole sitim gaudent restinguere siccam,
Nectoreum rorem, siccus ut ipse bibit.
Nunc and font libet puros haurire liquores,
Qui pretio nullo nocte dieque fluunt.
Vinea cum patina laetis florente corymbis,
Indicat hospitium semper adesse bonum.
Scribere sed nimis est insignia nomina cuncta,
Quae jam descripsi sint meminisse satis.
Providus in morem formicae alimenta reponit
Rusticus hiberni frigoris usque memor.
Aestivo reputans quodumque labor lucratur,
Quae mox insequitur, longa vorabit hyems.
Stramine tecta replet Cerealibus horrea donis
Impiger, and curat condere quicquid habet:
Despicit exoticas que dapes, vestesque superbas,
Contentus modicis vivere pace suis.
Esuriens dulces epulas depromit inemptas,
Et proprio vestis vellere texta placet.
Parva humilisque domus, latos quae prospicit agros,
Parta vel empta, sibi sufficit atque suis.
Utilis est illi, si non opulenta supella;
Res sapiens omnes utilitate probat.
O! mihi si liceat sylvas habitare beatas,
Et modico victu, non sine pace, frui.
THOMAS MAKIN,
1729.
Note, Thomas Makin appears to have been one of the most early settlers in the
province of Pennsylvania from -- for, in the year 1689, he was second master (
George Keith being the first) of the Friends' public grammar school, in
Philadelphia; which was the first of the kind in the province, and instituted
about that time. He was sometimes clerk of the Provincial Assembly; which, in
early time, was long held in the Friends' meeting house. The English version is
made by the transcriber, R. P.

A DESCRIPTION OF PENNSYLVANIA, ANNO 1729.
First, Pennsylvania's memorable name,
From Penn, the Founder of the country, came;
Sprung from a worthy and illustrious race,
But more en^^bled by his virtuous ways.
High in esteem among the great he stood;
His wisdom made him lovely, great and good.
Though he be said to die, he will survive;
Through future time his memory shall live:
This wise Proprietor, in love and praise,
Shall grow and flourish to the end of days.
With just propriety, to future fame,
Fair Pennsylvania shall record his name.
This, Charles the Second did, at first command,
And for his father's merits gave the land:
But his high virtue did its value raise
To future glory, and to lasting praise.
Beneath the temperate zone the country lies,
And heat and cold with grateful change supplies.
To fifteen hours extends the longest day,
When sol in cancer points his fervid ray:
Yet here the winter season is severe;
And summer's heat is difficult to bear.
But western winds often cool the scorching ray,
And southern breezes warm the winter's day.
Yet often, though warm and fair the day begun,
Cold storms arise before the setting sun:
Nay, often so quick the change, so great its power,
As summer's heat, and winter, in an hour!
So violent the wind, that often the ground
With rooted trees is covered wide and round.
A savage Indian race here first was known;
But milder now, in life and manners, grown.
To friendship's laws they faithfully adhere;
And love the English with a mind sincere.
Of jars and baneful strife they shun the cause;
And practice justice uncompell'd by laws.
A life of ease, and void of care, they choose;
But labor, and the toilsome arts, refuse.
Through woods and forests wide, they hunting stray,
In search of beasts, their much beloved prey.
Their skins, for clothes, their flesh, for food is sought;
Warm raiment, and delicious food, unbought.
Through devious wilds, and woody deserts, they
Often wander far, but never lose their way.
But more laborious in domestic care,
The female sex their corn and bread prepare;
Long journeys these, in patience, persevere;
And heavy loads upon their bodies bear.
With unremitted labor, too, the same
Their wooden vessels make, and baskets frame.
Wild fruits and strawberries by them are sought;
And fish and fowl by various methods caught,
All stronger drink than water from the lake,
The Indian youth forbidden are to take.
No feather bed, nor easy couch they keep;
Upon the ground, or shaggy skin they sleep.
For clothing, first warm skins they did possess;
But now coarse linen hides their nakedness.
Wherever they go their heads are always bare;
But skins upon their feet and legs they wear.
Though brown, or copper color, marks them all,
Yet are their bodies proper, strait and tall.
Chaste in their lives, unlawful lusts they fly;
Scarce ever known to break the marriage tie.
With native eloquence their speech abounds,
Untaught, with figures grand, and lofty sounds.
O happy Indians! blessed with joy and peace;
No future cares of life disturb your ease!
On just and equal terms the land was gained,
No force of arms has any right obtained:
It Is here without the use of arms, alone,
The blessed inhabitant enjoys his own;
Here many, to their wish, in peace enjoy
Their happy lots, and nothing does annoy.
But sad New England's different conduct showed
What dire effects from injured Indians flowed!
Yet once to arms false rumor called here;
To which the vulgar most inclined were.
'Twas on a certain day the plot began;
Deluded crowds together madly ran:
By artful means the stratagem was laid,
And great commotion through the city made;
So wild the tumult and so great the fear,
No law nor order was observed there:
While from the approaching foe to haste away,
One urged, another orders gave, to stay.
This strange affair, whatever was designed,
For loss to many, will be kept in mind.
The evening did the plot's design betray;
The farce was ended with the closing day.
This fruitful land all plenty does produce;
And never fails to answer human use.
Here yellow Ceres loads the joyful fields;
And golden crops the happy harvest yields.
With beasts the woods, with fish the streams abound;
The bending trees with plenteous fruits are crowned.
Here flocks and herds in flowery pastures stray;
Their numerous young around them feed and play.
The squirrels, rabbits, and the timid deer
To beasts of prey are yet exposed here:
The bear, the panther, and the wolf devour
The innocuous flocks, which seldom are secure.
Here dwells the crafty fox, which, night and day,
Invents his wiles, to catch the unwary prey.
But now these noxious beasts, which much annoy
The growing grain, and tender flocks destroy,
Are by a law diminished, with their breed,
And in the woods more safe the cattle feed.
Amphibious animals here too are found;
Which both in water live, and on the ground;
These for their skins alone are ever prized,
And lose their lives; their carcass is despised.
It Is here the mocking bird extends his throat,
And imitates the birds of every note;
It Is here the smallest of the feathered train,
The humming bird, frequents the flowery plain.
Its motion quick seems to elude the eye;
It now a bird appears, and now a fly.
The various woodpeckers here charm the sight;
Of mingled red, of beauteous black and white.
Here Is whip-per-will; a bird, whose fancied name
From its nocturnal note imagined, came.
Here, in the fall, large flocks of pigeons fly,
So numerous, that they darken all the sky.
Here other birds of every kind appear,
Whose names would be too long to mention here.
Large sturgeons numerous crowd the Delaware;
Which, in warm weather, leap into the air;
So high, that (strange to tell!) they often fly
Into the boats, which on the river ply!
That royal fish is little valued here;
But where more scarce, it is more esteemed and dear.
Here numerous mines of many kinds are found,
And precious metals, treasured in the ground.
The verdant woods, roots, herbs, and flowers produce,
For many virtues famed for human use.
Here insects are, which many much admire,
Whose plumes in summer ev'nings shine like fire.
Here too the magnet's found, whose wondrous power
Directs the seamen to each distant shore.
Here is the stone-like flax Asbestus.
of wondrous fame,
For not consuming in the burning flame!
But the chief produce of this happy land
Is always good, and ever in demand:
And bounteous Ceres' rich redundant stores
Are shipped abroad to many distant shores.
Its fame to distant regions far has spread,
And some for peace, and some for profit, led;
Born in remotest climes, to settle here,
They leave their native soil, and all that is dear;
And still will flock from far, here to be free;
Such powerful charms has lovely liberty!
Here high unequal taxes have no place;
A just proportion every person pays.
The extensive woods abound with various game,
Where all may freely take, and use the same.
In every flowing stream, all persons may
Take plenteous fish, and freely use the prey.
Such privilege in Europe is unknown;
Where every man is bounded with his own.
'Twas hither first the British crossed the main;
Thence many others left their native plain:
Hibernia's sons forsake their native home;
And from Germania crowded vessels come.
Not for themselves alone the British care;
Since every stranger may partake a share.
Hence still more culture shall the soil receive;
And every year increasing plenty give.
Cleared from the woods, more fruitful lands they gain;
And yellow Ceres loads the extended plain.
Here bubbling fountains flow through every mead;
Where flocks and herds delight to drink and feed.
The marshy grounds improved rich meadows yield;
The wilderness is made a fruitful field.
The Legislators, chosen every year,
Proceed to act, as shall to them appear.
Here just administration of the laws
Make public good, and private right one cause.
All crimes are punished, as their natures are;
The laws unwrested no offenders spare.
All civil magistrates have power and trust,
To act, in office, what is right and just.
Though first it was the intention of the laws
To punish vice, and favor virtue's cause;
Yet, by the power of gold how often is lost
The poor man's cause, and sacred justice crossed!
Nay, may it not be said, for cursed gold,
Both law and justice often are to be sold!
If with the rich, to law a poor man go,
Believe me, he shall have an overthrow!
For Danae fair had still remained a maid,
And in the brazen tower securely staid,
Had not the power of gold unbarr'd the chain;
What cannot gold and powerful love or Jove.
obtain!
What wonder then, if love of gold compel
The minds of men the right of law to sell?
When stormy winter whitens all below,
When woods and plains are clad in ice and snow,
The ships with icy chains are anchored fast,
Till the dissolving spring return at last;
Though boreas rage, and stormy tempests blow,
The streams are silent, and not seen to flow;
The fish then near the surface cease to play,
And to the bottom safely make their way.
But yet through holes, which in the ice are made,
With hook and line goes on the fisher's trade.
Sometimes the ice so strong and firm we know,
That loaded wagons on the rivers go!
But yet so temperate are some winters here,
That in the streams no bars of ice appear;
And all the season boats and shipping may,
With oar and sail divide the liquid way;
So various and uncertain is the clime,
For heat and cold extreme, in little time!
Fair Philadelphia next is rising seen,
Between two rivers placed, two miles between;
The Delaware and Sculkil, new to fame,
Both ancient streams, yet of a modern name.
The city, formed upon a beauteous plan,
Has many houses built, though late began;
Rectangular the streets, direct and fair;
And rectilinear all the ranges are.
Five houses here for sacred use are known,
Another stands not far without the town.
Of these appears one in a grander style;
But yet unfinished is the lofty pile.
Here psalms divine melodious accents raise,
And choral symphony sweet-songs of praise;
To raise the mind, and sooth the pious ear;
But God devoted minds does always hear.
A lofty tower is founded on this ground,
For future bells to make a distant sound.
Here schools, for learning, and for arts, are seen,
In which to many I Have a teacher been:
But one, in teaching, does the rest excel,
To know and speak the Greek and Latin well.
Here too, one spacious building we behold,
Where all provisions brought are daily sold;
From whose high steps too, loudly is proclaimed
The annual Magistrate, the Mayor named.
Here, in safe harbor, numerous vessels moor,
At anchor some, and some along the shore.
In commerce many cross the stormy main,
To distant countries, in pursuit of gain.
All necessary trades here get employ,
And useful arts, which large rewards enjoy.
Here signs, through all the streets, are hung in view,
Where entertainment may be had, ^o show.
The merry sailors, while they land their wares,
The praise of Bacchus sing, and ease their cares;
Yet often from the spring the draught is sought,
Which here to all does freely flow unbought;
But where fair ivy crowns the flowing bowl,
There dwells the large, the hospitable soul.
More things, at present, I forbear to name;
Because too long; -- these are enough for fame.
Except the country swains' distinguished praise
Demand the notice of my closing lays).
The farmer, provident, amidst his cares,
For winter, like the prudent ant, prepares;
Foreknowing, all that summer does produce,
Is only for consuming winter's use.
He fills his barns and cellars with good cheer,
Against that dreary season of the year.
He scorns exotic foods, and gaudy dress,
Content to live on homely fare, in peace;
Sweet to his taste his unbought dainties are;
And his own homespun he delights to wear.
His lowly dwelling views his large domain,
Improved in part, where peace and plenty reign.
Plain furniture, but useful, he does choose;
And wisely values every thing for use.
In these blessed shades may I delight to be;
Here little is enough, with peace, for me.
APPENDIX TO THE History of Pennsylvania. PART I.
CONTAINING,
No. I. Certain Conditions, or Concessions, in 1681. No. II. William Penn's
Frame of Government and Laws, etc. published in 1682. No. III. The Charter of
1683. No. IV. The Charter of 1696. No. V. Address of the Assembly to William
Penn, with his answer, in 1701. No. VI. Charter of the City of Philadelphia, in
1701.
No. I.
Certain conditions, or concessions, agreed upon by William Penn, Proprietary
and Governor of the province of Pennsylvania, and those who are the adventurers
and purchasers in the same province, the eleventh of July, one thousand six
hundred and eighty-one.

I. THAT so soon as it pleases God that the abovesaid persons arrive there, a
certain quantity of land, or ground plat, shall be laid out, for a large town
or city, in the most convenient place, upon the river, for health and
navigation; and every purchaser and adventurer shall, by lot, have so much land
therein as will answer to the proportion, which he has bought, or taken up,
upon rent: but it is to be noted, that the surveyors shall consider what roads
or highways will be necessary to the cities, towns, or through the lands.
Great roads from city to city not to contain less than forty feet, in breadth,
shall be first laid out and declared to be for highways, before the dividend
of acres be laid out for the purchaser, and the like observation to be had for
the streets in the towns and cities, that there may be convenient roads and
streets preserved, not to be encroached upon by any planter or builder, that
none may build irregularly to the damage of another. In this, custom governs.

II. That the land in the town be laid out together after the proportion of ten
thousand acres of the whole country, that is, two hundred acres, if the place
will bear it: however, that the proportion be by lot, and entire, so as those
that desire to be together, especially those that are, by the catalogue, laid
together, may be so laid together both in the town and country.

III. That, when the country lots are laid out, every purchaser, from one
thousand, to ten thousand acres, or more, not to have above one thousand acres
together, unless in three years they plant a family upon every thousand acres;
but that all such as purchase together, lie together; and, if as many as comply
with this condition, that the whole be laid out together.

IV. That, where any number of purchasers, more or less, whose number of acres
amounts to five or ten thousand acres, desire to sit together in a lot, or
township, they shall have their lot, or township, cast together, in such places
as have convenient harbors, or navigable rivers attending it, if such can be
found; and in case any one or more purchasers plant not according to agreement,
in this concession, to the prejudice of others of the same township, upon
complaint thereof made to the Governor, or his Deputy, with assistance, they
may award (if they see cause) that the complaining purchaser may, paying the
survey money, and purchase money, and interest thereof, be entitled, enrolled
and lawfully invested, in the lands so not seated.

V. That the proportion of lands, that shall be laid out in the first great
town, or city, for every purchaser, shall be after the proportion of ten acres
for every five hundred acres purchased, if the place will allow it.

VI. That notwithstanding there be no mention made, in the several deeds made
to the purchasers; yet the said William Penn does accord and declare, that all
rivers, rivulets, woods, and underwoods, waters, watercourses, quarries, mines,
and minerals, (except mines royal) shall be freely and fully enjoyed, and
wholly by the purchasers, into whose lot they fall.

VII. That, for every fifty acres, that shall be allotted to a servant, at the
end of his service, his quit-rent shall be two shillings per annum, and the
master, or owner of the servant, when he shall take up the other fifty acres,
his quit-rent, shall be four shillings by the year, or, if the master of the
servant (by reason in the indentures he is so obliged to do) allot out to the
servant fifty acres in his own division, the said master shall have, on demand,
allotted him, from the Governor, the one hundred acres, at the chief rent of
six shillings per annum.

VIII. And, for the encouragement of such as are ingenious and willing to
search out gold and silver mines in this province, it is hereby agreed, that
they have liberty to bore and dig in any man's property, fully paying the
damage done; and in case a discovery should be made, that the discoverer have
one-fifth, the owner of the soil (if not the discoverer) a tenth part, the
Governor two-fifths, and the rest to the public treasury, saving to the king
the share reserved by patent.

IX. In every hundred thousand acres, the Governor and Proprietary, by lot,
reserveth ten to himself, what shall lie but in one place.

X. That every man shall be bound to plant, or man, so much of his share of
land as shall be set out and surveyed, within three years after it is so set
out and surveyed, or else it shall be lawful for new comers to be settled
thereupon, paying to them their survey money, and they go up higher for their
shares.

XI. There shall be no buying and selling, be it with an Indian, or one among
another, of any goods to be exported, but what shall be performed in public
market, when such placed shall be set apart, or erected, where they shall pass
the public stamp, or mark. If bad ware, and prized as good, or deceitful in
proportion or weight, to forfeit the value, as if good and full weight and
proportion, to the public treasury of this province, whether it be the
merchandise of the Indian, or that of the planters.

XII. And forasmuch, as it is usual with the planters to overreach the poor
natives of the country, in trade, by goods not being good of the kind, or
debased with mixtures, with which they are sensibly aggrieved, it is agreed,
whatever is sold to the Indians, in consideration of their furs, shall be sold
in the market place, and there suffer the test, whether good or bad; if good,
to pass; if not good, not to be sold for good, that the natives may not be
abused, nor provoked.

XIII. That no man shall, by any ways or means, in word, or deed, affront, or
wrong any Indian, but he shall incur the same penalty of the law, as if he had
committed it against his fellow planter, and if any Indian shall abuse, in
word, or deed, any planter of this province, that he shall not be his own judge
upon the Indian, but he shall make his complaint to the Governor of the
province, or his Lieutenant, or Deputy, or some inferior Magistrate near him,
who shall, to the utmost of his power, take care with the king of the said
Indian, that all reasonable satisfaction be made to the said injured planter.

XIV. That all differences, between the planters and the natives, shall also be
ended by twelve men, that is, by six planters and six natives; that so we may
live friendly together as much as in us lies, preventing all occasions of
heart-burnings and mischief.

XV. That the Indians shall have liberty to do all things relating to
improvement of their ground, and providing sustenance for their families, that
any of the planters shall enjoy.

XVI. That the laws, as to slanders, drunkenness, swearing, cursing, pride in
apparel, trespasses, distresses, replevins, weights, and measures, shall be the
same as in England, till altered by law in this province.

XVII. That all shall mark their hogs, sheep and other cattle, and what are not
marked within three months after it is in their possession, be it young or old,
it shall be forfeited to the Governor, that so people may be compelled to avoid
the occasions of much strife between planters.

XVIII. That, in clearing the ground, care be taken to leave one acre of trees
for every five acres cleared, especially to preserve oak and mulberries, for
silk and shipping.

XIX. That all ship-masters shall give an account of their countries, names,
ships, owners, freights and passengers, to an officer to be appointed for that
purpose, which shall be registered within two days after their arrival, and if
they shall refuse so to do, that then none presume to trade with them, upon
forfeiture thereof; and that such masters be looked upon as having an evil
intention to the province.

XX. That no person leave the province, without publication being made thereof,
in the market place, three weeks before, and a certificate from some Justice of
the Peace, of his clearness with his neighbors and those he dealt with, so far
as such an assurance can be attained and given: and if any master of a ship
shall, contrary hereunto, receive and carry away any person, that has not
given that public notice, the said master shall be liable to all debts owing by
the said person, so secretly transported from the province.

Lastly, That these are to be added to, or corrected, by and with the consent
of the parties hereunto subscribed.

WILLIAM PENN. Sealed and delivered in the presence of WILLIAM BOELHAM, HARBERT
SPRINGET, THOMAS PRUDYARD.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of all the Proprietors, who have hereunto
subscribed, except Thomas Farrinborrough and John Goodson, in presence of HUGH
CHAMBERLEN, R. MURRAY, HARBERT SPRINGET, HUMPHRY SOUTH, THOMAS BARKER, SAMUEL
JOBSON, JOHN JOSEPH MOORE, WILLIAM POWEL, RICHARD DAVIE, GRIFFITH JONES, HUGH
LAMB, THOMAS FARRINBORROUGH, JOHN GOODSON.



No. II.
The frame of the government of the province of Pensilvania, in America:
together with certain laws agreed upon in England, by the Governor and diverse
freemen of the aforesaid province. To be further explained and confirmed there,
by the first provincial Council, that shall be held, if they see meet.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN the great and wise God had made the world, of all his creatures, it
pleased him to choose man his Deputy to rule it: and to sit him for so great a
charge and trust, he did not only qualify him with skill and power, but with
integrity to use them justly. This native goodness was equally his honor and
his happiness; and whilst he stood here, all went well; there was no need of
coercive or compulsive means; the precept of divine love and truth, in his
bosom, was the guide and keeper of his innocence. But lust prevailing against
duty, made a lamentable breach upon it; and the law, that before had no power
over him, took place upon him, and his disobedient posterity, that such as
would not live conformable to the holy law within, should fall under the
reproof and correction of the just law without, in a judicial administration.

This the Apostle teaches in diverse of his epistles: "The law (says he) was
added because of transgression:" In another place, "Knowing that the law was
not made for the righteous man; but for the disobedient and ungodly, for
sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers, for whoremongers, for them
that defile themselves with mankind, and for manstealers, for liars, for
perjured persons," etc. but this is not all, he opens and carries the matter of
government a little further: "Let every soul be subject to the higher powers;
for there is no power but of God. The powers that be are ordained of God:
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. For
rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil; will thou then not be
afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same." "He is the minister of God to thee for good." "Wherefore ye must needs
be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake."

This settles the divine right of government beyond exception, and that for two
ends: first, to terrify evil doers; secondly, to cherish those that do well;
which gives government a life beyond corruption, and makes it as durable in the
world, as good men should be. So that government seems to me a part of religion
itself, a thing sacred in its institution and end. For, if it does not directly
remove the cause, it crushes the effects of evil, and is as such, (though a
lower, yet) an emanation of the same Divine Power, that is both author and
object of pure religion; the difference lying here, that the one is more free
and mental, the other more corporal and compulsive in its operations: but that
is only to evil doers; government itself being otherwise as capable of
kindness, goodness and charity, as a more private society. They weakly err,
that think there is no other use of government, than correction, which is the
coarsest part of it: daily experience tells us, that the care and regulation of
many other affairs, more soft, and daily necessary, make up much the greatest
part of government; and which must have followed the peopling of the world, had
Adam never fell, and will continue among men, on earth, under the highest
seize they may arrive at, by the coming of the blessed Second Adam, the
Lord, from heaven. Thus much of government in general, as to its rise and end.

For particular frames and models, it will become me to say little; and
comparatively I will say nothing. My reasons are: --

First, That the age is too nice and difficult for it; there being nothing the
wits of men are more busy and divided upon. It is true, they seem to agree to
the end, to wit, happiness; but, in the means, they differ, as to divine, so to
this human felicity; and the cause is much the same, not always want of light
and knowledge, but want of using them rightly. Men side with their passions
against their reason, and their sinister interests have so strong a bias upon
their minds, that they lean to them against the good of the things they know.

Secondly, I do not find a model in the world, that time, place, and some
singular emergences have not necessarily altered; nor is it easy to frame a
civil government, that shall serve all places alike.

Thirdly, I know what is said by the several admirers of monarchy, aristocracy
and democracy, which are the rule of one, a few, and many, and are the three
common ideas of government, when men discourse on the subject. But I choose to
solve the controversy with this small distinction, and it belongs to all three:
Any government is free to the people under it (whatever be the frame) where the
laws rule, and the people are a party to those laws, and more than this is
tyranny, oligarchy, or confusion.

But, lastly, when all is said, there is hardly one frame of government in the
world so ill designed by its first founders, that, in good hands, would not do
well enough; and story tells us, the best, in ill ones, can do nothing that is
great or good; witness the Jewish and Roman states. Governments, like clocks,
go from the motion men give them; and as governments are made and moved by men,
so by them they are ruined too. Wherefore governments rather depend upon men,
than men upon governments. Let men be good, and the government cannot be bad;
if it be ill, they will cure it. But, if men be bad, let the government be
never so good, they will endeavor to warp and spoil it to their turn.

I know some say, let us have good laws, and no matter for the men that execute
them: but let them consider, that though good laws do well, good men do better:
for good laws may want good men, and be abolished or evaded by ill men; but
good men will never want good laws, nor suffer ill ones. It is true, good laws
have some awe upon ill ministers, but that is where they have not power to
escape or abolish them, and the people are generally wise and good: but a loose
and depraved people (which is to the question) love laws and an administration
like themselves. That, therefore, which makes a good constitution, must keep
it, viz. men of wisdom and virtue, qualities, that because they descend not
with worldly inheritances, must be carefully propagated by a virtuous education
of youth; for which after ages will owe more to the care and prudence of
founders, and the successive magistracy, than to their parents, for their
private patrimonies.

These considerations of the weight of government, and the nice and various
opinions about it, made it uneasy to me to think of publishing the ensuing
frame and conditional laws, foreseeing both the censures, they will meet with,
from men of differing humors and engagements, and the occasion they may give
of discourse beyond my design.

But, next to the power of necessity, (which is a solicitor, that will take no
denial) this induced me to a compliance, that we have (with reverence to God,
and good conscience to men) to the best of our skill, contrived and composed
the frame and laws of this government, to the great end of all government, viz.
To support power in reverence with the people, and to secure the people from
the abuse of power; that they may be free by their just obedience, and the
magistrates honorable, for their just administration: for liberty without
obedience is confusion, and obedience without liberty is slavery. To carry this
evenness is partly owing to the constitution, and partly to the magistracy:
where either of these fail, government will be subject to convulsions; but
where both are wanting, it must be totally subverted: then where both meet, the
government is like to endure. Which I humbly pray and hope God will please to
make the lot of this of Pensilvania. Amen.

WILLIAM PENN.

THE FRAME, etc.
TO all people, to whom these presents shall come. WHEREAS king Charles the
Second, by his letters patents, under the great seal of England, for the
consideration therein mentioned, has been graciously pleased to give and grant
unto me William Penn (by the name of William Penn, Esquire, son and heir of Sir
William Penn deceased) and to my heirs and assigns forever, all that tract of
land, or province, called Pensilvania, in America, with diverse great powers,
preheminences, royalties, jurisdictions, and authorities, necessary for the
well-being and government thereof: Now know ye, that for the well-being and
government of the said province, and for the encouragement of all the freemen
and planters, that may be therein concerned, in pursuance of the powers
aforementioned, I, the said William Penn, have declared, granted and confirmed,
and by these presents, for me, my heirs and assigns, do declare, grant and
confirm unto all the freemen, planters and adventurers of, in and to the said
province, these liberties, franchises and properties, to be held, enjoyed and
kept by the freemen, planters and inhabitants of the said province of
Pensilvania for ever.

Imprimis. That the government of this province shall, according to the powers
of the patent, consist of the Governor and freemen of the said province, in
form of a provincial Council and General Assembly, by whom all laws shall be
made, officers chosen, and public affairs transacted, as is hereafter
respectively declared, that is to say --

II. That the freemen of the said province shall, on the twentieth day of the
twelfth month, which shall be in this present year one thousand six hundred
eighty and two, meet and assemble in some fit place, of which timely notice
shall be before hand given by the Governor or his Deputy; and then, and there,
shall choose out of themselves seventy-two persons of most note for their
wisdom, virtue and ability, who shall meet, on the tenth day of the first month
next ensuing, and always be called, and act as, the provincial Council of the
said province.

III. That, at the first choice of such provincial Council, one-third part of
the said provincial Council shall be chosen to serve for three years, then next
ensuing; one-third part, for two years then next ensuing; and one-third part,
for one year then next ensuing such election, and no longer; and that the said
third part shall go out accordingly: and on the twentieth day of the twelfth
month, as aforesaid, yearly for ever afterward, the freemen of the said
province shall, in like manner, meet and assemble together, and then choose
twenty-four persons, being one-third of the said number, to serve in provincial
Council for three years: it being intended, that one-third part of the whole
provincial Council (always consisting, and to consist, of seventy-two persons,
as aforesaid) falling off yearly, it shall be yearly supplied by such new
yearly elections, as aforesaid; and that no one person shall continue therein
longer than three years: and, in case any member shall decease before the last
election during his time, that then at the next election ensuing his decease,
another shall be chosen to supply his place, for the remaining time, he was to
have served, and no longer.

IV. That, after the first seven years, every one of the said third parts, that
goes yearly off, shall be incapable of being chosen again for one whole year
following: that so all may be sitted for government, and have experience of the
care and burden of it.

V. That the provincial Council, in all cases and matters of moment, as their
arguing upon bills to be passed into laws, erecting courts of justice, giving
judgment upon criminals impeached, and choice of officers, in such manner as is
herein after mentioned; not less than two-thirds of the whole provincial
Council shall make a quorum; and that the consent and approbation of two-thirds
of such quorum shall be had in all such cases and matters of moment. And
moreover that, in all cases and matters of lesser moment, twenty-four Members
of the said provincial Council shall make a quorum, the majority of which
twenty-four shall, and may, always determine in such cases and causes of lesser
moment.

VI. That, in this provincial Council, the Governor, or his Deputy, shall or
may, always preside, and have a treble voice; and the said provincial Council
shall always continue, and sit upon its own adjournments and committees.

VII. That the Governor and provincial Council shall prepare and propose to the
General Assembly, hereafter mentioned, all bills, which they shall, at any
time, think fit to be passed into laws, within the said province; which bills
shall be published and affixed to the most noted places, in the inhabited parts
thereof, thirty days before the meeting of the General Assembly, in order to
the passing them into laws, or rejecting of them, as the General Assembly shall
see meet.

VIII. That the Governor and provincial Council shall take care, that all laws,
statutes and ordinances, which shall at any time be made within the said
province, be duly and diligently executed.

IX. That the Governor and provincial Council shall, at all times, have the
care of the peace and safety of the province, and that nothing be by any person
attempted to the subversion of this frame of government.

X. That the Governor and provincial Council shall, at all times, settle and
order the situation of all cities, ports, and market towns in every county,
modelling therein all public buildings, streets and market places, and shall
appoint all necessary roads, and highways in the province.

XI. That the Governor and Provincial shall, at all times, have power to
inspect the management of the public treasury, and punish those who shall
convert any part thereof to any other use, than what has been agreed upon by
the Governor, provincial Council and General Assembly.

XII. That the Governor and provincial Council, shall erect and order all
public schools, and encourage and reward the authors of useful sciences and
laudable inventions in the said province.

XIII. That, for the better management of the powers and trust aforesaid, the
provincial Council shall, from time to time, divide itself into four distinct
and proper committees, for the more easy administration of the affairs of the
province, which divides the seventy-two into four eighteens, every one of which
eighteens shall consist of six out of each of the three orders, or yearly
elections, each of which shall have a distinct portion of business, as
follows: First, a committee of plantations, to situate and settle cities,
ports, and market towns, and highways, and to hear and decide all suits and
controversies relating to plantations. Secondly, A committee of justice and
safety, to secure the peace of the province, and punish the mal-administration
of those who subvert justice, to the prejudice of the public, or private,
interest. Thirdly, A committee of trade and treasury, who shall regulate all
trade and commerce, according to law, encourage manufacture and country growth,
and defray the public charge of the province. And, Fourthly, A committee of
manners, education and arts, that all wicked and scandalous living may be
prevented, and that youth may be successively trained up in virtue and useful
knowledge and arts: the quorum of each of which committees being six, that is,
two out of each of the three orders, or yearly elections, as aforesaid, make a
constant and standing Council of twenty-four, which will have the power of the
provincial Council, being the quorum of it, in all cases not excepted in the
fifth article; and in the said committees, and standing Council of the
province, the Governor, or his Deputy, shall, or may preside, as aforesaid; and
in the absence of the Governor, or his Deputy, if no one is by either of them
appointed, the said committees or Council shall appoint a President for that
time, and not otherwise; and what shall be resolved at such committees, shall
be reported to the said Council of the province, and shall be by them resolved
and confirmed before the same shall be put in execution; and that these
respective committees shall not sit at one and the same time, except in cases
of necessity.

XIV. And, to the end that all laws prepared by the Governor and provincial
Council aforesaid, may yet have the more full concurrence of the freemen of the
province, it is declared, granted and confirmed, that, at the time and place or
places, for the choice of a provincial Council, as aforesaid, the said freemen
shall yearly choose Members to serve in a General Assembly, as their
representatives, not exceeding two hundred persons, who shall yearly meet, on
the twentieth day of the second month, which shall be in the year one thousand
six hundred eighty and three following, in the capital town, or city, of the
said province, where, during eight days, the several Members may freely confer
with one another; and, if any of them see meet, with a committee of the
provincial Council (consisting of three out of each of the four committees
aforesaid being twelve in all) which shall be, at that time, purposely
appointed to receive from any of them proposals, for the alterations or
amendment of any of the said proposed and promulgated bills: and on the ninth
day from their so meeting, the said General Assembly, after reading over the
proposed bills by the Clerk of the provincial Council, and the occasions and
motives for them being opened by the Governor or his Deputy, shall give their
affirmative or negative, which to them seems best, in such manner as herein
after is expressed. But not less than two-thirds shall make a quorum in the
passing of laws, and choice of such officers as are by them to be chosen.

XV. That the laws so prepared and proposed, as aforesaid, that are assented to
by the General Assembly, shall be enrolled as laws of the province, with this
style: By the Governor, with the assent and approbation of the freemen in
provincial Council and General Assembly.

XVI. That, for the establishment of the government and laws of this province,
and to the end there may be an universal satisfaction in the laying of the
fundamentals thereof; the General Assembly shall, or may, for the first year,
consist of all the freemen of and in the said province; and ever after it shall
be yearly chosen, as aforesaid; which number of two hundred shall be enlarged
as the country shall increase in people, so as it do not exceed five hundred,
at any time; the appointment and proportioning of which, as also the laying and
methodizing of the choice of the provincial Council and General Assembly, in
future times, most equally to the divisions of the hundreds and counties, which
the country shall hereafter be divided into, shall be in the power of the
provincial Council to propose, and the General Assembly to resolve.

XVII. That the Governor and the provincial Council shall erect, from time to
time, standing courts of justice, in such places and number as they shall judge
convenient for the good government of the said province. And that the
provincial Council shall, on the thirteenth day of the first month, yearly,
elect and present to the Governor, or his Deputy, a double number of persons,
to serve for Judges, Treasurers, Masters of Rolls, within the said province,
for the year next ensuing; and the freemen of the said province, in the county
courts, when they shall be erected, and till then, in the General Assembly,
shall, on the three and twentieth day of the second month, yearly, elect and
present to the Governor, or his Deputy, a double number of persons, to serve
for Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and Coroners, for the year next ensuing;
out of which respective elections and presentiments, the Governor or his Deputy
shall nominate and commissionate the proper number for each office, the third
day after the said presentiments, or else the first named in such presentment,
for each office, shall stand and serve for that office the year ensuing.

XVIII. But forasmuch as the present condition of the province requires some
immediate settlement, and admits not of so quick ^ revolution of officers; and
to the end the said province may, with all convenient speed, be well ordered
and settled, I, William Penn, do therefore think fit to nominate and appoint
such persons for Judges, Treasurers, Masters of the Rolls, Sheriffs, Justices
of the Peace, and Coroners, as are most fitly qualified for those employments;
to whom I shall make and grant commissions for the said offices, respectively,
to hold to them, to whom the same shall be granted, for so long time as every
such person shall well behave himself in the office, or place, to him
respectively granted, and no longer. And upon the decease or displacing of any
of the said officers, the succeeding officer, or officers, shall be chosen, as
aforesaid.

XIX. That the General Assembly shall continue so long as may be needful to
impeach criminals, fit to be there impeached, to pass bills into laws, that
they shall think fit to pass into laws, and till such time as the Governor and
provincial Council shall declare that they have nothing further to propose unto
them, for their assent and approbation: and that declaration shall be a dismiss
to the General Assembly for that time; which General Assembly shall be,
notwithstanding, capable of assembling together upon the summons of the
provincial Council, at any time during that year, if the said provincial
Council shall see occasion for their so assembling.

XX. That all the elections of members, or representatives of the people, to
serve in provincial Council and General Assembly, and all questions to be
determined by both, or either of them, that relate to passing of bills into
laws, to the choice of officers, to impeachments by the General Assembly, and
judgment of criminals upon such impeachments by the provincial Council, and to
all other cases by them respectively judged of importance, shall be resolved
and determined by the ballot; and unless on sudden and indispensible occasions,
no business in provincial Council, or its respective committees, shall be
finally determined the same day that it is moved.

XXI. That, at all times, when, and so often as it shall happen that the
Governor shall, or may, be an infant, under the age of one and twenty years,
and no guardians, or commissioners, are appointed, in writing, by the father of
the said infant, or that such guardians, or commissioners, shall be deceased;
that during such minority, the provincial Council shall, from time to time, as
they shall see meet, constitute and appoint guardians, or commissioners, not
exceeding three; one of which three shall preside as deputy, and chief
guardian, during such minority, and shall have and execute, with the consent of
the other two, all the power of a Governor, in all the public affairs and
concerns of the said province.

XXII. That, as often as any day of the month, mentioned in any article of this
charter, shall fall upon the first day of the week, commonly called the Lord's
Day, the business appointed for that day, shall be deferred till the next day,
unless in case of emergency.

XXIII. That no act, law, or ordinance whatsoever, shall, at any time
hereafter, be made or done by the Governor of this province, his heirs, or
assigns, or by the freemen in the provincial Council, or the General Assembly,
to alter, change, or diminish the form, or effect, of this charter, or any
part, or clause thereof, or contrary to the true intent and meaning thereof,
without the consent of the Governor, his heirs, or assigns, and six parts of
seven of the said freemen in provincial Council and General Assembly.

XXIV. And lastly, that I, the said William Penn, for myself, my heirs and
assigns, have solemnly declared, granted and confirmed, and do hereby solemnly
declare, grant and confirm, that neither I, my heirs, nor assigns, shall
procure or do any thing or things, whereby the liberties, in this charter
contained and expressed, shall be infringed or broken; and if any thing be
procured by any person or persons contrary to these premises, it shall be held
of no force or effect. In witness whereof, I, the said William Penn, have unto
this present charter of liberties set my hand and broad seal, this five and
twentieth day of the second month, vulgarly called April, in the year of our
Lord one thousand six hundred and eighty-two.

WILLIAM PENN.

Laws agreed upon in England, etc.
I. That the charter of liberties, declared, granted and confirmed the five and
twentieth day of the second month, called April, 1682, before diverse witnesses,
by William Penn, Governor and chief Proprietor of Pensilvania, to all the
freemen and planters of the said province, is hereby declared and approved, and
shall be for ever held for fundamental in the government thereof, according to
the limitations mentioned in the said charter.

II. That every inhabitant in the said province, that is or shall be, a
purchaser of one hundred acres of land, or upwards, his heirs and assigns, and
every person who shall have paid his passage, and taken up one hundred acres of
land, at one penny an acre, and have cultivated ten acres thereof, and every
person, that has been a servant, or bonds-man, and is free by his service,
that shall have taken up his fifty acres of land, and cultivated twenty
thereof, and every inhabitant, artificer, or other resident in the said
province, that pays sco^ and lot to the government; shall be deemed and
accounted a freeman of the said province: and every such person shall, and may,
be capable of electing, or being elected, representatives of the people, in
provincial Council, or General Assembly, in the said province.

III. That all elections of members, or representatives of the people and
freemen of the province of Pensilvania, to serve in provincial Council, or
General Assembly, to be held within the said province, shall be free and
voluntary: and that the elector, that shall receive any reward or gift, in
meat, drink, moneys, or otherwise, shall forfeit his right to elect; and such
person as shall directly or indirectly give, promise, or bestow any such reward
as aforesaid, to be elected, shall forfeit his election, and be thereby
incapable to serve as aforesaid: and the provincial Council and General
Assembly shall be the sole judges of the regularity, or irregularity of the
elections of their own respective Members.

IV. That no money or goods shall be raised upon, or paid by, any of the people
of this province by way of public tax, custom or contribution, but by a law,
for that purpose made; and whoever shall levy, collect, or pay any money or
goods contrary thereunto, shall be held a public enemy to the province, and a
betrayer of the liberties of the people thereof.

V. That all courts shall be open, and justice shall neither be sold, denied
nor delayed.

VI. That, in all courts all persons of all persuasions may freely appear in
their own way, and according to their own manner, and there personally plead
their own cause themselves; or, if unable, by their friend: and the first
process shall be the exhibition of the complaint in court, fourteen days before
the trial; and that the party, complained against, may be fitted for the same,
he or she shall be summoned, no less than ten days before, and a copy of the
complaint delivered him or her, at his or her dwelling house. But before the
complaint of any person be received, he shall solemnly declare in court, that
he believes, in his conscience, his cause is just.

VII. That all pleadings, processes and records in courts, shall be short, and
in English, and in an ordinary and plain character, that they may be
understood, and justice speedily administered.

VIII. That all trials shall be by twelve men, and as near at may be, peers or
equals, and of the neighborhood, and men without just exception; in cases of
life, there shall be first twenty-four returned by the Sheriffs, for a grand
inquest, of whom twelve, at least, shall find the complaint to be true; and
then the twelve men, or peers, to be likewise returned by the Sheriff, shall
have the final judgment. But reasonable challenges shall be always admitted
against the said twelve men, or any of them.

IX. That all fees in all cases shall be moderate, and settled by the
provincial Council, and General Assembly, and be hung up in a table in every
respective court; and whosoever shall be convicted of taking more, shall pay
twofold, and be dismissed his employment; one moiety of which shall go to the
party wronged.

X. That all prisons shall be workhouses, far felons, vagrants, and loose and
idle persons; whereof one shall be in every county.

XI. That all prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties, unless for
capital offenses, where the proof is evident, or the presumption great.

XII. That all persons wrongfully imprisoned, or prosecuted at law, shall have
double damages against the informer, or prosecutor.

XIII. That all prisons shall be free, as to fees, food and lodging.

XIV. That all lands and goods shall be liable to pay debts, except where there
is legal issue, and then all the goods, and one-third of the land only.

XV. That all wills, in writing, attested by two witnesses, shall be of the
same force, as to lands, as other conveyances, being legally proved within
forty days, either within or without the said province.

XVI. That seven years quiet possession shall give an unquestionable right,
except in cases of infants, lunatics, married women, or persons beyond the seas.

XVII. That all briberies and extortions whatsoever shall be severely punished.

XVIII. That all fines shall be moderate, and saving men's con^enements,
merchandise, or wainage.

XIX. That all marriages (not forbidden by the law of God, as to nearness of
blood and affinity by marriage) shall be encouraged; but the parents, or
guardians, shall be first consulted, and the marriage shall be published before
it be solemnized; and it shall be solemnized by taking one another as husband
and wife, before credible witnesses; and a certificate of the whole, under the
hands of parties and witnesses, shall be brought to the proper register of that
county, and shall be registered in his office.

XX. And, to prevent frauds and vexatious suits within the said province, that
all charters, gifts, grants, and conveyances of land (except leases for a year
or under) and all bills, bonds, and specialties above five pounds, and not
under three months, made in the said province, shall be enrolled, or registered
in the public enrolment office of the said province, within the space of two
months next after the making thereof, else to be void in law, and all deeds,
grants, and conveyances of land (except as aforesaid) within the said province,
and made out of the said province, shall be enrolled or registered, as
aforesaid, within six months next after tho making thereof, and settling and
constituting an enrolment office or registry within the said province, else to
be void in law against all persons whatsoever.

XXI. That all defacers or corrupters of charters, gifts, grants, bonds, bills,
wills, contracts, and conveyances, or that shall deface or falsify any
enrolment, registry or record, within this province, shall make double
satisfaction for the same; half whereof shall go to the party wronged, and they
shall be dismissed of all places of trust, and be publicly disgraced as false
men.

XXII. That there shall be a register for births, marriages, burials, wills,
and letters of administration, distinct from the other registry.

XXIII. That there shall be a register for all servants, where their names,
time, wages, and days of payment shall be registered.

XXIV. That all lands and goods of felons shall be liable, to make satisfaction
to the party wronged twice the value; and for want of lands or goods, the
felons shall be bondmen to work in the common prison, or workhouse, or
otherwise, till the party injured be satisfied.

XXV. That the estates of capital offenders, as traitors and murderers, shall
go, one-third to the next of kin to the sufferer, and the remainder to the next
of kin to the criminal.

XXVI. That all witnesses, coming, or called, to testify their knowledge in or
to any matter or thing, in any court, or before any lawful authority, within
the said province, shall there give or deliver in their evidence, or testimony,
by solemnly promising to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, to the matter, or thing in question. And in case any person so called to
evidence, shall be convicted of wilful falsehood, such person shall suffer and
undergo such damage or penalty, as the person, or persons, against whom he or
she bore false witness, did, or should, undergo; and shall also make
satisfaction to the party wronged, and be publicly exposed as a false witness,
never to be credited in any court, or before any Magistrate, in the said
province.

XXVII. And, to the end that all officers chosen to serve within this province,
may, with more care and diligence, answer the trust reposed in them, it is
agreed, that no such person shall enjoy more than one public office, at one
time.

XXVIII. That all children, within this province, of the age of twelve years,
shall be taught some useful trade or skill, to the end none may be idle, but
the poor may work to live, and the rich, if they become poor, may not want.

XXIX. That servants be not kept longer than their time, and such as are
careful, be both justly and kindly used in their service, and put in fitting
equipage at the expiration thereof, according to custom.

XXX. That all scandalous and malicious reporters, backbiters, defamers and
spreaders of false news, whether against Magistrates or private persons, shall
be accordingly severely punished, as enemies to the peace and concord of this
province.

XXXI. That, for the encouragement of the planters and traders in this
province, who are incorporated into a society, the patent granted to them by
William Penn, Governor of the said province, is hereby ratified and confirmed.

XXXII. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

XXXIII. That all factors or correspondents in the said province, wronging
their employers, shall make satisfaction, and one-third over, to their said
employers: and in case of the death of any such factor or correspondent, the
committee of trade shall take care to secure so much of the deceased party's
estate as belongs to his said respective employers.

XXXIV. That all Treasurers, Judges, Masters of the Rolls, Sheriffs, Justices
of the Peace, and other officers and persons whatsoever, relating to courts, or
trials of causes, or any other service in the government; and all Members
elected to serve in provincial Council and General Assembly, and all that have
right to elect such Members, shall be such as profess faith in Jesus Christ,
and that are not convicted of ill fame, or unsober and dishonest conversation,
and that are of twenty-one years of age, at least; and that all such so
qualified, shall be capable of the said several employments and privileges, as
aforesaid.

XXXV. That all persons living in this province, who confess and acknowledge
the one Almighty and eternal God, to be the Creator, Upholder and Ruler of the
world; and that hold themselves obliged in conscience to live peaceably and
justly in civil society, shall, in no ways, be molested or prejudiced for their
religious persuasion, or practice, in matters of faith and worship, nor shall
they be compelled, at any time, to frequent or maintain any religious worship,
place or ministry whatever.

XXXVI. That, according to the good example of the primitive Christians, and
the ease of the creation, every first day of the week, called the Lord's day,
people shall abstain from their common daily labor, that they may the better
dispose themselves to worship God according to their understandings.

XXXVII. That as a careless and corrupt administration of justice draws the
wrath of God upon magistrates, so the wildness and looseness of the people
provoke the indignation of God against a country: therefore, that all such
offenses against God, (...) swearing, cursing, lying, profane talking,
drunkenness, drinking of healths, obscene words, incest, sodomy, rapes,
whoredom, fornication, and other uncleanness (not to be repeated) all treasons,
misprisions, murders, duels, felony, sedition, maims, forceable entries, and
other violences, to the persons and estates of the inhabitants within this
province; all prizes, stage plays, cards, dice, Maygames, gamesters, masks,
revels, bull-baitings, cock-fightings, bear-baitings, and the like, which
excite the people to rudeness, cruelty, looseness, and irreligion, shall be
respectively discouraged, and severely punished, according to the appointment
of the Governor and freemen in provincial Council and General Assembly; as also
all proceedings contrary to these laws, that are not here made expressly penal.

XXXVIII. That a copy of these laws shall be hung up in the provincial Council,
and in public courts of justice: and that they shall be read yearly at the
opening of every provincial Council and General Assembly, and court of justice;
and their assent shall be testified, by their standing up after the reading
thereof.

XXXIX. That there shall be, at no time, any alteration of any of these laws,
without the consent of the Governor, his heirs, or assigns, and six parts of
seven of the freemen, met in provincial Council and General Assembly.

XL. That all other matters and things not herein provided for, which shall,
and may, concern the public justice, peace or safety of the said province; and
the raising and imposing taxes, customs, duties, or other charges whatsoever,
shall be, and are, hereby referred to the order, prudence and determination of
the Governor and freemen, in provincial Council and General Assembly, to be
held, from time to time, in the said province.

Signed and sealed by the Governor and freemen aforesaid, the fifth day of the
third month, called May, one thousand six hundred and eighty-two.
No. III.
The Frame of the Government of the Province of Pennsylvania and Territories
thereunto annexed, in America. 1683.

TO all persons, to whom these presents may come. 1683.
Whereas, king Charles the Second, by his letters patents, 2d mo. 2d.
under the great seal of England, bearing date the fourth day of March, in the
thirty and third year of the king, for diverse considerations therein mentioned,
has been graciously pleased to give and grant unto me, William Penn (by the
name of William Penn, Esquire, son and heir of Sir William Penn, deceased) and
to my heirs and assigns for ever, all that tract of land, or province, called
Pennsylvania, in America, with diverse great powers, preheminencies, royalties,
jurisdictions and authorities, necessary for the well-being and government
thereof. And, whereas, the king's dearest brother James, duke of York and
Albany, etc. by his deeds of feoffment, under his hand and seal, duly
perfected, bearing date the four and twentieth day of August, one thousand six
hundred eighty and two, did grant unto me, my heirs and assigns, all that tract
of land, lying and being from twelve miles northward of Newcastle, upon
Delaware river, in America, to Cape Hinlopen, upon the said river and bay of
Delaware southward, together with all royalties, franchises, duties,
jurisdictions, liberties and privileges thereunto belonging.

Now know ye, That for the well-being and good government of the said province
and territories thereunto annexed, and for the encouragement of all the freemen
and planters, that may be therein concerned, in pursuance of the rights and
powers aforementioned, I, the said William Penn, have declared, granted, and
confirmed, and by these presents, for me, my heirs and assigns, do declare,
grant and confirm unto all the freemen, planters and adventurers of, in and to
the said province and territories thereof, these liberties, franchises and
properties, so far as in me lies, to be held, enjoyed and kept by the freemen,
planters and adventurers of and in the said province of Pennsylvania, and
territories thereunto annexed, for ever.

Number of (...) Assembly*
Imprimis, That the government of this province and (...) thereof, shall, from
time to time, according to the powers of the patent and deeds of feoffment
aforesaid, consist of the Proprietary and Governor, and freemen of the said
province and territories thereof, in form of provincial Council and General
Assembly; which provincial Council shall consist of eighteen persons, being
three out of each county, and which Assembly shall consist of thirty-six
persons, being six out of each county, men of most note for their virtue,
wisdom and ability; by whom all laws shall be made, officers chosen, and public
affairs transacted, as is hereafter limited and declared.

Elections regulated.
II. There being three persons already chosen for every respective county of
this province and territories thereof, to serve in the provincial Council, one
of them for three years; one for two years, and one for one year; and one of
them to go off yearly, in every county; that on the tenth day of the first
month yearly, for ever after, the freemen of the said province and territories
thereof, shall meet together, in the most convenient place, in every county of
this province and territories thereof, then and there to choose one person,
qualified as aforesaid, in every county, being one-third of the number to serve
in provincial Council, for three years; it being intended, that one-third of
the whole provincial Council, consisting and to consist of eighteen persons,
falling off yearly, it shall be yearly supplied with such yearly elections, as
aforesaid; and that one person shall not continue in longer than three years;
and in case any member shall decease before the last election, during his time,
that then, at the next election ensuing his decease, another shall be chosen to
supply his place for the remaining time he was to have served, and no longer.

Rotation.
III. That, after the first seven years, every one of the said third parts, that
goes yearly off, shall be incapable of being chosen again for one whole year
following, that so all that are capable and qualified, as aforesaid, may be
fitted for government, and have a share of the care and burden of it.

IV. That the provincial Council in all cases and matters of moment, Quorum
settled.
as their arguing upon bills to be passed into laws, or proceedings about
erecting of courts of justice, sitting in judgment upon criminals impeached,
and choice of officers, in such manner as is herein after expressed, not less
than two-thirds of the whole shall make a quorum; and that the consent and
approbation of two-thirds of that quorum shall be had in all such cases, or
matters, of moment: and that, in all cases and matters of lesser moment,
one-third of the whole shall make a quorum, the majority of which shall and may
always determine in such cases and causes of lesser moment.

V. That the Governor and provincial Council shall have the power of preparing
and proposing to the Assembly, Bills to be prepared, etc.
hereafter mentioned, all bills, which they shall see needful, and that shall,
at any time, be past into laws, within the said province and territories
thereof, which bills shall be published and affixed to the most noted place, in
every county of this province and territories thereof, twenty days before the
meeting of the Assembly, in order to passing them into laws.

VI. That the Governor and provincial Council shall take care that all laws,
statutes and ordinances, which shall, Executive power in Governor and Council.
at any time, be made within the said province and territories, be duly and
diligently executed.

VII. That the Governor and provincial Council shall, Care of the public
safety, etc.
at all times, have the care of the peace and safety of this province and
territories thereof; and that nothing be, by any person, attempted, to the
subversion of this frame of government.

VIII. That the Governor and provincial Council shall, Appointing of towns and
roads, etc.
at all times, settle and order the situation of all cities, and market towns,
in every county, modelling therein all public buildings, streets and market
places; and shall appoint all necessary roads and highways, in this province
and territories thereof.

IX. That the Governor and provincial Council shall, Inspecting the Treasury.
at all times, have power to inspect the management of the public treasury, and
punish those who shall convert any part thereof to any other use, than what
has been agreed upon by the Governor, provincial Council and Assembly.

Erecting of schools.
X. That the Governor and provincial Council shall erect and order all public
schools, and encourage and reward the authors of useful sciences and laudable
inventions in the said province and territories thereof.

One-third of the Council with the Governor, etc.
XI. That one-third part of the provincial Council, residing with the Governor,
from time to time, shall with the Governor have the care of the management of
public affairs, relating to the peace, justice, treasury and improvement of the
province and territories, and to the good education of youth, and sobriety of
the manners of the inhabitants therein, as aforesaid.

Restriction of the Governor's power, etc.
XII. That the Governor, or his Deputy, shall always preside in the provincial
Council, and that he shall, at no time, therein perform any public act of state
whatsoever, that shall, or may, relate unto the justice, trade, treasury, or
safety of the province and territories aforesaid, but by and with the advice
and consent of the provincial Council thereof.

Elections regulated, etc.
XIII. And to the end that all bills prepared and agreed by the Governor and
provincial Council, as aforesaid, may yet have the more full concurrence of the
freemen of the province and territories thereof, it is declared, granted and
confirmed, that, at the time and place in every county for the choice of one
person to serve in provincial Council, as aforesaid, the respective Members
thereof, at their said meeting, shall yearly choose out of themselves six
persons of most note, for virtue, wisdom and ability, to serve in Assembly, as
their representatives, who shall yearly meet on the tenth day of the third
month, in the capital town or city of the said province, unless the Governor
and provincial Council shall think fit to appoint another place to meet in,
where, during eight days, the several Members may confer freely with one
another; and if any of them see meet, with a committee of the provincial
Council, which shall be, at that time, purposely appointed, to receive from any
of them proposals for the alterations, or amendments, of any of the said
proposed and promulgated bills; and, on the ninth day from their so meeeting,
the said Assembly, after their reading over the proposed bills, by the Clerk of
the provincial Council, and the occasions and motives for them being opened by
the Governor or his Deputy, shall, upon the question by him put, give their
affirmative or negative, which to them seems best, in such manner as is
hereafter expressed: but not less than two thirds shall make a quorum in the
passing of all bills into laws, and choice of such officers as are by them to
be chosen.

XIV. That the laws so prepared and proposed, Style of the laws.
as aforesaid, that are assented to by the Assembly, shall be enrolled as laws
of this province and territories thereof, with this style, By the Governor,
with the assent and approbation of the freemen in provincial Council and
Assembly met, and from henceforth the meetings, sessions, acts, and proceedings
of the Governor, provincial Council and Assembly, shall be styled and called,
The meeting, sessions and proceedings of the General Assembly of the province
of Pennsylvania, and the territories thereunto belonging.

XV. And that the representatives of the people in provincial Council and
Assembly, may, in after ages, Number of Representatives to be altered, etc.
bear some proportion with the increase and multiplying of the people, the
number of such representatives of the people may be, from time to time,
increased and enlarged, so as at no time, the number exceed seventy-two for the
provincial Council, and two hundred for the Assembly; the appointment and
proportion of which number, as also the laying and methodizing of the choice of
such representatives in future time, most equally to the division of the
country, or number of the inhabitants, is left to the Governor and provincial
Council to propose, and the Assembly to resolve, so that the order of
proportion be strictly observed, both in the choice of the Council and the
respective committees thereof, viz. one third to go off, and come in yearly.

XVI. That from and after the death of this present Governor, the provincial
Council shall, Courts of justice, etc.
together with the succeeding Governor, erect, from time to time, standing
courts of justice, in such places and number as they shall judge convenient for
the good government of the said province and territories thereof; and that the
provincial Council shall, on the thirteenth day of the second month then next
ensuing, elect and present to the Governor, or his Deputy, a double number of
persons, to serve for Judges, Treasurers, and Masters of the Rolls, within the
said province and territories, to continue so long as they shall well behave
themselves, in those capacities respectively; and the freemen of the said
province, in an Assembly met on the thirteenth day of the third month, yearly,
shall elect and then present to the Governor, or his Deputy, a double number of
persons to serve for Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and Coroners, for the
year next ensuing; out of which respective elections and presentiments, the
Governor, or his Deputy, shall nominate and commissionate the proper number for
each office, the third day after the said respective presentiments; or else the
first named in such presentment, for each office, as aforesaid, shall stand and
serve in that office, the time before respectively limited; and in case of
death or default, such vacancy shall be supplied by the Governor and provincial
Council in manner aforesaid.

Continuance of the Assembly.
XVII. That the Assembly shall continue so long as may be needful to impeach
criminals, fit to be there impeached, to pass such bills into laws as are
proposed to them, which they shall think fit to pass into laws, and till such
time as the Governor and provincial Council shall declare, that they have
nothing further to propose unto them, for their assent and approbation, and
that declaration shall (...) dismiss to the Assembly, for that time; which
Assembly shall be, notwithstanding, capable of assembling together, upon the
summons of the Governor and provincial Council, at any time, during that year,
if the Governor and provincial Council shall see occasion for their so
assembling.

Manner of voting, etc.
XVIII. That all the elections of members, or representatives of the people to
serve in provincial Council and Assembly, and all questions to be determined by
both, or either of them, that relate to choice of officers, and all, or any
other personal matters, shall be resolved or determined by the ballot, and all
things relating to the preparing and passing of bills into laws, shall be
openly declared and resolved by the vote.

Guardians to be appointed by the Council, etc.
XIX. That, at all times, when the Proprietary and Governor shall happen to be
an infant, and under the age of one and twenty years, and no guardians or
commissioners are appointed in writing, by the father of the said infant, or
that such guardian shall be deceased, that during such minority, the provincial
Council shall, from time to time, as they shall see meet, constitute and
appoint guardians and commissioners, not exceeding three, one of which shall
preside as deputy, and chief guardian, during such minority, and shall have and
execute, with the consent of one of the other two, all the power of a Governor,
in all public affairs and concerns of the said province and territories
thereof, according to charter; which said guardian so appointed, shall also
have the care and oversight of the estate of the said minor, and be yearly
accountable and responsible for the same to the provincial Council, and the
provincial Council to the minor, when of age, or to the next heir, in case of
the minor's death, for the trust before expressed.

XX. That as often as any days of the Month mentioned in any article of this
charter, Public business not to be done on the Lord's day, etc.
shall fall upon the first day of the week, commonly called the Lord's day, the
business appointed for that day, shall be deferred until the next day, unless
in cases of emergency.

XXI. And, for the satisfaction and encouragement of all aliens, I do give and
grant, that, if any alien, Aliens' estates to descend to their heirs, etc.
who is, or shall be a purchaser, or who does, or shall, inhabit in this
province or territories thereof, shall decease at any time before he can well
be naturalized, his right and interest therein shall notwithstanding descend to
his wife and children, or other his relations, be he testate, or intestate,
according to the laws of this province and territories thereof, in such cases
provided, in as free and ample manner, to all intents and purposes, as if the
said alien had been naturalized.

XXII. And that the inhabitants of this province and territories thereof may be
accommodated with such food and sustenance, as God, in his providence,
Privilege of hunting, etc.
has freely afforded, I do also further grant to the inhabitants of this
province and territories thereof, liberty to fowl and hunt upon the lands they
hold, and all other lands therein not enclosed; and to fish, in all waters in
the said lands, and in all rivers and rivulets in, and belonging to, this
province and territories thereof, with liberty to draw his or their fish on
shore on any man's lands, so as it be not to the detriment, or annoyance of the
owner thereof, except such lands as do lie upon inland rivulets that are not
boatable, or which are, or may be hereafter erected into m^nors.

XXIII. And that all the inhabitants of this province and territories thereof,
whether purchasers or others, Quiet possession granted, etc.
may have the last worldly pledge of my good and kind intentions to them and
theirs, I do give, grant and confirm to all and every one of them, full and
quiet possession of their respective lands, to which they have any lawful or
equitable claim, saving only such rents and services for the same, as are, or
customarily ought to be, reserved to me, my heirs or assigns.

Charter how alterable, etc.
XXIV. That no act, law, or ordinance whatsoever, shall, at any time hereafter,
be made or done by the Proprietary and Governor of this province, and
territories thereunto belonging, his heirs or assigns, or by the freemen in
provincial Council or Assembly, to alter, change or diminish the form or effect
of this charter, or any part or clause thereof, contrary to the true intent and
meaning thereof, without the consent of the Proprietary and Governor, his heirs
or assigns, and six parts of seven of the said freemen in provincial Council
and Assembly met.

Confirmation.
XXV. And lastly, I, the said William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the
province of Pennsylvania, and territories thereunto belonging, for me, my heirs
and assigns, have solemnly declared, granted and confirmed, and do hereby
solemnly declare, grant and confirm, that neither I, my heirs nor assigns,
shall procure, or do, any thing or things, whereby the liberties, in this
charter contained and expressed, shall be infringed or broken: and if any thing
be procured, by any person or persons, contrary to these premises, it shall be
held of no force or effect. In witness whereof, I, the said William Penn, at
Philadelphia, in Pennsylvania, have unto this present charter of liberties set
my hand and broad seal, this second day of the second month, in the year of our
Lord one thousand six hundred eighty and three, being the five and thirtieth
year of the king, and the third year of my government.

WILLIAM PENN.
This within charter, which we have distinctly heard read and thankfully
received, shall be by us inviolably kept, at Philadelphia, the second day of
the second month, one thousand six hundred eighty and three.

The Members of the provincial Council present,
William Markham, John Moll, William Clark, William Biles, William Haige,
Christopher Tailor, John Simcock, William Clayton, Francis Whittwel, Thomas
Holme, James Harrison, John Richardson, Philip Thomas Lenmar, Secr. Gov.
Richard Ingelo, Cl. Coun.
The Members of the Assembly present,
Casparus Harman, John Darby, Benjamin Williams, William Guest, Valentine
Hollingsworth, James Boyden, Bennony Bishop, John Beazor, John Harding, Andrews
Bringston, Simon Irons, John Wood, John Curtis, Daniel Brown, William Futcher,
John Kipshaven, Alexander Molestine, Robert Bracy, senior, Thomas Bracy,
William Yardly, John Hastings, Robert Wade, Thomas Hassald, John Heart, Robert
Hall, Robert Bedwell, William Simsmore, Samuel Dark, Robert Lucas, James
Williams, John Blunston, John Songhurst, John Hill, Nicholas Waln, Thomas
Fitzwater, John Clows, Luke Watson, Joseph Phipps, Dennis Rotchford, John
Brinklair, Henry Bowman, Cornelius Verhoofe, John Southworth, Cl. Synod.
Some of the inhabitants of Philadelphia present,
William Howell, Edmund Warner, Henry Lewis, Samuel Miles.


No. IV.
The Frame of Government of the Province of Pennsylvania, and the territories
thereunto belonging, passed by Governor Markham, November 7, 1696.

1696.
WHEREAS the late king Charles the Second, in the three and thirtieth year of
his reign, by letters patent under the great seal of England, 9th mo. 7th.
did, for the considerations therein mentioned, grant unto William Penn, his
heirs and assigns, for ever, this colony, or tract of land, thereby erecting
the same into a province, called Pennsylvania, and constituting him, the said
William Penn, absolute Proprietary thereof, vesting him, his Deputies and
Lieutenants, with diverse great powers, pre-eminences, royalties, jurisdictions
and authorities, necessary for the well-being and good government of the said
province. And whereas the late duke of York and Albany, etc. for valuable
considerations, did grant unto the said William Penn, his heirs and assigns,
all that tract of land which has been cast, or divided into three counties,
now called Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex, together with all royalties,
franchises, duties, jurisdictions, liberties and privileges thereunto
belonging; which last mentioned tract being intended as a beneficial and
requisite addition to the territory of the said Proprietary, he, the said
Proprietary and Governor, at the request of the freemen of the said three
counties, by their deputies, in Assembly met, with the representatives of the
freemen of the said province at Chester, alias Upland, on the sixth day of the
tenth month, 1682, did (with the advice and consent of the Members of the said
Assembly) enact, that the said three counties should be annexed to the province
of Pennsylvania, as the proper territories thereof: and whereas king William
and the late queen Mary, over England, etc. by their letters patent and
commission, under the great seal of England, dated the twenty-first day of
October, in the fourth year of their reign, having, (for the reasons therein
mentioned) taken the government of this said province and territories into
their hands, and under their care and protection, did think fit to constitute
Benjamin Fletcher, Governor of New York, to be their Captain General, and
Governor in Chief, over this province and country. And whereas also the said
king and queen afterward, by their letters patent, under the great seal of
England, dated the twentieth day of August, in the sixth year of their reign,
have thought fit, upon the humble application of the said William Penn, to
restore them to the administration of the government of the said province and
territories; and that so much of their said commission as did constitute the
said Benjamin Fletcher, their Captain General and Governor in Chief of the said
province of Pennsylvania, country of Newcastle, and the territories and tracts
of land depending thereupon, in America, together with all the powers and
authorities thereby granted for the ruling and governing their said province
and country, should, from the publication of the said last recited letters
patent, cease, determine and become void; and accordingly the same are hereby
declared void; whereupon the said William Penn did commissionate his kinsman,
William Markham, Governor under him, with directions to act according to the
known laws and usages of this government.

Now forasmuch as the former frame of government, Elections appointed.
modelled by act of settlement, and charter of liberties, is not deemed, in all
respects, suitably accommodated to our present circumstances, therefore it is
unanimously desired that it may be enacted, And be it enacted by the Governor
aforesaid, with the advice and consent of the representatives of the freemen of
the said province and territories, in Assembly met, and by the authority of the
same, that this government shall, from time to time, consist of the Governor,
or his Deputy, or Deputies, and the freemen of the said province, and
territories thereof, in form of a Council and Assembly; which Council and
Assembly shall be men of most note for virtue, wisdom and ability; and shall,
from and after the tenth day of the first month next, consist of two persons
out of each of the counties of this government, to serve as the people's
representatives in Council; and of four persons out of each of the said
counties, to serve as their representatives in Assembly; for the electing of
which representatives, it shall and may be lawful to and for all the freemen of
this province and territories aforesaid, to meet together on the tenth day of
the first month yearly hereafter, in the most convenient and usual place for
election, within the respective counties, then and there to choose their said
representatives as aforesaid, who shall meet on the tenth day of the third
month yearly, in the capital town of the said province, unless the Governor and
Council shall think fit to appoint another place.

Qualification of electors.
And, to the end it may be known who those are, in this province and
territories, who ought to have right of, or to be deemed freemen, to choose, or
be chosen, to serve in Council and Assembly, as aforesaid, Be it enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That no inhabitant of this province or territories, shall
have right of electing, or being elected as aforesaid, unless they be free
denizens of this government, and are of the age of twenty-one years, or
upwards, and have fifty acres of land, ten acres whereof being seated and
cleared, or be otherwise worth fifty pounds, lawful money of this government,
clear estate, and have been resident within this government for the space of
two years next before such election.

Solemn affirmation instead of an oath.
And whereas diverse persons within this government, cannot, for conscience sake,
take an oath, upon any account whatsoever, Be it therefore enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That all and every such person and persons, being, at any
time hereafter, required, upon any lawful occasion, to give evidence, or take
an oath, in any case whatsoever, shall, instead of swearing, be permitted to
make his, or their solemn affirmation, attest, or declaration, which shall be
adjudged, and is hereby enacted and declared to be of the same force and
effect, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as if they had taken an oath;
and in case any such person or persons shall be lawfully convicted of having
wilfully and corruptly affirmed, or declared any matter or thing, upon such
solemn affirmation or attest, shall incur the same penalties and forfeitures,
as by the laws and statutes of England are provided against persons convicted
of wilful and corrupt perjury.

Declaration of officers, etc.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all persons who
shall be hereafter either elected to serve in Council and Assembly, or
commissionated or appointed to be Judges, Justices, Masters of the Rolls,
Sheriffs, Coroners, and all other officers of state and trust, within this
government, who shall conscientiously scruple to take an oath, but when
lawfully required, will make and subscribe the declaration and profession of
their Christian belief, according to the late act of parliament, made in the
first year of king William, and the late queen Mary, entitled, An act for
exempting their majesties' Protestant subjects, dissenting from the Church of
England, from the penalty of certain laws, shall be adjudged, and are hereby
declared to be qualified to act in their said respective offices and places,
and thereupon the several officers herein mentioned, shall, instead of an oath
make their solemn affirmation or declaration in manner and form following; that
is to say,

The form of Judges' and Justices' attest shall be in these words, viz.

Thou shall solemly promise, that as Judge, or Justice, Forms of officers'
attests.
according to the Governor's commission to thee directed, thou shall do equal
right to the poor and rich, to the best of thy knowledge and power, according
to law, and after the usages and constitutions of this government; thou shall
not be of council of any matter or cause depending before thee, but shall well
and truly do thy office in every respect, according to the best of thy
understanding.

The form of the attests to be taken by the Masters of the Rolls, Secretaries,
Clerks, and such like officers, shall be thus, viz.

Thou shall well and faithfully execute the office of, etc. according to the
best of thy skill and knowledge; taking such fees only, as thou ought to
receive by the laws of this government.

The form of the Sheriffs' and Coroners' attest, shall be in these words, viz.

Thou shall solemnly promise, that thou will well and truly serve the King and
Governor in the office of the Sheriff (or Coroner) of the county of, etc. and
preserve the King and Governor's rights, as far forth as thou can, or may;
thou shall truly serve, and return, all the writs and precepts to thee
directed; thou shall take no bailiff, nor deputy, but such as thou will answer
for; thou shall receive no writs, except from such Judges and Justices, who, by
the laws of this government, have authority to issue and direct writs unto
thee; and thou shall diligently and truly do and accomplish all things
appertaining to thy office, after the best of thy wit and power, both for the
King and Governor's profit, and good of the inhabitants within the said
country, taking such fees only as thou ought to take by the laws of this
government, and not otherwise.

The form of a Constable's attest shall be this, viz.

Thou shall solemnly promise, well and duly, according to the best of thy
understanding, to execute the office of a Constable for the town (or county) of
P. for this ensuing year, or until another be attested in thy room, or thou
shall be legally discharged thereof.

The form of the Grand Inquest's attests shall be in these words, viz.

Thou shall diligently enquire, and true presentment make, of all such matters
and things as shall be given thee in charge, or come to thy knowledge, touching
this present service; the King's counsel, thy fellows, and thy own, thou shall
keep secret, and in all things thou shall present the truth, and nothing but
the truth, to the best of thy knowledge.

This being given to the Foreman, the rest of the Inquest shall be attested
thus, by three at a time, viz.

The same attestation that your Foreman has taken on his part, you will well
and truly keep on your parts.

The form of the attest to be given to the Traverse Jury, by four at a time,
shall be thus, viz.

You solemnly promise, that you will well and truly try the issue of traverse
between the lord the King, and A. B. whom you have in charge, according to your
evidence.

In civil causes thus, viz.

You solemnly promise that you will well and truly try the issue between A. B.
plaintiff, and C. D. defendant according to your evidence.

Provided always, and it is hereby intended, that no person shall be, by this
act, excused from swearing, who, by the acts of parliament, for trade and
navigation, are, or shall be required to take an oath.

Elections regulated.
And, that elections may not be corruptly managed, on which the good of the
government so much depends, (...) further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
That all elections of the said representatives shall be free and voluntary, and
that the electors, who shall receive any reward, or gift, for giving his vote,
shall forfeit his right to elect for that year; and such person or persons, as
shall give, or promise, any such reward to be elected, or that shall offer to
serve for nothing, or for less wages than the law prescribes, shall be thereby
rendered incapable to serve in Council, or Assembly, for that year; and the
representatives so chosen, either for Council or Assembly, shall yield their
attendance accordingly, and be the sole judges of the regularity, or
irregularity of the elections of their respective Members: and if any person,
or persons, chosen to serve in Council, or Assembly, shall be wilfully absent
from the service he or they are so chosen to attend, or be deceased, or
rendered incapable, then, and in all such cases, it shall be lawful for the
Governor, within ten days after knowledge of the same, to issue forth a writ to
the Sheriff of the county, for which the said person, or persons, were chosen,
immediately to summons the freemen of the same to elect another member in the
room of such absent, deceased, or incapable person or persons; and in case any
Sheriff shall misbehave himself, in the management of any of the said
elections, he shall be punished accordingly, at the discretion of the Governor
and Council, for the time being.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Regulation of Assemblymen's
wages, etc.
That every member now chosen, or hereafter to be chosen, by freemen as
aforesaid, to serve in Council, and the Speaker of the Assembly, shall be
allowed five shillings by the day, during his and their attendance; and every
Member of Assembly shall be allowed four shillings by the day, during his
attendance on the service of the Assembly; and that every Member of Council and
Assembly shall be allowed toward their traveling charges after the rate of
two pence each mile, both going to, and coming from, the place, where the
Council and Assembly is, or shall be, held; all which sums shall be paid yearly
out of the county levies, by the county receivers respectively.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Governor to preside in
Council.
That the Governor, or his Deputy; shall always preside in the Council, and
that he shall, at no time, perform any public act of state whatsoever, that
shall, or may relate unto the justice, treasury or trade of the province and
territories, but by and with the advice and consent of the Council thereof, or
major part of them that shall be present.

Officers to give security.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all the Sheriffs and
Clerks of the respective counties of the said province, and territories, who
are, or shall be, commissionated, shall give good and sufficient security to
the Governor, for answering the king and his people, in matters relating to the
said offices respectively.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Council, Quorum
settled.
in all cases and matters of moment, as about erecting courts of justice,
sitting in judgment upon persons impeached, and upon bills and other matters,
that may be, from time to time, presented by the Assembly, not less than
two-thirds shall make a quorum; and that the consent and approbation of the
majority of that quorum shall be had in all such cases and matters of moment;
and that in cases of less moment, not less than one third of the whole shall
make a quorum; the majority of which shall, and may, always determine in all
such matters of lesser moment, as are not above specified: and in case the
Governor's power shall hereafter happen to be in the Council, a President shall
then be chosen out of themselves by two-thirds, or the major part of them;
which President shall therein preside.

Powers of Governor and Council,
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Governor and Council
shall take care that all the laws, statutes and ordinances, which shall at any
time be made within the said province and territories, be duly and diligently
executed.

In preserving the peace,
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Governor and Council
shall, at all times, have the care of the peace of this province and
territories thereof, and that nothing be, by any persons, attempted to the
subversion of this frame of government.

Concerning towns,
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Governor and
Council, for the time being, shall, at all times, settle and order the
situation of all cities, and market towns, modelling therein all public
buildings, streets and market places; and shall appoint all public landing
places, of the towns of this province and territories: and if any man's
property shall be judged by the Governor and Council to be commodious for such
landing place, in the said towns, Landings,
and that the same be by them appointed as such, that the owner shall have such
reasonable satisfaction given him for the same as the Governor and Council
shall see meet, to be paid by the said respective towns.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Governor ^^d
Council shall, at all times, Treasury.
have power (...) inspect the management of the public treasury, and punish
those who shall convert any part thereof to any other use, than what has been
agreed upon by the Governor, Council and Assembly.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Public houses, etc.
That the Governor and Council shall erect and order all public houses, and
encourage and reward the authors of useful sciences and laudable inventions in
the said province, and territories thereof.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Governor and
Council shall, from time to time, Trade and education, etc.
have the care of the management of all public affairs, relating to the peace,
safety, justice, treasury, trade, and improvement of the province and
territories, and to the good education of youth, and sobriety of the manners of
the inhabitants therein, as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the representatives
of the freemen, Power of the Assembly, etc.
when met in Assembly, shall have power to prepare and propose to the Governor
and Council all such bills as they or the major part of them, shall, at any
time, see needful to be passed into laws, within the said province and
territories.

Provided always, That nothing herein contained shall debar the Governor and
Council from recommending to the Assembly all such bills as they shall think
sit to be passed into laws; and that the Council and Assembly may, upon
occasion, confer together in committees, when desired; all which proposed and
prepared bills, or such of them, as the Governor, with the advice of the
Council, shall, in open Assembly, declare his assent unto, shall be the laws of
this province and territories thereof, and published accordingly, with this
style, Style of the laws, etc.
By the Governor, with the assent and approbation of the freemen in General
Assembly met; a true transcript, or duplicate whereof, shall be transmitted to
the king's privy council, for the time being, according to the said late king's
letters patent.

Adjournments, etc.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Assembly, shall
sit upon their own adjournments, and committees, and continue, in order to
prepare and propose bills, redress grievances, and impeach criminals, or such
persons as they shall think fit to be there impeached, until the Governor and
Council, for the time being, shall dismiss them; which Assembly shall,
notwithstanding such dismiss, be capable of Assembling together upon summons of
the Governor and Council, at any time during that year; two-thirds of which
Assembly, in all cases, shall make a quorum.

Majority to determine.
And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all elections of
representatives for Council and Assembly, and all questions to be determined by
them, shall be by the major part of votes.

Lord's day.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That as often as any days of
the month, mentioned in any article of this act, shall fall upon the first day
of the week, commonly called the Lord's day, the business appointed for that
day, shall be deferred till the next day, unless in cases of emergency.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any alien, Alien
lands to descend, etc.
who is, or shall be a purchaser of lands, or who does, or shall inhabit in
this province, or territories thereof, shall decease at any time before he can
well be denizised, his right and interest therein shall notwithstanding descend
to his wife and children, or other, his relations, be he testate, or intestate,
according to the laws of this province and territories thereof, in such cases
provided, in as free and ample manner, to all intents and purposes, as if the
said alien had been denizised.

And that the people may be accommodated with such food and sustenance as God,
in his providence, has freely afforded, Liberty to fish, hunt, etc.
Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the inhabitants of this
province and territories thereof, shall have liberty to fish and hunt, upon the
lands they hold, or all other lands therein, not enclosed, and to fish in all
waters in the said lands, and in all rivers and rivulets, in and belonging to
this province and territories thereof, with liberty to draw his, or their fish
upon any man's land, so as it be not to the detriment or annoyance of the owner
thereof, except such lands as do lie upon inland rivulets, that are not
boatable, or which hereafter may be erected into manors.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Possession quieted.
That all inhabitants of this province and territories, whether purchasers, or
others, and every one of them, shall have full and quiet enjoyment of their
respective lands and tenements, to which they have any lawful or equitable
claim, saving only such rents and services for the same, as are, or customarily
ought to be, reserved to the lord, or lords of the fee thereof, respectively.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, This act not to be altered,
unless, etc.
That no act, law, or ordinance whatsoever, shall, at any time hereafter, be
made or done, by the Governor of this province, and territories thereunto
belonging, or by the freemen, in Council, or Assembly, to alter, change or
diminish the form and effect of this act, or any part, or clause thereof,
contrary to the true intent and meaning thereof, without the consent of the
Governor, for the time being, and six parts of seven of the said freemen, in
Council, and Assembly met. This act to continue, and be in force, until the
said Proprietary shall signify his pleasure to the contrary, by some
instrument, under his hand and seal, in that behalf.

Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, That neither this act, nor any
other act, or acts whatsoever, Former privileges reserved.
shall preclude, or debar the inhabitants of this province and territories,
from claiming, having and enjoying any of the rights, privileges and
immunities, which the said Proprietary, for himself, his heirs, and assigns,
did formerly grant, or which of right belong unto them, the said inhabitants,
by virtue of any law, charter or grants whatsoever, any thing herein contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

No. V.
The Address of the Assembly to the Proprietary, concerning property, September
20, 1701.

May it please the Governor,
WE, the representatives of the freemen of the province and territories, in
Assembly met, having taken into serious consideration some articles concerning
our privileges in property, incited by an address to this house from the
inhabitants of this place, and encouraged by thyself, in setting forth thy care
of us, and promises of compliance therewith, do humbly offer the following
heads for confirmation, requesting they may be granted the people of the
province and territories, and ascertained to them in a charter.

I. Imprimis, That, in case the Proprietary go for England, due care be taken
that he be represented here by persons of integrity, and considerable known
estates, who may have full power and authority, not only to grant and confirm
lands, etc. as if he were personally present, but also to make satisfaction to
those who have short, as well as receive what may be due from those who have
too much over measure, according to former agreement.

II. That before the Proprietary go for England, he grant us such an instrument
as may absolutely secure and defend us in our estates and properties, from
himself, his heirs and assigns, for ever, or any claiming under him, them, or
any of them, as also to clear all Indian purchases and others.

III. That, whereas there has been great delay in the confirmation of land,
and granting of patents, due care may be taken by the Proprietary, that no such
delays may be for the future; and that the ten acres in the hundred may be
allowed, according to the Proprietary's engagements.

IV. That no Surveyor, Secretary, or any other officer under the Proprietary,
presume to exact or take any fees, but what were, are, or shall be allowed by
the laws of this province, under severe penalties.

V. That no person, or persons, shall, or may, at any time hereafter, be liable
to answer any complaint, matter or thing whatsoever, relating to property,
before the Governor, or his Council, or in any other place, but in the ordinary
courts of justice.

VI. That the ancient records made before the Proprietary's first arrival here,
be lodged in such hands as the Assembly shall judge to be most fit.

VII. That a patent office, and all actual Surveyors thereby employed, may be
modelled according to the law of Jamaica, and such security taken, as may
render the people's interest safe.

VIII. That, whereas the Proprietary formerly gave the purchasers an
expectation of a certain tract of land, which is since laid out, about two
miles long, and one mile broad, whereon to build the town of Philadelphia, and
that the same should be a free gift; which since has been clogged with diverse
rents and reservations contrary to the first design and grant, and to the great
dissatisfaction of the inhabitants: we desire the Governor to take it into
consideration, and make them easy therein.

IX. That the land, lying back of that part of the town already built, remain
for common, and that no leases for the future, to make enclosures to the damage
of the public, until such time as the respective owners shall be ready to build
or improve thereon; and that the islands and flats near the town, be left to
the inhabitants of this town to get their winter fodder.

X. That the streets of the town be regulated and bounded, and that the ends of
the streets on Delaware and Sculkil be unlimited, and left free to be extended
on the river as the inhabitants shall see meet; and that public landing places
at the Blue Anchor and Penny Pot house be confirmed free to the inhabitants of
this town, not infringing any man's property.

XI. That the Justices may have the licensing and regulating ordinaries and
drinking houses, as in England; and as by thy letter, dated November 5, 1697,
did order.

XII. That the letters of feoffment for the soil of the three lower counties,
from the Duke of York, be recorded in the territories.

XIII. That all lands, in the said counties not yet taken up, may be disposed
of at the old rent, of a bushel of wheat a hundred.

XIV. That the thousand acres of land, formerly promised by the Governor to the
town of Newcastle, for common, be laid out and patented for that use.

XV. That the bank lots at Newcastle be granted to those that have the front
lots, to low water mark; or so far as they may improve, at a bushel of wheat a
lot.

XVI. That all the bay marshes be laid out for common, except such as are
already granted.

XVII. That all patents hereafter to be granted to the territories, be on the
same conditions, as the warrants or grants were obtained.

XVIII. That the division lines between the counties of Newcastle and Chester
be ascertained, allowing the bounds according to the Proprietary's letters
patent from the king.

XIX. That the twenty-second article in the old charter, concerning fishing and
fowling, be confirmed.

XX. That the inhabitants or possessors of land may have liberty to purchase
off their quit-rents, as formerly promised.

XXI. That the bill of property passed at Newcastle, 1700, be inserted in the
charter, with such amendments as shall be agreed on.

Signed by order of the House, JOSEPH GROWDON, Speaker.

The answer of the Proprietary and Governor to the preceding address of the
Assembly, head by head.
To the first I shall appoint those, in whom I can confide, whose powers shall
be sufficient and public for the security of all concerned; and I hope they
shall be of honest character, without just exception, to do that which is right
between you and me.

II. Much of it is included in my answer to the first; however, I am willing to
execute a public instrument, or charter to secure you in your properties,
according to purchase, and the law of property made lately at Newcastle,
excepting some corrections, or amendments, absolutely necessary, therein.

III. I know of no wilful delays, and shall use my endeavors to prevent any
for the future, and am very willing to allow the ten acres per cent. for the
ends proposed by the law, and not otherwise.

IV. I am willing that reasonable fees to officers shall be ascertained by law,
or their services left to a quantum meruit; for I hope you do not think they
should be maintained at my charge.

V. I know of no person, that has been obliged to answer before the Governor
and Council, in such cases; but I conceive that disputes about unconfined
properties must lie before the Proprietary, though not before his Council, as
judges.

VI. The records concern me, as well as the people, and are, or shall be, in
the hands of men of good fame, and to keep them only during good behavior; but
those of this county of Philadelphia, that chiefly concern the people, are in
so great disorder, by razures, blots and interlineations, that you would do
well to use some method in time, for their rectification.

VII. If the Jamaica law will improve our regulation, as it does augment the
fees, I am content we copy after it.

VIII. You are under a mistake, in fact; I have tied you to nothing, in the
allotment of the city, which the first purchasers, then present, did not
readily seem to comply with, and I am sorry to find their names to such an
address, as that presented to you, who have got double lots, by my re-aplotment
of the city, from fifty to one hundred and two feet front lots; and if they are
willing to refund the fifty-two feet, I shall, as you desire, be easy in the
quit-rents, although this matter solely refers to the first purchasers, and to
me as Proprietary.

IX. You are under a misapprehension, to think that a fourth part of the land,
laid out for a city, belongs to any body but myself, it being reserved for such
as were not first purchasers, who might want to build in future time; and when
I reflect upon the great abuse, done in my absence, by destroying of my timber
and wood, and how the land is overrun with brush, to the injury and discredit
of the town, it is small encouragement to grant your request; however, I am
content that some land be laid out for the accommodation of the town, till
inhabitants present to settle it under regulations that shall be thought most
conducing to the end desired, about which, I shall consult with those persons
chiefly concerned therein; and for the rest of the ninth article, about the
islands, I know not which you mean, nor on what terms desired, ^ being an
independent property from the town, if not from the province.

X. About the ends of streets, and other public landings of this town, I am
willing to grant the ends of streets, when and where improved, and the other
according to your request.

XI. I am contented that no licenses be granted to any ordinary keepers, but
such as the Justices shall recommend, nor suffer them longer, than the
Magistrates find they behave well.

XII. I do not understand it; for I had no letters of feoffment, but deeds,
which were recorded by Ephraim Harman, at Newcastle, and by John West, to the
best of my memory, at New York, and since confirmed by the order of Council,
for the line, as well as otherwise, and a most formal possession and obedience
given me in pursuance thereof.

XIII. I think this an unreasonable article, either to limit me in that which
is my own, or to deprive me of the benefit of raising in proportion to the
advantage, which time gives to other men's properties; and the rather, because
I am yet in disburse for that long and expensive controversy with the Lord
Baltimore, promised to be defrayed by the public, as appears by the minutes of
Council.

XIV. I allow it, according to what I lately expressed at Newcastle, and it is
not my fault it has not been done sooner.

XV. According to their own proposals, at Newcastle, I shall gratify their
desire, viz. that the same revert to me, after a certain time, if not improved.

XVI. This I take for a high imposition; however, I am willing that they all
lie in common and free, until otherwise disposed of, and shall grant the same
from time to time, in reasonable portions, and upon reasonable terms,
especially to such as shall engage to drain and improve the same; having always
a regard to back inhabitants, for their accommodations.

XVII. I cannot well understand it; therefore it must be explained.

XVIII. It is my own inclination, and I desire and expect the representatives
of Newcastle and Chester forthwith, or before they leave the town, to attend me
about the time and method of doing it.

XIX. They shall have liberty to fish, fowl and hunt, upon their own lands, and
upon all other lands that are mine untaken up.

XX. If it should be my lot to lose a public support, I must depend upon my
rents for a supply; and therefore must not easily part with them; and many
years are elapsed since I made that offer, that was not excepted.

XXI. I agree that the law of property, made at Newcastle, shall be inserted in
the charter, with requisite amendments.

No. VI.
The Charter of the City of Philadelphia.

WILLIAM PENN, 1701. Octbr. 25.
Proprietary and Governor of the province of Pennsylvania, etc. to all, to whom
these presents shall come, sends greeting.

Know ye, Philadelphia incorporated at the request of the inhabitants.
That at the humble request of the inhabitants and settlers of this town of
Philadelphia, being some of the first adventurers and purchasers within this
province, for their encouragement, and for the more immediate and entire
government of the said town, and better regulation of trade therein, I have, by
virtue of the King's letters patents, under the great seal of England, erected
the said town into a borough, and by these presents do erect the said town and
borough of Philadelphia into a city, which said city shall extend the limits
and bounds, as it is laid out between Delaware and Schuylkill. Bounds.


And I do, for me, my heirs and assigns, grant and ordain, that the streets of
the said city shall for ever continue, as they are now laid out and regulated;
Streets to continue as laid out before, etc.
and that the end of each street, extending into the river Delaware, shall be
and continue free for the use and service of the said city, and the inhabitants
thereof; who may improve the same for the best advantage of the city, and build
wharves so far out into the river there, as the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council, herein after mentioned, shall see meet.

And I do nominate Edward Shippen, First Mayor,
to be the present Mayor, who shall so continue until another be chosen, as is
herein after directed.

And I do hereby assign and name Thomas Story, Recorder.
to be the present Recorder, to do and execute all things, which unto the
office of Recorder of the said city does or may belong.

And I do appoint Thomas Farmer to be the present Sheriff, Sheriff and Clerk.
and Robert Ashton to be the present Town Clerk and Clerk of the peace, and
Clerk of the court and courts.

Aldermen.
And I do hereby name, constitute and appoint Joshua Carpenter, Griffith Jones,
Anthony Morris, Joseph Wilcon, Nathan Stanbury, Charles Read, Thomas Masters,
and William Carter, citizens and inhabitants of the said city, to be the
present Aldermen of the said city of Philadephia.

Common Council-men.
And I do also nominate and appoint John Parsons, William Hudson, William Lee,
Nehemiah Alien, Thomas Paschall, John Budd, junr. Edward Smout, Samuel Buckley,
James Atkinson, Pentecost Teague, Francis Cook, and Henry Badcocke, to be the
twelve present Common Council-men of the said city.

Incorporating clause.
And I do by these presents, for me, my heirs and successors, give, grant and
declare, that the said Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Common Council-men, for
the time being, and they, which hereafter shall be Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen,
and Common Council-men, within the said city, and their successors for ever
hereafter be, and shall be, by virtue of these presents, one body corporate and
politic in deed, and by the name of the Mayor and Commonalty of the city of
Philadelphia, in the province of Pennsylvania: and them by the name of Mayor
and Commonalty of the city of Philadelphia, one body politic and corporate in
deed and in name, I do, for me, my heirs and successors, fully create,
constitute and confirm, by these presents; and that by the name of Mayor and
Commonalty of the city of Philaladelphia, Power to hold lands, etc.
be, and at all times hereafter shall be, persons able and capable, in law, to
have, get, receive and possess lands and tenements, rents, liberties,
jurisdictions, franchises, and hereditaments, to them and their successors, in
fee simple, or for term of life, lives, years, or otherwise; and also goods,
chattels, and other things of what nature, kind or quality soever.

And to sell and dispose of the same etc.
And also to give, grant, let, sell, and assign the same lands, tenements,
hereditaments, goods, chattels, and to do and execute all other things about
the same, by the name aforesaid; and also that they be, and shall be for ever
hereafter persons able and capable in law, to sue and be sued, plead and be
impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended, in all or any
the courts and other places, and before any Judges, Justices and other persons
whatsoever within the said province, in all manner of actions, suits,
complaints, pleas, causes, and matters whatsoever, and of what nature or kind
soever.

And that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mayor and Commonalty
of the said city of Philadelphia, and their successors, for ever hereafter,
Seal.
to have and use one common seal, for the sealing of all businesses touching
the said corporation, and the same, from time to time, at their will and
pleasure to change or alter.

And I do, for me, my heirs and successors, give, Power of choosing a Mayor
yearly.
and by these presents, grant full power and authority unto the Mayor, Recorder
and Common Council of the said city of Philadelphia, or any five or more of the
Aldermen, and nine or more of the Common Council-men, the Mayor and Recorder
for the time being, or either of them being present, on the first third day of
the week, in the eighth month yearly for ever hereafter, publicly to meet at a
convenient room or place within the said city, to be by them appointed for that
purpose, and then and there nominate, elect and choose one of the Aldermen to be
Mayor for that ensuing year.

And also to add to the number of Aldermen and Common Council-men, such and so
many of those, And of adding to their number, etc.
that by virtue of these presents shall be admitted freemen of the said city,
from time to time, as they the said Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council shall
see occasion.

And that such person, who shall be elected Mayor, Mayor to be qualified before
the Governor.
as aforesaid, shall within three days next after such election, be presented
before the Governor of this province or his Deputy for the time being, and
there shall subscribe the declarations and profession of his Christian belief,
according to the late act of parliament made in the first year of king
William's reign, entitled, "An act for exempting their majesties' subjects,
dissenting from the Church of England, from the penalty of certain laws;" and
then and there the Mayor so p^esented, shall make his solemn affirmation and
engagement for the due execution of his office.

And that the Recorder, Sheriff, Aldermen, Recorder, etc. qualified before the
Mayor.
and Common Council men, and all other officers of the said city, before they,
or any of them shall be admitted to execute their respective offices, shall
make and subscribe the said declarations and profession aforesaid, before the
Mayor for the time being, and at the same time, shall be attested for the due
execution of their offices respectively; which declarations, promises and
attestations, the Mayor of the said city for the time being, is hereby
empowered to take and administer accordingly.

Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, to be Justices, etc.
And that the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the said city, for the time being,
shall be Justices of the Peace, and Justices of Oyer and Terminer; and are
hereby empowered to act within the said city and liberties thereof accordingly,
as fully and amply as any Justice or Justices of the Peace, or Oyer and
Terminer, can or may do, within the said province.

To have power to hear and enquire into all crimes, etc.
And that they, or any four or more of them (whereof the Mayor and Recorder of
the said city, for the time being, shall be two) shall and may for ever
hereafter have power and authority, by virtue of these presents, to hear and
enquire into all, and all manner of, treasons, murders, manslaughters, and all
manner of felonies and other crimes and offenses, capital and criminal,
whatsoever, according to the laws of this province, and of the kingdom of
England, with power also to hear and determine all petty larcenies, routs,
riots, unlawful assemblies; and to try and punish all persons that shall be
convicted for drunkenness, swearing, scolding, breaking the peace, or such like
offenses, which are by the laws of this province to be punished by fine,
imprisonment or whipping; with power also to award process against all rioters
and breakers of the peace, and to bind them, and all other offenders, and
persons of evil fame, to the peace or good behavior, as any Justice or
Justices of the Peace can do, without being accountable to me or my heirs, for
any fines or amerciaments to be imposed for the said offenses, or any of them.

To hold a court of record quarterly, etc.
And I do hereby empower them, or any four of them (whereof the Mayor and
Recorder, for the time being, shall be two) with the city Sheriff, and town
Clerk, to hold and keep a court of record quarterly, or oftener, if they see
occasion, for the enquiring, hearing and determining of the pleas and matters
aforesaid; and upon their own view, or after a legal procedure in some of those
courts, to cause all nuisances and encroachments in the streets of the said
city to be removed, and punish the parties concerned, as the law and usage, in
such cases, shall require.

And I do by these presents assign and appoint, that the present Mayor,
Recorder and Aldermen herein before mentioned, be the present Justices of the
Peace, and Oyer and Terminer, within the said city; and that they, and all
others, that shall be Mayors, Recorders and Aldermen of the said city, for the
time being, shall have full power and authority, and are hereby empowered and
authorized, without any further or other commission, to be Justices of the
Peace, and of Oyer and Terminer, within the said city for ever; Mayor and
Recorder to be of the qourum of the county courts, etc.
and shall also be Justices of the Peace, and the Mayor and Recorder shall be
of the quorum of the Justices of the County Courts, Quarter Sessions, Oyer and
Terminer, and Gaol Delivery, in the said county of Philadelphia; and shall have
full power to award process, bind to the peace or behavior, or commit to
prison, for any matter or cause arising without the said city, and within the
body of the aforesaid county, as occasion shall require; and to cause calendars
to be made of such prisoners, which, together with all recognizances, and
examinations taken before them for or concerning any matter or cause not
determinable by them, shall be duly returned to the Judges or Justices of the
said county, in their respective courts, where the same shall be cognizable.

And that it may be lawful to and for the said Mayor and Commonalty, and their
successors, To erect a gaol and courthouse etc.
when they see occasion, to erect a gaol or prison and courthouse within the
said city.

And that the Mayor and Recorder, for the time being, To take recognizance of
debts, etc.
shall have, and by these presents, have power to take recognizance of debts
there according to the statute of merchants, and of action burnel; and to use
and affix the common seal thereupon, and to all certificates concerning the
same.

And that it shall be lawful to and for the Mayor of the said city, for the
time being, And to appoint a Clk. of the Market.
for ever hereafter to nominate, and, from time to time, to appoint the Clerk
of the market, who shall have assize of bread, wine, beer, wood and other
things; and to do, execute, and perform all things belonging to the Clerk of
the market within the said city.

And I will that the Coroners, to be chosen by the county of Philadelphia for
the time being, Of Coroner's, etc.
shall be Coroner of the said city and liberties thereof; but that the freemen
and inhabitants of the said city shall, from time to time, as often as occasion
may be, have equal liberty with the inhabitants of the said county, to
recommend or choose persons to serve in the respective capacities of Coroners
and Sheriffs for the county of Philadelphia, who shall reside within the said
city.

Water Bailiff, etc.
And that the Sheriff of the said city and county, for the time being, shall be
the Water Bailiff, who shall, and may, execute and perform all things belonging
to the office of Water Bailiff, upon Delaware river, and all other navigable
rivers and creeks within the said province.

Power to remove the Mayor, etc.
And in case the Mayor of the said city, for the time being, shall, during the
time of his mayoralty, misbehave himself, or misgovern in that office, I do
hereby empower the Recorder, Aldermen and Common Council-men, or five of the
Adermen, and nine of the Common Council-men of the said city of Philadelphia,
for the time being, to remove such Mayor from his office of mayoralty; and in
such case, or in case of the death of the said Mayor, for the time being, that
then another sit person shall, within four days next after such death or
removal, be chosen in manner as above directed for electing of Mayors, in the
place of him so dead or removed.

Eldest Alderman to act as Mayor, etc.
And lest there should be a failure of justice or government in the said city,
in such interval, I do hereby appoint, that the eldest Alderman, for the time
being, shall take upon him the office of a Mayor there, and shall exercise the
same till another Mayor be chosen as aforesaid; and in case of the disability
of such eldest Alderman, then the next in seniority, shall take upon him the
said office of Mayor, to exercise the same as aforesaid.

Power to remove the Recorder, etc.
And in case the Recorder, or any of the Aldermen or Common Council-men of, or
belonging to, the said city, for the time being, shall misbehave himself, or
themselves in their respective offices and places, they shall be removed, and
others chosen in their stead, in manner following, that is to say, the Recorder
for the time being, may be removed (for his misbehaviour) by the Mayor and
two-thirds of the Aldermen and Common Council-men respectively; and in case of
such removal, or of the death of the Recorder, then to choose another sit
person, skilled in the law, to be the Recorder there, and so to continue during
pleasure as aforesaid.

And the Alderman so misbehaving himself may be removed by the Mayor, Recorder
and nine of the Aldermen and Common Council-men; Alderm^n, etc.
and in case of such removal, or death, then within four days after, to choose a
sit person or persons to supply such vacancies; and the Common Council-men,
Constables and Clerk of the market, for misbehaviour, shall be removed, and
others chosen, as is directed in the case of Aldermen.

And I do also, for me and my successors, by these presents, grant to the said
Mayor and Commonalty, Penalties on refusing to serve, etc.
and their successors, that, if any of the citizens of the said city shall be
hereafter nominated, elected and chosen to the office of Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council-men, as aforesaid, and having notice of his, or their election,
shall refuse to undertake and execute that office, to which he is so chosen,
that then, and so often, it shall, and may, be lawful for the Mayor and
Recorder, Aldermen and Common Council-men, or the major part of the Aldermen
and Common Council-men, for the time being, according to their discretion, to
impose such moderate fines upon such refusers, so as the Mayor's fine exceed
not forty pounds, the Alderman's five and thirty pounds, and Common Council-men
twenty pounds, and other officers proportionably to be levied by distress and
sale, by warrant under the common seal, or by other lawful ways, to the use of
the said corporation.

And in such cases it shall be lawful to choose others, to supply the defects of
such refusers, in manner as is above directed for elections.

And that it shall and may be lawful to and for the Mayor, Recorder, and at
least, three Aldermen for the time being, from time to time, so often as they
shall find occasion, to summon a Common Council of the said city.

And that no Assembly, or meeting of the said citizens shall be deemed or
accounted a Common Council, A Common Council, what, etc.
unless the said Mayor and Recorder, and at least three of the Aldermen, for
the time being, and nine of the Common Council-men, be present.

Power to add to their number,
And also that the said Mayor, Recorder and Common Council-men, for the time
being, from time to time, at their Common Council, shall have power to admit
such and so many freemen into their corporation and society as they shall think
fit.

To make laws and ordinances, etc.
And to make (and they may make, ordain, constitute, and establish) such and so
many good and reasonable laws, ordinances and constitutions (not repugnant to
the laws of England and this government) as to the greater part of them, at
such Common Council assembled (where the Mayor and Recorder, for the time
being, are to be always present) shall seem necessary and convenient for the
government of the said city.

And the same laws, ordinances, orders, and constitution so to be made, To
execute them, etc.
to put in use and execution accordingly, by the proper officers of the said
city; and at their pleasure to revoke, alter and make anew, as occasion shall
require.

And to impose mulcts, etc.
And also impose such mulcts and amerciaments upon the breakers of such laws and
ordinances, as to them, in their discretion, shall be thought reasonable; which
mulcts, as also all other fines and amerciaments, (...) set, or imposed, by
virtue of the powers granted, shall be levied, as above is directed in case of
fines, to the use of the said corporation, without rendering any account
thereof to me, my heirs and successors; with power, to the Common Council
aforesaid, to mitigate, remit or release such fines and mulcts, upon the
submission of the parties. Provided always, that no person, or persons,
hereafter, shall have right of electing or being elected, by virtue of these
presents, to any office or place judicial or ministerial, Who may elect or be
elected, etc.
nor shall be admitted freemen of the said city, unless they be free denizens
of this province, and are of the age of twenty-one years or upwards, and are
inhabitants of the said city, and have an estate of inheritance or freehold
therein, or are worth fifty pounds in money or other stock, and have been
resident in the said city for the space of two years, or shall purchase their
freedom of the Mayor and Commonalty aforesaid.

Market days.
And I do further grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty of the said city of
Philadelphia, that they and their successors shall, and may for ever hereafter
hold and keep within the said city, in every week of the year, two market days,
the one upon the fourth day of the week, and the other on the seventh day of
the week, in such place or places as is, shall, or may be appointed for that
purpose, by the said Commonalty, or their successors, from time to time.

And also two fairs therein every year, Two fairs.
the one of them to begin on the sixteenth day of the third month, called May,
yearly, and so to be held in and about the market place, and continue for that
day and two days next following; and the other of the said fairs to be held in
the aforesaid place on the sixteenth day of the ninth month, yearly, and for
two days next after.

And I do, for me, my heirs and assigns, Philadelphia constituted a port.
by virtue of the king's letters patent, make, erect and constitute the said
city of Philadelphia to be a port or harbor for discharging and unlading of
goods and merchandise out of ships, boats and other vessels, and for lading and
shipping them in, or upon such and so many places, keys and wharffs there, as
by the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the said city, shall, from time to
time, he thought most expedient, for the accommodation and service of the
officers of the customs, in the management (...) the king's affairs, and
preservation of his duties, as well as for the convenience of trade.

And I do ordain and declare, that the said port, or harbor, shall be called
the port of Philadelphia, Extent of the port.
and shall extend and be accounted to extend into all such creeks, rivers and
places within this province, and shall have so many wharffs, keys, landing
places, and members belonging thereto, for landing and shipping of goods, as
the said Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, for the time being, with the
approbation of the chief officer or officers of the king's customs, shall, from
time to time, think fit to appoint.

And I do also ordain, that the landing places now and heretofore used at the
Penny-pot-house and Blue Anchor, Landing places, etc.
saving to all persons their just and legal rights and properties, in the land
so to be open; as also the swamp between Budd's buildings and the Society-hill,
shall be left open and common for the use and service of the said city and all
others, with liberty to dig docks, and make harbors for ships and vessels, in
all, or any part of the said swamp.

And I do hereby grant, that all the vacant land within the bounds and limits
of the said city shall remain open, as a free common, Vacant land to remain
open, for pasture, etc.
or pasture, for the use of the inhabitants of the said city, until the same
shall be gradually taken in, in order to build or improve thereon, and not
otherwise. Provided always, that nothing herein contained, shall debar me, or
my heirs, in time to come, from fencing in all the vacant lands, that lie
between the center meeting house and the Schuylkill, which I intend shall be
divided from the land by me allotted for Delaware side, by a strait line along
the broad street from Edward Shippen's land, through the center square (...)
Daniel Pegg's land; nor shall the fencing, or taking in of any of the streets,
happening to be within that enclosure on Schuylkill, be deemed or adjudged to
be an encroachment, where it shall not interfere, or stop any of the streets,
or passages, leading to any of the houses built, or to be built, on that side,
any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

To be construed in favor of the corporation.
And I do grant, that this present charter shall, in all courts of law and
equity be construed and taken most favorably and beneficially for the said
corporation.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused my great seal to
be affixed, dated at Philadelphia, the five and twentieth day of October, Date.
anno Domini one thousand seven hundred and one, and in the thirteenth year of
the reign of king William the Third, over England, etc. and the one and
twentieth year of my government.

WILLIAM PENN,

APPENDIX TO THE History of Pennsylvania. PART II.
CONTAINING,
No VII. Friendly Association's Address to Governor Denny, in 1757. No VIII.
and IX. Christian Frederick Post's Journal among the Indians, etc. 1758.
No. VII.
To William Denny, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of the
province of Pennsylvania, etc.

The Address of the Trustees and Treasurer of the Friendly Association, for
regaining and preserving peace with the Indians by pacific measures,

Respectfully shows,
THAT on consideration of the answer given by the Governor to our offer of
contributing toward the expense of the ensuing treaty with the Indians, we
apprehend it to be necessary to lay before him a true state of the motives,
which induced us to use our endeavors to promote a reconciliation with them;
of the manner, in which we proceeded before and since the Governor's arrival in
this province, and of some reasons we have for desiring to see that the grounds
of their complaints are carefully and impartially enquired into and considered,
and such measures pursued, for satisfying them as the present melancholy
circumstances of this province immediately require: and we doubt not, if the
Governor will be pleased to attend to, and impartially consider, what we shall
offer, he will be fully convinced that our conduct has been consistent with
the profession, we make, of acting on those principles, of fearing God,
honoring the king, and promoting peace among men.

We, therefore, beg leave to inform the Governor, that soon after the first
accounts were brought of the mischief done by the Indians, on the frontiers of
Virginia, some of the people called Quakers, residing in Philadelphia,
seriously considering the fatal consequences of losing that interest and
friendship our predecessors had obtained, by their upright dealing and
hospitable treatment of the Indians, in the first settlement of this province;
and apprehending (...) general neglect of them, which had, for some time, been
obvious, would terminate to the public disadvantage, determined to improve
every future opportunity of manifesting some regard to them; and several
companies of Indians, of different tribes, coming to this city on diverse
occasions, they were visited by some of us, invited to our houses, and on their
going away, presented with some small matters, necessary for them, in their way
of living; and the grateful manner in which they received these instances of
regard, and the lively remembrance, they appeared to retain, of the friendship,
which subsisted between their ancestors, and the first settlers of this
province, afforded us real satisfaction, and some grounds to hope our good
intentions would not be disappointed.

During the following winter, the frequent melancholy accounts of the barbarous
murders, committed by the Indians, on the western and northern frontiers of
this province, filled the minds of people in general, with a spirit of
indignation and resentment against them, and no opportunity presented of
publicly manifesting the earnest concern we had, to use our utmost endeavors,
in a manner consistent with our peaceable principles, to prevent the impending
desolation; the calamity became general, and every one was deeply interested in
the measures taken for enquiring into the causes, which induced our ancient
steady friends to become our enemies: yet this being the proper business of
those then concerned in the administration of the government, we waited the
event of their proceedings, having just grounds to hope, that the knowledge
some of them had of several matters, which might probably have contributed to
this unhappy rupture, These were printed both in the gazettes and in their
minutes.
together with the repeated applications of the Assembly of the province, would
have excited them to pursue every rational method of making such an enquiry,
and obtaining an amicable adjustment of all differences with these Indians, and
of thereby averting the melancholy consequences of continuing to expose them
immediately to the artifices of the French, who would not fail to take
advantage of our misunderstanding with them: but the spring of another year
returned, and the public remained unacquainted with such measures being
pursued; great military preparations were indeed made and sorts erected in many
parts of the frontiers, but the desolation and distress of the province
increased, and the sanguine expectations of the people, who had, at first,
hoped by these means to defend themselves, were remarkably disappointed.
Governor Morris, nevertheless, determining to issue a declaration of war
against the Delawares and Shawanese, many of the people called Quakers residing
in Philadelphia, met together and presented an address to him, earnestly
beseeching, "That every measure which had been pursued, and whatever remained
possible to be done, to prevent so lamentable an extremity, might be strictly
and impartially reviewed and considered; that full enquiry might be made,
whether some apprehensions these Indians had conceived of a deviation from the
integrity of conduct toward them, conspicuous in the first establishment,
might not unhappily have contributed, in some degree, to the alteration of
their conduct toward us; that full time might be allowed for these Indians,
who remained well affected toward us, to use and report the effect of their
endeavors to reconcile our enemies to us, and that, by the Governor's care, to
guard against involving the innocent with the guilty, such clear demonstrations
of Christian tenderness might be given, as might tend to the engaging other
neighboring Indians in the desirable work of restoring peace and tranquillity;
and, at the same time, offering, though a much larger part of their estates
should be necessary, than the heaviest taxes of a war could be expected to
require, by voluntary grants cheerfully to contribute toward the obtaining
peace, in the same manner as the unhappy experience of several of the most
martial neighboring colonies had, after long and bloody wars, testified it
must at last, if ever, be obtained."

Governor Morris was pleased to give a civil answer to this address; but
thought it necessary to proceed immediately to a declaration of war: a few days
after which, some of us having the opportunity of a free conference with Conrad
Weiser, who had, as provincial interpreter, been long concerned in public
transactions with the Indians; we were thereby confirmed in our apprehensions,
that some dissatisfaction, respecting their lands, had tended to the alienating
their friendship from us; and that he thought the only method, to save the
province from ruin, was to endeavor for a peace with them, by pacific
measures; and the next day a Delaware Indian, from the Jerseys, was sent to one
of us, with a letter from Conrad Weiser, recommending him, as a person worthy
of some notice from us, and fit to be employed on a message to the Delawares,
when an opportunity of sending one could be obtained; and there being, at that
time, a number of the Chiefs of the Six Nation Indians in town, some of us
thought it necessary to take some friendly notice of them; but being determined
to avoid giving any occasion of offense, before we had any conversation with
them, two of us waited on Governor Morris, and informed him, "That as he had
issued his declaration of war, we thought it our duty to acquiesce therein;
but, as there were some friendly Indians in town, we were disposed to take some
notice of them, and to endeavor, by a friendly conversation, to manifest our
good disposition toward them, and engage their good offices on any occasion,
which might be improved for the public welfare; and we, at the same time,
assured the Governor if any thing should occur, which had a prospect of tending
to the public interest, or might be worthy of his notice, he should be fully
acquainted therewith." The Governor expressed his approbation of our design,
and gave us full liberty to prosecute our intentions, and the next day some of
these Indian Chiefs, with Conrad Weiser and Andrew Montour, the provincial
interpreters, and D. Claus, General Johnson's Secretary, dined at one of our
houses; and after dinner, had some conversation on the happy state of the first
settlers of this province, and the unhappy rupture, which had lately happened.

The free and hearty acknowledgments of pleasure and gratitude, from these
Indians, fully evidenced their good disposition toward us, and induced Conrad
Weiser to declare, he had not lately heard them express themselves with so much
openness, and earnestly to urge our improving this opportunity; and, in order
to it, he advised the calling together as many of our ancient men, of the
survivors of the first settlers, as we could collect, and to give the Indians
another meeting, in which the substance of that conversation might be repeated,
and enforced on their minds, by presenting them with a belt of wampum.

Governor Morris was immediately informed of what had passed; and as there
appeared some prospect of improving this disposition of the Indians to the
public benefit, he was assured, that if he would advise and direct the manner
of proceeding, nothing more was desired by us than under his direction to
proceed therein, in such manner as would be most agreeable to him, most
effectually answer the purpose intended, and demonstrate that we did not act
from views of private advantage thereby: and lest the differences then
subsisting, between him and the Assembly, about the raising money for the
public services, should discourage, or retard his engaging therein; he was
told, that whatever sum of money should be wanting, even, to the amount of L.
5,000, he should be immediately supplied with, and by every part of our
conduct, should find our hearty concern for the public welfare to be our
principal motive.

Our purposes appeared acceptable to the Governor; about twenty of us, with the
same interpreters, had two conferences with the Indians; and the most material
parts of what they said were immediately communicated to the Governor; and the
proposal This was made by the Indians Chiefs, and the message to be from them
to the Delawares, etc.
of sending three messengers to the Delawares and Shawanese being approved of
by him, the necessary provision was made for their setting out, and proper
company provided, for their safe conduct through the improved part of the
province; and when they were ready to proceed on their journey, the Governor
being waited on for the passes, and requested to direct what signal they should
give, on their return, to distinguish them from enemies; while the passes lay
before him ready to be signed, he suddenly appeared to change his intentions,
and signified his resolution to consult his Council, on the occasion. The
minutes of our conversation with these Indians, being examined and signed by
the three interpreters, were immediately, after this, delivered to the
Governor; and, his Council being summoned, we were informed, they soon agreed,
that, as he had so lately declared war, any offers of peace from him would be
unseasonable, and that the method first proposed of the messengers going with
such instructions, as they had received from their own chiefs, was most fit to
be pursued. The next day the Indian chiefs setting out in the stage boat for
New York, after they were gone, the messengers refused to perform the service
they had undertaken, and the day following, the Governor, in consequence of
some intelligence received from the Governor of New York, concluded to send the
messengers in his own name.

To prevent any misrepresentations of our conduct, as well as to engage the
friendship of gentlemen, from whom we hoped to receive more hearty assistance,
than we had from those, on whom we had hitherto depended, copies of the minutes
of our conversations with the Indians, and their answers, were immediately sent
to the Governor of New York, and to General Johnson, and an earnest application
for their assistance, in engaging the Indians of the Six Nations to promote the
restoration of peace, with an offer of cheerfully defraying the expenses
thereof, Governor Hardy was so kind as to send such an answer as evidenced his
hearty concern for the public welfare; and laid us under sensible obligations;
and we never received the least hint, from General Johnson, of his
disapprobation of any part of our conduct therein. Under these circumstances,
we had reason to apprehend that our intention was approved of, and the speedy
return of the messengers with an agreeable answer, confirmed us in a resolution
to continue our endeavors to engage as many of our fellow subjects, as
possible, to concur with us therein.

The messengers being sent the second time, on their return brought with them
the Indian king, Teedyuscung, and some of his people, to Easton, and repeatedly
informed us of the necessity of our personal attendance there, and manifest
thereby, and by contributing toward the expenses of a suitable present, the
sincerity of our professions of regard to them; and they were not willing to go
back to the Indians, without us.

We, therefore, being informed that Governor Morris had resolved to meet them
at Easton, The votes of Assembly prove it.
that the provincial treasury was exhausted, and that the Proprietaries' agents
refused to contribute toward the necessary expenses, and appeared averse to
the promotion of these pacific measures, a considerable number of us thought it
necessary to enter into a subscription, toward raising a fund, to supply the
deficiency of what ought, in justice, to be contributed by the Proprietaries,
on this occasion; and a considerable sum was immediately subscribed, and
Governor Morris informed of our inclination to attend the treaty, and to make
some addition to the present provided at the public expense. From the time of
the first messengers arriving at Teaogon, the hostilities on our northern
frontiers ceased, and a stop being put to the cruel devastations that had been
committed, an acceptable respite was obtained for our distressed fellow
subjects, which afforded us real pleasure and satisfaction; so that all the
malicious calumnies and aspersions (which then were uttered) were not
sufficient to divert us from the steady prosecution of our purpose. Governor
Morris being at Easton some time before us, immediately after our arrival
there, some of us waited on him, to repeat our desires of promoting the public
interest, and contributing any assistance in our power, in such manner as might
be most agreeable to him; he received us civilly, and expressed his approbation
of our design. At the Governor's lodgings we first saw Teedyuscung the Delaware
chief, to whom we were before utterly strangers: on our coming ^n he
immediately expressed his regard for, and confidence in, the Quakers; This was
in the hearing of Governor Morris.
and declared, "He would not proceed to any business, unless we were present;"
and confirmed it so evidently by his subsequent conduct, at that time, and the
ensuing treaty, that we could not, without unjustifiable neglect of our duty,
decline contributing our utmost endeavors to improve this disposition to the
interest of our country, so far as we might be able to do it, consistent with
our respective stations in life.

Governor Morris was afterward pleased to accept of the present provided by
us, and to deliver it to the Indians, in our name.

After the conclusion of this treaty, Governor Morris thought a necessary to
send Capt. Newcastle on a message to the Indians, ^ or near fort Johnson: but
before he was set out, Governor Denny arrived, and succeeded in the government
of this province, and we always apprehended, that, in his name, and by his
authority, Capt. Newcastle went on that message, as we never interfered
therein, in any manner whatever, and were not informed the particular business
he was charged with. On Captain Newcastle's return, we found by conversing with
him, he had given some offense to General Johnson, and we have since had cause
to apprehend From the account given by General Johnson to the Earl of London of
this journey of Newcastle, it is thought the Earl was induced to express
himself in the manner Governor Denny has published in his late messages to the
Assembly.
that some gentlemen in higher stations, have been informed, that we had sent
Newcastle on this message, and given him matters in charge, to be privately
transacted with the Indians, after it was known to us that the king had, by a
special commission, authorized Sir William Johnson to negotiate all matters of
a public concern with them; but as we had not given any occasion for such a
charge, nor were any way concerned in sending that message, it affords us a
particular pleasure, that the Governor has given us to favorable an
opportunity of clearing ourselves from this unjust ^ensure, and we hope that
this ingenuous account of our conduct, in the course of this business before
the Governor's arrival, will fully evince that we proceeded therein on just
motives, and with the regard due from us to the Governor of this province.

It is well known to the Governor, that on his arrival here, some of us waited
on him, and one of us assured him of our sincere desire to proceed in
contributing our assistance toward the restoration of peace, in a manner most
agreeable to him, and consistent with our characters and stations. He was then
pleased to declare his approbation of our purpose; and when we waited on him
with our address, before the second treaty of Easton, the Governor, by his
answer, This answer was in writing.
declared his approbation of our proceedings, and his being willing to receive
the present we prepared, and invited us to attend the treaty: we had reason to
conclude, that our conduct there had given the Governor no occasion of offense;
as, after the business was finished, on our acknowledging his integrity and
candor in the public transactions there; He thanked us for our company, and
said he was glad we were there, and that his conduct was satisfactory to us,
and that he should endeavor to act so upon all oc^ (...) to deserve our
esteem, etc.
he gave us such an answer as fully expressed his being well pleased with us;
and the Secretary and Provincial Interpreter very liberally declared their
satisfaction and approbation of our conduct; and the latter fully testified
that we had thereby evidently promoted the public interest, and been
instrumental in bringing the business so far toward the desired issue.

From that time till the late treaty at Lancaster, we know of no part of our
proceedings, which could displease the Governor, unless our application to the
Secretary, for an inspection of the records, in his office, had that unexpected
effect. Lest that sh^^ld be the case, and the intention and manner of that
application ^e misrepresented by any of the Proprietaries' Agents, and others
engaged with them in the measures, which have contributed to the present
unhappy circumstances of this province, we think it necessary to inform the
Governor, that this province was settled on terms very different from most of
the other colonies; the first adventurers were men of substance and reputation,
who purchased the lands of the Proprietor; and as he obliged himself, and his
heirs, by an express covenant, contained in their original deeds, "To clear the
land from all titles, claims, or demands of the Indian natives, or any other
persons whatsoever;" they agreed to pay an annual quit-rent, more than
sufficient to enable him to satisfy the Indians, and obtain a peaceable
possession of the land; and during the lives of our first Proprietor, and the
first settlers, we believe this was faithfully performed, and so large a
balance remained, toward making further purchases, as the settlement of the
country increased, that any attempt to elude the original intention and
agreement of honestly purchasing the land of the people, who had a native right
in it, will be ever condemned by all impartial and honest men.

At the second treaty, at Easton, the Governor, by his candid and ingenuous
treatment of the Indians (as the Mohawks since aptly expressed it) "Put his
hand into Teedyuscung's bosom, and was to successful as to draw out the secret;
which neither Sir William Johnson, nor the Six Nations could do." From that
time it was generally known, that one cause of the alienation of their
friendship was some injustice they had received, or supposed to be done them,
in the purchases and running out of their lands. They complained of diverse
kinds of frauds, which had been committed, repeatedly urged, that an impartial
enquiry should be made into the grounds of their complaints, by searching all
our records, and by the strong motives of a regard to our temporal and eternal
interest, urged the Governor to give liberty to all persons and friends to
search into those matters. Thus we thought ourselves under the strongest
obligations to make all the enquiry in our power, into the true state of the
Indian claims, whether or not such care had been taken to purchase, and pay
them for the lands, as the Proprietaries' Agents had constantly asserted. The
right many of us who hold large tracts of land under the first settlers, the
Governor's repeated declarations, both in public and private, that those
matters should be honestly and fully enquired into, and the Indians'
injunctions that this should be done, not only by the persons thus complained
of, or their Agents, but by others likewise interested therein, united in
engaging our particular attention, and gave us a reasonable prospect of meeting
with the Governor's approbation; and though the Secretary refused to permit us
to proceed therein, by inspecting the records in his office, we still had cause
to think our farther application to the necessary and important concern of
regaining peace, was not contrary to the Governor's inclination, as on our
informing him of our intention to attend the treaty at Lancaster, and our
willingness to contribute toward the expenses of the present, to be given to
the Indians there, the Governor with the utmost readiness expressed his
approbation of our proposal; and we are not conscious of having, at that
treaty, or since, given the least occasion for the alteration of his conduct
toward us; which from the answer now received, and the conversion consequent
thereon, we have occasion to observe.

We have no views inconsistent with the honor of our gracious king, and the
interest of our country, both which we sincerely endeavor to promote; we have
heartily desired that people of every denomination, in the province, would
unite in the same good purpose, and particularly in this business, that the
same harmony and good understanding, which subsisted between the first settlers
of the province and the natives, might be revived and maintained, and we have
happily succeeded with several religious societies, who have raised funds, and
are ready to apply them toward restoring peace: and, if the complaints of the
Indians appear to be just, and the Proprietaries and their Agents should refuse
to make them such satisfaction as, in justice, they ought to have, rather than
the lives of our fellow subjects should be sacrificed, their properties
destroyed, and so large a part of the king's dominions laid waste, they will
freely join with us, in contributing toward the satisfying such just claims of
the Indians, or at least, to pacify them, till the immediate authority of the
king, of whose justice and paternal care we have not the least doubt, can be
interposed, and justice, equity and mercy be again restored and maintained
amongst us.

And, if we are now so happy as to convince the Governor of the integrity of
our intentions and conduct, we shall have reason to hope, he will concur with
us, in taking the first opportunity of convincing the nobleman he has named,
that it must be from some unjust representations, that he was induced to think,
"We had presumed to treat with foreign princes, or by acting as mediators,
between the government and an independent people, invaded the king's
prerogative royal." We apprehend, our duty to God and the king has engaged us
in this business; and some of the good effects thereof have already appeared;
we, therefore, now again offer the Governor, to contribute something
considerable toward the present necessary to be made to the Indians, at the
ensuing treaty, and by our personal attendance to improve the confidence and
good opinion these people have of us, to the public benefit.

Should the Governor persist in refusing to accept our present, we assure him,
we shall not, by any part of our conduct, give any just occasion to charge us
with a disrespectful conduct toward him, and we desire our attendance, at the
treaty, may not be considered as such. The business to be transacted there is
of so much consequence to the lives, liberties, and properties of the people of
this province, that should we omit to attend there, and depend on the Governor
and the King's Agent, receiving all their information, on this important
occasion, from the Proprietaries' Agents and others, who have, for some years
past, been concerned in the transacting Indian affairs, we should be deficient
of our duty, as Christians and Englishmen, denominations, we hold more dear to
us, than any other titles, or appellations, whatsoever.

Signed on behalf, and by appointment of the said Trustees and Treasurer, by
ABEL JAMES, Clerk.
Philadelphia, the 14th of the seventh month, 1757.
No. VIII.
The first journal of Christian Frederick Post, from Philadelphia to the Ohio,
on a message from the government of Pennsylvania to the Delaware, Shawanese,
and Mingo Indians, settled there, and formerly in alliance with the English; in
order to prevail on them to withdraw from the French interest; in the year
1758. London, printed for John Wilkie, etc. 1759; with the notes, etc.

CHRISTIAN FREDERICK POST was a plain, honest, religiously disposed German, and
one of the Moravian brethren; who, from a conscientious opinion of duty,
formerly had lived among the Mohiccon Indians, with a view to convert them to
Christianity.

He had married twice among them, and lived with them seventeen years. It was a
dangerous undertaking; and though he was an illiterate person, and his
narrative seemingly artless and uncouth, yet being a man of sincerity,
acquainted with the Indian manners, and the importance of the affair, at that
time, being very interesting, the Indian custom of treating on public affairs
may thereby partly appear, and be entertaining. The event showed the propriety
of using reason, and friendly treatment, or true policy, toward the Indians,
in preference to force, or violence, when it may be done: the former of which
had so long been successfully used by the more early settlers of Pennsylvania,
and the latter so lately attended with unhappy consequences, etc.

THE JOURNAL, etc.
July the 15th, 1758. -- This day I received orders from his honor, the
Governor, to set out on my intended journey, and proceeded as far as German
Town, where I found all the Indians drunk. All Indians are excessive fond of
rum, and will be drunk whenever they can get it.
Willamegicken returned to Philadelphia, for a horse, that was promised him.

-- 16th. This day I waited for the said Willamegicken till near noon, and when
he came, being very drunk, All Indians are excessive fond of rum, and will be
drunk whenever they can get it.
he could proceed no further, so that I left him, and went to Bethlehem. The
Moravian Brethren's settlement.


July 17th. I arrived at Bethlehem, and prepared for my journey.

-- 18th. I read over both the last treaties, that at Easton, and that at
Philadelphia, and made myself acquainted with the particulars of each.

-- 19th. With much difficulty I persuaded the Indians to leave Bethlehem, and
traveled this day no further than Hayes's, having a hard shower of rain.

-- 20th. Arrived at fort Allen.

-- 21st. I called my company together, to know if we should proceed. They
complained they were sick, and must rest that day. This day, I think,
Teedyuscung laid many obstacles in my way, and was very much against my
proceeding: he said, he was afraid I should never return; and that the Indians
would kill me. About dinner time two Indians arrived from Wyoming, with an
account that Teedyuscung's son, Hans Jacob, was returned, and brought news from
the French and Allegheny Indians. Teedyuscung then called a Council, and
proposed that I should only go to Wyoming, and return, with the message his son
had brought, to Philadelphia. I made answer, that it was too late, that he
should have proposed that in Philadelphia; for that the writings containing my
orders were so drawn, as obliged me to go, though I should lose my life.

-- 22d. I desired my companions to prepare to set out, upon which Teedyuscung
called them all together in the fort, and protested against my going. His
reasons were, that he was afraid the Indians would kill me, or the French get
me; and if that should be the case he should be very sorry, and did not know
what he should do. I gave for answer, "that I did not know what to think of
their conduct. It is plain, said I, that the French have a public road An
India^ expression meaning free admission.
to your towns, yet you will not let your own flesh and blood, the English,
come near them; which is very hard: and if that be the case, the French must be
your masters." I added, that, if I died in the undertaking, it would be as much
for the Indians as the English, and that I hoped my journey would be of this
advantage, that it would be the means of saving the lives of many hundreds of
the Indians: therefore, I was resolved to go forward, taking my life in my
hand, as one ready to part with it for their good. Immediately after I had
spoken thus, three rose up and offered to go with me the nearest way; and we
concluded to go through the inhabitants, under the Blue mountains to sort
Augusta, on Susquahanna; where we arrived the 25th.

It gave me great pain to observe many plantations deserted and laid waste; and
I could not but reflect on the distress, the poor owners must be drove to, who
once lived in plenty; and I prayed the Lord to restore peace and prosperity to
the distressed.

At fort Augusta we were entertained very kindly, had our horses shod, and one
being lame, we exchanged for another. Here we received, by Indians from
Diahogo, An Indian settlement toward the heads of Susquahanna.
the disagreeable news that our army was, as they said, entirely cut off at
Ticonderoga, which discouraged one of my companions, Lappopetung's son, so
much, that he would proceed no further. Shamokin Daniel here asked me, if I
thought he should be satisfied for his trouble in going with me. I told him
every body, that did any service for the province, I thought, would be paid.

-- 27th. They furnished us here with every necessary for our journey, and we
set out with good courage. After we rode about ten miles, we were caught in a
hard gust of rain.

-- 28th. We came to Wekeeponall, where the road turns off for Wyoming, and
slept this night at Queenashawakee.

-- 29th. We crossed the Susquahanna over the Big Island. My companions were
now very fearful, and this night went a great way out of the road, to sleep
without fire, but could not sleep for the musquetoes and vermin.

-- 30th and 31st. We were glad it was day, that we might set out. We got upon
the mountains, and had heavy rains all night. The heavens alone were our
covering, and we accepted of all that was poured down from thence.

August 1st. We saw three hoops Little hoops on which the Indians stretch and
dress the raw s^^lp^.
on a bush; to one of them there remained some long white hair. Our horses left
us, I suppose, not being fond of the dry food on the mountains: with a good
deal of trouble we found them again. We slept this night on the same mountain.

-- 2d. We came across several places where two poles, painted red, were stuck
in the ground by the Indians, to which they tie the prisoners, when they stop
at night, in their return from their incursions. We arrived this night at
Shinglimuhee, where was another of the same posts. It is a disagreeable and
melancholy fight, to see the means they make use of, according to their savage
way, to distress others.

-- 3d. We came to a part of a river called Tobeco, over the mountains, a very
bad road.

August 4th. We lost one of our horses, and with much difficulty found him, but
were detained a whole day on that account.

I had much conversation with Pisquetumen; An Indian Chief, that traveled with
him.
of which I think to inform myself further when I get to my journey's end.

-- 5th. We set out early this day, and made a good long stretch, crossing the
big river Tobeco, and lodged between two mountains. I had the misfortune to
lose my pocket book with three pounds five shillings, The money of
Pennsylvania, being paper, is chiefly carried in pocket books.
and sundry other things. What writings it contained were illegible to any body
but myself.

-- 6th. We passed all the mountains, and the big river, Weshawaucks, and
crossed a fine meadow two miles in length, where we slept that night, having
nothing to eat.

-- 7th. We came in sight of fort Venango, belonging to the French, situate
between two mountains, in a fork of the Ohio river. I prayed the Lord to blind
them, as he did the enemies of Lot and Elisha, that I might pass unknown. When
we arrived, the fort being on the other side of the river, we hallooed, and
desired them to fetch us over; which they were afraid to do; but showed us a
place where we might ford. We slept that night within half gun shot of the fort.

-- 8th. This morning I hunted for my horse, round the fort, within ten yards
of it. The Lord heard my prayer, and I passed unknown till we had mounted our
horses to go off, when two Frenchmen came to take leave of the Indians, and
were much surprised at seeing me, but said nothing.

By what I could learn of Pisquetumen, and the Indians, who went into the fort,
the garrison consisted of only six men, and an officer blind of one eye. They
enquired much of the Indians concerning the English, whether they knew of any
party coming to attack them, of which they were very apprehensive.

-- 9th. Heavy rains all night and day: we slept on swampy ground.

-- 10th. We imagined we were near Kushkushkee; and having traveled three
miles, we met three Frenchmen, who appeared very shy of us, but said nothing
more than to enquire, whether we knew of any English coming against fort
Venango.

After we traveled two miles farther, we met with an Indian, and one that I
took to be a runagade English Indian trader; he spoke good English, was very
curious in examining every thing, particularly the silver medal about
Pisquitumen's neck. He appeared by his countenance to be guilty. We enquired of
them where we were, and found we were lost, and within twenty miles of fort
Duquesne. We struck out of the road to the right, and slept between two
mountains; and being destitute of food, two went to hunt, and the others to
seek a road, but to no purpose.

-- 11th. We went to the place were they had killed two deers, and Pisquetumen
and I roasted the meat. Two went to hunt for the road, to know which way we
should go: one came back, and had found a road; the other lost himself.

-- 12th. The rest of us hunted for him, but in vain; so, as we could not find
him, we concluded to set off, leaving such marks, that, if he returned, he
might know which way to follow us; and we left him some meat. We came to the
river Conaquonashon, where was an old Indian town. We were then fifteen miles
from Kushkushkee.

There we stopped, and sent forward Pisquetumen with four strings of wampum to
apprize the town of our coming, According to the rules of Indian politeness,
you must never go into a town without sending a previous message to denote your
arrival, or, standing at a distance from the town, and hallooing till some come
out, to conduct you in. Otherwise you are thought as rude as white men.
with this message:

"Brother, When the people of a town, or of a nation, are addressed, the
Indians always use the singular number.
thy brethren are come a great way, and want to see thee, at thy fire, to smoke
that good tobacco, I. E. To confer in a friendly manner.
which our good grandfathers used to smoke. Turn thy eyes once more upon that
road, by which I came. I. F. Call to mind our ancient friendly intercourse.
I bring thee words of great consequence from the Governor, and people of
Pennsylvania, and from the king of England. Now I desire thee to call all the
kings and captains from all the towns, that none may be missing. I do not
desire that my words may be hid, or spoken under cover. I want to speak loud,
that all the Indians may hear me. I hope thou will bring me on the road, and
lead me into the town. I blind the French, that they may not see me, and stop
their ears, that they may not hear the great news I bring you."

About noon we met some Shawanese, that used to live at Wyoming. They knew me,
and received me very kindly. I saluted them, and assured them the government of
Pennsylvania wished them well, and wished to live in peace and friendship with
them. Before we came to the town, two men came to meet us and lead us in. King
Beaver showed us a large house to lodge in. Every Indian town has a large
cabin for the entertainment of strangers by the public hospitality.
The people soon came and shook hands with us. The number was about sixty young
able men. Soon after king Beaver came and told his people, "Boys, hearken, we
sat here without ever expecting again to see our brethren the English; but now
one of them is brought before you, that you may see your brethren, the English,
with your own eyes; and I wish you may take it into consideration." Afterward
he turned to me and said,

"Brother, I am very glad to see you, I never thought we should have had the
opportunity to see one another more; but now I am very glad, and thank God, who
has brought you to us. It is a great satisfaction to me." I said, "Brother, I
rejoice in my heart, I thank God, who has brought me to you. I bring you joyful
news from the Governor and people of Pennsylvania, and from your children, the
Friends: (...)
and, as I have words of great consequence I will lay them before you, when all
the kings and captains are called together from the other towns. I wish there
may not be a man of them missing, but that they may be all here to hear."

In the evening king Beaver came again, and told me, they had held a council,
and sent out to all their towns, but it would take five days before they could
all come together. I thanked him for his care. Ten captains came and saluted
me. One said to the others; "We never expected to see our brethren the English
again, but now God has granted us once more to shake hands with them, which we
will not forget." They sat by my fire till midnight.

-- 14th. The people crowded to my house; it was full. We had much talk.
Delaware George said, he had not slept all night, so much had he been engaged
on account of my coming. The French came, and would speak with me. There were
then fifteen of them building houses for the Indians. The captain is gone with
fifteen to another town. He can speak the Indian tongue well. The Indians say
he is a cunning fox; that they get a great deal of goods from the French; and
that the French cloth the Indians every year, men, women and children, and
give them as much powder and lead as they want.

-- 15th. Beaver king was informed, that Teedyuscung had said he had turned the
hatchet against the French, by advice of the Allegany Indians; this he blamed,
as they had never sent him such advice. But being informed it was his own
doing, without any persuasion of the Governor, he was easy on that head.
Delaware Daniel prepared a dinner, to which he invited me, and all the kings
and captains; and when I came, he said, "Brother, we are as glad to see you
among us, as if we dined with the Governor and people in Philadelphia. We have
thought a great deal since you have been here. We never thought so much
before." That is, we look on your coming as a matter of importance, it engages
our attention.
I thanked them for their kind reception; I said, it was something great, that
God had spared our lives, to see one another again, in the old brother-like
love and friendship. There were in all thirteen, who dined together.

In the evening they danced at my fire, first the men, and then the women, till
after midnight.

On the 16th, the king and the captains called on me privately. They wanted to
hear what Teedyuscung had said of them, and begged me to take out the writings.
I read to them what Teedyuscung had said, and told them, as Teedyuscung had
said he would speak so loud, that all at Allegheny, and beyond, should hear it,
I would conceal nothing from them. They said, they never sent any such advice
(as above mentioned) to Teedyuscung, nor ever sent a message at all to the
government; and now the French were here, their captain would come to hear, and
this would make disturbance. I then told them I would read the rest, and leave
out that part, and they might tell the kings and captains of it, when they came
together.

-- 17th. Early this morning they called all the people together to clean the
place, where they intended to hold the council, it being in the middle of the
town. Kushkushkee is divided into four towns, each at a distance from the
others; and the whole consists of about ninety houses, and two hundred able
warriors.

About noon two public messengers arrived from the Indians at fort Duquesne and
the other towns. They brought three large belts and two bundles of strings;
These belts and strings are made of shell-beads, called wampum. The wampum
serves, among the Indians, as money; of it they also make their necklaces,
bracelets, and other ornaments. Belts and strings of it are used in all public
negotiations; to each belt or string there is connected a message, speech, or
part of a speech, to be delivered with a belt by the messenger, or speaker
These belts also serve for records, being worked with figures, composed of
beads of different colors, to assist the memory.
there came with them a French captain, and fifteen men. The two messengers
insisted that I should go with them to fort Duquesne; that there were Indians
of eight nations, who wanted to hear me; that if I brought good news, they
inclined to leave off war, and live in friendship with the English. The above
messengers being Indian captains, were very surly. When I went to shake hands
with one of them, he gave me his little finger; the other withdrew his hand
entirely; upon which I appeared as stout as either, and withdrew my hand as
quick as I could. Their rudeness to me was taken very ill by the other
captains, who treated them in the same manner in their turn.

I told them my order was to go to the Indian towns, kings and captains, and
not to the French; that the English were at was with the French, but not with
those Indians, who withdrew from the French, and would be at peace with the
English.

King Beaver invited me to his house to dinner, and afterward he invited the
French captain, and said before the Frenchman, that the Indians were very proud
to see one of their brothers, the English, among them; at which the French
captain appeared low spirited, and seemed to eat his dinner with very little
appetite.

(...) Indian kings and captains called me aside, (...) ^esir^ (...) them the
writings that I had. First I read part of the Easton treaty (...) them; but
they presently stopped me, and would not hear it; I then began with the
articles of peace made with the Indians there. They stopped me again, and said,
they had nothing to say to any treaty, or league, of peace, made at Easton, nor
had any thing to do with Teedyuscung; that, if I had nothing to say to them
from the government, or Governor, they would have nothing to say to me; and
farther said, they had hitherto been at war with the English, and had never
expected to be at peace with them again; and that there were six of their men
now gone to war against them with other Indians; that had there been peace
between us, those men should not have gone to war. I then showed them the belts
and strings from the Governor; and they again told me to lay aside Teedyuscung,
and the peace made by him; for that they had nothing to do with it. The peace
made with Teedyuscung, was for the Delawares, etc. on Susquahanna only, and did
not include the Indians on the Ohio; they having no deputies at the treaty. But
he had promised to halloo to them, that is, send messengers to them, and
endeavor to draw them into the peace, which he accordingly did.
I desired them to suffer me to produce my papers, and I would read what I had
to say to them.

-- 18th. Delaware George is very active in endeavoring to establish a peace.
I believe he is in earnest. Hitherto they have all treated me kindly.

In the afternoon, all the kings and captains were called together, and sent
for me to their council. King Beaver first add^^ssed himself to the captains;
and afterward spoke to me, as follows:

"Brother, you have been here now five days by our fire. A fire, in public
affairs, signifies, among the Indians, a council.
We have sent to all the kings and captains, desiring them to come to our ^^re
and hear the good news you brought. Yesterday they sent two captains to
acquaint us, they were glad to hear our English brother was come among us, and
were desirous to hear the good news he brought; and since there are a great
many nations that went to see ou^ brother, they have invited (...) their fire,
that they may hear us all. Now, brother, we have but one great fire; so,
brother, by this string we will take you in our arms, and deliver you into the
arms of the other kings, and when we have called all the nations there, we will
hear the good news, you have brought." Delivers four strings.

King Beaver, Shingas, and Delaware George, spoke as follows:

"Brother, we alone cannot make a peace; it would be of no signification; for,
as all the Indians, from the sunrise to the sunset, are united in a body, it
is necessary that the whole should join in the peace, or it can be no peace;
and we can assure you, all the Indians, a great way from this, even beyond the
lakes, are desirous of, and wish for a peace with the English, and have desired
^s, as we are the nearest of kin, if we see the English incline to a peace, to
hold it fast."

On the 19th, all the people gathered together, men, women, and children; and
king Beaver desired me to read to them the news I had brought, and told me that
all the able men would go with me to the other town. I complied with his
desire, and they appeared very much pleased at every thing, till I came to that
part respecting the prisoners. This they disliked; for, they say, it appears
very odd and unreasonable that we should demand prisoners before there is an
established peace; such an unreasonable demand makes us appear as if we wanted
brains.

-- 20th. We set out from Kushkushkee, for Sankonk; my company consisted of
twenty-five horsemen and fifteen foot. We arrived at Sankonk, in the afternoon.
The people of the town were much disturbed at my coming, and received me in a
very rough manner. They surrounded me with drawn knives in their hands, in such
a manner, that I could hardly get along; running up against me; with their
breasts open, as if they wanted some pretense to kill me. I saw by their
countenances they sought my death. Their faces were quite distorted with rage,
and they went so far as to say, I should not live long; but some Indians, with
whom I was formerly acquainted, coming up, and saluting me in a friendly
manner, their behavior to me was quickly changed.

On the 21st, they sent Messengers to Fort Duquesne, to let them know I was
there, and invited them to their fire. In the afternoon, I read them all my
message, the French (...) sent; for (...) still continued with (...) upon which
they were (...) kind to me. In the evening, (...) ar^ive^ here from ^kushkee.
The men here now about one hundred and twenty.

-- 22d. Arrived about twenty Shawanese and Mingos. I read to them the message;
at which they seemed well pleased. Then the two kings came to me, and spoke in
the following manner:

"Brother, we, the Shawanese and Mingos, have heard your message; the messenger
we sent to Fort Duquesne, is returned, and tells us, there are eight different
nations there, who want to hear your message; we will conduct you there, and
let both the Indians and French hear what our brothers, the English, have to
say."

I protested against going to Fort Duquesne, but all in vain; for they insisted
on my going, and said that I need not fear the French, for they would carry me
in their bosoms, i. e. engage for my safety.

-- 23d. We set off for Fort Duquesne, and went no farther this night than
Log's town, where I met with four Shawanese, who lived in Wyoming when I did.
They received me very kindly, and called the prisoners to shake hands with me,
as their countryman, and gave me leave to go into every house to see them,
which was done in no other town besides.

-- 24th. They called to me, and desired that I would write to the general for
them. The jealousy natural to the Indians is not to be described; for though
they wanted me to write for them, they were afraid I would, at the same time,
give other information, and this perplexed them.

We continued our journey to the fort; and arrived in sight, on this side the
river, in the afternoon, and all the Indian chiefs immediately came over; they
called me into the middle, and king Beaver presented me to them, and said,
"Here is our English brother, who has brought great news." Two of them rose up
and signified they were glad to see me. But an old deaf Onondago Indian rose up
and signified his displeasure. This Indian is much disliked by the others; he
had heard nothing yet, that had passed, he has lived here a great while, and
constantly lives in the fort, and is mightily attached to the French; he spoke
as follows, to the Delawares;

"I do not know this Swannock; I. E. This Englishman.
it may be that you know him. I, the Shawanese, and our father By father, they
express the French.
do not know him. I stand here (st^mping his foot) as a man on his own ground;
By I, he here means, I, the Six Nations, of which the Onondagoes are one of the
greatest. This was, therefore, a claim of the Ohio lands, as belonging to the
Six Nations, exclusive of the Delawares, whom they formerly called women.
therefore, I, (...) ^wanese and my f^ther (...) like that a (...) ground."
Then there was (...) ^ound; The Indians smoke in their councils.
after that was over, one of the Delawares rose up, and spoke in opposition to
him that spoke last, and delivered himself as follows:

"That man speaks not as a man; he endeavors to frighten us, by saying this
ground is his; he dreams; he and his father have certainly drank too much
liquor; they are drunk; pray let them go to sleep till they be sober. You do
not know what your own nation does, at home; how much they have to say to the
Swannocks. You are quite rotten. You stink. That is, the sentiments you
express, are offensive to the company.
You do nothing but smoke your pipe here. Go to sleep with your father, and
when you are sober we will speak to you."

After this the French demanded me of the Indians. They said it was a custom
among the white people when a messenger came, even if it was the Governor, to
blind his eyes, and lead him into the fort, to a prison, or private room. They,
with some of the Indians insisted very much on my being sent into the fort, but
to no purpose; for the other Indians said to the French: "It may be a rule
among you, but we have brought him here, that all the Indians might see him,
and hear what our brothers the English have to say; and we will not suffer him
to be blinded and carried into the fort." The French still insisted on my being
delivered to them; but the Indians desired them, to let them hear no more about
it; but to send them one hundred loaves of bread; for they were hungry.

-- 25th. This morning early they sent us over a large bullock, and all the
Indian chiefs came over again, and counseled a great deal among themselves;
then the Delaware, that handled the old deaf Onondago Indian so roughly
yesterday, addressed himself to him, in this manner; "I hope, to day, you are
sober. I am certain you did not know what you said yesterday. You endeavored
to frighten us; but know, we are now men, and not so easily frightened. You
said something yesterday of the Shawanese; see here what they have sent you,"
(presenting him with a large roll of tobacco.)

Then the old deaf Indian rose up, and acknowledged he had been in the wrong;
he said, that he had now cleaned himself, That is, he had changed his offensive
sentiments.
and hoped they would forgive him.

Then the Delaware delivered the message, that was sent by the Shawanese, which
was, "That they hoped the Delawares, etc. would be strong, That is, that they
would act vigorously.
in what they were undertaking; that they were extremely proud to hear such
good news from their brothers, the English; that whatever contracts they made
with the English, the Shawanese would agree to; that they were their brothers,
and that they loved them."

The French whispered to the Indians, as I imagined, to insist on my delivering
what I had to say, on the other side of the water. Which they did to no
purpose, for my company still insisted on a hearing on this side the water. The
Indians crossed the river to council with their Fathers. The French, at the
fort.
My company desired to know whether they would hear me or no. This afternoon
three hundred Canadians arrived at the fort, and reported that six hundred more
were soon to follow them, and forty battoes laden with ammunition. Some of my
party desired me not to stir from the fire; for that the French had offered a
great reward for my scalp, and that there were several parties out on that
purpose. Accordingly I stuck constantly as close to the fire, as if I had been
chained there.

-- 26th. The Indians, with a great many of the French officers, came over to
hear what I had to say. The officers brought with them a table, pens, ink and
paper. I spoke in the middle of them with a free conscience, and perceived by
the look of the French, they were not pleased with what I said; the particulars
of which were as follows; I spoke in the name of the government and people of
Pensilvania.

"Brethren at Allegheny, We have a long time desired to see and hear from you;
you know the road was quite stopped; and we did not know how to come through. We
have sent many messengers to you; but we did not hear of you; now we are very
glad we have found an opening to come and see you, and to speak with you, and
to hear your true mind and resolution. We salute you very heartily." A string,
No. 1.

"Brethren at Allegheny, Take notice of what I say. You know that the bad
spirit has brought something between us, that has kept us at a distance one
from another; I now, by this belt, take every thing out of the way, that the
bad spirit has brought between us, and all the jealousy and fearfulness we had
of one another, and whatever else the bad spirit might have poisoned your heart
and mind with, that nothing of it may be left. Moreover let us look up to God,
and beg for his assistance, that he may put into our hearts what pleases him,
and join us close in that brotherly love and friendship, which our grandfathers
had. We assure you of our love toward you." A belt of eleven rows.

"Brothers at Allegheny, Hearken to what I say; we began to hear of you from
Wellemeghihink, who returned from Allegheny. We heard you had but a slight
confused account of us; and did not know of the peace, we made twelve months
past, in Easton. It was then agreed, that the large belt of peace should be
sent to you at Allegheny. As these our two old friends from Allegheny, who are
well known to many here, found an opening to come to our council fire, to see
with their own eyes, to sit with us face to face, to hear with their own ears,
every thing that has been transacted between us; it gives me and all the people
of the province great pleasure to see them among us. And I assure all my
brethren at Allegheny, that nothing would please me, and all the people of the
province better, than to see our countrymen the Delawares well settled among
us." A belt.

"Hearken, my brethren at Allegheny. When we began to make peace with the
Delawares, twelve months ago, in behalf of ten other nations, we opened a road,
and cleared the bushes from the blood, and gathered all the bones, on both
sides, together; and when we had brought them together, in one heap, we could
find no place to bury them: we would not bury them as our grandfathers did.
They buried them under ground, where they may be found again. We prayed to God,
that he would have mercy on us, and take all these bones away from us, and hide
them, that they might never be found any more; and take from both sides all the
remembrance of them out of our heart and mind. And we have a firm confidence,
that God will be pleased to take all the bones and hide them from us, that they
may never be remembered by us, while we live, nor our children, nor grand
children, hereafter. The hatchet was buried on both sides, and large belts of
peace exchanged. Since we have cleared every thing from the heart, and taken
every thing out of the way; now, my brethren at Allegheny, every one that hears
me, if you will jo^^ with us, in that brotherly love and friendship, which our
grandfathers had, we assure you, that all past ^iences shall be forgotten, and
never more talked of by us, our children and grand children hereafter. This
belt assures you of our sincerity, and honest and upright heart toward you." A
belt of seven rows.

"Hearken, brethren at Allegheny. I have told you that we really made peace
with part of your nation, twelve months past; I now by this belt open the road
from Allegheny to our council fire, where your grandfathers kept good councils
with us, that all may pass without molestation or danger. You must be sensible,
that unless a road be kept open, people at variance can never together to make
up their differences. Messengers are free in all nations throughout the world,
by a particular token. Now, brethren at Allegheny, I desire you will join with
me in keeping the road open, and let us know in what manner we may come free to
you, and what the token shall be. I join both my hands to yours, and will do
all in my power to keep the road open." A belt of seven rows.

"Now, brethren at Allegheny, Hear what I say. Every one that lays hold of this
belt of peace, I proclaim peace to them from the English nation, and let you
know that the great king of England does not incline to have war with the
Indians; but he wants to live in peace and love with them, if they will lay
down the hatchet, and loave off war against him."

"We love you farther, we let you know that the great king of England has sent
a great number of warriors into this country, not to go to war against the
Indians, in their towns, no, not at all; these warriors are going against the
French; they are on the march to the Ohio, to revenge the blood they have shed.
And by this belt I take you by the hand, and lead you at a distance from the
French, for your own safety, that your legs may not be stained with blood. Come
away on this side of the mountain, where we may oftener converse together, and
where your own flesh and blood lives. We look upon you as our countrymen, that
sprung out of the same ground with us; we think, therefore, that it is our duty
to take care of you, and we in brotherly love advise you to come away with your
whole nation, and as many of your friends as you can get to follow you. We do
not come to hurt you, we love you, therefore we do not call you to war, that
you may be slain; what benefit will it be to you to go to war with your own
flesh and blood? We wish you may live without fear or danger with your women
and children." The large peace bel^.

"Brethren, I have almost finished what I had to say, and hope it will be to
your satisfaction; my wish is, that we may join close together in that old
broth^ (...) love and friendship, which our grandfathers had; so that all the
nations may hear and see us, and have the benefit of it; and if you have any
uneasiness, or complaint, in your heart and mind, do not keep it to yourself.
We have opened the road to the council fire, therefore, my brethren, come and
acquaint the Governor with it; you will be readily heard, and full justice will
be done you." A belt.

"Brethren, One thing I must bring to your remembrance. You know, if any body
loses a little child, or some body takes it from him, he cannot be easy, he
will think on his child by day and night; since our flesh and blood is in
captivity, in the Indian towns, we desire you will rejoice the country's heart,
and bring them to me; I shall stretch out my arms to receive you kindly." A
string.

After I had done, I left my belts and strings still before them. The Delawares
took them all up, and laid them before the Mingoes; The Six Nations.
upon which they rose up, and spoke as follows:

"Chau, What I have heard pleases me well; I do not know why I go to war
against the English. Noques, what do you think? You must be strong. I did not
begin the war, therefore, I have little to say; but whatever you agree to, I
will do the same." Then he addressed himself to the Shawanese, and said, "You
brought the hatchet to us from the French, and persuaded us to strike our
brothers the English; you may consider (laying the belts, etc. before them)
wherefore you have done this."

The Shawanese acknowledged they received the hatchet from the French, who
persuaded them to strike the English; that they would now send the belts to all
the Indians, and in twelve days would meet again.

Present at this council, three hundred French and Indians. They all took
leave, and went over again to the fort, but my companions, who were about
seventy in number.

Shamokin Daniel, who came with me, went over to the fort by himself, (which my
companions disapproved of) and counseled with the Governor; who presented him
with a laced coat and hat, a blanket, shirts, ribbons, a new gun, powder, lead,
etc. When he returned he was quite changed, and said, "See here, you fools,
what the French have given me. I was in Philadelphia, and never received a
farthing;" and, directing himself to me, he said, "The English are fools, and
so are you." In short, he behaved in a very proud, saucy and imperious manner.
He further said, "The English never give the Indians any powder, and that the
French would have given him a horseload, if he would have taken it; see that
young man there, he was in Philadelphia and never got on thing; I will take him
over to the French, and get some clothing for him."

Three Indians informed me, that as soon as the French got over, they called a
council, with their own Indians, among whom there happened accidentally to be a
Delaware captain, who was privately invited by one of his acquaintance to hear
what the French had to say; and when they were assembled, the French spoke, as
follows:

"My children, now we are alone, hearken to what I have to say. I perceive the
Delawares are wavering; they incline to the English, and will be faithful to us
no longer. Now all their chiefs are here, and but a handful, let us cut them
off, and then we shall be troubled with them no longer." Then the Tawaas
answered, "No, we cannot do this thing; for though there is but a handful here,
the Delawares are a strong people, and are spread to a great distance, and
whatever they agree to must be."

This afternoon, in council, on the other side of the river, the French
insisted that I must be delivered up to them, and that it was not lawful for me
to go away; which occasioned a quarrel between them and the Indians, who
immediately came away and crossed the river to me; and some of them let me know
that Daniel had received a string from the French, to leave me there; but it
was to no purpose, for they would not give their consent; and then agreed that
I should set off before day the next morning.

-- 27th. Accordingly I set out before day, with six Indians, and took another
road, that we might not be seen; the main body told me, they would stay behind,
to know whether the French would make an attempt to take me by force; that if
they did, they, the Indians, would endeavor to prevent their crossing the
river, and coming secretly upon me. Just as I set off the French fired all
their great guns, it being Sunday (I counted nineteen) and concluded they did
the same every Sabbath. We passed through three Shawanese towns; the Indians
appeared very proud to see me return, and we arrived about night at Sawcunk,
where they were likewise very glad to see me return. Here I met with the two
captains, who treated me so uncivilly before; they now received me very kindly,
and accepted of my hand, and apologized for their former rude behavior. Their
names are Kuckque^^^^^ and Killbuck. They said.

"Brother, we, in behalf of the people of Sawcunk, desire that you will hold
fast what you have begun, and be strong. That is, go on steadily with this good
work of establishing a peace.
We are but little and poor, and therefore cannot do much. You are rich, and
must go ou^ and be strong. We have done all in our power toward bringing about
a peace: we have had a great quarrel about you with the French; but we do not
mind them. Do you make haste, and be strong, and let us see you again." The
said Killbuck is a great captain and conjurer; he desired me to mention him to
the Governor, and ask him if he would be pleased to send him a good saddle by
the next messenger; and that he would do all in his power for the service of
the English.

-- 28th. We set out from Sawcunk, in company with twenty, for Kushkushkee; on
the road Shingas addressed himself to me, and asked, if I did not think, that,
if he came to the English, they would hang him, as they had offered a great
reward for his head. He spoke in a very soft and easy manner. I told him that
was a great while ago, it was all forgotten and wiped clean away; that the
English would receive him very kindly. Then Daniel interrupted me, and said to
Shingas, "Do not believe him, he tells nothing but idle lying stories.
Wherefore did the English hire one thousand two hundred Indians Meaning the
Cherokees.
to kill us." I protested it was false; he said, G -- d d -- n Some of the
first English speech, that the Indian^ learn from the traders, if swearing.
you for a fool; did you not see the woman lying in the road that was killed by
the Indians, that the English hired? I said, "Brother do consider how many
thousand Indians the French have hired to kill the English, and how many they
have killed along the frontiers." Then Daniel said, "D -- n you, why do not you
and the French sight on the sea? You come here only to cheat the poor Indians,
and take their land from them." Then Shingas told him to be still; for he did
not know what he said. We arrived at Kushkushkee before night, and I informed
Pisquetumen of Daniel's behavior, at which he appeared sorry.

-- 29th. I dined with Shingas; he told me, though the English had set a great
price on his head, he had never thought to revenge himself, but was always very
kind to any prisoners that were brought in; and that he assured the Governor,
he would do all in his power to bring about an established peace, and wished he
could be certain of the English being in earnest.

Then seven chiefs present said, when the Governor sends the next messenger,
let him send two or three white men, at least, to confirm the thing, and not
send such a man as Daniel; they did not understand him; he always speaks, said
they, as if he was drunk; and if a great many of them had not known me, they
should not know what to think; for every thing I said he contradicted. I
assured them I would faithfully inform the Governor of what they said, and they
should see, as messengers, other guise Indians than Daniel, for the time to
come; and I farther informed them, that he was not sent by the Governor, but
came on his own accord; and I would endeavor to prevent his coming again.
Daniel demanded of me his pay, and I gave him three dollars; and he took as
much wampum from me as he pleased, and would not suffer me to count it. I
imagined there was about two thousand.

About night, nine Tawaas past by here, in their way to the French Fort.

-- 30th and 31st. The Indians feasted greatly, during which time, I several
times begged of them to consider and dispatch me.

September 1st. Shingas, King Beaver, Delaware George, and Pisquetumen, with
several other captains said to me,

"Brother, We have thought a great deal since God has brought you to us; and
this is a matter of great consequence, which we cannot readily answer; we think
on it, and will answer you as soon as we can. Our feast hinders us; all our
young men, women and children are glad to see you; before you came, they all
agreed together to go and join the French; but since they have seen you, they
all draw back; though we have great reason to believe you intend to drive us
away, and settle the country; or else, why do you come to fight in the land
that God has given us?"

I said, we did not intend to take the land from them; but only to drive the
French away. They said, they knew better; for that they were informed so by our
greatest traders; and some Justices of the Peace had told them the same, and
the French, said they, tell us much the same thing, -- "that the English intend
to destroy us, and take our lands from us; but, that they are only come to
defend us and our lands;" but the land is ours, and not theirs; therefore, we
say, if you will be at peace with us, we will send the French home. It is you
that have begun the war, and it is necessary that you hold fast, and be not
discouraged, in the work of peace. We love you more than you love us; for when
we take any prisoners from you, we treat them as our own children. We are poor,
and yet we clothe them as well as we can, though you see our children are as
naked as at the first. By this you may see that our hearts are better than
yours. It is plain that you white people are the cause of this war; why do not
you and the French fight in the old country, and on the sea? Why do you come to
fight on our land? This makes every body believe, you want to take the land
from us by force, and settle it. The Indians, having plenty of land, are no
niggards of it. They sometimes give large tracts to their friends freely; and
when they sell it, they make most generous bargains But some fraudulent
purchases, in which they were grossly imposed on, and some violent intrusions,
imprudently and wickedly made without purchase, have rendered them jealous that
we intend finally to take all from them by force. We should endeavor to
recover our credit with them by fair purchases and honest payments; and then
there is no doubt but they will readily sell us, at reasonable rates, as much,
from time to time, as we can possibly have occasion for.


I told them, "Brothers, as for my part, I have not one foot of land, nor do I
desire to have any; and if I had any land, I had rather give it to you, than
take any from you. Yes, brothers, if I die, you will get a little more land
from me; for I shall then no longer walk on that ground, which God has made. We
told you that you should keep nothing in your heart, but bring it before the
council fire, and before the Governor, and his council; they will readily hear
you; and I promise you, what they answer they will stand to. I further read to
you what agreements they made about Wioming, The agreement made with
Teedyuscung, that he should enjoy the Wioming lands, and have houses built
there for him and his people.
and they stand to them."

They said, "Brother, your heart is good, you speak always sincerely; but we
know there are always a great number of people that want to get rich; they
never have enough: look, we do not want to be rich, and take away that which
others have. God has given you the tame creatures; we do not want to take them
from you, God has given to us the deer, and other wild creatures, which we must
feed on; and we rejoice in that which springs out of the ground, and thank God
for it. Look now, my brother, the white people think we have no brains in our
heads; but that they are great and big, and that makes them make war with us:
we are but a little handful to what you are; but remember, when you look for a
wild turkey you cannot always find it, it is so little it hides itself under
the bushes: and when you hunt for a rattlesnake, you cannot find it; and
perhaps it will bite you before you see it. However, since you are so great and
big, and we so little, do you use your greatness and strength in completing
this work of peace. This is the first time that we saw or heard of you, since
the war begun, and we have great reason to think about it, since such a great
body of you comes into our lands The army under General Forbes.
. It is told us, that you and the French contrived the war, to waste the
Indians between you; and that you and the French intended to divide the land
between you: this was told us by the chief of the Indian traders; and they said
further, brothers, this is the last time we shall come among you; for the
French and English intend to kill all the Indians, and then divide the land
among themselves.

Then they addressed themselves to me, and said, "Brother, I suppose you know
something about it; or has the Governor stopped your mouth, that you cannot
tell us?"

Then I said, "Brothers, I am very sorry to see you so jealous. I am your own
flesh and blood, and sooner than I would tell you any story that would be of
hurt to you, or your children, I would suffer death: and if I did not know that
it was the desire of the Governor, that we should renew our old brotherly love
and friendship, that subsisted between our grandfathers, I would not have
undertaken this journey. I do assure you of mine and the people's honesty. If
the French had not been here, the English would not have come; and consider,
brothers, whether, in such a case, we can always sit still."

Then they said, "It is a thousand pities we did not know this sooner; if we
had, it would have been peace long before now."

Then I said, "My brothers, I know you have been wrongly persuaded by many
wicked people; for you must know, that there are a great many Papists in the
country, in French interest, who appear like gentlemen, and have sent many
runaway Irish papist servants The Indian land is used to buy the transported
Irish, and other convicts, as servants, to be employed in carrying up the goods
among the Indians: many of those ran ^way from their masters* and joined the
Indians. The ill behavior of these people has always hurt the character o^ the
English among the Indians.
among you, who have put bad notions into your heads, and strengthened you
against your brothers the English.

"Brothers, I beg that you would not believe every idle and false story, that
ill-designing people may bring to you against us your brothers. Let us not
hearken to what lying and foolish people may bring to you, against us your
brothers. Let us not hearken to what lying and foolish people say, but let us
hear what wise and good people say; they will tell us what is good for us and
our children."

Mem. There are a great number of Irish traders now among the Indians, who have
always endeavored to spirit up the Indians against the English; which made
some, that I was acquainted with from their infancy, desire the chiefs to
enquire of me, for that they were certain I would speak the truth.

Pisquetumen now told me, we could not go to the General, that it was very
dangerous, the French having sent out several scouts to wait for me on the
road. And further, Pisquetumen told me, it was a pity the Governor had no ear
No spy among his enemies.
, to bring him intelligence; that the French had three ears, whom they rewarded
with great presents; and signified, that he and Shingas would be ears, at the
service of his honor, if he pleased.

-- 2d. I bade Shingas to make haste and dispatch me, and once more desired to
know of them, if it was possible for them to guide me to the General. Of all
which they told me they would consider; and Shingas gave me his hand, and said,
"Brother, the next time you come, I will return with you to Philadelphia, and
will do all in my power to prevent any body's coming to hurt the English more."

-- 3d. Today I found myself unwell, and made a little tea, which refreshed
me: had many very pretty discourses with George. In the afternoon they called a
council together, and gave me the following answer in council; the speaker
addressing the Governor and people of Pennsylvania:

"Brethren, It is a great many days since we have seen and heard you. That is,
since we had a friendly intercourse with each other. The frequent repetition of
the word, Brethren, is the effect of their rules of politeness, which enjoin,
in all conversations, a constant remembrance of the relation subsisting between
the parties, especially where that relation implies any affection, or respect.
It is like the perpetual repetitions among us, of Sir, or, Madam, or, Your
Lordship. In the same manner the Indians at every sentence repeat, My Father,
My Uncle, My Cousin, My Brother, My Friend, etc.
I now speak to you in behalf of all the nations, that have heard you
heretofore.

"Brethren, it is the first message which we have seen or heard from you.
Brethren, you have talked of that peace and friendship which we had formerly
with you. Brethren, we tell you to be strong, and always remember that
friendship, which we had formerly. Brethren, we desire you would be strong, and
let us once more hear of our good friendship and peace, we had formerly.
Brethren, we desire that you make haste, and let us hear of you again; for, as
yet, we have not heard you rightly.

Gives a string.

"Brethren, near what I have to say: look, brethren, we, who have now seen and
heard you, we, who are present, are part of all the several nations, that heard
you some days ago; we see that you are sorry we have not that friendship, we
formerly had.

"Look, brethren, we at Allegheny are likewise sorry, we have not that
friendship with you, which we formerly had. Brethren, we long for that peace
and friendship we had formerly. Brethren, it is good that you desire that
friendship, that was formerly among our fathers and grandfathers. Brethren, we
will tell you, you must not let that friendship be quite lost, which was
formerly between us.

"Now, brethren, it is three years since we dropped that peace and friendship,
which we formerly had with you. Brethren, it was dropped, and lay buried in the
ground, where you and I stand, in the middle between us both. Brethren, I see
you have dug up, and revived, that friendship, which was buried in the
ground; and now you have it, hold it fast. Do be strong, brethren, and exert
yourselves, that that friendship may be well established and finished between
us. Brethren, if you will be strong, it is in your power to finish that peace
and friendship well. Therefore, brethren, we desire you to be strong and
establish it, and make known to all the English this peace and friendship, that
it may embrace all and cover all. As you are of one nation and color, in all
the English governments, so let the peace be the same with all. Brethren, when
you have finished this peace, which you have begun; when it is known every
where amongst your brethren, and you have every where agreed together on this
peace and friendship, then you will be pleased to send the great peace belt to
us at Allegheny.

"Brethren, when you have settled this peace and friendship, and finished it
well, and you send the great peace-belt to me, I will send it to all the
nations of my color, they will all join to it, and we all will hold it fast.

"Brethren, when all the nations join to this friendship, then the day will
begin to shine clear over us. When we hear once more of you, and we join
together, then the day will be still, and no wind, or storm, will come over us,
to disturb us.

"Now, brethren, you know our hearts, and what we have to say; be strong; if
you do what we have now told you, and in this peace all the nations agree to
join. Now, brethren, let the king of England know what our mind is as soon as
possibly you can." In this speech the Indians carefully guard the honor of
their nation, by frequently intimating, that the peace is sought by the
English: you have talked of peace: you are sorry for the war: you have dug
up the peace, that was buried, etc. Then they declare their readiness to grant
peace, if the English agree to its being general, for all the colonies. The
Indian word, that is translated, be strong, so often repeated, is an expression
they use to spirit up persons, who have undertaken some difficult task, as to
lift, or move, a great weight, or execute a difficult enterprise; nearly
equivalent to our word, courage! courage!
Gives a belt of eight rows.

I received the above speech and belt from the underwritten, who are all
captains and counselors.

BEAVER, KING, DELAWARE GEORGE, PISQUETUMEN, TASUCAMIN, AWAKANOMIN,
CUSHAWMEKWY, KEYHEYNAPALIN, CAPTAIN PETER, MACOMAL, POPAUCE, WASHAOCAUTAUT,
COCHQUACAUKEHLTON, JOHN HICKOMEN, and KILL BUCK.
Delaware George spoke as follows:

"Look, brothers, we are here of three different nations. I am of the Unami
nation: I have heard all the speeches that you have made to us with the many
other nations.

"Brothers, you did let us know, that every one that takes hold of this
peace-belt, ^ou would take them by the hand, and lead them to the council fire,
where our grandfathers kept good councils. So soon as I heard this, I took hold
of it.

"Brother, I now let you know that my heart never was parted from you. I am
sorry that I should make friendship with the French against the English. I now
assure you my heart sticks close to the English interest. One of our great
captains, when he heard it, immediately took hold of it as well as myself. Now,
Brother, I let you know that you shall soon see me by your council fire, and
then I shall hear from you myself, the plain truth, in every respect.

"I love that which is good, like as our grandfathers did: they chose to speak
the sentiments of their mind: all the Five Nations know me, and know that I
always spoke truth; and so you shall find, when I come to your council fire."
Gives a string.

The above Delaware George had in company with him, CUSHAWMEKWY, KEHKEHNOPATIN,
CAPTAIN PETER, JOHN PETER, STINFEOR.


-- 4th. Present, Shingas, King Beaver, Pisquetumen, and several others. I
asked what they meant by saying, "They had not rightly heard me yet." They said,

"Brother, you very well know that you have collected all your young men about
the country, which makes a large body; Meaning General Forbes's army.
and now they are standing before our doors; I, E. Just ready to enter our
country.
you come with good news, and fine speeches. Brother, this is what makes us
jealous, and we do not know what to think of it: if you had brought the news of
peace before your army had begun to march, it would have caused a great deal
more good. We do not so readily believe you, because a great many great men and
traders have told us, long before the war, that you and the French intended to
join and cut all the Indians off. These were people of your own color, and
your own countrymen; and some told us to join the French; for that they would
be our fathers: besides, many runaways have told us the same story; and some we
took prisoners told us how you would use us, if you caught us: therefore,
brother, I say, we cannot conclude, at this time, but must see and hear you
once more." And further they said,

"Now, brother, you are here with us, you are our flesh and blood, speak from
the bottom of your heart, will not the French and English join together to cut
off the Indians? Speak, brother, from your heart, and tell us the truth, and
let us know who were the beginners of the war."

Then I delivered myself thus:

"Brothers, I love you from the bottom of my heart. I am extremely sorry to see
the jealousy so deeply rooted in your hearts and minds. I have told you the
truth; and yet, if I was to tell it you a hundred times, it seems you would not
rightly believe me. My Indian brothers, I wish you would draw your hearts to
God, that he may convince you of the truth.

"I do now declare, before God, that the English never did, nor never will,
join with the French to destroy you. As far as I know, the French are the
beginners of this war. Brothers, about twelve years ago, you may remember, they
had war with the English, and they both agreed to articles of peace. The
English gave up C^p^ Breton in Acadia, but the French never gave up the part of
that country, which they had agreed to give up; and, in a very little time,
made their Children strike the English. This was the first cause of the war.
Now, brothers; if any body strike you three times, one after another, you still
sit still and consider: they strike you again, then, my brothers, you say, it
is time, and you will rise up to defend yourselves. Now, my brothers, this is
exactly the case between the French and English. Consider farther, my brothers,
what a great number of our poor back inhabitants have been killed since the
French came to the Ohio. The French are the cause of their death, and if they
were not there, the English would not trouble themselves to go there. They go
no where to war, but where the French are. Those wicked people that set you at
variance with the English, by telling you many wicked stories, are papists in
French pay: besides, there are many among us, in the French service, who appear
like gentlemen, and buy Irish papist servants, and promise them great rewards
to run away to you and strengthen you against the English, by making them
appear as black as devils."

This day arrived here two hundred French and Indians, on their way to fort
Duquesne. They staid all night. In the middle of the night king Beaver's
daughter died, on which a great many guns were fired in the town.

-- 5th. It made a general stop in my journey. The French said to their
Children, they should catch me privately, or get my scalp. The commander wanted
to examine me, as he was going to fort Duquesne. When they told me of it, I
said, as he was going to fort Duquesne, he might enquire about me there: I had
nothing at all to say, or do with the French: they would tell them every
particular they wanted to know in the fort. They all came into the house where
I was, as if they would see a new creature.

In the afternoon there came six Indians, and brought three German prisoners,
and two scalps of the Catabaws.

As Daniel blamed the English, that they never paid him for his trouble, I
asked him whether he was pleased with what I paid him. He said, no. I said,
"Brother, you took as much as you pleased." I asked you, whether you was
satisfied; you said, yes. I told him, I was ashamed to hear him blame the
country so. I bid him, "You shall have for this journey whatever you desire,
when I reach the inhabitants."

-- 6th. Pisquetumen, Tom Hickman and Shingas told me,

"Brother, it is good that you have stayed so long with us; we love to see you,
and wish to see you here longer; but since you are so desirous to go, you may
set off to morrow: Pisquetumen has brought you here, and he may carry you home
again: you have seen us, and we have talked a great deal together, which we
have not done for a long time before. Now, Brother, we love you, but cannot
help wondering why the English and French do not make up with one another, and
tell one another not to fight on our land."

I told them, "Brother, if the English told the French so a thousand times,
they never would go away. Brother, you know so long as the world has stood
there has not been such a war. You know when the French lived on the other
side, the war was there, and here we lived in peace. Consider how many thousand
men are killed, and how many houses are burned since the French lived here; if
they had not been here it would not have been so; you know we do not blame you;
we blame the French; they are the cause of this war; therefore, we do not come
to hurt you, but to chastise the French."

They told me, that at the great council, held at Onondago, among the Five
Nations, before the war began ( Conrad Weiser was there, and wrote every thing
down) it was said to the Indians at the Ohio, that they should let the French
alone there, and leave it entirely to the Five Nations; the Five Nations would
know what to do with them. Yet soon after two hundred French and Indians came
and built Fort Duquesne.

King Beaver and Shingas spoke to Pisquetumen,

"Brother, you told us that the Governor of Philadelphia and Teedyuscung took
this man out of their bosoms, and put him into your bosom, that you should
bring him here; and you have brought him here to us; and we have seen and heard
him; and now we give him into your bosom, to bring him to the same place again,
before the Governor; but do not let him quite loose; we shall rejoice when we
shall see him here again." They desired me to speak to the Governor, in their
behalf, as follows:

"Brother, we beg you to remember our oldest brother, Pisquetumen, and furnish
him with good clothes, and reward him well for his trouble; for we all shall
look upon him when he comes back."

-- 7th. When we were ready to go, they began to council which course we should
go, to be safest; and then they hunted for the horses, but could not find them;
and so we lost that days journey.

It is a troublesome cross and heavy yoke to draw this people: They can punish
and squeeze a body's heart to the utmost. I suspect the reason they kept me
here so long was by instigation of the French. I remember somebody told me, the
French told them to keep me twelve days longer, for that they were afraid I
should get back too soon, and give information to the general. My heart has
been very heavy here, because they kept me for no purpose. The Lord knows how
they have been counselling about my life; but they did not know who was my
protector and deliverer: I believe my Lord has been too strong against them; my
enemies have done what lies in their power.

-- 8th. We prepared for our journey on the morning, and made ourselves ready.
There came some together and examined me what I had wrote yesterday. I told
them, I wondered what need they had to concern themselves about my writing.
They said, if they knew I had wrote about the prisoners, they would not let me
go out of the town. I told them what I writ was my duty to do. "Brothers, I
tell you, I am not afraid of you, if there were a thousand more. I have a good
conscience before God and man. I tell you I have wrote nothing about the
prisoners. I tell you, Brothers, this is not good; there is a bad spirit in your
heart, which breeds that jealousy; and it will keep you ever in fear, that you
will never get rest. I beg you would pray to God, for grace to resist that
wicked spirit, that breeds such wicked jealousies in you; which is the reason
you have kept me here so long. How often have I begged of you to dispatch me? I
am ashamed to see you so jealous; I am not, in the least, afraid of you. Have I
not brought writings to you? and what, do you think I must not carry some home,
to the Governor? or, shall I shut my mouth, and say nothing? Look into your own
hearts, and see if it would be right or wrong, if any body gives a salutation
to their friends, and it is not returned in the same way. You told me many
times how kind you were to the prisoners, and now you are afraid that any of
them should speak to me."

They told me, they had cause to be afraid; and then made a draught, and showed
me how they were surrounded with war. Then I told them, if they would be quiet,
and keep at a distance, they need not fear. Then they went away, very much
ashamed, one after another. I told my men, that we must make haste and go; and
accordingly we set off, in the afternoon, from Kushkushkee, and came ten miles.

-- 9th. We took a little foot-path hardly to be seen. We lost it, and went
through thick bushes, till we came to a mire, which we did not see, till we
were in it; and Tom Hickman fell in, and almost broke his leg. We had hard work
before we could get the horse out again. The Lord helped me, that I got safe
from my horse. I and Pisquetumen had enough to do to come through. We passed
many such places: it rained all day; and we got a double portion of it, because
we received all that hung on the bushes. We were as wet as if we were swimming
all the day; and at night we laid ourselves down in a swampy place to sleep,
where we had nothing but the heavens for our covering.

-- 10th. We had but little to live on. Tom Hickman shot a deer on the road.
Every thing here, upon the Ohio, is extremely dear, much more so than in
Pennsylvania: I gave for one dish of corn four hundred and sixty wampum. They
told me that the Governor of fort Duquesne kept a store of his own, and that
all the Indians must come and buy the goods of him; and when they come and buy,
he tells them, if they will go to war, they shall have as much goods as they
please. Before I set off, I heard further, that a French captain who goes to
all the Indian towns He was sent to collect the Indians together, to attack
General Forbes's army, once more, on their march.
came to Sacunck, and said, "Children, will you not come and help your father
against the English?" They answered, "Why should we go to war against our
brethren? They are now our friends." "O! Children," said he, "I hope you do not
own them for friends." "Yes," said they, "We do; we are their friends, and we
hope they will remain ours." "O! Children, said he, you must not believe what
you have heard, and what has been told you by that man." They said to him,
"Yes, we do believe him more than we do you: it was you that set us against
them; and we will by and by have peace with them:" and then he spoke not a word
more, but returned to the fort. So, I hope, some good is done: praised be the
name of the Lord.

-- 11th. Being Monday, we went over Antigoc: we went down a very steep hill,
and our horses slipped so far, that I expected, every moment, they would fall
heels over head. We found fresh Indian tracts on the other side of the river.
We crossed Allegheny river, and went through the bushes upon a high hill, and
slept upon the side of the mountain, without fire, for fear of the enemy. It
was a cold night, and I had but a thin blanket to cover myself.

-- 12th. We made a little fire, to warm ourselves in the morning. Our horses
began to be weary with climbing up and down these steep mountains. We came this
night to the top of a mountain, where we found a log-house. Here we made a
small fire, just to boil ourselves a little victuals. The Indians were very
much afraid, and lay with their guns and tomhocks on all night. They heard
somebody run and whisper in the night. I slept very sound, and in the morning
they asked me, if I was not afraid the enemy Indians would kill me. I said,
"No, I am not afraid of the Indians, nor the devil himself: I fear my great
Creator, God." "Aye, they said, you know you will go to a good place when you
die, but we do not know that: that makes us afraid."

-- 13th. In the afternoon we twice crossed Chowatin, and came to
Ponchestanning, an old deserted Indian town, that lies on the same creek. We
went through a bad swamp, where were very thick sharp thorns, so that they tore
our clothes and flesh, both hands and face, to a bad degree. We had this kind
of road all the day. In the evening we made a fire, and then they heard
something rush, in the bushes, as though they heard somebody walk. Then we went
about three gunshot from our fire, and could not find a place to lie down on,
for the innumerable rocks; so that we were obliged to get small stones to fill
up the hollow places in the rocks, for our bed; but it was very uneasy; almost
shirt and skin grew together. They kept watch one after another all night.

-- 14th. In the morning, I asked them what made them afraid. They said, I knew
nothing; the French had set a great price on my head; and they knew there was
gone out a great scout to lie in wait for me. We went over great mountains and
a very bad road.

-- 15th. We came to Susquehanna, and crossed it six times, and came to
Catawaweshink, where had been an old Indian town. In the evening there came
three Indians, and said they saw two Indian tracks, which came to the place
where we slept, and turned back, as if to give information of us to a party; so
that we were sure they followed us.

-- 16th and 17th. We crossed the mountain.

-- 18th. Came to the Big Island, where having nothing to live on, we were
obliged to stay to hunt.

-- 19th. We met 20 warriors, who were returning from the inhabitants, with
five prisoners and one scalp; six of them were Delawares, the rest Mingoes. We
sat down all in one ring together. I informed them where I had been, and what
was done; they asked me to go back a little, and so I did, and slept all night
with them. I informed them of the particulars of the peace proposed; they said,
"If they had known so much before, they would not have gone to war. Be strong;
if you make a good peace, then we will bring all the prisoners back again."
They killed two deer, and gave me one.

-- 20th. We took leave of each other, and went on our journey, and arrived the
22d at fort Augusta, in the afternoon, very weary and hungry; but greatly
rejoiced of our return from this tedious journey.

There is not a prouder, or more high minded people, in themselves, than the
Indians. They think themselves the wisest and prudentest men in the world; and
that they can overpower both the French and English when they please. The
white people are, in their eyes, nothing at all. They say, that through their
conjuring craft they can do what they please, and nothing can withstand them.
In their way of sighting they have this method, to see that they first shoot
the officers and commanders; and then, they say, we shall be sure to have them.
They also say, that if their conjurers run through the middle of our people, no
bullet can hurt them. They say too, that when they have shot the commanders,
the soldiers will all be confused, and will not know what to do. They say of
themselves, that every one of them is like a king and captain, and fights for
himself. By this way they imagine they can overthrow any body of men, that may
come against them. They say, "The English people are fools; they hold their
guns half man high, and then let them snap; we take sight and have them at a
shot, and so do the French; they do not only shoot with a bullet, but big swan
shot." They say, the French load with a bullet and six swan-shot. They further
say, "We take care to have the first shot at our enemies, and then they are
half dead before they begin to fight."

The Indians are a people full of jealousy, and will not easily trust any body;
and they are very easily affronted, and brought into jealousy; then afterward
they will have nothing at all to do with those they suspect; and it is not
brought so easy out of their minds; they keep it to their graves, and leave the
seed of it in their children and grand children's minds; so, if they can, they
will revenge themselves for every imagined injury. They are a very distrustful
people. Through their imagination and reason they think themselves a thousand
times stronger than all all other people. Fort du Quesne is said to be
undermined. The French have given out, that, if we overpower them, and they
should die, we should certainly all die with them. When I came to the fort, the
garrison, it was said, consisted of about one thousand four hundred men; and I
am told they will now be full three thousand French and Indians, They are
almost all Canadians, and will certainly meet the general before he comes to
the fort, in an ambush. You may depend upon it the French will make no open
field-battle, as in the old country, but lie in ambush. The Canadians are all
hunters. The Indians have agreed to draw back; but how far we may give credit
to their promises the Lord knows. It is the best way to be on our guard against
them, as if they really could with one thousand overpower eight thousand.

Thirty-two nights I lay in the woods; the heavens were any covering. The dew
came so hard sometimes, that it pinched close to the skin. There was nothing
that laid so heavy on my heart, as the man that went along with me. He thwarted
me in every thing I said or did; not that he did it against me, but against the
country, on whose business I was sent; I was afraid he would overthrow what I
went about. When he was with the English he would speak against the French, and
when with the French against the English. The Indians observed that he was a
false fellow, and desired me, that I would not bring him any more, to transact
any business between the English and them; and told me, it was through his
means I could not have the liberty to talk with the prisoners.

Praise and glory be to the Lamb, that has been slain, and brought me through
the country of dreadful jealousy and mistrust, where the prince of this world
has his rule and government over the children of disobedience.

The Lord has preserved me through all the dangers and difficulties, that I
have ever been under. He directed me according to his will, by his holy spirit.
I had no one to converse with but him. He brought me under a thick, heavy, and
dark cloud, into the open air; for which I adore, praise and worship the Lord
my God, that I know has grasped me in his hands, and has forgiven me for all
sins, and sent and washed my heart with his most precious blood; that I now
live not for myself, but for him that made me; and to do his holy will is my
pleasure. I own that, in the children of light, there dwells another kind of
spirit, than there does in the children of this world; therefore, these two
spirits cannot rightly agree in fellowship.

CHRISTIAN FREDERICK POST.

No. IX.
The second journal of Christian Frederick Post, on a message from the Governor
of Pennsylvania, to the Indians on the Ohio, in the latter part of the same
year:

Containing his further negotiation with these people, to accomplish the design
of his former journey, and procure a peace with them; in which he met with
fresh difficulties and dangers, occasioned by the French influence, etc.

But the Indians, being acquainted with his honest simplicity, and calling to
mind their former friendship with the inhabitants of Pennsylvania, so far paid
a regard to his sincerity, as to listen to the terms proposed; and in
consequence thereof the French were obliged to abandon the whole Ohio country
to General Forbes, after destroying with their own hands their strong fort of
Duquesne.

October 25th, 1758. HAVING received the orders of the honorable Governor
Denny, I set out from Easton to Bethlehem, and arrived there about three
o'clock in the afternoon; I was employed most of the night, in preparing myself
with necessaries, etc. for the journey.

-- 26th. Rose early, but my horse being lame, though I traveled all the day,
I could not, till after night, reach to an inn, about ten miles from Reading.

-- 27th. I set out early, and about seven o'clock in the morning came to
Reading, and there found Captain Bull, Mr. Hays, and the Indians just mounted,
and ready to set out on their journey; they were heartily glad to see me;
Pisquetomen stretched out his arms, and said, "Now, Brother, I am glad I have
got you in my arms, I will not let you go, I will not let your go again from
me, you must go with me:" and I likewise said the same to him, and told him, "I
will accompany you, if you will go the same way as I must go." And then I
called them together, in Mr. Weiser's house, and read a letter to them, which I
had received from the Governor, which is as follows, viz.

To Pisquetomen and Thomas Hickman, to Totiniontonna and Shickalamy, and to
Isaac Still.
Brethen, Mr. Frederick Post is come express from the general, who sends his
compliments to you, and desires you would come by the way of his camp, and give
him an opportunity of talking with you.

By this string of wampum I request of you to alter your intended rout by way
of Shamokin, and to go to the general, who will give you a kind reception. It
is a nigher way, in which you will be better supplied with provisions, and can
travel with less fatigue and more safety.

WILLIAM DENNY.
Easton, October 23d. 1758.

To which I added, "Brethren, I take you by this string, A string of wampum
beads. Nothing of importance is said, or proposed without wampum.
by the hand, and lift you from this place, and lead you along to the general."

After which they consulted among themselves, and soon resolved to go with me.
We shook hands with each other, and Mr. Hays immediately set out with them;
after which, having with some difficulty procured a fresh horse, in the king's
service, I set off about noon with captain Bull; and when we came to Conrad
Weiser's plantation, we found Pisquetomen lying on the ground very drunk, The
Indians, having learned drunkenness of the white people, do not reckon it among
the vices. They all, without exception, and without shame, practice it when
they can get strong liquor. It does not, among (...) hurt the character of the
greatest warrior, the greatest counsell^^, or the modestest m^^ron. It is not
so much an offense, as an excuse for other offenses: the injuries they (...)
each other in their drink being charged, not upon the man, but upon the rum.
which obliged us to stay there all night; the other Indians were gone eight
miles farther on their journey.

-- 28th. We rose early, and I spoke to Pisquetomen a great deal; he was very
sick, and could hardly stir; when we overtook the rest, we found them in the
same condition; and they seemed discouraged, from going the way to the general;
and wanted to go through the woods. I told them, I was sorry to see them
wavering, and reminded them, that when I went to their towns, I was not sent to
the French, but when your old men insisted on my going to them, I followed
their advice, and went; and as the general is, in the king's name, over the
provinces, in matters of war and peace, and the Indians, at Allegheny The Ohio.
, want to know, whether all the English governments will join in the peace with
them; the way to obtain full satisfaction is to go to him, and there you will
receive another great belt to carry home; which I desire you seriously to take
into consideration. They then resolved to go to Harris's ferry, and consider
about it as they went; -- we arrived there late in the night.

-- 29th. In the morning, the two Cayugas being most desirous of going through
the woods, the others continued irresolute They were afraid of going where our
people were all in arms, lest some of the indiscreet soldiers might kill them.
; upon which I told them, "I wish you would go with good courage, and with
hearty resolution," and repeated what I had said to them yesterday, and
reminded them, as they were messengers, they should consider what would be the
best for their whole nation; "consult among yourselves, and let me know your
true mind and determination;" and I informed them, I could not go with them,
unless they would go to the general, as I had messages to deliver him. After
which, having consulted together, Pesquitomen came and gave me his hand, and
said, "Brother, here is my hand, we have all joined to go with you, and we put
ourselves under your protection to bring us safe through, and to secure us from
all danger." We came that night to Garlisle and found a small house without the
fort, for the Indians to be by themselves, and hired a woman to dress their
victuals, which pleased them well.

-- 30th. Setting out early, we came to Shippensburg, and were lodged in the
fort, where the Indians had a house to themselves.

-- 31st. Set out early; in our passing by Chambers Fort, some of the Irish
people, knowing some of the Indians, in a rash manner exclaimed against them,
and we had some difficulty to get them off clear. At fort London we met about
sixteen of the Cherokees, who came in a friendly manner to our Indians,
enquiring for Bill Sockum, and showed the pipe A calumet pipe; the signal of
peace.
they had received from the Shawanese, and gave it, according to their custom,
to smoke out of, and said, they hoped they were friends of the English. They
knew me. Pesquitomen begged me to give him some wampum, that he might speak to
them: I gave him 400 white wampum, and he then said to them: -- "We formerly
had friendship one with another; we are only messengers, and cannot say much,
but by these strings we let you know we are friends, and we are about settling
a peace with the English, and wish to be at peace also with you, and all other
Indians." -- And informed them further, they came from a treaty, which was held
at Easton, between the Eight United Nations, and their confederates, and the
English; in which peace was established; and showed them the two messengers
from the Five Nations, who were going, with them, to make it known to all the
Indians to the westward. Then the Cherokees answered and said; "they should be
glad to know how far the friendship was to reach; they, for themselves, wished
it might reach from the sunrise to the sunset; for, as they were in
friendship with the English, they would be at peace with all their friends, and
at war with their enemies."

Nov. 1. We reached fort Littleton, in company with the Cherokees, and were
lodged, in the fort; they, and our Indians, in distinct places; and they
entertained each other with stories of their warlike adventures.

-- 2d. Pesquitomen said to me, "you have led us this way, through the fire; if
any mischief should befall us, we shall lay it entirely to you; for we think it
was your doing, to bring us this way; you should have told us at Easton, if it
was necessary we should go to the general."

I told him, "that I had informed the great men, at Easton, that I then thought
it would be best not to let them go from thence, till they had seen the
general's letter; and assured them that it was agreeable to the general's
pleasure."

-- 3d. Pesquitomen began to argue with captain Bull and Mr. Hays, upon the
same subject, as they did with me, when I went to them with my first message;
which was, "that they should tell them, whether the general would claim the
land as his own, when he should drive the French away? or, whether the English
thought to settle the country? We are always jealous the English will take the
land from us. Look, brother, what makes you come with such a large body of men,
and make such large roads into our country; we could drive away the French
ourselves, without your coming into our country."

Then I desired captain Bull and Mr. Hays to be careful how they argued with
the Indians; and be sure to say nothing, that might affront them; for it may
prove to our disadvantage, when we come amongst them. This day we came to
Rays-town, and with much difficulty got a place to lodge the Indians by
themselves, to their satisfaction.

-- 4th. We intended to set out, but our Indians told us, the Cherokees had
desired them to stay that day, as they intended to hold a council; and they
desired us to read over to them the governor's message; which we accordingly
did. Pesquitomen, finding Jenny Frazer there, who had been their prisoner, and
escaped, spoke to her a little rashly. Our Indians, waiting all the day, and
the Cherokees not sending to them, were displeased.

-- 5th. Rose early, and, it raining smartly, we asked our Indians, if they
would go; which they took time to consult about.

The Cherokees came and told them, the English had killed about thirty of their
people, for taking some horses; which they resented much; and told our Indians
they had better go home, than go any farther with us, lest they should meet
with the same. On hearing this, I told them how I had heard it happened; upon
which our Indians said, they had behaved like fools, and brought the mischief
on themselves.

Pesquitomen, before we went from hence, made it up with Jenny Frazer, and they
parted good friends; and though it rained hard, we set out at 10 o'clock, and
got to the foot of the Alleghenny, and lodged at the first run of water.

-- 6th. One of our horses went back; we hunted a good while for him. Then we
set off, and found one of the worst roads that ever was traveled until Stoney
creek. Upon the road we overtook a great number of pack horses; whereon
Pesquitomen said, "Brother, now you see, if you had not come to us before, this
road would not be so safe as it is; now you see, we could have destroyed all
this people on the road, and great mischief would have been done, if you had
not stopped, and drawn our people back." -- We were informed that the general was
not yet gone to fort Duquesne, wherefore Pesquitomen said, he was glad, and
expressed, "If I can come to our towns before the general begins the attack, I
know our people will draw back, and leave the French." -- We lodged this night
at Stoney creek.

-- 7th. We arose early, and made all the haste we could on our journey; we
crossed the large creek, Rehempalin, near Laurel hill. Upon this hill we
overtook the artillery; and came, before sun set, to Loyal Hanning. We were
gladly received in the camp by the general, and most of the people. We made our
fire near the other Indian camps; which pleased our people. Soon after some of
the officers came, and spoke very rashly to our Indians, in respect to their
conduct to our people; at which they were much displeased, and answered as
rashly, and said, "they did not understand such usage; for they were come upon
a message of peace; if we had a mind to war, they knew how to help themselves;
and that they were not afraid of us."

-- 8th. At eleven o'clock the general called the Indians together, the
Cherokees and Catawbas being present; he spoke to them in a kind and loving
manner, and bid them heartily welcome to his camp, and expressed his joy to see
them, and desired them to give his compliments to all their kings and captains:
-- He desired them that had any love for the English nation, to withdraw from
the French; for if he should find them among the French, he must treat them as
enemies, as he should advance with a large army very soon, and cannot wait
longer on account of the winter season. After that he drank the king's health,
and all that wish well to the English nation; then he drank king Beaver's,
Shingas', and all the warrior's healths, and recommended us (the messengers) to
their care; and desired them to give credit to what we should say. After that
we went to another house with the general alone; and he showed them the belt,
and said, he would furnish them with a writing, for both the belt and string;
and after a little discourse more, our Indians parted in love, and well
satisfied. And we made all necessary preparation for our journey.

-- 9th. Some of the colonels and chief commanders wondered how I came through
so many difficulties, and how I could rule and bring these people to reason,
making no use of gun or sword. I told them, it is done by no other means than
by faith. Then they asked me, if I had faith to venture myself to come safe
through with my companions. I told them, it was in my heart to pray for them,
"you know that the Lord has given many promises to his servants, and what he
promises, you may depend upon, he will perform." -- Then they wished us good
success. We waited till almost noon for the writing of the general. We were
escorted by an hundred men, rank and file, commanded by captain Haselet; we
passed through a tract of good land, about six miles on the old trading path,
and came to the creek again, where there is a large fine bottom, well timbered;
from thence we came upon a hill, to an advanced breast work, about ten miles
from the camp, well situated for strength, facing a small branch of the
aforesaid creek; the hill is steep down, perpendicular about twenty feet, on
the south side; which is a great defense; and on the west side the breast-work
about seven feet high, where we encamped that night: Our Indian companions
heard that we were to part in the morning, and that twelve men were to be sent
with us, and the others, part of the company, to go toward fort Duquesne. Our
Indians desired that the captain would send twenty men, instead of twelve; that
if any accident should happen, they could be more able to defend themselves in
returning back; "for we know, say they, the enemy will follow the smallest
party." It began to rain. Within five miles from the breast-work we departed
from captain Haselet; he kept the old trading path to the Ohio. Lieutenant Hays
was ordered to accompany us to the Alleghenny river The Ohio, as it is called
by the Sennecas. Alleghenny is the name of the same river in the Delaware
language. Both words signify the fine, or fair river.
with fourteen men. We went the path that leads along, the Loyal Hanning creek,
where there is a rich fine bottom, land well timbered, good springs and small
creeks. At four o'clock we were alarmed by three men, in Indian dress; and
preparation was made on both sides, for defense. Isaac Still showed a white
token, and Pesquitomen gave an Indian ^^lloo; after which they threw down their
bundles, and ran away as fast as they could. We afterward took up their
bundles, and found that it was a small party of our men, that had been long
out. We were sorry that we had scared them; for they lost their bundles with
all their food. Then, I held a conference with our Indians, and asked them, if
it would not be good, to send one of our Indians to Log stown and fort
Duquesne, and call the Indians from thence, before we arrive at Kushkushking.
They all agreed it would not be good, as they were but messengers; it must be
done by their chief men. The wolves made a terrible music this night.

-- 11th. We started early, and came to the old Shawanese town, called
Keckkeknepolin, grown up thick with weeds, briars and bushes, that we scarcely
could get through. Pesquitomen led us upon a steep hill, that our horses could
hardly get up; and Thomas Hickman's horse tumbled, and rolled down the hill
like a wheel; on which he grew angry, and would go no further with us, and
said, he would go by himself: It happened we found a path on the top of the
hill. At three o'clock we came to Kiskemeneco, an old Indian town, a rich
bottom, well timbered, good fine English grass, well watered, and lays waste
since the war began. We let our horses seed here, and agreed that lieutenant
Hays might go back with his party; and as they were short of provisions, we,
therefore, gave them a little of ours, which they took very kind of us. Thomas
Hickman could find no other road, and came to us again a little ashamed; we
were glad to see him; and we went about three miles farther, where we made a
large fire. Here the Indians looked over their presents, and grumbled at me;
they thought, if they had gone the other way by Shamokin, they would have got
more. Captain Bull spoke in their favor against me. Then I said to them, "I am
ashamed to see you grumble about presents; I thought you were sent to establish
a peace." Though I confess I was not pleased that the Indians were so slightly
fitted out from Easton, as the general had nothing to give them, in the
critical circumstances he was in, fit for their purpose.

-- 12th. Early in the morning, I spoke to the Indians of my company,
"Brethren, you have now passed through the heart of the country back and
forward, likewise through the midst of the army, without any difficulty or
danger; you have seen and heard a great deal. When I was among you, at
Alleghenny, you told me, I should not regard what the common people would say,
but only hearken to the chiefs; I should take no bad stories along. I did
accordingly; and when I left Alleghenny I dropped all evil reports, and only
carried the agreeable news, which was pleasing to all that heard it. Now,
brethren, I beg of you to do the same, and to drop all evil reports, which you
may have heard of bad people, and only to observe and keep what you have heard
of our rulers, and the wise people, so that all your young men, women and
children, may rejoice at our coming to them, and may have the benefit of it."

They took it very kindly. After awhile they spoke in the following manner to
us, and said, "Brethren, when you come to Kushkushking, you must not mind the
prisoners, and have nothing to do with them. Mr. Post, when he was first there,
listened too much to the prisoners; the Indians were almost mad with him for
it, and would have confined him for it; for, they said, he had wrote something
of them."

As we were hunting for our horses, we found Thomas Hickman's horse dead, which
rolled yesterday down the hill. At one o'clock we came to the Alleghenny, to an
old Shawano town, situated under a high hill on the east, opposite an island of
about one hundred acres, very rich land, well timbered. We looked for a place
to cross the river, but in vain; we then went smartly to work, and made a raft;
we cut the wood, and carried it to the water side. The wolves and owls made a
great noise in the night.

-- 13th. We got up early, and boiled some chocolate for breakfast, and then
began to finish our rafts; we clothed ourselves as well as we could in Indian
dress; it was about two o'clock in the afternoon, before we all got over to the
other side, near an old Indian town. The Indians told us, we should not call
Mr. Bull, captain, their young men would be mad that we brought a warrior
there. We went up a steep hill, good land, to the creek Cowewanick, where we
made our fire. They wanted to hunt for meat, and looked for a road. Captain
Bull shot a squirrel, and broke his gun. I cut fire wood, and boiled some
chocolate for supper. The others came home, and brought nothing. Pesquitomen
wanted to hear the writing from the general, which we read to them, to their
great satisfaction. This was the first night we slept in the open air. Mr. Bull
took the tent along with him. We discoursed a good deal of the night together.

-- 14th. We rose early, and thought to make good progress on our way. At one
o'clock Thomas Hickman shot a large buck; and, as our people were hungry for
meat, we made our camp there, and called the water Buck run. In the evening we
heard the great guns fire from fort Duquesne. Whenever I looked toward that
place, I felt a dismal impression, the very place seemed shocking and dark.
Pesquitomen looked his things over, and found a white belt, sent by the
commissioners of trade, Persons appointed by law to manage the Indian trade,
for the public; the private trade, on account of its abuses, being abolished.
for the Indian affairs. We could find no writing concerning the belt, and did
not know what was the signification thereof: They seemed much concerned to know
it.

-- 15th. We arose early, and had a good day's journey; we passed these two
days through thick bushes of briars and thorns; so that it was very difficult
to get through. We crossed the creek Paquakonink; the land is very indifferent.
At twelve o'clock we crossed the road from Venango to fort Duquesne. We went
west toward Kushkushking, about sixteen miles from the fort. We went over a
large barren plain, and made our lodging by (...) Pesquitomen told us* we must
send a messenger, to let them know of our coming, as the French live amongst
them; he desired ^ string of wampum; I gave him three hundred and fifty. We
concluded to go within three miles of Kushkushking, to their ^^gar cabbins,
Where they boil into sugar the juice of a tree that grows in those rich lands.
and to call their chiefs there. In discourse, Mr. Bull told the Indians, the
English should let all the prisoners stay amongst them, that liked to stay.

-- 16th. We met two Indians on the road, and sat down with them to dinner.
They informed us that no body was at home, at Kushkushking; that one hundred
and sixty, from that town, were gone to war against our party. We crossed the
above mentioned creek; good land, but hilly. Went down a long valley to Beaver
creek, through old Kushkushking, a large spot of land, about three miles long;
they both went with us to the town; one of them rode before us, to let the
people in the town know of our coming; we found there but two men, and some
women. Those, that were at home, received us kindly. Pesquitomen desired us to
read the message to them that were there.

-- 17th. There were five Frenchmen in the town; the rest were gone to war. We
held a council with Delaware George, delivered him the string and presents,
that were sent to him; and informed him of the general's sentiments, and what
he desired of them; upon which he agreed, and complied to go with Mr. Bull, to
the general. Toward night Keckkenepalin came home from the war, and told us
the disagreeable news, that they had fallen in with that party, that had guided
us; they had killed Lieutenant Hays, and four more, and took five prisoners,
the others got clear off. They had a skirmish with them within twelve miles of
fort Duquesne. Further he told us, that one of the captives was to be burnt,
which grieved us. By the prisoners they were informed of our arrival; on which
they concluded to leave the French, and to hear what news we brought them. In
the evening they brought a prisoner to town. We called the Indians together,
that were at home, and explained the matter to them, and told them, as their
own people had desired the general to give them a guide to conduct them safe
home, and by a misfortune, your people have fallen in with this party, and
killed five and taken five prisoners; and we are now informed that one of them
is to be burnt; "Consider, my brethren, if you should give us a guide, to bring
us safe on our way home, and our (...) should fall in with you, how hard you
would take it."

They said, "Brother, it is a hard matter, and we are sorry it has happened
(...)." I answered, "Let us therefore spare no pains to relieve them from any
cruelty." We could scarce find a messenger, that would undertake to go to
Sawcung, where the prisoner was to be bunt. We promised to one named Compass,
500 black wampum, and Mr. Hays gave him a shirt and a dollar, on which he
promised to go. We sent him as a messenger. By a string of wampum I spoke these
words, "Brethren, consider the messengers are come home with good news, and
three of your brethren, the English, with them. We desire you would pity your
own young men, women and children, and use no hardships toward the captives,
as having been guiding our party."

Afterward the warriors informed us, that their design had not been to go to
war, but that they had a mind to go to the general, and speak with him; and on
the road the French made a division among them, that they could not agree;
after which they were discovered by the Cherokees and Catawbas, who sled, and
left their bundles, where they found an English color. So Kekeuscung told them
he would go before them to the general, if they would follow low him; but they
would not agree to it; and the French persuaded them to fall upon the English
at Loyal-hanning; they accordingly did, and as they were driven back, they fell
in with that party, that guided us, which they did not know. They seemed very
sorry for it.

-- 18th. Captain Bull acted as commander, without letting us know any thing,
or communicating with us. He and George re^^eved a prisoner from the warriors,
by what means I do not kn^w. When the warriors were met, he then called us
first to (...), and to hear what they had to say. The Indian that delivered the
prisoner to Bull and George, spoke as follows:

"My brethren, the English are at such a distance from us, as if they were
under ground, that I cannot hear them. I am very glad to hear from you such
good news; and I am very sorry that it happened so, that I went to war. Now I
let the general know, he should consider his young men, and if you should have
any of us, to set them at liberty, so as we do to you.

Then Pesquitomen said, "As the Governor gave these three messengers into my
bosom, so I now likewise, by this string of wampum, give Bull into Delaware
George's bosom, to bring him safe to the general." Mr. Bull sat down with the
prisoner, who gave him some intelligence in writing; at which the Indians grew
very jealous, and asked them what they had to write there? I wrote a letter to
the general by Mr. Bull. In the afternoon Mr. Bull, Delaware George, and
Kesk^^epalen set out for the camp. Toward night they brought in another
prisoner. When Mr. Bull and company were gone, the Indians took the same
prisoner, whom Mr. Bull had relieved, and bound him and carried him to another
town, without our knowledge. I a thousand times wished Mr. Bull had never
meddled in the affair, fearing they would exceedingly punish, and bring the
prisoner to confession of the contents of the writing.

-- 19th. A great many of the warriors came home. The French had infused bad
notions into the Indians, by means of the letters, they found upon Lieutenant
Hays, who was killed, which they falsely interpreted to them, viz. That, in one
letter it was wrote, that the general should do all that was in his power to
conquer the French, and, in the mean time the messengers to the Indians should
do their utmost to draw the Indians back, and keep them together in
conferences, till he, the general, had made a conquest of the French, and
afterward he should fall upon all Indians, and destroy them. And, that, if we
should lose our lives, the English would carry on the war, so long as an
Indian, or Frenchman was alive. Thereupon the French said to the Indians;

"Now you can see, my children, how the English want to deceive you, and if it
would not offend you, I would go and knock these messengers on the head, before
you should be deceived by them." One of the Indian captains spoke to the French
and said, "To be sure it would offend us, if you should offer to knock them on
the head. If you have a mind to go to war, go to the English army, and knock
them on the head, and not these three men, that come with a message to us."

After this speech the Indians went all off, and left the French. Nevertheless
it had enraged some of the young people, and made them suspicious; so that it
was a precarious time for us. I said, "Brethren, have good courage, and be
strong; let not every wind disturb your mind; let the French bring the letter
here; for, (...) you cannot read, they may tell you thousands of false stories.
We will read the letter to you. As Isaac Still An Indian with an English name.
An Indian sometimes changes his name with an Englishman he respects: it is a
seal of friendship, and creates a kind of relation between them.
can read, he will tell you the truth."

After this all the young men were gathered together, Isaac Still being in
company. The young men said, "One that had but half an eye could see that the
English only intended to cheat them; and that it was best to knock every one of
us messengers on the head."

Then Isaac began to speak and said, "I am ashamed to hear such talking from
you; you are but boys like me; you should not talk of such a thing. There have
been thirteen nations at Easton, where they have established a firm peace with
the English; and I have heard that the Five Nations were always called the
wisest; go tell them that they are fools, and cannot see; and tell them that
you are kings, and wise men. Go and tell the Cayuga chiefs so, that are here;
and you will become great men." Afterward they were all still, and said not
one word more.

-- 20th. There came a great many more together in the town, and brought Henry
Osten, the sergeant, who was to have been burnt. They hallooed the war halloo;
and the men and women beat him till he came into the house. When a prisoner is
brought to an Indian town, he runs a kind of gauntlet through the mob; and every
one, even the children, endeavor to have a stroke at him; but as soon as he
can get into any of their huts, he is under protection, and refreshments are
administered to him.
It is a grievous and melancholy sight to see our fellow mortals so abused.
Isaac Still had a long discourse with the French captain; who made himself
great, by telling how he had fought the English at Loyal-Hanning. Isaac rallied
him, and said he had seen them scalp horses, and take others for food. The
first he denied, but the second he owned. Isaac ran the captain quite down,
before them all. The French captain spoke with the two Cayugas; at last the
Cayugas spoke very sharp to him, so that he grew pale, and was quite silent.

These three days past was precarious time for us. We were warned not to go far
from the house; because the people who came from the slaughter, having been
driven back, were possessed with a murdering spirit; which led them as in a
halter, in which they were catched, and with bloody vengeance were thirsty and
drunk. This afforded a melancholy prospect. Isaac Still was himself dubious of
our lives. We did not let Mr. Hays know of the danger. I said, "As God has
stopped the mouth of the lions, that they could not devour Daniel, so he will
preserve us from their fury, and bring us through." I had a discourse with Mr.
Hays concerning our message, and begged him he would pray to God for grace and
wisdom, that he would grant us peace among this people. We will remain in
stillness, and not look to our own credit. We are in the service of our king
and country. This people are rebellious in heart; now we are here to reconcile
them again to the General, Governor, and the English nation; to turn them again
from their errors. And I wished that God would grant us his grace, whereby we
may do it; which I hope and believe he will do. Mr. Hays took it to heart and
was convinced of all; which much rejoiced me. I begged Isaac Still to watch
over himself, and not to be discouraged; for I hoped the storm would soon pass
by.

In the afternoon all the captains gathered together in the middle town; they
sent for us, and desired we should give them information of our message.
Accordingly we did. We read the message with great satisfaction to them. It was
a great pleasure both to them and us. The number of captains and counselors
were sixteen. In the evening messengers arrived from fort Duquesne, with a
string of wampum from the commander; upon which they all came together in the
house where we lodged. The messengers delivered their string, with these words
from their father, the French King:

"My children, come to me, and hear what I have to say. The English are coming
with an army to destroy both you and me. I therefore desire you immediately, my
children, to hasten with all the young men; we will drive the English and
destroy them. I, as a father, will tell you always what is best." He laid the
string before one of the captains. After a little conversation, the captain
stood up and said; "I have just heard something of our brethren the English,
which pleases me much better. I will not go. Give it to the others, may be
they will go." The messenger took up again the string and said, "He will not go,
he has heard of the English." E. I. He has listened to the English messages.
Then all cried out, "yes, yes, we have heard from the English." He then threw
the string to the other fire place, where the other captains were; but they
kicked it from one to another, as if it was a snake. Captain Peter took a
stick, and with it slung the string from one end of the room to the other,
Kicking the string about, and throwing it with a stick, not touching it with
their hands, were marks of dislike of the message, that accompanied it.
and said, "Give it to the French captain, and let him go with his young men;
he boasted much of his fighting; now let us see his fighting. We have often
ventured our lives for him; and had hardly a loaf of bread, when we came to
him; and now he thinks we should jump to serve him." Then we saw the French
captain mortified to the uttermost; he looked as pale as death. The Indians
discoursed and joked till midnight; and the French captain sent messengers at
midnight to fort Duquesne.

-- 21st. We were informed that the general was within twenty miles of fort
Duquesne. As the Indians were afraid the English would come over the river
Ohio, I spoke with some of the captains, and told them that, "I supposed the
general intended to surround the French, and therefore must come to this side
the river; but we assure you that he will not come to your towns to hurt you."
I begged them to let the Shawanese at Logstown, know it, and gave them four
strings of 300 wampum, with this message; "Brethren, we are arrived with good
news, waiting for you; we desire you to be strong, and remember the ancient
friendship your grandfathers had with the English. We wish you would remember
it, and pity your young men, women and children, and keep away from the French;
and if the English should come to surround the French, be not afraid. We assure
you they will not hurt you,"

-- 22d. Kittiuskund came home, and sent for us, being very glad to see us. He
informed us, the general was within fifteen miles of the French fort; that the
French had uncovered their houses, and laid the roofs round the fort to set it
on fire, and made ready to go off, and would demolish the fort, and let the
English have the bare ground; saying; "they are not able to build a strong fort
this winter; and we will be early enough in the spring to destroy them. We will
come with seventeen nations of Indians, and a great many French, and build a
stone fort."

The Indians danced round the fire till midnight, for joy of their brethren,
the English coming. There went some scouting parties toward the army. Some of
the captains told me, that Shamokin Daniel, who came with me in my former
journey, had fairly sold me to the French; and the French had been very much
displeased, that the Indians had brought me away.

-- 23d. The liar raised a story, as if the English were divided into three
bodies, to come on this side the river. They told us the Cayugas, that came
with us, had said so. We told the Cayugas of it; on which they called the other
Indians together; denied that they ever said so; and said, they were sent to
this place from the Five Nations, to tell them to do their best endeavors to
send the French off from this country; and when that was done, they would go
and tell the general to go back over the mountains.

I see the Indians concern themselves very much about the affair of land; and
are continually jealous, and afraid the English will take their land. I told
them to be still and content themselves, "for there are some chiefs of the Five
Nations with the army; they will settle the affair, as they are the chief
owners of the land; and it will be well for you to come and speak with the
general yourselves."

Isaac Still asked the French captain, whether it was true, that Daniel had
sold me to the French? He owned it, and said, I was theirs, they had bought me
fairly; and, if the Indians would give them leave, he would take me.

-- 24th. We hanged out the English flag, in spite of the French; on which our
prisoners folded their hands, in hopes that their redemption was nigh, looking
up to God, which melted my heart in tears, and prayers to God, to hear their
prayers, and change the times, and the situation, which our prisoners are in,
and under which they groan. "O Lord, said they, when will our redemption come,
that we shall be delivered, and return home?" -- And if any accident happens,
which the Indians dislike, the prisoners all tremble with fear, saying, "Lord,
what will become of us, and what will be the end of our lives?" So that they
often wish themselves rather under the ground, than in this life. King Beaver
came home, and called us to his house, and saluted us in a friendly manner;
which we, in like manner, did to him. Afterward I spoke by four strings of 350
wampum, and said, as follows:

"I have a salutation to you, and all your people, from the general, the
governor, and many other gentlemen. Brother, it pleases me that the day is come
to see you and your people. We have warmed ourselves by your fire, and waited
for you, and thank you, that you did come home. We have good news of great
importance; which we hope will make you, and all your people's hearts glad. By
these strings I desire you would be pleased to call all your kings and
captains, from all the towns and nations; so that they all may hear us, and
have the benefit thereof, while they live, and their children after them."

Then he said, "As soon as I heard of your coming, I rose up directly to come
to you." Then there came another message, which called me to another place,
where six kings of six nations were met together. I sent them word, they should
sit together a while, and smoke their pipes, and I would come to them. King
Beaver said further,

"Brother, it pleases me to hear that you brought such good news; and my heart
rejoices already at what you said to me. It rejoices me that I have now heard
of you." I said, "Brother, you did well, that you first came here, before you
went to the kings; as the good news we brought is to all nations, from the
rising of the sun to the going down of the same; that want to be in peace and
friendship with the English. So it will give them satisfaction, when they hear
it." The French captain told us, that they would demolish the fort; and he
thought the English would be today at the place.

-- 25th Shingas came home, and saluted us in a friendly manner, and so did
Beaver, in our house; and then they told us, they would hear our message; and
we perceived that the French captain had an inclination to hear it. We called
Beaver and Shingas, and informed them, that all the nations, at Easton, had
agreed with the governor, that every thing should be kept secret from the ears
and eyes of the French. He said, "it was no matter, they were beaten already.
It is good news, and if he would say any thing, we would tell him what
friendship we have together." Accordingly they met together, and the French
captain was present. The number consisted of about fifty.

King Beaver first spoke to his men, "Hearken, all you captains and warriors,
here are our brethren, the English; I wish that you may give attention, and
take notice of what they say. As it is for our good, that there may an
everlasting peace be established, although there is a great deal of mischief
done, if it pleases God to help us, we may live in peace again."

Then I began to speak by four strings to them, and said,

"Brethren, being come here to see you, I perceive your bodies are all stained
with blood, and observe tears and sorrows in your eyes: With this string I
clean your body from blood, and wipe and anoint your eyes with the healing oil,
so that you may see your brethren clearly. And as so many storms have blown
since we last saw one another, and we are at such a distance from you, that you
could not rightly hear us as yet, I, by this string, take a soft feather, and
with that good oil, our grandfathers used, open and clear your ears, so that
you may both hear and understand what your brethren have to say to you. And by
these strings I clear your throat from the dust, and take all the bitterness
out of your heart, and clear the passage from the heart to the throat, that you
may speak freely with your brethren, the English, from the heart."

Then Isaac Still gave the pipe, sent by the Friends The Quakers of
Philadelphia, who first set on soot these negociations of peace; and for whom
the Indians have always had a great regard.
, filled with tobacco, and handed round, after their custom, and said:

"Brethren, here is the pipe, which your grandfathers used to smoke with, when
they met together in councils of peace. And here is some of that good tobacco,
prepared for our grandfathers from God: -- When you shall taste of it, you
shall feel it through all your body; and it will put you in remembrance of the
good councils, your grandfathers used to hold with the English, your brethren,
and that ancient friendship, they had together."

King Beaver rose, and thanked us first, that we had cleaned his body from the
blood, and wiped the tears and sorrow from his eyes, and opened his ears, so
that now he could well hear and understand. Likewise he returned thanks for the
pipe and tobacco, that we brought, which our grandfathers used to smoke. He
said, -- "When I tasted that good tobacco, I felt it all through my body, and
it made me all over well."

Then we delivered the messages, as follows:

Governor Denny's answer to the message of the Ohio Indians, brought by
Frederick Post, Pesquitomen and Thomas Hickman.

"By this string, my Indian brethren of the United Nations and Delawares, join
with me, in requiring of the Indian councils, to which these following messages
shall be presented, to keep every thing private from the eyes and ears of the
French." A string.

"Brethren, we received your message by Pesquitomen and Frederick Post, and
thank you for the care you have taken of our messenger of peace, and that you
have put him in your bosom, and protected him against our enemy, Onontio, and
his children, and sent him safe back to our council fire, by the same man, that
received him from us." A string.

"Brethren, I only sent Post to peep into your cabbins, and to know the
sentiments of your old men, and to look at your faces, to see how you look. And
I am glad to hear from him, that you look friendly; and that there still remain
some sparks of love toward us. It is what we believed before hand, and
therefore we never let slip the chain of friendship, but held it fast, on our
side, and it has never dropped out of our hands. By this belt we desire that you
will dig up your end of the chain of friendship, that you suffered, by the
subt^ety of the French, to be buried." A belt.

"Brethren, it happened that the governor of Jersey was with me, and a great
many Indian brethren, sitting in council at Easton, when your messengers
arrived; and it gave pleasure to every one that heard it; and it will afford
the same satisfaction to our neighboring governors, and their people, when they
come to hear it. I shall send messengers to them, and acquaint them with what
you have said.

"Your requesting us to let the king of England know your good dispositions we
took to heart, and shall let him know it; and we will speak in your favor to
his majesty, who has, for some time past, looked upon you as his lost children.
And we can assure you, that, as a tender father over all his children, he will
forgive what is past, and receive you again into his arms." A belt.

"Brethren, if you are in earnest to be reconciled to us, you will keep your
young men from attacking our country, and killing, and carrying captive our
back inhabitants: And will likewise give orders, that your people may be kept
at a distance from Fort Duquesne; that they may not be hurt by our warriors,
who are sent by our king to chastise the French, and not to hurt you. Consider
the commanding officer of that army treads heavy, and would be very sorry to
hurt any of his Indian brethren." A large belt.

"And brethren, the chiefs of the United Nations, with their cousins, our
brethren, the Delawares, and others now here, jointly with me send this belt,
which has upon it two figures, that represent all the English, and all the
Indians, now present, taking hands, and delivering it to Pesquitomen; and we
desire it may be likewise sent to the Indians, who are named at the end of
these messages "Sastaghretsy, Anigh Kalicken, Atowateany, Towigh, Towighroano,
Geghdageghroano, Oyaghta^ont, Sisaghroano, Stiaggeghroano, Jenontadynago."
; as they have all been formerly our very good friends and allies; and we
desire they will all go from among the French to their own towns, and no longer
help the French."

"Brethren on the Ohio, if you take the belts we just now gave you, in which
all here join, English and Indians, as we do not doubt you will; then, by this
belt, I make a road for you, and invite you to come to Philadelphia, to your
first old council fire, which was kindled when we first saw one another; which
fire we will kindle up again, and remove all disputes, and renew the old and
first treaties of friendship. This is a clear and open road for you; fear,
therefore, nothing, and come to us with as many as can be of the Delawares,
Shawaness, or of the Six Nations: We will be glad to see you; we desire all
tribes and nations of Indians, who are in alliance with you, may come. As soon
as we hear of your coming, of which you will give us timely notice, we will lay
up provisions for you along the road."

A large white belt, with the figure of a man, at each end, and streaks of
black, representing the road from the Ohio to Philadelphia.

"Brethren, the Six Nation and Delaware chiefs join with me in those belts,
which are tied together, to signify our union and friendship for each other;
with them we jointly take the tomahawks out of your hands, and bury them under
ground.

"We speak aloud, so as you may hear us; you see we all stand together, joined
hand in hand." Two belts tied together.

"General Forbes to the Shawanese, and Delawares, on the Ohio.

"Brethren, I embrace this opportunity by our brother, Pesquitomen, who is now
on his return home with some of your uncles, of the Six Nations, from the
treaty of Easton, of giving you joy of the happy conclusion of that great
council, which is perfectly agreeable to me; as it is for the mutual advantage
of our brethren, the Indians, as well as the English nation.

"I am glad to find that all past disputes and animosities are now finally
settled, and amicably adjusted; and I hope they will be for ever buried in
oblivion, and that you will now again be firmly united in the interest of your
brethren, the English.

"As I am now advancing, at the head of a large army, against his majesty's
enemies, the French, on the Ohio, I must strongly recommend to you to send
immediate notice to any of your people, who may be at the French fort, to
return forthwith to your towns; where you may sit by your fires, with your
wives and children, quiet and undisturbed, and smoke your pipes in safety. Let
the French fight their own battles, as they were the first cause of the war,
and the occasion of the long difference, which has subsisted between you and
your brethren, the English; but I must entreat you to restrain your young men
from crossing the Ohio, as it will be impossible for me to distinguish them
from our enemies; which I expect you will comply with, without delay; lest, by
your neglect thereof, I should be the innocent cause of some of our brethren's
death. This advice take and keep in your own breasts, and suffer it not to
reach the ears of the French.

"As a proof of the truth and sincerity of what I say, and to confirm the
tender regard I have for the lives and welfare of our brethren, on the Ohio, I
send you this string of wampum.

"I am, brethren and warriors, Your friend and brother, JOHN FORBES."

"Brethren, kings Beaver and Shingas, and all the warriors, who join with you:

"The many acts of hostility, committed by the French against the British
subjects, made it necessary for the king to take up arms, in their defense, and
to redress their wrongs, which have been done them; heaven has favored the
justice of the cause, and given success to his fleets and armies, in different
parts of the world. I have received his commands, with regard to what is to be
done on the Ohio, and shall endeavor to act like a soldier, by driving the
French from thence, or destroying them.

"It is a particular pleasure to me to learn, that the Indians, who inhabit
near that river, have lately excluded a treaty of peace with the English; by
which the ancient friendship is renewed with their brethren, and fixed on a
firmer foundation than ever. May it be lasting and unmovable as the mountains.
I make no doubt but it gi^es you equal satisfaction, and that you will unite
your endeavors with mine, and all the governors of these provinces, to
strengthen it: The clouds, that, for some time, hung over the English, and
their friends, the Indians on the Ohio, and kept them both in darkness, are now
dispersed, and the cheerful light now again shines upon us, and warms us both.
May it continue to do so, while the sun and moon give light.

"Your people, who were sent to us, were received by us with open arms; they
were kindly entertained, while they were here; and I have taken care that they
shall return safe to you; with them come trusty messengers, whom I earnestly
recommend to your protection; they have several matters in charge; and I desire
you may give credit to what they say; in particular, they have a large belt of
wampum, and by this belt we let you know, that it is agreed by me, and all the
governors, that there shall be an everlasting peace with all the Indians,
established as sure as the mountains, between the English nation and the
Indians, all over, from the sun rising to the sun setting; and as your
influence on them is great, so you will make it known to all the different
nations, that want to be in friendship with the English; and I hope, by your
means and persuasions, many will lay hold on this belt, and immediately
withdraw from the French: this will be greatly to their own interest and your
honor, and I shall not fail to acquaint the great king of it: I sincerely wish
it, for their good; for it will fill me with concern, to find any of you joined
with the French; as in that case, you must be sensible I must treat them as
enemies; however, I once more repeat, that there is no time to be lost; for I
intend to march with the army very soon; and I hope to enjoy the pleasure of
thanking you for your zeal, and of entertaining you in the fort ere long. In
the mean time I wish happiness and prosperity to you, your women and children.

"I write to you as a warrior should, that is, with candor and love, and I
recommend secrecy and dispatch.

"I am, kings Beaver and Shingas, And brother warriors, Your assured friend and
brother, JOHN FORBES.

"From my camp at Loyalhannon, Nov. 9, 1758."

The messages pleased, and gave satisfaction to all the hearers, except the
French captain. He shook his head with bitter grief, and often changed his
countenance. Isaac Still ran down the French captain with great boldness, and
pointed at him saying, "There he sits." Afterward Shingas rose up and said:

"Brethren, now we have rightly heard and understood you, it pleases me and
all the young men, that hear it; we shall think of it, and take it into due
consideration; and when we have considered it well, then we will give you an
answer, and send it to all the towns and nations, as you desired us."

We thanked them and wished them good success in their undertaking; and wished
it might have the same effect upon all other nations, that may hereafter hear
it, as it had on them. We went a little out of the house. In the mean time
Isaac Still demanded the letter, which the French had falsely interpreted, that
it might be read in public. Then they called us back, and I, Frederick Post,
found it was my own letter, I had wrote to the general. I therefore stood up,
and read it, which Isaac interpreted. The Indians were well pleased, and took
it as if it was written to them; thereupon they all said; "We always thought
the French report of the letter was a lie; they always deceived us:" Pointing
at the French captain; who, bowing down his head, turned quite pale, and could
look no one in the face. All the Indians began to mock and laugh at him; he
could hold it no longer, and went out. Then the Cayuga chief delivered a
string, in the name of the Six Nations, with these words:

"Cousins, hear what I have to say; I see you are sorry, and the tears stand in
your eyes. I would open your ears, and clear your eyes from tears, so that you
may see, and hear what your uncles, the Six Nations, have to say. We have
established a friendship with your brethren, the English. We see that you are
all over bloody, on your body; I clean the heart from the dust, and your eyes
from the tears, and your bodies from the blood, that you may hear and see your
brethren, the English, and appear clean before them, and that you may speak
from the heart with them."

Delivered four strings.

Then he showed to them a string from the Cherokees, with these words:

"Nephews, we let you know, that we are exceeding glad that there is such a
firm friendship established, on so good a foundation, with so many nations,
that it will last for ever; and, as the Six Nations have agreed with the
English, so we wish that you may lay hold of the same friendship. We will
remind you, that we were formerly good friends. Likewise we let you know, that
the Six Nations gave us a tomahawk, and, if any body offended us, we should
strike him with it; likewise they gave me a knife, to take off the scalp. So we
let you know, that we are desirous to hear very soon from you, what you
determine. It may be we shall use the hatchet very soon, therefore I long to
hear from you."

Then the council broke up. After a little while messengers arrived, and Beaver
came into our house, and gave us the pleasure to hear, that the English had the
field, and that the French had demolished and burnt the place entirely, and
went off; that the commander is gone with two hundred men to Venango, and the
rest gone down the river in battoes, to the lower Shawanese town, with an
intention to build a fort there; they were seen yesterday passing by Sawcung.

We ended this day with pleasure and great satisfaction on both sides: the
Cayuga chief said, he would speak further to them tomorrow.

-- 26th. We met together about ten o'clock. First, King Beaver addressed
himself to the Cayuga chief, and said;

"My uncles, as it is customary to answer one another, so I thank you, that you
took so much notice of your cousins, and that you have wiped the tears from our
eyes, and cleaned our bodies from the blood; when you spoke to me I saw myself
all over bloody; and since you cleaned me I feel myself quite pleasant through
my whole body, and I can see the sun shine clear over us."

Delivered four strings.

He said further, "As you took so much pains, and came a great way through the
bushes, I, by this string, clean you from the sweat, and clean the dust out of
your throat, so that you may speak what you have to say from your brethren, the
English, and our uncles, the Six Nations, to your cousins, I am ready to hear."

Then Petiniontonka, the Cayuga chief, took the belt with eight diamonds,
Diamond figures, formed by beads of wampum, of different colors.
and said;

"Cousins, take notice of what I have to say; we let you know what agreement we
have made with our brethren, the English. We had almost slipped and dropped the
chain of friendship with our brethren, the English; now we let you know that we
have renewed the peace and friendship with our brethren, the English; and we
have made a new agreement with them. We see that you have dropped the peace and
friendship with them. We desire you would lay hold of the covenant, we have
made with our brethren, the English, and be strong. We likewise take the
tomahawk out of your hands, that you received from the white people; use it no
longer; fling the towahawk away; it is the white people's; let them use it
among themselves; it is theirs, and they are of one color; let them fight with
one another, and do you be still and quiet in Kushkushking. Let our
grandchildren, the Shawanese, likewise know of the covenant, we established
with our friends, the English, and also let all other nations know it."

Then he explained to them the eight diamonds, on the belt, signifying the five
united nations, and the three younger nations, which join them: these all
united with the English. Then he proceeded thus:

"Brethren," (delivering a belt with eight diamonds, the second belt) "we hear
that you did not sit right; and when I came I found you in a moving posture,
ready to jump toward the sunset; so we will set you at ease, and quietly down,
that you may sit well at Kushkushking; and we desire you to be strong; and if
you will be strong, your women and children will see from day to day the light
shining more over them; and our children and grand children will see that there
will be an everlasting peace established. We desire you to be still; we do not
know as yet, what to do; toward the spring you shall hear from your uncles
what they conclude; in the mean time do you sit still by your fire at
Kushkushking."

In the evening the devil made a general disturbance, to hinder them in their
good disposition. It was reported they saw three Catawba Indians in their town;
and they roved about all that cold night, in great fear and confusion. When I
consider with what tyranny and power the prince of this world rules over this
people, it breaks my heart over them; and I wish that God would have mercy upon
them, and that their redemption may draw nigh, and open their eyes, that they
may see what bondage they are in, and deliver them from the evil.

-- 27th. We waited all the day for an answer. Beaver came and told us, "They
were busy all the day long," He said, "It is a great matter, and wants much
consideration. We are three tribes, which must separately agree among
ourselves; it takes time before we hear each agreement, and the particulars
thereof." He desired us to read our message once more to them in private; we
told them, we were at their service at any time; and then we explained him the
whole again. There arrived a messenger from Sawcung, and informd us that four
of their people were gone to our camp, to see what the English were about; and
that one of them climbing upon a tree was discovered by falling down; and then
our people spoke to them; three resolved to go to the other side, and one came
back and brought the news, which pleased the company. Some of the captains and
counselors were together; they said, that the French would build a strong
fort, at the lower Shawanese town. I answered them, "Brethren, if you suffer
the French to build a fort there, you must suffer likewise the English to come
and destroy the place; English will follow the French, and pursue them, let it
cost whatever it will; and wherever the French settle, the English will follow
and destroy them."

They said, "We think the same, and would endeavor to prevent it, if the
English only would go back, after having drove away the French, and not settle
there." I said, "I can tell you no certainty in this affair; it is best for you
to go with us to the general, and speak with him. So much I know, that they
only want to establish a trade with you; and you know yourselves that you
cannot do without being supplied with such goods as you stand in need of; but,
brethren, be assured you must entirely quit the French, and have no
communication with them, else they will always breed disturbance and confusion
amongst you, and persuade your young people to go to war against our brethren,
the English."

I spoke with them further about Venango, and said, "I believed the English
would go there, if they suffered the French longer to live there. This speech
had much influence on them, and they said; "We are convinced of all that you
have said; it will be so." I found them inclined to send off the French from
Venango; but they wanted first to know the disposition of the English, and not
to suffer the French to build any where.

-- 28th. King Beaver arose early before the break of day, and bid all his
people a good morning, desired them to rise early and prepare victuals; for
they had to answer their brethren, the English, and their uncles, and therefore
they should be in a good humor and disposition. At ten o'clock they met
together; Beaver addressed himself to his people, and said,

"Take notice all you young men and warriors to what we answer now: it is three
days since we heard our brethren, the English, and our uncles; and what we have
heard of both is very good; and we are all much pleased with what we have
heard. Our uncles have made an agreement, and peace is established with our
brethren, the English, and they have shook hands with them; and we likewise
agree in the peace and friendship, they have established between them." Then he
spoke to the French captain Canaquais, and said,

"You may hear what I answer; it is good news, that we have heard. I have not
made myself a king. My uncles have made me like a queen, that I always should
mind what is good and right, and whatever I agree with, they will assist me,
and help me through. Since the warriors came amongst us, I could not follow
that which is good and right; which has made me heavy; and since it is my duty
to do that which is good, so I will endeavor to do and to speak what is good,
and not let myself be disturbed by the warriors."

Then he spoke to the Mingoes, and said,

"My uncles, hear me: It is two days since you told me, that you have made
peace and friendship, and shook hands with our brethren, the English. I am
really very much pleased with what you told me; and I join with you in the
same; and, as you said, I should let the Shawanese and Delamattanoes know of
the agreement, you have made with our brethren, the English, I took it to
heart, and shall let them know it very soon."

He delivered a string.

"Look now, my uncles, and hear what your cousins say: you have spoke the day
before yesterday to me. I have heard you. You told me, you would set me at
Kushkushking easy down. I took it to heart; and I shall do so, and be still,
and lay myself easy down, and keep my match-coat close to my breast. You told
me, you will let me know in the next spring, what to do; so I will be still,
and wait to hear from you."

Gave him a belt.

Then he turned himself to us, and gave us the following answers. First, to the
general;

"Brother, by these strings I would desire, in a most kind and friendly manner,
you would be pleased to hear me what I have to say, as you are not far off.

"Brother, now you told me you have heard of that good agreement, that has been
agreed to, at the treaty at Easton; and that you have put your hands to it, to
strengthen it, so that it may last for ever. Brother, you have told me, that
after you have come to hear it, you have taken it to heart, and then you sent
it to me, and let me know it. Brother, I would desire you would be pleased to
hear me, and I would tell you, in a most soft, loving and friendly manner, to
go back over the mountain, and to stay there; for, if you will do that, I will
use it for an argument, to argue with other nations of Indians. Now, brother,
you have told me you have made a road clear, from the sunset to our first old
council fire, at Philadelphia, and therefore I should fear nothing, and come
into that road. Brother, after these far Indians shall come to hear of that
good and wide road, that you have laid out for us, then they will turn and look
at the road, and see nothing in the way; and that is the reason, that makes me
tell you to go back over the mountain again, and to stay there; for then the
road will be clear, and nothing in the way."

Then he addressed himself to the Governor of Pennsylvania, as follows;

"Brother, give good attention to what I am going to say; for I speak from my
heart; and think nothing the loss of it, though the strings be small. Important
matters should be accompanied with large strings, or bel^s, (...) sometimes*
sufficient quantity of wampum is not at hand.


"Brother, I now tell you what I have heard from you is quite agreeable to my
mind; and I love to hear you. I tell you likewise, that all the chief men of
Allegheny are well pleased with what you have said to us; and all my young men,
women and children, that are able to understand, are well pleased with what you
have said to me.

"Brother, you tell me that all the Governors of the several provinces have
agreed to a well established and everlasting peace with the Indians; and you
likewise tell me, that my uncles, the Six Nations, and my brethren, the
Dalawares, and several other tribes of Indians join with you in it, to
establish it, so that it may be everlasting; you likewise tell me, you have all
agreed on a treaty of peace to last for ever; and for these reasons I tell you,
I am pleased with what you have told me.

"Brother, I am heartily pleased to hear that you never let slip the chain of
friendship out of your hands, which our grandfathers had between them, so that
they could agree as brethren and friends in any thing.

"Brother, as you have been pleased to let me know of that good and desirable
agreement, that you and my uncles and brethren have agreed to, at the treaty of
peace, I now tell you I heartily join and agree in it, and to it; and now I
desire you to go on steadily in that great and good work, you have taken in
hand; and I will do as you desire me to do; that is, to let the other tribes of
Indians know it, and more especially my uncles, the Six Nations, and the
Shawanese, my grandchildren, and all other nations, settled to the westward.

"Brother, I desire you not to be out of patience, as I have a great many
friends at a great distance; and I shall use my best endeavors to let them
know it as soon as possible; and as soon as I obtain their answer, shall let
you know it."

Then he gave six strings all white.

In the evening arrived a messenger from Sackung, Netodwehement, and desired
they should make all the haste to dispatch us, and we should come to Sackung;
for, as they did not know what is become of those three, that went to our camp,
they were afraid the English would keep them, till they heard what was become
of us, their messengers.

-- 29th. Before day break Beaver and Shingas came, and called us into their
council. They had been all the night together. They said; "Brethren, now is the
day coming, you will set off from here. It is a good many days since we heard
you; and what we have heard is very pleasing and agreeable to us. It rejoices
all our hearts; and all our young men, women and children, that are capable to
understand, are really very well pleased with what they have heard; it is so
agreeable to us, that we never received such good news before; we think God had
made it so; he pities us, and has mercy on us. And now, brethren, you desire
that I should let it be known to all other nations; and I shall let them know
very soon. Therefore Shingas cannot go with you. He must go with me, to help me
in this great work; and I shall send nobody, but go myself, to make it known to
all nations."

Then we thanked them for their care; and wished him good success on his
journey and undertaking: and, as this message had such a good effect on them,
we hoped it would have the same on all other nations, when they came to hear
it. I hoped that all the clouds would pass away, and the cheerful light would
shine over all nations: so I wished them good assistance and help on their
journey. Farther, he said to us;

"Now we desire you to be strong; The word, wishicksey, translated, be strong,
is of a very extensive signification be strong, be steady, pursue to effect
what you hare begun, etc.
because I shall make it my strong argument with other nations; but as we have
given credit to what you have said, hoping it is true, and we agree to it; if
it should prove the contrary, it would make me so ashamed, that I never could
lift up my head, and never undertake to speak any word more for the interest of
the English."

I told them, "Brethren, you will remember that it was wrote to you by the
general, that you might give credit to what we say; so I am glad to hear of
you, that you give credit; and we assure you, that what we have told you is the
truth; and you will find it so."

They said further, "Brethren, we let you know, that the French have used our
people kindly, in every respect; they have used them like gentlemen, especially
those that live near them. So they have treated the chiefs. Now we desire you
to be strong; we wish you would take the same method, and use our people well:
for the other Indians will look upon us; I. E. They will observe how we are
dressed.
and we do not otherwise know how to convince them, and to bring them into the
English interest, without your using such means as will convince them. For the
French will still do more to keep them to their interest."

I told them, "I would take it to heart, and inform the Governor, and other
gentlemen of it; and speak to them in their favor." Then they said, "It is so
far well, and the road is cleared; but they thought we should send them another
call, when they may come." I told them; "We did not know when they would have
agreed with the other nations. Brother, it is you, who must give up the first
notice when you can come; the sooner the better; and so soon as you send us
word, we will prepare for you on the road." After this we made ready for our
journey.

Ke^iushund, a noted Indian, one of the chief counselors, told us in secret;
"That all the nations had jointly agreed to defend their hunting place at
Alleghenny, and suffer nobody to settle there; and as these Indians are very
much inclined to the English interest, so he begged us very much to tell the
Governor, General, and all other people not to settle there. And if the English
would draw back over the mountain, they would get all the other nations into
their interest; but if they staid and settled there, all the nations would be
against them; and he was afraid it would be a great war, and never come to a
peace again."

I promised to inform the Governor, General, and all other people of it, and
repeated my former request to them, not to suffer any French to settle amongst
them. After we had fetched our horses, we went from Kushkushking, and came at
five o'clock to Saccung, in company with twenty Indians. When we came about
half way, we met a messenger from fort Duquesne, with a belt from Thomas King,
inviting all the chiefs to Saccung. We heard at the same time, that Mr. Croghn
and Henry Montour would be there to day. The messenger was one of those three,
that went to our camp; and it seemed to rejoice all the company; for some of
them were much troubled in their minds, fearing that the English had kept them,
as prisoners, or killed them. In the evening we arrived at Saccung, on the
Beaver creek. We were well received. The king provided for us. After a little
while we visited Mr. Croghn and his company.

-- 30th. In the morning the Indians of the town visited us. About eleven
o'clock about forty came together; when we read the message to them; Mr.
Croghn, Henry Montour and Thomas King being present. They were all well pleased
with the message. In the evening we came together with the chiefs, and
explained the signification of the belts; which lasted till eleven o'clock at
night.

December 1st. After hunting a great while for our horses, without finding
them, we were obliged to give an Indian three hundred wampum for looking for
them. We bought corn for four hundred and fifty wampum for our horses. The
Indians met together to hear what Mr. Croghn had to say. Thomas King spoke by a
belt, and invited them to come to the general; upon which they all resolved to
go.

In the evening the captains and counselors came together, I and Isaac Still
being present; they told us, that they had formerly agreed not to give any
credit to any message, sent from the English by Indians; thinking, if the
English would have peace with them, they would come themselves; "So soon,
therefore, as you came, it was as if the weather changed; and a great cloud
passed away; and we could think again on our ancient friendship with our
brethren, the English. We have thought since that time, more on the English
than ever before, a^though the French have done all, in their power, to
prejudice our young men against the English. Since you now come the second
time, we think it is God's work; he pities us, that we should not all die; and
if we should not accept of the peace offered to us, we think God would forsake
us."

In discourse, they spoke about preaching, and said, "They wished many times to
hear the word of God; but they were always afraid the English would take that
opportunity to bring them into bondage." They invited me to come and live
amongst them; since I had taken so much pains in bringing a peace about between
them and the English. I told them, "It might be, that when the peace was firmly
established, I would come to proclaim the peace and love of God to them."

In the evening arrived a message, with a string of wampum, to a noted Indian,
Ketiuscund, to come to Wenango, to meet the Unami chief, Quitahicung there; he
said that a French Mohock had killed a Delaware Indian; and when he was asked
why he did it? He said the French bid him do it.

-- 2d. Early before we set out, I gave 300 wampums to the Cayugas, to buy some
corn for their horses; they agreed that I should go before to the general, to
acquaint him of their coming, The Beaver creek being very high, it was almost
two o'clock, in the afternoon, before we came over the creek; this land seems
to be very rich. I, with my companion, Kekiuscund's son, came to Log's-town,
situated on a hill. On the east end is a great piece of low land, where the old
Logs-town used to stand. In the new Logs-town the French have built about
thirty houses for the Indians. They have a large corn field on the south side,
where the corn stands ungathered. Then we went farther through a large tract of
fine land, along the river side. We came within eight miles of Pittsburg, where
we lodged on a hill, in the open air. It was a cold night; and I had forgot my
blanket, being packed upon Mr. Hays's horse. Between Saccung and Pittsburg, all
the Shawanos towns are empty of people.

-- 3d. We started early, and came to the river by Pittsburg; we called that
they should come over and fetch us; but their boats having gone adrift, they
made a raft of black oak pallisadoes, which sunk as soon as it came into the
water. We were very hungry, and staid on that island, where I had kept council
with the Indians, in the month of August last; for all I had nothing to live
on, I thought myself a great deal better off now, than at that time, having now
liberty to ^alk upon the island according to pleasure; and it seemed as if the
dark clouds were dispersed.

While I waited here, I saw the general march off from Pittsburg; which made me
sorry, that I could not have the pleasure of speaking with him. Toward evening
our whole party arrived: upon which they fired from the fort with twelve great
guns; and our Indians saluted again three times round with their small arms. By
accident some of the Indians found a raft hid in the bushes, and Mr. Hays,
coming last, went over first with two Indians. They sent us but a small
allowance; so that it would not serve each round. I tied my belt a little
closer, being very hungry, and nothing to eat. As it often happens to the
Indians, on their long marches, in war, and sometimes in their hunting
expeditions, to be without victuals for several days, occasioned by bad weather
and other accidents, they have this custom in such cases; which Post probably
learned of them, viz. girding their bellies tight, when they have nothing to
put in them; and they say it presents the pain of hunger.
It snowed, and we were obliged to sleep without any shelter. In the evening
they threw light balls from the fort; at which the Indians started, thinking
they would fire at them; but seeing it was not aimed at them, they rejoiced to
see them fly so high.

-- 4th. We got up early, and cleared a place from the snow, cut some fire
wood, and hallooed till we were tired. Toward noon Mr. Hays came with a raft,
and the Indian chiefs went over: he informed me of Colonel Bouquet's
displeasure with the Indians answer to the general, and his desire that they
should alter their mind, in insisting upon the general's going back; but the
Indians had no inclination to alter their mind. In the afternoon some provision
was sent over, but a small allowance. When I came over to the fort, the council
with the Indians was almost at an end. I had a discourse with Colonel Bouquet
about the affairs, disposition and resolution of the Indians.

I drew provision for our journey to fort Ligonier, and baked bread for our
whole company: toward noon the Indians met together in a conference. First
king Beaver addressed himself to the Mohocks, desiring them to give their
brethren an answer about settling at Pittsburg. The Mohocks said, "They lived
at such a distance, that they could not defend the English there, if any
accident should befall them; but you, cousins, who live close here, must think
what to do." Then Beaver said by a string:

"What this messenger has brought is very agreeable to us; and as our uncles
have made peace with you, the English, and many other nations, so we likewise
join, and accept of the peace offered to us; and we have already answered by
your messenger, what we have to say to the general, that he should go back over
the mountains; we have nothing to say to the contrary."

Neither Mr. Croghn nor Andrew Montour would tell Colonel Bouquet the Indians'
answer. Then Mr. Croghn, Colonel Armstrong and Colonel Bouquet went into the
tent by themselves, and I went upon my business. What they have further agreed
I do not know; but when they had done, I called king Beaver, Shingas, and
Kekeuscund, and said,

"Brethren, if you have any alteration to make, in the answer to the general,
concerning leaving this place, you will be pleased to let me know." They said,
they would alter nothing, "We have told them three times to leave the place and
go back; but they insist upon staying here; if, therefore, they will be
destroyed by the French and the Indians, we cannot help them."

Colonel Bouquet set out for Loyalhannon: The Indians got some liquor between
ten and eleven o'clock. One Mohock died; the others fired guns three times over
him; at the last firing one had accidentally loaded his gun with a double
charge: this gun burst to pieces, and broke his hand clean off; he also got a
hard knock on his breast; and in the morning at nine o'clock he died, and they
buried them in that place, both in one hole.

-- 6th. It was a cold morning; we swam our horses over the river, the ice
running violently. Mr. Croghn told me that the Indians had spoke, upon the same
string that I had, to Colonel Bouquet, and altered their mind; and had agreed
and desired that 200 men should stay at the fort. I refused to make any
alteration in the answer to the general, till I myself did hear it of the
Indians; at which Mr. Croghn grew very angry. I told him I had already spoke
with the Indians; he said, it was a d -- d lie; and desired Mr. Hays to enquire
of the Indians, and take down in writing what they said. Accordingly he called
them, and asked them, if they had altered their speech, or spoke to Colonel
Bouquet on that string they gave me. Shingas and the other counselor said,
they had spoken nothing to Colonel Bouquet on the string they gave me, but what
was agreed between the Indians at Kushkushking. They said, Mr. Croghn and Henry
Montour had not spoke and acted honestly and uprightly; they bid us not alter
the least, and said, "We have told them three times to go back; but they will
not go, insisting upon staying here. Now you will let the governor, general,
and all people know, that our desire is, that they should go back, till the
other nations have joined in the peace, and then they may come and build a
trading house."

They then repeated what they had said the 5th instant. Then we took leave of
them, and promised to inform the general, governor, and all other gentle people
of their disposition; and so we set out from Pittsburg, and came within fifteen
miles of the breast-work; where we encamped. It snowed, and we made a little
cabin of hides.

-- 7th. Our horses were fainting, having little or no food. We came that day
about twenty miles, to another breast-work; where the whole army had encamped
on a hill; the water being far to fetch.

-- 8th. Between Pittsburg and fort Ligonier the country is hilly, with rich
bottoms, well timbered, but scantily watered. We arrived at fort Ligonier in
the afternoon, about four o'clock; where we found the general very sick; and
therefore could have no opportunity to speak with him.

-- 9th. We waited to see the general; they told us he would march the next
day, and we should go with him. Captain Sinclair wrote us a return for
provisions for four days.

-- 10th. The general was still sick; so that he could not go on the journey.

-- 11th. We longed very much to go farther; and therefore spoke to Major
Halket, and desired him to enquire of the general, if he intended to speak with
us, or, if we might go; as we were in a poor condition, for want of linen, and
other necessaries. He desired us to bring the Indians' answer, and our journal
to the general. Mr. Hays read his journal to Major Halket and Governor Glen.
They took memorandums, and went to the general.

-- 12th. They told us we should stay till the general went.

-- 14th. The general intended to go; but his horses could not be found. They
thought the Indians had carried them off. They hunted all day for the horses,
but could not find them. I spoke to Colonel Bouquet about our allowance being
so small, that we could hardly subsist; and that we were without money; and
desired him to let us have some money, that we might buy necessaries.
Provisions, and every thing is exceeding dear. One pound of bread cost a
shilling; one pound of sugar four shillings, a quart of rum seven shillings and
six pence, and so in proportion. Colonel Bouquet laid our matters before the
general; who let me call, and excused himself, that his distemper had hindered
him from speaking with me; and promised to help me in every thing I should
want, and ordered him to give me some money. He said farther, that I often
should call; and when he was alone he would speak with me.

-- 16th. Mr. Hays, being a hunting, was so lucky as to find the general's
horses, and brought them home; for which the general was very thankful to him.

-- 17th. Mr. Hays, being desired by Major Halket to go and look for the other
horses, went, but found none.

-- 18th. The general told me to hold myself ready, to go with him down the
country.

-- 20th. After we had been out two days, to hunt for our horses, in the rain,
we went again to day, and were informed, they had been seen in a lost
condition; one laying on the hill, and the other standing; they had been
hoppled together; but a person told us, he had cut the hopples. When we came
home we found the horses; they having made home to the fort.

-- 22d. It was cold and stormy weather.

-- 23d. I hunted for our horses, and having found them, we gave them both to
the king's commissary; they not being able to carry us farther.

The sergeant Henry Osten, being one of the company that guided us, as above
mentioned, and was that same prisoner, whom the Shavanos intended to burn
alive, came to day to the fort. He was much rejoiced to see us, and said, "I
thank you a thousand times for my deliverance from the fire; and think it not
too much to be at your service my whole life time." He gave us intelligence
that the Indians were, as yet, mightily for the English. His master had offered
to set him at liberty, and bring him to Pittsburg if he would promise him ten
gallons of rum; which he did; and he was brought safe to Pittsburg. Delaware
George is still faithful to the English; and was very helpful to procure his
liberty. Isaac Still, Shingas and Beaver are gone with the message to the
nations living further off. When the French had heard that the garrison, at
Pittsburg, consisted only of 200 men, they resolved to go down from Venango,
and destroy the English fort. So soon as the Indians at Kushkushking, heard of
their intention, they sent a message to the French, desiring them to draw back;
for they would have no war in their country. The friendly Indians have sent out
parties with that intention, that if the French went on, in their march toward
the fort, they would catch them, and bring them to the English. They showed to
Osten the place, where eight French Indian spies had lain near the fort. By
their marks upon the place they learned that these eight were gone back, and
five more were to come to the same place again. He told us further, that the
Indians had spoke among themselves, that if the English would join them, they
would go to Venango, and destroy the French there. We hear that the friendly
Indians intend to hunt round the fort, at Pittsburg, and bring the garrison
fresh meat. And upon this intelligence the general sent Captain Wedderholz with
fifty men, to reinforce the garrison at Pittsburg.

-- 25th. The people in the camp prepared for a Christmas frolic; but I kept
Christmas in the woods by myself.

-- 26th. To day an express came from Pittsburg to inform the general, that the
French had called all the Indians in their interest together, and intended to
come and destroy them there.

-- 27th. Toward noon the general set out; which caused a great joy among the
garrison, which had hitherto lain in tents, but now being a smaller company,
could be more comfortably lodged. It snowed the whole day. We encamped by a
beaver dam, under Laurel Hill.

-- 28th. We came to Stony Creek, where Mr. Quichsell is stationed. The general
sent Mr. Hays, express, to fort Bedford (Rays Town) and commanded him to see,
if the place for encampment, under the Allegheny mountain, was prepared; as
also to take care that refreshments should be at hand, at his coming. It was
stormy and snowed all the day.

-- 29th. On the road I came up with some wagons; and found my horses with the
company; who had taken my horse up, and intended to carry the same away. We
encamped on this side, under the Allegheny hill.

-- 30th. Very early I hunted for my horses, but in vain, and therefore was
obliged to carry my saddle bags, and other baggage on my back. The burden was
heavy, the roads bad; which made me very tired, and came late to Bedford; where
I took my old lodging with Mr. Frazier. They received me kindly, and refreshed
me according to their ability.

-- 31st. This day we rested, and, contrary to expectation, preparation was
made for moving further tomorrow. Mr. Hays, who has his lodging with the
commander of that place, visited me:

January 1st. 1759. We set out early. I got my saddle bags upon a wagon; but
my bed and covering I carried upon my back; and came that day to the crossing
of Juniata; where I had poor lodgings, being obliged to sleep in the open air,
the night being very cold.

-- 2d. We set out early. I wondered very much that the horses, in these
slippery roads, came so well with the wagons over these steep hills. We came
to fort Littleton; where I drew provisions; but could not find any who had
bread, to exchange for flour. I took lodging in a common house. Mr. Hays
arrived late.

-- 3d. We rose early. I thought to travel the nearest road to Shippen's Town,
and therefore desired leave of the general to prosecute my journey to
Lancaster, and wait for his excellency there; but he desired me to follow in
his company. It snowed, freezed, rained, and was stormy the whole day. All were
exceeding glad that the general arrived safe at fort Loudon. There was no room
in the fort for such a great company; I, therefore, and some others went two
miles further, and got lodgings at a plantation.

-- 4th. I and my company took the upper road; which is three miles nearer to
Shippen's town, where we arrived this evening. The slippery roads made me, as a
traveller, very tired.

-- 5th. To day I staid here for the general. Mr. Hays went ten miles further,
to see some of his relations. In the afternoon Israel Pemberton came from
Philadelphia to wait upon the general.

-- 6th. I came today ten miles to Mr. Miller's, where I lodged, having no
comfortable place in Shippen's town; all the houses being crowded with people.

-- 7th. They made preparation, at Mr. Millers, for the reception of the
general; but he, being so well today, resolved to go as far as Carlisle. I
could scarce find any lodging there. Henry Montour was so kind as to take me in
his room.

-- 8th. I begged the general for leave to go to Lancaster, having some
business, which he at last granted. I went to captain Sinclair for a horse, who
ordered me to go to the chief justice of the town; who ought to procure one for
me, in the province service. According to this order I went; but the justice
told me, that he did not know how to get any horse; if I would go and look for
one, he should be glad if I found any. But having no mind to run from one to
another, I resolved to walk, a^ I had done before: and so traveled along, and
came about ten miles that day to a tavern keeper's, named Chestnut.

-- 9th. Today I crossed the Susquahanna over the ice, and came within
thirteen miles of Lancaster. It was slippery and heavy traveling.

-- 10th. It rained all the day. I arrived at three o'clock, in the afternoon,
in Lancaster; and was quite refreshed, to have the favor to see my brethren.

THE END.
INDEX TO THE History of Pennsylvania. VOLUME II.
Anno. 1709. ARRIVAL of Governor Gookin, etc. Page. 3 The Proprietor's letter
by him to his friends in the province, etc. Page. 4, etc. Assembly's address to
the Governor, with the names of the Members, etc. Page 5 to 8 The Assembly's
resentment against Governor Evans imprudently continued in their address to
Governor Gookin. Ibid. Governor Gookin's first speech to the Assembly, in reply
to their address, etc. Page. 9 to 12 The Assembly insist on what they had
before advanced in their address; and blame the Secretary, James Logan. Page.
12 The Council's address to the Governor. Page. 12 to 16 The Assembly blame the
Council, and present a remonstrance of grievances to the Governor. Page. 16 and
17 David Lloyd, Speaker of the Assembly, over which he had much influence, said
to have been chief promoter of some of these disputes, etc. Page. 17 The
Assembly not justifiable, in part of their conduct, so far as it tended to
embarrass the government, and induce the Proprietary to dispose of it, etc.
Page. 17 to 20 The Governor's speech to the Assembly; containing a requisition
toward retaking Newfoundland, and the conquest of Canada, etc. Page. 20 to 22
The Governor's requisition, being of a military nature, occasions a difficulty
with the Quakers; the consequences of whose principles against war, are
preferable to those of war; more consistent with humanity, and the original
design of settling the province of Pennsylvania, by the Quakers, etc. Page. 22
to 26 The Assembly's conduct on the occasion, who vote a present to the Queen:
a mode which might answer the intention, etc. Page. 26 and 27 The Assembly
excuse the smallness of the sum voted (...) but the Governor further urges a
more generous contribution; which occasions more dispute; and the Assembly
adjourn. Page. 28 and 29 Governor Gookin convenes the Assembly before their
time, and lays several affairs of importance before them. Page. 29 and 30 The
Assembly request Governor Gookin to call the late Governor and Secretary to
account, etc. -- They agree to augment the sum before voted for the Queen's
use; -- expect a redress of grievances, and his concurrence to a number of
bills; with their titles, etc. Page. 30 and 31 The Governor's reply, respecting
the Quakers not bearing arms; -- and in regard to Evans and Logan; -- with his
reasons for not assenting to the bill of courts; -- but the Assembly adhere to
their former opinion and method, etc. Page. 31 and 32 Part of the Governor's
message to the Assembly, further discovering his restraint from the Proprietor,
in passing certain laws, without the consent of the Council, etc. Page. 32 to
34 The Assembly, being much disappointed, present a remonstrance to the
Governor, wherein they complain bitterly against the Secretary, James Logan.
Page. 34 and 35 Part of the Governor's speech to the new Assembly, mentioning
Logan's charge against Lloyd, the Speaker, etc. Page. 36 They vindicate the
former Assembly, etc. and show their resentment against the Secretary, Logan.
Page. 36 to 39 Petition of the Secretary, James Logan, to the Assembly, etc.
with the extreme proceedings of the House against him. Page. 39 and 40 Warrant
for apprehending and imprisoning the Secretary Logan. Ibid. The Governor's
supersedeas to suppress, or prevent, the execution, etc. Page. 41
Discontinuance of further proceedings between the Governor and Assembly; -- the
Secretary goes to England, and survives the storm, etc. Page. 42 Party spirit
early in the province: increased by the Proprietor's absence from it: --
exaggerates what is amiss; and now endangers the government and constitution.
Page. 43 to 45 Anno. 1710. William Penn's expostulatory letter to the Assembly,
on the late transactions, etc. Page. 45 to 53 A new Assembly elected,
consisting entirely of different Members, in October, 1710, etc. Page. 53 Good
agreement between the Governor and this Assembly; with the names of the
Members, etc. Page. 54, etc. Anno. 1711. Governor Gookin convenes the Assembly
in consequence of an express from England, respecting the expedition to Canada.
Page. 55 The Queen's letter to the Governor on the occasion. Ibid. The Assembly
vote 2000 l for the Queen's use, notwithstanding the constant extraordinary
expense of the province with the Indians, etc. Page. 56 The Proprietor's desire
to serve the people of the province, etc. Page. 57 Anno. 1712. The Proprietor
agrees to dispose of the government of the province to Queen Anne; -- but soon
after, he being seized with an apoplexy, it was never executed, etc. Page. 57
and 58 Proceedings between the Governor and Assembly, etc. Page. 58, etc.
Account of wine and rum imported this year. Page. 59 Anno. 1713. John Lowdon,
etc. with the first settlement of New Garden in Chester Country. Ibid. Memorial
of Samuel Carpenter; -- with the names of Members of Council in 1712. Page. 60
Anno. 1714. Change in the Assembly; -- David Lloyd again Speaker; -- but not
agreeing with the Governor on the affairs before them, the Assembly adjourn
till the latter part of their year, etc. Ibid. Anno. 1715. Governor's writ for
summoning the Assembly in 1715; -- altercation between the Governor and
Assembly, etc. Page. 60 and 61 But they afterward agree for dispatch of
business, etc. -- London Grove in Chester County first settled, etc. Page. 61
and 62 The Assembly's address to the Governor respecting tumults raised in
Philadelphia; -- with the Governor's answer. Page. 63 to 69 Indian treaty held
in Philadelphia, anno 1715. Ibid. The Governor informs the Assembly of his
intention to go to England, etc. Page. 69, etc. Anno. 1716. The Assembly's
address to King George the First, on his accession to the throne, etc. Joseph
Growdon Speaker. Page. 70 to 72 The Governor disagrees with both the Council
and Assembly, etc. -- with the names of the Members, etc. Page. 72 and 73 The
Assembly's long representation to Governor Gookin, containing a variety of
things. Page. 74 to 94 Anno. 1717. Governor Gookin takes his last leave of the
Assembly; -- being superseded by Sir William Keith. Page. 94 Governor Keith's
first speech to the Assembly, June, 1717; -- with the Assembly's address, and
his reply. Page. 94 to 99 The government's apprehensions respecting the great
influx of foreigners about this time. Page. 100 Death and memorial of Griffith
Owen, one of the Council, etc. Ibid. Anno. 1718. Address of the Governor and
Assembly to the King respecting the settlement and state of the province; --
and the necessity of the solemn affirmation of the Quakers being admitted
there, in all things, instead of an oath, etc. Harmony between the Governor and
Assembly, etc. Page. 101 to 104 Death and character of the Proprietor William
Penn; wherein are obviated some objections against him, or his administration,
etc. Page. 105 to 114 Manner of his leaving his estate and property; -- with
the dispute which happened in consequence, etc. Page. 114 to 119 Conduct of the
Governor and Assembly on their hearing of the Proprietor's decease. Page. 119
Memorial of Jonathan Dickinson, Speaker of the Assembly. Ibid. Names of the
Members of Assembly. Page. 120 William Penn, junior, heir at law, claims the
government. Ibid. Anno. 1719. Governor Keith's speech to the Assembly, in
consequence of said claim; -- with a disagreement among the Indians, etc. Page.
121 The Assembly's answer to the Governor's speech, etc. Page. 122 to 124
Government, etc. of Pennsylvania, afterward settled in favor of the younger
branch of the Proprietor's family, etc. Page. 124 An important law, for the
advancement of justice, receives the royal assent; -- William Trent, etc. Page.
125 Anno. 1720. Governor Keith proposes to the Assembly to establish a Court of
Chancery; to which they agree; -- Vincent Caldwell and William Baldwin, etc.
Page. 125 and 126 Governor Keith's proclamation for establishing a Court of
Chancery in Pennsylvania; with the names of the Masters in Chancery, etc. Page.
126 and 127 Anno. 1721. The disagreement among the Indians increasing, Governor
Keith goes to Virginia, on the occasion, etc. Page. 128 Extract of a printed
Indian treaty, held by Governor Keith, etc. at Conestogoe in Pennsylvania, with
diverse Indian nations, etc. Page. 128 to 145 Governor Keith's concern for the
public good, and the Assembly's acknowledgment of the same; -- death and
memorial of Anthony Morris. Page. 145 and 146 Anno. 1722. Barbarous murder of
an Indian gives the Assembly much concern; -- they approve the Governor's
conduct on the occasion, and are very anxious to preserve friendship with the
Indians; with which the Governor heartily unites, etc. -- names of the Members
of Council, etc. Page. 146 to 149 Several useful laws passed; with the titles
of some of them. Ibid. Anno. 1722. Increase of law suits in the province; --
low credit of its bread and flour, in the West Indies, etc -- with the names of
the Members of Assembly; -- and number of writs annually, etc. Page. 150, etc.
Paper Money Scheme first introduced; -- which occasions great diversity of
sentiment, and party dispute respecting it. Page. 151 Sentiments of several
gentlemen and merchants on the proposed paper currency, delivered to the
Assembly by Isaac Norris and James Logan. Page. 152 to 162 Answer to the
Sentiments, etc. presented to the House, etc. Ibid. Further sentiments of the
gentlemen, merchants, etc. Ibid, etc. Governor Keith's sentiments, on the same
subject, in writing, to the Assembly. Page. 162 to 171 Anno. 1723. An act of
Assembly is passed, for emitting 15,000 l on loan in paper bills of credit; --
and before the end of the same year, another act, for 30,000 l more, etc, Page.
171 to 173 Extracts from Dr. Douglas and Governor Hutchinson's observations on
paper money in New England, etc. Ibid. Further account of the state of the
Pennsylvania paper currency, till the year 1749; -- with that of the several
rates of gold and silver in the province during the said time. Page. 173 to 177
Anno. 1724. Governor Keith a solicitor of popularity; -- his administration
beneficial to the country: -- he breaks his instructions from the Proprietor --
which causes a dispute in the province. Page. 177 to 179 Reasons given by
Governor Keith, and his party, for his conduct; -- with those given against it,
in vindication of said instructions, by the friends of the Proprietaries. Page.
179 to 183 Anno. 1725. James Logan's paper, offered to the Assembly, for
terminating the above mentioned dispute; -- with the names of the Members of
Assembly, in 1724 and 1725, and those of the Council about the same time, etc.
Page. 184 Widow, Hannah Penn's answer to the Assembly's remonstrance,
respecting the aforesaid instructions, etc. Page. 185 to 187 Further account
respecting the Proprietor's instructions, etc. with mention of William Allen
and Thomas Lightfoot. Page. 188 and 189 Establishment of the Quakers' solemn
affirmation instead of an oath, in Pennsylvania. Page. 190 to 193 Forms of the
declaration of fidelity to the King, of the abjuration and affirmation of the
Quakers in Pennsylvania. Ibid. Address of the Quakers in Pennsylvania to the
King expressive of their gratitude, on the restoration, or establishment, of
the solemn affirmation, etc. Page. 193 to 195 Speech of the deliverers of said
address to the King, and the King's answer; -- with an extract from an epistle
of the Quakers in England addressed to their own society there on a similar
occasion. Ibid. The privilege of the Quakers in Pennsylvania of appearing in
courts, in their own way, with their hats on their heads, interrupted, etc.
Page. 196 to 198 The Quakers address and request to Governor Keith, on the
occasion; and his compliance with said request. Page. 198 to 201 Anno. 1726.
Governor Keith, having displeased and opposed the Proprietary family,
notwithstanding his popularity, and useful abilities, and his having benefited
the province by his administration, is superseded in the government by Patrick
Gordon, in 1726; -- after which being elected a Member of Assembly, he
afterward became disagreeable to the people, and returned to England, etc.
Page. 201 and 202 Patrick Gordon, Esquire, succeeds to the government, and
first meets the Assembly in Sixth month, 1726; -- his administration at first
disturbed by the faction of Sir William Keith, etc. Page. 202 Prudent and
prosperous administration of Governor Gordon, in general; -- with the
flourishing state of the province; its trade and produce during and about the
same time; -- mention of Robert Fletcher, etc. Page. 202 to 206 Anno. 1732.
Thomas Penn, one of the Proprietors arrives in the province; the Assembly's
address to him, with his answer. Page. 206 to 208 Commissioners appointed to
mark and run the boundary lines between Maryland and Pennsylvania with those of
the territories of the latter; -- with Dr. Douglas's account of this affair,
etc. Page. 208 and 209 Description of the boundaries between Maryland and
Pennsylvania, etc. which were not finally executed till the year 1762. Page.
209 to 211 Anno. 1734. John Penn the eldest of the Proprietors arrives in the
province; -- Assembly's address to him, with his answer. Page. 211 and 212
Anno. 1735. The Proprietor of Maryland applies to the King for a grant, or
confirmation, of the territories and part of Pennsylvania, as being within the
charter granted to his ancestors; -- but he is opposed by the Proprietors of
Pennsylvania, and their friends, both in England and in the province, etc.
Page. 212 and 213 The Assembly's address to John Penn, on his departure to
England on this occasion; with his answer, etc. Page. 213 and 214 Anno. 1736.
Governor Gordon dies in 1736; -- and the government devolves on the Council,
James Logan being President, till the arrival of George Thomas, Esquire, in
1738; -- during which time the public affairs were well managed: -- names of
Members of Council; -- Benjamin Franklin, etc. Page. 215 Anno. 1738.
Administration of Governor Thomas; -- he first meets the Assembly in Sixth
month, 1738; and informs them his embarkation had been retarded by the conduct
of the Lord Baltimore, etc. -- with the grants of Assembly for the King's use,
during his administration; -- and Indian expenses, etc. Page. 215 and 216 Anno.
1739. Speech of Andrew Hamilton, Speaker of the Assembly, at his taking leave
of the same, in 1739; respecting the constitution and prosperity of
Pennsylvania about that time, etc. Page. 217 to 220 Anno. 1741. Governor
Thomas, having encouraged the enlisting of bought, or indented servants, in the
province for soldiers, John Wright, a Member of Assembly, and Magistrate of
Lancaster County, opposes the practice, in a speech before the Assembly; for
which he is removed from his office; -- as well as some other Magistrates, on
that account, etc. Page. 220 and 221 Number of servants thus taken from their
masters, who were indemnified for their loss by the Assembly, etc. with the
names of the Members of Assembly, etc. Page. 220 and 221 Speech of John Wright
to the Court and Grand Jury, on his removal from his office, at the Quarter
Sessions, in Lancaster; -- with a short memorial of said John Wright. Page. 221
to 227 Assembly's address to the Proprietor, Thomas Penn, on his departure for
England, with the Proprietor's answer, etc. Ibid. Anno. 1742. Account of a
riotous election at Philadelphia, in 1742; -- with the effects of much liberty
and party spirit, etc. -- Robert Jordan. Page. 227 to 230 Anno. 1747. Governor
Thomas resigns the government; -- though his administration was attended with
some altercation and disagreement, between him and the Assembly, in certain
cases, yet it was, in general, well executed, and they parted friendly, etc.
Page. 230 Names of Members of Council at different times. Ibid. Anno. 1748. On
Governor Thomas's resignation, the government devolves on the Council, Anthony
Palmer being President, till the arrival of James Hamilton, of Philadelphia,
from England, Governor, etc. who resigned in 1754. Page. 231 Succession of
later Governors till the year 1771. Page. 232 and 233 Memorials of John Kinsey,
Israel Pemberton, Michael Lightfoot and John Smith. Ibid. Conclusion. Page. 234
to 236
A View of the Province of Pennsylvania, and of the State in which it
flourished chiefly between the years 1760 and 1770, in four parts, viz.
Part I. The seasons of the year, and temperature of the weather; the nature of
the land and soil; with the face of the country in general, both in
Pennsylvania and the adjacent provinces; as, the mountains, valleys, plains,
rivers and creeks, etc. Page. 237 to 257 Part II. The chorography, division
into counties, principal towns, produce and chief staple of the country, with
its great increase and variety. -- Trade and commerce, present inhabitants,
with their great increase, etc. -- City of Philadelphia, and other considerable
towns, etc. -- Internal police, and courts of judicature in Pennsylvania, with
the public officers in 1772. Page. 257 to 292 Part III. The Indians, --
uncertainty of their origin, -- boundaries of the Six Nations, with their
dependencies, and the Indians on Ohio, etc -- Account of the Six Nations, their
customs and properties, etc. -- Of those of Pennsylvania and New Jersey; their
general turn of mind, propensities, customs and habits. -- Speech of an Indian
Chief, in answer to a Swedish Missionary, -- their religious sense of the
Deity. -- Conrad Weiser's letter on the subject. -- Account of some religious
Indians in 1760, etc. -- Infraction of the peace between the Indians, and the
people of Pennsylvania, about the year 1754. -- Massacre of the Conestogoe
Indians, etc. -- Causes of the Indian War, and means of the ensuing Peace in
1764. Page. 292 to 337 Part IV. Religious State of Pennsylvania; -- variety and
harmony of the religious sects in the province; -- their proportion in
Philadelphia. -- The Mennonists, Dunkards, Swenkfelders, and Moravians, --
Conclusion. Page. 337 to 360 Thomas Makin's account of Pennsylvania, a Latin
poem, in 1729, addressed to James Logan. Page. 360 to 373
APPENDIX.
No. I. Certain conditions, or concessions, in 1681. II. First frame of
government and laws of Pensylvania, etc. published in 1682. III. The charter of
1683. IV. The charter of 1696. V. The Assembly's address to the Proprietors,
with his answer, in 1701. VI. The charter of the city of Philadelphia, in 1701.
VII. The Friendly Association's address to Governor Denny, in 1757. VIII. and
IX. Christian Frederick Post's journal of his two journeys among the Indians,
etc.
ERRATA and EMENDATA in this Volume, viz.
Page. Line. Errata. Emendata. 4 Note, forasmuch as, for so much as. 156 16,
bacause, because. 310 23, etc. so much as, etc. did not succeed so much a^


