PROCEEDINGS OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS OF PHILADELPHIA, RELATIVE TO THE
PREVENTION OF THE INTRODUCTION AND SPREADING OF CONTAGIOUS DISEASES.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE No. 41, SOUTH
SECOND STREET.

1798.

COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS.
JANUARY 2 d, 1798.
Resolved, That the proceedings of the College relative to the prevention of
the introduction and spreading of contagious diseases, be published.

Extracted from the Minutes, THOMAS C. JAMES, Secretary.

PROCEEDINGS, etc.
COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS.
AUGUST 25 th, 1793. SPECIAL MEETING.
IN consequence of the prevalence of a fever of a very alarming nature in some
parts of this city, the College were called together, in order to consider what
steps should be taken by them on the occasion, consistent with their duty, to
their fellow citizens.

After a free communication of sentiment, a committee was appointed to consider
and report on the means best adapted to prevent the spreading of this disease,
and to guard against the contagion of it.

August 26 th, 1793. ADJOURNED MEETING.
THE committee reported a copy of directions for preventing the further
progress of the malignant fever, which, being amended, was agreed upon. It was
agreed to have it signed by the Vice President and Secretary, and to send a
copy of it to the Mayor. The directions were as follow, viz.

Directions for preventing the further progress of the Malignant, contagious
Fever.
The College of Physicians having taken into consideration the malignant and
contagious fever which now prevails in this city, have agreed to recommend to
their fellow citizens the following means of preventing its progress.

FIRST. -- That all unnecessary intercourse should be avoided with such persons
as are infected by it.

SECOND. -- To place a mark upon the door or window of such houses as have any
infected persons in them.

THIRD. -- To place the persons infected in the center of large and airy rooms,
in beds without curtains, and to pay the strictest regard to cleanliness, by
frequently changing their body and bedlinen; also by removing, as speedily as
possible, all offensive matters from their rooms.

FOURTH. -- To provide a large and airy hospital in the neighborhood of the
city, for the reception of such poor persons as cannot be accommodated with the
above advantages in private houses.

FIFTH. -- To put a stop to the tolling of the bells.

SIXTH. -- To bury such persons as die of the fever, in carriages, and in as
private a manner as possible.

SEVENTH. -- To keep the streets and wharves of the city as clean as possible.
As the contagion of the disease may be taken into the body and pass out of it
without producing the fever, unless it be rendered active by some occasional
cause, the following means should be attended to, to prevent the contagion from
being excited into action in the body.

EIGHTH. -- To avoid all fatigue of body and mind.

NINTH. -- To avoid standing or sitting in the sun, also in a current of air,
or in the evening air.

TENTH. -- To accommodate the dress to the weather, and to exceed rather in
warm than in cold clothing.

ELEVENTH. -- To avoid intemperance, but to use fermented liquors, such as
wine, beer and cider with moderation.

The college conceive fires to be very ineffectual, if not dangerous means, of
checking the progress of the fever. They have reason to place more dependence
upon the burning of gunpowder. The benefits of vinegar and camphire are
confined chiefly to infected rooms, and they cannot be used too frequently upon
handkerchiefs or in smelling-bottles, by persons whose duty calls them to visit
or attend the sick.

By order of the College, WILLIAM SHIPPEN junr. Vice President. Samuel P.
Griffitts, Secretary.


November 5 th, 1793.
A Letter from the Governor of the state was read, requesting information of
the origin, state and situation of the disease, and the measures necessary to
obviate its future ravages or its removal, as follows, viz.

SIR,
As I am desirous to lay before the legislature a statement of the
circumstances attending the calamity which has recently visited the city of
Philadelphia, permit me, through you, to request the aid of the College of
Physicians in satisfying the following inquiries.

Was the disorder imported or not? If imported, when, by what means, and from
what place? If not imported, what were the probable causes that produced it?
What measures ought to be pursued to purify the city from any latent infection;
and what precautions are best calculated to guard against the future occurrence
of a similar calamity?

I am persuaded that the public spirit and benevolence of the College of
Physicians will induce them cheerfully to excuse and to comply with this
request, which is intended to establish a foundation for regulations, that may
cooperate with their professional labors, in preserving to their fellow
citizens the invaluable blessing of health.

I am with great esteem SIR, Your most obedient servant, THOMAS MIFFLIN.
Germantown 30 th, October, 1793.
To Dr. Redman, President of the College of Physicians.

Answer to the Governor's Letter.
SIR,
It has not been from a want of respect to yourself nor from an inattention to
the subject that your letter of the 30th ult. was not sooner answered -- but
the importance of the question proposed has made it necessary for us to devote
a considerable portion of time and diligence to this business, in order to
arrive at a safe and just conclusion.

No instance has ever occurred, of the disease called the Yellow Fever, being
generated in this city, or in any other part of this state, as far as we know;
but there have been frequent instances of its having been imported, not only
into this, but into other parts of North America, and prevailing there for a
certain period of time -- and from the rise, progress and nature of the
malignant Fever, which began to prevail here about the beginning of last
August, and extended itself gradually over a great part of the city, we are of
opinion, that this disease was imported into Philadelphia by some of the
vessels which arrived in the port after the middle of July. This opinion we are
further confirmed in by the various accounts we have received from the best
authorities we could procure on the subject.

To purify the city from latent infection, we would recommend, that every
house, particularly those in which there have been any sick, should be
thoroughly cleansed and kept open, so as to admit fresh air through every
aperture -- the walls should be whitewashed and gunpowder burned in all the
apartments -- the beds and woollen apparel of the sick should either be
destroyed or smoaked with gunpowder in a close room, and exposed to the air and
rain -- unslaked Lime, should be thrown down the Necessaries, and the streets
should be kept clean, especially in the confined parts of the city.

In answer to your last question, permit us to observe, that we trust the early
attention of the Legislature will be directed to the safety of the port, with
respect to the officers and other arrangements which may be found necessary;
and on such an occasion the College will ever cheerfully cooperate with them
in their endeavors to prevent, avert, or, remove these dangerous calamities.

By order of the College of Physicians, Attest, JOHN REDMAN, President. SAMUEL
P. GRIFFITTS, Secretary. THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of Pennsylvania,

November, 26 th, 1793.

December, 2 d, 1794.
On motion, ordered, that a Committee be appointed to consider the defects of
the health laws, and to point out the proper remedies in a report to the
College.

December 17 th, 1794. SPECIAL MEETING.
A Committee from the Board of Health, consisting of John Kaighn, Thomas Ewing,
Thomas Paul, and Matthew Lawler, attended and laid before the College several
plans of the Hospital, intended to be erected for the reception of persons
affected with Contagious diseases, in order for their consideration -- some
time was spent in this business, and a free communication of sentiment took
place. -- The College gave it as their opinion, generally, that the building
ought to consist of one continued range, fronting the south, and should be so
constructed as to admit of a free passage for the air through every room.

January, 6 th, 1795,
The Committee on the Health Laws, appointed at the last stated Meeting, made
the following Report, viz.

The Committee, appointed by the College of Physicians, to consider the Health
Laws, having attended to the subject, report, that the said law appears to them
to be inadequate to the purposes intended to be embraced by the Legislature,
particularly as it respects the extension of Malignant, Contagious Diseases,
when they appear in the city.

The disease which appears to require most attention in this respect is the
Yellow Fever; for it is probable, that whenever this complaint is very
prevalent in the West Indies (which is generally the case in time of war) it
will find its way to this city, notwithstanding the care of the Health
Officers. -- Being highly contagious in cities, when it is introduced, the
lives of our fellow-citizens will be exposed to extreme danger. -- But
notwithstanding its contagious nature, the history of the plague and of other
Contagious diseases, authorizes the Committee to say, that by proper exertions,
it may be prevented from spreading when introduced.

Exertions of this kind can only be made or directed by persons who have some
knowledge of the nature and effects of contagion and can judge rightly of
suspicious cases when they occur. -- The Committee therefore consider the law
as defective in this point, because it neither lays down a precise rule of
conduct for the consulting physician employed in this business, nor commits the
object to his sole discretion; but it associates with him any two members of
the Committee of Health, without providing that these Gentlemen should have
sufficient information on the general subject; and therefore, the whole object
of the law may be lost, by the mistakes which will arise from their want of
Medical knowledge.

It is necessary, if a discretionary power be committed to any body of men,
that a majority of them should understand the nature of the business entrusted
to them; and from this view of the subject, the Committee are induced to
propose to the College, to recommend to the Legislature, to commit the powers
necessary to prevent the extension of Malignant Contagious Disorders, to the
consulting Physician, and a small number of associates of the Medical
Profession, a majority of whom shall determine what measures are to be pursued,
when occasions of alarm may occur. Of the many advantages which will be derived
from this association of professional gentlemen, the Committee will content
themselves with enumerating two:

1st. The consulting Physician will derive firmness and resolution in the
performance of his duty, from the support of his professional Brethren, and,
2dly. The great object, (the safety of the City,) will be more completely
obtained. The most skilful Physicians have been deceived respecting Contagion;
but when several are concerned they will most probably judge rightly.

December 5 th, 1794.
On which it was resolved, that this Committee be directed to draw up a
Memorial to the House of Assembly, according to the tenor of the Report, to be
laid before the college as soon as they are prepared.

January, 26 th, 1795. SPECIAL MEETING.
The Committee on the Health Laws reported an Essay of a Memorial to the Senate
and House of Representatives of this State, which after some alterations was
agreed to, and directed to be signed by the president and secretary, and
presented to the assembly by the same committee -- The Memorial is as follows
viz.

To the Senate and House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The MEMORIAL of the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS of PHILADELPHIA,
Respectfully Represents,

That the act for establishing a Health Office etc. appears to them inadequate
to some of the purposes for which it was formed, particularly as it respects
the communication of malignant contagious Disorders, when they appear in the
city.

Amongst those which require most of your Legislative attention, is that fatal
disease commonly called the Yellow Fever. -- For as that complaint is
frequently prevalent in the West Indies, it may sometimes be brought to this
city, notwithstanding the care of the Health Officers.

To prevent its being communicated, when introduced, is therefore an important
object; and although, it has been found to be highly contagious in Cities, yet,
from the History of the Plague and other Contagious Disorders, there is reason
to believe, that, by proper exertions, it may be prevented from spreading when
amongst us.

Exertions of this kind can only be directed, or made by persons, who, having
some knowledge of the nature and effects of Contagion, are the best judges in
doubtful cases; and therefore, in this respect, the law appears to the College
to be defective, as it has committed the business of deciding upon the removal
of persons, supposed to be infected, to the consulting Physician and two
associates, who are not of the Medical Profession -- whereas, in the opinion of
the College, it would be most properly entrusted to that Physician and a
council of Medical Gentlemen, a majority of whom ought to determine what
measures should be pursued, when any cause of alarm may occur.

They believe that the great object, the safety of the city, would be more
completely obtained, if the consulting Physician, and this Council, were
authorized to direct the removal, not only of such persons as are already
diseased, but of such, as from their exposure to the operation of Contagion,
are likely to become so; and also if they were consulted respecting the
quarantine and purification of vessels, and the construction and regulation of
the City Hospital, which is about to be erected.

The College trust that the importance of the subject will be sufficient
apology for their address to the Legislature; as from the abstruse nature of
Contagion, its effects can only be understood by those who have studied them
with attention, and the difficult business of preventing its propagation will
be most properly committed to persons of this description.

By order of the College, Attest. JOHN REDMAN, President. SAMUEL P. GRIFFITTS,
Secretary.


February 10 th, 1795. SPECIAL MEETING.
A Letter was read from the Committee of the Board of Health, addressed to the
President, requesting the cooperation of the College, in the construction of
the intended Hospital over Schuylkill. The letter is as follows:

GENTLEMEN,
The Board of Health having appointed a Committee to prepare a plan for an
Hospital, for the accommodation of persons afflicted with contagious Diseases;
and desirous of obtaining every assistance in this important undertaking, we
were directed to advise you thereof, and request your attention thereto.

We have only to add, that we shall esteem every information on this subject,
which you may think proper to afford, (leaving the mode in which it shall be
conveyed, to your judgment, whether it be communicated by writing, or the joint
cooperation of a Committee to be appointed by you to unite with us) as a mark
of your desire to alleviate the distresses incident to that afflicting disease.

We are with much esteem, Your Friends and Fellow-Citizens, in behalf of the
Committee, JOHN CONNELLY, Chairman.
January 28 th, 1795.

On which a Committee was appointed, on the part of the College, to join the
Committee of the Board of Health in this undertaking, and to give them such
assistance as may appear necessary.

The Committee on the address to the Assembly, were particularly requested to
continue their attention to that business.

March 3 d, 1795.
The Committee on the address to the Assembly, reported, that they had attended
to the business, by meeting a Committee of the Assembly, and informing them of
the opinion of the College on the subject.

The College were informed, that the Committee appointed the tenth of February,
to meet the Committee of Health, have performed the business for which they
were appointed.

July 7 th, 1795.
A Letter from the Governor to Dr. Samuel Duffield, was read, in which he
requests the College to nominate four persons, Members of the College, for the
Governor's appointment, to consult and advise with Dr. Duffield, respecting the
removal of persons infected with Contagious Diseases, etc. etc. according to an
act of Assembly passed last Session. The Letter is as follows:

SIR,
By an Act of the General Assembly, passed at the last Session, I am empowered
to appoint four persons, Members of the College of Physicians, to advise and
consult with you, respecting the removal of persons infected with Contagious
Diseases, and respecting the quarantine and purification of vessels. -- As the
subject is of great importance to the ease and safety of the Citizens, permit
me to request, that you will lay it before the College of Physicians, with an
expression of my wish, that they would nominate four Members, to whom the trust
contemplated by the Legislature, shall be confided.

I am with great esteem, SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant, THOMAS MIFFLIN.
Philadelphia 19 th, 1795.
To Dr. Duffield, Consulting Physician of the Port of Philadelphia.

On which it was resolved, that the President be directed to furnish the
Governor with a list of the present Fellows of the College, and to inform him,
that the College conceive he will thereby be enabled to make such a selection,
as will be most agreeable to him.

August 4 th, 1795.
The President reported the following answer to the Governor's Letter,
according to the direction of the College at their last meeting.

July 10 th, 1795. HONORED SIR,
Your Letter of June 19th, to Dr. Samuel Duffield, was by him laid before the
College of Physicians, on the seventh instant. -- The College would have
immediately complied with your request, by nominating four of their Members for
your appointment, in order to put into effect the Act of Assembly referred to
-- but they found several difficulties in the business, and concluded that your
views might be fully answered, by sending you a list of their Members, from
which the selection may be made. -- Agreeably to this conclusion, I enclose you
an accurate list of the officers and other Fellows of the College; and at the
same time am happy in assuring you, that duty as well as inclination, will ever
induce us to use our best endeavors to cooperate with you in this and every
other matter which regards the health and happiness, of our Fellow-Citizens.

With all due respect I am, etc. By order of the College, JOHN REDMAN,
President.

Thomas Mifflin, Esqr. Governor of Pennsylvania.

COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS,
August 15 th, 1797. SPECIAL MEETING.
The President informed the College, that the Meeting was called in consequence
of the following letter from the Governor.

SIR,
The alarm that prevails, respecting the appearance of the Yellow Fever, in the
neighborhood of Penn Street, induces me to request, that you will be so
obliging as to obtain, from your Brethren of the College of Physicians, a
statement of the facts which have occurred on the subject, in the course of
their practice; and an opinion upon the best mode of averting the calamity
threatened.

I am with great respect and esteem, SIR, Your most obedient humble servant,
THOMAS MIFFLIN.
Philadelphia, August 14 th, 1797.
To Dr. John Redman, President of the College of Physicians.

Which being taken into consideration and written or verbal reports being
given, by all the Members present, it was agreed, to request the President to
inform the Governor, that a Malignant Contagious Fever has lately appeared in
Penn Street, and its neighborhood, of which ten or twelve persons have died;
and that the College will as speedily as possible, inform the Governor of what
may appear to them the best mode of averting the calamity which threatens us.

It was further agreed, that a Committee be appointed to report to the College
at their adjourned Meeting to be held on the 17th instant, the measures
necessary, to prevent the introduction and extension of contagious Diseases.

The President's answer to the Governor's Letter.
HONORED SIR,
On the Receipt of your letter, I immediately summoned the College of
Physicians and laid it before them; and from a full statement of facts which
have occured upon the subject in the course of their practice, it is evident,
that a Malignant, Contagious Fever, has lately appeared in Penn Street, and its
vicinity, of which ten or twelve persons have died.

Our opinions upon the best mode of averting the calamity which threatens us,
will be communicated to you as speedily as possible.

With all due respect I am, SIR, Yours, etc. etc. JOHN REDMAN.
August 16 th, 1797.
To Thomas Mifflin, Esqr. Governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

August 17 th, 1797. ADJOURNED MEETING.
The Committee appointed to take into consideration the measures necessary to
prevent the introduction and extension of contagious diseases, presented their
report; which being read and amended, it was agreed that it should be laid
before the Governor in the form of a letter as follows viz.

SIR,
The College of physicians having attentively considered your request, of
giving an opinion upon the best mode of averting the calamity which threatens
us, have directed me to communicate to you the following methods; 1st for
preventing the spreading of contagious diseases, when introduced among us; and
2dly, for preventing the introduction of such diseases:

1st. To prevent the spreading of contagious diseases when introduced; we
recommend the most scrupulous attention to cleaning and watering the streets,
particularly washing out the Gutters -- Habits of temperance, caution as to
clothing, fatigue of body and exposure to the sun and night air. -- When it is
ascertained that such diseases exist, let the physicians of the city be
enjoined to give information thereof to the Board of Health; to whom they
should daily report such cases as may occur -- Let all unnecessary intercourse
be suspended with that part of the city where the disease first appears -- Let
such of the sick and their families who reside in any part of the city, where
their residence may prove hurtful or dangerous, be immediately removed -- When
the Disease is ascertained to exist in several Houses, near to each other, in
any part of the city, let all the neighboring families who have escaped
infection, be removed, and all communication between the infected families and
the city be suspended, by preventing any person, except those whose visits are
essentially necessary to the sick, previous to this removal, from entering into
that part of the town -- for this purpose Mercantile business must, of course,
be suspended there, and the vessels removed from the adjoining wharves.

All suspected Wharves and Houses, particularly such as have been occupied by
the sick, should be purified by order of the Board of Health, in the manner
formerly recommended by the College.

2d. To prevent the introduction of Contagious Diseases; we recommend that a
new Law on the subject be made, constituting a Board of Health, consisting of
five persons, including two Physicians; of whom three shall be Citizens of
Philadelphia, one an inhabitant of the Northern Liberties, and one an
inhabitant of Southwark; who shall meet daily during the months of June, July,
August, and September: they shall have full power to do every thing necessary
respecting the quarantine to be performed by vessels arriving in this port, as
well as to direct the removal of any vessels, after their arrival at the city,
which may be found or suspected to be unhealthy -- a consulting, and a residing
Physician should be appointed -- the former to dwell in the city, and the
latter to be generally at the Health Office, on State Island; from which he is
never to be absent during the abovementioned months. -- Every vessel which
arrives, from the West Indies, from the American Main to the Southward of
Florida, or from the Mediterranean, during these months, should perform a
quarantine of not less than thirty days -- and all suspected vessels, should
have every article wrought or unwrought, which is used for clothing, or
bedding, or which may be supposed to contain infection, particularly those
which may be composed of Cotton, Wool, or Silk, unladen and purified at the
Island.

By order of the College of Physicians, JOHN REDMAN, President.
August 18 th, 1797.
His Excellency Thomas Mifflin, Esqr. Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.

August 23 d, 1797. SPECIAL MEETING.
The following extract from the minutes of the Board of Health was read, viz.

Health Office, August 22 d, 1797.
Resolved, that the inspectors of the Health Office request the College of
Physicians to meet daily, or as often as they can with convenience, to adopt
and publish such information and advice to the citizens of Philadelphia, as
they may judge will tend to check the progress of contagion. That they be also
requested to communicate to this board, from time to time, such information as
they may deem necessary.

Extract from the Minutes, JOHN MILLER, Junr. Chairman.

In pursuance of the above, it was resolved that a committee be appointed, to
report to the college, at their next meeting, the particular method to be
pursued in purifying houses, in regulating funerals, in restricting intercourse
with houses where the contagious disease prevails, and in checking the progress
and extension of contagion.

August 24 th, 1797. ADJOURNED MEETING.
The commit appointed yesterday, to propose the methods of putting a stop to
the progress of contagion, presented their report, which was read, but the
meeting not being sufficiently numerous to enter into the full consideration
thereof, it was agreed to postpone it until tomorrow.

August 25 th, 1797. ADJOURNED MEETING.
The report of the committee appointed to propose a plan to prevent the
extension of contagion, was again read and deliberately considered, and, after
some amendment, it was agreed that it should be laid before the inspectors of
the Health Office as soon as possible; it is as follows, viz.

The College of Physicians having taken into consideration the request of the
inspectors of the Health Office, to propose the methods necessary to be adopted
for preventing the extension of contagion, recommend the following plan.

FIRST. -- Let a person, appointed for that purpose, call every morning upon
each of the physicians in the city and suburbs, and procure information of all
the cases of malignant contagious fever that have come to their knowledge.

SECOND. -- Let those who are affected with the aforesaid disease, be removed
from town, in all cases where they are willing, and also all those who by
living in the same family or visiting the sick are liable to an attack of the
same disease.

THIRD. -- Where it is not practicable to remove the sick, the families who
inhabit the adjoining houses should be directed to remove.

FOURTH. -- After the sick have recovered, so that they may be removed, or have
died, all the family should be removed from town. The bedding, clothing, and
other articles that have been used about the sick, and the furniture of the
rooms occupied by the sick, should be collected in the rooms which are to be
closed, and during two days kept filled with a smoke to be made in the
following manner, viz. Fill a small pan with alternate layers of charcoal and
brimstone, kindle a slow fire on the top of these combustibles, with a few
small pieces of bark, and they will burn a long time -- When they are consumed
renew them during the aforesaid space of two days -- After this, the walls are
to be whitewashed and the floors scrubbed -- These services should be performed
by Africans, under the inspection of persons appointed for the purpose.

FIFTH. -- The bodies of those who are supposed to have died of the aforesaid
fever, should be interred as soon as possible after death -- They should be
carried in hearses, and the whole business relating to interments should be
performed by native Africans, if possible; if this cannot be done the
descendants of Africans who have lately arrived from the West Indies, should be
preferred. No person, who by living in the family, or visiting the deceased may
be supposed capable of communicating infection ought to attend the funeral.

SIXTH. -- It cannot be repeated too often, that the sick should be placed in
large airy apartments, which should be constantly ventilated: Their clothing
and bed linen changed daily and washed in cold water. Half an ounce of strong
oil of vitriol poured upon an equal quantity of powdered saltpeter, in China
or glass vessels, produces a vapor that has been found very beneficial in
destroying contagion in sick rooms.

By order of the College of Physicians, Attest JOHN REDMAN, President. Thomas
C. James, Secretary,

August 25 th, 1797.
September 5 th, 1797.
The following Letter from the Secretary of the Commonwealth was read.

SIR,
As the legislature meets on Monday next, the governor is anxious at that time,
and as frequently as it is convenient during the session, to lay before the
members a correct statement of the information, which the College of physicians
may receive, on the subject of the existing malignant and contagious fever. He
directs me therefore to request that they will be good enough to furnish him
with the most satisfactory reports, that the nature of the case admits.

I am respectfully, Sir, Your most obedient servant, A. J. DALLAS, Secretary.
Secretary's Office, August 26 th, 1797.
To Dr. John Redman, President of the College of Physicians of Philad.

The President was requested to acknowledge the receipt of the above letter as
soon as possible.

Answer to the Letter of the Secretary of the Commonwealth.
SIR,
I laid your letter of August the 26th, before the College of Physicians, who
have requested me to acknowledge the receipt thereof, and to assure you of
their readiness at all times to assist the Governor's endeavors for the public
good. The adjournment of the Assembly, they presume, renders it unnecessary to
make any further reply at present.

I am respectfully By order and on behalf of the College of Physicians of
Philadelphia, etc. etc. JOHN REDMAN, President.
September 5 th, 1797.
A. J. Dallas, Esquire.

October 30th, 1797.
The following Letter from the Governor of the State was read.

SIR,
As I am desirous to lay before the legislature a statement of the
circumstances attending the calamity which has recently visited the city of
Philadelphia, permit me, through you, to request the aid of the College of
Physicians, in satisfying the following enquiry:

What measures ought to be pursued to purify the City from any latent
infection? And what precautions are best calculated to guard against the future
occurrence of a similar calamity?

I am persuaded that the public spirit and benevolence of the college of
Physicians, will induce them cheerfully to excuse and to comply with this
request, which is intended to establish a foundation for regulations, that may
cooperate with their professional labors in preserving to their
fellow-citizens, the invaluable blessings of health.

I am, with great esteem, Sir, Your most obedient humble servant, THOMAS
MIFFLIN.
Germantown, Oct. 24, 1797.
To Dr. Redman, President of the College of Physicians of Philad.

A committee was appointed to take into consideration and report on the above
enquiry.

November 7 th, 1797.
The report of the Committee on the Governor's letter was read, and adopted
unanimously as an answer to the same, and is as follows,

SIR,
We have duly considered your letter of the 24th ult. and shall cheerfully
comply with the requisitions contained therein.

The measures to be pursued for purifying the city from any latent infection,
are such as we have heretofore recommended, viz. -- A strict attention to
cleanliness, washing, white-washing, and ventilating the infected houses,
bedding and clothing; and fumigating them with charcoal and sulphur, or a
mixture of oil of vitriol and saltpeter. These, with the frost, we believe,
will be found sufficient entirely to destroy any latent contagion.

But the latter part of your enquiry, viz. What precautions are best calculated
to guard against the future occurrence of a similar calamity, is an object of
such magnitude, as to demand a more (...) reply.

We have, on former occasions, communicated our sentiments on this head; but as
you now inform us, that it is intended to establish a foundation for future
regulations, we willingly enter into the detail; and though this will
principally consist of repetition, yet it may be useful to have our ideas
presented in one view for your consideration. And as these sentiments have been
more fully confirmed by recent events, we are again induced earnestly to
recommend a strict adoption of the measures we advised in our communication of
August 18th, 1797, as being the best calculated to guard against the future
introduction of contagious diseases. We now recapitulate those advices with
some additions.

Let an entire new health-law, be made, constituting a Board of Health, to
consist of five persons, two of whom to be practitioners of physic. The
smallness of the number will ensure responsibility, and a constant residence in
the city; and the professional knowledge of the medical characters will be
necessary to assist in directing the measures of the Board. Let no person whose
private interest may be affected by quarantine laws, be a member of this Board.

Let a sufficient sum of money, per annum, be subject to the draughts of the
Board, who shall render to the Assembly a yearly account of their expenditures.
Let this Board sit daily during the months of July, August, September and
October; and, during these months let every vessel from the Mediterranean,
Coast of Africa, West Indies, and Continent of America, to the southward of
Florida, perform an effectual quarantine. Let the cargoes of suspicious vessels
be unloaded, and, with the vessels, be purified at the Island.

Let a resident physician, or health-officer be appointed, who shall never be
absent from the Island during the above mentioned months, and a consulting
physician, who shall reside at Philadelphia.

Let the punishment of a master of a vessel, who evades the law, by landing
cargo, crew or passengers, contrary to the intent and meaning of it, be the
same as for murder of the second degree. Let no vessel of war ever to be
allowed to come above the Fort.

Let co-operative laws be procured from the neighboring legislatures or from
Congress.

Let the Board of Health have power, with the concurrence of the Governor, to
cut off the intercourse with infected persons and places. Let the long
projected Hospital be erected.

Let the most diligent and scrupulous attention be given to cleaning and
watering the streets, gutters and wharves, throughout the City and Liberties.

Such are the precautions which we believe best calculated to guard against the
future occurrence of calamities similar to those we have experienced. If
further discoveries shall happily add to our knowledge on this important
subject, we shall not fail to make such communications to the governor, without
delay.

By order of the College of Physicians, Attest, JOHN REDMAN, President Thomas
C. James, Secretary.

Philadelphia, November 7, 1797.
To his excellency Thomas Mifflin, Esquire. Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.

The same committee were appointed to draught a memorial to the legislature of
this state, to carry into effect the propositions contained in the above letter.

December 5 th, 1797.
The committee appointed for that purpose reported the draught of a memorial to
the legislature, which was read and adopted. The same committee was desired to
present the memorial and procure the documents therein referred to.

To the Senate and House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Memorial of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia
respectfully represents:
That your Memorialists, deeply affected with the calamities produced by the
disease which has recently occurred amongst us, are impelled by a sense of duty
to their fellow-citizens and themselves, to inform you, that they consider the
laws which were enacted for the purpose of preserving this city from Malignant,
Contagious, Disorders, as very imperfect.

The subject being of immense importance, they hope to be excused for stating
their sentiments with respect to it, at large.

They are of opinion, that the disease which produced so much mortality and
distress in the year 1793, was imported into this city from the West Indies;
and they are confirmed in this sentiment, by the circumstances attending the
disease of this year, which they consider as of the same nature, and derived
from the same source.

Some of their most important reasons for this opinion, are as follow: -- The
disease in question is essentially different from the fevers that occur in this
climate, and which originate from domestic causes. This difference particularly
regards the general progress of the symptoms, and the mortality, as is evident
upon a comparison of its history with that of the ordinary diseases of this
city.

A disease which resembles the fever of 1793 and of this year, in many
important points, has long been known in the West Indies, and those parts of
America situated between the tropics; and in seven or eight different instances
in which a similar disease has occurred in the United States, in the course of
this century, there is good reason to believe that it was derived from those
countries. In most of the instances, the original history of the disease
contains the information that it was imported. In some cases, the infection can
be traced to the imported clothing of persons who died in the West Indies. In
most of the cases where the importation cannot be ascertained, the first
appearance of the disease has been, as in the other instances, in the
neighborhood of the shipping, or among persons connected with vessels.

The circumstances attending the fever of this year are extremely in point; and
the narrative which accompanies this, will, we trust, satisfy you that it was
imported.

The disease in question, commences invariably in our seaports, while inland
towns, equally exposed to the ordinary causes of fever, escape; and in the two
last instances of its occurrence in Philadelphia, the suburbs and the country
adjacent, were more healthy than usual at the same season; and at the
commencement of the disease, all the parts of the city, excepting the small
spaces to which it was confined, were remarkably healthy.

It exists in the West Indies, particularly in time of war, when great numbers
of strangers are to be found there; and reference to dates will show, that in
most of the instances of the occurrence of the disease in the United States,
there has been war in the West Indies.

Your Memorialists are aware, that cases may be adduced where the disease has
occurred in persons, who were not known to have been exposed to imported
contagion: but such is the subtle nature of this power, that it often exists
unsuspected and similar difficulties occur respecting the smallpox, and other
contagion, allowed by all to be of foreign origin. There also occur, although
very rarely, solitary cases of malignant remitting fevers, the symptoms of
which resemble so much the disease in question, that they are often supposed to
be the same; but there is this essential difference, that a malignant remittent
fever has never been to our knowledge contagious in this climate.

The difference of sentiments among physicians, now so much regretted,
resembles that which almost always takes place, when the plague is introduced
into any of the civilized parts of Europe, where it is not well known. The
identity of the disease, its origin and its contagious nature have been often
the subject of controversy. Some physicians have considered it as of domestic
origin; but proper health laws, strictly enforced, have latterly protected the
commercial parts of Europe from its ravages.

With these sentiments of the nature of the disease, your memorialists cannot
but regard a proper law respecting the subject, as a matter of the greatest
importance, and although they are perfectly sensible of the imperfection of the
science of medicine, yet from a conviction that physicians are the best
informed, as well as the most interested in the subject, they approach you with
that respect which is due to your legislative authority, and declare their
belief, that the existing health laws of this commonwealth are not such as are
best calculated to obtain the desired end, and that they ought to be improved.

Having lately communicated in writing to the governor their ideas respecting
the best methods of preventing the introduction of contagious diseases, they
beg leave to refer you to that communication. At the same time they tender you
their professional assistance in framing an efficient law for this purpose; and
thus having performed their duty, they hold themselves discharged from ^ll
responsibility, on account of the evils which may arise from the present
imperfect state of the legislative arrangements respecting this important
subject.

By order of the College, Attest JOHN REDMAN, President. Thomas C. James,
Secretary.

Philadelphia Dec. 5 th 1797.
Narrative of Facts relative to the probable Origin, and Progress, of the
Malignant Contagious Fever which lately appeared at the junction of Penn and
Pine Streets.
THE ship Arethusa, Captain Keith, sailed about June 1, 1797, from Port Royal
in Jamaica for the Havannah, with slaves; during the passage two men died with
a fever, which Mr. Stephen Kingston, a gentleman of this city, who was a
passenger on board, and has frequently seen the disease, believes to have been
the Yellow Fever, one having the black vomit. After remaining some days at the
Havannah, the vessel proceeded for Philadelphia, and arrived in the stream
opposite to Pine Street, July 23, 1797. At the capes of Delaware she took on
board a Pilot, and performed a quarantine of five days at State Island. The
Pilot was attacked with a fever the day of their arrival at the city, and went
on shore the same day, when he was visited by Dr. Currie, who has been much
conversant with the Yellow Fever, and was so sensible of the resemblance of his
symptoms to those of that disease, that he mentioned the case as suspicious to
one of his friends.

The Arethusa was moored at Mr. Joseph Russell's wharf, outside of two vessels
which lay there when she arrived, her crew left her immediately after she was
moored, and the next day, returned for their clothing, etc. when they crossed
and recrossed the above mentioned ships. Two boys only and the captain (who was
on board occasionally) composed the crew of the outermost ship, or that
immediately contiguous to the Arethusa; but the innermost vessel, the Brig Iris
from Oporto, had a crew of the usual number. On the twenty ninth day of July,
five men of this crew were taken ill with fever, and attended by Dr. J. Stuart,
who states, in his report to the College of Physicians, that the symptoms were
similar in all, though varying in the degree of violence; four of these
recovered, but one died with unequivocal marks of the malignant yellow fever. A
servant of George Latimer, Esquire. who lived about 100 yards to the north of this
vessel, and was frequently on the wharves, was attacked, July 30, with a fever
which was highly contagious and malignant, of which he died in five days.

Mr. N. Lewis, who kept a compting room about the same distance from the
Arethusa, was attacked about the same time, and died also in five days, of a
fever which was supposed to be of the same nature.

Mr. Dominick Joyce, who was much engaged on board a ship near the Arethusa,
was attacked, August 3d, with a fever of the same kind, but recovered. A man
who lived in a store on the South side of Pine Street, about 150 yards from the
river, was attacked with a malignant fever about this time, and died in a few
days.

About the sixth of August, Mr. Ferguson, whose yard adjoined the wharf where
the Arethusa and Iris lay, was attacked with a malignant fever, and the same
day Mr. John Plankinhorn's girl, who lived nearly opposite to Mr. Ferguson's
across Penn Street, and worked in a yard which was situated very near to the
above mentioned store in Pine street, was also attacked with fever, they both
died on the fifth or sixth day after the attack, Mrs. Ferguson with very
suspicious, and Mr. Plankinhorn's girl, with complete and unequivocal symptoms
of the yellow fever. In this manner the disease continued to spread, so that by
the middle of August, or within three weeks from the arrival of the Arethusa,
above ten persons had died, who either lived or were engaged in business within
300 yards of the Arethusa, and this at a time when the other parts of the city
were so healthy, that it is probable all the other deaths which occurred in it
(...) were not (...) equal in number to those which occurred in this small
district. After this the disease gradually extended itself to Southwark, and at
the same time became thinly scattered through the city, where its destructive
effects are but too well known.

December 26 th, 1797.
Facts relative to the sickly state of the Ship Hind.
IT appears from the depositions of Francis Tow, Nicholas Benson, and William
Cooper, seamen on board the armed Ship Hind, taken before Chief Justice M'Kean,
that about the beginning of July 1797, the Hind sailed from Port an Prince,
bound to Philadelphia, with a cargo of sugar and coffee, and with 43
passengers; of which number 23 were whites and twenty colored persons, that
they touched at Cape Nichola Mole, where they remained eight days and
discharged a part of their cargo, in lieu thereof taking in a quantity of stone
ballast: during the time they lay at the Mole, the passengers were occasionally
on shore. It would appear that they le^t the Mole between the 12th, and 15th,
of July, and arrived at this port, after a passage of twenty or twenty one
days. About three or four days after their departure from the Mole, five or six
white persons and one negro of the passengers were attacked with fever, the
white persons so attacked were observed to become very yellow. During the
passage four other colored persons and five of the crew fell ill of fever: one
or two of the latter number, after the vessel entered the capes of Delaware,
but only a colored boy and child died during the passage, and were thrown
overboard after the vessel entered the river. Upon the arrival of the vessel
opposite the Marine Hospital, in consequence of orders from the captain, four
sick persons were secreted and did not come under the inspection of the
Physician of the Port; exclusive of these, two women were sick in the cabin.
After passing the Fort one of the seamen was taken ill, went on shore, and was
afterward carried to the marine Hospital; and two other persons were taken on
shore sick. So far go the depositions.

From information obtained from the Health Office, it appears, that the Hind
was examined at the Fort on the second, and arrived at Philadelphia on the
fourth of August; and that Mr. Doughty, one of the Inspectors of the Health
Office, sent to the marine Hospital on the 13th of August, Peter Malosio, one
of the crew of the Hind then residing in Love Lane, and on the 14th, a
Portuguese from near the junction of Penn and South Streets, who had been
landed there; and that another person was sick of a suspicious fever at Mrs.
O'Connors in Almond near Front Street. Both these were from on board the Hind,
and the Portuguese abovementioned had been visited by Dr. Currie, who declares
his disease to have been Yellow Fever.

(...)
Letter from Dr. James Stuart, to the College of Physicians of Philadelphia.
When you consider the welfare of the citizens of this city, and the danger
attendant on the concealment of the appearance of contagious diseases, I trust
any apology for the following communication will be considered superfluous and
unnecessary.

On the 29th of July last, I was called upon to visit James Hood mariner,
belonging to the Brig Iris, Captain Rhodes, lately from Oporto, then lying at
Nixon's Wharf (occupied by Messrs. Wharton and Palmer.) He was taken in the
forenoon of the same day, on board with drowsiness, some stupor, sighing, light
but frequent chills, and pain in his loins and head. The pain in his loins he
represented as though he felt something tearing from his back; to these
symptoms succeeded a violent attack of Fever, in which state I found him about
four o'clock in the afternoon of the same day; still complaining of the most
excruciating pain in the head and back, with a burning sensation in the
stomach; inflamed eyes, flushed face, his tongue white on the fore part, but
more dark toward the pharynx, and very dry, a little incoherent at times in
conversation, his pulse very strong and tense -- he lost by my direction
sixteen ounces of blood from the arm with evident relief. I prescribed a
scruple of jalap with ten grains of calomel. On the 30th I found the powder had
produced several stools exhibiting a very dark color, but in no way
particularly foetid -- his pains had much abated, but the fever continued, with
strength and tension of the arteries; he lost twelve ounces of blood, and the
purge was repeated. 31st, He had a very restless night, had not taken the
powder; symptoms much the same as the day before; directed the same purge to be
given in my presence. August 1st, the powder, as I was informed, was ejected by
vomiting -- the pupils were considerably dilated; he had a slight delirium with
great restlessness, oppression, and pain in the breast, with still a tense
pulse. A blister was applied to his breast and stomach -- I ordered an
injection to be thrown up, and after a stool should have been procured, to give
five grains of calomel every third hour; he took two doses without effect, and
refused to repeat them. On the morning of the 2d, I found the difficulty of
breathing much relieved, and the other violent symptoms in some measure abated;
but a small diarrhoea attended, with dark stools, insomuch that he and the
attendants supposed it to be blood, but upon examination it was discovered to
be of a very dark green color, exhibiting the appearance of viscid bile -- I
directed a continuation of the powders -- about six o'clock in the evening he
had not taken any of the powders, had been attacked with a chill, was very
yellow, (which was taken notice of by his attendants) his fever had become more
violent, accompanied with an increase of delirium, his pulse still tense.
Whilst sitting by his bed he vomited up a small quantity of black bile -- took
ten ounces more of blood from the arm, which appeared different from what had
been taken at the first bleedings, in being bu^^y, whereas that taken before
had appeared dark without a disposition to separate, streaked with red --
prescribed a repetition of the injections -- August 3d, about nine o'clock the
vomiting had in some measure ceased and appeared only when he was moved,
comatous, increase of delirium, (when roused said he was well); Symptoms of
effussion in the breast, his skin and eyes very yellow with livid spots on the
former, especially on several parts of his arms. I ordered blisters to his
wrists, legs, and breast, and to take five grains of volatile alkali every hour
-- Cold clammy sweats now came on with singultus, and he expired at twelve
o'clock this day, being the fifth from that on which he was taken.

It is a circumstance worthy of remark, that four of the same crew were taken
on the same day with similar symptoms, (except in degree and one nearly in the
same degree at the first aggress) all of whom, being more conformable in taking
medicines as directed, recovered on the third and fourth day; and another who
was taken on the first of August, recovered on the seventh -- a particular
detail of each case, with the particular remedies employed, if required, will
be given, when time and opportunity will permit, by Gentlemen,

Your most obedient and very humble servant, J. STUART.
August 15 th, 1797.
To the College of Physicians of Philadelphia.


