LETTERS ON Liberty and Slavery: In ANSWER to a PAMPHLET, Entitled, "NEGRO
SLAVERY DEFENDED BY THE WORD OF GOD."

By PHILANTHROPOS.

SECOND EDITION.

Strange is it that our bloods --
Whose color, weight and heat poured out together,
Would quite confound distinction; yet stand off
In differences so mighty.
Shakespeare. Every man has a right to his liberty, and whoever endeavors to
ravish it from him, deserves death, more than the robber who attacks us for our
money on the highway.
Chesterfield. Indeed I tremble for my country, when I reflect that God is
just, that his justice cannot sleep forever, that considering numbers, natural
means only, a revolution of the wheel of fortune, an exchange of situation is
among possible events, and that it may become probable by supernatural
interferences! The Almighty has no attribute which can take side with us (the
whites) in such a contest.
Jefferson. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY R. WILSON, NO. 149, PEARL-STREET.

1798.

TO THE READER.
ALL that is required of thee is impartiality. No man can boast of a greater
attachment to America, than the writer of the following Letters. God has given
him a soul to disdain tyranny from the womb, and its faculties have been
exerted against despotism ever since they were capable of action. His heart
bleeds to see the remnant of slavery, in a country which the Creator has
consecrated to liberty. He dreads an insurrection of the negroes in the
southern states as much as any man; See Jefferson's Notes.
but he is confident a dreadful revolution must soon take place, unless the
slaves are instructed and gradually emancipated. It is now in the power of
America to ward off the blow, and escape the dreadful catastrophe: and if this
publication should incline the hearts of any to alleviate the miseries of their
fellow-men, the author has obtained his end.

LETTERS ON LIBERTY AND SLAVERY.
Hail bounteous love! be bounteous still,
To give us only good, and if the night
Have gathered ought of evil, or concealed,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.
Milton.
LETTER I.
To Mr. John Lawrence, South Quay, Virginia.
SIR,
I SHOULD not trouble you with the following lines, was it not for the bad
effect your pamphlet, in vindication of negro slavery has had, on the minds of
ignorant, weak and self-interested men. Some indeed are willing to suppose it
unanswerable, but I told the gentleman who favored me with your production,
that I thought I could answer all the arguments you advanced. He pledged me to
do it. I promised. I perform; for, What I can do, can do no hurt to try,
Since you set up your test against remedy:
He that of greatest works is finisher,
Often does them by the weakest minister.
Often expectation fails, and most often there --
Where most it promises; and often it hits
Where hope is coldest, and despair most sits.


May the present contest between freedom and slavery prove such. I am young and
you are old -- wherefore I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years
should teach wisdom; but great men are not always wise; neither do all the aged
understand judgment; therefore, I said, hearken to me, I also will show mine
opinion, concerning slavery.

You begin by saying, "that the Bible is the only rule of faith and practice."
Granted, for Christians; and it is probable the deists after a few years
experience, will judge the New Testament to contain the best rules of action.

Your assertion, "that whatever has been as yet said in favor of the
emancipation of slaves, has been drawn from reason, and the conduct of some of
the United States," is a palpable error. Slavery has been preached against,
both by Heathens and Christians, before the United States were known. Homer
said, 2600 years ago, Jove fixed it certain, that whatever day
Makes man a slave, takes half his worth away.


As you seem to discard reason, I shall endeavor to prove by the authority of
scripture (which is not contrary, but always consistent with reason) that even
the Mosaic dispensation condemns perpetual slavery. Yes, sir, I will produce a
"Thus says the Lord," for the manumission of slaves.

I join with you most cordially, in "wishing rigid disputants for liberty, to
read their Bibles more;" for its doctrines breathe a most noble love of
freedom, and a perfect hatred of tyranny.

When you wish the citizens of America to read the constitutions of the states
less, I must wish you a good night; for if it should ever be the case, gross
darkness will cover the land, and strange infatuation posses the people.

Thirst after knowledge, religious and political, should be the first trait in
the character of republicans. The very essence of their government, modus of
existence, and energy of action, depends on the knowledge and virtue of the
citizens. The citizens of America should, therefore, read the constitutions of
the different states with attention; compare them together, and be emulous
which state shall form the best constitution, and enact the best laws, in order
to render the greatest possible happiness to all their fellow creatures. The
maxim of their legislatures should be, "Nothing is done whilst any thing
remains to be done."

But I must endeavor to set you right with regard to that book called the
Bible, which you take for granted supports negro-slavery, and that your
treatise makes it manifest! Do you imagine, sir, that the Bible is like Pope's
Temple of Fame?

Where various news he heard of love and strife;
Of peace and war; health, sickness death and life;
Of old mismanagements, taxations new;
All neither wholly false, nor wholly true.
Around a thousand winged wonders fly,
Born by the trumpet's blast, and scattered through the sky.
There at one passage often you might survey,
A lie and truth contending for the way;
And long 'twas doubtful, both so closely pent,
Which first should issue through the narrow vent:
At last agreed together out they fly,
Inseparable now the truth and lie:
The strict companions are for ever joined,
And this or that unmixed no mortal now can find.
Excuse this digression; it describes but too truly the ^ate of the Bible; it
is made to say any thing, or nothing, just as it suits the party concerned.
But, sir, let us attend to the eternal rule of rectitude contained in it, and
endeavor to separate the precious from the vile.

Having thus introduced the subject, I bid you adieu for the present: till I
hear of your reformation,

I shall continue Your opponent, PHILANTHROPOS.
Charleston, S. Carolina.
LETTER II.
SIR,
"CURSED be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be to his brethern," is your
first argument in defense of negro slavery -- you then ask, "where this curse
was ever removed?" and speedily draw your conclusion, that the poor Africans
must be the descendants of Ham!

1st. Because "the borders of the Canaanites were from Sidon as thou come to
Gerar, unto Gaza;" and to prove your point, Philip met the eunuch in this road.

2d. Where a curse is, a mark you think will follow. The color, shape, and
even the hair of their heads, prove the poor Africans to be children of the
curse, and fit for nothing but drudgery and slavery.

In the 3d place, you labor to prove what no man denies, "that Israel had
their hired and bond servants."

4th. That slavery is not forbidden in the New Testament; therefore it is
lawful to buy and keep slaves.

You conclude by summing up the scriptures for and against slavery, and of
course (...) the majority on your own side. -- You have not divided your
pamphlet into sections, but, as far as I can judge, the above is the substance
of it.

I shall proceed to answer as briefly as possible, and 1st. The curse denounced
upon Canaan, was revoked in the destruction of the Canaanites by Israel. If you
wish to lay any stress on the words, "a servant of servants shall he be," you
shall be a servant to the Jew, and the negro shall be yours; for it is as
probable that you are the descendant of Canaan as the Africans, notwithstanding
your curious observations in geography. Were not the Canaanites, without
distinction, devoted to destruction, on account of their abominable iniquities.
The Gibeonites alone, by their subtilty, escaped with the punishment of
voluntary slavery. And you cannot be ignorant of the judgments that befell
Israel for abusing those hewers of wood and drawers of water.

Do you ask where the curse was removed? I refer you to the gospel -- there
hear the word " it is finished!" admitting your own point, that the Ethiopians
are the descendants of Ham, was not the curse removed from the eunuch you refer
to? Being the ambassador of the queen of Candace, and returning from Jerusalem,
not as a slave, but as the minister of a great nation, he was baptized by
Philip, and most probably preached the gospel of Jesus in his own country,
where it flourished for some time.

Pray, Mr. Lawrence, who were the Carthaginians, and out of whose loins came
the intrepid Hannibal? Were they not Africans? And though they were conquered,
they made a great struggle for liberty.

Your 2d observation scarcely deserves notice: however, as the prejudice of the
age is very strong against the color of the poor Africans, I shall make a few
remarks. -- And first, you say, "where a curse is, a mark will follow." Very
true; the tree is known by its fruit. But who told you that the descendants of
Canaan had a black skin on account of the curse? -- Neither sacred nor profane
historians: then it must be the child of fancy, owing, I suppose, to the devil
being painted black. But you should remember the Africans, of late, not without
cause, paint the devil white; and owing to such men as you, who defend slavery,
the name of a christian is become more frightful to them than the devil himself.

I shall leave others to philosophise on the color of skins; it is enough for
me, that the heat of the fire will turn most things black. The scorching sun of
Africa, without any cold winters to bleach, has perhaps had this effect, in a
long succession of years, on the color and hair of negroes; add to this, that
when the color becomes once tinged, in the union of the sexes, amongst all
creatures, a likeness is produced, which may be a reason why the blacks do not
change their hue sooner in this country: when intermarriages become general,
the white color will prevail in northern climates, but in more southern
latitudes it will always remain yellow or copperish. Should it be proved
hereafter that the color of negroes is a leprous disease, it is to be hoped
the faculty will exert their skill in pointing out a remedy.
But hear what the negro says: Some view our sable r^^e with scornful eye;
Their color is a diabolic dye.
Remember, christians, negroes black as Cain.
May be refined, and join the angelic train.
-- PHILLIS. 18. (...). 1^. Deem our nation brutes to longer,
Till-some reason you can find
Worthier of regard, and stronger
Than the color of our kind.
Slaves to gold whose sordid dealings,
Tarnish all your boasted powers,
Prove that you have human feelings,
Ever you proudly question ours.
COWPER.

My 2d remark is on your observation about the shape of negroes; "that they are
formed for drudgery," etc. A man must be strangely prejudiced, not to see that
both labor and thought affect the shape of every human being. Hence you may
know a cruel slave-holder or tyrant by his complexion; as Mr. Jefferson well
observes, "The whole commerce between master and slave, is a perpetual exercise
of the most boisterous passions, the most unremitting despotism on one part,
and degrading submission on the other: our children see this and imitate it.
The parent storms, the child looks on, catches the lineament of wrath, puts on
the same airs, gives a loose to his worst of passions; and thus nursed and
educated, and daily exercised in tyranny, cannot but be stamped with odious
peculiarities." Is it any wonder, that so many of the negroes, between their
hard labor, want of thought, and the most abject slavery, should want fine
features? But notwithstanding their condition, I have seen some hundreds of
negroes as well made as any white man: besides, if you were to make slaves of
all the awkward people, I am afraid many of your white brethren would come
under the lash.

I proceed to consider your third argument; "we read in the scriptures of hired
servants and of bond servants." Yes, and of men having a great number of wives
and concubines: but was it so from the beginning? No, sir, there is not a
single clause in the moral law that justifies either.

But who are your great patterns of slavery? Abraham and Solomon! Let us see
what kind of slaves they had: the former had three hundred and eighteen trained
servants, born in his house, whom Josephus calls respectable men, well
instructed; they were a part of his family, had received the covenant of
circumcision, and adopted into the church of God; therefore could not be
involuntary slaves. And if they were, how unlike your negro slaves! When do you
instruct them to read and write, and teach them to bear arms, to fight with
their masters? No, you are conscious of guilt; therefore you must not instruct
them, nor permit them to bear arms, lest they should claim their indisputable
right -- equal liberty with yourselves.

But what manner of slaves had Solomon? Could the man who condemned oppression,
and declares death to be more tolerable than subjection (Eccles. iv.) keep
involuntary slaves? No. But he brought the remnant of the Canaanites under
tribute, and employed some of them, for a season, as bondmen, in the building
of the temple, for which labor they were most probably paid along with Hiram's
servants.

But now we have it, Lev* xxv. 44, 45, 46. The Jews were permitted to buy of
the heathen that were around them, and to leave their bondmen as an inheritance
for their children for ever. But what was to become of the children of these
bondmen? Not a word about them! surprising, that the law did not mention, "they
and their children shall be your possession for ever." The children of bondmen
were without doubt born free, in Israel.


The fact is, that the Levitical law knew nothing of involuntary slavery,
unless in the case of theft or debt -- and in either of those cases, the year
of jubilee cleared all bondmen, without distinction. Read the 10th verse of
Lev. xxv. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty
throughout all the land, unto all the inhabitants thereof. The words for ever,
in regard to bondage, could extend no farther than that year. In short, the
Israelites could not consider their servants as bondmen any longer than they
used them as themselves; the same laws were made for the stranger as for the
Israelite. But the poor negroes in America have no law to defend them -- their
evidence will not hold good against a white man; they may be abused, tortured,
and are often wantonly killed -- but what can they do? Nothing.

If a bond servant ran away from his master in Israel, he was not to be
delivered up to him again, but he was to live where he chose, "where it likes
him best -- thou shall not oppress him," Deuteronomy. xxiii. 15, 16. This plainly
proves that the Israelites had no other law to bind their bondmen, but the law
of kindness. Thousands of such voluntary bondmen may be had at this day in
Europe, who would willingly attach themselves and families to good masters.
Yes, money would be given with them, provided their masters would support them
without becoming burdensome to the public. What a contrast between the bondmen
which the Jews had, and those which the Americans keep! There, if a servant ran
away from his master, none dared to deliver him up again: but he was to live
where he pleased: here; if a poor wretch runs away, for fear, perhaps, of being
flogged to death, all the bloodhounds in the country are after him, and all
the newspapers must publish, to the eternal disgrace of their country, that
such a negro has run away, with so much reward for bringing him back, dead or
alive; how many of the poor wretches are at this day wandering in the woods,
and had rather starve themselves to death than be taken; and when taken, how
many put an end to their existence, rather than bear the scorpion whips of
their masters. There were no such cases in Israel? would to God there were none
in America!

You triumph, by saying, "Now as we have liberty from the Old Testament to buy
and keep slaves, let us search our New Testament, and see if we can find it
forbidden there." But stop, sin! where in the Old Testament can you find a
passage that justifies (...) doing either? Are you a Jew or a Gentile? The wise
regulations contained in the Levitical law, concerning bondmen, appertained to
the Jews alone; Of course we as Gentiles have nothing to do with the Old
Testament Laws as it respects Slavery.
and this was granted them upon the same ground as the law of divorce, and
plurality of wives.

The 8th commandment expressly forbids your kind of slavery: and the law of
Moses condemns to death every slave-holder in America; "He that steals a man
and sells him, or if he be found in his hand, shall surely be put to death."

Are there any in America at this day, so wilfully ignorant as not to know that
the poor Africans were kidnapped from their native country, by a set of
miscreants, who ought to have been extirpated, long ago, from the face of the
earth; knowing this property to be stolen, you keep it still in your
possession, when you ought to return it to the right owners; wherefore, the
blood of those innocent men, you deprive of their rights, shall be required at
your hands.

How impertinently you apply the tenth commandment to the friends of abolition.
Can there be any thing more absurd! Pray, sir, wear the cap yourself, it fits
you and your slaveholding brethern exceeding well: for what else but diabolical
covetousness could tempt men to trade in their fellow creatures Strange horrid
traffic! mournful to behold;
Each tender feeling sacrificed to gold,
And fellow men, like cattle, bought and sold.


You plainly see, at least ought to see, that Abraham, Moses, and Solomon, your
great patterns for slavery, will do nothing for you. They had each of them a
black comely woman for a wife; and the curse of God ^ell heavy on M^ria^ for
speaking against Moses on that account. The conduct of these great men, plainly
prove, that they knew ^nothing of the curse of slavery which you suppose to be
inflicted by God on all Africans. Praying that God may open your eyes,

I remain, PHILANTHROPOS.
Charleston, S. Carolina.
LETTER III.
SIR,
I COME now to what I call your fourth head; where you say, If slavery is not
forbidden in the New Testament, we may lawfully keep slaves. By your leave,
sir, we may not. The New Testament does not forbid us, with St. Francis, to
preach to fishes, and baptize horses and horned cattle. Common sense, however,
teaches us that such a con^uc^ would be absurd. Cock-fighting, horse-racing,
and various species of iniquitous gaming, not then, perhaps, in use, are not
forbidden in the New Testament, yet we know such practices to be contrary to
the laws of Christ, and obnoxious to every idea we can form of moral virtue.
But the gospel, sir, wherever its precepts are obeyed, abolishes slavery: this
is, at any rate, tantamount to its being forbidden.

The first sermon that Jesus Christ preached, proclaimed liberty to the
captives. All the prophets preached against oppression, and predicted the day
of emancipation. Christ took his text from Isaiah, (...) 1, 2, and declared,
that it was that day fulfilled in their ears. Glorious news! hear it: The
spirit of the Lord is upon me: because he has appointed me to preach the
gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach
deliverence to the captives, and recovery of sight to the blind; to set at
liberty them that are bound; to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And he
closed the book -- and if I was to do the same, this alone would be enough
against slavery. But perhaps you will say the above text has a spiritual
meaning; and most assuredly it has a literal one. Religious and civil liberty
go always hand in hand; they are, in some respects, as closely connected as the
soul is to the body. The whole system of christianity is called by James, " the
perfect law of liberty." It could not be perfect, unless it comprehended the
whole family of man, and this it does in a conspicuous manner: the angels
brought glad tidings of great joy unto all people, nations, kindred and tongue
under heaven. The word gospel signifies not only news but good news to all
nations, and individuals who embrace the truth: and the truth shall make them
free.

I do not say, that the believing slave will be immediately liberated from an
unbelieving master. But I dare venture to affirm and prove, that every
believing master, obeying the precepts of Christ, would set (...) slaves at
liberty without hesitation.

Suppose, for instance, that the young man who came to Christ to ask, "what he
should do to inherit eternal life," to be a slaveholder; Christ told him to
keep the commandments. O, he was a fine professor! all this he had done! Christ
admired him: and so do I admire many things in my slave-holding friends. -- But
Christ said, "there is one thing lacking, go and sell all that thou have and
give to the poor." He might answer, if a slave-holder, there are no poor in my
neighborhood, we all support our own slaves! Slaves, did thou say? What, go
to heaven with a load of slaves on thy back! no, no, the gate is too strait and
the road too narrow for thee. Go and instruct them in the principles of
liberty, then set them free and give them something to begin the world with.
When you have done this, take up your cross and follow me; my mission on earth
is to preach-deliverance to the captives, to set at liberty them that are
bound, to do good to all, to love mine enemies, to establish a system of
perfect equality among mankind.

None of my disciples dare to lord it over one another. He that would be
greatest must be the servant of all: I cannot admit a slave-holder within the
pales of my Church; if you would become my disciple, you must deny yourself the
pleasure of handling a cowskin or a hickory to flog slaves. Yes, you must deny
yourself the pleasure of their labor, unless you choose to pay them for it,
and even then you must forbear threatening, for my disciples must be meekness
and love. If you object and say, "I have paid for them," then you had no right
to pay for what no man had a right to sell; I cannot admit my followers even to
sell themselves.

If you have bought those men, knowing them to be stolen, Moses, in whom you
trusted, will put you to death for it? and, if you had them from you father or
great-grandfather, you are condemned just the same, unless ye flee to me as the
Savior for refuge: and you must know that I am come, not to deliver my people
in their sins, but from their sins. If you would consider yourself a christian,
your slaves must be instructed and set at liberty: they must enjoy the same
privileges with yourself: but if you are determined to keep them still in
bondage, you may expect the consequence. Remember the fate of Pharaoh, and
repent in time.

St. Paul exhorted those who had believing servants "not to despise them,
because they were brethren, but rather to do them service, because they are
faithful and partakers of the benefit," that is, they are now paid for their
services, are well treated, and have full liberty to change their masters if
they can better themselves. But what must the poor slave do, who has an
unbelieving master? let him, Look to the will and sovereignty of God,
Suffer it a while and kiss the rod;
Wait for the dawning of a brighter day,
And snap the chain the moment when he may.


Notwithstanding your strange comment on "Do unto others as you would have
others do unto you." The precept will continue eternally the same; and, in
order that you they understand it, I would send you, for a few years, to be a
slave to the Algerines, who, by the bye, are angels when compared with many of
the English and American slave-holders. Your saying, that, if you were a slave,
your holder had a right to keep you so, is downright blasphemy against justice
and common sense; if you was to swear to this hypothesis, no man in his senses
would believe you.

It is true, according to the laws of retaliation, the negroes have a right to
make slaves of all their present ^^^ders in America. "He that admits no right
but force, no justice but superior violence, arms every man against himself,
and justifies all excesses. If it be lawful to enjoy because we can; if we may
seize the property of another, insult his person, or force him to labor for
our luxuries or caprice, merely because he is weaker; this principle will be
equally fatal to ourselves." It justifies your slaves, the instant they become
the stronger, in taking you, your wives and your children, and separate you
from each other, force you to labor to the ^^sic of whips and chains, from 4
o'clock in the morning till 8 at night, without any refreshment but a little
Indian meal and water, half naked, yes, ^n some plantations quite naked, half
starved and cooped up together at night in a cold, dirty hovel, covered with
wounds, bruises, and putrefying sores: robbed of every thing that is dear;
slogged for praying, and tortured for preaching consolation to your fellow
sufferers; and, after having exhausted your youth in servitude, you are
abandoned in old age to wretchedness and diseases. This is not an exaggerated
statement of the case, but the real representation of things which are in
America in the year 1797. O shame! where have thou fled!

But it is the use and not the abuse of slavery which you defend: it is
impossible, sir, to separate them: the whole system is abominably iniquitous. I
know there are many humane masters in America, who use their slaves better,
than many do their hired servants in Europe. What then, if a man keeps his
whores well, does that justify his having them? I argue against the first
principles of slavery; no man has a right to use or abuse another without his
consent, unless he be guilty of some crime against society, which exposes him
to its vengeance; every individual in the universe possesses certain rights
which no man can divest him of, without injustice.

Your hackneyed phrase, "Servants obey your masters," suits your purpose just
as well as Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone: where in the bible do you
meet with the words "Slaves obey your tyrants"? no where. It is well known the
word slave is not to be found in the original text of the bible. The word slave
in Jer. ii. 14. is added by the translators, and the word Somaton, rendered
slaves in Rev. xviii. 13. should be translated bodies as is the case every
where else. The word dou^^s, and its derivatives, would read very awkward, if
translated slaves, slave, slaving, etc. instead of servant, serve, serving. A
few quotations will be sufficient to show the absurdity. Genesis xlii. 10. "But to
buy food are thy slaves come." Psalm cxix. 91. They continue this day according
to thine ordinances, for all are thy slaves. Luke i. 38. and Mary said, "Behold
the slave of my Lord." Luke xv. 29. "Lo these many years do I slave thee." Acts
xx. 19. " Slaving the Lord with all humility of mind"!!!

That hired and indented servants should be exhorted to obey their masters, is
very rational; and was it not for the ruinous system of slavery, it would be
done more cheerfully. But Oh most degrading of all ills that wait
On man, 2 mourner in his best estate.
All other sorrows, virtue may endure,
And find submission more than half a cure.
Grief is itself a medicine, and bestowed,
TO improve the fortitude that bears a load;
To teach the wanderer, as his woes increase,
The paths of wisdom, all whose paths are peace.
But Slavery! virtue dreads it as her grave,
Patience itself is meanness in a slave
Nature imprints upon whatever we see,
That has a heart and life, in it -- BE FREE!


But the slave-holder, with one stroke, extirpates every thing that alleviates
the evils of life, and arms every man in an eternal war against his
fellow creature. Let me therefore advise you, sir, to renounce principles which
can be maintained by no one but a professed enemy to mankind. Wishing you to
weigh the matter well, I remain,

PHILANTHROPOS.
Charleston, S. Carolina.
LETTER IV.
SIR,
I WAS going to wish you a good morning, Sir, but the Poet forbids me.

" For Ah! what wish can prosper, or what prayer
For merchants rich in cargoes of despair,
Who drive a loathsome traffic; gage and span,
And buy the muscles and the bones of man:
The tender ties of father, husband, friend,
All bonds of nature in that moment end;
And each endures while yet he draws his breath,
A stroke as fatal as the scythe of death."
Alas! the poor African is fallen among thieves, and the Priests and Levites of
popery and protestantism, have passed him by, whilst wallowing in his blood,
and instead of relieving him, you have endeavored to prove that he deserves to
be made a slave, both he and his children for ever, and that for the sins of
his forefathers! And are there none who will have mercy on the poor African?
Yes: the Samaritan comes by; French Deists have poured wine and oil into the
wounds of the distressed negroes, whilst professed Christians keep them in
bondage, and will not let them go free! But Christians, O never call them!
blush for shame,
Ye worse than heathens: let the sacred name
By acts of violence be not profaned;
By crimes, black crimes, like yours so foully stained,
That high profession you disgrace, renounce,
And turn consistent Atheists at once.
Divine religion! can thou patronize
Such cursed oppression, such base cruelties;
Do thou acquire thy converts by such means
As heavy bondage scourges, racks, and chains?
Is this the way in which the untuto^'d mind
By thee is taught, and polished and re^in'd? --
No; -- Blessed religion such a conduct hates,
And Mammon's worshippers lo^^ reprobates.
Her paths are peace, her ways are pleasantness,
No mark of blood, her angel-footsteps trace;
No thirst of rapine in her face appears,
But sweet compassion every feature we^rs.
Good Will to man beams in her ruthful eyes,
Her fostering hand with tenderess care applies.
A healing balm, -- instead of scorpion whips,
The law of kindness dwells upon her lips;
Majestic meekness her persuasions arm,
And make them strong, the uncivilis'd to charm;
The power divine that waits to bear her word,
Gains greater conquests than Mahomet's sword.


But what shall we say when Israel turns his back on the enemy? There is an
Achan in the camp, and I do not hesitate to affirm that the present forlorn
state of religion in many of the states, is owing to negro slavery.

I know there are many other crying sins in the country, but this is the
principal vice. "Robbers invade the property, and murderers the life of human
beings, but he that holds another man in bondage, subjects the whole of his
existence to oppression, bereaves him of every hope, and is therefore more
detestable than the robber and assassin combined."

With what face can any slave holder pray for the success of the gospel, whilst
he acts contrary to its first principles? Or have the Americans (as Day says)
shared the dispensing power of St. Peter's successors to excuse their own
observance of those rules which they impose on others? It is truly ridiculous
in a civil sense, that they should with one hand sign a bill of rights
declaring all men equally free, and yet with the other hand brandish a whip
over their affrighted slaves: if men would be consistent, they must admit all
the consequences of their own principles; and the Americans, both as men and
professed Christians, are reduced to the dilemma of acknowledging the rights
of* their negroes, or surrendering their own.

Your observation on Mr. O'Kelly's comment on Rev. 18. 30, I should take no
notice of, were it not for this horrid question, "Pray where is the difference
between one man making use of a horse to serve him, and another employing a
slave?" You think that according to the above text, it is an equal abomination
to buy horses, chariots, fine linen, etc. as it is to buy the bodies and souls
of men: -- what diabolical reasoning! because what may be lawfully sold is
connected with what no man has a right to sell; do you suppose that it
justifies you in keeping slaves; -- and the church of Rome in selling
indulgences, and pretending to bring souls for money out of purgatory!

Your argument with J. Ramsay that the devil is the author of slavery, proves
you to be a faithful servant of Old Nick, otherwise you would not be so zealous
in defending his trade. You charge those who are advocates for the manumission
of slaves, with "being blinded by the devil;" pray, sir, to what end did Jesus
Christ come into the world? was it not to destroy the works of the devil? then
according to your own mouth you are condemned to be the man blinded by the
devil -- and that the friends of emancipation are children of light, laboring
together with Christ to destroy slavery* which is the works of Beelzebub!

As a champion combating all around, you next meet Mr. Leland, who asserts
"that the whole scene of slavery is pregnant with enormous evils, and why not
liberate them at once;" -- "He would to heaven this was done, for the sweets of
rural and social life, will never be enjoyed until then;" had he said justice
will not be done until then: God will not be honored by the slave holders
until then, it would be as well.

Something, he says, must be done, and you say that this something is already
done, and refer him to Titus ii. 9. You might as well refer him to Tobit and
his dog, for the exhorting of servants to obey their masters, has no more to do
with the obedience to their tyrants, than I have to do with the inhabitants of
Jupiter; no, sir, that something has not yet been done in all the states: the
negroes in the first place should be instructed so as to understand their
rights as men, and their duties as citizens: then emancipate them without
hesitation. This instead of producing any bad consequences, would cause the
blessings of God to flow through the land, as our majestic rivers roll their
rapid waves to the ocean. Let the legislators of the different states,
therefore enact, that every slave-holder shall instruct his negroes in the duty
of citizenship, and use them in every respect as citizens for the term of (...)
at which period they are to have full liberty to choose their own masters, or
form a settlement together in such parts of the union as shall be appointed for
them. -- Any man holding slaves, not complying with the above law, shall
forfeit L -- to the state, and the immediate manumission of all his slaves.

If such a law should not be enacted, I would hope that every conscientious man
will act in this case as if there was no law, knowing this, "that the law is
not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, etc." and O
that I could see the time When the defenseless are not bought and sold,
Nor sordid Christians thirst for paltry gold.


PHILANTHROPOS.
Savanna, Georgia.
LETTER V.
SIR,
AS you have concluded your pamphlet by collecting together those passages of
scripture which you suppose favored slavery and bondage. I shall collect a few
out of many which speak against oppression. If similar consequences are deduced
from the same causes, the application of the words Africans, America, etc.
instead of Israel and Canaan, can be no crime; they are, however, wrote in
Italics, that you may see where the scripture-words are exchanged.

Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways; for he that
oppresses the poor reproacheth his Maker. Rob not the poor because he is poor,
neither oppress the afflicted in the gate. The Lord will be a refuge for the
oppressed, and will judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the
earth may no more oppress. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of
the needy, now will I arise says the Lord. I will set him in safety from him
that puffs at him. They are corrupt and speak wickedly concerning oppression.
They speak loftily. But he shall judge the poor of the people. He shall save
the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor. The cry of
the children of Africa is come unto me, and I have also seen the oppression
wherewith the British and the Americans oppress them; and I will break the yoke
of their burden, and the rod of their oppressors as in the day of Midian.
Surely oppression makes a nation as well as a wise man mad.

So I returned and considered all the oppressions that are done under the Sun:
and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and
on the ^^de of their oppressors there was power. Wherefore the Lord God has
sworn by his holiness, that lo, the day shall come upon you, that unless you
repent of your evil doings, he will take you away with hooks and your posterity
with fish-hooks.

O Americans! thus says the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, and deliver
him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor; lest my fury go out like
fire, and burn that none can quench it. Hear this now ye kine of Bashan, which
oppress the poor negroes and crush the needy among them; which say to their
masters, come and let us drink, for tomorrow will be as to day and much
better: but thus says the Lord, woe to the oppressing city! she obeyed not my
voice; she received not correction, in her late struggle for Liberty she
trusted not in the Lord that he would provide for her if in case she liberated
her slaves; she drew not near to her God to ask counsel of him, who fought her
battles and established her independence. Wherefore what have ye to do with me,
O Southern States, nor are ye to the north, east and west free from blood; for
the poor Africans have ye bought and sold like cattle. Wherefore have I sold
your sons and your daughters to the Algerines and Indians, and I will come near
to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the slave holders,
and against those who oppress the poor negroes, and turn away the stranger from
his right, for ye were strangers yourselves at one time in this land.

Therefore thou shall neither vex a stranger nor oppress him; for ye know the
heart of a stranger. Wherefore thus says the holy One of Israel, because ye
despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness and stay thereon.
His iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall swelling out in a high
wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant.

Therefore go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten: your
gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Behold the hire of the slaves
which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries;
and the cries of them that have reaped and planted have entered into the ears
of the Lord of Sabbath: ye have lived in pleasure on the earth and been wanton;
ye have nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and
killed the just, and he ( the poor African) does not resist you; but in a
mournful tone after being scourged and tortured to the last degree says with
his expiring breath, " Master, you have killed me."

For thy violence against thy brother, ( the African) shame shall cover thy
borders, O America! Because I have called by a particular Providence upon you
to set them free, when you obtained your own liberty, and ye refused. I have
stretched out my hand, since and smote your borders, particularly the seat of
your Federal Government with a malignant scourge, but you have not regarded. I
have caused an insurrection to take place in the land, and have sent forth a
furious element to threaten and destroy your cities; your commerce likewise I
have given as a pr^y to contending powers. But ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity; I
will mock when your fear comes as a desolation, and your destruction comes as
a whirlwind: for I will continue to plague you more and more, until you let the
Africans go free.

Ye have fasted and kept days of thanksgiving, but is not this the fast I have
chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burden, and let the
oppressed African go free, and that ye break every yoke of bondage among you:
therefore learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, and if ye
thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, if ye thoroughly execute judgment
between a man and his neighbor, if ye oppress not the stranger, etc. Then I
will cause you to dwell in this place, in the land I have given to your
fathers* for ever and ever. -- But if ye continue to keep the Africans in
bondage, behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud
oppressors, yea, and all who do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that
comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them
neither root nor branch. No not so much as a slave-holder in the world

Then shall the oppressed take up this proverb against the tyrants and say; How
has the oppressor ceased! What shall the prey be taken from the mighty, and
the captive be delivered? But thus says the Lord, even the captives of the
mighty shall be taken away; and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered;
for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and will save thy
children. And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh, and they
shall be DRUNKEN WITH THEIR OWN BLOOD, as with sweet wine. I, even I, am he
that will comfort you O Africans! -- Who art thou, that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall die -- and forgettest the Lord thy maker; and have
feared every day continually because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he was
ready to destroy.

And where is the fury of the oppressor? The captive-exile hasteneth that he
may be loosened, and that he should not die in the pit; nor that his bread
should fail. For it shall come to pass in that day that his burden shall be
taken away from off thy shoulders, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke
shall be destroyed because of the anointing -- because of the promise and the
oath of God, the unction of Liberty shall be poured upon all flesh; and
Ethiopia among other nations shall stretch forth her hands to God. Yes, all the
nations of the earth shall like kindred drops of rain mingle together in one
ocean of love -- in one family of brethren. Then I shall sing -- All hail!
immortal Freedom's reign!
The enraptured prisoner bursts his chain:
Thy genial rays, bright sun of love,
Melts the rude savage to a dove;
Nor priests nor tyrants shall confine,
Or damp thy influence divine;
Thy glorious and all conquering light,
Dispels the shades of ancient night.
Beneath thy rays, Mankind shall last,
Without a Pharaoh to give task,
Sweet Liberty their only law,
And heavens great King their only awe.


I hope Mr. L -- and the Americans in general will think of the threatenings
above quoted, and consider whilst it is called to day, what belongs to their
peace. I rejoice that there are so many in the United States who abhor slavery
in their hearts; for their sakes, I trust the Lord will spare the land from a
deluge of blood. This is the fervent prayer of the author, who will behold,
with transports of joy the rising empire of America established in
righteousness and peace. Farewell. -- I shall ever remain,

PHILANTHROPOS.
Savannah.
FINIS.

