FRONTISPIECE


DRAMATIC DIALOGUES, FOR THE USE OF YOUNG PERSONS.

BY THE AUTHOR OF THE BLIND CHILD, etc.

"True Critics inquire, Does the Work relate to the Interests of Mankind? -- Is
its Object useful, and its End moral? -- Will it inform the Understanding, and
amend the Heart?" ESSAY ON SOLITUDE, BY M. ZIMMERMAN. BOSTON: PRINTED FOR W.
SPOTSWOOD.

1798.

NEW PUBLICATIONS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE, For Sale by W. SPOTSWOOD.
1. The BLIND CHILD, or Anecdotes of the Wyndham Family. 2. THE HISTORY OF
SANDFORD AND MERTON, abridged from the original Work. 3. The TWO COUSINS, a
MORAL STORY. By the Author of the BLIND CHILD. 4. The HISTORY OF THE DAVENPORT
FAMILY, a moral tale. 5. TALES FOR YOUTH in thirty poems. To which are annexed
Historical Remarks and Moral Applications, in prose. 6. ^mart's, Watts's and
Barbauld's Hymns in verse and prose. 7. JUVENILE TRIALS, for robbing orchards,
telling fibs, and other heinous offenses. By Master Tommy Littleton, secretary
to the court; with a sequel Dr. Aiken. 8. An ADDRESS TO YOUNG PERSONS AFTER
CONFIRMATION. By RICHARD WATSON, Lord Bishop of La^du^^.
PREFACE.
TO publish a Work with the Title borne by this, may, perhaps, by some, be
thought presumption, when it is recollected that Madame de Genlis has already
occupied the Dramatic line, in a manner to be imitated by few, and, probably,
to be equalled by none. -- But a comparison of this work with the Theater of
Education, of that great Author, would be unfair as to execution, and unjust as
to design. -- The Writer of this Work does not, like Madame de Genlis, intend
her Dramatic Dialogues to be performed; well aware that the length of the
Scenes, in some places, and the simplicity of the Plot in all, would render
them ^lat and heavy in representation. The motives by which she was induced to
throw her Stories into Dialogue, were a belief that young people are easily
captivated and interested by this manner of writing, and the convenience of
avoiding the "said (...)," and "replied she," which becomes so fatiguing in a
narration of any length, and which she was so often obliged to break in her
last work.

This short explanation the Authoress thought due to herself, lest she should
be suspected of endeavoring to imitate one of the first Authors the Age has
produces.

If these simple Dialogues should be considered as an additional barrier
against the encroachments of Error, and an additional support to the efforts of
Virtue, the Writer will be most happy; and she trusts them, though not without
fear, yet not without hope, to the candor of a generous Public, who at least
will give her credit for purity of (...)

The Misfortunes of Anger.


THE MISFORTUNES OF ANGER.

A DRAMA.

IN TWO PARTS.

Our Passions gone, and Reason in her Throne,
We wonder at the Mischief we have done.
WALLER. BOSTON: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD.

1798.

CHARACTERS.
Mrs. Selwyn, -- Governess to Juliet. Paulina, -- Her Cousin. Mary, -- Her
Maid. Juliet, Fanny -- A little Girl.
THE Misfortunes of Anger.
SCENE, a Parlour. Mary enters, lifts up a tambour frame which appears to have
been thrown down, picks up the spangles, silks, etc. -- She speaks. SO Miss
Juliet has been here, I see! -- What put her into a ^age with her tambour, I
(...) -- Oh! I see, this rose-bud d^^^ (...) look well, so down it we^^, (...)
warrant it, and here (...) spangles and twist thrown (...). For my part, (...)
frame was not all broke to smash, it would have been like her. -- Ah! here
comes Miss Paulina! There Is a young lady, marry, I wish our's was like her, but
no hope of that!

Enter Paulina (with a book.) Paulina. Mary have you seen my cousin?


Mary. No, Miss, not since breakfast.


Paulina. I left her here at her tambour frame -- She said she would work while
I read to her.


Mary. Aye, Miss, but something has gone wrong since that. -- Here I found the
frame, and there lay the si^ks -- Truly, I Am glad I was not here, they would have
been thrown at my head.


Paulina. Perhaps she is gone to her own room, I Will seek her; if she comes here
in the mean time, Mary tell her I am up stairs.


Mary. Yes, Miss, to be sure I will. -- ( Paulina goes out.) -- Ah! by my
truth, there is some pleasure in doing any thing for you, one does not get
pinched and called names! -- So here is the Governess, yawning as usual, but
just up.


Enter Mrs. Selwyn. (She speaks in a slow, dull manner, and yawns often.) Mrs.
Selwyn. Well, Mary! -- Where Is Miss Juliet?


Mary. I don't know, Ma'am, not I, she is in one of her passions today; every
thing goes wrong with her; she was ready to fight with the looking-glass, while
I dressed her this morning, and I don't know how many pinches I got for not
being quick enough to please her.


Mrs. Selwyn. She Is a strange girl, I cannot help laughing at her sometimes.


Mary. ( laughing.) It Is no laughing matter, ma'am, I can tell you that, and it
only makes her worse.


Mrs. Selwyn. She fatigues me so! I really cannot stay with her long at a time.


Mary, (aside.) No, truly, you take care not to have too much trouble!

Mrs. Selwyn draws a chair indolently, and takes out her work.
Mrs. Selwyn. Well, Mary, go and tell her to come to me, I want her to read.


Mary. Lord, ma'am I Am quite afraid to go, she will not mind me.


Mrs. Selwyn, (yawning.) And she will fatigue me sadly too, well, never mind,
she will come bye-and-bye.


Enter Fanny, (crying.) Mary. What Is the matter with you, Fanny, what are you
crying for?


Fanny. Miss Juliet! -- Miss Juliet! -- Oh dear.


Mrs. Selwyn. Child, don't make so much noise, what has Miss Juliet done to you?


Fanny. Why, ma'am, an please you, she met me in the garden, about half an hour
agone, I was a coming up, ma'am, to beg a little milk for my little sister, for
mother is very bad, and so she said as how --


Mrs. Selwyn. Don't talk so fast, let us hear what Miss Juliet did.


Fanny. Yes, ma'am, and so ma'am, if you please, I met Miss Juliet; and so she
asked me what I wanted, and so I told, and so she.


Mrs. Selwyn. Grant me patience! How many more so's?


Mary. Don't make such a long story, Fanny, tell us, at once, what made you cry.


Fanny. Yes, I Am a going, so miss asked me to play wi' she, for she said his
honor was gone out and Madam Selwyn wa'nt up, and Master Charles was gone to
school, and Miss Paulina was up stairs, and she did not know what to do wi'
herself.


Mrs. Selwyn. So, there is all the family disposed of. -- Well, child, what then?


Fanny. Then we vent up stairs ma'am, and miss showed me her doll, and we
played, but at last, -- Oh dear, oh dear!


Mrs. Selwyn. I never heard such a girl in my life. -- What happened then?


Fanny. Why, miss beat me, yes, she did, ever so hard, and scratched me.


Mrs. Selwyn. What all at once, without any cause?


Fanny. Yes, ma'am, 'cause I let the doll fall.


Mrs. Selwyn, (laughing.) What nonsense! -- Go away, child, take your milk, and
bid ^he cook give you some broth.


Fanny. Yes, ma'am, thank you ma'am. (Aside.) -- But I will not come here any more
to be beat about so. (Mary and Fanny go out.)


Enter Juliet, (with her doll.) Juliet. Where Is Fanny Wood?


Mrs. Selwyn. Gone home, miss, do you think any body will stay where you are,
to be beat and scratched?


Juliet. I don't care. What business had she to throw down my doll?


Mrs. Selwyn. Do you think she did it on purpose?


Juliet. I don't know. -- Let her take more care then.


Mrs. Selwyn. Has she spoiled it?


Juliet. No.


Mrs. Selwyn. Well then, what was there to be in such a rage about? -- Come and
read.


Juliet. Not till I have dressed my doll.


Mrs. Selwyn. Well, -- make haste then -- (A pause, Mrs. Selwyn works but
slowly and idly, Juliet dresses her doll, at last, she stamps her fo^t, and
says: --

You tiresome creature, will not you be dressed?


Mrs. Selwyn. My stars, Miss Juliet, how you make one start. -- What is the
matter now?


Juliet. Why, my nasty doll is such a torment.


Mrs. Selwyn. Very pretty, to quarrel with a bit of painted wood! -- Oh! you
silly child! -- Come, leave your doll, and let me hear you read.


Juliet. I tell you I will not.


Mrs. Selwyn. Oh! you are a sweet little girl, so mild and so obliging; how
every body loves you.


Juliet, (Crying.) Let me alone then!


Mrs. Selwyn. Pretty creature! -- What a sweet face! -- Look how your doll
stares at you!


Juliet. (Rising in a passion, and throwing her doll across the room.) I wish
the doll was a thousand miles off, a little provoking creature! -- (Mrs. Selwyn
laughs.) -- I will not be laughed at that I will not.


Mrs. Selwyn. How will you help it? -- Leave off crying directly, or I will
shut you up for two hours. -- (Another pause, Juliet still cries, but by
degrees becomes quiet, after some time she calls.) -- Mary! -- Mary


Mrs. Selwyn. What now, miss?


Juliet. I want Mary. -- (calls) -- Mary, I say!


Enter Mary. Mary. Mercy, miss I came as soon as ever I heard you.


Juliet. You are always so slow. -- Take down my goldfinch, and fetch me some
seed and water.


Mary. Yes miss. (She reaches the bird down, then goes out, and returns with
some water and seed.)


Juliet. Come my pretty, let your mistress feed you, I love you very much --
(She feeds it.)


Mrs. Selwyn. Yes, you love it vastly just now, but sometimes you are ready to
wring its neck, when it does not eat to please you.


Mary. (aside.) One would think Mrs. Selwyn liked to see her in a passion, she
delights so in teazing her!


Juliet. (feeding the bird) Oh, you little torment you will not eat out of my hand!


Mrs. Selwyn. There, I told you so, now, miss, you had better beat the bird, or
throw it across the room, as you did your doll.


Juliet. So I will, if I please.


Mrs. Selwyn. Do, I would advise you!


Mary. Dear ma'am, how can you?


Juliet. Come, eat then. -- You will not! -- You nasty, little obstinate,
ungrateful creature, -- I Will teach you to teaze me, I will. -- (She snatches
the bird out of the cage in a passion, gives it a squeeze, then looks at it,
and bursts into tears.) -- Oh! Heaven, I have killed my bird! --


Mary. Oh, dear, miss, I hope not.


Juliet. Look at it, Mary, pray try if you can fetch it to life! -- Oh my poor
bird. -- Is it dead, Mary? --


Mary. Yes, miss, you have killed it.


Juliet. I! -- I have killed it! -- I that loved it so! -- Oh! how unhappy I am!


Mary. Don't cry so, miss, you was not so much to blame now.


Enter Paulina. Paulina. Dear Juliet, what is the matter?


Juliet. ( Throws herself into Paulina's arms.) Oh! cousin, why did you leave
me? -- I am never so naug^^y when you are with me.


Paulina. My dear, I have been seeking you, at last I heard you was playing
with Fanny Wood, so then I sat down to write to mama -- But what has happened?
--


Mrs. Selwyn. Oh Miss Juliet has been in one of her usual furies. -- I must
dress. -- I am tired out with her. -- Mary will tell you, Miss Paulina.

(She goes out.)
Mary, (muttering.) And it is as much your fault as here is this time, I must say,
teaze, teaze, for ever.


Paulina. Mary, what is the matter?


Mary. Shall I tell, miss?


Juliet. Oh! my cousin will hate me.


Paulina. I hate you, my dear, no^ (...) shall pity you.


Mary. Why, miss, my young lady was feeding her bird, and ^^rt it somehow, and
it is dead.


Juliet. No, Paulina, that is not all; I was angry with my poor bird, I gave it
a sudden squeeze, and killed it.


Paulina. My dear cousin, you almost redeem your faults by this openness of
heart. -- How I pity you, how much you must feel on this occasion!


Juliet. (weeping, but with gentleness.) But you, who are so good, how much you
must detest me!


Mary. To tell you the truth, Miss Paulina, my young lady was not so much to
blame as she is sometimes. Mrs. Selwyn did teaze her sadly, that she did, to be
sure.


Juliet. But that was not my bird's fault! -- Ah, my poor bird, he will never
eat out of my hand again! -- How could I be so cruel as to hurt a little
creature who loved me so dearly.


Paulina. Leave us, Mary.

(Mary goes out.)
Paulina, Juliet. Paulina. Do not distress yourself so much, my dear Juliet.


Juliet. Do I not deserve to be distressed?


Paulina. You have certainly been wrong.


Juliet. Ah! You do not know half how naughty I have been: I pinched Mary, I
beat Fanny Wood! -- What is it makes me so wicked, Paulina? I always know when
I am so, and I am unhappy, then I fret, and do wrong again.


Paulina. I can easily conceive all that, you are greatly to be pitied.


Juliet. But you are the only person (except my father) who ever speaks to me
as if I had common sense! -- Mary shrugs up her shoulders and leaves me as soon
as she can. -- Mrs. Selwyn laughs at me and treats me like a baby. It was but
just now she bade me "look how my doll stared at me!" And that put me into such
a passion, that I threw my doll across the room.


Paulina. Certainly Mrs. Selwyn does not treat you properly, but that does not
justify you. You are now, my dear, more than twelve years old; at that age,
though children, we are no longer babies, but you do not seek to improve
yourself. You read, indeed, because you love reading, but not with a steady
view to your own improvement, and almost all the remainder of your time is
spent in dressing your doll and playing with Fanny Wood, who is too ignorant to
be a proper companion for you; thus you tempt others to treat you like a baby.
-- I do not offend you?


Juliet. No, no, -- I like to hear you because you speak to me gently, and I
feel what you say. Pray, dear Paulina, tell me what I must do to be like you.


Paulina. My dear Juliet, I wish you a better example; -- if you were with us,
mama would soon teach you to be all your friends could wish. -- But Juliet,
with the understanding nature has given you, you may do much for yourself. In
the words of a very great author I will tell you that -- "There is no soul
More ableto direct you than yourself,
If with the sap of Reason you would quench
Or but allay the Fire of Passion!" --



Read more, and reflect. -- Whenever you find yourself getting angry leave the
cause of your displeasure, take a book which amuses you, and read till you find
yourself calm and easy. Struggle with your violent passions, and think to what
dreadful consequences they will lead if you indulge them.

Juliet. Consequences!


Paulina. Yes, my dear cousin, I know not to what an excess they may transport
you in time, if they are not now opposed. -- My mother told me, the other day,
she had just read the history of a man, who, when a boy, squeezed his squirrel
to death as you did your bird, and when he grew up, after various crimes, being
angry with his wife, his child, who was in her arms, happened to cry while he
was speaking and, in a fit of passion, he laid his hand on it, and strangled it
in a moment!


Juliet. Oh! Heaven, how shocking; do you think it possible, Paulina, do you
think it possible I should ever do so?


Paulina. It is impossible to say to what extravagance passion may lead! -- But
yesterday you would have detested the idea of injuring your bird -- and are we
not told i^ the Bible, that when the Prophet foretold to Hazael See 8th Chapter
of the 2d Book of Kings.
the miseries he would bring on his country, and the cruelties of which he
would be guilty, he exclaimed, "Is thy servant a dog that he should do this
great thing?" -- And yet when he gave way to his passions, he exactly verified
the Prophet's words.


Juliet. Oh, Paulina! you terify me extremely -- I will indeed try to be good
-- I will not beat Fanny, nor pinch Charles any more.


Paulina. I wish you may not -- It is time for us to dress, your father will be
at home presently, and I hear Charles is just come from school.

(They go out.)
END OF THE FIRST PART.
THE Misfortunes of Anger.
PART II.
Juliet enters from the garden, she draws a chair, sits down, and leans her
head on her hand. Juliet. I HAVE a sad headache, it always comes when I cry so
much. -- How true is what Paulina said just now, that I make myself wretched by
indulging my passions! -- Why did nobody ever tell me so before? -- She takes a
picture from her bosom and kisses it. -- Oh, my dear mother! -- You died too
early to form by your example, the daughter you loved so tenderly! -- Wretched
girl! -- Why do I ever, for a moment, forget the character which my father drew
of my mother when he gave me this picture. -- "Be like your mother, my Juliet;
she was mild and gentle to all, she was beloved by every one who knew her! her
dying wish was, that you might be virtuous! -- My child, be worthy of your
mother! -- Yes, those were exactly his words. Ah! how little do I fulfill her
wishes! -- I, who ill-treat the servant to whose care she entrusted my infancy
-- Who abuse a poor child whose situation should make me pity her! -- I whom
every body hates! -- Torn by contrary feelings! -- Capable of knowing when I do
wrong, yet yielding to the next temptation. -- In spite of my faults, am I not
to be pitied?


Enter Mary. Mary. Miss, my master bade me tell you he is going to Mr.
Richley's, and shall be back in less than an hour.


Juliet. Very well.


Mary. What is the matter miss, you are crying?


Juliet. I have reason to cry.


Mary. I am sure, miss, I don't know any young lady who might be happier. --
You have the best of fathers.


Juliet. Ah! that is true.


Mary. And here you have a fine house, where you are, as one may say, mistress,
and a carriage, and every earthly thing you can wish. -- Only think of the poor
children down in the village: the little Wood's whose mother is so sick, and
who are half starved!


Juliet. Alas, yes! -- And I have ill-treated poor Fanny! -- My dear Mary, do
go down to the village and give her this shilling; I will beg papa, presently,
to send our apothecary to her mother.


Mary. Oh, miss, what a pity you are not always good, how every body would love
you.


Juliet. I hope they will in future.


Enter Paulina. Paulina. Juliet, what are you going to do?


Juliet. I am going to read to Mrs. Selwyn, in her own room, and afterward
Charles and I are going to play.


Paulina. Very well, then I will finish my letter to mama.


Juliet. Do so. -- I shall not stay long with Mrs. Selwyn. -- Let me know,
Mary, when my father comes in.


Mary. Yes, miss.

(Juliet goes out.)
Paulina, Mary. Mary. Miss Juliet seems very unhappy today.


Paulina. Yes, she has naturally a strong sense of what is right; she feels
that she is wrong, and of course is unhappy.


Mary. I cannot help loving her, though she is sometimes so much out of the
way. She was a sweet child before she grew so passionate, and she has a great
deal of good about her still. How my poor lady would have grieved had she lived
to see her ^o headstrong.


Paulina. Had it pleased Heaven to spare Mrs. Beecher, Juliet would probably
have been a very different character; she has an admirable understanding, but
she is ill educated.


Mary. That Is true, indeed, miss. I take the liberty of speaking to you because
you know how I love all his family, and that I have lived in it long enough to
know something about it.


Paulina. Yes, Mary, you may speak to me without fear; I know your attachment
to your late lady and all that belonged to her.


Mary. Ah, miss, I wish my young lady lived with you, you are so mild and so
sensible, and my lady your mother is so fine a character --


Paulina. I have reason to glory in my mother -- May I be one day like her.


Mary. You will, miss, ^ay, you are already; truly I hear of you from all
parts. -- But I know yo^ don't wish to be praised. -- What I was going to say,
is this: -- Nobody hears us? -- No. -- Indeed, Miss Paulina, Mrs. Selwyn is not
fit to have the care of my young lady.


Paulina. It is true indeed.


Mary. She sets her no example but laziness, and she teazes her out of her
wits; -- if you had but heard her this morning --


Paulina. I see it with pain. She has no command over my cousin, because she
puts herself on a level with her by mean teazing and raillery; -- a passionate
temper was never mended by irritation. -- By the way, I don't much like this
scheme of playing with Charles; Juliet and he always quarrel, and I am afraid
he will overthrow all her good resolutions. I mean to speak to my uncle,
tonight, about Mrs. Selwyn, not to blame or censure her, but merely to say I
think she does not exactly follow the right method of managing my cousin's
temper.


Mary. Truly I think not.


Paulina. I intend to ask my uncle to ^et Juliet return with me, I know mama
wishes it.


Mary. I wish ^e may, miss, with all my heart.


Paulina. Well, I will go and write my letter.

(She is going, when Juliet rushes in apparently much terrified.)
Juliet. Oh Paulina! -- Mary! -- Help, help!


Mary. Oh dear, miss what, is the matter?


Juliet. My brother! -- help -- help him! -- go to him.

(Mary runs out, Juliet sinks down with her head against a chair, Paulina goes
to her.)
Paulina. Cousin! -- My dear Juliet, what is the matter? -- Oh, Heaven! she is
fainting! -- What shall I do, shall I run to Charles? -- No, I cannot leave
this dear girl. -- Juliet, revive, smell to my salts. -- (Juliet recovering,
rises on her knees, and clings round Paulina.)


Juliet. Oh, Paulina! -- Send for some help. -- Run to my father. -- My father!
-- Good Heaven! he will hate me for ever. -- I shall be banished his sight;
plead for me Paulina! -- Wretched girl! -- What will become of me!


Paulina. For pity's sake tell me what you have done?


Juliet. What have I done? -- I know not! -- Perhaps I have ki^^ed my brother!


Paulina (shudders and shrinks back.) Unhappy girl!


Juliet. Oh! well may you shudder, well may you look at me with horror! -- You
who warned me; how dare I clasp my arms round you. -- Those hands, which, (how
can I live to tell it) perhaps have murdered my brother.

(She faints)
Paulina. With what terror do I hear her, (She leans over her.) Wretched victim
of ungoverned passion! -- Revive, fear not my reproaches! -- Ah, thou art
already too miserable!


Enter Mary Mary. Ah, miss, what shall we do? -- I have sent for a surgeon.


Paulina. How is he hurt?


Mary Alas! I know not how much, the knife has struck him near the eye.


Paulina. The knife!


Mary. Yes, they were at play and quarrelled, Miss Juliet had a knife in her
hand, which she threw at him.


Paulina How dreadful! -- let us run to him! -- Yet, Juliet! But why should I
seek to revive her! -- Unhappy creature, she wakes but to woe -- Perhaps he may
be blinded! -- I stiffen with horror! -- Ah I hear the surgeon; follow me, Mary!

(They run out.) (Juliet alone and recovering.)
Paulina, where am I! -- You will not speak! -- What have I done! -- Ah I
remember -- too, too well I remember! -- (She raises herself) -- They are gone!
-- They leave me! -- to die alone! -- Alas I deserve it! -- Am I worthy that
one creature should pity me! -- Yet the torments I endure! -- Can they atone
for my crimes? -- Never, never! -- Dreadful idea! -- must I suffer through life
the anguish I feel at this moment? -- Through life -- what terrible fears crowd
upon me! -- (She kneels,) Oh God of mercy! hear me, pity me! -- Ah He is a God
of justice! -- Can he forgive me who have murdered my Brother? -- What a wretch
am I!

Enter Mary. Mary. Miss Juliet, are you better?


Juliet. Yes, Mary. -- Have you seen --


Mary. Your brother? -- yes, Miss.


Juliet. Ah, you weep!


Mary. Truly yes, I am frightened to death.


Juliet. I am the unhappy cause. -- I dread to hear -- I dare not ask.


Mary. The surgeon is with him; I could not stay any longer to see him suffer
so.


Juliet. Suffer!


Mary. Yes, the surgeon is obliged to hurt him, to find if the wound is -- I
cannot speak it.


Juliet. Mortal you would say? How is it that I have courage to pronounce that
horrible word? -- Ah, I gather courage from the excess of my despair.


Mary. Oh my poor master, what will he say!


Juliet. Do not distract me! -- Pity for a moment the pangs I suffer! -- Leave
me, Mary, leave me, I implore you! -- Go, learn it there is any hope!

(Mary goes out.)
Juliet. I have lost everything! -- My father will drive me from him for ever
-- I shall quit every thing I love! -- My friends, my relations will blush when
my name is mentioned -- Never mo^^ shall I revisit these scenes, so dear to my
infancy! -- Let me not recall the years I have past -- years of innocence and
happiness! -- Go where I will, I shall be pointed at and hated. -- Even the
picture of my mother, which used in all my distresses to console me, I can
never see again. -- I should fancy it reproached me. -- And all this misery I
have incurred by one moment of passion! -- Oh God, if thou should this once
deign to save me, never, never, will I be guilty again!


Enter Paulina, (running.) Paulina. Juliet! -- my dear cousin! -- be comforted.


Juliet. Ah! what then! -- What! -- may I, dare I hope!


Paulina. Yes -- the surgeon says he is in no danger.


Juliet (throwing herself into her arms.) Oh my best Paulina!


Paulina, ( embracing her with tears.) I ran to you the instant I heard it.


Juliet. I have not deserved your goodness.


Paulina. Ah Juliet! -- if the knife had gone ever so little on one side,
Charles would have been killed, or on the other, and he would have been blinded
for ever.


Juliet. Oh merciful Almighty God! -- from what misery has thy providence
preserved me! -- even now I cannot behold myself without horror. -- Have I
deserved the mercy I have met with? -- No! -- though innocent in intention, my
action was guilty. -- I could not wish to hurt my brother, yet took the means
to do so! -- Detested passion! -- Oh Paulina, I am cured for ever!


Paulina. I dare hope so! -- The lessons of this day have been striking. --
They show how one step in evil leads to another. -- Aweful and horrid might
have been the event, but as it has proved, we will hope this instruction has
been directed by Providence, to warn you of your danger!


Juliet. It has done it completely. -- But Paulina, where is my father?


Paulina. I hear him now in the hall.


Juliet. Oh Paulina, I dare not see him.


Paulina. I will go to him, and I hope, return with your pardon.


Juliet. My best friend -- let actions speak my gratitude, deign but to counsel
and direct me, henceforth I will be guided by you alone.

(Paulina goes out.)
Enter Mrs. Selwyn and Mary. Mary. Well, Miss Juliet, make yourself easy, all
goes well.


Juliet. Thank God!


Mrs. Selwyn. You have had good fortune, Miss, I can tell you.


Juliet. Good fortune, Ma'am! I dare to consider it as the act of Divine
Providence, if not to save me, yet to preserve my father from misery.


Mrs. Selwyn. You improve, Miss, your language is really fine.


Juliet. Misfortunes correct the heart, and strong feelings excite strong
expression. -- I hope I shall improve.


Mrs. Selwyn. You astonish me -- you who but this morning were dressing your
doll, to be making wis^ remarks, is indeed surprising.


Juliet. I am not a fool, though I have acted like one.


Mary. No, no, they an't very wise that take you for a fool. I have often heard
you talk to my master as sensible as anybody is the world.


Mrs. Selwyn. Miss Juliet never indulged me with any of her sensible
conversation.


Mary. Truly no, because y^^ treated her like a baby.


Mrs. Selwyn. You take great liberties.


Mary. I beg your pardon, Ma'am, but I have often told you you did not know my
young lady so well as I did.


Mrs. Selwyn. The more sense she has, the more shame for her to behave as she
has done.


Juliet. Too true indeed! -- my conscience tells me I have not the excuse of
fo^ly. -- But I have suffered passion to overrun and darken all my good
qualities. This one hour has driven it from my heart. I am no longer a foolish
child.


Enter Paulina. Paulina. Come, my dearest Juliet -- Charles is with your
father, he knows all, he forgives you, he calls for you.


Juliet. I owe everything to you!


Paulina. I have more good news for you -- one word.

(Mrs. Selwyn and Mary retire to the back of the Scene.) You go home with me --
you are to stay with us as long as you please!
Juliet. Delightful! --


Paulina. Your father dismisses Mrs. Selwyn.


Juliet. Ah I am sorry! She is poor, and she has taught me many things.


Paulina. My good cousin, how I love that gratitude! -- your father will allow
her a pension, we have settled all that since I left you.


Juliet. Oh my best cousin! -- how much do I owe you.


Paulina. I am overpaid if you are happy.


Juliet. To be so I must be good. -- That will be the work of your hands! --
How will you be loved by your friends, by your mother, by Heaven itself! -- yes
that will repay you.


Paulina. Let us go, my uncle expects us.


Scene closes. Sensibil^ity. Cecilia supporting M^^ Melville.


SENSIBILITY.

A DRAMA.

IN TWO PARTS.

-- Exclamations, tender tones, fond tears,
And all the graceful drap'ry Pity wears,
These are not Pity's self, they but express
Her inward sufferings, by her pictured dress;
And these fair marks, reluctant I relate,
These lovely symbols may be counterfeit.
SENSIBILITY. -- MISS MORE: BOSTON: PRINTED FOR W. SPOTSWOOD.

1798.

CHARACTERS.
Mrs. Melville, Mrs. Rivers, Cecilia, -- Daughter of Mrs. Rivers. Isabella, --
Daughter of Mrs. Melville, Martha, -- Mrs. Melville's Maid.
SENSIBILITY.
SCENE, a Dressing Room, at Mrs. Melville's. A Table standing with Work, and
Books.) Enter Mrs. Rivers, Cecilia, and Martha. Martha. PRAY, ma'am, walk in, I
will let my mistress know you are here, she is walking in the garden with Miss
Melville. -- Will Not you please to sit?

( She places chairs, they sit down.)
Mrs Rivers. Thank you Martha, don't hurry your mistress.

(Martha goes out.)
Cecilia This is a pretty room, mama.


Mrs. Rivers. Very much so, I see it again with great pleasure.


Cecilia. It is some time, I think, since you were here.


Mrs, Rivers. Yes, near two years. Mrs. Melville has been gone so long on
business of her late husband's to an estate he had in Jamaica.


Cecilia. How glad you will be to see her again! What a delightful day we shall
spend?


Mrs. Rivers. It will indeed give me great pleasure.


Cecilia. But her daughter! -- Oh, mama, what joy to her to see her mother
again after an absence of two years! -- I should envy her, if I had not passed
those two years with the best of mothers.


Mrs. Rivers. She has indeed probably lost much by so long an absence from her
who is so well able to instruct her.


Cecilia. Undoubtedly! -- Ah, whose instructions can teach the heart so soon as
those of a mother, whose reproofs proceed from affection, whose praises are the
greatest glory of a child!


Mrs. Rivers. It is true, -- a child must be obstinate indeed, who refuses to
listen to the instructions of a fond mother. -- Mrs. Melville is entitled to
her daughter's best affections, not only by the goodness of her heart and
understanding, but by the sacrifices she has made for her sake. -- When Mr.
Melville died, he left his large estate in Jamaica to his little girl: on
inquiry, her mother found that the estate had been, and still was, ill managed
by the steward; in short, that nothing but the presence of some person
interested in its improvement could render it half so valuable as it had been
supposed. -- She determined, therefore, to overcome her dread of the sea, which
all her life had been extreme; to leave her friends, her sister, even her
child, in England, and undertake the voyage herself. -- This she has done; has
restored the estate to the most flourishing condition, and is now returned to
enjoy the reward of her labors.


Cecilia. What a charming character! -- (A short pause.) I like this room very
much, it is so pleasant and quiet -- ( She rises and walks about) -- Mama, may I
look at this book?


Mrs. Rivers. If you please, a^ it is lying open to every-one's inspection, it
cannot be improper, but it is impertinent and ill-bred to look even into
printed books, which are placed out of immediate view.


Cecilia. "The Beauties of Stern!" -- It has Miss Melville's name in it. -- I
do not know this book, Mama.


Mrs. Rivers. No, my dear, though it has great merit in point of writing and
sentiment, it is not exactly the book I should choose for you at present. In my
opinion it recommends too much the enervating mind of Sensibility, to which I
so greatly object. -- But here come Mrs. Melville and Isabella.


Enter Mrs. Melville and Isabella. Mrs. Melville. My dear friend, how much I
rejoice to see you.


Mrs. Rivers. The pleasure is mutual, believe me! -- It is so long since we
met, I began to fear we should meet no more! -- This is, I believe, Miss
Melville, but so grown I should hardly have known her!


Mrs. Melville. Not more than Miss Rivers. -- I must have the^^ young people
acquainted.

(Mrs. Melville introduces Cecilia and Isabella to each other, they curtsy, and
seem to talk apart.)
Mrs. Rivers. I hope they will be so, nothing can give me more pleasure.


Mrs. Melville. But I forget to beg your pardon for keeping you waiting, I had
strolled beyond the garden into the field, and Martha could not find me. -- She
has shown you into a litter'd room.


Mrs. Rivers. No apology is necessary, I have long known and loved this room.


Mrs. Melville. It is my daughter's now, I gave it up to her the day after my
return, and she has already brought hither her books and work -- so that she
has the confusion to answer for --

( smiling.)
Mrs. Rivers. It is a becoming confusion, I like to see books and work about in
a young person's apartment.


Isabella. Mine would have been in better order, mama, if you had not called me
away suddenly. -- Besides I hardly know where I am, or what I do at present.


Mrs. Rivers. I dare say, my dear, you have hardly yet recovered, if I may ^o
express myself, the happiness of seeing your mother!


Isabella. No indeed, Ma'am! -- The extreme joy almost overcome me. It may well
be called recovery, for such delight is really suffering!

( Mrs. Rivers looks at her wi^h some surprise.)
Mrs. Melville. Mine was, and still is, exquisite! -- To return once more to my
friends, to my sister, to my daughter, is happiness so great as wholly to repay
me all I have suffered in my absence from them!


Mrs. Rivers. No doubt, every sacrifice we make of pleasure to duty will,
sooner or later, be repaid; even the conviction of having done so carries with
it a comfort to the heart superior to all the advantages to be derived from a
deviation from virtue.


Mrs. Melville. You say true. It was with extreme regret that I prepared to
quit England, and to leave my daughter; but the assurance that my departure was
necessary to her future welfare, the dread of endangering her health, then
extremely delicate, by taking her with me, and the conviction that I left her
in proper care, conspired to determine me, and I am now repaid.


Isabella. But, mama, I should have been so afraid of the sea and storms!


Mrs. Melville. Go, you are a silly child, to form such a terrible idea of
dangers, which (...) principally imaginary. -- But, my dear Mrs. Rivers, will
you go with me to my greenhouse? -- I have some curious West India plants.


Mrs. Rivers. With all my heart. -- Children, will you stay here, or go with us?


Mrs. Melville. Oh, they shall remain here. -- They will become better
acquainted in our absence.

( Mrs. Rivers and Mrs. Melville go out.)
Cecilia, Isabella. Isabella. Let us sit down, my dear Miss Rivers. (They sit.)
-- What pleasure I hope to derive from your aquaintance!


Cecilia. My mother I am sure will be happy in my forming an intimacy with you,
she has so high an opinion of Mrs. Melville!


Isabella. It will give me infinite pleasure. -- Suffer me to say I already
feel I shall love you extremely, I am already attached to you. -- Dear Cecilia,
may I believe the impression is mutual!


Cecilia. I have no doubt, on a farther acquaintance, my gratitude for your
kindness will ripen into real regard.


Isabella. You are very good! -- (She assumes a melancholy air.) -- Hitherto I
have been very unfortunate in my friendships!


Cecilia, (with a smile.) You are very young to complain of that.


Isabella, (earnestly.) Alas yes! -- The misfortune of too great sensibility is
mine. -- You can have no idea what I have suffered -- what I do at this moment
suffer!


Cecilia. You alarm and distress me. -- What at your age can have happened to
make you so uneasy?


Isabella, (shedding tears.) Alas, my dear Cecilia, amidst all my joy for the
return of my mother, I endure severe regret, bitter anguish I might call it.


Cecilia. Good Heaven! on what account.


Isabella, (embracing her.) Amiable girl! -- I see you sympathize with me.


Cecilia. I do indeed, but surely you would not have told me so much without
intending to explain yourself.


Isabella. No, my sweet friend. The inflated and strong language Isabella uses,
is one symptom of False Sensibility. -- To apply violent terms on common
occasions is equally absurd and unnatural
-- From your tenderness I expect the only consolation of which my situation is
capable. -- How will your kind and gentle nature pity me when you hear the loss
I have sustained!


Cecilia. What can it be, when your mother is still with you?


Isabella. At the seat of my aunt, where I have been during my mother's
absence, I contracted a strong and ardent attachment to a young lady about your
age. -- I even think you resemble her, -- you have the same softness of
complexion, the same sweet smile!


Cecilia. (embracing her.) Ah, my dear Isabella, I will spare you the relation.
-- I guess too easily what you have suffered! -- It is true I have never formed
any friendship out of my own family, but I can conceive what its feelings must
be. -- And have you really lost, for ever, a tie so tender?


Isabella. Not, I hope, for ever.


Cecilia. How! -- I have misunderstood you. -- I believe you meant to have said
she was dead.


Isabella. Oh no! -- I should hardly be able to survive so great a misfortune.
-- Is it not enough to be separated from her?


Cecilia. You fear you shall, perhaps, meet her no more!


Isabella. No. -- She is to spend the greatest part of the summer with me.


Cecilia. I do not understand -- what then do you lament?


Isabella. What? -- Surely her absence at present!


Cecilia. What the absence of a few months do you regret so deeply! -- I
profess you surprise me!


Isabella, (a little disconcerted.) But I have been so accustomed to see her
every day, she is so charming -- and my misfortune is too great sensibility!


Cecilia. Can sensibility become a misfortune and a torment? -- I have been
taught to consider it as the source of goodness and delight -- True, indeed, we
may be sometimes severely pained by the impossibility of relieving those whom
we pity, by the illness of friends, and various other circumstances, but at the
same time an active wish to do good warms and chea^s the heart, and when we
st^^e our anguish and carefully attend the sickbed of those we love, do we not
feel such comfort as half repays us for the sorrow we endure in seeing them
suffer!


Isabella. But unfortunately I feel so much. I can do very little to relieve
the pain of those I love; my presence of mind forsakes me, and I become unable
to assist them.


Cecilia. But pardon me for saying that it is a sort of weakness against which
we ought to struggle, our feeling becomes useless, worse than useless; it
disables us if it does does not prompt us to action. We might as well not feel
for the unhappy, as not seek to relieve them.


Isabella. I sympathise with them, but my spirits are so weak I can do little
more.


Cecilia. I protest I do not understand you.


Enter Martha. Martha. Oh, dear Miss Melville, a sad thing has happened!


Isabella. Oh Heavens! what? You alarm me beyond expression!


Martha. Don't be too much frightened, miss, it is well it is no worse, but you
will be vexed? --


Isabella. I entreat you to tell me what has happened at once.


Martha. Why, miss, your pretty parrot has hurt himself sadly.


Isabella. Ah! my poor parrot, what has he done?


Martha. Miss, he was standing upon his perch, when a great dog followed the
baker into the kitchen, Poll was frigtened, and flew to the window, dashed
himself against a pane of glass, broke it and cut himself very much with the
pieces.


Isabella, (in tears.) Oh? what shall I do, what shall I do?


Cecilia. My dear Isabella, don't distress yourself so, -- I dare say he will
soon be well again, -- let us go and see if we can do any thing for him.


Isabella. Oh! I cannot bear to see him.


Martha. Dear miss, he will soon be well, but somebody should put something to
the cut.


Isabella. Martha, will you?


Martha. I would with all my heart, Miss, but I burned my hand so yesterday I
cannot hold him, and our silly cook is afraid of his biting her.


Isabella. Will Thomas?


Martha. Thomas is not at home, Miss.


Cecilia. Dear Isabella, I will do it -- it is true I shall be sorry to see the
poor creature in pain, but I cannot bear the idea of not assisting him.


Isabella. You are extremely good!


Cecilia. Poor thing! he is suffering all this time. Come, my dear, let us go
to him.


Isabella. Oh, I cannot see him.


Cecilia. Not see him!


Martha. Dear Miss, the poor thing knows you, and he will be quiet if you are
by.


Isabella. Oh, but indeed it will make me ill.


Cecilia. Pooh, pooh, a run in the garden will soon make you well again!


Isabella. What spirits you have!


Cecilia. To be sure -- that is natural at my age -- what have I to be
melancholy about?


Isabella. You are very happy!


Cecilia. You have as much cause to be happy as I have; but come along.

(They go out.)
Martha. That Is a charming young lady! -- How she runs along and how cheerful
she looks! -- What ails Miss Isabella, I wonder; she always looks sorrowful,
and sighs, and walks so slowly, I see that already. -- Truly, that is unnatural
at her age.


Enter Mrs. Rivers, Mrs. Melville. Mrs. Melville. Martha, where are the young
ladies?


Martha. Marry, Ma'am, they are gone to see the poor Parrot; he has hurt
himself, and they are gone to help him.


Mrs. Melvillie. Very well, they are well employed.

(Martha goes out.)
Mrs. Melville, Mrs. Rivers. Mrs. Melville. My dear friend, I am so charmed to
see you, and so anxious to talk with you, that I fear I shall quite fatigue you
with prate!


Mrs. Rivers. Not at all; assure yourself I am too much interested in all which
concerns you, and am indeed eager to have an unrestrained conversation with you.


Mrs. Melville. I am equally eager; and as the first subject to a fond mother
is her child, we will talk of ours. I am not quite satisfied with Isabella.


Mrs. Rivers. How so? -- She appears gentle and sensible!


Mrs. Melville. Yes, she has many good qualities, but I see with pain, that one
of the most amiable, she carries to an excess which makes me wish she possessed
it not: it gives her so much pain, and will through life be so often a source of
distress to her, that I could almost wish to suppress it entirely.


Mrs. Rivers. Pray tell me what it is -- you really alarm me!


Mrs. Melville. Sensibility.


Mrs. Rivers. I am amazed!


Mrs Melville. I once hardly could have believed I should wish a child of mine
to want Sensibility; but I see in Isabella how much it tends to increase the
unavoidable distresses of human life, even to create them where they are not;
so that I really think had I another child to educate, I should labor as much
as possible to suppress this pleasing, but unhappy quality.


Mrs Rivers. I must repeat, you amaze me! -- What! Sensibility! -- The first
and best gift of Heaven -- would you rob your child of that? -- Not only is it
the sweetest grace of youth, but the principal source of its virtues. -- Can
you conceive any great or good action which has ever been performed by a person
wanting Sensibility? Did you ever hear of any really great character who wanted
this endowment? Have I then a right to rob my child of that which alone can
lead to exalted virtue, and to the train of delight by which it is accompanied?
-- How sweetly, as well as truly, says a certain charming Authoress, Cold and
^^ert the mental powers would lie.
Without this quickening spark of Deity
To draw the rich materials from the mine,
To bid the mass of intellect refine;
To melt the firm, to animate the cold,
And Heaven's own impress stamp on Nature's gold;
To give immortal Mind its firmest tone,
Oh Sensibility! -- is all thine own!



Mrs. Melville. I agree with you fully, my dear friend, as to the graces and
charms of Sensibility; but allow me to differ from you a moment. Was not Cato a
great character, yet had he sensibility, who did not shed a tear over the body
of his son, just slain in battle?


Mrs. Rivers. Undoubtedly yes. -- First we ought to consider the education
which was given to the Romans. -- We ought to recollect that their country was
the chief object of their love, and that they were taught to despise all
considerations which interfered with their duty to that. -- Thus when Cato saw
the dead body of his son, he did not weep, because true Sensibility exalted his
mind to the height of patriotism, which made him willingly yield his son a
victim to Rome. -- He wished also to encourage the sinking Romans, by making
their lives less valuable in their eyes, when he, to whom they looked for
example, could so cheerfully par with that life which was dearer to him than
his own. -- What but Sensibility could have awakened this high sense of duty,
and heroic resolution?


Mrs. Melville. But that is exactly what I complain of, Sensibility, at least
the sensibility I am used to see, enervates and weakens the mind; it destroys
this heroic resolution, this preference of duty to indulgence.


Mrs. Rivers. "The Sensibility you are used to see," these words explain to me
your meaning.


Mrs. Melville. You think then there are two kinds of Sensibility?


Mrs. Rivers. Undoubtedly. -- Or rather I should say that which is commonly
dignified with that charming name, is unworthy of it; and if you will allow me
to say so, by what I have seen of Miss Melville's, that is the Sensibility she
possesses, though perhaps mixed and blended with the true mind. Let us refer
again to the delightful Authoress I have already quoted, whose every line
contains meaning and reason. It Is not to mourn because a Sparrow dies,
To rave in artificial extasi^s!
I would have Sensibility a spring of Action. I would have it directed to a
generous, firm line of Conduct. In short, it should be Principle refined and
pointed. I would have young people taught to treat every creature with mercy
and kindness, but I would not have them waste their tenderness and affection on
a set of Animals. I would have them anxious to relieve every thing in distress,
but I would not have them Boast quick rapture trembling in their eye,
If from the Spider's web they save a Fly.
Far would I be from wishing them to have the word Sensibility continually in
their mouths, though I would never for an instant have it quit their hearts. It
ought to animate, not deject them; to strengthen, not enervate their minds.


Mrs. Melville. You are perfectly right, my dear friend but how shall we teach
young people to draw the line?


Mrs. Rivers. By not suffering them to pass it, without reprehension; by not
praising them for feeling, by not allowing them to exaggerate their language,
which leads to that hateful exaggeration of Sentiment I so much dislike. --
Accustomed to express themselves strongly, to say they "love," they "detest" --
they are in "anguish," in "ecstasy," they strive to make their feelings
correspond with their words: if they succeed, their imaginations become
inflamed and delusive; if they do not, they are perpetually affected and
unnatural. -- Let them ask themselves, whether they really feel what they
express, when they say they love or hate anything; let them first consider
whether it is worth loving or hating, and then whether they really do love or
hate it: they will then not be so easily deceived themselves, which, I believe,
generally is the case before they seek to deceive others.


Mrs. Melville. I am sure you are right, and I shall earnestly press this
knowledge of herself on Isabella.


Mrs Rivers. I have always done so with Cecilia; and I wish young people would
consider how much more amiable, simple unaffected manners are, than that
pompous prentence of feeling and tenderness of which some are so fond.


Enter Martha. Martha. The dinner is ready, Ma'am.


Mrs. Melville. Very well, we are coming.

(They go out.)
SENSIBILITY.
PART II.
Enter Cecilia and Isabella. Isabella. THIS room is cooler than the dining
parlour.


Cecilia. It is remarkably pleasant and quiet.


Isabella. (sighing.) Come let us ^it, I am wretchedly out of spirits.


Cecilia. I saw with great concern that you appeared out of spirits at dinner,
and that your mama looked uneasy at it. -- What is the matter, are you not well?


Isabella. Yes, well -- that is tolerably well -- but the sight of my poor
Parrot this morning has made me quite unhappy.


Cecilia. But, my dear, you ought not to suffer it to do so!


Isabella. Bless me! can I feel as I please?


Cecilia. In a great measure.


Isabella. I am glad you think so. -- Then you are never unhappy I suppose, for
I believe nobody would choose to be so!


Cecilia. Pardon me. -- There are cases in which we must feel unhappy, whether
we struggle against it or not: but do you not think much of our unhappiness
depends on our indulging melancholy, or striving against it?


Isabella. Perhaps it may, but why will you not allow the present to be one of
the cases you mention?


Cecilia. I cannot think it of consequence enough. It is true I pity the poor
bird, and if I were attached to him, as I dare say you are, I should be
extremely concerned, but still as my concern would do him no good, and as I had
done all I could to relieve him, I should strive against it, and make myself
easy.


Isabella But I cannot -- it makes me unhappy.


Cecilia. That is what it ought not to do.


Isabella. Do you make no allowance for the difference of dispositions?


Cecilia. Yes, -- but I also believe we can greatly correct and after our own.


Isabella. And you think I need this correction?


Cecilia. You are not angry with me!


Isabella. No -- but


Cecilia. Nay, that is unfair -- we were speaking generally -- you asked my
sentiments, or I should not have given them; if I have offended you I sincerely
beg your pardon.


Isabella. No, no, you have not offended me -- yet I will own much less than
what you have said would have offended me in some people; but you speak so
sensibly, and with so much goodness, I love to hear you though it is to blame me.


Cecilia. I did not mean to blame you: I could not think of taking that
liberty. -- Let us drop the subject.


Isabella. No, no, we will (...) drop it. -- I shall think you are angry, if
you do not tell me all you think.


Cecilia. What would you have me tell you?


Isabella. Whether I really, in your opinion, require the correction you talk
of?


Cecilia. I have not a right, on so short an acquaintance, to decide.


Isabella. You will not tell me -- but I beg of you to be sincere!


Cecilia. Well then remember you have no right to be offended. -- I do think
you suffer your feelings to govern you too much.


Isabella. Well I will not dispute the word suffer, since you say I might
correct it, but tell me how?


Cecilia. Are you convinced the correction is necessary?


Isabella. Perhaps not entirely.


Cecilia. Permit me to ask you a few questions.


Isabella. With all my heart.


Cecilia. Suppose your mother, or any of your friends, were ill, what would you
do?


Isabella. I should be very much grieved!


Cecilia. Of course -- but should you attend to them yourself, or how should
you act?


Isabella. I should wish to attend them, but I fear I should be too unhappy!


Cecilia. If you were yourself ill, how should you expect your mother to act?


Isabella. Oh I know very well she would attend me constantly!


Cecilia. Well, do you not believe she would feel a great deal?


Isabella. Oh yes, I am sure of it!


Cecilia. Should you not be very much distressed, if, instead of attending you,
she disturbed you by continual sighs and tears, and rendered herself so
incapable of assisting (...) be obliged to leave you to the care of servants?


Isabella. Certainly!


Cecilia. The inference is so obvious, I will leave you to draw it for your
self. -- Only let me hint, if everybody felt as you say you do, and acted in
consequence, what would become of those who are sick, or in danger?


Isabella. You are certainly right -- but how am I to conquer this excessive
feeling?


Cecilia. Simply by not indulging it -- Perhaps your mind will sometimes turn
itself from a suffering object; but do not heed it. -- Force it to act. -- Do
not say "I cannot" -- but try. -- Think you can, and you will be able.


Isabella. Do you think so?


Cecilia. I am even sure of it. -- I will give you an instance; I am myself
extremely afraid of Fire! and used to tell my mama I believed if my bed were on
fire, I should be burnt for want of resolution to move. She took a great deal
of pains to reason me out of this belief, which she foresaw might be so
dangerous. -- Last summer, when we were at my aunt's, I was one evening in my
own room, which joins the nursery, where her little girl was sleeping, the
nursery maid was just gone down stairs, I smelt fire, and running into the
nursery, saw that the cat had jumped on a table where the maid had placed a
candle, and had beat the candle into the cradle where the baby was -- the quilt
was in a blaze!


Isabella. Oh mercy! -- what did you do?


Cecilia. My first impulse was to run for help, but struck with the idea that
the infant would be burnt (...) stifled before help could arrive, I said to
myself "Oh mama, let me now remember your lessons!" -- I flew to the cradle,
snatched up a small carpet, and threw into the cradle; it extinguished the
flame: I then seized the child, and ran with her down stairs. -- You may
suppose that my mother and aunt thought me distracted; but when I explained to
them what had happened, I thought my aunt would never cease thanking and
praising me. -- She told me I had saved her from despair and distraction; that
her child should be taught to love me as a second mother. -- I short I cannot
repeat to you half she said, or describe the painful delight I felt in her
gratitude and joy.


Isabella. But did you not suffer from the fright?


Cecilia. A little. -- I felt sick and faint; mama gave me some drops, and I
cried a good deal; after which I was quite well, and never can think myself
grateful enough to Heaven, for giving me courage to rescue the poor infant!


Isabella. Well, I admire you! -- but I fear I should never be able to imitate
you!


Cecilia. Only give me your promise that you will try, and I am sure you will
be able.


Enter Mrs. Melville and Mrs. Rivers. Mrs. Rivers. So my dear girls you have
run away from us! -- Indeed the dining parlour is so warm, that we ^^re glad to
quit it also.


Isabella. It is very warm indeed, ma'am.


Cecilia. (to Mrs. Melville.) I am afraid you are not well, (...)


Mrs. Melville. Not very well indeed.


Isabella. Oh, mama, what is the matter?


Mrs. Rivers. Are you saint? -- Sit down.

( She places a chair, and Mrs. Melville ^is down.)
Isabella. Speak to me mama! -- Oh, what shall I do!


Cecilia. My dear, you alarm your mama (...) she will be better presently; I
will fetch some water.

(She runs out. Mrs. Rivers gives her (...) to Mrs. Melville, who becomes more
and more faint. Isabella runs about distractedly and crying.)
Mrs. Rivers. My dear Isabella, don't be so frightened! Open the window, and
bathe your mother's forehead with this Hungary water.


Isabella. Oh I cannot, indeed I cannot, I am so frightened!


Mrs. Rivers. Silly girl, how can you be such a coward!

(Cecilia returns with water. Martha comes in; they sprinkle Mrs. Melville with
water. Cecilia supports her. Isabella continues crying.)
Mrs. Rivers. Isabella, I am quite ashamed of you -- how can you be so childish!


Isabella. Oh, mama is dying, I am sure.


Mrs.. Rivers. Dying! -- what nonsense! -- she is even now recovering. -- My
dear friend, are you better?


Mrs. Melville. Yes, I am better, I thank you. -- My eyes are still dim. -- Who
is this supporting me? -- My dear Isabella! -- Dear child, do not be alarmed, I
am better!

(Isabella advances. Cecilia makes signs to her come forward.)
Martha. Dear ma'am, we are all frightened, Miss Isabella is as bad as you
almost!


Mrs. Melville, (leaning her head on Cecilia.) Don't be frighted, my love; I am
better indeed, -- I ought to be well, when you are so attentive to me -- Ah!
what happiness for a mother to be supported in the arms of her child. -- I feel
your tears on my face, speak to me Isabella.


Isabella, (falling on her (...) before her mother, and kissing her hands) Ah
mama, I am here!


Mrs. Melville. Who then is this? -- Cecilia! -- It is to you then that I am
obliged for assistance! ( A short pause, during which Isabella appears much
confused.) -- Thank you, my dear. -- I am subject to these attacks in warm
weather, but I am now well.


Mrs. Rivers. My dear Mrs. Melville, had you not better go to your own room?


Mrs. Melville. I will presently; you and Cecilia will have the goodness to
assist me?


Isabella. Ah mama, why do you not say Isabella will assist me?


Mrs. Melville. We naturally look for help toward those from whom we have
received it.


Isabella. Ah mama, it is true indeed I have not been so happy as to be of use
to you, but can you believe I did not wish it?


Mrs. Melville. We can only judge of the heart by the actions it produces.


Cecilia, (eagerly.) Dear ma'am, if you could have seen Isabella's distress,
her alarm -- she is incapable. -- Oh can you believe your child could neglect
you!


Mrs. Melville. Generous girl! how I love that amiable warmth.


Isabella. Mother, my dearest mother forgive me!


Mrs. Melville. If you are conscious of no offense, why ask forgiveness?


Isabella. Can I think myself innocent, when you are displeased with me?


Mrs. Rivers. How amiable is that sentiment! It must procure your pardon. -- My
dear friend, believe me, Isabella suffered exceedingly; her distress alone
caused that appearance of neglect you condemn.


Mrs. Melville. If too much feeling, or too little cause the same effect, ought
they not to be equally condemned?


Ms. Rivers. If not equally, both ought to be. -- But this is not a time to
argue. -- You will increase your indisposition by talking, and at least
Isabella cannot feel your displeasure too much. -- Forgive her, I beg of you!


Cecilia. Dearest madam, forgive Isabella. -- Look at her; can you see her
distress, and not pity her? -- Her constitution is slight; the alarm was too
much for her. -- Her extreme affection for you was the cause of it.


Mrs. Melville. Rise, my dear girl, I forgive the apparent slight.


Isabella. Oh believe, believe it could not proceed from my heart!


Mrs. Melville. (embracing her.) Let us speak of it no more, but correct and
suppress in future, I beg of you, that excess of feeling, which renders you
incapable of doing your duty. -- Come, my dear friend, you will have the the
goodness to go with me into my own room. -- I will lie down awhile.


Isabella. Mama, will you not suffer me to assist you?


Mrs. Melville. If I do not, my dear, it is not because I am still angry with
you; but because I do not need your attendance: in less than an hour I dare say
I shall be well enough to meet you at the tea-table. -- This faintness has only
been owing to the heat; I have felt it all day.


Isabella. And yet you have not complained.


Mrs. Melville. No, since complaining could not cool the air, and consequently
could not relieve my faintness. -- Stay here, my child, with Cecilia, and both
of you recover yourselves before I return.

(Mrs. Melville, Mrs. Rivers, and Martha go out.)
Cecilia, Isabella. ( Isabella ^its down, and leans her head on her hand.)
Cecilia. My dear, will you take a little hartshorn and water?


Isabella. No, thank you.


Cecilia. Be easy, my dear girl since your mama is quite reconciled to you!


Isabella. Ah Cecilia, if I had but recollected your kind and wife counsels, I
should not have incured her displeasure!


Cecilia. In future, you will, I doubt not, act otherwise.


Isabella. I hope so! -- Never let me again incur a pang so severe as that I
felt when my mother spoke of the sweetness of being assisted by her child, when
I had not been of the least service to her. -- And again, when she said "You
and Cecilia will assist me" -- as if I were not there! as if, alas, but too
justly, I were a useless, helpless being!


Cecilia. Let us drop these unpleasant ideas, and hope that the consequence
will be a fixed resolution on your part to encourage fortitude and activity,
and to repress enervating and excessive feeling.


Isabella. It shall indeed; and still, dear Cecilia, counsel and advise me. Be
as sincere as I have hitherto found you; be my monitor, my adviser, and my
advocate. -- Dear girl, (embracing her) how (...) I ever enough thank you for
th^se generous tears you shed, when pleading for me to my mother! -- My heart,
at least, has for once elected a real friend!


Cecilia. I hope so, but the same facility with which I was exalted to that
character, might expose you to much deceit and treachery. -- You see I use the
privilege you give me.


Isabella. Do so always, and assist me if you can, to root up my idle
prejudices altogether, and to renounce, for ever, the exaggerated expressions
and unnatural sentiments of that which you have convinced me is false
SENSIBILITY.


Scene closes. THE LITTLE TRIFLER.

A DRAMA.

IN THREE PARTS.

The Story of Melanthon affords a striking Lesson on the Value of Time, which
was, that whenever he made an appointment, he always expected not only the
Hour, but the Minute, should be fixed; that the Day might not run out in the
Idleness of Suspense. JOHNSON. BOSTON: PRINTED FOR W. SPOTSWOOD.

1798.

CHARACTERS.
Mrs. Mildmay, Her Daughters. Sophia, Eudocia, Laura,
Mrs. Cecil, Governess to the Miss Mildmays. Ruth Saunders, A Poor Woman.
Sally.
THE LITTLE TRIFLER.
SCENE a Room with Book-cases, Globes, a Harpsichord, etc. Enter Mrs. Cecil,
Sophia, and Eudocia. Sophia. I FEEL so cheerful this fine morning, that I hope
I shall get through my employments comfortably before we go for our ride.


Eudocia. Yes, and the sun is so enlivening, we shall enjoy our airing of all
things.


Mrs. Cecil. To do that, you must all of you perform your tasks well. -- As to
Miss Mildmay, I need not remind her, she is always ready.


Sophia. You are always too good to me, my dear governess.


Eudocia. Not better than you deserve, Sophia, we are all ready to allow that.


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, yes, the praise of candor and affection belongs to you
equally. -- But we lose time. -- Where is Miss Laura? -- Idling, I dare say. I
never shall succeed in my endeavors to teach that child the value of those
minutes she wastes so abominably! -- Nothing but a concurrence of circumstances
will make her aware of the necessity there is, if we would go through our
duties properly, of being punctual. It Is past nine, she must know it, and yet
she is not here. -- Do, Miss Eudocia, ring the bell. (Eudocia rings the bell,
they draw a small table, and sit down to work.)


Enter Sally. Mrs. Cecil. Sally, pray tell Miss Laura it is past nine; I want
her here.


Sally. Yes, ma'am.

(She goes out.)
Eudocia. Don't you think Sally a very good girl ma'am?


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, I do indeed. Your mama has had her in her service six years,
all that time she has behaved unexceptionably. She was very young when she came
hither, and had before been tolerably educated; therefore I do not object to
your talking to her sometimes, though I strictly forbid your doing so to the
other servants.


Sophia. We are perfectly convinced of the propriety of that. Indeed I cannot
conceive how any one can wish it, their language is so unpleasant; and can one
expect either pleasure or improvement from those who have had no education.


Mrs. Cecil. Those must have a very bad taste who do.

Laura runs in.
Laura. Dear ma'am, is it nine o'clock?


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, a full quarter after; what have you been doing?


Laura. Why ma'am, I asked after breakfast what it was o'clock, and they said
it wanted a quarter of nine, so I thought I would set one of my drawers in
order, but I did not begin directly, and I fancy that made me so late.


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, most likely -- your drawers generally require more than a
quarter of an hour to set them to rights, and even of that quarter it seems you
trifled away part. If you would but consider whether it is possible to do what
you undertake in the time you can spare to it, you would not be so often behind
your time. -- And how have you left your clothes now?


Laura. Oh ma'am, when Sally called me, I pushed them all into the drawer as
well as I could.


Eudocia. (laughing.) Pushed them -- yes, your things are generally pretty well
pushed, as you call it!


Laura. You have nothing to do with that.


Mrs. Cecil. Come, come, leave off talking, and get to work -- but remember I
will have your drawer set to rights before you go out.


Laura. Oh I shall have plenty of time to do that.


Mrs. Cecil. Aye! -- that is exactly your way! -- You always have plenty of
time in idea, and none in reality; of course you are always unpunctual.


Laura. If I am, it is not a great fault.


Sophia. Fie Laura!


Mrs. Cecil. Is it not a great fault? -- There I differ from you. -- It leads
to very unpleasant consequences at least -- often to very bad ones. In the
first place, you trifle away a great deal of time: for instance, your sisters
have been at work some minutes; of course their tasks will be done sooner, and
they will have the more time for other employments. -- It is a chance if you
are ready to go out with your mama: you have all your work to do; to read
French, and to put your drawers in order.


Laura. Well, all that is my l^ss*


Mrs. Cecil. Your accent and manner are a little impertinent, but I will pass
that over, as I wish if possible, to convince you by reasoning. -- Suppose
then, when you are older, you should appoint a friend to meet you at any place,
and because you forget, or over stay your time, she is disappointed and has her
trouble for nothing -- That will be her loss, I think!


Laura. Yes; but it would not be of much consequence.


Mrs. Cecil. You are very slow to be convinced! -- Suppose her business is of
consequence, and cannot be delayed!


Laura. Oh but I should know that, and should be sure to be there.


Mrs. Cecil. Very well! if you can all at once break through a settled habit, you
have greater command of yourself than I give you credit for. -- You will see,
and we shall learn, if you do not regret the many moments you have lost in idle
trifling. -- When do you mean to begin work?

(Laura takes several pieces of work out of her bag.)
Mrs. Cecil. Why do you take out so much at once? you cannot do it all!


Laura. Which should I do ma'am?


Mrs. Cecil. This is what you left on Saturday, on promise to do it today; and
this is your task for this morning, which I will have done.


Laura. But there is so much!


Mrs. Cecil. Not so much as I have given your sisters!


Laura. But they are older!


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, and somewhat more industrious: there is not too much for you;
so no more disputing, but begin.

(Laura sits down by Sophia. After a short pause, she yawns; then leans on
Sophia's chair, and whispers to her, Sophia makes no answer.)
Laura, (in a low voice.) Now pray do, Sophia! -- You cannot think how much I
shall be obliged to you.


Sophia. Have done, Laura!


Laura. Hush, don't speak so loud!


Sophia. I do not choose to whisper!


Mrs. Cecil. Pray what are you doing, Miss Laura? Attend to your work, I beg of
you; you are like all idle people, fond of disturbing others.

(A short pause, during which they work. When Mrs. Cecil is not observing her,
Laura wraps her work round her thread papers like a doll, and jogs Eudocia.)
Laura. Eudocia, look, look, I say, is not it droll?

(Eudocia looks up: tries to (...) a laugh, but cannot. Mrs. Cecil looks
toward them. Laura snatches up her work.)
Mrs. Cecil. How now, young ladies?


Eudocia. My stars, Laura, you are so ridiculous, you make me laugh!


Laura. (laughing.) I! -- 'Twas the thread papers!


Mrs. Cecil. Oh to be sure! Have done, I charge you. -- (Another pause, then
Laura whispers Sophia.)


Sophia. Do pray be quiet, Laura, you are very teazing.


Mrs. Cecil. What is all this about? -- Miss Mildmay, what is she saying?


Sophia. Asking me, ma'am, to tell her something I have refused to let her know
twenty times already.


Mrs. Cecil. She is very impertinent. -- I shall remove you, Miss Laura, if you
torment your sister so.


Laura. Because it is so cross, ma'am, it cannot be a secret, only she chooses
to make it one on purpose to teaze me.


Mrs. Cecil. That is very likely -- But no more of this.


Laura. Dear ma'am, it is something so very odd.


Mrs. Cecil. Hold your peace.


Eudocia. What does she want to know, Sophia?


Laura. I want to know what -- *


Mrs. Cecil. I insist on your not speaking. -- You have all the faults of a
Trifler, curious, impertinent, chattering. -- I wish you could see how
disagreeable you make yourself.


Eudocia. Here comes mama.


(Enter Mrs. Mildmay.) (They rise. -- The girls run and embrace their mother.)
Mrs. Mildmay. Sit still Mrs. Cecil. -- My dear girls, how are you?


All. Quite well, mama, thank ye -- are you well?


Mrs. Mildmay. Yes; though a little late this morning.


Mrs. Cecil. You sat late last night, ma'am.


Mrs. Mildmay. Yes, the pleasure of seeing my son detained me later than usual.
-- How do your pupils behave, Mrs. Cecil?


Mrs. Cecil. Vastly well, ma'am except a little --


Mrs. Mildmay. Laura, I suppose -- you are conscious, I see! -- I too have a
complaint to make.


Laura. Dear mama!


Mrs. Mildmay. Yes, I have indeed, but sit down to your works.


Laura. Should I sit, mama while you are speaking to me?


Mrs. Cecil. No, my dear, I shall excuse as much of your work as you would have
done in the time.


Mrs. Mildmay. As much as she might have done, my dear Mrs. Cecil; what she
would have done is, I fancy, rather doubtful.


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, indeed, ma'am.


Mrs. Mildmay, (sits down; Laura stands before her.)


You look a little alarmed, Laura, but I am not very angry with you, since I
believe your fault proceeded as usual from want of thought. -- Yesterday, at
church my dear, you behaved very ill. -- In the first place, while we stood up,
I saw your eyes wandering all over the church: in the next place, while we were
sitting, you whispered to Eudocia, jogged her elbow, and tried to make her
laugh. -- Now, my dear, I beg you to consider how very improper all this is. --
Do you know for what purpose we go to church?

Laura. Yes, mama, surely, to pray to God.


Mrs. Mildmay. Well then, can you think such behavior proper?


Laura. But it was not during the prayers.


Mrs. Mildmay. True, but part was during the psalms, which are intended as
immediate addresses to our Creator, of both praise and prayer; therefore we
stand to show our reverence and attention. -- When we were sitting it was to
hear the lessons read; that is, selected parts of the holy scripture, the
immediate word of God, and the the rule by which we are to direct our life. --
Even if the service had not been begun, or had been ended, to talk and laugh
would have been highly improper. -- It unfits the mind for serious duties, and
implies a lightness and thoughtlessness, which ought not to be indulged or
allowed in a place sacred to our maker. -- Our Savior showed his
disapprobation of any thing which might disturb the tranquillity and decency of
the holy place, by driving from the Temple (the place of worship) at Jerusalem
those whom human laws allowed to transact business there, saying, "It is
written, my house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a
den of thieves." -- I am sure if you were in the President's presence, you
would not be so ill-bred as to laugh and whisper, when he was speaking to you,
or allowing another to do so; how much less then, when God speaks to you by his
scriptures, ought you to behave irreverently?


Laura. I am fully convinced, mama, I am much obliged to you for taking the
trouble of instructing me* and, I assure you, I will never behave so aga^^.


Eudocia. I thank you also, mama, for I never saw this matter so clearly
before. -- I knew it was wrong to talk at church, but sometimes I have
forgotten it; now I think nothing will ever tempt me to do so again.


Mrs. Mildmay. I am always happy, my children, to be of service to you, and
while I see you willing to be convinced and to amend, I am over paid for any
trouble I can be at in instructing yo^. -- Laura, return to your work. -- At
one o'clock, you will all be ready to go out; I shall not wait a minute for
anybody, unless Mrs. Cecil can give me a good reason for the delay. Sophia,
your brother will take you in his phae^on; our cold provisions are all packed
up. -- I hope to hear a good account of you all: remember, that if you would
enjoy the ride, and the ^ight of the gardens we are to visit, you must behave
well. -- Good-bye. -- Mrs. Cecil, a good morning to you. -- I hope you will
like our ride.


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, ma'am, I have no doubt of it; a good morning to you.

(Mrs. Mildmay goes out.)
Laura. Now, Mrs. Cecil, how much will you allow me, to leave of my work?


Eudocia. That is Laura's first concern?


Laura. So it would be yours, if you had as much to do as I have.


Eudocia. I had as much at first.


Laura. But mama has not been talking to you.


Eudocia. No, because I behaved better yesterday than you did.


Sophia. Eudocia, when my mother is satisfied with the atonement for a fault,
it does not become us to mention it reproachfully.


Laura. Thank ye, Sophia, you seldom take my part, and Eudocia deserves a good
lecture this time -- however!


Eudocia. Then you think I do not often deserve one?


Mrs. Cecil. However that may be, you certainly de now. -- Have done disputing,
Eudocia, that is your principal fault; you have been wrong all the way now you
had, as your sister observed, no right, nor was it kind, to resume a subject
your mama had done with; and to answer so sharply and so often, shows an
inclination to quarrel, very unpleasant and improper.


Eudocia, (after a short pause.) It is very true, I have been wrong. Laura, I
beg your pardon.


Laura. Oh my dear, how good you are! -- I am not angry!


Sophia. How sweetly was that said! -- How amiable is candor!


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, indeed, I am pleased with Eudocia!


Laura. Well, nothing affects me like hearing any one say in that honest way,
"I was wrong, I beg your pardon." -- I never can help crying, and I feel so
sorry and so humble, and so pleased with them -- But in spite of all that, I
never can prevail on myself to ask pardon; I feel so ashamed, and so afraid of
being laughed at!


Mrs. Cecil. That is false shame. -- No shame is just, but the shame of a bad
or improper action; and as to being laughed at, the person who can laugh at
another for doing as she ought, must be unable to taste the sweetness of
virtue, and the exaltation of humility. -- But go on with your work, Laura: I
shall allow you to leave off, when you have done so much, (measuring her work.)
-- You have been sadly idle. Eudocia, you may now read: bring that little book
of manuscripts your mama gave you on Saturday.


Eudocia. Yes, ma'am. -- (She sits down by Mrs. Cecil; takes a small book, and
reads.) "Come ye who love to see what is beautiful -- come who wish to enjoy
what is sublime -- come and I will direct your eyes to the bright Moon, which
rides triumphantly on the bosom of heaven. Is she not beautiful, when breaking
through the black clouds which surround her, she diffuses splendor around! -- Is
she not sublime when sinking beneath the ^able veil, she just tinges with lucid
silver its unequal edges! -- Again she swells above the heavy vapor, and
shines in perfect beauty. So rises from the false imputations of malicious
slander, the undiminished luster of true virtue. The machinations of evil men,
the unavoidable concurrence of accident, may a while overspread the beauty of a
good name with heavy clouds, but its splendor shall return, and its enemies
shall fly before it like the broken and disjointed track, which flies from the
face of the Moon. -- Comfort yourselves, then, ye sons of men: despair not,
because darkness, or even the shadow of death, surrounds you. -- Time shall
make manifest the beauty of goodness, and its soft luster shall diffuse a sweet
and calm satisfaction into the bosoms of all who believed it."


Sophia. That is very pretty.


Mrs. Cecil. The imitation of Mrs. Barbauld's hymn, "Come, and I will show you
what is beautiful" -- at the beginning of this little piece, is obvious; but
though inferior to that charming production, it is not without merit. -- Read
one more, Miss Eudocia.

(Eudocia reads.)
How swiftly does imagination wing her flight! -- Ere an instant has rolled
over our head she conveys us to the most distant quarter of the globe; she
represents to our mind the most remote events! -- Time and distance fade before
her, and her way is as unmarked as it is swift. We set out with one idea, and
without being sensible of the progressive change, we find ourselves meditating
another. -- Imagination then is like a voyager who, embarking on an immense
river, is lulled by the found of the rippling water into a soft repose: he
awake^ and finds himself in another country* the trees, the flowers, the whole
face of nature is changed: perhaps he has in his slumber passed from the most
gloomy scenes to the most enlivened, but he shudders in reflecting that he has
probably also passed a tremendous fall or a lurking quicksand! In like manner
the mind, wrapped in contemplation, may perhaps touch on the confines of some
forbidden idea, some false principle, or scheme of gu^^^. -- Happy those who
pass them without harm; who do not indulge in such imaginations, but, if they
perceive them, start aside, and direct their course to a more desirable
climate."

Mrs. Cecil. Very well -- that is sufficient. -- Now, Miss Laura, bring me your
Telemachus.
Maintenant, Mademoiselle Laura, apportez moi^o^re Telemaque.


Laura. Laura. Yes, ma'am.
Oui, Madame. -- (She rises, loo^^ in the book-case, then says) Oh dear, it is
not here, it is upstairs!


Mrs. Cecil. How came it up stairs?


Laura. Mama desired to hear me read while she dressed yesterday and afterward
I took the book into my own room, and forgot to bring it down.


Mrs. Cecil. Well, make haste and fetch it; there is so much time lost!


Laura. Oh I shall be back in a minute.

(She runs out.)
Mrs. Cecil. What a careless child!

(Laura returns with the book; s^e sits down and reads.) "Narbal me regardoit
avec etonnement, et il crut appercevoi^ en moi je ne scai quoi de hureux qui
vient des dons du Ciel, et qui n'est point dans le commun des hommes: il etoit
naturellement sincere et genereux; il fut touch de mon malheur, et me p^rla
avec ^ne confiance, que les Dieux lui inspirerent pour me sauver d'un grand
peril, etc. etc.


Mrs. Cecil. That is well read; now Miss Mildmay you will translate it.

(Laura returns to her work; Sophia takes her book.) "Narbal regarded me with
astonishment, and believed he perceived in me a certain expression of goodness,
which is the gift of Heaven, and is not common among men. He was naturally
sincere and generous; he was touched with my misfortunes, and he spoke to me
with a confidence which the Gods inspired, to save me from imminent danger. --
Telemachus, said he to me, I neither do nor can doubt that which you tell me.
The softness and virtue painted on your countenance will not suffer me to
supect you; I even feel that the Gods whom I have always served love you, and
decree that I shall regard you as my son. I will give you salutary con^els, and
in return I only demand that you shall be secret. -- Fear not, said I to him,
that I shall find any difficulty in concealing those things which you confide
to me. Though young, I am old in the habit of never revealing my own secrets,
and still less the secrets of others. How have you been able, said he, in such
extreme youth, to accustom yourself to secrecy: I shall be delighted to know by
what means you have acquired that quality, which is the foundation of the
wisest conduct, and without which all talents are useless? When Ulysses, I
replied, departed for the siege of Troy, he took me on his knees, holding me in
his arms, (as I have been told) and after he had kissed me tenderly, he used
these words, though I could not understand them. Oh! my son, may the Gods never
suffer me to see thee again; rather let the fatal scissars cut the thread of
thy days ere it be half formed, as the reaper cuts down with his sickle a
tender flower as it begins to open; may my enemies dash thee in pieces before
the eyes of thy mother and myself, if thou (...) doomed one day to be corrupted
and to abandon virtue! -- Oh' my friends, continued he, I leave to you a son so
dear: take care of his infancy. If you love me, banish from him pernicious
flatterry; teach him how to conquer his passions, that he may be like a tender
plant which men often bend in order to make it grow upright: above all, forget
nothing which may render him just; benevolent, sincere, and faithful in keeping
a secret: whoever is capable of lying, does not deserve to live; and whoever
knows not how to be silent, is unworthy to govern. I repeat these words
exactly; because care was taken to recount them to me frequently, and that they
sunk into the bottom of my heart."


Mrs. Cecil. Very well rendered indeed.


Sophia. This is a charming passage! -- One sees in the first part of it, how
agreeable to all men is a candid open countenance, which can only be preserved
by retaining Truth in the heart.


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, and the latter part is an excellent lesson. -- When you are
disposed to teaze your sisters out of a secret, Laura, recollect this passage,
and learn the necessity of a prudent reserve.


Laura. But Ulysses said, whoever could not be silent was unworthy to govern,
my sisters are not going to govern.


Mrs. Cecil. I never saw a young lady more ingenious at finding objections.
These words were addressed to a young prince, therefore the word govern is
used, but secrecy is a quality equally necessary in all situations, besides,
you may probably some time or other govern a family, though not a kingdom, and
believe me, you would find yourself very ill qualified to do that if you told
your servants, your neighbors, and whoever would hear you, all the concerns of
your household, and every thing which came to your knowledge. -- Have you done
work, young ladies? -- It Is past twelve.


Sophia. I have.


Eudocia. And I.


Laura. I have a little bit.


Mrs. Cecil. You must have been very idle, for I gave you very little. -- You
must dress, and set your drawer in order, so make haste.

(Sophia and Eudocia rise, fold their work and put it away.)
Enter Mrs. Mildmay. Mrs. Mildmay. Laura, what is the reason your poor squirrel
has not been cleaned and fed? -- I heard him very restless, looked at him, and
found he had nothing to eat or drink.


Laura. Oh dear, mama, on Saturday I had not time, yesterday I could not do it,
and this morning, before breakfast, I had so much to do.


Mrs. Cecil. I told you then not to trifle so much time away, in putti^g on
your clothes. In the midst of dres^ing, you took a fancy of reading two old
letters, which you found in one of your drawers, then in spite of my
remonstrances you entirely new dressed your doll, and had only time to take
half a turn in the garden, though your sisters and I walked a considerable time.


Mrs. Mildmay. That is always the way. You will take improper times to do
things. You have no regularity, no idea how much time it will take to
accomplish such and such things. -- When you had the squirrel, it was on
promise to take care of it yourself; you shall not go out till he is fed.


Laura. But, mama, I have not quite done work, I must put my drawer in order,
and dress myself, I shall not be ready. -- May Not Sally clean my squirrel's
cage?


Mrs. Mildmay. No, she shall not. -- It Is your own fault if you are not ready,
and I will not indulge you in such idle ways. -- Let me hear what you have done
since breakfast?


Laura. Mama, I began putting my drawer to rights, which I had not time to
finish: I have read French, and hemmed all this muslin.


Mrs. Mildmay. And you, Eudocia.


Eudocia. Mama, I made part of a paper-box, and wrote my journal in my
pocketbook, before school hour; and since I have read and worked this pattern
of my frock.


Mrs. Mildmay. There, Laura, and all that in exactly the same time you have had?


Laura. Indeed, mama, I will manage better another time!


Mrs. Mildmay. Very well; at present however, you must do all you have to do.


Sophia. Mrs. Cecil, shall we dress?


Mrs. Cecil. Yes, if you please.


Mrs. Mildmay. I am dressed, therefore, Mrs. Cecil, I will take care that Laura
finishes her employments while you dress.


Mrs. Cecil. Thanks to you, ma^^^


Laura* Dear Mrs. Cecil, excuse me this bit of work!


Mrs. Mildmay. No, Mrs. Cecil, I beg you will not!


Mrs. Cecil. Indeed, ma'am, I am not at all disposed to do so, unless you
should desire it.

(Mrs. Cecil, Sophia, and Eudocia, go out.
Mrs. Mildmay reads. -- A pause. Laura. Mama, I have done work.


Mrs. Mildmay. Very well; go then, and do all you have undertaken, and if you
are ready, you shall go with me.


Laura. Mama, tell me what is o'clock?


Mrs. Mildmay. Half past twelve.


Laura. And you go at one. -- Well I think, I shall be ready.


Mrs. Mildmay. I think you will not.

(They go out.)
THE LITTLE TRIFLER.
PART II.
Enter Mrs. Mildmay, meeting Mrs. Cecil, Sophia, and Eudocia. Mrs. Mildmay,
WELL, Mrs. Cecil, are you ready? Where Is Laura?


Mrs. Cecil. Not ready, ma'am.


Mrs. Mildmay. Then I shall not wait; she deserves to be left behind, and it is
now ten minutes past one.


Sophia. Mama, she will be ready in five minutes.


Mrs. Mildmay. No matter, it (...) already past the time I had fixed; we are to
be at home by five, and we shall have barely time to see the gardens. -- It is
her own fault: let us go.


Eudocia. Oh I am very sorry indeed Laura will not go!


Enter Sally. Sally. Ma'am, Miss Laura begs you will be good enough to wait ten
minutes; she will be dressed in that time.


Mrs. Mildmay. No, I will not* I have said I will not, and she knows I always
keep my word. Come, Mrs. Cecil, come children. Sadly, tell Laura to confine
herself to this room and the garden while we are gone; I will not have her
running about among the servants. -- Lay the cloth for her here.

(They go out.)
Sally. I am very sorry for poor Miss Laura, she will be so vexed! -- But she
is always past her time. -- Today, truly, she has been chattering to me
instead of dressing, though she knew her mama would not wait. "Oh I have plenty
of time, it is not near one!" -- that is her way. -- Oh here she comes.

(Laura runs in.)
Laura. Sally, do you know where my gloves are? -- I am ready now!


Sally. Ah miss!


Laura. What? -- Bless me! -- Sure mama is not gone!


Sally. Indeed, miss, I am sorry to say she is.


Laura. You jest, I am sure!


Sally. No, truly miss, I should not take that liberty. Your mama would not
wait a minute longer; both Miss Mildmay and Miss Eudocia tried to prevail on
her, but she said you knew she never broke her word;


Laura. (with tears in her eyes.) You may go Sally.


Sally. Miss, your mama ordered me to tell you, she desired you to to stay in
this room.


Laura. Very well.

(Sally goes out. Laura draws a chair, throws herself into it: rises again, and
walks impatiently about the room.)
Laura. It is too bad, I declare! -- To go without me; and to order me to stay
in this room. -- What is the reason of that, I wonder. -- And George is gone
with them. He goes away tomorrow. -- This last day, which I thought to have
spent so pleasantly, to be so disappointed. -- It Is very cross in mama, I am
sure. -- (She wipes her eyes.) I am always to blame: "Laura did this, Laura did
that, Laura is always wrong. -- (She pauses.) After all, I certainly might have
been ready. -- How did I dare say, mama was cross. -- What! mama, who is always
so kind, so indulgent, so equal in her sweetness of temper! -- It was very
wrong in me. -- Dear mama, though you cannot hear me, I wish to ask your
pardon. -- Well, what shall I do while they are gone? -- How tedious the time
is. -- (A pause.) Lord bless me, I wish I might walk in the garden. -- Perhaps
mama said I might: I will inquire -- (She goes to the door, and calls) Sally!
-- Sally!

(Sally comes in.)
Sally. Did you call, miss?


Laura. Yes. -- Did mama say I might walk in the garden?


Sally. Yes, miss; I thought I had told you, this room and the garden. -- My
mistress said, you should not run about among the servants.


Laura. Oh that was the reason! -- I am glad I know that. -- Apropos, I wish I
could find out this mighty secret of Sophia's. -- Sally do you know it?


Sally. What, miss?


Laura. Why, I Will tell you. About a month ago, mama gave Sophia two guineas,
and told her to buy whatever she liked best with it. She gave one to Eudocia
and one to me. Eudocia bought a small writing desk; and I bought a squirrel's
cage, and some flower seeds for my garden: but Sophia said she would wait
awhile and consider before she bought. Well, yesterday it came into my head
that she had not bought any thing; and I asked her what she should purchase
with her two guineas. -- She colored a little, and said, "Oh something I shall
like." -- Mrs. Cecil smiled, and I have never been able to get a more direct
answer from Sophia. -- Now, Sally, do you know what she means to buy?


Sally. Dear Miss, is it likely I should know?


Laura. No, but you might nevertheless.


Sally. And if I did, what advantage would it be to you to be told?


Laura. Oh then you do know! -- Ah ha! -- Come, my dear Sally, tell me, I pray
you!


Sally. I did not say I knew* miss.


Laura. Oh, but I am sure of it. -- Pray tell me.


Sally. ^ye miss! -- Consider, if I did know, your sister must have told me in
confidence; and do you think I would betray her? -- Oh no, my good mistress has
taught me better!


Laura. Well, you know, however; so she has determined on something, that is
one step gained -- I shall soon guess what!


Sally. But, Miss Laura, who told you I knew?


Laura. Who? -- yourself?


Sally. I! -- that I could not! -- I said if, but it was only supposing!


Laura. What then you don't know!


Sally. (laughing) That you should really fancy Miss Mildmay had told me! --
Surely she would have told you first!


Laura. No, no, she would not.


Sally. Why, miss?


Laura. Because she thinks I should tell.


Sally. Then you believe she thinks I would not?


Laura. I suppose so!


Sally. You (...) me a great compliment, miss; which I will try to deserve.


Laura. Well, I cannot tell whether you know or not, but I have not (...) you
all. -- Mrs. Cecil and Sophia have risen half an hour earlier than common this
last fortnight, and I wish I knew what for; I never could find out how they had
employed themselves.


Sally. Well, miss, if I might venture to speak, I should say it was not worth
taking so much trouble to know.


Laura. If I think it is, that is enough. -- I do not ask your advice.


Sally. I beg your pardon, miss.


Laura. You may go.

(Sally goes out.)
Laura. Let me consider (...) -- What can Sophia warn to purchase -- books
(...) has plenty, and mama is always buying fo^^^^. -- A box of colors. -- She
(...) one. -- New music -- perhaps -- but why make a secret of it! -- Ah! -- a
locket of mama's hair! That must be it! -- I dare say it is very pretty, and
she means to surprise us with it, I suppose! -- But then what have Mrs. Cecil
and Sophia been doing in the morning? -- Oh, perhaps, they are painting a
device for it. -- Yes, yes, that is it!


Enter Sally. Sally. Miss, there is a woman below stairs, in great distress;
she is very poor, and she begs to see you.


Laura. Well show her up; I will speak to her here.


Sally. Yes, miss.

(Sally goes out.)
Laura. What shall I be able to do for her, I have but half a crown, but I can
speak to mama.


Enter Sally, and Ruth Saunders. Sally. That is Miss Laura.


Laura. Come in good woman.

(Sally goes out. -- Ruth curtsies, and comes a little forward.)
Laura. What can I do for you?


Ruth. Miss I came to beg some relief from my lady, but your servants tell me
she is not at home, so I made bold to ask leave to speak to you, miss.


Laura. Very well; what can I do to serve you?


Ruth. Alas aday, my young lady, I am grievous poor; I am a widow, with three
children, the eldest of 'em is out at service, but the two little ones are too
young to go out: my old mother lives with us; she is helpless, and you may
think, miss, I find it hard to keep so many with the work of my own hands. --
In the summer, I work in the fields: in the winter, I spin; and my children
help me as well as they can. For two years, that my husband has been dead, we
have done pretty well, 'till this last winter.


Laura. What happened then?


Ruth. Alas, miss! in the autumn, I was so unhappy as to get an ague, which
hindered my working a great deal; my children could do but little; they began
to get dirty and ragged; it ^ut me to the heart to see them so, and not be able
to help them! -- To complete my misfortune, a dog got into my little garden,
and killed my two hens, whose eggs used to furnish us with a sure penny. Things
went from bad to worse; I was fain to run in debt to my landlord, and though now
the summer is coming on, and I am better, I hope I should be able to pay him;
the cruel man declares he will seize for rent tomorrow morning.


Laura. What is seizing for ^ent.


Ruth. Ah, miss! he will take all our little clothes and furniture, and the
very beds we lie on, my poor old mother's and all, to sell them, and pay
himself.


Laura. Can he be so cruel! -- Is he poor?


Ruth. No, miss, he has four hundred pounds a year, and only himself and his
wife to keep. -- What will become of my poor children, and my mother! -- At
seventy years old; must she be turned out to starve?


Laura. (eagerly.) No, ^o, she shall not -- be easy -- I promise you she shall
not. -- Poor, good woman, how I pity you -- but what do you owe this unfeeling
wretch?


Ruth. Oh, good young lady, a great deal!


Laura. But how much?


Ruth. Thirty shillings, for half a year's rent.


Laura. Oh, how unfortunate I am! -- If I had not spent my guinea, I should
have had almost enough; and perhaps he would have waited awhile.


Ruth. Ah, miss, you are very good! -- but don't think I came here to beg my
lady to pay for me; no, indeed, miss I only thought if she would speak to my
landlord, he would may-be wait a little; and indeed I hope I shall pay him
every farthing.


Laura. I am sure mama will do that and perhaps more. I will speak to her for
you good woman; make yourself easy, I will do all I can for you.


Ruth. Thank you a thousand times, good young lady; we shall all pray for, and
bless you. I have often seen your two sisters walking with Madam Cecil, and I
have thought when Miss Mildmay looked so kindly on my poor little girls, while
they opened the gate for her, and said with her sweet voice, "Poor children,
there is a penny for you." -- I have thought if she did but know how wretched we
were, she would speak to my lady for us; but I had not the heart to tell her,
'till now; things getting so bad, I thought I would try at least.


Laura. You did very right. -- Call again at six o'clock; I will see you, and
before that I will speak to mama, you may depend on it. -- In the mean time, I
will give you this half crown; I have no more.


Ruth. No, miss, I thank you, I will not rob you; you will do all for me in
speaking to your mama. -- She is so good, she deserves to have good children,
and she is rewarded!


Laura. But I insist on your taking this money; I wish it was more.


Ruth. It does not become me to refuse your favors.


Laura. Take it, buy something with it for your mother. -- Good woman, I love
you for being so kind to her! (She calls) Sally!


(Enter Sally) Take this good woman with you, and give her something to eat:
mama will not object to that.

Sally. No, miss, I am sure.


Laura. And when she comes again, let me know. -- A good day to you. -- Oh,
tell me your name?


Ruth. Ruth Saunders, miss.


Laura. Very well, I shall remember.


Ruth. Your servant, miss, a thousand thanks.

(Sally and Ruth go out.)
Laura. Well, I shall not regret being left at home, since it has been the
cause of my seeing this poor woman.

(Sally comes in.)
Do you know that woman, Sally?

Sally. Yes, miss, I have seen her often; she is very poor.


Laura. So I hear -- but why I wonder did she never come hither before?


Sally. Ah, miss! it is very hard to beg; people who have been used to keep
themselves by their own industry, are ashamed and afraid to ask relief.


Laura. Ashamed, perhaps; but why afraid?


Sally. Because, miss, so many gentlefolks are cross and hardhearted; and one
says -- "Where did you learn all that history," and another says, "Ah, a sad
story, if it is true!"


Laura. But that is abominable if we don't choose to give, we need not insult
the poor creature who begs from us.


Sally. Very true, miss, but too many don't think of that; they forget that a
beggar has any feeling. I once saw a poor man color like scarlet, and his eyes
sparkle with anger, at a gentleman, who said he was an impostor; but, poor
wretch, he recollected himself, put his hand on his bosom, sighed and passed
on. -- I gave him a trifle; he bowed, and I saw the tears in his eyes; he did
not speak. -- Poor creature, truly he was cut to the heart.


Laura. You are a good girl, Sally -- but tell me what you know of this poor
woman?


Sally. Why, miss, she lives in a little cottage just at the end of the
village, and keeps it very neat when she is well; she has two pretty children,
and her mother (a good old woman) lives with her* the old woman is lame, but
has all her senses, and when dame Saunders was so ill, the poor old woman used
to cry, and the little girls, thinking to comfort her, said, "Don't cry
grandmother, I will feed you, and put on your clean cap for you."


Laura. Poor little dears! -- how did you know this, Sally?


Sally. Oh I heard them one day, miss; when I was walking by the house, I saw
the poor woman standing at the door; she looked sickly, so I asked her a few
questions, and found the ague was off that day, and she had crept to the door
for a little air.


Laura. And when was this?


Sally. About a month ago, miss.


Laura. And why did you not t^ll mama?


Sally. I did, miss, and my mistress ordered the cook to send her some broth
twice or three times, and Miss Sophia sent her a shilling.


Laura. I never heard of that.


Sally. No, miss, because Miss Sophia never tells the good she does.


Laura. That is right, but I wonder I don't hear of it. -- Indeed I never see
any poor people; they don't come here, I fancy?


Sally. No, miss, your governess and sisters find them out when they walk of a
morning before breakfast.


Laura. That may be, for I don't know how, I seldom have time to walk of a
morning. Well, I will walk in the garden, and then learn my grammar-task; then,
for once, I shall be beforehand. -- Afterward I will dine. -- You will lay the
cloth, Sally.


Sally. Yes, miss.

(Laura goes out.)
Sally, (putting the room in order.)


Miss Laura is very good; she has an excellent heart, but she is so
lightheaded and careless; it is a great pity, and I hope she will break herself
of it in time; no doubt she will, for she has very good sense. Well, this room
will do now.

(She goes out.) END OF THE SECOND PART.
THE LITTLE TRIFLER.
PART III.
Mrs. Mildmay, Mrs. Cecil, Sophia, Eudocia, taking off their Cloaks and Hats,
which they give to Sally.

Mrs. Mildmay. WHERE is Laura, Sally?


Sally. Ma'am, she is walking in the garden.


Mrs. Mildmay. Has she dined


Sally. Yes, ma'am.


Mrs. Mildmay. Well, call her hither directly.

(Sally goes out.)
Mrs. Cecil. We have had a delightful day indeed.


Sophia. Very charming; and our little hasty dinner I enjoyed wonderfully.


Mrs. Mildmay. I never ate with better appetite in my life, than in the snug
little cottage George found out for us.


Eudocia. I only wished for Laura.


Sophia. That indeed was only wanting to make our party complete.


Enter Laura. Laura. Oh, mama, are you returned; I did not expect you quite so
soon.


Mrs. Mildmay. It Is past (...); but, Laura, your brother has not ordered his
phaeton from the door, having prevailed on me to suffer you to take a little
ride with him.


Laura. And man (...)* mama?


Mrs. Mildmay. (...) if you have behaved well (...) we have been go^e.


Laura. Yes indeed, mama, I have only been in this room and the garden, and I
have learned my grammar-task.


Mrs. Mildmay. Well, go then.


Laura. Yes, mama, thank you! thank you! --

(She runs a few steps; then returns, and whispers Sophia.)
Sophia. Pshaw, nonsense!


Laura. Aye, but I have indeed.


Mrs. Mildmay. Come, come, Laura, get your hat, and be gone; your brother waits.


Laura. Yes, mama -- Good bye -- Good bye, Mrs. Cecil, Sophia, Eudocia, your
most obedient.

(She runs out.)
Mrs. Mildmay. What did she say to you, Sophia?


Sophia. (...) she had discovered my (...) ^^ma.


Mrs. Mildmay. What does she mean?


Sophia. You know, mama, how I have disposed of the two guineas you were so
good as to give me* and Laura has been teazing me since yesterday to know what
I mean to buy: I refused to tell her, and she fancies she has guessed it.


Mrs. Mildmay. Silly child, how light her head is!


Sophia. But perhaps she really knows. -- She may have learned from Sally, who
bought my materials, and even assisted in the work.


Mrs. Cecil. No, I believe Sally is perfectly faithful.


Mrs. Mildmay. I believe so too. -- We will ask her presently, if Laura has
been questioning her. -- But why did you so much object to Laura's knowing it,
my dear.


Sophia. Because mama, Laura can no more keep a (...), than she can let any one
else keep it in peace, and I know she would have told everybody she had met
with; which, for many reasons, I wished to avoid.


Mrs. Mildmay. It is very true, that those who are extremely curious, are
generally unable to keep a secret, because it gratifies their self-importance,
to show that they know more than others, and because they hope to obtain new
secrets, in return for those they tell: not considering, that a wise person
will never place confidence in one who has abused the same trust from another.


Mrs. Cecil. There is nothing, I think, on which young people ought to be more
scrupulous than on the subject of Confidence. -- Let them not be over-fond of
seeking a trust, which generally brings with it anxiety and care; but if by any
accident, or any necessity, they find themselves in possession of a secret,
they ought, with extreme delicacy and caution, to preserve a trust so sacred.


Mrs. Mildmay. Most surely. -- And the limits of Confidence are very strict. --
It is not only what our friends say, prefaced by "I beg you will not tell
this," which we ought to consider as confided to us. Every thing which we can
suppose they would not wish revealed, we ought to consider as told in
confidence. Having once confided in a person, we do not say every minute,
"don't mention that." -- We suppose their own prudence will teach them what
ought to be kept secret; and every thing is told in confidence which passes
between friends, either relating to their situations, sentiments, or opinions;
often, indeed, when referring to these circumstances in others.


Eudocia. Mama, I have heard people say, that we ought not to tell to one
friend what another has told us.


Mrs. Mildmay. Certainly not. The person who confides in you may not have an
equally good opinion of your friend, or circumstances may render it very
improper to entrust her. You may not be able to judge of these circumstances;
therefore you ought to be as reserved to her as to the rest of the world:
besides, she also might have a friend, to whom she might not scruple to tell
the secret; that friend another, and so on without any bound.


Eudocia. I see that very clearly. -- But suppose I should, know the person who
entrusts me is also very intimate with my friend, and loves her, might I not
then talk about the affair with her?


Mrs. Mildmay. No, not without leave from the person who entrusts you; if she
chooses to tell this third person, she can; if not, you may be sure she has some
reason against it. I lately read a story exactly in point. -- When Genesis Monk
projected the Restoration of Charles the IId. he maintained the strictest
reserve on the subject, even to his friends. -- He sent, however, for his
brother, Dr. Monk, intending to confide his plan to him, and even giving him
some hints respecting it. -- When Dr. Monk arrived, while waiting for admission
to the General, he entered into conversation with the General's Chaplain, in
whom he knew he confided and talked with him on the plan. -- When he was
admitted to his brother, the General asked him if he had mentioned the subject
to any one? -- "To nobody," said the Doctor, "but to your Chaplain, whom I know
you trust." -- The General immediately changed countenance, dropped the
discourse and soon after sent his brother away; not choosing to trust a man who
had talked on a subject of so much consequence to another, even though he would
himself have trusted him (...) Hun^^'s History of England.
. A proof of his wisdom; for surely Dr. Monk had evidently showed a want of
delicacy in his se^^^ments, which rendered him u^^it to have the care of a plan
so important!


Sophia. I admire the General's conduct extremely.


Mrs. Cecil. He was undoubtedly right. The faculty of keeping a secret is
highly necessary, yet rarely possessed. I made Laura remark that admirable
passage in Telemachus today, because I remember the effect it had on myself.
This is absolutely fact, of a child well known to the Author.
Always fond of reading, Telemachus fell early into my hands: I was not above
eight years old when that passage struck me; I reflected on it, and it has
influenced my conduct ever since. Such indeed has been the constant advantage I
have derived from books. -- My mother died ^^ung: and my father, encumbered
with the care of a family, left us in great measure to educate ourselves. I was
naturally very passionate, very idle, fond of beginning every thing, and ending
nothing; but with a constant fondness for ^^^ding, which in the end supplied to
me the place of an instructor. -- The same author, I have always loved so much,
says in another place Happy those who are amused by Instruction, and take
delight in cultivating their minds by Science. Into whatever situation unkind
Fortune may cast them, they carry always with them the means of conversation.
And that fatiguing Idleness, which devours so many, even in the midst of
Pleasure, is unknown to them who know how to employ themselves in reading. --
Happy those who love to read!"
"Heureux ceux qui se divertissent en s'intruisant, et qui se plaisent a
cultiver leur esprit par les sciences! En quelque endroit que la fortune
ennemie les jette, ils portent ^o^jours avec eux dequoi s'entretenir Et
l'ennui, qui devore les (...) au milieu meme des delices, ^st inconnu a ceux
qui savents' occuper par quelque lecture. Heureux ceux qui aiment a lire." --
When I saw any very amiable character represented in my books, I considered
whether I had, or wanted the qualities I admired so much. This was often a most
unpleasant task, but I obliged myself to persevere in the inquiry; and having
decided, tried to act accordingly. -- When I read of any disagreeable
character, and my heart told me I had its faults, I did not drive the
conviction from me, but tried to correct myself.


Mrs. Mildmay. An admirable example, and well worthy of being followed by those
young people whose parents are either dead, or so engaged in business, as not
to be able to attend to them: such young people would do well to observe the
convictions of their own heart, and reason, and follow them, not refuse to
listen to them.


Eudocia. I have often heard people say, it is of no use to read without
reflection; but I never quite understood what was meant (...) reflection,
before. However, we are very happy in having a mother and governess so well
able to instruct us.


Mrs. Mildmay. Very true, you have great advantages; but, that does not render
reflection less necessary to you: without it, our precepts will be soon
forgotten; and when you come to act for yourself, you will look round for those
rules by which indeed you have been guided, but which you have neglected to
implant in your heart; and missing them, you will no more know how to act in
the world, than a man to find his way through a wood, which he had often seen at
a distance, but whose particular situation he had neglected to mark.


Enter Sally. Sally. Pray, ma'am, is Miss Laura here?


Mrs. Mildmay. No, Sally, she is gone out with her brother. -- Why; do you want
her?


Sally. Ma'am, there is a poor woman below, who came while you were out: she
saw Miss Laura, who desired her to call again at six o'clock. -- It is six
o'clock now.


Mrs. Mildmay. Yes, but Laura has surely forgotten the appointment! -- Idle
child! -- she will never learn to be punctual. -- Where is the woman? I will
see her.


Sally. She is down stairs, ma'am. It is Dame Saunders.


Sophia. Indeed! -- then perhaps -- but she kn^w nothing of it: so Laura could
not learn from her.


Mrs. Mildmay. What, is it the woman for whom your gift was intended!


Sophia. Yes, mama.


Mrs. Mildmay. Sally, did Laura question you about the purchase Miss Mildmay
meant to make with her two guineas?


Sally. Yes, ma'am, but I told her nothing; indeed she does not know that I
know any thing about it.


Mrs. Mildmay. That is right, -- Come with me, Sophia; we will talk to the poor
woman.

(Mrs. Mildmay, Sophia, and Sally go out) Mrs. Cecil, Eudocia.
Mrs. Cecil. How shameful for Laura to have neglected an appointment; on which,
probably, the peace and happiness of this poor woman depended! -- And to have
been surpassed by her servant in faithfulness and secresy! -- All her faults
proceed from carlessness, inattention, and want of punctuality. -- Great vices,
as well as great virtues, are rare; but it is those errors, which seem at first
trifling, but which grow upon us by degrees, of which we ought principally to
beware.


Eudocia. But, Mrs. Cecil Laura is so young.


Mrs Cecil. Yes, she is young; but, with the advantages she has, she ought to
know better: however, she has a good heart and understanding* and, I hope, she
will correct herself.


Eudocia. Oh yes, I hope so!

(A short pause, then.)
Enter Sophia. Sophia. Oh, Mrs. Cecil, mama has rendered this poor woman so
happy (...) -- She has been in the greatest distress about her rent: mama has
given her money to pay it, and money to buy food and clothes. I have desired
her to wait, while Sally fetches down the box I design for her* -- Will you go
with me, and give it to her?


Mrs. Cecil. With all my heart.


Eudocia. Pray, sister, let me go also.


Sophia. My dear, I should be happy to do so; but I wish very much you would be
kind enough to stay in this room. Laura will be at home in a few minutes; if
she finds no one here, she will follow us; and mama is determined to punish
her, for neglecting this poor woman, by leaving her in doubt whether she has
been here or not.


Eudocia. Very well -- I will call with you, then, tomorrow.


Sophia. If you please; you oblige me extremely by this compliance. -- Only
think, Laura had promised Ruth Saunders to represent her situation to mama, and
to give her the answer at six o'clock. She forgot all that! -- but she gave her
all the money she had; and Ruth said, behaved so kindly to her, as to make her
quite happy.


Mrs. Cecil. How capable she is of behaving well, if she does but think!

(Mrs. Cecil, and Sophia, go out.)
Eudocia. It is very true, indeed, that a habit of carelessness injures one
extremely. -- Laura this morning could not believe she should ever neglect an
appointment of consequence. -- Oh here she comes!


Enter Laura. Laura. So, Eudocia! -- Where are mama and Mrs. Cecil; and Sophia,
I don't see her either! -- We have had a charming ride! My brother was very
good to take me out, and he has been telling me such delightful things about
the ^ights in Philadelphia; he promises to ask mama to let me go next autumn,
and see them. -- Shall you not wish me to go, Eudocia?


Eudocia. To be sure; why do you think I would not?


Laura. Oh, because you looked so grave.


Eudocia. Did I look grave?


Laura. Yes, I think so. -- Have you drank tea?


Eudocia. No: of course we should wait for my brother.


Laura, (in a jesting t^^e.) And for me, I hope you think I am of consequence
enough to be waited for!


Eudocia. (smiling.) What do you think?


Laura. Ah you ^^y girl! -- I know what you (...): it is true, mama did not
think so this morning.


Eudocia. I assure you, we all wished for you.


Laura. Oh I don't doubt it at all. I shall be more punctual another time; for
though I liked my ride, it did not make amends for losing so much pleasure. --
And George must go tomorrow: he says it will be a month before he comes again.
-- How good he is; how I love him!


Eudocia. How we all love him -- He is so attentive to us all! -- Oh here comes
Sophia.


Enter Sophia. Eudocia. Sophia, what are you come (...)?


Sophia. Yes, I have been extremely ^^lighted!


Eudocia. Was ^he pleased?


Sophia. Oh (...) one so happy*


Laura. So! so! -- More secrets -- Ah ha Sophia! -- I have found out the last
however! -- Another time, I hope, you will trust me!


Sophia. Not the sooner because I find you curious, and prying into what I wish
to hide from you.


Laura. Well, but my little Sophia, my dear sweet Sophia, don't be angry; you
know I could not help guessing!


Sophia. You guessed, did you?


Laura. Yes, I guessed: well, Sophia, is it very beautiful?


Sophia. Oh, very beautiful, if one did but know what you meant.


Laura. You don't then, I suppose? -- Is the device handsome?


Sophia. The device! -- What nonsense!


Laura. What, then, I suppose you will not own you have purchased a locket,
with mama's hair?


Sophia. You have a fine guess, indeed!


Laura. A true one, I fancy?


Sophia. For once, you are entirely mistaken.


Laura. What can it be then! -- Now, Sophia, do tell me.


Sophia. Perhaps --


Laura. Oh do, pray do; indeed I will not tell.


Sophia. I wish I had more reason (...) trust your (...) however, it is no
longer (...), so, if you wish it, I will tell you.


Laura. Oh yes, yes, make haste, Sophia, make haste!


Sophia. You must know then, that, during the winter, I observed two pretty
little girls, in the village, almost without clothes: I pitied them very much,
and wished I could relieve them. I began by saving all I could out of my
allowance, and had already some shillings in advance, when mama gave me the two
guineas: with her leave, I laid it out entirely in clothes for the two little
girls, and their mother, of whose distress I heard sad accounts. -- Mrs. Cecil,
Sally and I, have been hard at work in making these clothes, whenever we could
find time, and all is now finished.


Laura. So, then, Sally knew!


Sophia. Yes.


Laura. She would not tell!


Sophia. What, you tried to make her?


Laura. I asked her -- a little.


Sophia. Fie, fie, Laura! -- You must have supposed she knew in confidence, if
she knew at all! Only think what a shame, that your servant should know better
how to act with respect to secresy than you.


Laura. Well, that is true; but, Sophia, who are these little girls?


Sophia. Their mother's name is Ruth Saunders.


Laura. Ruth Saunders! -- Oh goodness! -- Is it six o'clock?


Sophia. Six! -- it is almost seven!


Laura. Oh, where is mama! -- Let me see her directly! -- Where is Sally?


Sophia. What is the matter?


Eudocia. Dear Laura.


Sophia, ( aside to her.) Hush -- What Is the matter, Laura?


Laura. Oh, don't ask me! -- I am ashamed of myself; tell me where is mama.


Sophia. Mama is busy; you cannot see her.


Laura. Oh, I must, I must! -- Sally! Sally.

(She runs to ring the bell;)
Sophia. Oh, Eudocia, how I feel for her!


Eudocia. I can hardly bear to see her so unhappy.


Sophia. Mama has commanded silence!


Laura. Sally! Sally! -- why don't you come.

(Sally runs in.)
Sally. Miss! -- Bless me, what is the matter?


Laura. Sally, has Ruth Saunders been here?


Sally. Yes, miss.


Laura. Without seeing me! -- What must she think of me! -- It is almost dark
too! -- I shall not be able to see her tonight, and tomorrow! -- Oh, poor
creature, how unhappy she is. -- But if I can see mama, it may not be yet too
late! -- Dear Sophia, if you have any love for me, ask mama to let me see her!
-- I have something of great consequence to say.


Sophia. Indeed, my dear girl, it grieves me to refuse you, but mama has
forbidden me to interrupt her.


Laura. How can you be so unkind! -- Indeed it is very cruel, and you seem not
to feel for me.


Sophia. Believe me, my dear, I feel for you very much.


Laura. Why then will you not intercede for me?


Sophia. I have told you already, that mama --


Laura. Oh mama would hear me, if she knew -- but how we lose time! -- It will
be too dark, and I shall be too late. -- Eudocia will you ask mama to let me
see her?


Eudocia. I hear her coming.


Laura. Oh then I may still succeed!


Enter Mrs. Mildmay, and Mrs. Cecil. Laura, (running to Mrs. Mildmay.) Mama,
dear mama, will you have the goodness to hear me!


Mrs. Mildmay. What would you say? -- Why this extreme agitation?


Laura. Oh mama, while you were gone, a poor woman came hither: she wanted
relief from you; I saw her, I promised to intercede for her, and give her the
answer at six o'clock. -- Her landlord has threatened to take all her goods for
rent tomorrow morning. She hopes I shall prevail on you to plead for her to
him. Dearest mama, will you grant me this favor? Indeed she deserves your
goodness!


Mrs. Mildmay. How do you know that?


Laura. Because, mama, she told me all her story: she has been sick; she has
two children, and an old mother.


Mrs. Mildmay. But, Laura, it is easy to say all that; nay, it may be true, and
yet she may be idle and undeserving. You know I never exert myself but in
favor of worthy objects. I have now no time to inquire, it is past seven, and
very near dark; can I learn the truth of this story tonight?


Laura. But, mama, tomorrow will be too late.


Mrs. Mildmay. Why then did you not tell me the story sooner?


Laura. I intended to do so, as soon as you came home, mama, but --


Mrs. Mildmay. But you forgot it! -- Is it not so? -- You chose the pleasure of
a ride, rather than the gratifying these poor people: -- Thus you have lost,
from your carelessness and unpunctuality, an opportunity of doing a good
action, of making a whole family happy, and of increasing my love for you!


Laura. Oh, mama, I have been sadly to blame indeed, but I assure you this
shall be the last time. Only hear me this once! -- try what you can do for this
poor woman; Sally knows her, nay Sophia kn^ws her: inquire of them! -- Punish
me as you please, but do not punish her for my fault!


Mrs. Mildmay. Only imagine this poor creature's disappoinment when told you
were not at home. Think of her distress: she had then lost her only hope! --
See her returning to her cottage, where she had left her mother and children
anxious for the success of her petition; hear her with tears say, "Ah my
children, we must be ruined; the person who promised us assistance has
forgotten us! -- She i^ gone out; she has not mentioned us to her mother, and
tomorrow we shall be turned out to starve!"


Laura (throwing herself at her mother's feet.)

Oh, mama, I implore you to save me from being the cause of this misery! --
Indeed, I am cured for ever of my folly; I will never be trifling,
inconsiderate, and unpunctual again!
Mrs. Mildmay, (raising her.)

Promises of amendment do not prove any thing, yet I must hope this lesson will
reach your heart! -- If I were as i^considerate as you all the sad consequences
I have described to you would be realized, and even all I can do will hardly
efface from the mind of this poor woman the anguish she suffered when told you
were gone out, and had not mentioned her to me.


Laura. Then, mama, you will be good enough to assist her?


Mrs. Mildmay Certainly I will; your breach of promise can be no reason why I
should fail in my duty: but if. I had waited till I heard the story from you,
it would really have been too late for me to do any thing in it, as I could not
have learned all I wanted to know at this time.


Laura. Had you then heard it before?


Mrs. Mildmay. Yes; Sally, not finding you, came to me. I saw the poor woman;
heard her story, and having had ^eason before to believe it, I relieved her.
Sophia has given her a box of clothes, and she is gone home perfectly happy.


Laura. Oh, mama, how good you are to every body! -- Indeed, you may believe, I
will profit by this lesson. I can never again run such a risk of making any one
miserable.


Mrs. Cecil. You must then break yourself of the habit of trifling; for you see
now, as I told you this morning, it cannot be dismissed at once, whenever it is
of consequence it should be!


Laura. Oh, it is true, indeed! -- even, at least, when I came home if I had
not trifled away the time, by asking Sophia impertinent questions, I should
have found it less impossible to serve this poor woman! -- dear Sophia, I will
never teaze you again.


Sophia. Believe me, it hurt me extremely, to keep the truth from you, when I
saw you so distressed; but mama had commanded me not to tell you.


Eudocia. As to me, I was on the point of telling.


Laura. Mama, do you forgive me?


Mrs. Mildmay. I forgive you, hoping you will correct yourself, and that you
now see the fault, you thought so trifling, is really of serious consequence:
but although I am no longer displeased, I shall inflict a punishment in addition
to that which you have already suffered. I shall not permit you to have any
share in the farther assistance we mean to give this poor woman; nor to call on
her with your sisters for a full fortnight; if, in that time, I see any
instance of unpunctuality in your conduct, I shall extend the time as long as I
think proper. -- So you will lose the pleasure of seeing her happiness, and the
joy of her old mother and children, for the gift Sophia has made them!


Laura. Oh, mama, this is indeed a punishment -- but I deserve it! -- However,
I hope -- I am sure I shall see her at the end of the fortnight!


Mrs. Mildmay. I hope you will. -- But it is late. -- Let us go down stairs to
tea. -- And let this occurrence teach us all never to forget our promise,, or
let any gratification tempt us to neglect our positive engagements.


Little Country Visitor. Laura's Visit to the Young Montforts.


THE LITTLE COUNTRY VISITOR.

A DRAMA.

IN TWO PARTS

Accomplishments by Heaven were first designed
Less to adorn than to amend the mind.
MISS MORE'S PASTORAL. BOSTON: PRINTED FOR W. SPOTSWOOD.

CHARACTERS.
Mrs. Montfort, Her daughters. Matilda, Harriot,
Rosetta, -- A Farmer's daughter. Maria, -- A young woman under Mrs. Montfort's
care.
THE Little Country Visitor.
SCENE, a Garden -- Parlour. Mrs. Montfort and Maria, at work. -- Matilda and
Harriot at a window; one dressing a doll, the other playing with a bandalore.
Matilda. HARRIOT, don't you think my doll looks very pretty in this bonnet?


Harriot. Yes; I wish you would make me such a one.


Matilda. Oh, to be sure! -- No indeed! -- Why don't you make yourself one?


Harriot. But I don't know how. -- Well, if you will not, Maria will; will not you
Maria?


Maria. What, my dear?


Harriot. Make my doll a bonnet, like Matilda's?


Maria. -- Perhaps --


Harriot. Oh, only perhaps --


Maria. You know, Miss Harriot, it must depend on whether you behave properly,
and whether your mama chooses it to be done.


Harriot. Oh, but I will behave properly, and then mama will choose it to be
done.


Mrs. Montfort. We shall see that.


Matilda. I shall make my doll so many things this summer; we shall have so
much time in the country.


Harriot. Not so much time truly!


Matilda. But we shall! -- The days will be very long, and we shall get up
early.


Harriot. Yes, but then we shall run in the garden, and plant flowers, and that
will take up our time.


Matilda. How shall we plant flowers? -- We don't know how, nor when to water
them.


Harriot. Oh, James will tell us.


Matilda. Well, I wish Miss Rosetta would come. I suppose she is pretty stupid!


Harriot. Oh, and so awkward! -- I dare say she hangs down her head, and will not
speak, like those little girls we saw when we were in Worcester.


Matilda, (laughing.) Oh dear! -- How droll they used to be. They used to
curtsey, just so, (mimicking) and say, yes, miss; if you please, miss! -- and
they were so ignorant too!


Harriot. Dear, yes! -- They did not know how to dance, nor to draw, nor to do
fine work. -- What stupid children!


Matilda. Now you have made me think of them, I shall laugh if Miss Rosetta
should be like them. -- Harriot, don't make me laugh when she comes.


Harriot. Don't you make me laugh.


Maria. But -- Miss Harriot.


Mrs. Montfort, (to her.) Hush -- let them alone -- this will be a lesson for
them -- they think I don't hear.


Matilda. Mama, did you speak?


Mrs. Montfort. Yes to Maria.

(A short pause.)
Matilda. When will this girl come? -- I dare say she is afraid -- she thinks
she shall look awkward.


Harriot. I fancy she is not much mistaken!

(They laugh.) (A rap is heard at the parlour door.)
Mrs. Montfort. Pray come in. -- Matilda open the door.


Matilda. Oh dear mama, (laughs.) -- Harriot, have done laughing.

(Rosetta comes in, she curtsies modestly. Her dress and manner should be
plain, but not awkward. Matilda and Harriot stare at her, and stifle a laugh.)
Mrs. Montfort. Come in, my dear. I am very glad to see you, How do your father
and mother?


Rosetta: Very well, thank you, ma'am; they desired their respects to you.


Mrs. Montfort. I am very much obliged to them. -- Matilda, come and speak to
Miss Rosetta, and take her bonnet.


Matilda. (aside to Harriot.) To wait upon her indeed.

(She advances affectedly and proudly toward Rosetta.) How do you do, ma'am? I
am glad to see you. -- Give me leave to take your cloak.


Rosetta. Thank you, ma'am; pray don't trouble yourself.

(Matilda takes away her cloak, etc. laughing aside at Harriot. -- Rosetta sees
them, blushes, and looks uneasy.)
Mrs. Montfort. It is a fine day, Miss Rosetta. -- The country begins to look
very pleasant.


Rosetta. Yes, ma'am.


Mrs. Montfort. What says your father to the present appearance of the corn?


Rosetta. He thinks it promises very fair, ma'am.


Mrs. Montfort, (to Matilda.) Why don't you go and talk to Miss Rosetta. -- I
am ashamed of you.


Matilda, (in a low voice.) Dear mama, what should I say to her?


Mrs. Montfort. Fie, you silly child! -- Maria come with me, I am going to
dress; and by the time I return, I hope young people you will be better
acquainted. Matilda, do all you can to amuse Miss Rosetta. Harriot, be sure you
behave properly.

(Mrs. Montfort, Maria go out.) (A long pause, during which all the children
look confused.)
Harriot, (to Matilda.) Why don't you speak?


Matilda, (aloud.) Be quiet, Harriot, you are the most provoking child!


Harriot. Child! -- to be sure!


Matilda. What, you think yourself a woman, I suppose, at nine years old!


Harriot. Why not, as well as you at ten?


Matilda. Such nonsense! -- Miss Rosetta, will you like to look at my books?


Rosetta. If you please, ma'am.

(Matilda takes down several books.)
Harriot, (showing Rosetta the bandalore.) Is not this a very pretty thing?


Rosetta. Yes, ma'am.


Harriot. Will you play with it?


Rosetta. I don't know how.


Harriot, (showing her.) There you must let it fall, and then jerk the string a
little -- you see it winds up; there, you must keep it up.


Rosetta, (trying.) Is that right*


Harriot. Yes, very right; you will soon do it. O, but you must not jerk it so
much.


Rosetta. What do you call it, pray?


Harriot. A bandalore; some call them, Prince of Wales's toys.


Rosetta. Why?


Matilda. Oh, don't you know? -- They are all the fashion. The Prince of Wales
brought them in.


Rosetta. They are pretty, but there is no great ingenuity in playing with
them, I think.


Matilda. Oh no, it is all a knack.


Rosetta. I like better a play, thing which requires more skill, or else is an
exercise.


Matilda. So do I.


Rosetta. But you said, ma'am, you would show me your books.


Matilda. So I will -- (To Harriot.) -- She speaks prettily.


Harriot. Yes, she does not seem stupid.


Rosetta, (looking at the books.) Oh, here is the Friend of Youth, and the
Tales of the Castle.


Matilda. Yes, can you read them in French.


Rosetta. No, ma'am.


Matilda. Oh, they are charming in French.


Rosetta. I dare say they are.


Matilda. Should you not like to learn French?


Rosetta. Yes, but my father says it is not proper for me.


Matilda. Do you learn to dance?


Rosetta. No, ma'am.


Matilda. Dear, not to dance! -- oh, that is best of all; I love dancing.
Harriot, let us dance Mr. Duport's Cadrille. Shall you like to see us?


Rosetta. If you please.

(They dance -- Matilda sings the tune.)
Matilda. Now the Scotch steps Harriot.

(They dance again -- Matilda very well.)
Matilda. Oh! I am out of breath -- I love the Scotch reels, and they are very
fashionable now.


Rosetta. It is very pretty indeed, and you dance vastly well.


Matilda. Oh no, you flatter me!


Rosetta. No indeed -- I hope you have not so bad an opinion of me. -- Perhaps,
indeed, I am no judge.


Matilda. Oh yes, I dare say you are.


Harriot. Yes, because she admires your dancing!


Matilda. Harriot, you are very impertinent.


Rosetta. Oh, Miss Harriot only jests.


Harriot. Not I, Indeed!


Matilda. Very well, miss, I shall tell mama.


Harriot. As you like it.


Rosetta. But, Miss Matilda, here is another book, which seems very pretty. Is
it pretty?


Matilda. Which do you mean?


Rosetta. Mrs. Barbauld's Hymns.


Matilda. Oh, that is a child's book, and so grave!


Harriot. A child's book! -- why mama is very fond of it, and says it is
beautiful.


Rosetta. I should like to read it.


Matilda. Oh, I Will lend it to you.


Rosetta. I shall be extremely obliged to you.


Matilda. Oh, you will be very welcome. -- Pray do you learn to sing?


Rosetta. No indeed.


Matilda. Your education seems to be very confined.


Rosetta. You know I am only a farmer's daughter.


Matilda. There is something in that to be sure. I suppose, if you learn how to
make butter, and sell eggs, your father is satisfied?


Rosetta. Not entirely with that.


Matilda. I learn to sing. -- Do you love singing?


Rosetta. Yes, indeed very much.


Harriot. Matilda wants to be asked to sing.


Matilda. Harriot, you are excessively impertinent.


Rosetta. I am sure I shall be happy to hear you.


Matilda. Oh, indeed, I am very hoarse.


Rosetta. Pray then don't trouble yourself.


Matilda. Nay, to oblige you, I Will try.

(She sings.)
Rosetta. Very pretty, indeed. -- That is a charming song.


Matilda. I declare, Miss Rosetta, you have a great deal of taste.


Rosetta. Have I?


Matilda, (aside to Harriot.) How simple she is!


Harriot. I like her very well.


Matilda, (aloud.) But if you neither dance nor sing, how do you contrive to
fill up your time?


Rosetta. Oh, I have a great deal to do.


Matilda, (to Harriot.) I suppose she milks the cows!


Rosetta. No, Miss Matilda, I don't.


Matilda, (embarrass'd.) What!


Rosetta. You thought I did not hear you!


Matilda, (very much confused.) I beg your pardon.


Rosetta. Oh, I am not angry; if you are amused, that is enough.


Matilda. You are extremely good -- I did not mean --


Rosetta. You did not mean to offend me. I know that one ought not to be angry
at a jest.


Matilda. You are very obliging.


Harriot. Now, Matilda, you are fairly caught; it serves you right.


Matilda. Harriot, I did not ask you to interfere.

Mrs. Montfort and Maria come in.
Mrs. Montfort. So, young people! -- Heyday, Matilda, what is the matter? -- You
look confused. -- What have you been doing?


Matilda. Nothing, mama.


Mrs. Montfort. Oh, don't tell me that, I know better. -- What was it?


Harriot. Mama, she spoke impertinently of Miss Rosetta.


Mrs. Montfort. Harriot, that is a great fault, but it is a greater to be so
eager to accuse your sister. My children, learn, that if you fail to conceal
and excuse the errors of each other, the world will still more eagerly publish,
and still more bitterly condemn them. -- Where, alas! shall those who are
faulty, look for pity and forgiveness, if not to those kindred bosoms who,
knowing their failings, know also their virtues. -- If we ourselves point the
arrows of satire and reproach, at our sisters and our friends, who will hold
before them the shield of allowance and pardon! -- This is not, however,
intended to excuse you, Matilda. I am sorry, indeed, to hear you have behaved
ill.


Rosetta. Dear ma'am, indeed it was a mere jest, a trifle, I assure you.


Mrs. Montfort. Very well, my dear, if you are satisfied.


Rosetta. Yes, indeed, ma'am.


Matilda, (eagerly.) It is more than I deserve. -- Mama, I was very much to
blame. -- I ask your pardon Rosetta.


Rosetta. Indeed, Miss Matilda, I am not offended. I am sorry to have caused
you any uneasiness.


Mrs. Montfort. You are a very good girl. I hope both your companions will
profit by your example. -- Let us go to dinner.

(They go out.)
The Little Country Visitor.
PART II.
SCENE, a Garden. Matilda, Harriot, and Rosetta, enter from the house. Matilda.
YOU will like our garden, I think, Miss Rosetta; it is very pleasant, and you
cannot imagine how we enjoy it, after being so long in Philadelphia.


Rosetta. I imagine you were very much confined there.


Matilda. Yes, indeed. -- You know we lived in Chesnut-Street; every morning,
before breakfast; we walked with our governess, and Maria, up and down the
square for an hour.


Rosetta. The square -- but is it like a garden?


Matilda. Oh, no, there are houses on every side, and where we walk is only a
pavement; so it is merely for exercise, and tiresome enough I can tell you.


Harriot. Oh, but you know sometimes we went to the State-House.


Matilda. Oh, the State-House -- yes, that is very fine to be sure. -- There we
have a long gravel walk, with trees on each side, and full of people.


Rosetta. What! no grass walks? -- nor flowers?


Matilda. Flowers! -- Oh no, you might look for seven years without finding
one. -- And on the grass we must not walk.


Rosetta. Oh dear how sad! -- I should hate that.


Matilda. Oh yes, it is frightful indeed. -- Sometimes we went to Harrow
gate-gardens, which are charming, but not often. -- Well, now we are in the
country, we shall walk a great deal.


Rosetta. We have charming walks. -- If Mrs. Montfort will give me leave, I
will show them to you.


Matilda. Oh, thank you, we shall like that vastly.


Harriot. Perhaps too you know how to plant flowers, and manage them.


Rosetta. I have a large piece of garden, which I keep in order.


Matilda. What, all yourself?


Rosetta. No, the man digs it, and puts it in order; I sow the feeds, water
them, tie up the flowers when they are blown, and do all that is not very
fatiguing.


Matilda. How very agreeable! -- What flowers have you?


Rosetta. Honeysuckles, roses, carnations, stocks, and a great variety of
others, and also a large bed of thyme for my bees.


Matilda. Your bees! -- Have you bees also?


Rosetta. Oh, yes, three hives.


Matilda. Oh, charming! -- You are not afraid of them?


Rosetta. Dear no! -- I never disturb them, and they do not hurt me.


Matilda. Are they troublesome to keep?


Rosetta. Not at all. I have only to give them a little honey in the winter, to
observe when they are going to swarm, and to provide a hive.


Matilda. To swarm -- what is that?


Rosetta. When the hive becomes too full, a great number of young bees go out
of it, to find another place, where they make their comb and put the honey.


Matilda. Where do they get the honey?


Rosetta. From the flowers. They suck it out with a sort of trunk; in passing
through their bags it becomes honey. They also roll themselves in t^^ yellow
dust of flowers, which makes the wax.


Matilda. That is very curious! -- You know all that! -- We do not know any
thing of the matter.


Rosetta. Oh, it is soon learned.


Matilda. I should like to keep bees.


Harriot. Perhaps, mama, will let us.


Matilda. But we do not know how to manage them.


Rosetta. I will show you, with all my heart, if you please.


Matilda. Oh, thank you, thank you; how good you are!


Harriot. And to plant flowers also?


Rosetta. Yes, surely.


Matilda. Oh, delightful! -- Rosetta, what flower is this?


Rosetta. A larkspur -- Here is another, of a different color. -- They are
various in color, and some are double. -- They are annuals.


Matilda. What do you mean by annuals?


Rosetta. They last but one year. -- the seed must be saved, and sowed again.
Most of our common flowers are annuals.


Matilda. Oh, but you forget roses, honeysuckles, lilacs, and jasmine?


Rosetta. Those are called flowering shrubs.


Matilda. How much you know! -- We know nothing of all this!


Rosetta. Oh, there is nothing more easy, when one lives in the country.


Matilda. But you have been taught all this?


Rosetta. Not at all; I need only observe. -- I do not need telling.


Matilda. And we know nothing but what we are taught. -- And yet we fancy
ourselves very wise! -- No wonder your time is employed! -- What else do you do?


Rosetta. I work a great deal. -- I read whenever I can: I make cakes, and
pastry: I help to gather the fruit in season, and to cull flowers and herbs for
distilling: I manage the poultry-yard, and overlook the dairy.


Matilda. Oh, how clever you are! -- I wish I could do so.


Rosetta. There is nothing clever in that; I only do my duty. -- You are
differently situated, you have no need of these things.


Matilda. For all that, they are more useful. -- But if we did what mama wishes
us, that would be enough.


Rosetta. To be sure it is. -- You do, I dare say.


Harriot. No, truly.


Matilda. No. -- Mama wishes us to read more; not to be conceited; to spend
less time idly; to talk less ourselves, and attend more to other people. -- Not
to be impertinent; and above all not to quarrel.


Rosetta. No doubt, you obey such reasonable, and kind commands.


Matilda. Yes -- when we remember! -- But today -- I see now how foolishly I
have behaved! -- How ignorant, I fancied you were, because you could not dance
and sing! -- How I chattered to you without attending to what you said! -- Then
I was very impertinent to you, and quarrelled with Harriot.


Rosetta. But, dear Miss Matilda, how I love you for owning your faults! -- You
will soon mend them.


Matilda. Ah! -- I fear not!


Rosetta. Yes, since you know them so well!


Matilda. You allow, then, I have faults; I love you for that: every body else,
except Mama, my Governess, and Maria flatter me.


Rosetta. To flatter! -- Oh, how vile!


Matilda. Do they not flatter you? --


Rosetta. No, surely; I should ^espise any one who did. -- What! ^ake us more
faulty, by pretending to think us perfect? -- Is it not (...)? -- Such people
must either wish us to be blameable out of ill nature, that they may ridicule
us, or mean to make some advantage of our faults.


Matilda. I believe you are right; I shall be more cautious in future. --
Rosetta promise to tell me when I am wrong.


Rosetta. Ah! have you not a mother, much more capable than I am of telling you?


Matilda. Yes; but I behave better when mama sees me.


Rosetta. And why?


Matilda. Because I know she will love me better


Rosetta. What then does she wish you to seem good, or really to be so?


Matilda. Oh, really to be so without doubt.


Rosetta. Then you do not answer her wishes, if you are le^ good when she does
not see you, than when she does.


Matilda. Very true indeed! -- Oh, you shall see I will be very good
henceforward. -- We shall have you with us often, I hope.


Rosetta. Certainly; I shall be happy, if Mrs. Montfort pleases.


Matilda. Oh, I am sure she will like it. -- Here comes mama. -- I shall ask
her. -- Harriot, you will like it too; shall you not?


Harriot. Oh yes, indeed.

Enter Mrs. Montfort and Maria.
Matilda, (running to her.) Mama mama!


Mrs. Montfort. Well! -- What say you?


Matilda. Mama, will you not ^e Miss Rosetta to come and see (...)?


Mrs. Montfort. Yes, certainly, (...) often as she can make it convenient to
come to you. -- At all yours, my dear Rosetta; if the children are taking their
lessons, they ^all not disturb themselves; you ^ill not perhaps be sorry to be
of ^e party.


Rosetta. Thank you, ma'am, ^ou are very kind indeed.


Mrs. Montfort. I see, Matilda, (...) this request, that at last you understand
the merit of your companion.


Matilda. Oh, yes, indeed, mama! -- She knows so much; she understands flowers,
and how to keep bees, and to make cakes, and many other things.


Mrs. Montfort. Yes -- and that (...) not all. -- She helps her mother to
instruct her sisters, in working reading, and writing. -- Besides the
assistance she gives in household affairs, she works excellently we at her
needle. -- She is fond of reading, and has greatly improved by it. -- I beg
your pardon, Rosetta for commending you to your face but I wish to give my
children lesson, who fancied this morning, because you had not the same
advantages with themselves; you must be ignorant and awk ward. They now see you
are neither; and the^ begin to know how much mo^^ valuable and useful are your
employments than theirs.


Rosetta. Indeed, ma'am, the young ladies were not mistaken; am very ignorant.


Mrs. Montfort. You are very modest; which will, I hope, be another lesson to
them. -- Beside Matilda, Miss Rosetta is not deficient in those lighter
accomplishments which you admire so much. -- She has taught herself to design
landscapes, and to paint flowers, charmingly well, and she also sings very
agreeably.


Matilda. What! Rosetta, can you sing?


Rosetta. But -- very little indeed.


Matilda. You did not say so this morning.


Rosetta. You only asked me, if I had learned; and, I said, I had not; which is
true.


Matilda. Mama, I am quite convinced of what you have so often told me, that by
chatting so much, attending so much to myself, and so little to other people, I
lose a great deal of pleasure and instruction.


Mrs. Montfort. Yes. -- If you had not chosen to display what you fancied your
superiority, in dancing and singing, to Miss Rosetta, you would earlier have
learnt her merit, and the power she has of teaching you many useful and
agreeable things. -- You would have saved yourself the pain of being
impertinent to her, and me the mortification of seeing you rude, saucy, and
conceited.


Matilda. Mama --


Mrs. Montfort. Indeed, you were all these! -- But, hence forward, Matilda, I
hope you will reflect, that the light frivolous accomplishments you have
boasted of so much, are in reality of no essential import, since they neither
make us more wise, more humble, or more pleasing in our behavior.


Harriot. But mama, do you not then wish us to learn singing and dancing?


Mrs. Montfort. Certainly. -- It is a duty incumbent on you to learn them,
because I wish it, and because they are ornamental parts of education, suited
to the place you are to ^ill in life. -- But I would not have you fancy they
make you at all superior to those whose situation excludes them from such
information. -- You will do very wrong not to learn them, but you have no merit
in possessing them, as every other person would do the same, if they had the
same opportunity. -- And I would have you always consider, that one precept
which teaches you to improve your behavior, or regulate your temper, is of
more value than the finest singing, or most graceful dancing.


Matilda. I am sure you are right, mama.


Mrs. Montfort. Even superior acquirements ought not to render you proud or
conceited. -- If you read more, or write better, than other children of your
age; if you know better how to behave, or have better qualities, you ought to
reflect that all have not equal advantages with yourself. -- Every child has
not a father, who can or will be at the expense of having her well instructed.


Matilda. Ah, mama, nor has every child a mother who takes such pains in
teaching her!


Mrs. Montfort. That is true, -- Learn then to make allowances for differences
of natural capacity, which we have no merit in possessing, as we did not give
it to ourselves; and for difference of education, which depends on those about
us, -- When these allowances are made, we shall seldom, if ever, find any thing
to ridicule or despise; pity, and a wish to amend, will be our only sentiments.
-- And when we consider how many opportunities we have ourselves lost, how much
more we might have learned, than we have learned, we may easily allow for those
who have even lost more time than ourselves.


Matilda. Ah, mama, I feel how much you are in the right; and I promise you
henceforth to be more attentive, and less presuming.


Harriot. And I also, indeed, mama.


Rosetta. Ah, ma'ma, let me too thank you for these valuable instructions;
which, I hope, will be also profitable to me.


Mrs. Montfort. You are a very good girl, my dear Rosetta. -- I hope you will
come hither often, and that the connection will be mutually useful. -- Let us
go in; it is tea-time.

(They go in.)
Scene closes. The Distressed Family. Vilmats distress relieved by Mr. and Miss
Barclay


THE DISTRESSED FAMILY.

A DRAMA.

IN TWO PARTS.

Such fate to suffering worth is given,
Who long with wants and woes has striven;
By cruel fraud and cunning driven
To misery's brink.
'Till wrench'd of every stay, save Heaven,
He ruined sunk.
POEMS by R. BURNS. BOSTON: PRINTED FOR W. SPOTSWOOD.

CHARACTERS.
Mr. Barclay, Eleonora, His Daughter. Wilmot, A Poor Man. Agnes, His Sick Wife.
Johnson, A Farmer. Rachel, George,
Wilmot's Children.
THE DISTRESSED FAMILY.
SCENE before a Cottage, with a small railed Garden, a distant view of a
Village, the Church, etc. -- Wilmot comes out of the Cottage. Wilmot. THE Sun
is arisen; the mists are partly dispelled. -- How pure is the air! -- For a
moment let me try to forget my cares, and enjoy these refreshing odours. -- (He
pauses.) -- Oh, how vain the attempt! -- These scenes, the moment of daybreak,
once so delicious to my heart, to which it used to expand with so much rapture,
have lost their power! -- Oh, my God, it was here I used to offer to thee my
morning sacrifice of praise and prayer. It was here, softened into universal
benevolence, I used to pray for all men. -- I no longer feel those delightful
emotions. -- A weight of grief hangs upon my heart. The ardour of my devotion
is departed. My wishes are contracted to a point. -- I have lost my hopes on
earth; and, I fear, I am also losing my trust in God. -- Oh, my heavenly
father, deign to hear me! -- Suffer me not to despair of thy mercies, or to
murmur at thy will! -- Teach me to support my anguish, if not with the
fortitude of a man, with the resignation of a christian! (He leans against a
tree, with his face on his arms, in thought.)

Rachel enters from the cottage; as she shuts the door, she looks back* and
says. -- Be quiet, George -- don't make a noise, I shall be back in a minute.

(She advances.)
Rachel, (taking Wilmot's hand,) Father, my dear father, why are you so sad?


Wilmot. My child!


Rachel. Indeed, father, my mother is better. -- She sleeps.


Wilmot, (breaking from her with distraction.) She will soon sleep in death! --
Must I see her die! -- Without friends, without the means of procuring her
proper assistence, I see her languishing under a disease which might be cured,
could I but obtain proper nourishment for her. -- Why do I hesitate! -- Driven
from men, as if I did not belong to their species, the bands between me and
society are broken; wherefore then should I not fall, like a beast of prey, on
those barbarous wretches who leave us to perish.


Rachel, (coming to him.) Father you did not bid me pray today, but I have
prayed. -- Why do you not teach me to be good, as you used to do?


Wilmot. (catching her in his arms.) Oh, my child! -- My God! thou have made
this innocent my preserver. -- Are the bands between me and society broken! --
Oh no! my children are ties which I dare not break. -- Thou have trusted them
to me! -- Dare I corrupt thy work, and lead those to wickedness and misery whom
thou have created to be good and happy?


Rachel. What do you mean, father? -- Why do you cry -- why do you speak so
hastily -- are you angry with me?


Wilmot. No, my child, no I -- Happy innocent! -- thou know not the force of
the passions! -- thou read not the anguish of a heart, fluctuating between
good and evil. -- Go my child to thy mother; she may want thee.


Rachel. I will, father. -- (As she goes out, she meets Mr. Johnson. -- She
curtsies, but he takes no notice.)


Rachel, (aside.) How cross he looks! -- I hope he will not scold my father! --
What can make people so cross, I wonder!

(She goes in.)
Wilmot. Good-day to you, Sir.


Johnson. (in a rough tone.) Servant, George. -- What art doing here; why do
not get to work man?


Wilmot. Sir, I am going to work; but my wife has been ill all night. -- I fear
for her life. -- I know not how to leave her, lest I should see her no more.


Johnson. Well, well, man, if thee do not work, thy wife cannot eat, nor thy
children neither: that is all I know.


Wilmot. Alas, Sir, I would I were able to work incessantly, for their sakes;
would that I could live without rest, that I might earn more for their support.


Johnson. Well, then, why do stand idle?


Wilmot. Ah, Sir, it is not idleness, my strength, and my spirits fail me, but
never my wish to labor.


Johnson. How thou talk of thy strength, and thy strength; have not as much
strength as another?


Wilmot. At least, Sir, what have I employ willingly.


Johnson. Don't know that. -- Thou do not as much work in a day and a half,
as some of my men do in a day. -- George, George, I am afraid thee art lazy and
then thy wife, she is sick. -- She says so however; she cannot do this, and she
cannot do that; her betters can do it. -- God knows how you contrive to live!


Wilmot, (with earnestness.) Yes, Sir! -- God does know! -- He sees our hearts;
he knows whether or not I wish to work; whether or not my poor Agnes is really
sick. -- Ah, Heaven, I can bear any thing for myself, but I have not yet learnt
to bear reproach on her!


Johnson. Well, well, George, thou seem not to be cut out for a working man,
thou look and talk like a gentleman, so may be thou know how to live
like one, I Am sure I Have no objection.


Wilmot, (aside.) What cruel insults! -- Down proud and rebellious spirit. -- I
will be humble! (To Johnson.) -- Ah, Sir, gentlemen do not live as I live;
gentlemen do not see those they love dying before their eyes, without the power
of giving them assistance.


Johnson. I Will tell thee what, George; if thou can afford to stand
chattering here all day, I cannot. -- So fare thee well; since thou have not a
mind to work, I must find somebody who has.


Wilmot. Good heavens, Sir! -- I am going to work instantly; do not, I conjure
you, do not think of employing another.


Johnson. Well, well, I shall see about it.


Wilmot. But, Sir, hear me, I pray you: promise me that you will not employ
another. -- Consider my poor wife and children.


Johnson. It Is for thee to consider them, and work the harder.


Wilmot. Oh, Sir, you need not fear me; you shall have no reason to complain.


Johnson. We shall see that. -- Go to work. -- The men have been in the fields
this half hour. Make haste, and we shall see.


Wilmot. I shall, Sir. (Johnson goes out.)


Wilmot. Oh God! -- Oh God! -- hear my groans! Pity me, and teach this cruel
man to pity me! -- Make me forget I ever was, what I am not now! -- Oh that I
could acquire at once the strength and humility of the hardy peasant! -- My
blood rises, my heart swells; hardly could I restrain myself from answering
this tyrant as he deserved. -- Let me see my Agnes once more, and then hasten
to obey this imperious master.

(He goes into the cottage, then comes cut again, crosses the stage, and goes
out. Rachel and George follow him.)
Rachel. Good-bye, father good-bye. -- Come, George, let us go and get some
sticks, to boil the potatoes.


George. But mother will want you.


Rachel. No, she says she is better. -- She will not eat any breakfast,
however. -- She does not like bread.


George. I like it -- but I like it best with an apple.


Rachel. Oh, but apples are scarce. -- Our tree had but a few, and those must
be saved for mother: she can eat a bit now and then.


George. I am sure, then, I don't want them. -- I had rather she had them.


Rachel. I am sure I wish I could live without eating, that mama might have
better things.


George. Mama! You must not say that.


Rachel. Oh, I had forgot; I must never say, mama, since Nancy Johnson laughed
at me, and her mother scolded me for saying so.


George. I hate Nancy Johnson; she is so proud and ill-temper'd.


Rachel. Oh, but you must not ^ate any body.


George. Well, I will hate Mrs. Johnson, however, because she is so cross to
mother.


Rachel. You will hate her. -- I cannot help laughing at that.

(While they are laughing, Mr. Barclay and Eleonora come in.)
Eleonora. Dear papa, what pretty children. -- What Is your name my dear?


Rachel, (curtsying.) Rachel Wilmot, ma'am.


Eleonora. A very pretty name, and I dare say you are a very good girl. -- Is
that your brother?


Rachel. Yes, ma'am.


Eleonora. And what were you laughing at so heartily, my dear!


Rachel, (confused.) At -- a^ George, ma'am.


Eleonora. What did he say^ then?


Rachel. Ma'am, he says he w^^ hate Mrs. Johnson.


Mr. Barclay, (laughing.) A very kind determination.


Rachel. Oh dear, ma'am, bu^ pray don't tell her. -- Perhaps you know her. --
Pray don't be angry, ^e is but a child.


Eleonora. Be easy, I don't know her; and if I did, I should not tell her.


Rachel. Oh, I Am glad of that. -- Perhaps it might ruin my father.


Mr. Barclay. How so, child?


Rachel. Sir my father works for Mr. Johnson; and, perhaps, they might be
affronted.


Mr. Barclay. Very likely. -- We will not tell them. Be good children -- mind
your book. -- Let me see you at church, and here is sixpence for you.


Rachel, (joyfully.) Oh dear Sir, will you be so kind then as to let me work
for you.


Mr. Barclay. Work, my child! -- What work can thou do? -- Why, do think
I will give the^ work?


Rachel. Will you not, Sir?


Mr. Barclay. I have none for you, child.


Rachel. Then, Sir, what am I to do with this money?


Mr. Barclay. Keep it, my child.


Rachel. Sir, my father says, I must not take money till I can work for it. --
He forbids me to beg.


Mr. Barclay. Charming little creature!


Eleonora. How amiable! -- But, my dear, you did not beg; my papa gave it to
you.


Rachel. But I don't think my father would like me to have it.


Mr. Barclay. Her integrity i^ charming! -- Look then, my child, I want those
flowers which grow yonder. -- I will give you sixpence to gather them for me.


Rachel. Oh, yes, Sir, yes.

(She runs and gathers the flowers. Mr. Barclay gives her the sixpence, and
the flowers to Eleonora.)
Mr. Barclay. Keep them, my Eleonora, and if ever you should be tempted to
forget my precepts, let them remind you how well this little cottager kept
those of her father.


Eleonora. I can never forget it. -- Adieu, Rachel. I shall see you again some
time or other.


Rachel. Good-bye, ma'am. -- Thank you, Sir.

(She curtsies. They go out.) Rachel, George.
Rachel. O, George, see! -- I have got sixpence! -- I shall go directly to the
village, and buy mother some biscuits, such as she likes, and some coffee: I
can have both for sixpence. -- Go in -- don't tell her where I am gone. -- If
she wants any thing, Dame Green will come if you call her. -- Don't make a
racket.


George. No, no. -- Good-bye.

(Rachel goes out. George goes into the cottage.)
Scene closes. The Distressed Family.
PART II.
SCENE, the Inside of the Cottage. Agnes, Rachel, George. -- A small table
stands by Agnes, with coffee, and buiscuits. -- A little inner room is seen,
with a bed. Rachel. BUT, mother, you don't eat the buiscuits.


Agnes. Yes, my dear, I have eaten one; take one yourself.


Rachel. No, thank ye, mother.


Agnes. Why not?


Rachel. I am not hungry.


Agnes. My child, there are more than I can eat; you may take one safely.


Rachel. But, mother, they will not be spoiled by tomorrow, and they are
better for you than bread. -- I like bread very much.


Agnes. My dear Rachel! (embraces her with tears.) -- My God, I thank the for
the blessing of such affectionate children: they comfort me in all my
distresses! Rachel see if your father is coming.


Rachel, (going to the window.) No, mother, it is twelve o'clock too; how very
hot it is!


Agnes. Alas, how my poor Wilmot will be fatigued. -- He exhausts his strength
in working for us. -- I dare not wish to die, for I know how much my death
would afflict him! -- And my poor children, they yet need a mother's care!


Rachel. Mother, my dear mother, why do you cry; my father will soon be here.


George, (at the window.) Don't cry, mother, my father is coming.


Agnes. Do not tell him I have been crying. -- I am better now; how near is he?


George. Mother, he is just getting over the style; he looks up to the sky; he
wipes his face. -- Ah, how hot he is; I will run out to him.

(He runs out.)
Agnes. Ah, how he must be fatigued! -- In this burning Sun -- he that was so
delicately bred!

(Wilmot and George come in.)
George. Here he is, mother -- here he is!


Agnes. My dear Wilmot! -- How tired you are.


Rachel, (sets a chair.) Sit down here father; let me take your hat.


Wilmot. The Sun is so hot! -- My dear Agnes, how are you?


Agnes. Better, thank you! -- Rachel has procured me some coffee; it has done
me good. -- Take a cup of it, it will refresh you.


Wilmot, (in a low voice.) No.


Agnes. What is the matter? -- You look pale. Oh, Wilmot, speak to me, for
God's sake. -- You are ill? -- Ah, he is dying. He has killed himself for me!

(Wilmot fainting, leans back. Agnes runs for water, and sprinkles him. Rachel
and George scream. Rachel r^us to the door.)
Rachel. Help, help! -- Oh, my father is dying. Mother, mother, don't you die
too.


George, (crying.) Oh, mother mother!

(A knocking at the door. -- After a while, it is repeated.)
Agnes. Wilmot, Wilmot speak to me, speak to me.

(The knocking is heard again. Rachel opens the door. Mr. Barclay and Eleonora
come in. Agnes still hangs over Wilmot, in the greatest agony.)
Mr. Barclay. What is the matter, good people -- What occasioned the screams I
heard?


Rachel. Oh, Sir, my father is dead, and my mother is dying. -- George, George,
let us die too!


Eleonora. My dear, don't be frightened -- he is not dead, he will soon
recover. (To Agnes.) Pray don't be so terrified.

(Agnes looks only at Wilmot. Eleonora takes out her salts; applies them to
Wilmot. Mr. Barclay supports him)
Mr. Barclay. My good woman, recover yourself; he is only faint.


Agnes. Oh no, he is dead. -- I have killed him. Wilmot, I shall not outlive
you.

(Wilmot begins to recover; half raises his head, and looks at Agnes. -- In a
moment he speaks.)
Wilmot. My wife!


Agnes. I am here -- I am at your side. -- I will not leave you even in death.


Wilmot. My dearest Agnes, I am better; do not terrify yourself.


Eleonora. Indeed there is no need -- he will be well presently.


Wilmot. Ah, Madam, I beg your pardon. -- I fear I have been troublesome to you?


Eleonora. By no means; your wife and children have been sadly alarmed. -- Pray
prevail on your wife to take some care of herself.


Wilmot. Agnes, I entreat you to sit down.


Eleonora, (placing her in a chair.) Take a little water, will you? -- Rachel,
show me where it is, I will fetch some.

(She fetches water, and obliges Agnes to drink of it, who is relieved by a
violent fit of crying.)
Agnes. Thank you ma'am; you are extremely good.


Mr. Barclay. Have you been ill long, my friend?


Wilmot. No, Sir, I was very well this morning.


Agnes. Ah, my dear Wilmot you have over-worked yourself. -- This burning Sun
-- Your cares, your anxiety, have overcome you! -- Why would you do so?


Wilmot. My dear Agnes, if you knew the terrors I have suffered!


Mr. Barclay. The terrors!


Wilmot. Yes, Sir, of being deprived of my work. My master threatened me this
morning with dismission; he accuses me of laziness.


Agnes. Oh, what you! -- You who have worked so eagerly, so constantly?


Wilmot. Alas, yes! -- Unable before to procure for you, my dear Agnes, the
support your disease required, could I bear the idea of losing the common
necessaries for you, and for my children? -- Nor was this all, the cruel man
added the most bitter and unprovoked reflections on me, and those I love best.
-- I left you, Agnes, this morning half heart broken, and scarcely able to
resolve on longer enduring a miserable existence, except for those dear sakes,
whose rememberance urged me on beyond my strength!


Agnes. Ah, Wilmot, to us then you owe your illness, even perhaps your death;
to us who would have died to save you!


George. Father, let me help you to work tomorrow; perhaps Mr^ Johnson will not
scold then.


Wilmot. Alas, my child!


Mr. Barclay. Pray tell me, who is this oppressive man, this Johnson, of whom
you speak?


Wilmot. Sir, he is the farmer who employs me.


Mr. Barclay. Where does he live?


Wilmot. In a farm called Oatley, Sir.


Mr. Barclay. I thought so! -- It is my farm, and he is now urging me for a new
lease, on terms very favorable to himself. -- I am glad to learn how I ought
to deal with him.


Wilmot. I should be sorry, Sir, to prejudice you against him; he is honest,
and a good farmer.


Mr. Barclay. You do yourself honor, by thus repaying his unkindness; but he
must not expect me to favor a man capable of such conduct.


Agnes. I beg your pardon, ma'am, for not asking you to sit down. -- We are
exceedingly indebted to you for the trouble you have taken.


Eleonora. Not in the least. -- I would not be impertinent; but -- can we be of
service to you?


Wilmot, (aside.) Vain prejudice, which has so long taught me to conceal my
distresses, begone! -- Unable longer to labor, I must apply to the compassion
of others, Sir.


Mr. Barclay. Speak freely, my good friend. -- Can I assist you?


Wilmot. Ah, Sir, the dear woman you see has been ill a long time; she is
better, but her weak state requires nourishment, which I cannot procure for her.


Agnes. My dear Wilmot, think more of yourself, and less of me. -- It is he,
Sir, who requires your assistance. -- I have already taken refreshment, which
your kindness this morning enabled my child to procure.


Mr. Barclay. What! my little flower-gatherer! -- Amiable child!


Eleonora. My good friend, your husband seems much recovered; you are yourself
indisposed, be prevailed on to lie down; in the mean time my father will learn
how he can be of use to you.


Wilmot. Do, my dear Agnes; I am quite well.


Agnes. Since you request it, I will obey you.


Eleonora. Let me help you?


Agnes. Oh no! -- dear young lady, I cannot bear you should wait on me.


Eleonora. Why not? -- It is a pleasure to me.


Agnes. But it is giving you so much trouble.


Eleonora. Not at all. -- I dare say, if I were sick, and you were well, you
would wait on me?


Agnes. Most surely. -- It would be fit I should be your servant.


Eleonora. To be sure, it is always fit those who are in health should wait on
those who are sick.


Agnes. What sweetness!

(She goes out, leaning on Eleonora, followed by Rachel; in a minute Eleonora
returns.)
Eleonora. (in a low voice, to her father.) Sir, these poor people have great
need of refreshment, let me fetch it from home, I will return presently.


Mr. Barclay. Do so, but do not run, it is too hot.


Eleonora. I will not.

(Mr. Barclay, Wilmot, George at a distance.)
Mr. Barclay. My child will soon return; she is gone for refreshment.


Wilmot. Ah, Sir, how can I thank you for your goodness!


Mr. Barclay. My good friend, why would you not apply to me before?


Wilmot. Sir, while I was able by the work of my hands, to procure for my wife
and children the means of life, I had no right to encroach upon the goodness of
others, or on that relief which poorer wtetches had a better right to. -- But
when my strength failed me; when I saw myself on the point of being deprived of
work, and my children of bread, it became time to ask, and God has been pleased
that I should not ask in vain.


Mr. Barclay. I admire your sentiments, and --

Rachel enters.
Rachel. Father, my mother is inclined to sleep, but every time her eyes close
she starts and fancies she ^ees you fainting again. -- If you go to her,
perhaps, she will be easy.


Wilmot. Sir --


Mr. Barclay. Go, my friend, no apologies; I will chat awhile with Rachel; I
shall tell you a charming story of her.

(Wilmot goes in. Rachel stands by Mr. Barclay.)
Rachel. Will my mother get well soon, Sir, do you think?


Mr. Barclay. I hope so my dear: has she been ill long?


Rachel. Oh yes, Sir, a great while: all the winter she had a cough, but it is
gone; but she is so weak, and then she cannot eat bread and potatoes, as we do.
-- I bought her some coffee today, with the money I had from you, Sir. -- She
took some. -- I was so pleased! -- But my father frighted us sadly!


Mr. Barclay. Did you ever see him so before?


Rachel. No, Sir; he is often tired very much indeed, but not so bad. -- To be
sure, he has not been used to such hard work.


Mr. Barclay. What work then has he been used to, my child?


Rachel. Why, Sir, it is a great while ago, before George can remember, we
lived in a nice house, and had servants, and I had white frocks, and fine
people used to come and see us! -- But now the fine people don't come, Sir; why
don't they?


Mr. Barclay. Happy innocent* -- Thou know not how eagerly the great fly
from the unfortunate!

(Eleonora returns with a basket.)
Mr. Barclay. My dear! -- What, have you carried that basket through the heat?


Eleonora. No, Sir, I thought you would not be pleased, so I made John bring it
to the gate, but I would not let him come in for these people seem to have so
much feeling, I could not bear to bring an unnecessa^^^^ witness of their
distress.


Mr. Barclay, (embracing her.) My dear girl!


Eleonora. Rachel, see if your mother is asleep.

(Rachel goes into the inner room. Wilmot comes out.)
Wilmot. My poor Agnes can get no r^st.


Eleonora. I will go to her. -- I have brought some drops, which will compose
her spirits.

(She ^^kes cut of the basket a bottle of wine, two glasses, slices of cold
ham, and bread and cakes.)
Eleonora. Papa, will you eat something? -- Perhaps Mr. Wilmot will take a
glass of wine.


Wilmot, (aside.) Charming delicacy! -- How I feel that kindness!

(Eleonora goes into the inner room. Mr. Barclay and Wilmot sit at the table.
Rachel and George creep toward them. Mr. Barclay gives them cakes. They all
eat.)
Wilmot, (looking after Eleonora.)

Angelic charity! -- Not contented with furnishing the means of health, she
administers them herself, waiting with humility and sweetness on the poor and
wretched


Mr. Barclay. There is nothing extraordinary in that; (...) one know what it is
to be ill, and leave those who are so to the unfeeling attendance of servants,
or mercenary nurses?


Wilmot. No; you cannot. -- Warm and feeling, your hearts make the distresses
of others your own.


Mr. Barclay. That is no matter of wonder.


Wilmot. Oh! not to you. -- Goodness is to you too common to be wonderful. --
But to me, to me who have been rejected by the world, cast off by my relations,
such kindness is scarcely credible!


Mr. Barclay. Your lot seems to have been an hard one, but let it not make you
think ill of all mankind. -- There seems to be something uncommon in your story
and if the recital be not painful --


Wilmot. The recital, Sir, I thank God, will not be painful, for I have no
guilt of my own to relate.


Mr. Barclay. I dare engage it.


Wilmot. Perhaps, of some imprudence, you will not so easily acquit me. -- I
was born to a good estate; just after I came of age, my father died; soon
after, I married that dear woman you have seen. -- She was of good family, but
had no fortune; mine was sufficient for us both, but fond as I was of my Agnes,
desiring to procure for her every indulgence, I lived to the extent of my
income, and far beyond her wishes: for five years we lived happily, when a
distant relation of the person from whom my father had bought the estate,
pretending a fault in the title, laid claim to it; the cause was tried, and by
an artifice my chief witness kept out of court. I lost my cause, and was left
destitute; my relations excusing themselves on account of my marrying, as they
called it, imprudently, and my living expensively, refused me any assistance,
and with the rest of my friends, turned their back^ upon me.


Mr. Barclay. What cruel conduct!


Wilmot. One friend alone was left, who received us into his house, and would
have procured a re-hearing of our cause, but he died, and we were sent forth to
wander through the world. I hired this cottage, where, by the labor of my
hands, I have supported my wife, that dear consoling angel, who has never once
reproached me for the misery I have brought upon her, and our children; till
her sickness drove me almost to distraction and despair, from which Heaven sent
you this day to relieve me.


Mr. Barclay. Make yourself easy, I hope all will be well; our first care must
be to restore your wife. -- Is the person yet alive who was to have witnessed
in your cause?


Wilmot. He is.


Mr. Barclay. Very well, My dear Wilmot hear me, I am tolerably rich, I have
only one child, I will support you in this cause if, on enquiry, I find you are
likely to succeed, and I will only a^^ in return your promise to repay me when
you regain your estate.


Wilmot. Sir -- such amazing kindness to a stranger!


Mr. Barclay. No, Wilmot, not to a stranger. I knew your father well; he was my
senior at college. I have often heard of this cause as a most iniquitous
transaction, and I have no doubt of your success, so that all the favor I do
you is to advance you a little money; no mighty obligation!


Wilmot. Oh yes! -- My obligations to you are mighty, are not to be repaid! --
Best of men!


Mr. Barclay. Psha! there are thousands better.


Wilmot. Such amazing generosity!


Mr. Barclay. There is really no generosity in the matter. -- I am sure of my
security.


Wilmot. What, Sir! -- The word of a person you do not know*


Mr. Barclay. No, Wilmot, not of a person I do not know. -- I have seen enough
of you to convince me you are honest and grateful; what better security should
I desire?


Wilmot. I am overpowered! -- My children, bless your benefactor!


Rachel. Oh, Sir, will you make my father and mother well and happy?


George. And will you give my mother something better to eat than potatoes?


Wilmot. Oh yes, my children, he will save us all. -- Thank him then; learn to
love and serve him; keep about you -- never forget the form of this cottage;
and if, as I hope, we live to inhabit a better place, remember always who
rescued us from poverty!


Mr. Barclay. No more, no more; if you will think yourself obliged to me, in
return do me the favor not to thank me.

(Eleonora enters softly.)
Eleonora. Mr. Wilmot, your wife is asleep; she will be well, I da^e say -- and
you, how are you?


Wilmot. Oh, well, quite well! -- The blessing of Heaven accompanies you; all
must be well where you are.


Mr. Barclay. Wilmot think of what I have said to yo^. In the evening I will
send my carriage to bring you all to my house, where you shall remain, either
till your cause is gained, or, if that cannot be, till I can place you in some
way of life better suited to your birth. (To Eleonora.) My dear, Mr. Wilmot is
entitled to a very large fortune, which I hope to procure for him.


Eleonora. I am very glad of i^, but fortune cannot add to my respect for
people so worthy.


Wilmot. Angelic creature! -- How can I ever want --


Mr. Barclay. You forget my injunctions! -- I shall send for you -- be ready.
-- In the mean time; take care of yourselves.


Rachel. What, father, shall we ride in a coach?


Eleonora. Yes, my dear, often, every day, if you continue good: and, what is
better, you shall have a great many charming little books.


Rachel. Oh, how glad I shall be.


Mr. Barclay. Wilmot, Farewell!


Eleonora. Farewell, Mr. Wilmot. -- Good-bye, Rachel; we shall except you.


Wilmot. Every blessing attend you!


Rachel. Thank you, thank you.

(She kisses Eleonora's hand, who embraces her. -- Wilmot attends Mr. Barclay
to the door, and returns.)
Wilmot. Oh my God! -- How can I ever thank thee, for such amazing goodness! --
Heart broken, wearied, on the point of renouncing my dependence on thee; of
^eting thy laws at defiance; that moment have thou chosen to relieve and bless
me! -- Aweful and striking lesson! -- Shall I ever again despair, when I know
that the next hour to that of our greatest misery may bring with it comfort and
happiness! -- I hear my Agnes coming; let me meet and explain to her these
happy events!


Scene closes. The limits of the Drama not allowing of the events being
finished, it may perhaps be satisfactory to the reader to hear, that Mrs.
Wilmot recovered; and that Wilmot, gaining his cause, by Mr. Barclay's means,
was restored to affluence, and the two families formed a friendship, which
lasted during their lives.

The Village Wedding. Col^ Nesbit presenting a Wedding portion to the (...)


THE VILLAGE WEDDING.

A DRAMA.

IN ONE PART.

Blessed too is he whose evening ramble stray^
Where droop the sons of indigence and care;
His little gift their gladden'd eyes (...),
And (...) at small expense their ^ondest pray'^
^HENSTONE. BOSTON: PRINTED FOR W. SPOTSWOOD.

CHARACTERS.
Squire Aubrey, Proprietor of the Manor Colonel Nesbit, Lady Aubrey, Miss
Nesbit,
His Daughters. Robert, An old Peasant. Lucetta, His Daughter. Phillip, Married
to Lucetta. Peasants.
THE VILLAGE WEDDING.
SCENE, a Lawn before a Cottage. (Under the shade of some trees a table is
spread, with fruits, milk, and cider. Robert, and some old peasants, sit at
this table. Philip, Lucetta, and some young peasants, are dancing on the lawn.
Lucetta is dressed in white, with flowers, as a bride, Philip as a bridegroom.
Robert. AYE, marry neighbor, it does my heart good to see them, -- Look ye
there, I Will warrant ye as light as the best!


Old Peasant. Truly, neighbor Robert, Lucetta is a pretty girl; yes, yes, you
may well be proud of her. She is not only handsome, but good.


Robert. Ah, neighbor! -- She is the joy of my old heart! -- Had her mother
lived to see this day!

(He wipes his eyes.)
Old Peasant. Come cheerly, neighbor, don't let us disturb ourselves with sad
thoughts, we met to be merry. (Lucetta seeing her father look sad, (...) out of
the dance.)


Lucetta. Ah, father! -- What Is the matter? -- You are not ill?


Robert. No, no, my child, I am very well, and very happy.


Lucetta. Well, then! -- why look sad! -- on my wedding day too! -- Truly, I
will not excuse it!

(He smiles.)
Robert, (taking her in his arms.) My child, I do not weep for sorrow, but for
joy, thou art so good, and so happy.


Lucetta. Ah, my dear father, I owe both to you! -- but not a single tear must
you shed today. -- Ah, ha, here comes Philip; he thinks something is the
matter.

(She runs to Philip, gives him her hand, he leads her back to the dance.)
Old Peasant. Aye, aye, they are happy enough! -- Well, they be a sweet couple.


Old Woman. As to Lucetta, I must say, I don't know her equal, nor ever did,
except my poor daughter, that is gone. -- Marry neighbor Robert, I have reason
to love your girl; how kind she was to me, when my poor daughter lay sick. --
Don't grieve so, neighbor Martha, she would say, pray don't; I Will do all I can
to fill your daughter's place. -- Ah, and so she has; she tended me when I was
sick; she works for me, now my eye-fight fails! Ah, marry, I love her as if she
was my own!


Second Old Woman. Then she is so kind to the children; my little
grand-daughters run when they see her coming -- here is Lucetta, they say,
here is Lucetta; truly, it is a holiday to see her?


Robert. Ah, it does my heart good, to hear her praises! -- What a blessed
thing it is to have every body's good word!


Old Peasant. Aye, Robert, that is the honest man's reward, to be well thought
of himself, and leave a good name to his children!


Robert. True, neighbor, true; but look, here is gentlefolk Marry, it is our
young 'Squire, and his bride.


Old Woman. Yes, and that is my Lady's father, and her sister. -- Mercy! how
handsome they be!


Enter 'Squire and Lady Aubrey, Colonel and Miss Nesbit. Lady Aubrey. What a
charming scene! -- How happy these good people seem!


Colonel Nesbit. This appears to be a wedding.


Miss Nesbit. Ah, that is the bride! -- What a pretty creature, and how neat.


'Squire Aubrey. That young man is the bridegroom, I fancy; how happy he looks!


Colonel Nesbit. Ah! -- I see the bride's father!


Lady Aubrey. Where, Sir?


Colonel Nesbit. The old peasant, seated under the shade of those trees, and
surrounded by his neighbors. -- I know him by the joy, the happiness of his
looks! -- yes, I am well acquainted with the sweet transports of beholding;
daughter happily married.


Lady Aubrey, (kissing his hand.) Ah, my dear father, your, heart has led you
to him.

(They advance; the old people rise up.)
'Squire Aubrey. Keep your seats, my good friends. -- We are willing to share
with you, but not to interrupt this happy scene.


Robert. Will Not your Honor and my good Lady, please to sit down?


'Squire Aubrey. No, thank you, my old friend, we will stand nearer the
dancers; I love to see them.


Lady Aubrey. We shall go away, if we interrupt you good people; pray take your
seats again.


Robert. Thank your good Ladyship.

('Squire Aubrey, Lady Aubrey, and Miss Nesbit, walk toward the dancers.)
Colonel Nesbit. My honest friends, with your leave, I shall sit with you. --
We will leave the young folks to themselves; we old ones can but look on now,
though some years ago we could have danced with the best of them.


Robert. Your Honor is all goodness.

(He gives a chair. Col. Nesbit sits down, the Peasants seem to hesitate.)
Colonel Nesbit. Come, come, sit down all of you; I insist upon it.

(They sit, Robert and the Colonel a little apart from the rest.)
Colonel Nesbit. So, my good friend, this is a wedding, is it?


Robert. Yes, your Honor; and I pray God it may prove a happy one.


Colonel Nesbit. I don't doubt it. -- That is the bride, I suppose; a pretty
girl, truly. -- I must drink to her health.


Robert. Sir, you do her honor.


Colonel Nesbit. I need not to be told she is your daughter. I read in your
face how much you are concerned in this affair.


Robert. Ah, Sir, it is an affair of consequence, indeed! -- The marrying an
only and dear child, is no light matter.


Colonel Nesbit. Most surely not; and, I dare say, you have taken care to marry
her well.


Robert. Yes, your Honor, well; I hope well. Philip is a worthy, good young
man. -- He has been brought up in this village; I have known him ever since he
was half the height of my stick, as I may say. -- A good tempered lad. --
"Neighbor, shall I do this for you; shall I do that. -- Neighbor, I am going
to market; can I do any thing for you?" All that makes one love a lad.


Colonel Nesbit. No doubt.


Robert. At last, Sir, I began to find out he liked my daughter. -- That made
me think a little. -- Lucetta, they say, is pretty. -- I know she is good: and
farmer Thomas, who is main rich, had made her an offer, but the girl did not
like him. -- Marry, I cannot say he is one of the best. -- But I tire your
Honor.


Colonel Nesbit. Not at all, my friend, not at all, I take pleasu^^ in hearing
you.


Robert. Your Honor is very kind. -- To be sure, Philip is poor; and I cannot
give my girl much: it is hard, your Honor, to fear one shall live to see one's
children want! -- But then, I bethought me that Philip is an industrious lad;
and Lucetta knows how to manage very prettily. -- "Father, (said Philip) if you
give me Lucetta, don't fear while I have strength but we shall do very well. --
I Will work for her while I can, and when I can work no longer, I hope God will
take care of us." What could I say, your Honor? I could not refuse him, and so
this morning they were married.


Colonel Nesbit. You have done very right, my friend, and this must be a happy
day to you.


Robert. Ah, Sir, it is a happy day! -- But yet not without its cares. -- I
cannot think of the future without some fear! -- But I rely on Providence, and
hope it will support a virtuous young couple, who will not spend their days in
idleness.


Colonel Nesbit. Good old man! -- you need fear nothing. -- Hear me, my friend!
-- I am a father myself; I have lately experienced what it is to marry away a
daughter, dearer, far dearer than my life. -- I know the cares, the anxieties
of a father for the happiness of his child; but I cannot endure the idea of
your suffering a care which I can remove so easily. -- My good friend, I cannot
ensure your child's future happiness; but, at least, I can contribute to it,
and to your case, by removing your fears of future poverty for her. Happily, as
I have married my daughter with wealth beyond her wants or wishes, I cannot
permit a man, a father like myself, to struggle with a fear so painful, as that
of his daughter's future subsistence. (He takes out his pocketbook.) My good
friend take these notes; this is worth an hundred pounds, this is worth fifty;
the sum they will produce will sufficiently support you in your old age, and
your children when death obliges you to quit them.


Robert. But, your Honor -- what -- I do not understand.


Colonel Nesbit. My good old man, these notes are yours. -- Do me the favor to
accept them.


Robert. Oh Heavens! -- What goodness! -- Is this possible! -- Surely I dream!


Colonel Nesbit. Ah, virtuous old man, let us not think a common act of
kindness so extraordinary as to disbelieve its reality!


Robert. Ah, Sir! -- a common act!


Colonel Nesbit. Let us say no more of it! -- The notes are yours; and believe
me. I feel more plea^^^e in giving than you do in receiving them. -- You will,
perhaps, choose to purchase a little farm; which may descend to your children's
children


Robert. Ah, yes, Sir, and they shall learn to bless your name, to honor your
goodness! -- In spring, when they see the opening blossoms; in autumn, when
they gather in harvest; they shall, next to their God, love and bless your name.


Colonel Nesbit. My good old friend! -- let me not hear any more of this. -- I
wish not to draw observation.

('Squire and Lady Aubrey, Miss Nesbit, and Lucetta, come toward them.)
Lady Aubrey. What is the matter, my dear Sir? -- you seem affected.


Lucetta. Father, what is the matter -- I saw you change color.


Robert. Yes, my child! -- Come hither, Lucetta -- all my cares for thee are at
an end! -- His Honor! -- Oh, best of men?


Miss Nesbit. What does all this mean?


Lady Aubrey. Tell us, my dear Sir -- explain the cause of this good man's
emotion.


Colonel Nesbit. Nothing, my children: nothing my friend.


Robert. Ah, Sir, pardon me; if I disobey you. Look here, my good Sir* see
(...) -- His Honor has most liberally blessed me! (He shows the notes.)


Lady Aubrey. Ah, my dear father, what goodness!


Colonel Nesbit. Dear Julia! -- Blessed as I am in my children, happy as I feel
in your marriage, could I bear to see a father full of care, which I could so
easily relieve?

(Lady Aubrey throws herself into his arms, while Miss Nesbit kisses his hand.)
Lady Aubrey. My father, how my heart thanks you!


Colonel Nesbit. Silly girls! -- What is there in all this to excite surprise?


'Squire Aubrey. No, my dear Sir, acts of goodness are with you too common to
excite surprise; but I am angry with you.


Lady Aubrey. How!


'Squire Aubrey. Yes, my dear Julia your father has invaded ou^ rights. -- We
ought to assist and encourage such of our tenants as are deserving. -- My good
Robert well merits our attention, and your father shall not rob us of the
pleasure of assisting him.


Lady Aubrey. I am quite of your opinion.


Colonel Nesbit. So, so, I am to be chid amongst you, it seems.


'Squire Aubrey. Not if you will permit us to join your benevolent attentions.


Colonel Nesbit. Oh, with all my heart.

(During this conversation, Robert, Philip, and Lucetta, with great marks of
pleasure and surprise, have been looking at the notes, and talking apart.)
'Squire Aubrey. Come hither, my friends?


Robert. Yes, please your Honor*

(They advance.)
'Squire Aubrey. My good Robert I remember you many years, and from that
remembrance, as well as the general report, I know you to be a worthy
industrious man. -- Had I been earlier at the Park, I should have known of this
wedding before hand, and I should have thought it my duty to give you something
toward your daughter's portion. -- It is not yet too late. -- Therefore, I
promise you half a dozen sheep, two cows, two pigs, a stock of poultry,
provided you make Lucetta the manager of your farm-yard.


Robert. Oh Heavens! -- I am over powered.


'Squire Aubrey. As to you, Philip, when a man is married, he ought to have a
house for his wife; you shall therefore have the tenement next to Robert's with
the field behind it; for the first year it shall be (...)-free, after which we
will agree on such a rent as you will and yourself able to pay, and that
because I do not desire to set you above the necessity of being industrious.


Robert. Thank you, my Lord, for that, more than all the rest.


Philip. Oh, my Lord! -- I cannot thank you as I ought. (He (...) to Lucetta,
takes her by the hand and says) thank God, Lucetta, I have a home for the^. --
Ah, my dear, help me to thank our benevolent landlord.

(They go toward 'Squire Aubrey, and attempt to throw themselves at his feet;
he prevents them.)
Lady Aubrey, (wiping her eyes.) See, sister, how malicious they are! -- They
want to prevent our having a share in their pleasure! -- But it remains for us,
my pretty Lucetta, to furnish your house, and to give you a stock of groceries.


Miss Nesbit. You are right, sister; and of that satisfaction we will not be
deprived.


Lucetta, (throwing herself at Lady Aubrey's feet, and kissing her hand.)

Forgive my boldness, my Lady, I can only thank you by my tears!

(Lady Aubrey raises and embraces her.)
Robert, (lifting up his hands and eyes.)

Oh, my God! these are thy blessings, and I thank thee with sincerity and
truth! beseeching thee to render my benefactors as happy during life as I am at
this moment!


Colonel Nesbit. Good old man, we are debtors to you for the kindness of your
prayers! -- But we have interrupted your amusements; we will depart.


'Squire Aubrey Let us see you at the Park, to dinner, tomorrow.


Lady Aubrey. Ah, Laura, I wish we could teach some of our city friends how
much more exquisite is the pleasure derived from an evening like this, than
from being shut up in a room with wax-lights and cards, or even in the Assembly
or Playhouse.


'Squire Aubrey. Farewell, my good friends, continue your mirth.


Robert. Our blessings attend your Honors.

Lucetta and Philip.
Heartily, indeed!

Lady Aubrey. Farewell, Lucetta!

(They go out, and after a dance of the Peasants, the Scene closes.)
THE Mocking Bird's Nest.
A DIALOGUE.
IT being the season when the Spring Vacation took place at school, which
interval Mrs. Woodfield embraced for enjoying with her little family the
delights of a rural retreat. The beauty of the country daily increased; the
spring was mild and forward. Her little boys William and Thomas had left school
about ten days.

Their sisters and their little female kinsfolk were now employed for some
hours every morning in assisting to repair the children's linen, or making up
new against their return to school, after the vacation.

The first day after their arrival, the boys amused themselves by walking
through the woods, which were already in leaf. The reluctant oak and the timid
ash, no longer resisting the warmth of the sun, were rapidly unfolding their
fresh leaves. The hedges and underwood were every where green and afforded
concealment and shelter to an infinite number of birds, now busy in building
their nests.

In the course of their walk, little Thomas, who had wandered on before, came
running back out of breath, without his hat, which he held in his hand, and in
which, with delight sparkling in his eyes, he showed his brother a nest of
young unfledged birds.

Thomas. Oh, William! see my dear William, what a nest of birds! The boys
there, that have taken them, say they are mocking-birds. Mamma, tell me if I
may buy them? They ask only twenty-five cents for them. I will give half of
them to William.


William. Mamma, are they mocking birds? May we have them?


Mrs. Woodfield. Indeed, I am afraid they are mocking birds: and they are so
tender, that you will never be able to raise them, so that to take them seems
to be wanton cruelty.


William. But mamma, these are taken already; and I am sure, if they are the
tenderest little things in the world, my sister Matilda will nurse them up.
Don't you remember how she nursed the young yellow-birds, which the cat threw
down from the peach tree in the garden?


Mrs. Woodfield. Poor, little, unfortunate creatures! see how they pant! I have
no other objection to your buying them, my dear William, than as I think it
encourages idle boys to continue their cruel robberies on the birds. But,
however, as these poor mocking birds are prisoners, I believe we may rescue
them out of worse hands, by taking them into ours. Can the boys there tell you
where they took them from; perhaps, after they are out of sight, we may be able
to put them back into the tree where they were hatched.

(The two boys go, though with some reluctance, and ask the bird-sellers to
show them the place.)
Thomas. (returning to his mother.) Mamma, the boys say they got this nest out
of a cherry-tree, quite in the very middle of the wood, almost a mile off; and
they don't believe they can find the place for ever so much.


Mrs. Woodfield. Well, my loves, then pay for your purchase, and we will do the
best we can with it. Your luckless little captives will soon be hungry, and we
shall find nothing to give them here; therefore, I would have you Jane, with
your two uncles, go home, and find a secure cage for your mocking birds, which
must still, however, remain in the nest; and let your maid Rachael, assist you
in feeding them, as she is fond of such things, and understands something of
them. Matilda, Eliza, and I, shall continue our walk, as I have some business
with a woman at the village who is spinning for me.

(The children go back to the house.
Eliza. See how carefully little Thomas steps with his treasure.


Mrs. Woodfield. He will be an excellent nurse to them, and so will William, as
far as their judgment goes; but these unfortunate objects of childish
tenderness are not unfrequently killed by kindness. Neither of my little
fellows have that disposition to cruelty which is said to be inherent in human
nature, and which I have sometimes thought really is so, however degrading the
idea may be.


Matilda. I am sure I have thought so, very often, when I have seen how cruel
some people are to animals.


Mrs. Woodfield. It is indeed, not only humiliating, but it is to my feelings
so distressing, that I seldom have passed through any great towns, without
seeing some instance of human cruelty and animal suffering that has dwelt upon
my mind, and affected my spirits for the rest of the day.


Matilda. And is it impossible to punish such horrid monsters?


Mrs. Woodfield. The sufferings of these miserable victims of human barbarity
have not been, and therefore, I suppose, cannot be sufficiently attended to by
the legislature. An hackney-coach-man may whip his galled and tired horse with
impunity, though the exhausted animal has not strength to execute the task his
brutal driver demands of him; for what positive law is there against a man's
whipping his horses? or how shall his management of them be regulated. Were I a
man, I am persuaded I should turn knight errant in defense of the mere animal,
against what are improperly called reasonable beings. How beautifully does the
inimitable COWPER treat this subject! Speaking of the domestic animal dependant
on man, he says, -- They prove too often at how dear a rate
He fells protection. Witness at his foot
The Spaniel dying for some venial fault,
Under dissection of the knotted scourge:
Witness the patient ox, with stripes and yells
Driven to the slaughter, goaded, as he runs,
To madness; while the savage at his heels
Laughs at the frantic sufferer's ^ury spent
Upon the guiltless passenger overthrown.
He, too, is witness, noblest of the train
That wait on man, the fleet performing horse
With unsuspecting readiness he takes
His murderer on his back; and pushed all day,
With bleeding sides, and flanks that heave for life,
To the far distant goal arrives -- and dies.
Does LAW, so jealous in the cause of man,
Denounce no loom on the delinquent? -- None.
And alas! this is one of those evils that satire, excellent and just even as
this is, can do but little to correct; for, as some periodical work, (I think
the World,) in one of its essays, observes, coachmen, draymen, cartmen, and
drovers, do not read essays; yet I have often fancied that something might be
done to soften the cruel hearts of the lower classes of people, if any person
of abilities would adopt remonstrances to their comprehension, and teach them
to fear hereafter such punishments as they now inflict, in dreadful retaliation.

They were by this time arrived at the village, whose few straggling houses
edged the extensive wood, and in a neat cottage found a decently dressed woman,
whose husband was a farmer, and who was employed by Mrs. Woodfield to spin for
her. She desired the woman to bring out some flax in its raw state; described
the process of making it into tow, fit for spinning, and then made each of the
girls spin a thread. Not far from thence, in the same village, was a loom; they
there saw it woven into sheeting and other coarse linen. Their walk home was
designedly varied. Mrs. Woodfield led them across a rustic bridge, and along
the banks of a rapid stream that turned a paper-mill, into which they entered,
and saw the whole operation of making several kinds of paper. She then
explained to them the materials and means by which it was made; and bade them
carry their imagination back, from the stalk of the flax they had seen, bearing
a blue and simple flower trembling on its slender summit, through all its
changes and modifications till it contributes to make a sheet of paper.

This speculation amused them for the rest of their walk. On their arrival at
home, Matilda and Eliza, were agreeably surprised by a card they found upon
their table, from a gentleman of their acquaintance, inviting the whole family
to one of Mr. Duport's much admired Fancy Balls.

Pleasure danced in the eyes of Matilda, when she found Mrs. Woodfield intended
to return an answer that they would accept this invitation. Nor was Eliza much
less delighted. An immediate consultation was held as to the arrangement
necessary; and Mrs. Woodfield, leaving them to enjoy this antepast of pleasure,
(all that life's deception frequently allow as to taste, and which is at their
ages so keenly tasted,) went to inspect the little menagerie of the three
younger children, lately increased by their mocking birds, about which they
were anxiously employed. It was more necessary to repress their ill-judged
solicitude, than to reprove them for carelessness of their little charge. But
desirous of teaching them to reflect, she made use of the present opportunity;
when the eldest of the two boys said, "Mamma, I do not believe these little
birds would be more comfortable if they were with their own mother."


Mrs. Woodfield. Admitting it to be so, my dear William (though I greatly fear
it is not the fact) pray tell me what you think is the opinion of their own
mother.


William. Perhaps she may be a little sorry, when she comes back and finds the
nest gone.


Mrs. Woodfield. William! how do you think I should feel, if, on my return from
a journey, where I had been to procure money to pay for the subsistence of my
children, I found my house vacant; and that some tyrant, whom I could not
pursue or punish, had taken them from me, and condemned them to imprisonment or
death? Tell me, William; and do you, Thomas, tell me, how do you think your
mamma would feel?


William. (looking earnestly and sorrowful) Certainly mamma, you would cry, and
be very unhappy.


Mrs. Woodfield. Just so must the birds' mother feel, when she returns and
finds the vacant bough from which her nest has been torn. But, to impress this
more forcibly on your memory, William, you shall learn by rote, and write these
lines in your copy-book: Often when returning with her loaded (...)
The astonished mother finds a vacant nest,
By the hard hands of unrelenting clowns
Robbed; to the ground the vain provision falls;
Her pinions ruffle, and, low drooping, scarce
Can bear the mourner to the poplar shade.



Thomas (with tears starting in his eyes.) Mamma, if I had thought about what
the old bird must feel, I would have made the boys I bought them of, put the
nest back again.


Mrs. Woodfield. If you had done so, my dear little boy, it would hardly, in
this case, have answered your humane intention; for those idle boys, as soon as
you are out of sight, would have taken the nest again, and have sold the poor
birds to some other person. What I mean is, not only to induce you to take care
of them, since they now depend on you, but to engage you, in every case, to put
yourself in the place of whatever creature you are about to injure or oppress;
that you may acquire a habit of saying to yourself, How should I like to be
treated thus? What should I suffer, if I were in the place of the cat we are
wantonly hunting with our terriers? of the robbins which we are wounding with
our arrows? of the ducks we are setting the spaniels at? Whoever learns early
in life to make these reflections, will never have a reproach to make himself on
the score of humanity, either toward the animal, or the human species.


William. But, mamma, grown people hunt, and shoot, and fish, and do not seem
to think there is any cruelty in it!


Mrs. Woodfield. So far as it becomes necessary to kill for our support, the
animals Providence has allotted for us, there is nothing criminal in it; but to
prolong their tortures is highly so, or want only to destroy any living
creatures that are innoxious. For tomorrow's task, Thomas shall write out for
me these lines, on the subject of inferior animals, and even reptiles and
insects: -- If man's convenience, health.
Or safety interfere, his rights and claims
Are paramount, and must extinguish theirs;
Else they are all, the meanest things that are,
As free to live and to enjoy that life,
As God was free to form them at the first,
Who in his sovereign wisdom made them all*
Ye, therefore, who love mercy, teach your sons to love it too. --
And now, my dear boys, you must release your niece Jane, for she is going out
tomorrow evening, and I fancy has some little preparation to make. My dear
Jane, follow me.


SCENE, A room above stairs -- MATILDA and ELIZA consulting about their Dress.
Matilda. I dare say I shall look is horribly old-fashioned as possible; it is
five months since I have seen any creature who could tell me what they wear.


Mrs. Woodfield. (entering) "What they wear!" there is no term in the whole
cant of frivolity that is half so disgusting to me as that* Who are they, my
dear Matilda, to whose mode of dress you are determined to pay such obsequious
deference?


Matilda (confused). Nay, ma'am, I mean people that -- people that are in the
world you know -- that is -- people -- in short....


Mrs. Woodfield. That are not twaddles and quizzes, and grubs and goodies, and
half an hundred other odd names, that you give to the folks you usually meet
with in the country. Tell me now, Matilda, if it would not have afforded you
great pleasure, had you known of this ball soon enough, to have written s^ily
to your fashionable friend, Miss Freemantle, to have sent you some very
whimsical dress, with a new name, such as you imagine, having never been seen
in this country, would make people stare?


Matilda. I should not have ventured to have done it without your leave.


Mrs. Woodfield. But, however, it would have given you pleasure.


Matilda. Certainly; I should not like to appear any where but properly
dressed, if I could help it.


Mrs. Woodfield. And after all, what is so proper for a young person of your
age, as perfect simplicity and neatness? You are still in mourning, and would
not, I hope* have thrown it off an hour sooner on account of this public ball.


Matilda. But all I am afraid of is, that if one is not a little fashionable,
one looks vulgar.


Mrs. Woodfield. It is infinitely more vulgar to appear at such an assembly
over-drest. Believe me, my dear, mere dress contributes nothing to that look of
elegance, or, if you will, of superiority, that you seem so jealous of. You
will be convinced of this, if you should see tomorrow evening, as you probably
will, a lady, named Scarfton, who is the first and finest at all our public
balls; she is the wife of a man in trade of considerable credit, who is often
to Great Britain, as he is engaged in business there. This woman, who is
extremely homely, is the greatest adept in fashions I ever saw. She runs about
for a week before the commencement of the public assemblies, from milliner to
milliner, to see other ladies' clothes, and then imagines something like the
most remarkable, with which to induce some attention toward her. Her clothes
are made up in every variety of extravagant fashion, and each habiliment has
some outlandish name that she cannot even pronounce. Without the least regard
to proportion or propriety, she dressess out her unfortunate person in the
wildest mode of the wildest girl of fashion, and the effect is, that she
creates envy in the weak, and pity in the wise; and, while she thinks herself
on the very pinnacle of politeness and elegance, I see some look upon her as a
mad woman, and all consider her as bordering on insanity. Have you any
ambition, Matilda, to share, with such a woman as Mrs. Scarfton, the state of
public amazement?


Matilda. Dear ma'am, can you suppose I have?


Mrs. Woodfield. Let us hear no more, then of wishes to know what they ^ear. My
mantua-maker, who makes clothes for such as are esteemed fashionable, often
forces me to smile, by advising me to have my gown made so and so, assuring me
they wear them so: and when I ask who^ she simperingly informs me, that Miss
K^^ty Doeskin, daughter of Mr. Doeskin, an eminent leather dresser, and Miss
Clutterbucks, daughter of Mr. Clutterbucks, green-grocer and dealer, have had
new dresses from London, "quite in taste," which they have given me leave to
look at.


Such are the histories of fashions. The belles, who derive their information
from the Miss Doeskins and the Miss Clutterbucks, will take the lead in
elegance, till Mrs. Scarfton's husband arrives next from London, then the ton
of articles a la Does^ins and Clutterbucks, will be entirely superseded by the
knowledge acquired by the happier few, who, are admitted (...) contempla^e the
superior elegance of the lady's of that house.

Do you think, Matilda, such ^hemeron triumphs as these, are worth a moment's
thought? I am far, however, from wishing you entirely to decline appearing in
what is called in the fashion; such affection would be as ridiculous on one
hand, as running into its wildest excesses is on the other. A young woman
should dress as the persons of her age dress, but without sacrificing decency,
common sense, or proportion. Nothing, perhaps, is a more glaring absurdity,
among all the weaknesses women are charged with, than the undistinguishing
avidity with which women of all ranks, ages and figures, run into modes of
d^^ss that neither suits the person or pockets of all, and probably disfigures
five out of six. Some slender girl of fashion imagines, in the caprice of
imputed perfections, (...) manner of dressing which shall show every ^ne of
those perfections. It succeeds; the men compliment, the Misses envy, and the
mob wonder. In a few days, the fat red-faced matron of fifty; the dwarfish
Miss, who has owed her little consequence to her heels and her head; the round
snug damsel, as thick as she is long; and the genteel young lady, that has
lived on vinegar till she is reduced to a study for an anatomist: all follow
the fashion: but hardly are they established in it, before some other, more
preposterous succeeds; and the former, Like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Leaves not a wreck behind;
unless it be in that description of persons who, in Shakespeare's time were
called,

The velvet guards, and Sunday citizens.

I have often thought, that if were possible to have a set of dolls dressed in
the fashions of the last two hundred years, it would be an amusing spectacle,
and not without its use, as a lesson to human vanity. The modes are now
forgotten, and the names of the triflers who invented them are forgotten too;
the only memorial that remains of either exists, perhaps, in some book, where
they are accidentally alluded to, and which the commentary of the antiquarian
and the critic may have explained.

It should be a lesson to the spangled butterfly of the passing day, and it
should teach her the superiority of Intellect over Beauty, when she reflects,
that the charms of so many lovely women live now only in the memory of mankind
by the poets who have celebrated their names. Even the beautiful Lady Coventry
is obliged to Mason for telling us what she was. "The liquid luster of her
eyes," is thought of but faintly by those who read of the incomparably
fascinating charms that graced her person. There is a s^nnet of Drayton's
addressed to a lady, whose merit he glories in being able to rescue from (...),
which is apposite to this topic. It is not so polished as modern poetry; but is
highly expressive of his opinion of the power of poesy, and of those objects of
transient admiration, of whom it has been said, THEY had no POET and THEY died.

DRAYTON'S SIXTH SONNET.
How many foolish, paltry, painted things,
That now in coaches trouble every street,
Shall be forgotten -- whom no poet sings
Ever they are well wrapped in their winding sheet;
But (...) to t^^^ eternity shall give,
When nothing else remains of those days,
And queens hereafter shall be glad to live
Upon the alms of my super^^uous praise.
Virgins and matrons, reading thus my rhymes.
Shall be so much delighted with (...).
That they shall grieve they lived not in these times,
To have seen thee, their sexes greatest glory.
For thou shall soar above the vulgar throng,
And still survive in my immortal Song*
THE END.

