THE PRINCIPLE OF UNIVERSAL SALVATION EXAMINED AND TRIED BY THE LAW AND
TESTIMONY. AND FOUND TO BE A DIRECT CONTRADICTION TO THE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST AND
HIS INSPIRED WITNESSES. In an Epistle to a Friend.

By SAMUEL SHEPARD, PREACHER OF THE GOSPEL.

PRINTED AT EXETER, BY HENRY RANLET, FOR THE AUTHOR. M, DCC, XCVIII.

THE PRINCIPLE OF UNIVERSAL SALVATION EXAMINED AND TRIED. IN AN EPISTLE TO A
FRIEND.
DEAR SIR,
As you have appeared for many years past, by your profession, to be sound in
the faith, you have been near to me by long acquaintance, and a number of your
brethren. Therefore I feel disposed (learning by your con^^^^^ ^^^^^etime past,
that you have embraced the prin^^^^ (...) ^^iversal and final salvation of all
men) to send you, and those that join with you, the following Epistle.

You remember I told you (...) our conversation, I expected some ministers, of
(...) principles ^^ght be tempted, in a strait, to use certain (...) of
^^^^are, too much as I have heard reported of lawyers using points of law, viz.
To try to make the jury (...) it meant what they wanted it to mean, to answer
their favorite purposes. But I observed that after the jury had found by law
and evidence that a criminal was verily guilty, and delivered their verdict
that he must be punished with death, it would be great folly for any lawyer to
try to make the court believe, the jury did not mean the criminal should die,
but be cleared and made free. Agreeable to the forementioned simile, I observed
that the LORD JESUS had declared his verdict how he should fare with the
nations of the earth, at the day of judgment, according as they had believed
and obeyed the gospel, or not. By a parable of a shepherd, having a large
flock, consisting of sheep and goats, dividing them apart, the sheep from the
goats, Math.chapterxxv. The close of CHRIST's verdict expressly says, the nations,
viz. who had not fed and clothed him, etc. should go away into everlasting
punishment; but the righteous into life eternal. I asked you what you
understood the nations on the left hand could mean, if it was not the souls and
bodies of the wicked, false professors, hypocrites, and disobeyers of the
gospel, risen from the dead to the judgment, to receive their just punishment,
or to the same purport. -- You said they meant mens' lusts and sins; and added,
you could make out by scripture, if I understood you, that our lusts and sins
were called men, women, and children. I was sure I had never read any such
scriptures. Therefore concluded if it was made so to appear, it must be done by
human and mystical reasonings, or casting of figures, which tends to deceive
the mind; I mean strange comments upon obscure texts of scripture.

However your mind is bewildered. I expect I shall produce demonstrative
evidence to the unprejudiced, by a fair comparison of express scriptures, and
undeniable consequences drawn from express scriptures, that you and all others
are deceived, who believe and testify that Cain and all the old sinners before
the flood, Pharaoh and his magicians, together with those Isaiah speaks of,
that should be brought down to hell, also the strong among the mighty, that
should speak out of the midst of hell, Ezekiel. chapter xxxii. Likewise the reprobate
Pharisees, and Judas, a devil, as CHRIST declares he was, and all whoremongers,
fornicators, covetous, liars, and abominable idolatous, who have died in their
sins and appeared to their exit, (...) of the cross of CHRIST; with their
brethren, Gog and Magog. I say, that you, and all others who hold the
aforementioned sinners (so expressly condemned by GOD and all his inspired
witnesses) are saved, you are deceived in a matter of great importance; and I
cannot account for it, except it is bro't about by the spirit of sorcery, which
St. Paul mentions in Gal. chap. iii. if I understand him, he represents the
false teachers as spiritual sorcerors, and their doctrine, spiritual
witchcraft. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not
obey the truth, etc. As sorcerors, by deluding the senses, make persons believe
they see that which they truly see not; so the spirit of error, by casting a
mist of (...) reason before the understanding, deludes it, and makes the person
believe that to be truth, which, in fact, is not. Sorcerors make use of dark
and unintelligible words, and seem to be assisted beyond their own ability, in
their performances. So, erroneous spirits will generally quote the most dark
and obscure figures and texts of scripture in the Prophets, and the
revelations, whose meaning is difficult, particularly to describe, and seem to
be strangely assisted in giving a meaning to them, to answer their favorite
purposes. These things I have observed, to my astonishment, among the Shakers,
and some deluded persons in the vicinity of Hampstead, some years past. The
LORD ^^lp all Christians, who think they stand, to take heed lest they fall.

Having made this introduction, I proceed to consider your answer of what is
the meaning of the nations on the left hand, at the judgment-day; which you say
are lusts and sins, and not their souls or persons. It looks to me, to talk of
the existence and punishment, pain and suffering of sins, lusts, and evil
principles in men, when separated from those who have transgressed the law of
GOD; for sin is the transgression of law, and their persons made happy, who
have sinned, is such a perfect contradiction to express scripture, to sound
reason, and so regupnant to common (...), it is difficult to conceive how any
honest man can be satisfied with such a meaning, or ever believe what himself
advances, allowing him to have his senses. How can we conceive that GOD or men
could imprison the crime of wilful murder, try it, and ^^ng it, and at the same
time let the person of the murderer be free from imprisonment, condemnation,
and death? What would a notorious thief care, if he was proved ever so guilty
of the greatest theft, if the judge would only condemn the crime, but justify
the person of the thief; and comfort him with the promise that he should never
feel a whip, nor hang in a halter, if he should steal all the property of the
country in which he lived? How would it sound to reason or common sense to hear
the judge say, Cursed be your thievish lust, for it is cruel; send it into
everlasting punishment: Cursed be your wicked actions, send them into
everlasting burnings. How can a mortal judge, or the judge of quick and dead,
punish a crime separate from the criminal? Have mere crimes got eyes to weep,
or teeth to gnash with? For, among those nations there is to be weeping,
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, which is impossible for mere crimes to perform.

Further, if you, by your comments on figures, can make out that sins or lusts
are called men, women, and children, as you imagine, I would ask you if they
are called virgins, or slothful servants, or if mere crimes can cry, LORD,
LORD, open to us, or if they can do wonderful works in CHRIST's name? All these
names and works were among the left hand nations, and if you cannot make out
that lusts and sins bear all the aforementioned names, and can perform said
wonderful works, separate from the souls and bodies of rational persons, your
ideas are false and altogether imaginary; and appear a flat contradiction, both
to the united testimony of the scriptures, and the nature and reason of things.
For it is evident from the words that was declared from the unfeigned lips of
our LORD and judge, Mat. chap. xxv. that the slothful servants and foolish
virgins were the souls and risen bodies of hypocrites and false professors,
brought to judgment; which CHRIST, in the 5th chapter of John, calls the
resurrection of damnation.

Further, consider, Sir, another scriptural idea. St. Peter calls the day of
judgment, a time of refreshing to all that belong to the new covenant, Acts
iii. 10. You hold, that all the persons in the black catalogue, aforenamed,
belong to the new covenant: St. Paul says, Heb. chap. viii. that such as belong
to the new covenant, their sins and iniquities GOD will remember no more. And
Peter speaks of their sins being blotted out, forecited Acts chapter iii. How is it
possible their sins can be remembered at the judgment, be publicly tried and
condemned to everlasting punishment, if all the human family belong to the
right hand of CHRIST, as children of the new covenant? Can CHRIST and the
Apostles say, and unsay, about the same important point? One time declare their
sins shall not be remembered, but be blotted out, another time bring them into
everlasting remembrance, and condemn them to everlasting punishment? Dear Sir,
if you have any reason remaining in you, pause and see what contradictions and
inconsistencies you have fell into in your mind, and behold how great is that
darkness in you, which you call light.

Thus I have demonstrated, both from the words of CHRIST, and his Apostles, and
from the nature and reason of things, that the nations on the left hand of
CHRIST, spoken of, Matt. chap. xxv. cannot mean lusts and sins. -- Some of your
denomination, being sensible, I conceive, of the absurdity of your ideas, say,
that the nations on the left hand of CHRIST, mean devils.

I acknowledge such an interpretation does not shock common sense, so much as
the aforementioned, because devils are capable of punishment, and sins are not
separate from the sinner; yet it flatly contradicts every threatening, expressed
in the word of GOD, respecting the matter. For it is wicked men are threatened
with punishment for their sins, Mat. chapter xxv. not devils. CHRIST says the
nations of the earth shall be divided, some on the right hand, and some on the
left. Are the devils called the nations of the earth? no, it is a name not
given them any where in the scriptures, they are the legion of hell. Are devils
called to feed and cloth CHRIST's members? no, they are not under such a law,
neither are capable of so doing -- But the aforenamed nations, on CHRIST's left
hand, were sent into everlasting punishment, for not feeding and clothing
CHRIST, viz. in his members. Hence it is as evident as words can make it, from
CHRIST's own account, and the Apostles testimonies, the nations on the left
hand, Mat. chapter xxv. consists of the souls and risen bodies of the families of
Adam, and they must go into everlasting punishment, as sure as the sentence
passed upon them, by the judge of quick and dead, is unalterable.

If what I have written does not convince you, will you believe, if I can
produce the express testimony of JESUS CHRIST; and the wise Solomon, and the
learned and inspired Paul's testimonies, that instead of sins and lusts of
wicked men, it is their souls must be punished and lost to all happiness. If
these three witnesses are sufficient to gain your credit, and are worthy to be
believed, I will produce them respecting the matter. That the LORD who spoke to
Moses, was the LORD JESUS, I expect you dare not deny. He says, respecting
certain persons, who dare break his precepts, Exodus xii. 15. That soul shall be
cut off from Israel: also, Lev. xxiii. 30. That same soul will I destroy. Mark
viii. 36, 37. For what shall it profit a man, if he (...) gain the whole world
and lose his own soul? Or, what shall a (...) give in exchange for his soul;
(not for his lusts and sins.) Solomon says, He that commits adultery with a
woman, destroys his own soul, Prove. chapter ^i. Paul in Romans chapter ii. has cleared
the matter (...) plain as words can express it, particularly, when speaking of
the future rewards and punishments of saints and sinners, he testifies, To
them, who, by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor,
and immortality, eternal life. But unto (...) that are contentious, and do not
obey the truth, etc. tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does
evil. Words cannot be more expressive upon the very point. Sir, if these three
witnesses will not convince you, with what I have offered before, I query
whether you would be convinced, if one should rise from the dead.

However, having a great desire to convince you, and all who are led astray
with you, or by your instrumentality, I will proceed to observe, further, if I
am mistaken, with the greater part of the Christian world, respecting the true
meaning of CHRIST'S verdict, pronounced in Mat. chapter xxv. if all Adam's family
are to be finally saved, and not one of them is surely to die, as the serpent
declared to our mother Eve, we may surely expect the kind Redeemer, who is full
of grace, and was sent to bear witness to the truth, has some where in his last
Testament, told us so from his express word? For he says, The word which I have
spoken shall judge him at the last day. Or if he has omitted it, we may justly
expect some of his Apostles have declared it. Now, if there is not one sentence
in the New Testament, by a fair comparison of the whole, declares such a
doctrine, and on the contrary, if CHRIST, in many places, besides the forecited
Mat.chapterxxv. declares the fame truth concerning the final punishment of the
wicked; and if his Apostles likewise testify the same repeatedly, is it
possible for a man, in his reason, who has a mustard seed grain of true faith,
to embrace the absurd and unscriptural opinion, that there will not be one of
Adam's family (who have rejected the atonement of CHRIST, disbelieved the
gospel, and hated the cross of CHRIST, even to their death) that will finally
perish?

Beside CHRIST'S verdict, Mat. chapter xxv. he says, chapter vii. Not every are that
says unto me, LORD, LORD, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Hence it is
evident that some who cried LORD, LORD, will be shut out. Sins and lusts cannot
cry LORD; therefore it must be the persons of some of the children of Adam,
ver. 22, Many will say to me, in that day, (viz.the judgment-day,) LORD, LORD,
have we not praphesied in thy name, etc. cast out devils, etc. And then I will
prosess, I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity. -- Dear Sir,
lay your hand against your heart, and let conscience speak, can sins and lusts
prophesy in CHRIST'S name? or can devils cast out devils? or, can ye that work
iniquity, which are cast out, be the works of iniquity? You must know the
English grammar too well, not to see the distinction between those that work
iniquity, and the iniquity itself; or between the person, and the wicked works
of the person. CHRIST further says, which must put it out of all dispute, that,
them which do iniquity, shall be cast into a furnace of fire, and at the
judgment-day, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth, Mat. chapter xiii.
Again, Mat. xii. 32. Whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. And Mark
says, He has never forgiveness. Luke xvi. 22. The rich man also died and was
buried: And in hell lift up bis eyes being in torment, etc. It was not his
sins, which have no eyes, it was the person of the sinner, lifting up his eyes
and begging for a drop of water; but there was no favor could pass over that
great gulf of justice, that is pronounced by CHRIST'S verdict, Mat. chapter xxv.
In hell, he that is filthy, and he that is unjust, must so remain, for the word
of the LORD has spoken it. Who, that have their senses, can read those texts I
have quoted, with their connections, and yet possibly suppose, that there will
be no unbeliever, no refuser of mercy, no rich worldling of the nations of the
earth, that will be found on CHRIST'S left hand, and condemned to everlasting
punishment; when CHRIST expressly declares they shall, from his own sacred
lips, forecited Mat. chapter xxv. Further, to strengthen the evidence of the
destruction of the souls and bodies of those who belong to the black catalogue
of characters I have before named, which may be all summed up under the term,
WICKED, I will quote some of the Apostles' testimonies, which will show how
they understood it will fare with the aforenamed characters, at the
judgment-day. 2 Cor. chapter ii. For we are unto GOD a sweet (...) of CHRIST, in
them that are saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are a savor of
death unto death; and to the other a savor of life unto life, etc. 2 Thessalonians.
chapter i. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the LORD JESUS shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not GOD, and that obey not the gospel of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the LORD, and from the glory of his power, etc. It is evident the last
mentioned texts mean some of the characters before named: for lusts of men, or
their sins, are not called to obey the gospel, neither are the devils; for they
never had a gospel call. -- It is therefore, surely the nations of the earth
that CHRIST has condemned in Mat. chapter xxv. Further, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 12. That they
all night be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. I will sum up the Apostle James' witness in his own words, chapter
ii. ver. 13. For he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no
mercy: which must mean he shall be punished eternally. St. Peter witnesses, as
plain as words can express, the matter in dispute; for he says, 2 Epis. chapter
iii. The heavens and the earth are reserved unto fire against the day of
judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. Not ungodly lusts and sins, but men.
And again, he expressly testifies, that GOD has reserved the wicked to the day
of judgment. For what? To be punished. And, as though he foresaw the error of
the Universalists, and meant to prevent every evasion, mistake, and quibble
that could be invented, he says, They shall utterly perish in their own
corruption, etc. St. Jude testifies of some false teachers, to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness forever. The loving Apostle John, who spoke
more of the love of GOD, in proportion to the length of his Epistles, than any
Apostle, is so far from thinking it inconsistent with the love of GOD, to speak
of the future and everlasting punishment of the wicked, he testifies
respecting it more abundantly than any other Apostle. In his first epistle he
says, All unrighteousness is sin, chapter v. and, There is a sin unto death;
aocordingly he would not give leave to pray for the pardon of it, as I
conceive; therefore doubtless he meant the unpardonable sin, that has never
forgiveness.

In the second chapter of his revelations, he speaks of some who overcomes and
shall not be hurt of the second death. What he means by the second death, is
(...) in chapter xi. where, upon the seventh angels sounding, there was great
voices in heaven, because the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
our LORD and of his CHRIST, and he shall reign for ever and ever. I conceive it
is evident by what follows, that these kingdoms mean CHRIST'S sheep, spoken of
Mat. chapter xxv. for it follows, verse 18, And the nations were angry, (viz. the
goats on the left hand.) and (...) wra^^ says John, is come, and the time of
the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto
thy (...) etc. and should destroy (...) which destroy the earth. The
destruction here spoken of it is evident is consequent on the day of judgment,
Mat. chapter xxv. And the destruction of those who worship the beast, etc. (viz.
the angry nations,) is described, Rev. xiv. 10, 11. The same shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of GOD which is poured out without mix^^^ into the cup of his
indignation: And he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, etc. And the
smoke of their torments ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest
day nor night. In chapter xxi. ver. 8. John testifies and says, But the soarful
and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerors, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Mark, dear
Sir, it is their persons the revelater says have their part in the lake.

Having thus considered the express account given by CHRIST and his Apostles,
it appears that their testimonies, although expressed in different words,
exactly agree with what the LORD JESUS declares in the so often forecited, Mat.
chapter xxv. I remember wh^^ St. Paul was witnessing the great truths contained in
the New Testament, he says, Acts xxvi. 22. Saying none other thing, than those
which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. Therefore, to further
strengthen the evidence of the future everlasting punishment of the wicked, I
will produce a number of the most noted, Old Testament witnesses respecting the
matter. Job and his friends, by the best account I can get, lived in the days
of Moses, or before: And by them we may learn what was the doctrine respecting
the punishment of the wicked; and what would become of the hypocrite's hope, as
it was taught and received by the people of GOD in their day. They say, What is
the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when GOD takes away his
soul; GOD shall cast upon him and not spare. Yea, he shall perish forever. Joh
iv. 9. By the blast of GOD they perish, chapter viii. so are the paths of all that
forget GOD, and the hypocrite's hope shall perish. -- You say lusts, and sins,
they say hope. They say the portion of a wicked man from GOD, and the heritage
appointed unto him by GOD, is, He shall perish forever, etc. The inspired king
of Israel, David, GOD'S anointed, in his first Psalm, speaks expressly of the
judgment, and pronounces the pious, blessed; and the ungodly, cursed. He
compares the ungodly to chaff, and says, Therefore they shall not stand in the
judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous; but the way of the
ungodly shall perish. Again, he says, Upon the wicked GOD shall rain snares,
fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their
cup. He further says, concerning the ungodly, Thou castedst them down to
destruction: which cannot be true, if they are happy. Again he says, Psalm
lxxiii. speaking of the porsperity of the ungodly, I could not account for it,
until I went (says he) into the sanctuary of GOD, then understood I their end:
(which was) thou castedst them down to destruction. The end spoken of with the
aforementioned horrible tempest of GOD'S fiery indignation, must mean, in the
future world; for if the wicked were happy at death, or judgment, the first
Psalm could not be true and this passage would be a perfect deception. And how
could there be any other end to this destruction, when itself is declared to be
their end. St. Paul, speaking of the righteous, says, You have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life: and as the end of the righteous is
everlasting life -- the end of the wicked is everlasting destruction, according
to the testimony of the Psalmist and St. Paul. Solomon in the first chapter of
his Proverbs, testifies, that such as set at naught GOD's councils, he will
laugh at their calamity, etc. when their destruction comes as a whirlwind,
although they may call in their anguish, and seek GOD in their distress, he
will not answer, neither shall they find him; how then can they be happy?
Solomon further says, When a wicked man dies his expectation shall perish, and
the hope of the unjust man perishes. What words could more fully assert that
the wicked after does shall be deprived of all good, which is the object of
hope. Time would fail, and it would fill a volume, instead of a short Epistle,
to take notice of all the witnesses in the Old Testament, respecting the final
destruction of the wicked. I will therefore sum them up from Isaiah's time, to
Malachi, who speaks of a day that shall burn as an oven, etc. in the words of
Isaiah, iii. 10, 11. Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him,
for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked! it shall be
ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall be given (...). Here it is
evident the righteous and the wicked are set in opposition to each other, with
respect to the fruit, and end, of what they do in this world. And whereas the
labors of love, performed by the righteous, has the promise of endless life
and happiness, can the threatenings of the contrary, to the wicked, be any thing
but directly the opposite, viz. endless misery and punishment? Let conscience
stand judge. If the united testimonies of the Old Testament witnesses may be
summed up in the forecited text, the Universalist principle, I conceive, to be
a full contradiction to them all; for the Universalists say, it shall be
finally well with the souls or persons of the wicked as well as the righteous.
-- How shall we know who bears the true witness? Isaiah informs us how we may
know, in such a strait, in all matters of importance. In the eighth chapter of
his prophesy, he warns every sincere, enquiring soul, instead of seeking unto
them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep and that mutter,
etc. which I conceive to be the spiritual sorcery mentioned by St. Paul; for
erroneous spirits peep into certain dark passages of scripture, and obscure
figures, and say they find wonderful new light in them, and seem to make their
ideas look, for a time, as much like truth as the magicians of Egypt, by their
sorcery, made their rods appear serpents like unto the rod of Mofes. But as the
rod of Moses swallowed up their rods, in the end, so all erroneous doctrines,
when tried by the plain, express law and testimony, are swallowed up:
Especially the principle of Universal Salvation, I conceive, contradicts every
express account of the day of judgment, spoken of by Daniel, by CHRIST and his
Apostles, and thereby their beautiful arguments, and seeming reasons, get
swallowed all up. -- Therefore Isaiah directs us, chapter viii. ver. 20. to regard
the law and the testimony, and says, If they (viz. the promulgators of strange
doctrines,) speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light
in them. The Prophet Daniel testifies, chapter xii. ver. 2. And many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some
to shame and everlasting contempt.

Who can read what I have written respecting the final punishment of the black
catalogue of sinners, beforenamed, and not be fully convinced that the wicked,
who die in their sins will be everlastingly punished? If we had nothing but
CHRIST'S own verdict to determine us respecting the matter, it is completely
sufficient. But I have produced the most noted witnesses in the Old Testament,
with the Apostolic, inspired jury, declaring their verdict against the
forenamed criminals, and they agree with and corroborate the verdict of the
Supreme judge, who is King of kings, and Lord of lords. Their united
declarations assure us that the wicked, who die in their sins, will be punished
with an evenlasting punishment in a future state. I conceive the holy
scriptures give us as full assurance of it, as we have that CHRIST JESUS is the
Son of GOD, the Savior of believing sinners. Verily, I do not conceive how we
can doubt the testimonies I have produced respecting the important verdict
without calling the whole inspired volume in question. No witness recorded in
the Bible has said so much of the future punishment of the wicked as CHRIST
himself; and the reason is plain, because no one knew so much about it. We may
surely expect our blessed Savior and his inspired witnesses, when giving in
their final verdict respecting of a matter that so nearly concerns all men of
every capacity, has chosen words that are most plain and casy to be underftood.
Whoever has the daring confidence to assert the contrary, must answer for it at
his peril.

I never heard of any sect in the christian world, (excepting the
Universalists) that pretended to put any other meaning to the words, nations of
the earth, than what the words plainly express. And, I conceive, if necessity
did not oblige them, being sensible that all their comments on other texts of
scripture, with all the obscure figures and mysterious metaphors that they
press into their service, would be totally confounded, even by that one verdict
given by CHRIST, Mat. chapter xxv. they never would have invented such an
unscriptural meaning, and so inconsistent to reason itself, or ever had the
confidence to say, that while they allow the word, nations, on the right hand,
means the souls and risen bodies of men, etc. the same word, nations, on the
left hand, means sins and lusts, or devils. I conceive it might be said, with
as much sense and propriety, that the word, nations, on the left hand of
CHRIST, means the unelean spirits, like frogs, spoken of Rev. xvi. that came
out of the mouth of the dragon, beast, and false prophet, etc.

If the evidence which appears on the very face of these texts, I have
produced, is to be confronted with, and set aside by other texts, which the
Universalifts must do or give up the point; it is evident they ought to be more
in number -- their testimony more positive and express -- or their meaning more
conspicuous, and less liable to misinterpretation; which I have the confidence
to say cannot be done, without procuring another Bible.

Origin, a learned teacher in the school of Alexandria, according to the best
account lean get from authentic history was the first promulgator of the
doctrine of Universal Salvation, ever heard of in the christian world; which
was about the middle of the third century: And to evade the evidence of
CHRIST'S express words, and the testimonies of his inspired witnesses against
his doctrine, he maintained the necessity of rejecting the literal sense of all
scriptures, and so reduced, by his expositions, the whole bible into an
Allegory, to support his principle. A crafty scheme indeed, which would answer
better in that ignorant age, than in our day. But, I conceive, he was a man of
a distempered brain. For he held that all the fathers of the Old Testament ages
were kept in hell till the death of CHRIST, when he went down into their
prison, preached the gospel to them, and carried them with him to heaven. He
held the state between death and the resurection, was a state of sleep in one
common receptacle, called hades, by the Greeks; where the righteous and the
wicked are reposed together promiscuously. Further, he held that the fire of
the future world would purisy the damned; so that after a temporary suffering
of its severity; in which, however, none could be held longer than 1000 years,
all the damned spinits both of men and devils shall be finally delivered from
their woes.

He strangely balanced his new-sangled gospel, by adding that the highest
favorite around the throne of GOD was still left liable to fall from all his
bliss; and so to be remanded back to a new state of trial in an earthly body.
And thus the whole celestial choir of men and angels would continue filling up
an eternity to come in alternate falls, trials, purgations, and restorations,
one after another.

I am informed that a number of great men, by Origen's influence, were
entangled for awhile with some of his ideas; but in process of time, they began
to examine his doctrines by the law and testimony; and Jerome, (who some
Universalists would signify was of their opinion,) was the very man that
detected and publicly exposed the errors of that scheme, and had them
judicially condemned by the unanimous sentence of the Synod of Alexandria, in
the year 399. The disciples of Origin were consequently banished from Egypt and
Palestine, as enemies to religion, and a nuisance to civil society.

Must it not look strange, even to yourself, dear Sir, and those brethren
entangled with you, to think that 250 years should roll round, after the
doctrine of CHRIST was preached to a perishing world, declaring that he that
believes shall he saved, and he that believes not shall he damned; and not
one martyr, nor minister of JESUS should find out that all the New Testament,
with its laws and penalties, as well as the Old Testament, was a mere allegory:
And although the judge of all says, that all that are in their graves shall
come forth, they that have done good to the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil to the resurrection of damnation: that it is not so, it is no
more than a sigure of speech. I conceive the Universalists to this day are
obliged to make the same miserable shift, having nothing better to support
them. If appears to me, if Christians who embrace such unscriptural ideas, are
not in a religious delirium, or bewildered with the spirit of sorcery, these
cannot be such a thing.

The learned Dr. Chauncey being sensible, I conccive, of the fallacy and
absurdity of supposing the nations on CHRIST'S left hand, Mat. chapter xxv. mean
either sins, lusts, or devils, acknowledges, (if I understand him,) they mean
what CHRIST says, viz. foolish virgins, hypocrites, slothful servants, workers
of iniquity, etc. He grants such shall surser the second death. But where as he
had formed a scheme finally to save the whole family of Adam, he was aware that
it would not do to let the ark of the covenant, nor the testimony stand where
the holy scriptures have put them, according to our English translation: And as
he could not procure any of the sons of Levi to carry it on their shoulders, as
was the divine order under the economy of Moses; neither any suitable
milch-kine among the Philistines to remove it where he would have it. Necessity
being considered above law, and his need being exceeding great to have the ark
removed, or his whole scheme would be lost forever; he has yoked up his
grammatical knowledge of the Greek and the doctrine of purgatory together, and
with this novel team and his skill in driving it, it appears to me he has
trailed it, having no new cart to put it in, about on the line between the land
of Israel and the border of the Philistines, where the tribes of Israel have no
divine warrant to assemble for divine worship. But the worshippers of Dagon may
draw near, the ark being partly set within their line, if they can but procure
a sufficient number of golden emerods and golden mice to make atonement to the
GOD of Israel, 1 Samuelchaptervi. they may all be delivered, peradventure, from all
their plagues, if they have been in hell ages of ages suffering the second
death, and be brought finally to give glory to the GOD of Israel. --
Notwithstanding the Doctor's new meaning put to some words, I expect the
translators of our English bible have construed said words truly: and had the
Doctor understood CHRIST'S saying, in John chapter vii. I go unto him that sent me.
Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am thither ye cannot come,
he would have blushed and dropped his pen, and not have undertook by his new
meaning, put to some Greek words, to deliver the damned out of hell, and send
them where CHRIST is, contrary to CHRIST'S express declaration.

But to abridge the answer to the new meaning of the English words, eternal,
everlasting, forever, forever and ever, and never, etc. which the said Chauncey
has put upon them, I will sum it up as follows: The Greek word which is used
six times to express the duration of the punishment of the wicked, and
translated eternal and everlasting (says a learned divine) is to be found in
above seventy places in the New Testament: and it every where is evidently used
to express an endless duration, unless those six places which speak of the
duration of future punishment, be excepted. And is not this sufficient to
ascertain the meaning of the word, if we had no other way to determine what it
is designed to express? This word is Aionios, and is derived from Aion; which
is used above an hundred times in the New Testament, and does not mean any
certain, definite, but an indeterminate duration, unless it be limited by the
words or subject, with which it is connected. And when the preposition, eis, is
put before it, whether it be used in the singular or plural number, it always
signifies an endless duration, and is generally translated forever, and
sometimes never; of which there are near forty instances, only two of which
respect, the duration of future punishment, viz. 2 Pet. ii. 17. Jude ver. 13.
and no reason can be given why it should not be understood here, as it must be
in other places, where it is used. When the words are doubled, they are more
emphatical, and are translated forever and ever. There are twenty-two instances
of this, nineteen of which express a duration which is certainly endless. In
the remaining three, the duration of future punishment is expressed agreeably
to what has been observed. From this state of the case, is it not easy to
determine whether these words, which in all other instances are used to express
a duration which is endless, mean only temporary, when they are used with a
design to let us know what is the duration of future punishment? This
expression, forever and ever, is sound twenty-two times in the original, in the
New Testament. It is used eight times in the Epistles of St. Paul and Peter,
where they ascribe glory, honor, praise, and dominion to GOD, forever and ever.
It is found fourteen times in the book of Revelations, and a number of them is
used to mark GOD'S eternity: and the word is used three times in the same book,
by the same writer, to denote the duration of future punishment. Is it possible
to mistake the meaning, and think that in these three instances only, these
words mean a finite duration? Such a shift is offering violence to the
scripture.

As sure as the scriptures referred to, mean in the original, what has been
observed, Dr. Chauncey's knowledge of the Greek cannot move the ark; but his
scheme is fallen, as Dagon did of old time, upon its stumps. Likewise, his
ideas of damned souls being delivered from the second death and purged by what
they suffer, and go finally to heaven, after ages of ages, I think they are
altogether unscriptural and imaginary. There is no more express scripture to
suppors his opinion, than that there is a place of purgation in the moon to
qualify the ungodly for the joys of heaven. The words of father Abraham, as
they are set forth by him who is to be judge at the last day, will confound all
his arguments for the restoration of the danmed, Luke xvi. 26. And besides all
this, between us (the righteous) and you (the wicked) there is a great gulf
fixed: so that they which would pass from bence to you, cannot; neither can
they pass to us, that would come from thence. This text informs us fully, that
there can be no intercourse between glorified saints and damned sinners; but
the state of souls, both in heaven and hell is unalterably fixed, as the oath
of GOD is unchangeable. I have sworn, says the LORD, that they shall not enter
into my rest: and damned sinners will never get out of the second death through
such a gulf. -- Thus it is evident from express scripture, the Doctor nor any
of his opinion, cannot remove the ark nor the testimoay from where the LORD has
fixed it in its place.

Thus I have finished my examination of the testimony of CHRIST and his
inspired witnesses respecting how the foolish virgins, slothful servants,
hypocrites, and all unbelievers who die in their sins, will be condemned and
punished at the great day of judgment. I have mentioned in the foregoing
Epistle something concerning the doctrines of devils. And as it is of great
importance for us to know the difference between the spirit of truth, and the
spirit of error, I shall observe St. Paul informs us, in 2 Cor. chapter xi. of
deceitful workers, and says, No marvel; for satan himself is transformed into
an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be
transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to
their works; that is, I conceive, working deceitfully, preaching for their
master satan; and perhaps they may be self-deceived, thinking they are
ministers of righteousness: such may appear among all denominations; and that
we may know how to distinguish them apart, St. Paul informs us in his Epistle
to the Hebrews, chapter xiii. Remember them which have the rule over you, (viz. the
Apostles) who have spoken unto you the word of GOD, etc. and adds, Be not
carried about with diverse and strange doctrines, etc. Hence it is evident every
doctrine which is diverse and contrary to the express doctrine of CHRIST and his
inspired witnesses, is a strange doctrine; which I understand, St. Paul means
by the doctrines of devils, that in the latter times, some, by departing from
the faith and giving heed to seducing spirits, would fall into, 1 Timothy chapter iv.
We find the spirit of error is moveable, it is hard to trace it; for one says
this doctrine is right, another says a contrary doctrine is right, and all
cloaked under a pretense that the scriptures mean as they say. We must observe
the devil was to go upon his belly, after he told the lie to our mother Eve,
Thou shall not surely die; that is, he was cursed to be a creeper, never more
to dare appear in his own name, and say I am a devil; but always be obliged to
creep under the names of great-light, wonderful-truth, and real-friendship to
the sons of men, or some other borrowed name or friendly pretense. Therefore,
to give as plain and short a specimen, or sample of the doctrines of devils as
I can, I will say.

Glad tidings, glad tidings, rejoice all ye sons of Belial, shout aloud ye
workers of iniquity, join all ye that contemn experimental, heart religion, and
real piety, who are puffed up with pride and drowned in wantonness, with all
that hate the daily cross of CHRIST; like wise all the children of disobedience
of every character, even all that have blasphemed against the Holy Ghost, and
have done despite to the spirit of grace, I have glad tidings to proclaim to
you all. You shall not surely die, that is, finally. This is scripture. You may
read it asserted in Genesis iii. 4. and if you doubt it because a fallen angel
said it, you may observe he did not lose his light and knowledge of things,
although he left his beginning. It is evident from express scripture, he
several times spoke the truth, and why not in the forecited text: but if you
are not satisfied, I can produce you abundant proof from the sayings of CHRIST
and his Apostles, and you may judge whether it does not plainly declare the
same sense with the forecited text. CHRIST says, he did not come into the world
to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. Can you
think he will fail of answering the end he came for! -- Again, it is written,
he tasted death for every man, and is a propitiation for the sins of the whole
world. Do not these texts sully prove what was declared to our mother Eve, in
the sorecited texs, Genesis iii. 4.? Are they not sull to the point as I have
quoted them? Judge for yourselves. Be not frighted by a parced of sniveling
priests, trying to scare you to death by fire and brimstone, that that eternal
hell which has been so often a terror to you, and sometimes restrained you in
your wild career, and often embittered your golden cup of pleasure, is now no
more. We have got a discovery in this age of reason, of true scripture light,
and find that hell and damnation is to take place only on your sins and lusts.
Our ancient and modern divines have made a mistake, and misapplied it as Job's
friends in another case did concerning him. Cheer up ye sinners of every
character, your precious souls and risen bocties are all to be gloritied in
heaven forever, after the day of judgment; for CHRIST has been lifted up upon
the cross, has bore the curse and put an end to sin, and declared with his own
blessed lips, he will draw all men unto him. This damnation of hell and
everlasting punishment that has been sounding in your ear-drums from every
pulpit for ages past, among all denominations of Christians, excepting us the
universal friends, of all men, we have found to be mere priestcraft, or at
least, a great mistake among the best of them. The LORD JESUS never intends
finally to execute any threatenings contained in the New Testament, against any
person or persons whomsoever. For it is written, He tasted death for every man:
And if you want all I have said proved, read 1 Timothy ii. 4. Who will have all
men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth. Now judge, all ye
jovial sinners, of every character besoronamed, if I have not proved to a
demonstration, that what was told our mother Eve in the garden, forecited Genesis
iii. 4. is exactly according to the declarations of CHRIST and his holy
Apostles.

In this sample of the doctrines of devils, you may see what St. Paul calls
deceitful working, 2 Cor. chapter xi. or using subtilty, as he says the serpent
beguiled Eve, ver. 3. I have took as much of a sentence of scripture as served
my purpose, designedly, leaving out that part which would have made a
distinction; and by a fair comparison of other scriptures, which speak
particularly respecting the final destruction of the characters beforenamed,
would have altogether changed the sense I have put upon them. Thus by handling
the word of GOD deceitfully, in the several texts I have quoted, I have seemed
to prove that the devil, who is recorded a liar from the beginning, John chapter
viii. and the holy Son of GOD, who is the way, the truth, and the life, with
his holy Apostles, have unitedly bore one and the same restimony, respecting
mens' final end. Whereas it is evident from a fair comparison of express
scriptures, as I have already manifested, in examining the united verdict of
the inspired witnesses of both Testaments, there is no more concord between
their testimonies respecting the matter, and the declaration of the devil, than
there is between heaven and hell.

I have not so much as mentioned any necessity of believing in JESUS, in order
to be justified; nor any need of repenting of sin, or obeying the gospel that
our sins may be blotted out, nor any need of forsaking all our carnal delights,
taking up our daily cross, and following the LORD JESUS in keeping his
commandments; this would have spoiled my joyful sound, in the sample, and
overthrown all the glad tidings I proclaimed, in the sense I proposed them.
Nevertheless, it is a truth too serious and important for me to forget, and I
pray GOD that all Christians may ever remember it. The LORD JESUS has said,
without faith, repentance, and taking up the daily cross, aforementioned, we
cannot be his disciples: And what mortal dare contradict the judge of the quick
and the dead, as it were, to his very face? I think none but the ministers of
satan, who are led blindfold at his nod, would dare creep under the sweet name
of glad tidings, and leave out the aforementioned truths. For every
experimental Christian must know, he can no more enjoy fellowsaip with the
Father, with the LORD JESUS, and with the living brethren; nor have his calling
and personal election made sure to himself, without possessing and practicing
the aforementiomed truths; than a sinner can truly see the kingdom of GOD, in
its spiritual beauty, without being born again, or from above. The one cannot,
is as certain as the other, for the mouth of the same LORD has spoken it.

I have put a false sense upon every text I have quoted in the sample, and the
consequences are false accordingly; so that the whole sumple is one continued
compound of lies in the sense I have proclaimed it to the asorenamed
characters. For, according to the sense I have put upon several texts, I have
denied the execution of any thread nings, declared in the New Testament,
against any ungodly sinner whatsoever, finally; for I have not excepted them
that have committed the unpardonable sin, which CHRIST has particularly
excepted, three times, in his last will; and declares it never shall have
forgiveness. Yet I have seemed to prove it, to an inattentive mind, and
especially to those who would be glad to have it so.

Thus I have given you my ideas how the devil appears like an angel of light,
to sinners who are under the power of a fleshly mind, and how his ministers
appear like ministers of rightcousness.

Sir, if you, who in years past could, as it were, have given me your eyes,
will not now count me your enemy because I tell you the truth, I will yet
speak, and further say, that I conceive the sample, forecited, is what I can
make appear by several publications of the Universalists and their catechize,
to be the very doctrine they proclaim for the true Apostolic gospel; as to the
general sense of it: and they have put the same general sense upon the texts I
have quoted in the forenamed sample, if I understand their writings. Perhaps
you will say they do not proclaim their gospel in the bold, plain manner that I
have. I grant it. But the only difference, I think, is this, viz. creeping on
the belly, and leaving that part of revealed truth, or perverting of it, that
does not sinit their favorite purpose, and making, as it were, any thing, and
every thing, of texts, where the letter of thern seems to sound suitable to
their minds, frequently separating them from their connexions. Whereas, in the
forenamed sample, I have set the doctrines upright upon their proper
foundation, as I conceive, viz. the lie spoken of, forecited, Genesis iii. 4. I
have exposed the belly of the doctrines, instcad of being hid in the dust, or
under leaves, grass, or bushes. And I honestly say, as in the fear of GOD, I
see no other real difference between the doctrines contained in the sample, and
the principles of the universalist, but my want of ability to communicate the
matter in such a masterly manner as some universalist may be able to do. Yet,
let it be observed, I do not say any universalist perverts the aforecited
texts, or any other designadly, as I have done in the sample.

I expect, that you, Sir, and many others, think you are doing GOD service,
while you are preaching and doing many things, as I conceive, contrary to the
name, authority, and express verdict of JESUS CHRIST and his inspired
witnesses, respecting the day of judgment, and the necessity of becoming holy
here in time, without which, GOD's word testifies, no man shall fee the LORD.
Likewise, your denying that the penalty of the law of CHRIST is finally
executed upon any soul of man, instead of every soul of man that does not obey
the truth, but does evil, as the apostle testifies.

Doubtless, Sir, there is a query arises in your mind, that if I have perverted
the true sense of a number of texts, to make out my proclamation in the
forementioned sample, I ought to give the scriptural, consistent sense of them.
-- I will endeavor to do it -- according to my ability.

It is evident from the scriptural account given us, that the bar which was in
the way of the salvation of any one of mankind, was the broken law of GOD; in
order therefore to have saved Abel only, the law must have been completely
fulfilled, justice satisfied, the Deity atoned, and every divine perfection
harmonized: so that peace and good will might take place upon Abel, consistent
with GOD's highest glory. In point of merit, therefore, CHRIST has fulfilled
the law, and answered every demand GOD the Father could call for, by virtue of
it. Accordingly, the Father has committed all power in heaven and upon earth
into his hands, as Mediator, to kill or make alive, to wound or heal at his
pleasure. He has in this respect saved all the family of Adam from the penalty
of the law falling upon them, immediately; so that if a sinner should live an
hundred years, and then die accursed, the long redemption from the grave and
hell, would be owing to the redemption of CHRIST, with all the mercies, more in
number than the hairs of his head, that he had received in his life time.

There must have been as much done to harmonize the divine perfections in
saving Abel, as to save all Adam's family. Had it not been for the ample
atonement made by CHRIST, the sins of men had barred the way of their
salvation, and mercy could not have been extended to them. CHRIST, in making
atonement for the transgression of the law, has received power, as Mediator,
over all flesh, yea, all power in heaven and in earth is given unto him. In
this sense, which is a scriptural and proper sense, He has tasted death for
every man, and is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world. This sense
opens an easy, plain, and important meaning to the passages aforenamed in the
sample, and to all other texts of like import in the new testament. In this
sense, he bought them which bring in damnable heresics, even denying the LORD
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. ii. I. In
this sense, the reprobate Jews, after all things were ready, were invited,
there being sufficient provision, and to spare, in point of righteousness and
merit, the aforenamed bar being removed, and nothing hindered but the bar of
their unbelieving hearts and proud wills, despising and making light of the
heavenly invitation, which was the cause of their never being admitted to taste
of the supper. In this sense, he gave himself a ransom for all, he died for
all, etc.

Perhaps you will draw this consequence, as many others do who are not of your
principle, viz. If CHRIST died for all men, then all will be saved, or else he
died and shed his blood partly in vain. I answer that it does not follow, but
is an unscriptural and imaginary consequence. The immediate fruit and effect of
CHRIST'S death, is not the actual discharge of any person from guilt, but as
CHRIST himself has assured us, that whosoever believes on him should not
perish, but have everlasting life, John iii. 16. Our salvation is considered in
scripture in a twofold view, viz. as it is wrought by CHRIST'S merits, and as
it is applied by the spirit to the believer through the word. In the sirst
instance, a foundation is laid for our deliverance; in the last, we experience,
through faith, actual and personal deliverance. It is as true as the bible,
that many are redeemed by price, as before observed, who are not redeemed by
power, I humbly conceive. David speaks of such as had experienced the power in
Psalm. cvii. Let the redeemed of the LORD say so, whom he has redeemed out of
the hand of the enemy. Those are the redeemed who shall obtain gladness and
joy, and from whom sorrow and mourning shall flee away, Isa. li. 11. They who
are bought by price in the sense before mentioned, but not by power, who
reprobated themselves by denying their LORD, are spoken of forecited, 2 Pet.
ii. It would fill a small volume to quote all the texts that testify the fact
and makes the distinction I have observed. In 1 Timothy iv. 10. St. Paul makes the
distinction I have been observing, as plain as words can express it. For he
says, GOD is the Savior of all men, specially of those that believe. It is
only the blood of CHRIST, as applied by the spirit, which effects the personal
forgiveness of sins, Col i. 14. purges the conscience of the believer from dead
works, Heb. ix. 14. If you still object, that if CHRIST has satisfied law and
justice, they can have no claim on the sinner. This objection only befits such
as hold eternal justification; notwithstanding it is made the resort of numbers
of different descriptions. But if divine justice has no demand against sinners
for whom CHRIST has tasted death, as before described, then such were never
personally children of wrath, nor under the curse; neither can there be any
personal deliverance from ruin, to which they were never personally exposed. If
reasoning according to the objection be just, the testimonies of scripture, and
spiritual illumination are mere deceptions of the senses, as philosophers say
of colors. But to answer the objection. If a creditor should exact a just debt
of a number of insolvent debtors, and they were both unwilling and unable to
pay, and must immediately suffer the rigor of the law. Provided a surety
answered all demands to the honor of the law, and took the insolvent debtors
into his hands, are not the debtors, according to all law and equity, in the
power of the surety? and to be dealt with by him according to law, or
mercifully to have his or their debts remitted, in such a way as the surety
shall propose? How repugnant to reason and common sense would it appear to hear
the debtors say, they were clear of all their debts; for a surety had paid
them: although they had not paid said surety a farthing, nor had thanked him,
nor received any discharge from him. Thus, I conceive, JESUS the surety of the
new covenant, Heb. vii. comes to sulfill his Father's will, Heb. x. pays the
debt of duty and sufferings which man could never pay, and thus tasted death
for every man; and thus buys not only Jews, but the heathens also, with the
inhabitants of the uttermost parts of the earth. GOD the Father recognizes his
right -- all power respecting the family of Adam devolves upon him -- he is
anointed as mediator with the oil of gladness above his sellows, Psalm. xlv. The
2d Psalm describes this subject very clearly. The Father says, ask of me (and
not a destined number of individuals only) but I shall give thee the heathen
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession;
but those, who refuse his rule and government, he will break with a rod of
iron, and dash in pieces like a potter's vessel, ver. 8 and 9.

Thus I have showed a scriptural sense to all those texts asorementioned,
respecting CHRIST'S dying for all, and being a Savior of all men, etc. This
plain account of the end, and immediate effect of our Savior's sufferings,
obedience and death, for which he was crowned with resurrection, glory and
honor, Heb. ii. 9. furnishes a full answer respecting CHRIST'S being listed up
and drawing all men unto him, John xii. 32. -- for he spoke it concerning the
manner of his death. Occasion was given by being lifted up upon the cross unto
death, to give testimony unto all men of his power to raise himself from the
dead; and that he will by the same power raise the whole family of Adam from
the dead, Acts xvii. 32. and will draw all men unto him to judgment; that is,
he will gather together all nations, Matt. xxv. St. Paul so fully clears up
this sense of the forecited text, in the 15th chap. of his is it epistle to the
Cor. it needs no other comment. -- I proceed to consider the meaning of the
last mentioned text in the sample, viz. 1 Timothy ii. 4. who will have all men to
be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth. I intimated in the sample,
that the word WILL was GOD's decreeative, intentional, authoritative will, that
never can be altered nor disobeyed. If the text means so, it would be as
unalterable as the verdict aforementioned, and would be as full a contradiction
to the testimony of CHRIST and his inspired witnesses, respecting the end of
finally impenitent sinners, as nay is to yea. Therefore, in order to reconcile
this text with all of like import, and show its agreement with the
aforementioned verdict, I must consider some scriptural ideas respecting
election, or GOD's decreeative will: which would not be difficult to describe,
if there had not been heretofore such straining, racking and crowning with
thorns, and even crucisying of several texts of scripture, as far as can be
done, I conccive, to answer favorite purposes. While one sect says, GOD's
decreeative will, according to the scriptures, is to save all Adam's family,
and no more. Others say it means to save all the fallen angels. Others say in
means to restore all things, even the whole creation of beasts and creeping
things, etc. Others say it means a remnant of the human family only, who have
been already brought forth by the womb of time, since the creation: But they
further say GOD's will is to regenerate millions in the latter end of time,
during a number of ages, so that when the general judgment shall take place,
there will be more saved than will be lost in perdition. If equal credit may be
given to all the asorementioned opinions, what a variety of unalterable wills
exists in the Deity; and how different their intentions and extent. All the
aforementioned opinions are agreed in one thing, viz. that GOD's decreeative
will respecting these matters was beforetime. Others, with equal confidence
say, concerning sinners salvation or damnation. GOD's decreeative will
determines nothing before they have a day of visitation: and if they, in said
day, choose GOD for their portion, then GOD chooses them for his inheritance.
Hence we may learn the consequences of undertaking to look into the secret
things which belong to GOD only to know, and bring to pass. Such, I conceive,
would do well to learn what that means, where GOD smote fifty thousand
threescore and ten of the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh for looking into the
ark, 1 Samuel chapter vi. How many thousands of professed christians have been smote
with death, in a religious sense, and have caused divisions and contentions
contrary to the plain doctrine of CHRIST and the law of brotherly love, through
the christian world, by peeping and trying to look into such secret things as
are not particularly explained in the holy scriptures, and making them mean
what they would have them, by their artful reasonings and consequences. Hence
arises the confusion of opinions aforenamed, with many heretical principles of
different sects. Some holding the justification of sinners from eternity,
having no regard to the moral agency of men; but drown all our ideas in the
decreeative will, both concerning the salvation and damnation of the souls of
the family of Adam. Others, by their reasonings and consequences make the same
decreeative will a mere nullity. Indeed, the confusion of ideas is so great, as
to what is the meaning of GOD's decreeative will, that if one man should ask
another what religious prosession he was of, and he should answer, I am a
sincere believer that JESUS CHRIST is the Son of GOD, I am fully persuaded that
unless a man be born again, or of the spirit, he cannot see the kingdom of GOD
in its spiritual beauty, it consisting in righteousness, peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost; and trust through grace I have experienced it; and prosess to be an
honest, apostolic christian, fully believing all the principles of the doctrine
of CHRIST, as expressed in the New Testament; and find myself bound, and
willing to obey the laws and ordinances enjoined therein, according to my
ability: how should we know by all he professed whether he is sound in the
faith? We could not judge but little about it, according to the opinion of
many, because he had not declared in what sense he understood GOD's decreeative
will, or election; that being the great criterion by which he must be deemed
sound, or heterodox.

If the man had said, I am a Lutheran christian, or a Calvinistic christian, an
Arminian christian, a Methodist, a Universalist, or an Hopkintonian christian,
he would have been understood. If he had owned either of the aforenamed leaders
opinions, doubtless he would be pronounced sound in the faith, by one sect, and
perhaps condemned as erroneous by all the others. But from whence arose the
puzzle? Because the man professed the apostolic christianity, and did not
distinguish his principles by any modern name. Hence we see what a confusion
the present generation of christians are in, by hearkening to those popular
leaders of modern date, and paying more attention to some of their mystical and
allegorical reasonings, and comments upon certain texts of scripture, than to
the scriptures themselves fairly compared with each other. Can any christian
deliberately judge, that what was necessary to be known, to teach men GOD's
will and our duty, in order for our happiness here and glory hereafter, should
be taught by the Holy Ghost in such an unintelligible manner, as it were to the
halves; and want hundreds of modern teachers to finish it. I think the
entertaining of such a thought, would be an impeachment of the holy scriptures,
and repugnant to reason itself. Let it be observed, that I have not mentioned
the confusion of opinions about election, or GOD's decreeative will, because I
would make light of it, or oppose the doctrine: GOD forbid. I fully believe
what the scriptures say concerning it. I only oppose the strange comments that
many have made thereupon. It is plain, I think, from scripture, whoever makes
election and predestination blanks in their creed, had as well renounce the
Bible itself: For if there is no election there is no elect JESUS nor any
grace. Therefore I will examine what the scriptures say concerning the main
leading ideas that GOD has been pleased to reveal.

The first time I remember the word, elect, is mentioned concerning redemption
and salvation, is in Isa. xlii. 1. Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine
elect, in whom my soul delights, etc. Read to the tenth verse, and you will
learn what GOD chose him for, and what he was to do.

Secondly, we read which way GOD chose to save sinners, viz. according to the
election of grace, and not of works, read Romans xi. 5, 6. You will find it more
particularly explained in Romans chapter ix. where, under the types of Esau and
Jacob, the Apostle illustrates the difference of works and grace. Saying ver.
11, For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil,
that the purpose of GOD according to election might stand. Mark what purpose,
the purpose of saving sinners. How? Not of works but of him that calls, viz.
the LORD JESUS, the wisdom of the Father, who says, To you O men I call, etc,
Thus it appears GOD's choice in saving sinners is in the way of grace, and not
of works.

Thirdly, we read by what rule, viz. Elect, according to the foreknowledge of
GOD the Father, through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, etc. And
again, St. Paul informs us Romans xi. 2. God has not cast away his people which
he fore-knew; but further testifies, Ephesians. i. 4. that his choice was existing
before the foundation of the world. And tells his Ephesian brethren, they had
obtained their inheritance, (...) trusted in CHRIST, being predestined
according (...) the purpose of him who works all things according (...) the
council of his own will, etc. The general language (...) scripture, when
speaking of GOD's decreeative will, may be summed up in the testimony recorded,
Isa. chapter lv. where GOD says, his ways and thoughts are as much higher than
ours, as the heavens are higher than the earth, and causes the rain and snow,
without our leave, to answer his designs, So shall my word be that goes sorth
out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void; but it shall accomplish that
which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing where to I sent it, ver. 11.

Thus I understand GOD's intentional, decreeative will, is eternally and
unalterably the same. And what can any sinner know respecting his personal
election, by all that I have quoted, and by all the scriptures further say
about it? It is evident he can know nothing in this way; neither did GOD mean
he should. The way to know our personal election, is to look into what GOD's
preceptive will says. By GOD's preceptive will, I mean that part of GOD's will
which is plainly and particularly revealed, by way of proclamation, commands,
precepts, promises, and threatenings to men, as moral agents, and accountable
beings. Which preceptive will, contains every essential point, necessary for us
to know, in order to obtain salvation, personally and individually; or it would
not properly be a revelation. For as GOD corresponds with man only by his
conscience, respecting his salvation or damnation; so the Apostles, bringing a
divine revelation, suitable to all capasities, did not address men's passions by
the insinuating art of human reasonings, or an artful chain of philosophic
arguments; but they considered men as intelligent, moral agents; and declared
GOD's preceptive will to every man's conscience. They entered into no parley
with men's reasonings; but pressing forward to their consciences, placed them
before GOD, and conversed with them there. All the commands, precepts and
institutions of the New Testament, are directed to consciences of men, as moral
agents. There is no doubt but GOD can make any of his creatures whatever he
pleases, consistent with his purposes. But as it has pleased GOD to make men
moral agents, they are thereby accountable for their conduct. But without the
power of moral agency, they could not be obedient to GOD preceptive will, nor
disobedient; and consequently not accountable for their actions, nor the
subjects of rewards or punishments on the account of them. It is worthy to be
observed, that GOD's decreeative will never justifies nor (...) the conscience
of any sinner, as an absolute decree. If a minister was to preach an hundred
years, upon GOD's decreeative will, it could not reach the conscience of any
sinner; said decrees being the same before creation existed that they are now,
and ever will be. Therefore the surety aforcnamed, to whom all power is
committed, has revealed a part of his will and purposes, by way of commands,
precepts, promises and threatenings. And this part of his will respects the
moral agency of rational beings; and in this view, GOD says come let us reason
together. And although the original creditor could not forgive the least
transgression of his law, nor admit of any repentance or reformation of the
rebel sinner; but annexes a curse upon the least fault. JESUS CHRIST, the
surety, can forgive sins, and admit of repentance; if we are willing to receive
him as proclaimed in the gospel. He testifies in his great commission, that
repentance and remission of sins can take place through his name; and has
promised for our encouragement, that he that believes in him, shall be saved.
But if any despise, disbelieve, and make light of the gospel, it is evident
divine justice does not now proceed against the sinner according to the
covenant made with Adam (as it is called by many) but according to a new
denunciation of wrath, under the Mediator's government, viz. He that believes
not shall be damned. Also, Whosoever loves not our LORD JESUS CHRIST, let him
be anathema, maranatha. Adam knew nothing of such a denunciation of wrath upon
the footing he stood in his innocence. St. Paul says, Tit. ii. II. The grace of
GOD that brings salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us, that,
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, etc. This is a
great gospel truth, and GOD's precepts expressly declare it to be his will,
that all men, viz. who hear of this grace, should come to the knowledge of the
truth, upon the footing of this gospel grace, and be saved; according as it is
revealed in the New Testament; this is GOD's preceptive will. Accordingly he
commands all men every where to repent, Acts xvii. 30. I conceive that St.
Paul, knowing when he wrote the second chapter of his first epistle to Timothy,
that it was the express command and preceptive will of our Savior, who is GOD,
that the gospel should be preached to all men, that they might come to the
knowledge of the truth and be saved; unless they should obstinately reject it;
therefore, in this sense, the text under consideration, was properly expressed.
This is a scriptural easy and consistent sense, and perfectly agrees with the
many texts that testify the eternal destruction of all, who in this life,
reject the gospel. This sense of the text agrees with the aforementioned
unalterable verdict, Mat. chapter xxv. This preceptive will of GOD can be, and has
been broken, from the time that GOD wrote part of his will, with his own singer
on tables of stone, Exodus chapter xxxi. until now. It was GOD's will that Israel
should not worship idols; but how often did they commit idolatry.

The preceptive will of GOD, made known by the law, and all the prophets, as
interpreted by our LORD JESUS, consists in loving GOD with all our heart, and
our neighbor as ourselves. I need no more proof of the matter, than to ask the
consciences of every moral agent, under the light of the gospel, whether they
have not broken this will of GOD, viz. this law of love. To sum up a cloud of
scripture witnesses, by one instance, I will quote Mat. xxiii. 37. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not, etc. Here is the same word in
the Greek, says a learned author, as in the text, 1 Timothy ii 4. translated WILL;
and in this passage WOULD, and might have been rendered in our English
language, How often have I willed together thy children, etc. It is evident in
this text, CHRIST represents himself as willing the salvation of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; and it is equally evident they prevented his will
taking effect, by their obstinate refusal of his kindness. CHRIST had made full
provision, in point of merit, for their salvation; and publicly proclaimed his
will, by an invitation for them to come, declaring all things were ready for
their refreshment; and had they accepted it, they would have been saved; but
notwithstanding this, they perished because they would not comply with his
invitation. Thus it is evident the text, in 1 Timothy ii. 4. is so sar from
affording the least evidence of the actual salvation of all men, that it
exactly agrees with the united verdict of CHRIST and his inspired witnesses,
that numbers of the children of the kingdom, viz. the obstinate Jews, were cast
into outer darkness, etc. And CHRIST testifies they never should taste of his
supper.

Thus I have showed, that all the texts I have perverted the sense of, in the
sample, will bear a scriptural meaning, with the verdict of CHRIST and his
inspired witnesses, respecting the everlasting punishment (not of the works of
iniquity) but of the workers of iniquity themselves, in their risen souls and
bodies, at the day of judgment For want of considering the scriptural
distinction, I have observed between the intententional, decreeative part of
GOD's will, and the preceptive part, as it respects moral agents, I conceive it
is, that all the consusion aforementioned has taken place. In every instance,
where the apostles speak of personal election, it was to them only, who, having
believed the gospel, made their personal election sure; by keeping the faith
and a good conscience; or, as St. Peter expresses it, 2 Pet. chapter i. such who
give diligence, to add to their faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance,
godliness, etc. Such persons have the spirit witnessing with their spirit, that
they are the elect children of GOD.

The knowledge of GOD's purposes being unchangeable, is of great service to
such, to support them under persecutions and trials; in this sense, the
Apostles speak of it to comfort and strength the saints. This secret of GOD is
only with the righteous, Prove. iii. 32. they only can read their new name in
the white stone, which no man knows saving he that receives it. The Psalmist
expresses it full and clear, Psalm. xxv. 14. The secret of the LORD is with
them that fear him; and be will sheen them his covenant. They are such
individuals, who can take comfort in the belief of GOD's unchangeable,
decrecative will and purposes, claiming, through grace, their right in the
exceeding great and precious promises; which may be summed up in the words of
our LORD JESUS, John xiv. 19. Because I live, ye shall live also. And it was
GOD's purpose to save every one, that ever was, or will be saved, through the
sanctification of the spirit and the belief of the truth, 2 Thef. chapter ii.
Accordingly, GOD calls them by the gospel: And upon truly believing the record
GOD has given of his Son, any one may know his personal election: and GOD has
revealed no other way for any sinner to have knowledge of it, any more than if
there had not been one word written, that ever GOD had any absolute decrecative
will, or not.

Therefore, it ought to be carefully observed, whenever the scriptures speak of
GOD's decrees, as ordaining men personally to eternal happiness, or misery,
they have always reference to them, under the characters, to which the promises
and threatenings are made, by GOD's preceptive will, For instance; GOD promises
to justify the believer, to pardon the penitent, and will glorify the
perservering saint. -- So he decreed from eternity, to justify, pardon, and
glorify such: And on the other hand, he as absolutely ordained from eternity,
that the finally unbelieving, impenitent, disobedint sinner, as such, should be
punished with everlasting destruction, 2 Thef. i. 9. This state of the case
cannot be denied by any, without giving the lie to a considerable part of the
New Testament scriptures, which speak of those important points. This being a
scriptural fact, I conceive it is presumptuous, and very daring, for any mortal
to undertake to preach, or write his ideas respecting the decreeative part of
GOD's will, when he is at best a mere guesser; and by his mystical reasonings,
to assert many things which expressly contradict the preceptive part of GOD's
will, which is plainly revealed by the word which shall judge us at the last
day, as surely as CHRIST's testimony is true, John xii. 48. The word that I
have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. Yea, boldly deny the
express testimonies of CHRIST and his inspired witnesses.

Where, Sir, do you get your commission and authority to proclaim to a world of
sinners, the intentional, decreeative part of GOD's will, first? when it is
evident as words can express it, that CHRIST commissioned his Apostles to go
and preach the preceptive part of his will to every creature; first witnessing
to every man's conscience, that if they believed their testimony, they should
be saved; if not, they should be damned. They further testified, that the
penalty fixed by CHRIST, the great surety, aforenamed, for all such as did not
repent and obey the gospel, was everlasting destruction from the presence of
the LORD.

I pray you to remember that the scriptures do not say, in one instance, that
ever CHRIST repented for any sinner, or credited his own record for any, hoped
or obeyed the gospel for any sinner: These are acts of a moral agent, and as
necessary, in order to our personal knowledge of our election, as that the
elect JESUS should atone the deity, to prepare a way for our return to GOD's
favor.

He obeyed the law for sinners, it is true, but we must credit it, each one for
himself, in order to be personally justified; and each one obey the gospel, or
perish; as sure as the word which will judge us at the last day, is true.

Please, Sir, to pause one half hour, and consider whether you do not preach
your gospel wrong end foremost; testifying to sinners, that their names are all
written in the white stone, by GOD's intentional, decreeative will; whether
they have received it, or can even, read it, or not, you are persuaded their
names are all there.

And now, if sinners will but pin their faith upon your guess, or only believe
your opinion of the scriptures, they may find rest to their souls, immediately,
whether they take CHRIST's yoke upon them, or the devil's, for the present, no
matter; all will be finally saved. O astonishing! If such doctrine is not
sewing pillows to all arm-holes, and trying peace where GOD says no peace, I
know of no way it can be performed.

I can speak the truth in CHRIST, and lie not, my conscience bearing me witness
by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, that the Aposties did not preach their
gospel in such a manner, but contratiwise. I leave it as my dying witness to
this generation, and to them who may be born in ages to come, if they should
read these lines, that there is not one text in the Bible, that says GOD's
intentional will, is to save the souls or persons of all Adam's family, and
punish their crimes only. Neither is there a sentence that can properly bear
such a meaning, excepting the lie told our mother Eve, Genesis iii. 4. Our great
judge, with his inspired witnesses, have testified the contrary; and surely no
appeal can be made from our Savior's decision.

May the LORD grant you, and all that are entangled and bewildered with you,
heartily to consider the scriptural testimonies I have offered to your
consideration. So, wishing you, with myself, and all of every denomination,
wherein we are mistaken, in any religious point, may experience the blessing
recorded in Isa. xxix. 24. They also that erred in spirit shall come to
understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine. --

I remain your grieved friend, SAMUEL SHEPARD.


