THE SPUNKIAD: OR HEROISM IMPROVED. A CONGRESSIONAL DISPLAY OF SPIT AND CUDGEL.
A POEM, IN FOUR CANTOES.

BY AN AMERICAN YOUTH.

NEWBURGH: PRINTED AND SOLD BY D. DENNISTON. M, DCC, XCVIII.

THE SPUNKIAD, etc.
CANTO I.
INDULGENT Muse! thy genial fire impart,
And glow refulgent in my youthful heart,
Dwell in my soul, while I in strains sublime,
Relate the wonders of the western clime;
Teach me to sing, in animating lays,
The strange transactions of the modern days;
Thy power, O CLIO! and thy spirit lend,
My song enliven, and my cause befriend;
Thou, whose immortal rapture breathing fire
Did HOMER, BARLOW, and FRENEAU inspire,
Now deign to shed thine influence divine,
Inspire my pen, and bless the great design,
Nor Grecian heroes, nor the Trojan flame,
The Spartan prowess, nor the Roman fame,
Deserved more amply of thy powerful aid,
Than the grand subject of the Spunkiad.
Let other Poets chaunt their amorous strains,
Of Cupid's victims, and of Hymen's chains;
Let others sing of seasons and of times,
Of different nations and of different climes;
A theme more noble for my song I choose,
Still more adapted to awake the muse;
Of Legislators, fraught with spunk, I sing,
Whose fame ere long in distant climes shall ring.
One undertakes his brother's face to scrub,
And he with vengeance wields the hick'ry club.
Attend the tale, ye social freeborn bands!
The MUSE awhile the attentive ear demands.
In modern date on famed Columbia's shore,
The seat of science and of useful lore,
Where reigns no despot and no tyrant frowns,
And where exist no sceptred monarchs' crowns;
But where the freeman, blessed with equal laws,
Stands firm and faithful in his righteous cause --
Our sapient sages, men of worth and weight,
Convened in Congress for the wise debate
Some were for honor, some for riches came,
Some thought of glory and eternal fame,
And some (perhaps too few) wise laws to frame.
But language pauses, and scarce deigns to tell
What dire mishap their rising fame befell!
From cold Vermont's far northern frigid clime,
Where the Green Mount uprears its cliffs sublime,
Whose verdant hue a noble prospect lends,
And awful scenery with the pleasant blends;
Brave LYON'S self to join their body came,
More for his country's good than wealth or fame,
A zealous stickler for the people's cause,
"Who feared no frowns and sought no blind applause;"
At splendid pageantry and pomp he frowned,
Despised all formal rites as empty sound;
Like some tall oak, the hero of the wood,
Which scorns to bend before the raging flood,
His dauntless soul despised the tyrant's nod,
And crouch'd beneath no vile despotic rod.
Such was the man, whom those of different creed,
Combined to smother, and his cause impede.
Long did the sage, with freedom's voice inspired,
Cry down the rites by custom's slaves required;
Whilst in amaze, and with a dread surprise,
His colleagues star'd and scarce believed their eyes,
To see the plain-bred mountaineer refuse,
To join their throng, and custom thus abuse;
Long did they urge our hero to comply,
To what they would long observed, they knew not why,
But he relentless stood, and plead his cause,
Without one second and without applause.
Firm and upright the undaunted hero stood,
The scourge of tyrants on his native sod;
No custom swayed him, and no frowns impressed,
But truth and virtue fired his manly breast.
Thus stood the sage, whose heart with freedom glowed,
And Vermont's sons their grateful praise bestowed.
CANTO II.
ERE yet four moons revolving had expired,
Again they met, with equal ardor fired;
But O! what language can suffice to tell
What tumult reigned where peace and love should dwell.
From eastern climes the famous Griswold came,
Whose thirst for honor fed ambition's flame;
Early he rose to posts of trust and gain,
And early fell to infamy again;
In buffoon wit and impudence he shone,
Yet thought no wisdom could excel his own.
Against freedom's cause a furious war he waged,
And factious demons in his bosom raged.
Such was the man whom future bards shall sing,
And with his fame make hills and valleys ring;
Whose nervous arm did wield the hick'ry cane
Upon his unarmed foe's defenseless brain.
And now the council of the western world
The fates of nations and of states unfurled;
The wise, the great, the patriot and the sage,
In learned debate did each with warmth engage.
Brave Gallia's sons, so late our warmest friends,
Complained of trespass and required amends;
Our ships they plundered, and our commerce spoiled,
And all our trade in ruin's gulf embroiled;
Denounced dire vengeance and in angry mood.
Declared if longer in their light we stood,
Our plains they would deluge in the crimson flood.
Indignant millions caught the dread alarm,
While amor patriae nerv'd each hero's arm,
And all with horror viewed the approaching storm.
In this great crisis of impending fate,
(I blush when I the shameful tale relate)
That cordial friendship once our council's boast,
On this occasion was forgot and lost;
If one's opinion differed from the rest,
Malicious rancor lurked in every breast
Against the man who dared their will oppose,
Or who against their favorite schemes arose.
Thus persecution's unrelenting hand,
Even to this place with fury did extend.
'Twas thus the pattern of all realms beside,
Had dwindled down to selfishness and pride.
While Congress then each threatening cloud surveyed,
And schemes and plans in wisdom's scales were weighed,
A deed was done, which casts eternal shame
On hist'ry's leaf, and blots the page of fame.
In private converse numbers were engaged,
Some this opinion, and some that alleged;
When Vermont's son, with much impatience fired,
To see some men by selfish views inspired,
Addressed his colleagues who around him stood.
In this reproving but good humor'd mood:
"Believe, my friends, that (though you may not see
The truth of this, it is very plain to me,)
My colleagues here from eastern parts who came,
Have naught in view but interest and same,
Regardless of their country's good they come,
Obtain their wishes and again go home;
Self-interest and gain inspires their mind,
This they pursue, and leave all else behind;
I know the minds of those by whom they are sent,
And who ere long will give their feelings vent;
Often in contention I Have with them engaged,
And often convincd them of the truth alleged."
Meanwhile, the man whom Lion had exposed,
With anger fired to see his views opposed,
Now felt his pluck fast rising in his throat,
Which threatened soon to find its passage out;
He quelled it with this base unmanly word,
Sir did you fight them with your wooden sword? Alluding to the old story of
his having been disgraced in the army.

A peal of laughter burst from different lungs,
At this the wittiest of all witty tongues.
The sage concealed his ire (if aught he found)
Suppressed his feelings and despised the sound.
While thus resumed his yet undaunted strain,
And calm, addressed the attentive crowd again:
"Yes, gentlemen, were I to try my hand,
I Would change the creed of that deluded land;
They Would soon discharge this selfish set of men,
And then would justice rear her head again;
I Would soon dispel those fable mists, that rise
And shed delusion over the people's eyes;
I Would tear the veil with one consuming blast,
Which over their faces has so long been cast,
And form a revolution in their minds at last.
Ere long, should fortune my endeavors bless,
Perhaps I Will try them with a Printing-Press,
And then I Will shed the effulgent blaze around,
Then will I sight them on a nearer ground;
Their self applauding leaders then shall find
The nose is not the place by which to lead mankind."
Young Griswold now no longer could contain
The ripening rage which long had fired his brain,
With hasty steps straight from his seat he rose,
And placed himself just under Lyon's nose;
Then jogged his arm, determined to be heard,
Affected coolness in his mien appeared;
While frequent grins his inward mind betrayed,
With much sang froid deliberate he said --
"Should you go there according to your word,
Sir, would you take along your wooden sword?"
This pierced too far; his patience now was spent,
His bosom raged to give its feelings vent;
The foaming torrent, burst the stormy place,
And shed its moist contents on Griswold's face.
Thus sweetly bathed, the hero took alarm,
Half choked with rage, he braced his nervous arm,
Prepared to strike the all destroying blow,
Which straight should send him to the realms below;
But suddenly he checked his furious ire,
Suppressed a while his fierce revengeful fire;
Perhaps he thought, "should I begin the treat,
I might get d -- 'd black eyes and sorely beat;
Whereas, should Dayton lift the avenging rod,
He Would drive him hence, and save a deal of blood,
Then would my direful vengeance be complete,
To see him sneak disgraceful from his seat:
But, should my colleagues not approve the plan,
I Will steal a sly revenge whenever I can."
Lulled with this though it, he brook'd the vile disgrace,
And wiped the frothy plaster from his face.
As when some dread volcano's laboring breast,
Whose swelling torrent long has been suppressed,
With horrid grumbling shakes the vale below,
And trembling natives view the impending woe,
Withholds its flames, 'till, dreaming naught of harm,
They fall overwhelmed beneath the fiery storm:
Thus he reserved, until some future day,
The direful storm which then should burst its way,
When Lion should unarmed by him be seen,
Then wreak his fury, and with vengeful spleen
Dicharge his thunder from its torrid bed,
In dreadful torrents on his aged head!
CANTO III.
HARK! whence this shrill, this loud alarming sound,
Which rends the skies and shakes the trembling ground?
It Is Fame; whose voice flies over each land and clime,
And spares no cause, no season, age or time;
Her brazen trump, with shrill and piercing sound,
Proclaimed the tale to distant shores around;
Exulting despots heard the noise afar,
And smiled with pleasure at the shameful jar;
"Soon (cried the tyrant) soon we'll see the day,
When they to us shall fall an easy prey,
Their liberty and boasted freedom's flame,
Will prove ere long to be an empty name;
Now fast approaching is the joyful time
When thrones and crowns shall rule the western clime."
Such was the plan (no doubt) they held in view,
And this perhaps may yet be sound too true;
These jarring frays no future good portend,
On these some adverse demon must attend,
From these I view the dreadful storm at hand,
Which hangs impending over my native land.
Arise Columbia's sons, united strive
To quell the storm, bid freedom's sun revive.
As erst old BABELS' heaven aspiring crew,
Received the check to their presumption due,
When unknown language dwelt on every tongue
And loud confusion through the rabble rung;
So rang the hall from side to side around,
Contending voices formed a murmuring sound;
The foes if LION with exulting strain,
In secret hailed the approaching monarch's reign;
Rejoiced together, and with smiles beheld,
The wished for time when he should be expelled;
When freedom's blaze, extinguished weak and dim,
Should shine no more upon their mystic scheme;
'Till ADAMS should to sceptred glory rise,
And reign the monarch of the western skies;
But in this house some patriots yet were found,
To check their progress and their hopes confound.
And now behold with all attentive eyes,
See different men of different parties rise,
Some could forgive, some not, and some despise;
See them on oath rehearse the shameful tale,
While partial turns, and prejudice prevail;
One talks of honor, dignity and fame,
Another fears their everlasting shame;
Thus they prolonged their useless dry debate,
And thus they drained the coffers of the slate,
As when some wight gets beaten and abused,
His sconce is broken or most sadly bruised.
A quack forthwith displays chirurgic skill,
And sees a chance his empty purse to fill;
Quick to the patient then he gravely struts,
First cuts and views and next he views and cuts,
A nostrum next, which long has graced the shelf,
Whose virtues none could find except himself,
With much encomium, to the wound applies,
Mal-treated thus, the fatal symptoms rise,
The wound grows larger and the patient dies;
Just so our dignity thus torn and bruised,
When wrongly dressed, ill-treated and misused;
Instead of healing up, the wound is worse,
And quacks exulting bear away our purse.
Our mountaineer with deep concern beheld,
All order banished and all hope dispel'd;
Contrition's pangs now kindled in his breast,
And to his colleagues this defense addressed.
"My friends, had I foreseen the ill effect
Of this rash deed, my anger had been checked;
I never dreamt when I my ire displayed
That mountains out of molehills would be made.
If I have erred, forgiveness now I ask,
And let us resign this vile ungrateful task.
Long have I labored in my country's cause,
With approbation and unfeigned applause;
And Vermont's sons, by whose decree I came,
Could soon assure you of my spotless name.
When war's dread horrors reigned within our land,
And freedom's voice invoked the hero's hand;
When tyrants strove to make our brethren slaves
To foreign realms beyond the Atlantic waves;
When savage hosts from northern wilds came forth,
And spared no sex, no age, degree or birth;
Then I obtained that pure unfeigned esteem,
Which fills my heart with gratitude supreme;
And though a stigma on my name was thrown,
They Are now convinced the fault was not my own.
Could I alone abide the dangerous post,
When every man had fled the threatening host?
Yet none escaped the mortifying doom,
I Would rather made the savage maw my tomb.
In dark oblivion's gulf the tale was drowned,
Awhile was hushed the vile ungrateful sound,
Till meddling envy, with her spiteful train,
Tore up the wound within my breast again;
Since then I Have acted in a higher sphere,
Discharged important trusts from year to year;
Sincere applause from every quarter burst,
And I was chosen for my present trust;
Since then I Have strove their kindness to repay,
And spoke whatever I thought themselves would say;
Does it become me, as a man of trust
To brook such insults? sure it is unjust;
Impartial men, who rightly view the fact,
I trust, will pardon and forgive the act."
In vain to hush the rising storm he sought,
His plain and just defense availed him naught,
Their utmost skill his angry foes applied,
T'extract this bramble from their aching side;
Should we (thought they) get this cursed whig dismissed,
'Twould strike one vote from democratic list;
Each little helps, and to our side will add,
We'll help the good by taking from the bad.
'O dire disgrace!' some hot-bloods would exclaim,
'A seat with him would be an odious shame;
Vile wretch! to daub our noble brother's face,
Our honor's gone, should he sustain his place?
See heart-rent OTIS wipe his moist'ning eyes,
While thus to each attentive wight he cries:
"When radiant Phoebus' orient beams arise,
Or in meredian splendour deck the skies;
Or gloomy night her sable curtain draws,
And splendid Phoebus' gleaming ray withdraws;
When drowsy MORPHEUS with his leaden mace
Bids senses rest, and every nerve unbrace;
Still, still the horrid vision haunts my brain,
And all the scene seems acted over again,
LIONS and GRISWOLDS in dreadful contest rise,
And sleep forsakes my sorrow flowing eyes."
Again, O MUSE, thy aid I now implore,
While I rehearse Sir Dayton's thunder over.
A feeling man, R. WILLIAMS.
whom all good men shall bless,
Whose praise may each indulgent Muse express,
Expulsion he as too severe opposed,
And in its stead a reprimand proposed:
'A reprimand! quoth Dayton, 'trifling doom!
I Would sooner see him in the silent tomb:
Grant me thy bolt, O father of the world,
With vengeance pointed, and with fury hurled;
Red hot from Vulcan's furnace let it come,
Grant me thy strength to point my vengeance home,
And strike the vile detested rascal dumb!'
Thus spoke the man (or thus at least he thought,)
With anger bloated, and with vengeance fraught.
But now the Muse demands a short repose,
That she a tale more dreadful may disclose.
CANTO IV.
THE Muse, awakened, now renews her fire,
Once more she deigns to touch the obedient lyre.
Attend, while I relate in song sublime,
A tale, whose fame shall even outlive old Time.
Ye Nine! direct me, and begin the song,
To such a theme immortal strains belong.
When Griswold heard the thundering Speaker roar
His soul expanded and escaped the floor.
High over the azure void his spirit flew,
And from the earth his deathless part withdrew;
With rapid flight he reached the bright abodes
Of bliss celestra, and the seat of Gods,
High on his throne, old HERCULES he spied,
Then bowed submissive, and thus trembling cried;
'Father of might, indulge my small request,
A Lion does my mortal frame infest;
Lend me thy club, or one small part at least,
That I may fly to kill the angry beast."
The nervous god, with much contempt, replied;
'Thou wield my club! what vain presumptuous pride!
Vain mortal, know my club is not so small,
It weighs as much as thou do, guts and all:
But, to content thee, if thou have a knife.
I Will split enough to take the Lyon's life."
The indulgent god, cut, while he dreamt no harm,
A stick as big, almost, as Griswold's arm.
(But had he known what Lion 'twas he meant,
To PLUTO's realms Sir Griswold had been sent,
For Herkey was, as I have heard it said,
As good a whig as ever wore a head.)
With gratitude he bowed, and grimly smiled,
Pursued his journey through the trackless wild;
Arrived on earth, the heav'n-wro't club he twirl'd
Around his head, and banter'd all the world.
Toward Congress hall his hasty steps he bent,
To give the storm within its dreadful vent;
The happy chance now met his watchful eye,
His Lion now unarmed he saw with joy;
His head uncovered, and his cane aside.
With flashing eyes the' approaching hero spied;
His lifted arm with tenfold vigor grasped,
He breathed dire vengeance while the club he clasped:
When Hercules the Nemaean lion fought,
And hard to kill the furious beast he wrought,
With horrid cracks the thundering strokes resound,
And echoing woods repeat the noise around:
Our hero thus, his direful vengeance fed,
With equal fury on his foe's bare head
Thus unprepared: the astonished Lion rose,
And sought a refuge from the furious blows;
'Till closed alike, in angry conflict bound,
They both at length came tumbling to the ground.
Our thundering speaker viewed the scene awhile,
And horribly he grinn'd a ghastly smile!
'Till some less sanguine flew to Lyon's aid,
And thus awhile the furious combat staid.
Our Lion now, astonished and perplexed,
To find himself thus beaten, bruised and vexed,
Was forced at present to endure his fate,
Yet vowed to crush the coward soon or late.
Fortune ere long reversed the former scene,
And winked to Lion to emit his spleen;
Our injured wight the pressing moment caught,
And braced the arm which never in vain had wro't,
But Griswold, ere the thundering storm began,
Escaped the field and from the battle ran;
Till some humane, some sympathizing hand,
Conveyed a weapon to his flying friend:
But now alas, the thundering Speaker bawled,
And order soon from every side was called;
Our order-loving Dayton, fore afraid,
To see his darling get a broken head,
Soon found a way to check the gathering storm,
And screen his Griswold from impending harm.
When much debate on every side had past,
They came to this conclusive point at last;
That they no more their country should disgrace,
But FIGHT IT OUT, some other time and place!
Thus ends the tale, which stamps eternal shame
On freedom's sons, and on Columbia's name;
Whose fame shall gall the blushing patriot's breast,
The game of tyrants, and of kings the jest;
A pantomime, which in some future age,
Shall shine in farce, and grace the comic stage.
I sing no more: now Phoebus gilds the west,
The POET drops his lyre, the MUSE retires to rest.
FINIS.

