THE COMPANION: BEING A SELECTION OF THE BEAUTIES OF THE MOST CELEBRATED
AUTHORS, IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.

IN PROSE AND VERSE.

'Thou, cheerfulness, by Heaven designed
To rule the pulse, that moves the mind.'
AKENSIDE. PRINTED BY NATHANIEL AND BENJAMIN HEATON, FOR JOSEPH J. TODD,
PROVIDENCE, At the SIGN of the BIBLE and ANCHOR.

M, DCC, XCIX.

CONTENTS.
THE Indians, a Tale, PROFESSOR RICHARDSON PAGE. 9 Rodolpho and Matilda, KEATE
PAGE. 24 Choang and Hansi, a Chinese tale, DR. GOLDSMITH PAGE. 27 The Two
Coquettes, CUNNINGHAM PAGE. 31 The disabled Soldier, DR. GOLDSMITH PAGE. 33 The
three Warnings, THRALE PAGE. 40 The Ruins of the House of Albert, ANON PAGE. 44
A Turkish Ode, ANON PAGE. 56 The Surrender of Calais, BROOKS PAGE. 58 Albert
and Elweena, FALCONAR PAGE. 68 Croma, an ancient Poem, OSSIAN PAGE. 74 An
Elegy, GRAY PAGE. 79 The Baron St. Brunne, a Provencal tale, RADCLIFFE PAGE. 85
Fate of Athwold and Elfrida, MEEK PAGE. 93 Adventures of a Knight, a Tale of
the Sixteenth Century, C. SHINK PAGE. 101 A Fairy Tale, in the ancient English
Style, PARNELL PAGE. 119 The Cave of Modred, a British Story, ANON PAGE. 126
Armine and Elvira, a Legendary Tale, ANON PAGE. 146 Sir Reginald de Cuthbert, a
Romance elucidated, ANON PAGE. 167 The Hermit of Warkworth, DEAN PERCY PAGE.
175
PART THE SECOND. THE TREASURY OF WIT.
A Rogue's Modesty PAGE. 210 A Virgin's Request PAGE. 228 Anecdote of Dr.
Radcliffe PAGE. 211 A disputable Fact PAGE. 217 An indisputable Fact PAGE. 222
A Receipt by which two men can make fifty armed men run PAGE. 222 An
unaccountable whim PAGE. 227 A remarkable case PAGE. 228 A doubtful case PAGE.
227 A disquisition on colors PAGE. 224 A Kick for a Bite PAGE. 210 A Prophecy
fulfilled PAGE. 215 A military Anecdote PAGE. 216 A cure for the itch of
Duelling PAGE. 221 A glimpse of Cosmography PAGE. 221 A Soldier's Reply PAGE.
223 A hanging matter PAGE. 224 A receipt to prevent any bad accident by falling
from a tree PAGE. 225 A perfect hunch-back PAGE. 236 A Rogue caught in bad
Company PAGE. 241 Comparisons of Drunkenness PAGE. 218 Count de Grance PAGE.
241 Dead alive PAGE. 220 Don Sancho in distress PAGE. 215 Extreme Modesty PAGE.
234 Fortune of a Liar PAGE. 218 Fruitless Precaution PAGE. 228 Great
Consolation for the Loss of an Eye PAGE. 214 Historical Anecdote PAGE. 237
Horsemanship PAGE. 234 How to cut a Cheese in the best place PAGE. 236 Ill
Effects of rising early PAGE. 233 Imaginary Courage PAGE. 213 Last Words of Don
Francis PAGE. 213 Law explained PAGE. 234 Liberty and Equality PAGE. 219
Nought's Wife PAGE. 229 Oratory PAGE. 240 Praying made easy PAGE. 217 Prayer at
Sea PAGE. 236 Preaching well applied PAGE. 216 Remarkable accident of a gun,
which went off without being charged PAGE. 230 Real Courage PAGE. 212 Story of
an Ass who contradicted his Master PAGE. 223 Specimen of English skill in wit
and warfare PAGE. 238 Surprising Instance of Forgetfulness PAGE. 226 Signs of
Civilization PAGE. 235 Sum total of a Lord Mayor's talents PAGE. 237 The Man of
Fortitude PAGE. 214 The Man of Feeling PAGE. 225 The Man of Failing PAGE. 225
Tears of Affection PAGE. 219 The Linguist PAGE. 242 The bloody minded Parson
PAGE. 231 The contented Wife PAGE. 233 The Goose and his Lordship PAGE. 240 The
Retort PAGE. 211 The Reply PAGE. 212 The wooden God PAGE. 222 The deaf Man
stunned PAGE. 229 Tit for tat PAGE. 230 The poor Scholar PAGE. 231 The old
Sportsman outwitted PAGE. 231 The great Bishop's beard PAGE. 232 The generous
Conqueror PAGE. 232 The Parson brought to terms PAGE. 235 Unfortunate
Speculation PAGE. 233 Voltaire PAGE. 242 Wonderful Power of Magnetism PAGE. 220
PART THE THIRD. THE REPOSITORY OF GENIUS.
A Court Audience PAGE. 244 A Rhapsody PAGE. 246 A Repartee PAGE. 249 Lines
written in a Lady's Milton PAGE. 247 Lord Lyttleton to Lady Brown PAGE. 245 On
Matrimony PAGE. 245 Sir Topewell PAGE. 250 True Wit PAGE. 243 The Moralist
PAGE. 243 The Lawyer and Client PAGE. 244 True Benevolence PAGE. 246 The Friend
PAGE. 247 The Fashions PAGE. 248 The Knights of the Sheers PAGE. 244 The Kings
of Europe PAGE. 249 The Comparison PAGE. 248 The dead alive PAGE. 250 The
Modern Couple PAGE. 248 The Fair Thief PAGE. 251 Upon a Mill PAGE. 245 What the
world is like PAGE. 250 Young Tony's Reason for drinking PAGE. 247
PART THE FOURTH. FASHIONABLE SONGS.
Adams and Liberty PAGE. 275 All for a Song PAGE. 253 A favorite Scotch Air
PAGE. 267 Hail Columbia PAGE. 273 Heathen Mythology PAGE. 255 In the dead of
the night PAGE. 271 Nancy, or the Sailor's Journal PAGE. 264 Poor Tom, or the
Sailor's Epitaph PAGE. 266 Row, dow, dow PAGE. 254 Tom Tackle PAGE. 257 The
Federal Constitution PAGE. 279 The generous Lover PAGE. 261 The neglected Fair
PAGE. 268 Tug at the Oar PAGE. 259 The girl of my heart PAGE. 261 It Is no fault
of mine PAGE. 262 The Fashions PAGE. 270 The Eve PAGE. 272
THE INDIANS. A TALE.
In pity come, and ease my grief,
Bring my distempered soul relief.

MARANO, amiable in her sorrow, sat alone by a shelving rock. She sought in
solitude to indulge the anguish of her soul. She leaned pensive on her arm. Her
tresses flowed careless to the gale. The blooming beauty of her complexion was
flushed with weeping. Her eyes were full of tender anxiety. And her bosom
heaved with repeated sighs.

'When will he return?' she said, my beloved Oneyo! the husband of my
affections! How I long to behold him! ye waves of Ontario convey him to his
native shore; restore him to his friends; restore him to my tender embrace. O
when shall I behold him? when will the swift canoe come bounding over the lake,
and waft the hero to his gladsome isle! Yes, thou happy isle! thy rocks, thy
resounding glades, and thy forests shall then rejoice. Gladness shall then be
in the village. The Elders shall come forth to receive him. The festival shall
be prepared. Ah me! peradventure he has perished! Or now expires in some
bloody field! impetuous in his valor, and eager in the ardour of youth,
perchance he rushes on the foe and falls! While Marano thus indulged her
inquietude, the venerable Ononthio was drawing nigh to console her. He had
perceived the uneasiness of her soul, and had followed her from the village. He
was the father of Oneyo, one of the Elders of the nation, revered for his
wisdom, and beloved for his humanity. He loved Marano with the affection of a
father. 'Be comforted,' he said, give not thy soul to despair. The great
spirit, who rides in the whirlwind, and speaks from the passing thunder, will
protect thee. But to merit his favor, be resigned to his will. It is impious
to anticipate misery, and render ourselves unhappy before we are actually
afflicted. Be comforted. Oneyo may soon return loaded with the spoils of the
Briton, and extolled by the gallant warriors of France.

'To see my husband return in safety,' she replied, is the sum of my desires.
To see him loaded with the spoils of the Briton will be no addition to my joy.
The Indian seemed astonished. 'Have you forgotten,' she continued, that I
myself am a Briton that I was carried violently from my father's house, when
the Outagami ravaged our land, and carried terror to the gates of Albany? My
parents perished. I was yet a child; but I remember the bloody carnage. My
brother of riper years, was rescued; but I became the prey of their fury. Since
that time, many years are elapsed; yet at the name of Briton my bosom glows
with peculiar transport.

'I fondly imagined,' answered the Indian, that you loved us. We named you
after the manner of our tribe. But your affections are estranged, and you
languish for the land of your fathers. I called you my daughter -- but, Marano
you would leave me. Uttering these words, he looked tenderly upon her. You
would leave me, he repeated, and a tear rose in his eye. Marano was affected.
She clasped his hand, and pressed it to her rosy lips. No, I will never leave
thee. My heart is thine, and my beloved Oneyo's. I revere thee. Can I forget
thy compassion? Can I forget the dreadful day when the Outagami, in an assembly
of their nation, decreed me a sacrifice to their god Areskoui. You was present
on an embassy from your people. Oneyo in the bloom of years accompanied his
father. He was beside you. He sighed, when he beheld me weeping. Alas! I was
feeble, friendless, and beset with soes. Oneyo entreated you to relieve me.
Your own heart was affected; you interposed in my behalf; you redeemed me, and
called me yours. Oneyo hasted to my deliverance; he loosened my setters, and
clasped me to his breast. Our affection grew with our years. You beheld it with
kind indulgence, and ratified our wishes with your consent. I have heard of
European refinements, of costly raiment, and lofty palaces; yet to me the
simplicity of these rocks and forests seem far more delightful. But if Oneyo
returns not, I am undone. Many moons have arisen since. With the flower of our
tribe, he departed. The matrons are already wailing for their sons. -- Oneyo,
alas! is impetuous, and if he has fallen, grief will subdue thee; I know the
tenderness of thine affection; it will pull thee down to the grave. Who then
will be my friend? Among a strange people, I have no father to protect me, no
brother to counsel or give me aid.

Ononthio was about to reply, when an Indian from the village accosted them. He
told them, with a sorrowful aspect, that the hopes of their tribe were blasted,
for that some Indians of a neighboring nation, having returned from Canada,
brought certain intelligence of the total overthrow of their friends; that they
had, with difficulty, escaped; that Oneyo was seen fierce and intrepid in the
heat of the battle; that he was surrounded by the foe, and must have fallen a
victim to their fury.

Marano was overwhelmed. Ononthio heaved a sigh: but the hapless condition of
his daughter, and the desire of yielding her consolation, suspended and
relieved his sorrow. If my son has fallen, he said, he has fallen as became a
warrior. His praise shall be preserved by his kindred and descend to posterity
in the war song. His name shall terrify the European, when the chieftains of
future times, rushing fierce from their forests, shall surround his habitation
at midnight, and raise the yell of death in his ear. Oneyo shall not die
unrevenged. 'He shall not,' interrupted the Indian. The messingers of our
misfortune hovered around the walls of Quebec. They surprised a party of the
foe, they have brought them captives to our Island; the Elders of our nation
are now assembled; they have doomed them a sacrifice to the memory of the dead;
and defer their execution, only till your arrival. 'Alas!' said Marano, the
sacrafice of a captive will afford me small consolation. Will the death of a
foe restore life to my husband? or heal his ghastly wounds? or reanimate his
breathless bosom? Leave me to my woe. Leave me to wail on these lonely
mountains. Here I will not long be a sojourner. I will away to my love. I will
meet him beyond the deserts, in some blissful valley, where no bloody foe shall
invade us. Leave me to my sorrow; for I will not live. She entreated in vain.
The Indian was urgent, and Ononthio seconded his solicitation.

That nation of Indians, of which Oneyo was a leader, inhabited an Island in
the Lake Ontario. They were, therefore, no sooner informed of the death of
Oneyo, and of their brethren, than they abandoned themselves to loud
lamentations. The matrons with rent garments and disshevelled tresses, ran
forth into the fields, and filled the air with their wailing. They then crowded
around the captives, whom, in the bitterness of their woe, they loaded with
keen invectives. The Elders were assembled; the boiling caldron into which the
victims, after suffering every species of torment, were to be precipitated, was
suspended over a raging fire; the knives, tomahawks, and other implements of
cruelty, were exhibited in dreadful array; and the prisoners, loaded with heavy
fetters, were conducted to the place of sacrifice.

Though Marano was deeply afflicted, the screams of the Indians, and the horrid
preparations of torture, drew her attention to the prisoners. She regarded them
with an eye of pity. Their leader, in the prime of youth, was comely, vigorous,
and graceful. The sullenness of undaunted and indignant valor was portrayed by
nature in his fearless aspect. His eye, full of ardour and invincible firmness,
surveyed the preparations of death with indifference, and shot defiance to the
foe. His followers, though valiant, seemed incapable of the same obstinate
resolution; their features betrayed symptoms of dismay; but turning to their
leader, they were struck with his unshaken boldness, they resumed their native
courage, and armed their minds with becoming fortitude. Marano sighed. The
sense of her own misfortune was for a moment suspended. Peradventure, said she
in her soul, this valiant youth, like Oneyo, may be lamented. Some tender
maiden, to whom his faith has been plighted, may now languish for his return.
Some aged parent, whose infirmities he relieved and supported, may be sighing,
anxious for his safety. Or some orphan sister, helpless and forsaken, like me,
may, by his death, be made desolate. She then reflected on her own condition,
and on the variety of her misfortunes. Carried into captivity in her early
years, she was a stranger to her people, and to her kindred. Her husband no
longer existed; and he, who had been to her as a father, overcome by age and
calamity, was now declining into the grave. Yet alive to compassion, she was
moved for the unhappy victims. She admired the magnanimity of their leader, and
in regarding him, she felt unusual emotions, and a pang that she could not
express. He was of her nation! Could she behold him perish, and not endeavor
to save him? Could she behold him tortured, and not shed a tear for his
sufferings! Meantime one of the Elders of the nation made a signal to the
multitude. Immediate silence ensued. Then with a look of stern severity, he
thus expressed himself to the captive. The caldron boils, the ax is sharpened.
Be prepared for torture and painful death. The spirit of the deceased is yet
among us. He lingers on the mountains, or hovers amid the winds. He expects a
sacrifice, and shall not chide our delay. Have you a parent or friend? They
shall never behold you. Prepare for torture and painful death. Inflict your
tortures, he replied, my soul contemns them. I have no parents to lament for
Sydney. In Albany they were massacred, massacred by inhuman Indians. I had a
sister -- I lost her. She was carried into captivity, and became the victim of
your savage sury. Inflict your tortures; my soul contemns them, but remember,
the day of vengeance shall overtake you.

Marano was astonished -- Of Albany! reft of his parents by the sword, and of a
sister! -- Suffice it to say, he was her brother. Mutual was their amazement,
their affection mutual. She fell on his throbbing breast. He received her into
his arms. His soul was softened. Marano for a time was speechless. At length
weeping and in broken accents -- And have I found thee! a brother to solace and
support me. Who will guide me through the weary wilderness of my sorrow! Who
will be to me as a parent! I was desolate and forlorn, my soul languished and
was afflicted; but now I will endure with patience. Then turning to the
astonished multitude, He is my brother! Born of the same parents! If I have
ever merited your favor, O save him from destruction. They were deeply
afflicted. 'Be not dismayed,' said Ononthio, he spoke with the consent of the
Elders: Be not dismayed. The brother of Marano shall be to us as Oneyo. Then
addressing himself, with an air of dignity to the stranger. Young man, I have
lost a son, Marano a husband, and our nation, a gallant warrior. He was slain
by the people of your land, and we are desirous of gratifying his spirit,
before it passes the mountains, by offering a sacrifice to his memory. But you
are the brother of Marano; by her intercession we have changed our design, and
adopt you into our tribe. Be a brother to our people, and to me a son. Supply
the place of the dead; and as you possess his valor, and steady boldness, may
you inherit his renown. So saying, he presented to him the calumet of peace,
and a girdle of wampum.

Meantime the arrival of some canoes, filled with armed warriors, attracted the
notice of the assembly. They were transported with ecstacy and surprise, when
they descried the ensign of their nation, and recognized some of their
brethren, whom they imagined slain. The hopes of Marano were revived. She
enquired eagerly for Oneyo. He perished, answered an Indian. She grew pale, her
voice faltered, faint and speechless, she fell back on the throbbing breast of
Ononthio. He perished, continued the Indian, and with him the prime of our
warriors. The armies of France and Britain were marshalled beneath the walls of
Quebec. Direful was the havoc of the battle. The earth trembled with the shock
of the onset. The air was tortured with repeated peals. The commanders of both
armies were slain. The fall was glorious, for their souls were undaunted.
Resentment inflamed the combatants. Keen and obstinate was the encounter.
Albion at length prevailed. Her sons, like a rapid torrent, overthrew the ranks
of their adversaries. We counseled Oneyo to retire. Raging against the foe,
and performing feats of amazing valor, we saw him environed beyond all hope of
retreat. We saw the impetuosity of a youthful warrior, who brandished a bloody
sword, rushing on to destroy him. We hastened from the field of death. We
tarried some time in the adjacent forests, and observed the progress of the
foe. The walls of our allies were overthrown. The sword of Albion will pursue
us; and our shield, our gallant warrior, our Oneyo is no more.

This melancholy recital filled the audience with lamentation. But their sorrow
was interrupted by the sudden astonishment of the narrator. Casting his eye
accidentally on the Briton, Seize him, tear him, he exclaimed; His was the
lifted sword I beheld! It was he cleft the breast of our chieftain! It was he
that destroyed him.

The resentment of the assembly was again inflamed. 'I am innocent of his
blood,' said the captive. But his declaration, and the entreaties of Ononthio
in his behalf, were lost in furious screams and invectives. They dragged him
again to the place of sacrifice. Marano, distracted with contending woes,
'Spare him, spare him!' exclaimed, 'He is my brother!' Fixing her eyes on him
with a look of exquisite anguish, whose hands are red with the blood of my
husband! And was there none but thee to destroy him? 'Tear him,' exclaimed the
multitude. Marano clasped him to her bosom, and turning to the outrageous and
menacing, with a wild and frantic demeanor, Bloody, bloody, though he be, I
will defend him, or perish! Let the same javelin transfix us both! Smite and
our kindred gore shall be mingled. The transcendent greatness of her calamity,
who had lost a husband by the hand of a brother, and the resistless energy of
her features, expressive of woe, tenderness and despair, awed the violence of
the Assembly, and disposed them to pity. Onorthio took advantage of the change.
He waved his hand with parental love and authority. His hoary locks gave
dignity to his gestures. The usual benignity of his countenance was softened
with sorrow. He spoke the language of his soul, and was eloquent; spoke the
language of feeling, and was persuasive. They listened to him with profound
veneration, were moved, and deferred the sacrifice. He then comforted Marano,
and conveyed the captives to a place of security.

When they were apart from the multitude, 'Tell me,' said he to the Briton, are
you guiltless of the death of my son! 'I know not,' he replied; for he had
resumed the pride of indignant courage, I know not whom I have slain. I drew my
sword against the foes of my country, and I am not answerable for the blood I
have spilt. 'Young man;' said Ononthio, full of solicitude and parental
tenderness, O reflect on a father's feelings. I had an only son. He was
valiant. He was the prop and solace of my old age; if he has gone down to
darkness and the grave, I have no longer any joy in existence. But, if he
lives, and lives by thy clemency, the prayers of an old man shall implore
blessings upon thee, and the great spirit shall reward thee? While he was yet
speaking, a tear rose in his eye, his voice faltered, he sighed -- O tell me if
my son survives.

'I slew him not,' he replied. In the heat of the encounter, a gallant Indian
assailed me. He was tired and exhausted* I disarmed him; and my sword was
lifted against his life. 'Briton,' said he with a resolute tone, think not that
death dismays me. I have braved perils and the sword. I am not a suppliant for
myself. I have an aged parent, whose life depends upon mine; the wife of my
bosom is a stranger among my people, and I alone can protect her. 'Generous
youth,' I replied, go, comfort and protect thy friends. I sent him forthwith
from the field. I never enquired into his condition; for in preserving him I
obeyed the dictates of my heart. Marano and Ononthio were overjoyed. But
reflecting that many days had elapsed since the discomfiture of their allies,
and that hitherto they had received no intelligence of Oneyo, their joy
suffered abatement.

Meantime Ononthio counseled his daughter to conduct the strangers to a
distant retreat, and preserve him there, till, by his influence and authority,
he had appeased the violence of his brethren.

It was already night. The Indians were dispersed to their hamlets, the sky was
calm and unclouded. The full-orbed moon, in serene and solemn majesty, arose in
the east. Her beams were reflected in a blaze of silver radiance from the
smooth and untroubled bosom of the lake. The gray hills and awful forests were
solitary and silent. No noise was heard, save the wailing of matrons, who
lamented the untimely death of their sons. Marano, with the captives, issuing
unperceived from the village, pursued their way along the silent shore, till
they arrived at a narrow unfrequented recess. It was open to the lake, bounded
on either side by shelving precipices, arrayed with living verdure, and parted
by a winding rivulet. A venerable oak overshadowed the fountain, and rendered
the scene more solemn. The other captives were overcome with fatigue, and
finding some withered leaves in an adjoining cavern, they indulged themselves
in repose. Marano conversed long with her brother; she poured out her soul in
her sympathising bosom; she was comforted and relieved. While she leaned on his
breast, while his arm was folded gently around her, a balmy slumber surprised
them. Their features, even in sleep, preserved the character of their souls. A
smile played innocent on the lips of Marano, her countenance was ineffably
tender, and her tresses lay careless on her snowy bosom. The features of
Sydney, of a bolder and more manly expression, seemed full of benignity and
complaisance. Calm and unruffled was their repose. They enjoyed the happy
visions of innocence, and dreamed not of impending danger.

The moon in unrivalled glory, had now attained her meridian, when the
intermitting noise of rowers came slowly along the lake. A canoe was advancing,
and the dripping oars arising at intervals from the water, shone gleaming along
the deep. The boatman, silent and unobserved, moored their vessel on the sandy
beach; and a young man of a keen and animated aspect, arrayed in the shaggy
skin of a bear, armed with a bow and a javelin, having left his companions, was
hastening along the shore. It was Oneyo. Having received wounds in the battle;
he had been unable to prosecute his return, and had tarried with some Indians
in the neighborhood of Montreal. By the skilful application of herbs and
balsams his cure was at length effectuated, and he returned impatient to his
nation.

'I will return secretly,' he said. I will enjoy the sorrow and regret of
Marano, and of my brethren, who, doubtless, believe me dead. I will enjoy the
ecstacy of their affection, and their surprise on my unexpected arrival. My
lovely Marano now laments unconsoled. I will hasten to relieve her, and press
her, weeping with joy, to my faithful transported bosom.

Such were the sentiments of anticipated rapture that occupied the soul of
Oneyo, when he discovered Marano in the arms of a stranger. He recoiled. He
stood motionless in an agony of grief, anger, and astonishment. Pale and
trembling he uttered some words incoherently. He again advanced, again
recognized her, then turning abruptly, in bitter anguish, smiting his breast.
Faithless and inconstant, he cried, and is this my expected meeting! In the
arms of a stranger! Arrogant invader of my felicity! He shall perish! His blood
shall expiate his offense. Fury flashed in his eye, he grasped his javelin, he
aimed the blow, and recognized his deliverer. Surprise and horror seized him.
Injured by my deliverer! By him, whom my soul revered! And shall I dip my hands
in his blood! My life he preserved. Would to Heaven, he had slain me! Thus
injured and betrayed, Oneyo will not live. -- Thou great universal Spirit,
whose path is in the clouds! Whose voice is in the thunder! And whose eye
pierces the heart! O conduct me to the blissful valley, for Oneyo will not
live. He sighed, One look, one parting look of my love. I believed her
faithful; for her I lived, and for her I die. He advanced toward her, gazing
on her with anguish and regret. She will not weep for me! faithless and
inconstant! She will exult! Exult to behold me bleeding! And shall it be? Have
I cherished her for this? and lavished my soul on her? to be betrayed! to give
her love to a stranger! He paused, trembled, his countenance grew fierce, his
eye wild, he grasped his javelin. -- Marano named him: Her voice was soft and
plaintive, her visions were of Oneyo. O come, she said, hasten to thy love!
Tarry not, my Oneyo! How I long to behold thee! For this, said he, I Will embrace
thee. He embraced her; she awakened, discovered her husband, and flew eagerly
into his arms. He flung from her in fierce indignation. 'Away,' he cried, go,
cherish thy stranger. Away, perfidious. She followed him trembling and aghast.
He is my brother, she cried. 'Thy brother' -- Stranger, said he to the Briton,
who now approached him, you preserved my life. You are generous and valiant.
Tell me then, am I to salute thee as a friend, and give full vent to my
gratitude! or, must I view thee as a guileful seducer, and lift my javelin
against thy life?

The Briton perceiving his error, answered him with brevity and composure: He
related to him the circumstances of his captivity, and, in confirmation,
appealed to the testimony of his father. Oneyo was satisfied. He embraced them.
They returned by morning to the village. Ononthio received them with becoming
gladness, and the day was crowned with rejoicing.

RODOLPHO AND MATILDA.
And often, at midnight, airy strains are heard
Around the grave, where the fond pair are laid,
Nor is the dirge by village maidens feared,
The lover's spirit guards the holy shade!
Ann Radcliffe.
IN a lone vale washed by the impetuous Arve,
Beneath a shade its tallest mountain threw,
Matilda dwelt, the sole remaining hope
Of old Alberto, whose paternal farm,
Covered with flocks and herds spread wide around,
Here Is was each blushing charm which youth may boast,
When nature grows profuse; here is too each power,
Attended with each studious wish to please,
Fair as the bloom of May, and mildly sweet
As the soft gales that with their vernal wings
Fan the first opening flowers. -- Each neigbhouring swain
Had sighed and languish'd; on the tender bark,
Inscribed the fair one's name, or to her ear
Whispered his love. -- In vain! -- None, none were heard;
Save young Rodolpho, whose prevailing form
Had won her to his favor; on his brow
Sat native comeliness, and manly fire
Over all diffused its luster. Yet with her
His generous mind most swayed, where shone each thought
That delicacy knows, far more refined
Than suits the happy! -- Much he had conversed
With reverend age, and learned from thence to prize
A rural life, learned to prefer the peace
Of his own woods, to the discordant din
Of populous cities. -- What but fate could bar
Their wishes? -- What indeed! -- The morn was fixed
To seal their plighted faith, the bridegroom rose
With all a bridegroom's transport, called his friends
To join the jocund train, and hasten forth
To greet the expecting maid; still as he went
Anticipating Fancy's magic hand,
The thousand raptures drew, which youthful breasts
Feel at approaching bliss. -- Alas! how quick
Treads woe on pleasure's footsteps: -- Now pursue
The fated youth, though words are sure too weak
To speak his horror, when nor well known farm,
Nor wonted flocks he saw, but in their place
A ponderous mound of snow. -- At early dawn
From the near Alp the cumb'rous ruin fell,
And crushed Alberto's roof. -- To lend their aid
The assembled villagers were met, and now
From out the mass had brought once more to light
The ill-starr'd Matilda; lovely still! -- For still
A blush was on her cheek, and her closed eye
Showed but as sleep. Around her head she wore
Her bridal ornaments decked as she was
To wait the nuptial hour. -- Ah! decked in vain,
The grave thy marriage bed! -- On the sad scene
Rodolpho gazes, stands a while aghast,
The semblance of despair; his swelling breast,
Torn by conflicting passions, from his tongue
Utterance withholds. He rolls his haggard eyes
On all around, as he would ask, if ever
Griefs such as his were known; then over the dead
A moment pausing, on her lips imprints
A thousand frantic kisses, her cold hand
With ardour seizes, and in broken sounds,
Calls on Matilda's name. -- With that last word
The struggling soul a passage, and down
He sinks in death, pale as the ambient snow.
A CHINESE TALE.
Attend, ye fair, to wisdom's voice:
A better fate shall crown your choice.

CHOANG was the fondest husband, and Hansi the most endearing wife, in all the
kingdom of Corea. They were the pattern of conjugal bliss; the inhabitants of
the country around saw, and envied their felicity. Wherever Choang came, Hansi
was sure to follow; and in all the pleasures of Hansi, Choang was admitted a
partner. They walked hand in hand wherever they appeared, showing every mark of
mutual satisfaction, embracing, kissing; their mouths were forever joined.

Their love was so great, that it was thought nothing could interrupt their
mutual peace; when an accident happened, which, in some measure, diminished the
husband's assurance of his wife's fidelity; for love, so refined as his, was
subject to a thousand little disquietudes.

Happening to go one day alone among the tombs that lay at some distance from
his house, he there perceived a lady dressed in the deepest mourning, fanning
the wet clay, that was raised over one of the graves, with a large san, which
she held in her hand. Choang, who had early been taught wisdom in the school of
Lao, was unable to assign a cause for her present employment; and coming up,
civilly demanded the reason. 'Alas!' replied the lady, her eyes bathed in
tears, how is it possible to survive the loss of my husband, who lies buried in
this grave? He was the best of men, the tenderest of husbands; with his dying
breath he bid me never marry again, till the earth over his grave should be
dry; and here you see me steadily resolving to obey his will, and endeavoring
to dry it with my fan. I have employed two whole days in fulfilling his
commands, and am determined not to marry, till they are punctually obeyed, even
though his grave should take up four days in drying.

Choang, who was struck with the widow's beauty, could not, however, avoid
smiling at her haste to be married; but, concealing the cause of his mirth,
civilly invited her home; adding, that he had a wife, who might be capable of
giving her some consolation. As soon as he and his guest were returned, he
imparted to Hansi in private what he had seen, and could not avoid expressing
his uneasiness, that such might be his own case, if his dearest wife should one
day happen to survive him.

It is impossible to describe Hansi's resentment at so unkind a suspicion. As
her passion for him was not only great, but extremely delicate, she employed
tears, anger, frowns, and exclamations, to chide his suspicions; the widow
herself was inveighed against; and Hansi declared, she was resolved never to
sleep under the same roof with a wretch, who, like her, could be guilty of such
barefaced inconstancy. The night was cold and stormy; however, the stranger was
obliged to seek another lodging, for Choang was not disposed to resist, and
Hansi would have her way.

The widow had scarce been gone an hour, when an old disciple of Choang's, whom
he had not seen for many years, came to pay him a visit. He was received with
the utmost ceremony, placed in the most honourble seat at supper, and the wine
began to circulate with great freedom. Choang and Hansi exhibited open marks of
mutual tenderness and unfeigned reconciliation; nothing could equal their
apparent happiness; so fond a husband, so obedient a wife, few could behold
without regretting their own infelicity; when lo! their happiness was at once
disturbed by a most fatal accident. Choang fell lifeless in an apoplectic fit
upon the floor. Every method was used, but in vain, for his recovery. Hansi was
at first inconsolable for her husband's death: After some hours, however, she
found spirits to read his last will. The ensuing day she began to moralize and
talk wisdom; the next day she was able to comfort the young disciple; and, on
the third, to shorten a long story, they both agreed to be married.

There was now no longer mourning in the apartments, the body of Choang was
thrust into an old coffin, and placed in one of the meanest rooms, there to lie
unattended until the time prescribed by law for his interment. In the mean
time, Hansi and the young disciple were arrayed in the most magnificent habits;
the bride wore in her nose a jewel, of immense price, and her lover was dressed
in all the finery of his former master, together with a pair of artificial
whiskers that reached to his middle. The hour of his nuptials was arrived; the
whole family sympathised with their approaching happiness; the apartments were
brightened up with a light that diffused the most exquisite perfumes, and a
luster more bright than noonday. The lady expected her youthful lover in an
inner apartment, with impatience; when his servant, approaching with terror in
his countenance, informed her that his master was fallen into a fit, which
would certainly be mortal, unless the heart of a man lately dead, could be
obtained, and applied to his breast. She scarce waited to the end of his story,
when, tucking up her clothes, she ran with a mattock in her hand to the coffin,
where Choang lay, resolving to apply the heart of her dead husband, as a cure
for the living. She therefore struck the lid with the utmost violence; in a few
blows the coffin flew open, when the body, which to all appearance had been
dead, began to move. Terrified at the sight, Hansi dropped the mattock, and
Choang walked out, astonished at his own situation, his wife's unusual
magnificence, and her more amazing surprise. He went among the apartments,
unable to conceive the cause of so much splendour. He was not long in suspense,
before his domestics informed him of every transaction since he first became
insensible. He could scarce believe what they told him, and went in pursuit of
Hansi herself, in order to receive more certain information, or to reproach her
infidelity. But she prevented his reproaches: he sound her weltering in blood;
for she had stabbed herself to the heart, being unable to survive her shame and
disappointment.

Choang, being a philosopher, was too wise to make any loud lamentations; he
thought it best to bear his loss with serenity; so mending up the old coffin,
where he had lain himself, he placed his faithless spouse in his room; and,
unwilling that so many nuptial preparations should be expended in vain, he the
same night married the widow with the large fan.

As they both were apprised of the foibles of each other beforehand, they knew
how to excuse them after marriage. They lived together for many years in great
tranquillity, and not expecting to find rapture, made a shift to find
contentment.

THE TWO COQUETTES.
AT day's early dawn, a gay butterfly spied
A budding young rose, and he wished her his bride;
She blushed, when she heard him his passion declare,
And tenderly told him he need not despair.
Their vows soon they plighted, as lovers still do;
He swore to be constant, she vowed to be true.
It had not been prudent to deal with delay:
The bloom of a rose passes quickly away,
And the pride of a butterfly dies in a day.
When wedded away the young gentleman hies;
From flower to flower he wantonly flies:
Nor did he revisit his bride, till the sun
Had less than one fourth of his journey to run.
The rose thus reproached him -- 'Already so cold?
'How feigned, O you false one! that passion you 'told!
''Tis an age since you left me' -- she meant a few hours;
But such we'll suppose the fond language of flowers.
'I saw when you gave the base vi'olet a kiss:
'How could you descend to such meanness as this?
'Shall a low little wretch, whom we roses despise,
'Find favor, O love, in my butterfly's eyes?
'On a Tulip, quite tawdry, I marked your fond rape;
'Nor yet could the pitiful primrose escape;
'Dull daffodils, too, were with passion addressed,
'And poppies, ill-scented, you fondly caressed.'
The coxcomb was piqued, and replied with a snear,
'That you're first to complain, I commend you, 'my dear;
'But, know, from your conduct my maxims I drew,
'And if I Am inconstant, I copy from you.
'I saw the boy Zephyrus rifle your charms;
'I saw how he simper'd and smiled in your arms:
'The honey-bee kissed you, you must not disown;
'You favored, likewise, O dishonor! a drone!
'What's worse -- it is a fault which you cannot deny,
'Your sweets were made common, false rose, to 'a fly.'
THE MORAL.
This law, long ago, did love's providence make,
That every coquette should be cursed with a rake.
THE DISABLED SOLDIER. A SIMPLE STORY.
See some strange comfort every state attend,
And pride bestowed on all a common friend;
See some fit passion every age supply;
Hope travels through, nor quits us when we die.
POPE.
NO observation is more common, and at the same time more true, than that one
half of the world are ignorant how the other half live. The misfortunes of the
great are held up to engage our attention; are enlarged upon in tones of
declamation; and the world is called upon to gaze at the noble sufferers: the
great, under the pressure of calamity, are conscious of others sympathising
with their distress; and have, at once, the comfort of admiration and pity.

There is nothing magnanimous in bearing misfortunes with fortitude, when the
whole world is looking on: men in such circumstances will act bravely, even
from motives of vanity; but he who, in the vale of obscurity, can brave
adversity; who, without friends to encourage, acquaintance to pity, or even
without hope to alleviate his misfortunes, can behave with tranquillity and
indifference, is truly great: whether peasant or courtier, he deserves
admiration, and should be held up for our imitation and respect.

I have been led into these reflections, from accidentally meeting, some days
ago, a poor fellow, whom I knew when a boy, dressed in a sailor's jacket, and
begging at one of the outlets of the town, with a wooden leg. I knew him to
have been honest and industrious, when in the country, and curious to learn
what had reduced him to his present situation; wherefore, after giving him what
I thought proper, I desired to know the history of his life and misfortunes.
The disabled soldier, for such he was, though dressed in a sailor's habit,
scratching his head, and leaning on his crutch, put himself into an attitude to
comply with my request, and gave me his history, as follows:

'As for my misfortunes, master, I cannot pretend to have gone through any more
than other folks; for except the loss of my limb, and my being obliged to beg,
I don't know any reason, thank heaven, that I have to complain; there is BILL
TIBBS, of our regiment, he has lost both his legs, and an eye to boot; but,
thank heaven, it is not so bad with me yet. I was born in Shropshire; my father
was a labourer, and died when I was five years old; so I was put upon the
parish. As he had been a wandering sort of a man, the parishioners were not
able to tell to what parish I belonged, or where I was born; so they sent me to
another parish, and that parish sent me to a third. I thought in my heart, they
kept sending me about so long, that they would not let me be in born any parish
at all; but, at last, however, they fixed me. I had some disposition to be a
scholar, and was resolved at least to know my letters; but the master of the
workhouse put me to business as soon as I was able to handle a mallet; and here
I lived an easy kind of life for five years. I only wrought ten hours in the
day, and had my meat and drink provided for my labor. It is true, I was not
suffered to stir out of the house, for fear, as they said, I should run away.
But what of that? I had the liberty of the whole house, and the yard before the
door; and that was enough for me. I was then bound out to a farmer, where I was
up early and late; but I ate and drank well, and liked my business well enough,
till he died, when I was obliged to provide for myself; so I was resolved to go
and seek my fortune.

'In this manner I went from town to town, worked where I could get employment,
and starved when I could get none; when happening one day to go through a field
belonging to a justice of peace, I spied a hare crossing the path just before
me; and I believe the devil put it in my head to fling my stick at it. Well,
what will you have on it? I killed the hare, and was bringing it away, when the
justice himself met me: he called me a poacher, and, collaring me, desired I
would give an account of myself. I fell upon my knees, begged his worship's
pardon, and began to give a full account of all that I knew of my breed, seed,
and generation; but, though I gave a very true account, the justice said I
could give no account, so I was indicted at the Sessions, found guilty of being
poor, and sent up to London, to Newgate, in order to be transported as a
vagabond.

'People may say this and that of being in jail; but, for my part, I found
Newgate as agreeable a place as ever I was in, in all my life. I had my
bellyfull to eat and drink, and did no work at all. This kind of life was too
good to last forever; so I was taken out of prison, after five months, put on
board a ship, and sent off with two hundred more, to the plantations. We had
but an indifferent passage; for being all confined in the hold, more than a
hundred of our people died for want of sweet air; and those that remained were
sickly enough, God knows. When we came ashore, we were sold to the planters,
and I was bound for seven years more. As I was no scholar, for I did not know
my letters, I was obliged to work among the negroes; and I served out my time
as in duty bound to do.

'When my time was expired, I worked my passage home; and glad I was to see Old
England again, because I loved my country. I was afraid, however, that I should
be indicted for a vagabond once more, so did not much care to go down into the
country, but kept about the town, and did little jobs, when I could get them.

'I was very happy in this manner for some time, till one evening, coming home
from work, two men knocked me down, and then desired me to stand. They belonged
to a press gang. I was carried before the justice, and, as I could give no
account of myself, I had my choice left, whether to go on board a man of war,
or list for a soldier. I chose the latter, and, in this post of a gentleman, I
served two campaigns in Flanders, was at the battle of Val and Vontenoy, and
received but one wound, through the breast here; but the doctor of our regiment
soon made me well again.

'When the peace came on, I was discharged: and, as I could not work, because
my wound was sometimes troublesome, I listed for a landsman in the East India
company's service. I have fought the French in six pitched battles; and I
verily believe, that if I could read or write, our captain would have made me a
corporal. But it was not my good fortune to have any promotion, for I soon fell
sick, and so got leave to return home again, with forty pounds in my pocket.
This was at the beginning of the present war, and I hoped to be set on shore,
and to have the pleasure of spending my money; but the government wanted men,
and so I was pressed for a sailor, before ever I could set foot on shore.

'The boatswain sound me, as he said, an obstinate fellow; he swore he knew
that I understood my business well, but that I shammed Abraham, to be idle; but
God knows, I knew nothing of sea-business, and he beat me without considering
what he was about. I had still, however, my forty pounds, and that was some
comfort to me, under every beating; and the money I might have had to this day,
but that our ship was taken by the French, and so I lost it all.

'Our crew was carried into Breast, and many of them died, because they were not
used to live in jail; but for my part, it was nothing to me, for I was
seasoned. One night, as I was asleep on my bed of boards, with a warm blanket
about me, (for I always loved to lie well) I was awakened by the boatswain, who
had a dark lanthorn in his hand. 'Jack,' says he to me, will you knock out the
French centry's brains? 'I don't care,' says I, striving to keep myself awake,
if I lend a hand. 'Then follow me,' says he, 'and I hope we shall do the
business.' So up I got, and tied my blanket, which was all the clothes I had,
about my middle, and went with him to fight the Frenchmen. I hate the French,
because they are all slaves, and wear wooden shoes.

'Though we had no arms, one Englishman is able to beat five French at any
time; so we went down to the door, where both the centries were posted, and,
rushing upon them, seized their arms in a moment, and knocked them down. From
thence, nine of us ran together to the quay, and seizing the first boat we met,
got out of the harbor, and put to sea. We had not been here three days, before
we were taken up by the Dorset privateer, who were glad of so many good hands;
and we consented to run our chance. However, we had not as much luck as we
expected. In three days we fell in with the Pompadour privateer, of forty guns,
while we had but twenty three; so to it we went, yard-arm and yard-arm. The
fight lasted for three hours, and I verily believe, we should have taken the
Frenchman, had we but had some more men left behind; but, unfortunately, we
lost all our men, just as we were going to get the victory.

'I was once more in the power of the French, and, I believe, it would have
gone hard with me, had I been brought back to Breast; but by good fortune we
were retaken by the Viper. I had almost forgot to tell you, that in that
engagement, I was wounded in two places; I lost four fingers off the left hand,
and my leg was shot off. If I had had the good fortune to have lost my leg and
the use of my hand, on board a king's ship, and not on board a privateer, I
should have been entitled to clothing and maintenance during the rest of my
life; but that was not my chance: one man is born with a silver spoon in his
mouth, and another with a wooden ladle. However, blessed be God! I enjoy good
health, and will forever love liberty and Old England. Liberty, property, and
Old England, forever, huzza!'

Thus saying, he limped off, leaving me in admiration at his intrepidity and
content; nor could I avoid acknowledging, that an habitual acquaintance with
misery serves better than philosophy to teach us to despise it.

THE THREE WARNINGS.
Shall ignorance of good and ill
Dare to direct the eternal will?
GAY.
THE tree of deepest root is found
Least willing still to quit the ground;
'Twas therefore said, by ancient sages,
That love of life increased with years
So much, that in our later stages,
When pains grow sharp, and sickness rages,
The greatest love of life appears.
This great affection to believe,
Which all confess, but few perceive,
If old assertions cannot prevail,
Be pleased to hear a modern tale.
When sports went round, and all were gay,
On neighbor Dobson's wedding day,
Death called aside the jocund groom
With him into another room:
And looking grave, 'You must,' says he,
'Quit your sweet bride, and come with me.'
'With you, and quit my Susan's side!
'With you!' the hapless husband cried:
'Young as I am! it is monstrous hard!
'Besides, in truth, I Am not prepared:
'My thoughts on other matters go;
'This is my wedding night, you know.'
What more he urged, I have not heard,
His reasons could not well be stronger;
So death the poor delinquent spared,
And left to live a little longer.
Yet calling up a serious look,
His hourglass trembled while he spoke.
'Neighbour,' he said, 'farewell! No more
'Shall death disturb your mirthful hour:
'And further to avoid all blame
'Of cruelty upon my name,
'To give you time for preparation,
'And fit you for your former station,
'Three several warnings you shall have,
'Before you're summoned to the grave:
'Willing for once to quit my prey,
'And grant a kind reprieve;
'In hopes you will have no more to say,
'But when I call again this way,
'Well pleased the world will leave.'
To these conditions both consented,
And parted perfectly contented.
What next the hero of our tale befell,
How long he lived, how wise, how well,
How roundly he pursued his course,
And smok'd his pipe, and stroak'd his horse,
The willing Muse shall tell:
He chaffer'd then, he bought, he sold,
Nor once perceived his growing old,
Nor thought of death as near;
His friends not false, his wife no shrew,
Many his gains, his children few;
He passed his hours in peace;
But while he viewed his wealth increase,
While thus a long life's dusty road,
The beaten track content he trod,
Old time, whose haste no mortal spares,
Uncalled, unheeded, unawares,
Brought on his eightieth year.
And now one night, in musing mood,
As all alone he sat,
Th'unwelcome messenger of fate
Once more before him stood.
Half killed with anger and surprise,
'So soon returned!' old Dobson cries.
'So soon do you call it!' Death replies:
'Surely, my friend, you're but in jest,
'Since I was here before,
''Tis six and thirty years at least,
'And you are now four-score.'
'So much the worse,' the clown rejoined;
'To spare the aged would be kind:
'Besides, you promised me three warnings,
'Which I Have looked for nights and mornings.'
'I know,' cries Death, 'that at the best,
'I seldom am a welcome guest;
'But do'nt be captious, friend, at least;
'I little thought, you would still be able
'To stump about your farm and stable;
'Your years have run to a great length,
'I wish you joy, though of your strength.'
'Hold', says the farmer, 'not so fast,'
'I have been lame these four years past.'
'And no great wonder,' death replies,
'However, you still keep your eyes;
'And sure to see one's loves and friends,
'For legs and arms would make amends.'
'Perhaps,' says Dobson, 'so it might;
'But latterly I Have lost my sight.'
'This is a shocking story, faith,
'Yet there is some comfort still,' says Death;
'Each strives your sadness to amuse;
'I warrant you hear all the news.'
'There's none,' cries he, 'and if there were,
'I'm grown so deaf I could not hear.'
'Nay then,' the spectre stern rejoined,
'If you are lame, and deaf, and blind,
'You've had your three sufficient warnings:
'So come along, no more we'll part.'
He said, and touched him with his dart;
And now old Dobson turning pale,
Yields to his fate -- so ends my tale.
THE RUINS OF THE HOUSE OF ALBERT. A ROMANCE.
Then welcome death, since death alone can prove,
The mournful solace to a constant love.

ADELA was the only daughter of a powerful baron of Aquitaine. Her father,
sprung from an illustrious family, added to hereditary honors, the glory of
heroic achievements. In his youth, he accompanied the flower of the European
chivalry, who fought under the banner of Godfrey, and recovered the holy
sepulcher from the hands of the infidel. He returned to his country, crowned
with victory and fair renown; and inherited the rich domains of his ancestors.

Adela was in the prime of beauty, and possessed a susceptible heart. In her
air and aspect, dignity was mingled with sweetness: For in the disposition of
her mind, conscious elevation of sentiment was softened by amiable and mild
affections.

Edwin, a gallant youth, animated with the generous love of arms, smit with the
renown of Albert's prowess, and ambitious of profiting by the narrative of his
exploits, repaired with other warriors to his hospitable castle. His eye, keen
and piercing, indicated a fiery, vigorous and active spirit: His form was well
fitted to kindle desire in the bosom of tender maids: And the heart of Adela
was not insensible to his merit. Their passion was mutual. He gazed on her
unaffected charms with astonishment; for till then, he had never felt the
tender anxiety, the restless longing, and languishment of love. Ambition had
been the governing passion of his soul; but the fierceness of ambition now
yielded to a softer, though no less ardent desire. He no longer discoursed, in
keen rapture, of marshalled hosts, of listed fields, and feats of venturous
daring; but languished on the ineffable attractions of a roseate complexion,
and a tender melting eye. The vehement impatience of the warrior was lost in
the complacency and pensiveness of the lover.

Albert, perceiving this change in his deportment, demanded the cause. Edwin
replied in candid and respectful guise: He told him, without reserve, of the
impression made on his soul, by the peerless beauty of Adela. And, with the
temerity of youthful passion, besought him to ratify his sincere attachment by
wedlock. And who art thou, said the houghty baron, who pretendest to the love
of Adela? What feats of heroic prowess have thou achieved? Or is thy ancestry
distinguished among the chieftains of the south? Thy shield is inscribed with
no valorous achievement; nor are thy deeds, nor the deeds of thy fathers,
rehearsed by recording minstrels. Gain thee a name in arms, and then aspire to
the envied alliance of the House of Albert.

These words, like an arrow, penetrated the heart of Edwin. Love and ambition,
hitherto at variance, were now united; they concurred in the same pursuit; and
their vehemence was irresistible. Accordingly, the youthful warrior prepared
for his departure, and took a tender farewell of Adela. 'Farewell,' she
replied, the tears gushing from her radiant eyes, Heaven knows no gallant
youth, but thee, ever shared my affections. May the holy angels, who regard
true and virtuous love with esteem, grant thee protection. Speedy be thy
return! and O! remember me. Gay and courtly dames, skilled in seducements and
cunning device, may strive to allure thee; but their love will not equal mine.
They plighted vows of mutual fidelity, and exchanged tokens of unshaken
attachment. Then Edwin, clad in complete armor, a gay undaunted warrior,
mounted a steed proudly caparisoned, and bent his course to the plains of
Catalonia, where the Saracen waded in the blood of Spain.

Soon after his departure, Edgar, a proud and wealthy chieftain, with a
numerous retinue of knights and retainers, came to the castle of Albert. He was
received with pomp and hospitable welcome. He cast amorous glances on the
reserved, unrivalled charms of Adela. He preferred his courtship with studied
smiles and speeches devised with cunning. She heard him at first with
indifference; he persisted; and she requited him with contempt. He then
addressed his suit to the baron: He boasted of the high renown of his
ancestors, and the wide extent of his domain: He expatiated on the number of
his vassals; and insisted, in magnificent terms, on the mutual honor and
security that would accrue from so seemly an alliance. Albert listened to him
with partial and pleased attention: He repented of the hopes he had encouraged
in the soul of Edwin; and he endeavored to persuade his daughter to forget her
attachment to that valiant youth. In vain the astonished Adela lamented, wept,
entreated; in vain she threw herself at her father's feet, and tore her
dishevelled tresses, and in anguish smote her breast. Her opposition, instead
of mitigating his rigor, irritated his resentment, and confirmed him in his
ungenerous purpose. He mingled menaces and unkindly reproach with his
persuasions: By the holy rood, said he, with a fastidious and wrathful aspect,
the honor of my house shall not be stained by the pretensions of a low-born
boy. Degenerated as thou art, the meanness of thy sentiments shall not fully
the splendor of thine ancestry, nor load my respected age with dishonor.
Receive the addresses of Edgar with suitable regard, and the deference due to
my commands. Meantime preparations shall be made for the bridal solemnity in a
manner becoming the dignity of this alliance.

Adela, after remonstrating in vain against the severity of his commands,
entreated, with an humble and dejected air, that the marriage-ceremony might be
delayed. 'Can Edgar,' said she, prize the cold and constrained embraces of a
heart that throbs for another? Will the sighing and anguish of a broken spirit
accord with the fond caresses of a bridegroom? To Edwin my faith was plighted,
and on him my imagination has dwelt. Give me time, therefore, to divert the
current of an affection too violent to be suddenly opposed; to discourage the
reveries of fancy, animated by a legal and habituated passion; and to be
reconciled to the addresses of Edgar. As her reasoning was plausible, the
nuptial solemnity was deferred. But, as soon as she retired from her father's
presence, she summoned a page in whom she confided, and spoke to him in the
following manner: Prepare thee for a long journey: Saddle the fleetest of my
father's steeds; and during the obscurity of the night, depart. Hie thee to the
banks of the Ebro; find Edwin; tell him of the perils that beset me; tell him
that a wealthy and powerful rival, with costly parade, and glittering show of
blazonry, has imposed on my father, and insinuated himself into his esteem.
The menial bowed with humble obeisance, and, with professions of diligence and
fidelity, departed.

Meantime Edgar pressed his suit with courteous phrase and dalliance. Daily
tournaments were exhibited at the castle of Albert. The knights and barons of
the neighboring domains attended: But Edgar surpassed them in the splendor of
his armor, and the pomp of his retinue. The hall resounded with revelry and
rejoicing; and minstrels clad in gaudy apparel celebrated the praises of
warlike chiefs, or sung the power and the pleasures of love. Adela arrayed her
countenance with smiles and courtesy; but her bosom was distracted with
anguish, and her couch was bedewed with weeping. 'O when,' she cried, shall I
be delivered from the importunity of a detested suitor; and the bondage of a
feigned complacency? When will Edwin return, adorned with conquest, and
confident with success? His merit shall shine unrivalled, and Edgar be covered
with shame.

At length the page returned; and repairing to the apartment of his mournful
dame, Now heaven foresend, said he, most gracious lady, that the tidings I
bring should injure thy tender frame more than thou art able to endure. May the
saints and ministering angels uphold thee! -- 'Hath he perished?' cried Adela,
with a look of terror and amazement. In what bloody field has he fallen? Where
lies the lifeless body? What barbarous adversary has mangled and insulted his
graceful form? -- He has not perished, replied the menial. But O gentle lady!
foul arts have been practiced; shameful perfidy has been committed. Edwin
lives, but not for thee; he has given his hand to another! -- 'Peace, peace!'
interrupted Adela, with a faultering utterance, and looks of astonishment,
mixed with anger; restrain thy blasphemous speech: nor with base calumny
asperse the fame of a true and gallant warrior. -- 'When,' answered the menial,
have I been guilty of deceit or infidelity toward my gentle mistress? Full
sore it grieveth me to be the messenger of evil tidings. -- Rehearse them
unreservedly, cried Adela, with a tone of anxious impatience.

'I pursued my journey,' said he, many days without any adventure, till I came
within sight of a stately castle. It stood on the brow of a woody hill; was
garnished with towers and battlements; and commanded a wide prospect of
cultivaled fields and forests. As I advanced, mine ear was suddenly surprised
with the din of hounds and horns, mingled with the cries of the huntsmen. I
soon descried a gallant show of knights and gorgeous dames, mounted on
milk-white coursers, and pursuing the rapid deer. When the chase was ended,
they stopped by the side of a crystal brook; and a comely youth, arrayed in
shining apparel, alighted from his foamy steed, with courtly obeisance,
presented the prey to a fair and smiling lady. I mingled in their company, and
in the lineaments of the courteous youth recognized the inconstant Edwin. O
gentle lady, may Heaven so help me in my utmost need, as I now speak the words
of truth; and may the faints and holy angels so succor thee as thy mishap
requires. The faithless youth has committed treason against thy love: Seduced
by the blandishment of an artful dame, he has become forgetful of thy peerless
beauty.

The heart of Adela throbbed with anguish during the recital. 'Valorous, heroic
warrior!' she exclaimed, are these thy deeds of hardy prowess, to betray the
innocent credulity of an easy maid! Stain to manhood, and the honored
profession of arms, be henceforth banished from my remembrance.

Meantime Edgar advanced his suit with redoubled ardour. Albert, unable to
brook any longer delay, insisted on having the bridal ceremony solemnized; and
Adela, incited by secret pride and resentment, submitted to the will of her
father. The report of this noble alliance was published through the land; and
the kindred of Albert and Edgar, with the neighboring barons, were assembled
to grace the solemnity. Already were the parties betrothed; the holy
benediction was already pronounced; and forever was Adela to be the wedded
spouse of Edgar. Now, with pompous show and attendance the banquet was served
up to dames and knights, the flower of courtesy and valor. The castle
resounded with minstrelsy and the dance, when a stranger, in the simple garb of
a pilgrim, entered the hall. He cast his eyes around on the goodly company,
and, with an air of sanctity and respect, implored a blessing on their
friendship. He was received with hospitable welcome, and the reverence due to
his holy semblance. He spoke in meek and modest guise; his eyes were often
fixed on Adela: they were sometimes dimmed with a glistening tear, and ever and
anon his bosom heaved with involuntary sighs. He took up the harp of a
minstrel; he touched the strings with masterly cunning, and accompanied the
notes with a melodious voice. Tuneful, but melancholy was the strain; for he
sung the sorrows of those that are forsaken; the anguish of a desponding
spirit; and the wounds inflicted on a faithful heart by inconstancy and proud
disdain. He desisted with marks of grief and inward contention. 'Holy pilgrim,'
said Albert, the sense of calamity devours thy spirit. Inform us of thy
mishhap, that, if possible, we may administer comfort. Nor think it
incompatible with bridal festivity to indulge compassion, and assuage the
torment of heartfelt care.

'I am the son of a freeman,' replied the stranger; and though my birth was not
ennobled by splendid titles, nor my ancestry distinguished by the parade of
blazonry, my bosom burned with the love of arms, and my heart was upright. In
an unlucky hour I became enamoured of a gentle dame, the only daughter of a
noble baron. My sincere, though presumptuous suit, seemed not displeasing to
that peerless beauty; and with the rash, intemperate boldness of a lover, I
asked her in marriage of her sire. Go, said he, gain thee a name in arms, and
then aspire to the envied alliance of my house. I departed, not without tender
interchange of vows and tokens of affection with the beloved idol of my heart.
I hastened to the plains of Catalonia, where the Saracen was waging fierce
battle against the banner of the holy cross. I proffered my service to the
chief of the Christians; and that my sword was not idle, and that I was not
backward in the strife of arms, my honorable wounds can testify. Neither were
my services, nor my thirst after martial fame unrewarded. Fair recompense have
I received, and the fun of glory has gilded the obscurity of my birth.
Rejoicing in my success, I hastened my return. But what power of utterance can
express the agony of my soul, when I learned that the faithless and inconstant
dame had yielded to the vows of another? I who was so true and loyal to my love
and plighted troth, to be so soon forgot, so soon forsaken.

'Enough! enough!' cried Adela, O ill-requited lover! pierce not my soul with
deeper wounds. O Edwin! Edwin! never was I inconstant. Bear witness, ye holy
angels! But traitorous guile has been practiced: Thy integrity has been
impeached, and my vexed heart betrayed into error.

The eyes of all were now turned on the stranger: He threw off his disguise,
and, instead of a pilgrim's staff, he grasped a keen and trenchant weapon.
Resentment glowed on his cheek, and flashed from his fiery eye. 'And who,' said
he, has impeached mine integrity? Stand forth, thou proud, but dastard baron,
whose glozing tales have betrayed the unwary heart of a tender maiden: It is
Edwin demands reparation. Conscious fear was manifest in the disordered
features, the pale cheek, and disconcerted air of Edgar. He nevertheless
accepted the challenge; and the two warriors, arraying themselves in complete
armor, descended into the court of the castle. In the first onset, the well
tempered steel of Edwin cleft the crested helm of his adversary; he threw him
to the ground, and disarmed him. Confess thy guilt, said the conqueror, and by
what infamous arts thou have accomplished thy design. -- 'By gifts and
glittering gold,' he replied, I corrupted the page of Adela, who, with
counterfeited semblance of fidelity and regret, accused thee of inconstancy,
and imposed falsehood on the easy ear of his mistress. I embraced the season of
her excited resentment, and forwarded my suit with success. She is mine by the
indissoluble ties of wedlock: And know, proud boy, that if thy hands be stained
with my blood, it is the blood of Adela's husband; and if she receives thee to
her bosom, she receives the slayer of her spouse.

Edwin started with apparent horror. He paused; but recollecting himself,
'Arise,' he cried, and by another trial, prove thyself worthy of that envied
title. So saying, he raised him from the ground; and both warriors addressed
themselves a second time to the fight. Edgar, burning with exasperated rancour,
aimed his spear at his rival's breast. Edwin neither averted nor avoided the
deadly blow. The keen weapon cleft his breast, and was tinged in the purple
springs of his heart. He fell to the ground. 'Farewell,' he cried, Adela! lady
peerless! and dearly beloved. I have proved myself worthy of thy esteem: I die
a sacrifice to thy repose. With my hands red with thy husband's blood, could I
ever aspire to thy love? Could I survive and behold thee the wedded bride of
another! He heaved a sigh and died. 'Inhuman deed!' cried Adela, tearing her
lovely tresses, and beating her snow-white breast. She ran, she threw herself
on the bloody body, 'O stay!' she exclaimed, O leave me not in my woe. Return,
fleeting spirit! Reanimate these pallid features. He heeds me not. -- I heard a
voice! a dreary voice! It was Edwin! He summons me away! -- I come! I come! Let
the nuptial bed be prepared! the clay-cold bed! -- So saying, she clasped the
corpse, and expired.

Instantly the menial, who had been corrupted by Edgar, seizing a dagger,
rushed behind that treacherous baron, and pierced him to the heart. 'Perish!'
he cried, author of my ruin, and of the ruin of the House of Albert. He grew
immediately frantic: He ran forth furious and screaming: The memory of his
crimes pursued him; and his reason was never restored.

The obsequies of the deceased were celebrated with due solemnity; Holy
requiems were chanted over their remains; and pious priests preferred orisons
for their eternal repose. Albert, unable to sustain the weight of his
misfortune, forsook the habitation of his ancestors; and exposing his old age
to fatigue, undertook a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, where he ended his days in
a monastery.

A TURKISH ODE.
STANZA I.
ADIEU, sweet maid! the din of war,
Calls Achmed from thy arms, afar,
Inglorious sadness chills my heart;
It Is death to stay, but worse to part.
Would rapid time but move more slow,
Or fortune one short hour bestow,
Within thy arms, reclined at ease,
Beneath the shade of cypress trees,
I Would hang my sabre on the boughs,
And breathe once more my faithful vows.
STANZA II.
I go to seek the embattled plain,
Where horror leads her direful train,
The clashing sword, the brazen shield,
The shrieks, that rend the ensanguin'd field,
Succeed to thy sweet silver voice,
That made the mimic birds rejoice,
When, in thy arms, reclined at ease,
Beneath the shade of cypress trees,
I hung my fabre on the boughs,
And breathed to heaven and thee my vows
STANZA III.
Already I endure the stings,
That cruel absence ever brings.
As thirsty camels, doomed to toil
Over wild Arabia's burning soil,
If near some lonely brook they stray,
Are driven reluctantly away,
So, forced from thee by fate unkind,
I linger, stop, and look behind,
And still desire, reclined at ease,
Beneath the shade of cypress trees,
To hang my sabre on the boughs,
And breathe inviolable vows.
STANZA IV.
Yet, when the dreadful slaughter's over.
When bearded jav'lins hiss no more,
I Will quickly fly from fields of death,
To taste thy renovating breath,
To view thy ever blooming charms,
To lodge within thy blissful arms,
And, blessed with beauty, love, and ease*
Beneath the shade of cypress trees,
I Will hang my sabre on the boughs,
And breathe my everlasting vows.
THE SURRENDER OF CALAIS. AN HISTORIC FACT.
Let glorious Acts more glorious Acts inspire,
And catch from breast to breast the noble fire.
POPE.
EDWARD the Third, after the battle of Cressy, laid siege to Calais. He had
fortified his camp in so impregnable a manner, that all the efforts of France
proved ineffectual to raise the siege, or throw succors into the city. The
citizens, however, under the conduct of Count Vienne, their gallant governor,
made an admirable defense. Day after day the English effected many a breach,
which they repeatedly expected to storm by morning; but, when morning appeared,
they wondered to behold new ramparts raised, nightly erected out of the ruins
which the day had made.

France had now put the sickle into her second harvest since Edward with his
victorious army sat down before the town. The eyes of all Europe were intent on
the issue. The English made their approaches and attacks without remission; but
the citizens were as obstinate in repelling all their efforts.

At length, famine did more for Edward than arms. After the citizens had
devoured the lean carcases of their starved cattle, they tore up old
foundations and rubbish in search of vermin. They fed on boiled leather and the
weeds of exhausted gardens, and a morsel of damaged corn was accounted a matter
of luxury.

In this extremity they resolved to attempt the enemy's camp. They boldly
sallied forth; the English joined battle; and, after a long and desperate
engagement, Count Vienne was taken prisoner; and the citizens, who survived the
slaughter, retired within their gates.

On the captivity of the governor, the command devolved upon Eustace Saint
Pierre, the mayor of the town, a man of mean birth, but of exalted virtue.

Eustace now found himself under the necessity of capitulating, and offered to
deliver to Edward the city, with all the possessions and wealth of the
inhabitants, provided he permitted them to depart with life and liberty.

As Edward had long since expected to ascend the throne of France, he was
exasperated, to the last degree, against these people, whose sole valor had
defeated his warmest hopes; he therefore determined to take an exemplary
revenge, though he wished to avoid the imputation of cruelty. He answered, by
Sir Walter Manny, that they all deserved capital punishment, as obstinate
traitors to him, their true and natural sovereign. That, however, in his wonted
clemency, he consented to pardon the bulk of the plebeians, provided they would
deliver up to him six of their principal citizens, with halters about their
necks, as victims of due atonement for that spirit of rebellion with which they
had enflamed the vulgar herd.

All the remains of this desolate city were convened in the great square, and,
like men arraigned at a tribunal from whence there was no appeal, expected with
beating hearts the sentence of their conqueror.

When Sir Walter had declared his message, consternation and pale dismay was
impressed on every face. Each looked upon death as his own inevitable lot; for
how should they desire to be saved at the price proposed? whom had they to
deliver save parents, brothers, kindred, or valiant neighbors, who had so
often exposed their lives in their defense? To a long and dead silence, deep
sighs and groans succeeded; till Eustace St. Pierre, getting up to a little
eminence, thus addressed the assembly.

My friends, we are brought to great straits this day. We must either submit to
the terms of our cruel and ensnaring conqueror; or yield up our tender infants,
our wives, and chaste daughters, to the bloody and brutal lusts of the
violating soldiery.

Look about you, my friends, and fix your eyes on the persons, whom you wish to
deliver up as the victims of your own safety. Which of these would ye appoint
to the rack, the axe, or the halter? Is there any here who has not fought for
you, who has not bled for you? who through the length of this inveterate siege,
has not suffered fatigues and miseries, a thousand times worse than death, that
you and yours might survive to days of peace and prosperity? Is it your
preservers, then, whom you would destine to destruction? you will not, you
cannot do it. Justice, honor, humanity, make such a treason impossible.

Where then is our resource? Is there any expedient left, whereby we may avoid
guilt and infamy on the one hand, or the desolation and horrors of a sacked
city on the other? There is, my friends, there is one expedient left; a
gracious, an excellent, a god-like expedient! Is there any here to whom virtue
is dearer than life; let him offer himself an oblation for the safety of his
people! He shall not fail of a blessed approbation from that Power, who offered
up his only Son for the salvation of mankind.

He spoke -- but an universal silence ensued. Each man looked around for the
example of that virtue and magnanimity, in others, which all wished to approve
in themselves, though they wanted the resolution.

At length St. Pierre resumed -- It had been base in me, my fellow citizens, to
propose any matter of damage to others, which I myself had not been willing to
undergo in my own person. But I held it ungenerous to deprive any man of that
preference and estimation, which might attend a first offer, on so signal an
occasion. For I doubt not but there are many here as ready, nay, more zealous
of this martyrdom than I can be, however modesty and the fear of imputed
ostentation may withhold them from being foremost in exhibiting their merits.

Indeed, the station, to which the captivity of Lord Vienne has unhappily
raised me, imparts a right to be the first in giving my life for your sakes, I
give it freely, I give it cheerfully; who comes next?

'Your son.' exclaimed a youth, not yet come to maturity. -- 'Ah, my child!'
cried St. Pierre, I am, then, twice sacrificed. -- But no -- I have rather
begotten thee a second time. -- Thy years are few but full, my son! the victim
of virtue has reached the utmost purpose and goal of mortality. Who next, my
friends? -- This is the hour of heroes. -- 'Your kinsman,' cried John de Air.
'Your kinsman,' cried James Wissant. Your kinsman, cried Peter Wissant. --
'Ah!' exclaimed Sir Walter Mauny, bursting into tears, 'why was I not a citizen
of Calais?'

The sixth victim was still wanting, but was quickly supplied by lot, from
numbers, who were now emulous of so ennobling an example.

The keys of the city were then delivered to Sir Walter. He took the six
prisoners into his custody. He ordered the gates to be opened, and gave charge
to his attendants to conduct the remaining citizens, with their families,
through the camp of the English.

Before they departed, however, they desired permission to take their last
adieu of their deliverers. -- What a parting, what a scene! they crowded with
their wives and children about St. Pierre and his fellow prisoners. They
embraced, they clung around, they wept aloud; and the joint clamor of their
mourning passed the gates of the city, and was heard throughout the camp.

The English, by this time, were apprised of what passed within Calais. They
heard the voice of lamentation, and their souls were touched with compassion:
each of the soldiers prepared a portion of their own victuals to welcome and
entertain the half famished inhabitants; and they loaded them with as much as
their present weakness was able to bear, in order to supply them with
sustenance by the way.

At length, St. Pierre and his fellow victims appeared, under the conduct of
Sir Walter and a guard. All the tents of the English were instantly emptied.
The soldiers poured from all parts, and arranged themselves on each side, to
behold, to contemplate, to admire this little band of patriots as they passed.
They murmured their applause of that virtue, which they could not but revere,
even in enemies. And they regarded those ropes, which they had voluntarily
assumed about their necks, as ensigns of greater dignity than that of the
British garter.

As soon as they had reached the presence of the king -- 'Mauny!' says the
monarch, 'are these the principal inhabitants of Calais?' -- 'They are,' says
Mauny, they are not only the principal men of Calais, they are the principal
men of France, my lord, if virtue has any share in the act of ennobling. --
'Were they delivered peaceably,' says Edward; was there no resistance, no
commotion among the people? Not in the least, my lord; the people would all
have perished, rather than have delivered the least of these to your Majesty.
They are self-delivered, self-devoted, and come to offer up their inestimable
heads as an ample equivalent for the ransom of thousands.

Edward was secretly piqued at this reply of Sir Walter, but he knew the
privilege of a British subject, and suppressed his resentment. 'Experience,'
says he, has ever shown, that lenity only serves to invite people to new
crimes. Severity, at times, is indispensibly necessary to deter subjects into
submission by punishment and example. Go, he cried to an officer, lead these
men to execution -- Your rebellion, continued he, addressing himself to St.
Pierre, your rebellion against me, the natural heir of your crown, is highly
aggravated by your present presumption and affront of my power. -- We have
nothing to ask of your Majesty, said Eustace, save what you cannot refuse us.
-- 'What is that?' Your esteem, my lord, said Eustace, and went out with his
companions.

At this instant, a sound of triumph was heard throughout the camp. The queen
had just arrived, with a powerful reinforcement of those gallant soldiers, at
the head of whom she had conquered Scotland, and taken their king captive.

Sir Walter Mauny flew to receive her Majesty, and briefly informed her of the
particulars respecting the six victims.

As soon as she had been welcomed by Edward and his court, she desired a
private audience. My lord, said she, the question I am to enter upon is not
touching the lives of a few mechanics; it respects a matter more estimable than
the lives of all the natives of France; it respects the honor of the English
nation, it respects the glory of my Edward, my husband, my king.

You think you have sentenced fix of your enemies to death. No, my lord, they
have sentenced themselves, and their execution would be the execution of their
own orders, not the orders of Edward.

They have behaved themselves worthily, they have behaved themselves greatly; I
cannot but respect, while I envy, while I hate them, for leaving us no share in
the honor of this action, save that of granting a poor, an indispensible
pardon.

I admit they have deserved every thing that is evil at your hands. They have
proved the most inveterate and efficacious of your enemies. They alone have
withstood the rapid course of your conquests, and have withheld from you the
crown to which you were born. Is it therefore that you would reward them? that
you would gratify their desires, that you would indulge their ambition, and
enwreath them with everlasting glory and applause?

But, if such a death would exalt mechanics over the fame of the most
illustrious heroes, how would the name of my Edward, with all his triumphs and
honors, be tarnished thereby! Would it not be said, that magnanimity and
virtue are grown odious in the eyes of the monarch of Britain? and the objects
whom he destines to the punishment of felons, are the very men who deserve the
praise and esteem of mankind? The stage on which they should suffer would be to
them a stage of honor, but a stage of shame to Edward, a reproach to his
conquests, a dark and indelible disgrace to his name.

No, my lord. Let us rather disappoint the saucy ambition of these burghers,
who wish to invest themselves with glory at our expense. We cannot, indeed,
wholly deprive them of the me^^^ of a sacrifice so nobly intended, but we may
cut them short of their desires: in the place of that death by which their
glory would be consummate, let us bury them under gifts, let us put them to
shame with praises; we shall thereby defeat them of that popular opinion, which
never fails to attend those who suffer in the cause of virtue.

I am convinced; you have prevailed; be it so, cried Edward, prevent the
execution; have them instantly before us!

They came, when the queen, with an aspect and accents diffusing sweetness,
thus bespoke them:

Natives of France, and the inhabitants of Calais, ye have put us to vast
expense of blood and treasure in the recovery of our just and natural
inheritance; but you acted up to the best of an erroneous judgment, and we
admire and honor in you that valor and virtue, by which we are so long kept
out of our rightful possessions.

You noble burghers, you excellent citizens! though you were tenfold the
enemies of our person and our throne, we can feel nothing on our part, save
respect and affection for you. You have been sufficiently tested, we loose your
chains, we snatch you from the scaffold, and we thank you for that lesson of
humiliation, which you teach us, when you show that excellence is not of blood,
of title, or station; that virtue gives a dignity superior to that of kings;
and that those, whom the Almighty informs with sentiments like yours, are
justly and eminently raised above all human distinctions.

You are now free to depart to your kinsfolk, your countrymen, to all those
whose lives and liberties you have so nobly redeemed, provided you refuse not
to carry with you the due tokens of our esteem.

Yet, we would rather bind you to ourselves, by every endearing obligation; and
for this purpose, we offer to you your choice of the gifts and honors that
Edward has to bestow. Rivals for fame, but always friends to virtue, we wish
that England were entitled to call you her sons.

Ah, my country, (exclaimed Saint Pierre,) it is now that I tremble for you!
Edward could only win your cities, but Philippa conquers hearts.

'Brave Saint Pierre, (said the queen,) wherefore 'look you so dejected? Ah,
madam! (replied St. Pierre,) when I meet with such another opportunity of
dying, I shall not regret that I survived this day.

ALBERT AND ELWEENA.
OVER evening skies the queen of night
Had spread her silver beam,
That tinged the neighboring hills with light,
Or sported in the stream.
No peasants, wandering through the plains,
On sounds melodious hung,
All still, but where her love-lorn strains
Sweet Philomela sung.
To hear thy tender woes displayed,
Sweet songstress of the grove,
The melancholy Albert strayed,
A prey to hopeless love.
Fast over his health's declining bloom
A wasting languor flew;
So noontide suns, with fervid beam;
Exhale the morning dew.
'Twas bright Elweena, matchless maid,
Whose beauties fanned the flame*
And taught him 'neath the lonely shade,
In sighs to breathe her name.
In absence often he sought relief,
And vowed to love no more;
But absence sharpened every grief,
That pierced his soul before.
In equal pain Elweena sighed,
And mutual love expressed;
But, ah! her father's cruel pride
Forbade them to be blessed.
Young Albert's innocence and truth
He could not disapprove;
But fortune placed the luckless youth
Beneath his daughter's love.
Such worth might well esteem inspire,
It almost won his praise;
But avarice quelled the kindling fire,
Compassion strove to raise.
Soft over the morn of Albert's life
Had fortune smiled serene;
How blessed the youth, till bitter strife
Reversed the happy scene!
He with his widowed mother dwelt,
In solitude obscure;
And every shock of fate she felt
He helped her to endure.
Long since the fatal, news had passed
The mourning village over,
That her brave husband breathed his last
On India's distant shore.
But added to her hapless doom
Was now her Albert's grief;
She saw him wither in his bloom,
Nor could she yield relief:
For, with a heart devoid of blame,
He lived to joy no more;
And now resolved, for wealth and fame,
To search some foreign shore.
The night was come, the fatal night,
Replete with tender pain;
Doomed, in his native land, the light
Never to behold again.
And now the pensive mourner strayed,
No gleam of hope he knew;
He went to bid his charming maid
A long, a last adieu!
As over her form soft sorrow stole,
Her thoughts you might descry;
It seemed as if her spotless soul
Beamed from her azure eye.
No more her cheek that glow expressed,
Which health had once displayed,
While, careless, over her lily breast
Her auburn tresses played.
'Alas!' she cried, and clasped his hand,
And pressed it to her heart;
'And do the cruel Fates command?
'And must we, Albert, part?'
'We must,' overwhelmed in grief, he said,
'We must, Elweena dear!
'But, ever I go, afflicted maid,
'Accept my vow sincere.
'Whene'er through foreign lands I roam,
'Whatever change I see,
'Still, turning to my native home,
'My heart shall dwell with thee.'
He said, and over Elweena's breast
The briny torrent fell;
A thousand times her hand he pressed,
And bade as often farewell.
They part, and through the mournful grove,
Her maid's Elweena bore;
Each cast a lingiring look of love,
Till they could view no more.
Now softly over the dewy plain
Night's dusky shadows stole;
While anguish, love, and cruel pain,
Oppressed young Albert's soul.
His mother, gently on his breast,
Reclined her drooping head;
The weeping youth she fondly pressed,
And mutual sorrows shed.
While strangers to each peaceful smile,
They mourned their luckless fate,
An aged pilgrim, spent with toil,
Approached the cottage gate.
The mournful youth, in humble plight,
Addressed the reverend sage;
Who asked a shelter for the night,
To rest his drooping age.
Full welcome to their humble shed,
The hospitable pair
With liberal hand the viands spread,
And bade the stranger share.
With pain he marked the cruel grief,
That preyed on either heart;
Which (anxious to extend relief)
He begged them to impart.
With livid cheek, and tearful eye,
The pensive Albert rose,
And told, but, oh! with many a sigh,
The story of his woes.
His life, his birth, his father's name,
His mother's tender care;
But, still more sad, the fatal flame
He bore Elweena fair.
The good old man with transport flew,
And pressed the youth, and smiled*
He cried, 'Support me, heavens! I view
My long-lost wife and child!
''Twas on no distant Indian-shore
'Thy father sunk to rest;
'But now returns with ample store,
'To make his Albert blessed.
'And thou, dear partner of my soul,
'Whom often my fancy drew;
'Nor time, nor absence, could control
'The pangs I felt for you!
'Then chase all sorrow from your breast,
'Secure from bitter strife;
'Myself will sooth to balmy rest
'The evening of your life.'
He ceased; and to his constant fair
Enraptured Albert flew;
And left the long-divided pair,
To tell their joys anew.
The blissful news Elweena told,
And made her sire relent;
Nor more to Albert's passion cold,
Nor more denied consent.
And when the azure-vested day
Dawned over the smiling land,
In mutual bliss, serenely gay,
They joined the nuptial band.
CROMA. AN ANCIENT POEM FROM OSSIAN.
If there be ought of presage in the mind,
This day will be remarkable in my life
By some great act, or of my days the last.

IT was the voice of my love! seldom art thou in the dreams of Malvina! Open
your airy halls, fathers of Toscar of shields! Unfold the gates of your clouds:
The steps of Malvina are near. I have heard a voice in my dream. I feel the
fluttering of my soul. Why did thou come, O blast! from the dark rolling face
of the lake? Thy rustling wing was in the tree; the dream of Malvina fled. But
she beheld her love, when his robe of mist flew on the wind. A sunbeam was on
his skirts; they glittered like the gold of the stranger. It was the voice of
my love; seldom comes he to my dreams!

But thou dwell in the soul of Malvina, son of mighty Ossian! my sighs arise
with the beams of the East; my tears descend with the drops of night. I was a
lovely tree, in thy presence, Oscar! with all my branches round me; but thy
death came like a blast from the desert, and laid my green head low. The Spring
returned with its showers; no leaf of mine arose! The virgins saw me silent in
the hall: they touched the harp of joy. The tear was on the cheek of Malvina;
the virgins beheld me in my grief. Why art thou sad, they said, thou first of
the maids of Lutha? Was he lovely as the beam of the morning, and stately in
thy sight?

Pleasant is thy song in Ossian's ear, daughter of streamy Lutha! Thou have
heard the music of departed bards, in the dream of thy rest, when sleep fell on
thine eyes, at the murmur of Moruth. -- When thou did return from the chase,
in the day of the Sun, thou have heard the music of bards, and thy song is
lovely. It is lovely, O Malvina! but it melts the soul. There is a joy in
grief, when peace dwells in the breast of the sad. But sorrow wastes the
mournful, O daughter of Toscar; and their days are few! They fall away, like
the flower on which the sun has looked in his strength, after the mildew has
passed over it, when its head is heavy with the drops of the night. Attend to
the tale of Ossian, O maid! He remembers the days of his youth!

The King commanded; I raised my sails; and rushed into the bay of Croma; into
Croma's sounding bay, in lovely Inisfail. High on the coast arose the towers of
Crothar, King of Spears; Crothar renowned in the battles of his youth; but age
dwelt then around the chief. Rothmar had raised the sword against the hero; and
the wrath of Fingal burned. He sent Ossian to meet Rothmar in war; for the
Chief of Croma was the friend of his youth. I sent the bard before me with
songs. I came into the hall of Crothar. There sat the Chief amidst the arms of
his fathers; but his eyes had failed. His gray locks waved around a staff, on
which the warrior leaned. He hummed the songs of other times, when the sound of
our arms reached his ears. Crothar rose, stretched his aged hand, and blessed
the son of Fingal.

Ossian! said the hero, the strength of Crothar's arms has failed. O could I
lift the sword as in the day that Fingal fought at Strutha! He was the first of
men! but Crothar had also his fame. The King of Morven praised me; he placed on
my arm the bossy shield of Calthar, whom the King had slain in his wars. Do
thou not behold it on the wall, for Crothar's eyes have failed! Is thy strength
like thy father's, Ossian? Let the aged feel thine arm!

I gave my arm to the King; he felt it with his aged hands; the sigh rose in
his breast, and his tears came down. Thou art strong, my son, he said; but not
like the King of Morven! but who is like the hero among the mighty in war! Let
the feast of my hall be spread; and let my bards exalt the song. Great is he
that is within my walls, ye sons of echoing Croma! The feast is spread; the
harp is heard; and joy is in the hall. But it was joy covering a sigh, that
darkly dwelt in every breast. It was like the faint beam of the moon spread on
a cloud in heaven. At length the music ceased; and the aged King of Croma
spoke: He spoke without a tear, but sorrow swelled in the midst of his voice.

Son of Fingal; beholdest thou not the darkness of Crothar's joy? My soul was
not sad at the feast, when my people lived before me. I rejoiced in the
presence of strangers, when my son shone in the hall. But Ossian, he is a beam
that is departed. He left no streak of light behind. He is fallen, son of
Fingal! in the wars of his father. Rothmar, the chief of grassy Tromlo, heard
that these eyes had failed; he heard that my arms were fixed in the hall, and
the pride of his soul arose! He came toward Croma; my people fell before him.
I took my arms in my wrath; but what could sightless Crothar do? My steps were
unequal; my grief was great. I wished for days that were past. Days! wherein I
fought and won in the field of blood. My son returned from the chase; the
fair-haired Fovar-gormo. He had not lifted his sword in battle, for his arm was
young. But the soul of the youth was great; the fire of valor burned in his
eyes. He saw the disordered steps of his father; and his sigh arose. King of
Croma, he said; is it because thou have no son? is it for the weakness of
Favor-gormo's arm, that thy sighs arise? I begin, my father, to feel my
strength. I have drawn the sword of my youth; and I have bent the bow. Let me
meet this Rothmar, with the sons of Croma: Let me meet him, O my father! I feel
my burning soul. And thou shall meet him, I said, son of the sightless Crothar!
But let others advance before thee, that I may hear the tread of thy feet at
thy return; for my eyes behold thee not, fair-haired Fovar-gormo!

He went; he met the foe; he fell. Rothmar advances to Croma. He, who flew my
son is near, with all his pointed spears.

This is no time to fill the shell, I replied; and took my spear! My people saw
the fire of my eyes; they all rose around. Through night we strode along the
heath. Gray morning rose in the East. A green narrow vale appeared before us;
nor wanting was it in green winding streams. The dark host of Rothmar are on
its banks, with all their glittering arms. We fought along the vale. They fled.
Rothmar sunk beneath my sword! Day had not descended in the West, when I
brought his arms to Crothar. The aged hero felt them with his hands; and joy
brightened over all his thoughts.

The people gather to the hall. The shells of the feast are heard. Ten harps
are strung; five bards advance, and sing by turns the praise of Ossian. They
poured forth their burning souls; and the string answered to their voice. The
joy of Croma was great; for peace returned to the land. The night came on with
silence; the morning returned with joy. No foe came in darkness, with his
glittering spear. The joy of Croma was great; for the gloomy Rothmar had fallen!

I raised my voice for Fovar-gormo, when they laid the chief in earth. The aged
Crothar was there, but his sigh was not heard. He searched for the wound of his
son, and found it in his breast. Joy rose in the face of the aged. He came and
spoke to Ossian. King of Spears! he said; my son has not fallen without his
fame. The young warrior did not fly; but met death, as he went forward in his
strength. Happy are they, who die in youth, when their renown is heard! The
feeble will not behold them in the hall, nor smile at their trembling hands.
Their memory shall be honored in song; the young tear of the virgin will fall:
But the aged wither away by degrees; the fame of their youth, while yet they
live, is all forgotten. They fall in secret. The sigh of their son is not
heard. Joy is around their tomb; the stone of their fame is placed without a
tear. Happy are they who die in youth, when their renown is around them.

AN ELEGY, WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD. GRAY.
THE curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly over the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his drony flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that, from yonder ivy-mantled tower
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as, wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-trees shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell forever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow, twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care:
Nor children run to lisp their fire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield;
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their teams afield;
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await, alike, the inevitable hour;
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
If memory over their tomb no trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn aisle and fretted vault,
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery soothe the dull cold ear of death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire:
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of time, did never unroll;
Chill Penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem, of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear.
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest;
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.
The Applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes.
Their lot forbade: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined:
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind;
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of luxury and pride
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhimes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by th'unletter'd muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing, lingering, look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires:
Even from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
Even in our ashes live their wonted fires.
For thee, who, mindful of the unhonour'd dead,
Do in these lines their artless tale relate;
If, chance, by lonely contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall enquire thy fate.
Happily some hoary-headed swain may say,
'Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn,
'Brushing, with hasty steps, the dews away,
'To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
'There at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
'That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
'His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
'And pore upon the brook that bubbles by.
'Hard by yon wood, now smiling, as in scorn,
'Mutt'ring his wayward fancies, he would rove;
'Now drooping, woeful man, like one forlorn,
'Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love,
'One morn I missed him on the 'custom'd hill,
'Along the heath, and near his favorite tree;
'Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
'Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he.
'The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
'Slow through the churchyard path we saw him borne;
'Approach and read (for thou can read) the lay,
'Grav'd on the stone beneath you aged thorn.'
THE EPITAPH.
Here rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to fortune and to fame unknown;
Fair science frowned not on his humble birth,
And melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere,
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to misery all he had, a tear;
He gained from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
THE BARON ST. BRUNNE. A PROVENCAL TALE.
'Who is he, with voice unblest,
'That calls me from the bed of rest?'
GRAY.
THERE lived, in the province of Bretagne, a noble Baron, famous for his
magnificence and courtly hospitalities. His castle was graced with ladies of
exquisite beauty, and thronged with illustrious knights; for the honors he paid
to feats of chivalry invited the brave of distant countries to enter his lists,
and his court was more splendid than those of many princes. Eight minstrels
were retained in his service, who used to sing to their harps romantic
fictions, taken from the Arabians, or adventures of chivalry, that befell
knights during the crusades, or the martial deeds of the Baron, their lord;
while he, surrounded by his knights and ladies, banqueted in the great hall of
his castle, where the costly tapestry, that adorned the walls with pictured
exploits of his ancestors, the casements of painted glass, enriched with
armorial bearings, the gorgeous banners that waved along the roof, the
sumptuous canopies, the profusion of gold and silver that glittered on the
side-boards, the numerous dishes, that covered the tables, the number and gay
liveries of the attendants, with the chivalric and splendid attire of the
guests, united to form a scene of magnificence, such as we may not hope to see
in these degenerate days.

Of the Baron, the following adventure is related. One night having retired
late from the banquet to his chamber, and dismissed his attendants, he was
surprised by the appearance of a stranger of a noble air, but of a sorrowful
and dejected countenance. Believing, that this person had been secreted in the
apartment, since it appeared impossible he could have lately passed the
anti-room, unobserved by the pages in waiting, who would have prevented this
intrusion on their lord, the Baron, calling loudly for his people, drew his
sword, which he had not yet taken from his side, and stood upon his defense.
The stranger slowly advancing, told him that there was nothing to fear; that he
came with no hostile design, but to communicate to him a terrible secret, which
it was necessary for him to know.

The Baron, appeased by the courteous manners of the stanger, after surveying
him for some time in silence, returned his sword into the scabbard, and desired
him to explain the means, by which he had obtained access to the chamber, and
the purpose of this extraordinary visit.

Without answering either of these enquiries, the stranger said, that he could
not then explain himself, but that, if the Baron would follow him to the edge
of the forest, at a short distance from the castle walls, he would there
convince him, that he had something of importance to disclose.

This proposal again alarmed the Baron, who could scarcely believe, that the
stranger meant to draw him to so solitary a spot, at this hour of the night,
without harboring a design against his life, and he refused to go, observing,
at the same time, that, if the stranger's purpose was an honorable one, he
would not persist in refusing to reveal the occasion of his visit, in the
apartment where they were.

While he spoke this, he viewed the stranger still more attentively than
before, but observed no change in his countenance, or any sympton, that might
intimate a consciousness of evil design. He was habited like a knight, was of a
tall and majestic stature, and of dignified and courteous manners. Still,
however, he refused to communicate the subject of his errand in any place, but
that he had mentioned, and, at the same time, gave hints concerning the secret
he would disclose, that awakened a degree of solemn curiosity in the Baron,
which at length induced him to consent to follow the stranger, on certain
conditions.

'Sir Knight,' said he, I will attend you to the forest, and will take with me
only four of my people, who shall witness our conference.

To this, however, the Knight objected.

'What I would disclose,' said he with solemnity, is to you alone. There are
only three living persons, to whom the circumstance is known; it is of more
consequence to you and your house, than I shall now explain. In future years
you will look back to this night with satisfaction or repentance, accordingly
as you now determine. As you would hereafter prosper -- follow me; I pledge you
the honor of a knight, that no evil shall befall you; -- if you are contented
to dare futurity, remain in your chamber, and I will depart as I came.

'Sir Knight,' replied the Baron, how is it possible, that my future peace can
depend upon my present determination?

'That is not now to be told,' said the stranger, I have explained myself to
the utmost. It is late; if you follow me, it must be quickly; -- you will do
well to consider the alternative.

The Baron mused, and, as he looked upon the knight, he perceived his
countenance assume a singular solemnity.

The Baron paced his apartment, for some time, impressed by the last words of
the stranger, whose extraordinary request he feared to grant, and feared also
to refuse. At length he said, Sir Knight, you are utterly unknown to me; tell
me yourself, is it reasonable, that I should trust myself alone with a
stranger, at this hour, in a solitary forest? Tell me, at least, who you are,
and who assisted to secret you in this chamber.

The knight frowned at these latter words, and was a moment silent; then, with
a countenance somewhat stern, he said,

I am an English knight; I am called Sir Bevys of Lancaster -- and my deeds are
not unknown at the Holy City, whence I was returning to my native land, when I
was benighted in the neighboring forest.

'Your name is not unknown to fame,' said the Baron, 'I have heard of it.' (The
knight looked haughtily.) But why, since my castle is known to entertain all
true knights, did not your herald announce you? Why did you not appear at the
banquet, where your presence would have been welcomed, instead of hiding
yourself in my castle and stealing to my chamber, at midnight!

The Stranger frowned, and turned away in silence; But the Baron repeated the
questions.

'I come not,' said the knight, to answer enquiries, but to reveal facts. If
you would know more, follow me, and again I pledge the honor of a Knight, that
you shall return in safety, Be quick in your determination -- I must be gone.

After some further hesitation, the Baron determined to follow the stranger,
and to see the result of his extraordinary request; he therefore again drew
forth his sword, and, taking up a lamp, bade the knight lead on. The latter
obeyed, and opening the door of the chamber they passed into the anti-room,
where the Baron, surprised to find all his pages asleep, stopped, and, with
hasty violence, was going to reprimand them for their carelessness, when the
knight waved his hand, and looked so expressively upon the Baron, that the
latter restrained his resentment and passed on.

The knight, having descended a staircase, opened a secret door, which the
Baron had believed was known only to himself, and, proceeding through several
narrow and winding passages, came, at length, to a small gate, that opened
beyond the walls of the castle. Meanwhile the Baron followed in silence and
amazement, on perceiving that these secret passages were so well known to a
stranger, and felt inclined to return from an adventure, that appeared to
partake of treachery, as well as danger. Then considering that he was armed,
and observing the courteous and noble air of his conductor, his courage
returned, he blushed, that it had failed him for a moment, and he resolved to
trace the mystery to its source. He now found himself on the heathy platform,
before his castle, where, looking up, he perceived lights glimmering in the
different casements of the guests, who were retiring to sleep; and while he
shivered in the blast, and looked on the dark and desolate scene around him, he
thought of the comforts of his warm chamber, rendered cheerful by the blaze of
wood, and felt, for a moment, the full contrast of his present situation.

The wind was strong, and the Baron watched his lamp with anxiety, expecting
every moment to see it extinguished; but, though the flame wavered, it did not
expire, and he still followed the stranger, who often sighed as he went, but
did not speak.

When they reached the borders of the forest, the knight turned and raised his
head, as if he meant to address the Baron, but then, closing his lips in
silence, he walked on.

As they entered beneath the dark and spreading bows, the Baron, affected by
the solemnity of the scene, hesitated whether to proceed, and demanded how much
further they were to go. The knight replied only by a gesture, and the Baron,
with hesitating steps and a suspicious eye, followed through an obscure and
intricate path, till, having proceeded a considerable way, he again demanded
whither they were going, and refused to proceed unless he was informed.

As he said this, he looked at his own sword, and at the knight alternately,
who shook his head, and whose dejected countenance disarmed the Baron, for a
moment, of suspicion.

A little further is the place, whither I would lead you, said the stranger; no
evil shall befall you -- I have sworn it on the honor of a knight.

The Baron, reassured, again followed in silence, and they soon arrived at a
deep recess of the forest, where the dark and lofty chestnuts entirely excluded
the sky, and which was so overgrown with underwood, that they proceeded with
difficulty. -- The knight sighed deeply as he passed, and sometimes paused; and
having at length reached a spot, where the trees crowded into a knot, he
turned, and with a terrific look, pointing to the ground, the Baron saw there
the body of a man, stretched at its length, and weltering in blood; a ghastly
wound was on the forehead, and death appeared already to have contracted the
features.

The Baron, on perceiving the spectacle, started in horror, looked at the
knight for explanation, and was then going to raise the body, and examine if
there were yet any remains of life; but the stranger, waving his hand, fixed
upon him a look so earnest and mournful, as not only much surprised him, but
made him desist.

But what were the Baron's emotions, when, on holding the lamp near the
features of the corpse, he discovered the exact resemblance of the stranger his
conductor, to whom he now looked up in astonishment and enquiry? As he gazed,
he perceived the countenance of the knight change and begin to fade, till his
whole form gradually vanished from his astonished sense! While the Baron stood
fixed to the spot, a voice was heard to utter these words:

The body of Sir Bevys of Lancaster, a noble Knight of England, lies before
you. He was, this night, waylaid and murdered, as he journeyed from the Holy
City toward his native land. Respect the honor of knighthood and the law of
humanity; inter the body in Christian ground, and cause his murderers to be
punished. As you observe, or neglect this, shall peace and happiness, or war
and misery, light upon you and your house forever!

The Baron, when he recovered from the awe and astonishment, into which this
adventure had thrown him, returned to his castle, whither he caused the body of
Sir Bevys to be removed; and, on the following day, it was interred, with the
honors of knighthood, in the chapel of the castle, attended by all the noble
knights and ladies, who graced the court of the Baron St. Brunne.

THE FATE OF ATHWOLD AND ELFRIDA.
'DO you not see yon castle fair,
'That stands upon the brow?
'Where many a blast has shook the trees,
'Waving them to and fro.
'My love lives in you castle fair,
'That stands upon the brow.
'Where many a blast has shook the trees,
'Waving them to and fro.
'My love, he is a valiant knight,
'And beauteous to behold;
'And many a lady sighs for him,
'With lands and heaps of gold.
'My love, he has a honey'd tongue,
'And lacks not land or gold;
'But he will have a lady fair,
'And beateous to behold*
'My love, he has a honey'd tongue,
'And takes me on his knee;
'And sweetly speaks, and sweetly smiles,
'And sweetly kisses me.
'The haughty Earl, his father, bold,
'Vow'd, me he should not wed;
'But my love vowed, he surely would,
'When he approached my bed.
'Then up betimes, my virgins all,
'And braid my yellow hair,
'And ere I hear his bugle horn,
'Make me look fresh and fair.
'And tie the bracelets round my arms,
'Which my young Earl has sent;
'They're precious gifts, they are tokens true,
'That I shall never repeat.
'Then lie thee still, my precious babe,
'I feel thee spring for joy,
'That ere tomorrow's sun shall set,
'Thou'lt be thy father's boy.
'Then lie thee still, my precious babe,
'Thou'lt be no bastard born;
'Stir not, nor start, till thou shall hear
'The young E^^^'s bugle horn.
'And when thou hear'st his bugle horn,
'Then spring, my babe, for joy;
'Thy mother then shall be a bride,
'And thou thy father's boy.
'I would tomorrow night were come,
'And I reposed in bed,
'And my silk curtains drawn around,
'Though the old Earl be dead.
'I would tomorrow night were come,
'The young Earl in my arms;
'That I might bless his love and truth,
'And fear no future harms.
'I would tomorrow night were come,
'That I might certain be,
'My precious babe a father had,
'To dandle on his knee.
'How can you sleep, my virgins fair,
'How can you sleep so sound?
'The noisy owl from yonder wall
'Makes the old porch resound.
'Away, away, thou noisy owl,
'And cease thy horrid din;
''Tis not thy cheerful sound I want,
'To welcome this day in.
'Away, away, thou noisy owl,
'Disturb not thus my rest;
'Thy boding sounds, thy dismal song,
'Alarm my anxious breast.
'And sleep you still, my virgins fair?
'And don't you hear the bell,
'With hollow voice and iron tongue*
'The midnight hour to tell?
'Sleep on, sleep on, my virgins fair,
'For innocence can sleep,
'Despight of owls, or bells, or ghosts,
'While guilt must wake and weep.
'Ah me! who stands at my bed's foot?
'Earl Athwold, love, is it you?
'Nay, prithee, stay till 'morrow night,
'When I Am your bride so true.
'The wind is bleak, the moon is dark,
'The frost creeps over the grass,
'How did thou open the iron gate,
'And leap the deep morass?
'How deadly pale thou look, my love,
'I fear thou art not well;
'Speak to me, life, I Will call my maids,
'I'll ring the chamber bell.
'Why do thou sigh, why look so sad?
'Ah me! why these alarms?
'How cold thou seem; come to me, love,
'Come, warm thee in my arms.
'Nay, prithee, prithee, speak, my love,
'Nay, look not such a look;
'For just so looked my brother dear,
'When taken from the cold brook.
'Then, prithee, one soft kiss, my life,
'I will not bid thee stay;
'What means my love? where do thou point?
'Why beckon me away?
'O go not thus -- stay, Athwold, stay!
'Virgins, awake, awake!
'See where he glides, hark that sad sigh,
'Hark! the foundations shake.
'Awake, awake, companions dear,
'My sister virgins all,
'And ring aloud the chamber bell,
'Our lady loud does call.
'Alas! what ails our lady dear?
'And wherefore does she shake?
'And why did she with voice so sad,
'So fearfully awake?'
'Did you see naught, my virgin's fair,
'Did ye not hear a bell,
'That with a deep and solemn sound,
'Rung out a sad death knell:
'Nought have we seen, our lady dear,
'Nor have we heard a bell,
'That with a deep and solemn sound,
'Rung out a sad death knell.
'Now Christ preserve your Athwold safe.
'And safe make you his bride;
'As sure he has not been this night,
'Standing at your bed side.'
'Now Christ preserve my Athwold safe,
'And safe make me his bride;
'For sure I am, I saw him now,
'Standing at my bed side.
'The gates are closed, the draw-brige up,
'And yestern Athwold went,
'To the bold Baron Orgar's house,
'That live's by silver Trent.
'To the bold Baron Orgar's house,
'With whom today he will come,
'With bugle horn, and merry men,
'To fetch his fair maid home.
'Then haste ye, bring my robes so white,
'I can no longer sleep;
'Tho' I Am to be a bride today,
'I cannot choose, but weep.
'And haste ye, bring my kerchief too,
'With which my Athwold dear
'Oft, after he has kissed my cheek,
'Hath wiped away the tear.
'Why come thou not, my Athwold dear?
'The twilight leaves the sky;
'Come bless me with thy honey'd tongue,
'Or I shall surely die.
'Swift let me hear thy horse's hoofs
'Come batt'ring over the ground,
'And thy sweet sounding bugle horn,
'That makes the hills resound.
'Ah me! the winds begin to roar;
'Why does the tempest rise?
'Why does the thunder's dreadful din
'Disturb the peaceful skies?
'Red runs the rapid Derwent stream,
'Its angry spirits shriek;
'The blood runs chill around my heart,
'And pale -- pale paints my cheek.
'Red runs the rapid Derwent stream,
'How shall my lover pass?
'Though in the night he opened the gates,
'And leaped the deep morass.
'Red runs the rapid Derwent stream,
'Its angry spirits foam;
'Oh! Christ foresend my Athwold safe,
'To fetch his fair bride home.
'Rejoice, my virgins, do'nt you hear
'The woods and hills resound?
'Do you not hear the horse's hoofs
'Come batt'ring over the ground?
'Now woe betide the lazy wight,
'That watches at the gate;
'Why turns he not the iron key,
'That makes Earl Athwold wait?
'Rejoice, rejoice, my darling babe,
'Now you are thy mother's joy,
'For now thy father dear is come,
'To make thee his own boy.'
She ran to meet her Earl so dear,
She tore her silken band,
She stumbled at the threshold step,
And bruised her lily hand.
She ran to meet her Earl so dear,
She trembled at the door,
And three large drops of her life's blood,
Came trickling to the floor.
She ran to meet her Earl so dear,
And smiling was her look;
She met a pale corpse at the door,
Taken from the cold, cold brook.
She ran to meet her Earl so dear,
She met him at the door;
A pale corpse taken from Derwent stream,
And not a smiling wooer.
They bore the body on a bier,
They laid it by her side:
She looked, she sighed, she kissed his cheek,
And looked, and shrieked, and di'd.
In one low grave they both repose,
Yet often a pensive shade
Is seen to glide among the towers,
And with the twilight fade.
Oh! be their early fault forgot,
Their soft offense forgiven;
And let the erring world remit
What pardon meets in Heaven.
ADVENTURES OF A KNIGHT. A TALE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.
Ye powers of darkness and of hell,
Propitious to the magic spell,
Who rule in silence over the night,
Be present now --
FRANCIS.
TOWARD the latter end of the reign of Henry VIII. Sir Gawen, a man of some
fortune and considerable curiosity, fond of enterprise, and insatiate of
knowledge, traveled through the northern counties of England. The following
single adventure is still extant among the family writings, and is still
recorded by his posterity.

It was toward sunset, (says the manuscript) when Sir Gawen, after having
traversed a very lone and unfrequented path, arrived at the edge of a thick and
dark forest; the sky was suddenly overcast, and it began to rain, the thunder
rolled at a distance, and sheets of livid lightning flashed across the heath.
Overcome with fatigue and hunger, he rode impatiently along the borders of the
forest, in hopes of discovering an entrance, but none was to be found. At
length, just as he was about to dismount, with an intention of breaking the
fence, he discerned as he thought, something moving upon the heath, and, upon
advancing toward it, it proved to be an old woman gathering peat, and who,
overtaken by the storm, was hurrying home as fast as her infirm limbs would
carry her.

The sight of a human creature filled the heart of Sir Gawen with joy, and
hastily riding up, he enquired how far he had deviated from the right road, and
where he could procure a night's lodging. The old woman now slowly lifted up
her palsied head, and discovered a set of features, which could scarcely be
called human; her eyes were red, piercing, and distorted, and, rolling
horribly, glancing upon every object but the perform by whom she was addressed,
and, at intervals, they omitted a fiery disagreeable light; her hair, of a
dirty gray, hung matted with filth in large masses upon her shoulders, and a
few thin portions rushed abrupt and horizontally from the upper part of her
forehead, which was much wrinkled, and of a parchment hue; her cheeks were
hollow, withered, and red with a quantity of acrid rheum; her nose was large,
prominent and sharp, her lips thin, skinny and livid, her few teeth black, and
her chin long and peaked, with a number of bushy hairs depending from its
extremity; her nails also were acute, crooked and bent over her fingers, and
her garments ragged and fluttering in the wind, displayed every possible
variety of color. The knight was a little daunted, but the old woman having
mentioned a dwelling at some distance, and offering to lead the way, the
pleasure received from this piece of news effaced the former impression, and
getting from his horse, he laid hold of the bridle, and they slowly moved over
the heath.

The storm had now ceased, and the moon rising gave presage of a fine night,
just as the old woman, taking a sudden turn, plunged into the wood by a path
narrow and almost choked up with a quantity of briar and thorn. The trees were
thick, and save a few glimpses of the moon, which now and then poured light on
the uncouth features of his companion, all was dark and dismal; the heart of
Sir Gawen misgave him; neither spoke, and the knight pursued his guide merely
by the noise she made in hurrying through the bushes, which was done with a
celerity totally inconsistent with her former decrepitude. At length the path
grew wider, and a faint blue light, which came from a building at some
distance, glimmered before them; they now left the wood, and issued upon a
rocky and uneven piece of ground; the moon struggling through a cloud, cast a
doubtful and uncertain light, and the old woman, with a leer, which made the
very hair of Sir Gawen stand an end, told him that the dwelling was at hand. It
was so; for a Gothic castle, placed on a considerable elevation, now came in
view; it was a large massy structure, much decayed, and some parts of it in a
totally ruinous condition; a portion, however, of the keep, or great tower, was
still entire, as was also the entrance to the court or enclosure, preserved
probably by the ivy, whose fibers crept round with solicitous care. Large
fragments of the ruin were scattered about, covered with moss, and half sunk in
the ground, and a number of old elm trees, through whose foliage the wind
sighed with a sullen and melancholy sound, dropped a deep and settled gloom,
that scarce permitted the moon to stream by fits upon the building.

Sir Gawen drew near; ardent curiosity, mingled with awe, dilated his bosom,
and he inwardly congratulated himself upon so singular an adventure, when
turning round to question his companion, a glimpse of the moon poured full upon
his eye so horrid a contexture of feature, so wild and preternatural a
combination, that, smote with terror and unable to move, a cold sweat trickled
from every pore, and immediately this infernal being, seizing him by the arm,
and hurrying him over the drawbridge to the great entrance of the keep, the
portcullis fell with a tremendous sound, and the knight, starting as it were
from a trance, drew his sword in act to destroy his treacherous guide, when
instantly a horrible and infernal laugh burst from her, and in a moment the
whole castle was in an uproar, peal after peal issuing from every quarter, till
at length growing faint, they died away, and a dead silence ensued.

Sir Gawen, who, during this strange tumult, had collected all his scattered
powers, now looked round him with determined resolution; his terrible companion
had disappeared, and the moon shining full upon the portcullis, convinced him
that any escape that way was impracticable; the wind sighed through the elms;
the scared owl, uttering his discordant note, broke from the rustling bough,
and a dim twinkling light beamed from a loop-hole near the summit of the great
tower. Sir Gawen entered the keep, having previously reasoned himself into a
state of cool fortitude, and bent up every power to the appalling enterprise.
He extended his sword before him, for it was dark, and proceeded carefully to
search around, in hopes either of discovering some aperture, which might lead
to the vestibule or staircase, or of wreaking his vengeance on the wretch, who
had thus decoyed him. All was still as death: but as he strode over the floor,
a dull, hollow sound issued from beneath, and rendered him apprehensive of
falling through into some dismal vault, from which he might never be able to
extricate himself. In this situation, dreading the effect of each light
footstep, a sound, as of many people whispering, struck his ear; he bent
forward listening with eager attention, and as it seemed to proceed from a
little distance before him, he determined to follow it: he did so, and
instantly fell through the mouldering pavement, whilst at the same time peals
of horrid laughter again burst with reiterated clamor from every chamber of
the castle. Sir Gawen rose with considerable difficulty, and much stunned with
the fall, although fortunately the spot he had dropped upon was covered with a
quantity of damp and soft earth, which gave way to his weight. He now found
himself in a large vault, arched in the Gothic manner, and supported by eight
massy pillars, down whose sides the damp moisture ran in cold and heavy drops,
the moon shining with great luster through three iron-grated windows, which,
although rusty with age, were strong enough to resist the efforts of Sir Gawen,
who, after having in vain tried to force them, looked around for his sword,
which during the fall had started from his grasp, and in searching the ground
with his fingers, he laid hold of, and drew forth the fresh bones of an
enormous skeleton, yet greasy and moist from the decaying fibers: he trembled
with horror -- a cold wind brushed violently along the surface of the vault,
and a ponderous iron door, slowly grating on its hinges, opened at one corner,
and disclosed to the wandering eye of Sir Gawen a broken staircase, down whose
steps a blue and faint light flashed by fits, like the lightning of a summer's
eve. Appalled by these dreadful prodigies, Sir Gawen felt, in spite of all his
resolution, a cold and deathlike chill pervade his frame, and kneeling down, he
prayed fervently to that power, without whose mandate no being is let loose
upon another, and feeling himself more calm and resolved, he again began to
search for his sword, when a moonbeam falling on the blade, at once restored it
to its owner.

Sir Gawen having thus resumed his wonted fortitude and resolution, held a
parley with himself, and perceiving no other way by which he could escape,
boldly resolved to brave all the terrors of the staircase, and, once more
recommending himself to his Maker, began to ascend. The light still flashed,
enabling him to climb those parts which were not broken or decayed. He had
proceeded in this manner a considerable way, mounting, as he supposed, to the
summit of the keep, when suddenly a shrill and agonizing shriek issued from the
upper part of it, and something rudely brushing down, grasped him with
tremendous strength; in a moment he became motionless, cold as ice, and felt
himself hurried back by some irresistible being; but just as he had reached the
vault, a spectre of so dreadful a shape stalked by within it, that straining
every muscle, he sprang from the deadly grasp: the iron door rushed in thunder
upon its hinges, and a deep hollow groan resounded from beneath. No sooner had
the door closed, than yelling screams and sounds, which almost suspended the
very pulse of life, issued from the vault, as if a troop of hellish furies,
with their chains united, were dashing them in writhing frenzy, and howling to
the uproar. Sir Gawen stood petrified with horror, a stony fear ran to his very
heart, and dismayed every sense about him; he stared wide with his long locks
upstanding stiffly, and the throbbing of his heart oppressed him. The tumult at
length subsiding, Sir Gawen recovered some portion of strength, which he
immediately made use of to convey himself as far as possible from the iron
door, and presently reaching his former elevation on the staircase, which,
after ascending a few more steps, terminated in a winding gallery. The light,
which had hitherto flashed incessantly, now disappeared, and he was left in
almost total darkness, except that now and then the moon threw a few cool rays
through some broken loop-holes, heightening the horror of the scene. He
dreaded going forward, and fearfully looked back, lest some yelling fiend
should again plunge him into the vault. He stood suspended with apprehension; a
mournful wind howled through the apartments of the castle, and listening, he
thought he heard the iron door grate upon its hinges; he started with terror,
the sweat stood in big drops upon his forehead, his knees smote each other, and
he rushed forward with desperate despair, till having suddenly turned a corner
of the gallery, a taper, burning with a faint light, gleamed through a narrow
dark passage: Sir Gawen approached the light; it came from an extensive room,
the folding doors of which were wide open: he entered; a small taper in a massy
silver candlestick stood upon a table in the middle of the room, but gave so
inconsiderable an illumination, that the one end was wrapped in palpable
darkness, and the other scarcely broken in upon by a dim light, that streamed
through a large ramified window, covered with thick ivy. An arm-chair,
shattered and damp with age, was placed near the table, and the remains of a
recent fire were still visible in the grate. The wainscot, of black oak, had
formerly been hung with tapestry, and several portions still clung to those
parts, which were near the fire; they possessed some vivacity of teint, and
with much gilding, yet apparent on the chimney-piece, and several mouldering
relics of costly frames and paintings, gave indisputable evidence of the
ancient grandeur of the place.

Sir Gawen closed the folding doors, and, taking the taper, was about to survey
the room, when a deep hollow groan from the dark end of it smote cold upon his
heart; at the same time the sound, as of something falling with a dead weight,
echoed through the room. Sir Gawen replaced the taper, the flame of which was
agitated, now quivering, sunk, now streaming, flamed aloft, and as the last
pale portion died away, the scarce distinguished form of some terrific being
floated slowly by, and again another dreadful groan ran deepening through the
gloom. Sir Gawen stood for some time incapable of motion, at length summoning
all his fortitude, he advanced with his sword extended to the darkest part of
the room: instantly burst forth in fierce irradiations a blue sulphurous
splendor, and the mangled body of a man distorted with the agony of death, his
very fibers racked with convulsion, his beard and hair stiff and matted with
blood, his mouth open, and his eyes protruding from their marble sockets,
rushed on the fixed and maddening senses of Sir Gawen, whose heart had beat no
more, had not a hiss, as of ten thousand fiends, loud, horrible, roused him
from the dreadful scene; he started, uttering a wild shriek, his brain turned
round, and running he knew not whither, burst through the folding doors.

Darkness again spread her sable pall over the unfortunate Sir Gawen, and he
hurried along the narrow passage with a feeble and faultering step. His
intellect shook, and, overwhelmed with the late appalling objects, had not yet
recovered any degree of recollection, and as he wandered in a dream, a confused
train of horrible ideas passing unconnected through his mind: at length,
however, memory resumed her function, resumed it but to daunt him with
harrowing suggestions; the direful horrors of the room behind, and of the vault
below, were still present to his eyes, and as a man whom hellish fiends had
frightened, he stood trembling, pale, and staring wild.

All was now silent and dark, and he determined to wait in this spot the dawn
of day; but a few minutes had scarce elapsed, when the iron door, screaming on
its hinges, bellowed through the murmuring ruin. Sir Gawen nearly fainted at
the sound, which pausing for some time, again swelled upon the wind, and at
last died away in shrill melancholy shrieks; again all was silent, and again
the same fearful noise struck terror to his soul. Whilst he was thus agitated
with horror and apprehension, a dim light streaming from behind, accompanied
with a soft, quick, and hollow tread, convinced Sir Gawen that something was
pursuing him, and struck with wildering fear, he rushed unconscious down the
steps; the vault received him, and its portal swinging to their close, sounded
as the sentence of death. A dun, faetid smoke filled the place, in the center
of which arose a faint and bickering flame. Sir Gawen approached and beheld a
corse suspended over it by the neck, its fat dropped, and a flame flashing
through the vault, gleamed on a throng of hideous and ghastly features, that
now came forward through the smoke. Sir Gawen, with the desperate valor of a
man, who sees destruction before him, ran furious forward; an universal shriek
burst forth; the corse dropped into the fire, which rising with tenfold
brilliance, placed full in view the dreadful form of his infernal guide,
dilated into horror itself; her face was as pale as death, her eyes were wide
open, dead and fixed, a horrible grin sat upon her features; her lips black,
and half putrid, were drawn back, disclosing a set of large blue teeth, and her
hair, standing stiffly erect, was of a withered red. Sir Gawen felt his blood
freeze within him, his limbs forgot to move, the face, enlarging as it came,
drew near, and, swooning, he fell forward on the ground.

Slow passed the vital fluid through the bosom of Sir Gawen, scarce did the
heart vibrate to its impulse; on his pallid forehead sat a chilly sweat and
frequent spasms shook his limbs; but at length returning warmth gave some
vigor to his frame, the energy of life became more suffused, a soothing
languor stole upon him, and on opening his eyes, rushed neither the images of
death or the rites of witchcraft, but the soft, the sweet and tranquil scenery
of a summer's moonlight night. Enraptured with this sudden and unexpected
change, Sir Gawen rose gently from off the ground, over his head towered a
large and majestic oak, at whose foot, by some kind and compassionate being he
concluded he had been laid. Delight and gratitude dilated his heart, and
advancing from beneath the tree, whose gigantic branches spread a large extent
of shade, a vale, beautiful and romantic, through which ran a clear and deep
stream, came full in view; he walked to the edge of the water, the moon shone
with mellow luster on its surface, and its banks fringed with shrubs, breathed
a perfume more delicate than the odours of the East. On one side, the ground,
covered with a vivid, soft, and downy verdure stretched for a considerable
extent to the borders of a large forest, which sweeping round, finally closed
up the valley, on the other, it was broken into abrupt and rocky masses swarded
with moss, and from whose clefts grew thick and spreading trees, the roots of
which, washed by many a fall of water, hung bare and matted from their craggy
beds.

Sir Gawen forgot in this delicious vale, all his former sufferings, and giving
up his mind to the pleasing influence of curiosity and wonder, he determined to
explore the place by tracing the windings of the stream. Scarce had he entered
upon this plan, when music of the most ravishing sweetness filled the air,
sometimes it seemed to float along the valley, sometimes it stole along the
surface of the water, now it died away among the woods, and now with deep and
mellow symphony it swelled upon the gale. Fixed in astonishment, Sir Gawen
scarce ventured to breathe; every sense, save that of hearing, seemed quite
absorbed, and when the last faint warblings melted on his ear, he started from
the spot, solicitous to know from what being those more than human strains had
parted; but nothing appeared in view; the moon full and unclouded, shone with
unusual luster, the white rocks glittered in her beam, and, filled with hope,
he again pursued the windings of the water, which conducting to the narrowest
part of the valley, continued their course through the wood. Sir Gawen entered
by a path, smooth, but narrow and perplexed, where, although its branches were
so numerous that no preference could be given, or any direct route long
persisted in, yet every turn presented something to amuse* something to sharpen
the edge of research. The beauty of the trees, through whose interstices the
moon gleamed in the most picturesque manner: the glimpses of the water, and the
notes of the nightingale, who now began to fill the valley with her song, were
more than sufficient to take off the sense of fatigue, and he wandered on still
eager to explore, still panting for further discovery. The wood now became more
thick and obscure, and at length almost dark, when the path taking suddenly an
oblique direction, Sir Gawen found himself on the edge of a circular lawn,
whose teint and softness were beyond compare, and which seemed to have been
lightly brushed by fairy feet. A number of fine old trees, around whose boles
crept the ivy and the woodbine, rose at irregular distances, here they mingled
into groves, and there separate, and emulous of each other, they shook their
airy summits in disdain. The water, which had been for some time concealed, now
murmured through a thousand beds and visiting each little flower, added vigor
to its vegetation, and poignancy to its fragrance. Along the edges of the wood
and beneath the shadows of the trees, an innumerable host of glowworms lighted
their inocuous fires, lustrous as the gems of Golconda, and Sir Gawen, desirous
yet longer to enjoy the scene, went forward with light footsteps on the lawn;
all was calm, and, except the breeze of night, that sighed soft and sweetly
through a world of leaves, a perfect silence prevailed. Not many minutes,
however, had elapsed, before the same enchanting music, to which he had
listened with so much rapture in the vale, again arrested his ear, and
presently he discovered on the border of the lawn, just rising above the wood,
and floating on the bosom of the air, a being of the most delicate form; from
his shoulders streamed a tunic of the tenderest blue, his wings and feet were
clothed in downy silver, and in his grasp he had a wand, white as the mountain
snow. He rose swiftly in the air, his brilliance became excessive from the
lunar rays, his song echoed through the vault of night, but having quickly
diminished to the size and appearance of the evening star, it died away, and
the next moment he was lost in ether. Sir Gawen still fixed his eye on that
part of the heavens, where the vision had disappeared, and shortly had the
pleasure of again seeing the star-like radiance, which in an instant unfolded
itself into the full and fine dimensions of the beauteous being, who having
collected dew from the cold vales of Saturn, now descended rapidly toward the
earth, and waving his wand, as he passed athwart the woods, a number of like
form and garb, flew round him, and all alighting on the lawn, separated at
equal distances on its circumference, and then shaking their wings, which
spread a perfume through the air, burst into one general song. Sir Gawen, who
apprehensive of being discovered, had retreated within the shadow of some mossy
oaks, now waited with eager expectation the event of so singular a scene. In a
few moments a bevy of elegant nymphs, dancing two by two, issued from the wood
on the right, and an equal number of warlike knights, accompanied by a band of
minstrels, from that of the left. The knights were clothed in green; on their
bosoms shone a plate of burnished steel, and in their hands they grasped a
golden targe and lance of beamy luster. The nymphs, whose form and symmetry
were beyond whatever poets dream, were dressed in robes of white, their zones
were azure, dropped with diamonds, and their light brown hair decked with roses
hung in ample ringlets. So quick, so light and airy was their motion, that the
turf, the flowers shrunk not to the gentle pressure, and each smiling on her
favorite knight, he slung his brilliant arms aside, and mingled in the dance.

Whilst thus they flew in rapid measures over the lawn. Sir Gawen, forgetting
his situation, and impatient to salute the assembly, involuntarily stepped
forward, and instantaneously a shrill and hollow gust of wind murmured through
the woods, the moon dipped into a cloud, and the knights, the dames and aerial
spirits vanished from his view, leaving the amazed Sir Gawen to repent at
leisure of his precipitate intrusion; scarce, however, had he time to determine
what he should pursue, when a gleam of light flashed suddenly along the
horizon, and the beauteous being, whom he first beheld in the air, stood before
him; he waved his snowy wand, and pointing to the wood, which now appeared
sparkling with a thousand fires, moved gently on. Sir Gawen felt an
irresistible impulse which compelled him to follow, and having penetrated the
wood, he perceived many bright rays of light, which, darting like the beams of
the sun, through every part of it, most beautifully illuminated the shafts of
the trees. As they advanced forwards the radiance became more intense and
converged toward the center; and the fairy being turning quickly round,
commanded Sir Gawen to kneel down and having squeezed the juice of an herb into
his eyes, bade him now proceed, but that no mortal eye, unless its powers of
vision were increased, could endure the glory that would shortly burst upon
them. Scarce had he uttered these words, when they entered an amphitheatre; In
its center was a throne of ivory inlaid with sapphires, on which sat a female
form of exquisite beauty, a plain coronet of gold obliquely crossed her flowing
hair, and her robe of white satin hung negligent in ample folds. Around her
stood five and twenty nymphs clothed in white and gold, and holding lighted
tapers; beyond these were fifty of the aerial beings, their wings of downy
silver stretched for flight, and each a burning taper in his hand; and lastly,
on the circumference of the amphitheatre shone one hundred knights in mail of
tempered steel, in one hand they shook aloft a large targe of massy diamond,
and in the other flashed a taper. So excessive was the reflection, that the
targes had the luster of a hundred suns, and when shaken, sent forth screams of
vivid lightning; from the gold, the silver, and the sapphires rushed a flood of
tinted light, that mingling, threw upon the eye a series of revolving hues.

Sir Gawen impressed with awe, with wonder and delight, fell prostrate on the
ground, whilst the fairy spirit advancing, knelt and presented to the queen a
crystal vase. She rose, she waved her hand, and smiling, bade Sir Gawen to
approach. 'Gentle stranger,' she exclaimed, let not fear appal thine heart for
to him, whom courage, truth and piety have distinguished, our friendship and
our love is given. Spirits of the blessed we are, our sweet employment is to
befriend the wretched and the weary, to lull the torture of anguish, and the
horror of despair. Ah! never shall the tear of innocence or the plaint of
sorrow, the pang of injured merit, or the sigh of hopeless love, implore our
aid in vain. Upon the moonbeam do we float, and light as air, pervade the
habitations of men, and hearken, O favored mortal! I tell thee, spirits pure
from vice are present to thy inmost thoughts; when terror and when madness,
when specter and when death surrounded thee, our influence put to flight the
ministers of darkness; we placed thee in the moonlight vale, and now upon thy
head I pour the planetary dew, from Hecate's dread agents, it will free thee
from wildering fear and gloomy superstition.

She ended, and Sir Gawen, impatient to express his gratitude, was about to
speak, when suddenly the light turned pale, and died away, the spirits fled,
and music soft and sweet was heard remotely in the air. Sir Gawen started, and
in place of the refulgent scene of magic, he beheld a public road, his horse
cropping the grass, which grew upon its edge, and a village at a little
distance, on whose spire the rising sun had shed his earliest beams.

A FAIRY TALE, IN THE ANCIENT ENGLISH STYLE.
IN Britain's Isle and Arthur's days,
When midnight fairies daunc'd the maze,
Lived Edwin of the Green;
Edwin, I wis, a gentle youth,
Endowed with courage, fense and truth,
Though badly shaped he been.
His mountain back mote well be said,
To measure high against his head,
And lift itself above.
Yet spite of all that nature did
To make his uncouth form forbid,
This creature dared to love.
He felt the charms of Edith's eyes,
Nor wanted hope to gain the prize,
Could ladies look within;
But one Sir Topaz dressed with art,
And, if a shape could win a heart,
He had a shape to win.
Edwin (if right I read my song)
With slighted passion paced along
All in the moony light:
'Twas near an old enchanted Court,
Where sportive fairies made resort,
To revel out the night.
His heart was drear, his hope was crossed,
'Twas late, 'twas far, the path was lost,
That reached the neighbor town;
With weary steps he quits the shades,
Resolved, the darkling dome he treads,
And drops his limbs adown.
But scant he lays him on the floor,
When hollow winds remove the door,
A trembling rocks the ground:
And (well I ween to count aright)
At once a hundred tapers light,
On all the walls around.
Now sounding tongues assail his ear,
Now sounding feet approachen near,
And now the sounds increase,
And from the corner where he lay,
He sees a train prosusely gay
Come pranckling over the place.
But (trust me, gentles) never yet
Was dight a masking half so neat,
Or half so rich before;
The country lent the sweet perfumes,
The sea the pearl, the sky the plumes,
The town its silken store.
Now whilst he gazed, a gallant dressed
In flaunting robes above the rest,
With awful accent cried;
'What mortal, of a wretched mind,
'Whose sighs infect the balmy wind,
'Has here presumed to hide?'
At this the swain, whose venurous soul
No fears of magic art control,
Advanced in open sight;
'Nor have I cause of dreed,' he said,
'Who view, by no presumption led,
'Your revels of the night.
''Twas grief for scorn of faithful love,
'Which made my steps unweeting rove
'Amid the nightly dew.'
''Tis well,' the gallant cries again,
'We fairies never injure men,
'Who dare to tell us true.
'Exalt thy love-dejected heart,
'Be mine the task, or ere we part,
'To make thee grief resign;
'Now take the pleasure of thy chance,
'Whilst I with Mab my partner dance,
'Be little Mable thine.'
He spoke, and all a sudden there*
Light make flouts in wanton air;
The monarch leads the queen:
The rest their fairy partners sound,
And Mable trimly tript the ground
With Edwin of the Green.
The dancing past, the board was laid,
And siker such a feast was made,
As heart and lip desire;
Withouten hands the dishes fly,
The glasses with a wish come nigh,
And with a wish retire.
But now to please the fairy king,
Full every deal they laugh and sing,
And antic feats devise;
Some wind and tumble like an ape,
And other some transmute their shape,
In Edwin's wondering eyes.
'Till one at last that Robin hight,
(Renowned for pinching maids by night)
Has hent him up aloof;
And full against the beam he flung,
Where by the back the youth he hung.
To spraul unneath the roof.
From thence, Reverse my charm,' he cries,
'And let it fairly now suffice,
'The gambol has been shown.'
But Oberon answers with a smile,
'Content thee, Edwin, for a while,
The 'vantage is thine own.'
Here ended all the phantome play;
They smelt the fresh approach of day,
And heard a cock to crow:
The whirling wind that bore the crowd,
Has clapped the door, and whistled loud,
To warn them all to go.
Then screaming all at once they fly,
And all at once the tapers die;
Poor Edwin falls to floor:
Forlorn his state, and dark the place,
Was never wight in sike a case,
Through all the land before.
But soon as Dan Apollo rose,
Full jolly creature home he goes,
He feels his back the less,
His honest tongue and steady mind
Han rid him of the lump behind,
Which made him want success.
With lusty livelyhed he talks,
He seems a dancing as he walks,
His story soon took wind;
And beauteous Edith sees the youth,
Endowed with courage, sense and truth,
Without a bunch behind.
The story told, Sir Topaz moved,
(The youth of E^lyth erst approved)
To see the revel scene:
At close of eve, he leaves his home,
And wends to find the ruined dome,
All on the gloomy plain.
As there he bides, it so befell,
The wind came rustling down a dell,
A shaking seized the wall:
Up spring the tapers as before,
The fairies bragly foot the floor,
And music fills the hall.
But certes sorely sunk with woe,
Sir Topaz sees the Elphin show,
His spirits in him die:
When Oberon cries, 'A man is near,
'A mortal passion, cleeped fear,
'Hangs flagging in the sky.'
With that Sir Topaz (hapless youth!)
In accents fault'ring ay for ruth
Entreats them pity grant;
For als he been a mister wight,
Betrayed by wandering in the night,
To tread the circle^ haunt.
'Ah! lozel vile,' at once they roar,
'And little skilled of Fairy lore,
'Thy cause to come we know:
'Now has thy kestrell courage fell
'And fairies, since a lie you tell,
'Are free to work thee woe.'
Then Will, who bears the wispy fire
To trail the swains among the mire,
The caitive upward flung;
There, like a tortoise in a shop,
He dangled from the chamber-top,
Where whilome Edwin hung.
The revel now proceeds apace,
Deffly they frisk it over the place,
They sit, they drink and eat;
The time with frolic mirth beguile,
And poor Sir Topaz hangs the while,
'Till all the rout retreat.
By this the stars began to wink,
They skriek, they fly, the tapers sink,
And down ydrops the knight.
For never spell by fairy laid
With strong enchantment bound a glade,
Beyond the length of night.
Chill, dark, alone, adreed, he lay,
'Till up the welkin rose the day,
Then deemed the dole was over:
But wot ye well his harder lot?
His seely back the bunch has got,
Which Edwin lost before.
This tale a sybil nurse ared;
She softly strok'd my youngling head,
And when the tale was done,
'Thus some are born, my son,' (she cries)
'With base impediments to rise,
'And some are born with none.
'But virtue can itself advance
'To what the favorite fools of chance
'By fortune seem designed;
'Virtue can gain the odds of fate,
'And from itself shake off the weight
'Upon th'unworthy mind.'
THE CAVE OF MODRED. A BRITISH STORY.
WHEN the all conquering sword of the Romans had penetrated into the Southern
part of Wales, and ensanguined the hostile plain with the blood of her most
distinguished heroes, Modred, the sage, sought a retreat from the desolating
rage of war; he was a Druid, renowned for his piety and wisdom; yet he had
lived to see the holy altar besprinkled with the blood of its priests, and the
sacred groves polluted by the crimes of a licentious soldiery!

The asylum he chose was a spacious cave, divided by the hand of nature into a
variety of apartments: an obscure path led to it by a gentle descent, and by a
variety of intricate windings seemed to pronounce it inaccessible, but to those
whom the friendly hand of the Druid guided: thus sequestered, it formed a
retreat for innocence and virtue.

Here the tender virgin fled to escape violation, and the modest matron insult;
and here the widow and the fatherless sought protection and consolation, here
too the hardy veteran, covered with wounds, oftimes repaired from the battle,
and healed by the sage's pious care, returned with renewed strength and vigor
to the fight. Every morn and eve, Modred was seen prostrate beneath a venerable
grove of oak, which graced the side of a hill, that rose at a small distance
from his habitation; there he erected the sacred altar, and agreeably to the
custom of his revered ancestors, laid on it the sacred oblation of meal. Thus
passed his days in prayer, contemplation, and acts of benevolence. His drink
was from a clear streamlet, that distilled from the rock, out of which his rude
dwelling was formed, and his food salubrious herbs, which grew within the
precincts of his habitation. -- Such was Modred, the Druid; in whom the
simplicity of childhood, and the wisdom of old age, were observed to unite.

One day having wandered beyond the bounds he usually prescribed himself, in
pursuit of medicinal herbs, he observed the ground to be distained with several
drops of blood, and perceiving, a few paces further, that it widened into a
tract of considerable dimensions, his humanity prompted him to follow it. It
led him to a spot of ground, on which a person in armor lay extended; he
appeared to be in a swoon, and his beaver being up, Modred could discern that
he was in the flower of his age.

The Druid perceived by his armor, that he belonged to the Roman army; but
compassion for the helpless state in which he beheld him, caused him, at that
instant, to forget all animosity; he raised him in his arms, and applied a
sovereign cordial, that he always carried about him, to his lips, a few drops
of which greatly revived him, but he was nevertheless so extremely exhausted
from loss of blood, that he in vain attempted to rise upon his feet. Modred,
finding the stranger incapable of rising, without other assistance than he was
able to give, hastened back to the cavern, and returned with all speed,
accompanied by Oscar: -- Oscar was the most valiant of all the British youths,
who fearless lifted the sword in defense of liberty. His courage had been
manifest in many battles, which he had sought with the common enemy, and it was
united with clemency and generosity. By the assistance of this youth, the
stranger was supported to Modred's cavern; but as he was a Roman, they first
took the precaution to blindfold him, lest, being an enemy, he should make
observations relative to the situation of the place, which might hereafter
prove to their disadvantage.

Having conducted him into the cavern, they took the bandage from his eyes,
unbraced his armor, and laid him on a couch of the softest moss; the Druid
then examined his wounds, which he found by care might speedily be healed, and
applying to them some herbs, which he knew to be of the most sovereign
efficacy, left him awhile to his repose. An hour being elapsed, he renewed his
visit, and found the stranger so much recovered by the remedies applied to his
wounds, together with a gentle sleep, from which, on Modred's entrance he
awoke, that he was able, in a faint voice, to enquire into whose hands he had
fallen; but presently recollecting they were Britons, he testified by his
countenance, that he expected little mercy at their hands.

The Druid, guessing at what passed in his mind, endeavored to dispel his
apprehensions: 'Youth,' said he, you are in the hands of those, whom your
nation calls barbarians, but though strangers to the specious arts used by
civilized nations to gloss over the basest designs, the Britons are not
unacquainted with the virtues of hospitality and humanity. They love victory,
but they delight not in blood; dispel your fears, therefore, and rest assured,
that while you remain in the cave of Modred, the Druid, you shall be secure
from danger or insult.

In the morning, the Druid found his guest wonderfully recovered; who informed
him, that he was an officer in the Roman army; that he had left the camp, which
was stationed within a day's march of that place, in company with five other of
the troop; their design being, he confessed, to make discoveries concerning the
state of the enemy; but his men being, as he imagined, suborned by a brother
officer, between whom and himself, there had been some trifling difference,
they had basely turned their arms against him, and left him for dead on the
spot, where the Druid first discovered him. He expressed the warmest
acknowledgements for the kind treatment he had received, and, at Modred's
request, followed him to the outward part of the cave, where a number of
persons, of different sex and age, were assembled, being that morning returned
from sacrifice.

Among these, the superior beauty of the fair Elsimena, arrested the attention
of the young Roman. Her stature arose considerably above her companions, and,
like her features, was formed with the most exact symmetry; a thousand beauties
played round her mouth; her cheek disclosed a tincture pure as the opening
rose; and her hair floated over her shoulders, in all the wild negligence of
nature. From the playful hours of infancy, Elsimena had known no other parent,
than Modred; to his care, a mother's dying breath had bequeathed her, and the
pious sage religiously discharged the sacred trust reposed in him. He watched
over her with the attention and care of a fond parent, and received from
Elsimena the grateful return of filial tenderness and obedience. Oscar had long
resigned his heart at the shrine of Elsimena's beauty, nor was the fair maid
insensible of his merit; on the contrary, Oscar beheld her affections captive;
she burned with an equal flame, and a short period was to see them united.

Oscar, not without uneasiness, beheld his mistress exposed to the rapturous
gaze of the young Roman; he observed that her charms touched his soul; and
feared his noble mien and gallant deportment might cause Elsimena to draw
between them a comparison not to his own advantage; but these modest
apprehensions were dissipated, when he observed the coolness and reserve with
which she replied to his civilities; and how solicitous she was to disengage
herself from his conversation. Claudius, for that was the name of the Roman,
became every moment more enamoured of Elsimena; in the simple attire of a
British maid, his heart confessed that she eclipsed the fairest Roman; but he
had the mortification to find that she was insensible to every thing he could
urge in behalf of his passion, and that her heart was solely devoted to Oscar.

Three days insensibly glided away, which the enamoured Claudius, happy in the
presence of Elsimena, thought no more than as many hours; but the Druid finding
him restored to his former vigor, reminded him that it was time to depart: 'We
have now,' said Modred, discharged the debt, which humanity exacted from us, in
your behalf; we have received you beneath our roof, and the sacred laws of
hospitality, which we revere, forbid us to exert to your disadvantage, that
power which we derive not from the strength of our arms, or the chance of war,
but by the private calamity of our enemy; but now that you no longer claim our
sufference, it is time that you depart, since we can no longer entertain you
but as the enemy of our country, the base enslaver of our rights and liberties:
as such, a Briton cannot, without reproach, hold amicable converse with you.

The young Roman expressed the highest sense of the Druid's generosity, and
lamented that he was constrained to bear arms against a country to which he was
indebted for his life, and, what was still dearer, his liberty.

While Claudius thus expressed himself, the Druid tied a bandage over his eyes,
in the same manner, as when he first brought him to the cave, and then, with a
generosity scarcely to be paralleled, consigned him to the care of Oscar, who
waited to conduct him in safety to the place where they found him.

During the time that Claudius was entertained in the cave of Modred, the
Britons having received intelligence that the Romans were on their march to
attack them, were making great preparations for a vigorous defense: on the
third day, the armies encamped within sight of each other, and on the morning
of the fourth, were drawn up in order for battle.

Elsimena having, with an aching heart, received the farewell of her beloved
Oscar, retired to the pious Druid, who, beneath the covert of a consecrated
grove, (which, as it stood on a rising ground, commanded a distant view of the
plain, where the two armies were to engage) offered sacrifice to the gods for
the success of the British arms.

The two armies engaged with equal fury, and for a long time it was doubtful on
which side victory would terminate: Elsimena, from the confines of the grove,
beheld her lover rush into the midst of the battle, with a courage and
resolution truly heroic; but when he leaped from the chariot to engage the
enemy sword in hand, she stretched her aching eyes in vain, to distinguish him
from the crowd of gallant heroes, who united against the common foe.

The fight was long and desperate, but the superior number of the Romans at
length prevailed; the flower of the warlike Silures were slain, or taken
prisoners, and the rest obliged to save themselves by flight.

Elsimena anxiously enquired of the Britons, who fled toward the hills for
shelter from the victorious enemy, concerning her lover, and with anguish heard
the gallant youth had fallen among the slain; frantic with grief, she snatched
a sword from one of them: 'How! my brave countrymen,' said she, will you suffer
the gallant heroes, who fought with you this day, in defense of our liberties,
to fall unrevenged? For my part, I am resolved to fell my life dearly, and not
till I have myself had the consolation of a dying sword in the blood of our
enemies. Saying thus, like an arrow from a bow, she descended the hill, and
urged on by despair, rushed into the midst of the enemy, who had now gained the
foot of it, in pursuit of the flying Britons, resolving, if she could not
revenge the death of her lover, at least to perish in the attempt.

The Britons, animated by the conduct of Elsimena, once more faced the enemy;
ashamed of being surpassed in courage by a woman, they attacked them with
redoubled fury, and though the superior numbers of the latter rendered all
hope of victory abortive, to the great loss of the Romans, they fought till
either they were slain, or made prisoners. The Druid was, in the mean while,
not an inactive spectator of this scene; animated with a glorious enthusiasm,
he seized the reins of a chariot, and vaulting into the seat, drove, with a
desperate fury, into the midst of the fight, cutting down all before him, and
repeatedly discharging darts upon the enemy, till, overpowered by numbers, he
was constrained to yield himself their prisoner.

But to return again to our fair heroine; urged on by despair, she attempted to
rid herself of a life, which, since Oscar was slain, could no longer afford her
pleasure; But Claudius, the young Roman, who had been entertained by the Druid,
fortunately observed her, and made a sign to his men, to surround and convey
her prisoner to his tent; which was accordingly done, notwithstanding her
efforts to prevent it, by endeavoring to put an end to her existence: but what
was the excess of her joy, when in the tent, to which she was conducted by the
Roman troops, she beheld her beloved Oscar! He was reclined on a superb sopha,
and from the wounds, which he had received in battle, was extremely weak and
faint; so that the unexpected sight of his mistress a prisoner, and in the tent
of his rival, raised in his breast such violent emotions, that they were nearly
fatal to him. Nor was Elsimena less agitated to behold her lover, contrary to
her expectations, alive; yet a prisoner and apparently on the brink of the
grave. She sunk at his feet in a swoon, out of which it was some time before
she was recovered by the attendants, who, by the orders of their master,
treated her with the utmost respect and attention; but what afterward
contributed greatly to her recovery was, to find from the surgeon, who had
examined the wounds of her lover, that they were not mortal.

Elsimena having, at the request of Oscar, informed him by what means she fell
into the hands of the enemy, was in return acquainted by him, that she was in
the tent of the stranger, who had sojourned with them in the Druid's cave; who,
he had learned, was son to the Roman General; he also informed her, that it was
entirely owing to the humanity of Claudius, he owed his life. Overpowered, said
he, by the enemy, I sunk down covered with wounds, and faint with loss of
blood, when the generous Roman hastily advanced to my assistance; his own
soldiers bore me to this tent, where I have been treated with a respect, rather
due to the victor than the vanquished. Thus has he rendered me his debtor for a
life, which must, in future, prove a burden to me.

'Have better thoughts, my Oscar,' said Elsimena, supposing he alluded to the
prospect of a tedious captivity; who can tell but the grateful Roman may design
the generous treatment we receive as a prelude to the freedom he means to offer
you. Indulge not that flattering thought, my Elsimena, said the youth, which,
should it prove a true presage, can afford to me but small consolation. Do not
I see thee captive to my rival? to one, who is too powerfully awake to thy
charms, to forego the possession of them: O cruel thought! it wrings my very
soul.

I shall pass over the many tender melancholy things, which passed between the
lovers on this subject, (which they could the more freely utter, as they found
their attendants were not familiar with the Celtic tongue) as also the solemn
protestations which Elsimena made, to preserve the faith she had plighted to
Oscar inviolate, whether life or death awaited her, and inform the reader, that
the Romans having gained a complete victory over the Britons, Claudius returned
to the tent where Elsimena and Oscar were. He approached them both with the
most obliging and respectful air, and addressing himself to Oscar, though his
eyes insensibly inclined toward the fair captive -- 'Fortune,' said he, is not
always the friend to valor; if so, Oscar would this day have been a conqueror;
blush not, gallant youth; the Romans have little to boast of a conquest, which
redounds equally to the honor of the vanquished and the victor; but here
indeed, said he, turning to Elsimena, is a prize, that may well swell the pride
of conquest! Weep not, beautiful Elsimena, continued he, you are in the hands
of one, who, though inflamed by your beauty, will not forget the respect due to
your virtue and misfortunes.

Little more passed at that time, Claudius being summoned to the tent of his
father; who, having in the action been slightly wounded by a javelin, had
ordered enquiry to be made among the prisoners for the Briton, who threw it;
and further to aid the discovery, had offered life and freedom to the owner.
The next day the javelin was exposed, in the tent of the Roman General, but as
the Britons fought, for the most part, with darts and swords, few appeared to
review it, much less to own it.

News, however, was at length brought to the General, that one of the prisoners
confessed himself to be the man, who threw it. The Roman commander ordered him
to be brought into his presence, and having dismissed his attendants, asked him
many questions concerning the manner in which he came by it. 'Sir,' said
Modred, (for it was in truth that venerable sage) it once belonged to a fair
unfortunate, who has long since descended to the dust. The General, whose
curiosity was excited by this reply, requested, with emotion, to know further
particulars; which the Druid thus proceeded to relate. When Aulus Didius, said
he, succeeded the gallant Ostorius, who gained immortal honor by the conquest
of our monarch, the valiant Caractatus, in the command of the Roman forces;
Ethelda, the daughter of a gallant warrior, who has since fallen in defense of
our liberties, was made captive by a young commander, who led a numerous legion
against our nation. The conqueror, struck with her beauty, and respecting her
misfortunes, strove to lighten her captivity by the most generous treatment;
but, alas! in so doing, he imposed on her more lasting chains. She no longer
viewed him but with the eyes of love, and a passion, too strong to be erased by
time, took possession of her heart. The young conqueror, as I before observed,
was not insensible of her charms; but Ethelda knew too well what was due to her
birth and sex to yield on dishonorable terms; she repelled the solicitation of
her lover with a firmness that at once awed and increased his flame. Convinced
of her merit, he at length offered her his hand, which the fair captive had not
power to refuse. That very hour, she became his wife; but a final separation,
in a short time after, took place. On their march to join the Roman General,
they were surprised by a body of our troops; led on by the father of Ethelda,
they routed the enemy and rescued the prisoners, which were taken in the former
skirmish. Ethelda, from a rising ground, beheld the contest with inconceivable
horror; not knowing for the success of which to direct her prayers to Heaven;
the liberties, and perhaps the lives, of her father and countrymen, depending
on the one side, and, on the other, those of the man, for whom she had
enstranged herself from both.

The engagement was obstinate and bloody, but victory was on the point of
terminating in favor of our arms, when the Romans were relieved by a troop of
horse; but not before the unfortunate Ethelda had seen both her father and her
husband fall.

This reinforcement of the Romans threw the Britons into confusion; they fled
with precipitation, and escaped the sword of the enemy under covert of the
night. Ethelda fled, not knowing whither, till her strength failing, she sunk
down at the door of a poor widow, who received her into the humble dwelling,
and set before her some refreshment; but it was two days before she could be
prevailed upon either to eat or speak; after this, she became more calm, and
related to the good woman the calamities, that had befallen her and caused her
grief; she also declared it as her determination, never more to unite with
society, and joyfully accepted the poor widow's offer of abiding in her
cottage, and partaking the small comforts her humble lot afforded. Ethelda died
two years after, having first given birth to a female infant.

'I had often,' continued Modred, observed her at our Holy Sacrifices, where
she constantly appeared covered with a veil, which totally conconcealed her
person from the eyes of men; curiosity prompted me to enquire into her story,
which I learned first from the woman, at whose house she sojourned, and
afterward from Ethelda herself; for it is necessary, Sir, to inform you, that
although animated by the glorious cause of liberty, I for once ventured to
raise the hostile sword in defense of my country, my office is to speak comfort
to the afflicted, to utter divine mysteries, and to recommend universal peace
and concord to mankind; being, to be plain, of the sacred order of Druids.

My office gave me free access to Ethelda, who readily made me the confident of
her misfortunes, and with her last breath, recommended her infant daughter to
my protection. On her death, I took the little lisper home to my abode; and
when the fury of war forced me to seek shelter in these mountains, she was the
companion of my flight, and for eighteen years has been the solace of my
declining age; but, alas! my Elsimena is either numbered among the dead, or
must waste her blooming years in an irksome captivity.

The Roman commander asked, with an emotion that caused Modred to suspect he
was prompted by other motives, than mere curiosity, in his enquiries, what were
his reasons for supposing, that the daughter of Ethelda was either numbered
among the dead, or a captive. The sage then informed him of all that he knew
concerning Elsimena; how, on being told her lover had fallen in the battle, she
rushed, sword in hand, into the midst of the enemy; how, by the intrepidity of
her conduct, the flying troops were inspired with courage once more to face the
enemy, and to revenge the death of their brave companions; and lastly, that it
had been rumoured she was a prisoner in the tent of Claudius, the General's
son. Then reverting to the former part of his discourse, 'That javelin, my
lord,' said he, with which it was my fortune to wound you, the wretched mother
of Elsimena, previous to the fatal engagement, which bereft her of all she held
dear, concealed in her garments, for the purpose of putting an end to her
existence, should she live to see either her parent or husband slain. But that
Almighty Power, who permitted her affliction, endued her with fortitude to bear
it. The weapon once belonged to her husband, and in her exile she preserved it
as a precious relic sacred to his remembrance. On her death, it fell into my
hand; since which, for the same reason, I have kept it as belonging to one, in
whose misfortunes I was deeply interested.

'Yesterday,' continued Modred, instigated by an impulse, for which I cannot
account, I armed myself with it; and, when inspired by the example of my brave
countrymen, I ascended the warlike chariot, resolving to yield up my life in
defense of our liberties, having expended my darts, as a last effort, I threw
the javelin.

'Wonderful and mysterious,' said the Roman, are the ways of Providence! in me,
venerable Modred, behold the father of Elsimena, and once the husband of the
unfortunate Ethelda!

'Mysterious Heaven!' said the Druid, can it really be so?

'I fell, indeed,' said the General, among the slain, but was not mortally
wounded; the brave fellows, who fought by my side, bore me from the field of
battle, and a short time restored me to my former vigor; but my blooming bride
was forever lost. I caused strict search to be made after her, but all was in
vain; since, till this day, I could never obtain the least tidings of her. The
javelin, with which I was yesterday wounded, I remembered once to have been
mine, it having, for several ages, been handed down in our family from father
to son, as a relic of antiquity. I recollected the period when I lost it, and
thought it might have been thrown by a Briton, who had fought in that
engagement, which forever separated me from Ethelda; methought it might lead to
a discovery of her, or at least inform me concerning the manner of her death.
This, venerable Modred, was the cause of my enquiry, and Heaven doubtless
inspired me with the thought, that it might restore to me the pledge of my
Ethelda's love.

While this discourse passed between the Roman commander and the venerable
Druid, a scene nearly as interesting was acting in the tent of Claudius. The
grateful youth, having discovered to his father that the generous Britons, to
whom he was indebted for his life and liberty, were among the prisoners,
received his permission to offer them rewards suitable to the signal service
they had done him.

'Generous Oscar,' said Claudius, 'it is time to convince you, that ingratitude
does not form a part of the Roman character; abide with us, gallant youth,
enrol yourself among the friends of Rome, and in return they will bestow on you
the highest honors; you are silent, Oscar; but your countenance tells me, you
treat our proffered friendship with disdain. Well then, since it is so,
Claudius alone must pay the debt he owes; from this moment, gallant youth, you
are free, and blush not to receive life and freedom from one, who to your
generosity is indebted for the power of bestowing either. Oscar, you are
silent; I would do much to purchase your esteem, your friendship; six British
prisoners, whom you shall name, will I also add: still are you silent!

'Claudius,' said the youth, a Briton's heart must speak in his countenance;
for the lives and liberties of his friends, Oscar offers you the return of a
grateful heart; but, for his own, Claudius, can he offer thanks for life and
freedom, when robbed of all that can render either desirable?

'Oscar,' said the young Roman, I understand you; this fair maid is the object,
to which we both aspire; we both love Elsimena, and the happiness of one (so
say our passions) must be founded on the despair of the other. Must it then be
so, Oscar? No; you shall see that a Roman can soar above the low pursuits of
self-gratification, that his pride and confidence rests not alone in the
strength of his arms, nor in the conquest of cities, but in the subjection of
his passions. You possess the heart of Elsimena; fortune has given me a right
over her person, but it is a right which I scorn to avail myself of. Take her,
gallant youth, receive the fair Els^mena, even from the hand of thy rival, and
henceforth remember that the Romans fight, not to tyrannize over and enslave,
but to civilize mankind. Saying this, he took the hand of Elsimena, and united
it with that of her beloved Oscar.

The joy of both was, for some minutes, absorbed in admiration; that Claudius,
in the ardour of youth, when the affections are unused to yield to the curb of
reason, in the height of prosperity, which is so seldom tempered by moderation,
should thus nobly square his conduct by the most rigid rules of virtue; thus
nobly yield up the object of his love into the arms of another, struck them
with an awe, which, for some moments, deprived them of utterance. They threw
themselves at the feet of Claudius, who having once made the painful sacrifice,
experienced from it a satisfaction, infinitely surpassing that which any
sensual gratification could have bestowed.

Affairs were in this posture, when a message arrived from the General,
requesting the attendance of his son, and the two prisoners, who were
entertained in his tent. For, upon enquiry, he had learned that they were
really Elsimena and Oscar.

Claudius, who supposed his father's summons to proceed merely from a curiosity
to see and honor those, to whom he was indebted for the life and liberty of
his son, immediately proceeded with them to his tent. When they entered, they
were inexpressibly delighted to find the venerable Druid; who, in his turn,
received no less joy at beholding the young pair. He presented Elsimena to the
Roman commander, who embraced her with a warmth truly parental, and with
delight scarcely to be equalled, viewed the beauties of her form, promising a
mind equally noble and perfect.

Claudius and the young Britons, as the reader will conclude, were at a loss to
comprehend the cause of this seemingly mysterious behavior, till they were
informed of it by Modred; who, at the request of the General, related to them
the particulars of Ethelda's story. Elsimena then threw herself at the feet of
her sire, to testify her entire obedience to his will. The passion, which
Claudius lately entertained for her person, was now changed into brotherly
love; he embraced her with the tenderest and purest affection, and rejoiced
sincerely in having gained so charming a sister. Joy was diffused over every
countenance, excepting that of Oscar, who greatly feared Elsimena was once more
on the point of being snatched from his arms; but his fears vanished, when, at
the request of his son, the Roman commander joined his hand with that of his
mistress.

Such was the joy, which pervaded the breast of the noble Roman, on receiving
to his arms so lovely an image of his lost Ethelda, and such was his gratitude
to the venerable Druid, who had for so many years cherished and protected her,
and, to whom he was beside indebted for the life of his son, that he promised
to grant him whatever he should ask in favor of his countrymen. Modred availed
himself of this generous offer, by requesting the lives and liberties of all,
who had, the day before, been made prisoners; which was accordingly granted.

Through the influence of the Druid, Elsimena and Claudius, an honorable and
advantageous peace was soon concluded between the Romans and the warlike
Britons, who inhabited that part of the country.

The eyes of the venerable Druid were, in a good old age, closed by his beloved
Elsimena; who, with Oscar, lived a series of years in uninterrupted peace and
happiness.

ARMINE AND ELVIRA. A LEGENDARY TALE. IN TWO PARTS.
PART THE FIRST.
A HERMIT on the banks of Trent,
Far from the world's bewildering maze,
To humbler scenes of calm content,
Had fled from brighter, busier days.
If happily from his guarded breast
Should steal the unsuspected sigh,
And memory, an unbidden guest,
With former passion filled his eye:
Then pious hope and duty praised
The wisdom of the unerring sway;
And while his eye to heaven he raised,
Its silent waters sunk away.
Life's gayer ensigns once he bore --
Ah! what avails the mournful tale?
Suffice it, when the scenes were over,
He fled to the sequestered vale.
'What though the joys I loved so well,
'The charms,' he cried, 'that youth has known,
'Fly from the Hermit's lonely cell!
'Yet is not Armine still my own?
'Yes, Armine, yes, thou valued youth!
''Midst every grief thou still art mine;
'Dear pledge of Winifreda's truth,
'And solace of my life's decline!
'Tho' from the world and worldly care*
'My wearied mind I mean to free,
'Yet every hour that Heaven can spare,
'My Armine, I devote to thee.
'And sure that Heaven my hopes shall bless,
'And make me famed for virtues fair,
'And happy too, if happiness
'Depends upon a parent's prayer:
'Last hope of life's departing day,
'In whom its future scenes I see!
'No truant thought shall ever stray
'From this lone hermitage and thee.'
Thus to his humble fate resigned,
His breast each anxious care foregoes;
All but the care of Armine's mind,
The dearest task a parent knows!
And well were all his cares repaid;
In Armine's breast each virtue grew,
In full maturity displayed,
To fond affection's anxious view.
Nor yet neglected were the charms,
To polished life that grace impart;
Virtue, he knew, but feebly warms,
Till science humanize the heart.
And when he saw the lawless train
Of passions in the youthful breast,
He curbed them not with rigid rein,
But strove to soothe them into rest.
'Think not, my son, in this,' he cried,
'A father's precept shall displease:
'No; be each passion gratified,
'That tends to happiness or ease.
'Nor shall the ungrateful task be mine,
'Their native generous warmth to blame,
'That warmth of reason's suffrage join
'To point the object and the aim.
'This suffrage wanting, know, fond boy,
'That every passion proves a foe:
'Tho' much it deals in promised joy,
'It pays, alas! in certain woe.
'Complete ambition's wildest scheme;
'In power's most brilliant robes appear;
'Indulge in fortune's golden dream;
'Then ask thy breast, if peace be there:
'No: it shall tell thee, peace retires,
'If once of her loved friends deprived;
'Contentment calm, subdued desires,
'And happiness that is self-deriv'd.'
To temper thus the stronger fires
Of youth he strove, for well he knew,
Boundless as thought though man's desires,
The real wants of life were few.
And often revolving in his breast,
The insatiate love of wealth or fame,
He, with no common care oppressed,
To fortune thus would often exclaim:
'O fortune! at thy crowded shrine,
'What wretched worlds of suppliants bow!
'Forever hailed thy power divine,
Forever breathed the serious vow.
'With tottering pace and feeble knee,
'See age advance in shameless haste,
'The palsy'd hand is stretched to thee,
'For wealth he wants the power to taste.
'See, led by hope, the youthful train,
'Her fairy dreams their hearts have won;
'She points to what they never shall gain,
'Or dearly gain -- to be undone.
'Must I too form the votive prayer,
'And will thou hear one suppliant more*
'His prayer, O Fortune, deign to hear,
'To thee, who never prayed before.
'O may one dear, one favored youth,
'May Armine still thy power disclaim:
'Kneel only at the shrine of truth,
'Count freedom wealth, and virtue fame!
Lo! to his utmost wishes blessed,
The prayer was heard; and freedom's flame,
And truth, the sunshine of the breast,
Were Armine's wealth, were Armine's fame.
His heart no selfish cares confined,
He felt for all that feel distress,
And, still benevolent and kind,
He blessed them, or he wished to bless.
For what though Fortune's frown deny,
With wealth to bid the sufferer live,
Yet Pity's hand can often supply
A balm she never knew to give:
Can often with lenient drops assuage
The wounds no ruder hand can heal,
When grief, despair, distraction, rage.
While death the lips of love shall seal.
Ah! then, his anguish to remove,
Deprived of all his heart holds dear,
How sweet the still surviving love
Of friendship's smile, of pity's tear!
This knew the Sire: he often would cry,
'From these, my son, O never depart;
'These tender charities, that tie
'In mutual league the human heart.
'Be thine those feelings of the mind,
'That wake at honor's, friendship's call;
'Benevolence, that unconfined,
'Extends her liberal hand to all.
'By sympathy's untutored voice,
'By taught her social laws to keep;
'Rejoice, if human heart rejoice,
'And weep, if human eye shall weep.
'The heart, that bleeds for others woes,
'Shall feel each selfish sorrow less;
'His breast, who happiness bestows,
'Reflected happiness shall bless.
'Each ruder passion still withstood,
'That breaks over virtue's sober line,
'The tender, noble, and the good
'To cherish and indulge, be thine.
'And yet, my Armine, might I name
'One passion, as a dangerous guest;
'Well may thou wonder, when I blame
'The tenderest, noblest, and the best.
'Nature, it is true, with love designed
'To smooth the race our fathers ran;
'The savage of the human kind
'By love was softened into man.
'As feels the ore the searching fire,
'Expanding and refining too,
'So sairer glowed each fair desire,
'Each gentler thought so gentler grew.
'How changed, alas! those happier days!
'A train how different now succeeds!
'While sordid avarice betrays,
'Or empty vanity misleads.
'Fled from the heart each nobler guest,
'Each genuine feeling we forego;
'What nature planted in the breast,
'The flowers of love are weeds of woe.
'Hence all the pangs the heart must feel,
'Between contending passions tossed,
'Wild jealousy's avenging steel,
'And life and fame and virtue lost!
'Yet falling life, yet sading fame,
'Compar'd to what his heart annoy,
'Who cherishes a hopeless flame,
'Are terms of happiness and joy*
'Ah! then the soft contagion fly!
'And timely shun the alluring bait!'
The rising blush, the downcast eye,
Proclaimed -- the precept was too late.
PART THE SECOND.
DEEP in the bosom of the wood.
Where art had formed the moated isle,
An antique castle towering stood.
In Gothic grandeur rose the pile.
Here Raymond, long in arms renowned,
From scenes of war would often repair;
His bed an only daughter crowned,
And smiled away a father's care.
By nature's happiest pencil drawn,
She wore the vernal morning's ray:
The vernal morning's blushing dawn,
Breaks not so beauteous into day.
Her breast, impatient of control,
Scorned in its silken chains to lie.
And the soft language of the soul
Flowed from her never-silent eye.
The bloom, that opened on her face,
Well seemed an emblem of her mind,
Where snowy innocence we trace,
With blushing modesty combined.
To these resistless grace impart,
That look of sweetness, formed to please.
That elegance, devoid of art,
That dignity that is lost in ease.
What youth so cold could view unmoved,
The maid, that every beauty shared?
Her Armine saw, he saw, he loved,
He loved -- alas! and he despaired!
Unhappy youth! he sunk oppressed,
For much he labored to conceal
That gentlest passion of the breast,
Which all can feign, but few can feel.
Ingenuous fears suppressed the flame,
Yet still he owned its hidden power:
With transport dwelling on her name,
He soothed the solitary hour.
'How long,' he cried, 'must I conceal
'What yet my heart could wish were known?
'How long the truest passion feel,
'And yet that passion fear to own?
'Ah! might I breathe my humble vow!
'Might she too deign to lend an ear!
'Elvira's self should then allow
'That Armine was at least sincere.
'Wild wish! to deem the matchless maid,
'Would listen to a youth like me,
'Or that my vows could ever persuade,
'Sincere and constant though they be.
'Ah! what avails my love or truth?
'She listens to no lowly swain;
'Her charms must bless some happier youth,
'Some youth of fortune's titled train.
'Then go, fallacious hope! adieu!
'The flattering prospect I resign!
'And bear, from my deluded view,
'The bliss that never must be mine.
'Yet will the youth, who'er he be,
'In truth or tenderness excel?
'Or, will he on thy charms like me
'With fondness never-dying dwell?
'Will he with thine his hopes unite?
'With ready zeal thy thoughts improve?
'With fond attention and delight,
'Each wish prevent, each fear remove?
'Will he, still faithful to thy charms,
'For constant love be long revered?
'Nor quit that bliss within thy arms,
'By every tender tie endeared?
'What though his boastful heart be vain
'Of all that birth or fortune gave?
'Yet is not mine, though rude and plain,
'At least as noble and as brave?
'Then be its tender suit preferred!
'Its tender sighs Elvira hear!
'In vain I sigh -- but sigh unhear'd;
'Unpity'd falls this lonely tear!'
Twice twelve revolving moons had past;
Since first he caught the fatal view;
Unchanged by time his sorrows last,
Uncheer'd by hope his passion grew.
That passion to indulge he sought,
In Raymond's groves, the deepest shade;
There fancy's haunting spirit brought
The image of his long-lov'd maid.
But, hark! what more than mortal sound
Steals on attention's raptured ear!
The voice of harmony around
Swells in wild whispers soft and clear.
Can human hand a tone so fine
Sweep from the string with touch profane?
Can human lip with breath divine
Pour on the gale so sweet a strain?
It Is she -- the source of Armine's woe --
It Is she -- whence all his joy must spring --
From her loved lips the numbers flow,
Her magic hand awakes the string.
Now, Armine, now thy love proclaim,
Thy instant suit the time demands;
Delay not -- tumult shakes his frame!
And lost in ecstacy he stands!
What magic chains thee to the ground?
What star malignant rules the hour,
That thus in fixed delirium drowned,
Each sense intranc'd has lost its power?
The trance dispel! awake! arise!
Speak what untutored love inspires!
The moment's past -- thy wild surprise
She sees, nor unalarm'd retires.
'Stay, sweet illusion! stay thy flight!
''Tis gone! Elvira's form it wore --
'Yet one more glimpse of short delight!
It Is gone -- to be beheld no more!
'Fly, loit'ring feet! the charm pursue,
'That plays upon my hopes and fears!
'Ha! no illusion mocks my view;
''Tis she -- Elvira's self appears!
'And shall I on her steps intrude?
'Alarm her in these lonely shades?
'O stay, fair nymph! no russian rude
'With base intent your walk invade.
'Far gentler thoughts -- ' his fault'ring tongue,
By humble diffidence restrained,
Paused in suspense -- but thus ere long,
As love impelled, its power regained.
'Far gentler thoughts that form inspires;
'With me far gentler passions dwell;
'This heart hides only blameless fires,
'Yet burns with what it fears to tell.
'The fault'ring voice that fears control,
'Blushes that inward fires declare,
'Each tender tumult of the soul
'In silence owns Elvira there.'
He said; and as the trembling dove,
Sent forth to explore the watery plain,
Soon feared her flight might fatal prove,
And sudden sought her ark again.
His heart recoiled; as one that ru'd
What he too hastily confessed,
And all the rising soul subdued,
Sought refuge in his inmost breast.
The tender strife Elvira saw
Distressed; and as some parent mild,
When armed with words and looks of awe,
Melts over the terrors of her child.
Reproof prepared and angry fear
In soft sensations died away:
They felt the force of Armine's tear,
And fled from pity's rising sway.
'That mournful voice, that modest air,
'Young stranger, speak the courteous breast,
'Then why to these rude scenes repair,
'Of shades the solitary guest?
'And who is she, whose fortunes bear
'Elvira's melancholy name?
'O may those fortunes prove more fair,
'Than here is, who sadly owns the same!
'Ah! gentle maid, in mine survey
'A heart,' he cries, 'that's yours alone!
'Long has it owned Elvira's sway,
'Tho' long unnotic'd and unknown.
'On Sherwood's old heroic plain,
'Elvira graced the festal day,
'There, foremost of the youthful train,
'Her Armine bore the prize away.
'There first that form my eye surveyed,
'With future hopes that filled my heart;
'But ah! beneath that frown they fade --
'Depart, vain, vanquished hopes! depart.'
He said; and on the ground his eyes
Were fixed abashed: the attentive maid,
Lost in the tumult of surprise,
The well-remember'd youth surveyed.
The transient color went and came,
The struggling bosom sunk and rose,
The trembling tumults of her frame
The strong-conflicting soul disclose.
The time, the scene, she saw with dread,
Like Cynthia setting glanced away,
But scattered blushes, as she fled,
Blushes, that spoke a brighter day.
A friendly shepherd's neighboring shed
To pass the live-long night he sought,
And hope, the lover's downy bed,
A sweeter charm than slumber brought.
On every thought Elvira dwelt,
The tender air, the aspect kind,
The pity that he found she felt,
And all the angel in her mind.
No self-plum'd vanity was there,
With fancied consequence elate;
Unknown to her the haughty air
That means to speak superior state.
Her brow no keen resentments arm,
No swell of empty pride she knew,
In trivial minds that take the alarm,
Should humble love aspire to sue.
Such love, by flattering charms betrayed,
Shall yet, indignant, soon rebel,
And, blushing for the choice he made,
Shall fly where gentler virtues dwell.
It Is then the mind, from bondage free,
And all its former weakness over,
Asserts its native dignity,
And scorns what folly prized before.
The scanty pane the rising ray
On the plain wall in diamonds threw,
The lover hailed the welcome day,
And to his favorite scene he flew.
There soon Elvira bent her way,
Where long her lonely walks had been,
Nor less had the preceding day,
Nor Armine less endeared the scene.
Often, as she passed, her rising heart
Its strongest tenderness confessed,
And often she lingered to impart,
To some soft shade, her secret breast.
'How slow the heavy hours advance,'
She cried, 'since that eventful day,
'When first I caught the fatal glance,
'That stole me from myself away!
'Ah! youth beloved! though low thy birth,
'The noble air, the manly grace,
'That look, that speaks superior worth,
'Can fashion, folly, fear, erase?
'Yet sure from no ignoble stem
'Thy lineage springs, though now unknown:
'The world censorious may condemn,
'But, Armine, I am thine alone.
'To splendor only do we live?
'Must pomp alone our thoughts employ?
'All, all that pomp and splendor give
'Is dearly bought with love and joy!
'But oh! -- the favored youth appears --
'In pensive grief he seems to move;
'My heart forebodes unnumber'd fears;
'Support it, pity, virtue, love!
'Hither his footsteps seem to bend --
'Come, resolution, to my aid!
'My breast what varying passions rend!
'Averse to go -- to stay, afraid!'
'Dear object of each fond desire
'That throbs tumultuous in my breast!
'Why with averted glance retire?
'At Armine's presence why distressed?
'What though he boasts no titled name,
'No wide extent of rich domain?
'Yet must he feed a fruitless flame,
'Must truth and nature plead in vain?'
'Think not,' she said, 'by forms betrayed,
'To humbler worth my heart is blind;
'For soon shall every splendour fade,
'That beams not from the gifted mind.
'But first thy heart explore with care,
'With faith its fond emotions prove,
'Lurks no unworthy passion there?
'Prompts not ambition bold to love!'
'Yes, lovely maid,' the youth replies,
'A bold ambition prompts my breast,
'The towering hope that love supplies,
'The wish in blessing to be blessed.
'The meaner prospects I despise
'That wealth, or rank, or power bestow;
'Be yours the groveling bliss ye prize,
'Ye sordid minds, that stoop so low!
'Be mine the more refined delights
'Of love, that banishes control,
'When the fond heart with heart unites,
'And soul's in unison with soul.'
Elvira blushed the warm reply,
(To love a language not unknown)
The milder glories filled her eye,
And there a softer luster shone.
The yielding smile, that is half suppressed,
The short quick breath, the trembling tear,
The swell tumultuous of the breast,
In Armine's favor all appear.
At each kind glance their souls unite,
While love's soft sympathy imparts
That tender transport of delight,
That beats in undivided hearts.
Respectful to his lips he pressed
Her yielded hand; -- in haste away
Her yielded hand she drew distressed,
With looks that witnessed wild dismay?
'Ah! whence, fair excellence! those fears?
'What terror unforeseen alarms?'
'See where a father's frown appears' --
She said and sunk into his arms.
'My daughter! -- Heavens! -- it cannot be --
'And yet it must -- O dire disgrace!
'Elvira have I lived to see
'Clasp'd in a peasant's vile embrace!
'This daring guilt let death repay' --
His vengeful arm the javelin threw;
With erring aim it winged its way,
And far, by fate averted, flew.
Elvira breathes -- her pulses beat,
Returning life illumes her eye;
Trembling a father's view to meet,
She spies a reverend hermit nigh.
'Your wrath,' she cries, 'let tears assuage,
'Unheeded must Elvira pray!
'O let an injured father's rage
'This hermet's sacred presence stay!
'Yet deem not, lost in guilty love
'I plead to save my virgin fame;
'My weakness virtue might approve,
'And smile on nature's holy flame.' --
'Oh! welcome to my hopes again,
'My son,' -- the raptured hermit cries,
'I sought thee sorrowing on the plain,'
And all the father filled his eyes.
'Art thou,' the raging Raymond said,
'Of this audacious boy, the sire?
'Curse on the dart that idly sped,
'Nor bade his peasant soul expire?'
'His peasant soul!' -- indignant fire
Flashed from the conscious father's eye,
'A gallant Earl is Armine's sire,
'And know, proud chief, that Earl am I*
'Tho' here within the hermit's cell,
'I long have lived unknown to fame,
'Yet crowded camps and courts can tell --
'Thou too have heard of Egbert's name.
'Ha! Egbert! -- he, whom tyrant rage
'Forc'd from his country's bleeding breast?
'The patron of my orphan age,
'My friend, my warrior, stands confessed!
'But why?' -- 'The painful story spare*
'That prostrate youth,' said Egbert, 'see;
'His anguish asks a parent's care,
'A parent, once who pitied thee!'
Raymond, as one, who glancing round,
Seems from some sudden trance to start,
Snatched the pale lovers from the ground,
And held them trembling to his heart.
Joy, gratitude, and wonder shed
United tears for Hymen's reign,
And nature her best triumph led,
For love and virtue joined her train.
SIR REGINALD DE CUTHBERT. A ROMANCE ELUCIDATED.
Truth lies not long concealed in mystery;
Clearly to Reason she reveals her light,
And Errors vanish like a mist before her.
SAVAGE.
SIR Reginald de Cuthbert, a noble knight who had long fought valiantly under
the banners of the Holy Cross, when the armies were going to retire to their
respective quarters for the winter, applied to the general for leave to return
home. Crowned with glory, and arrayed with honor, Sir Reginald sought
retirement in the land of his fathers; intending to dedicate the remainder of
his days to the service of his God, in defense of whose name he had so often
engaged in the horror of battle.

The many perilous adventures the knight encountered on his way from the Holy
Land, we find not recorded in history, until his arrival at the borders of a
dreary forest on the confines of Germany. The twilight was spreading over the
hemisphere, when Sir Reginald entered what at first appeared to him a small
wood, which he now found extended itself by degrees into an immense and almost
impenetrable forest. The knight pricked forward with great impatience, till the
shades of night, which fell heavily over the forest, in some measure arrested
his progress; the narrow winding path grew more and more intricate; the clouds,
which seemed charged with thunder, passed slowly along the heavens; the wind
now arose and whistled hollow through the branches, the rain began to rattle
amidst the trees, and a tremendous storm seemed to be fast approaching, while
the darkness of night surrounded him with all its horrors.

At length, overcome with fatigue and impeded by the bushes and underwood, the
knight alighted from his horse, and threw himself upon the ground; but soon
arose, and securing his trusty steed, walked slowly onward in hopes of finding
some solitary cottage, which might afford him shelter from the 'pelting of the
pitiless storm.' Ere the knight had measured many paces, he perceived a light,
which, from its lofty situation, at first appeared to his deluded eye a
brilliant star; he was, however, soon undeceived, and joy reanimated his
drooping spirits, in a few moments he found himself at the gate of a castle.
The knight knocked violently at the castle gate. Who is there? some body; whom
he could not see, snarlled with a rough voice from above. In the name of all
the blessed saints, exclaimed Sir Reginald, I conjure you to open quickly the
gate to a traveller, who have lost his way in the forest, and is piteously
beaten by the tempest. No answer was returned, but the gate was opened by an
unseen hand. The entrance was still and gloomy as the grave. The knight groped
his way through the dark. 'Come!' roared the same rough voice he had heard
before; at the same time, a hand, cold as ice, pulled him along. Sir Reginald
shuddered violently, and was going to retire, when the gate was shut after him
with a thundering noise.

Perceiving that all retreat was cut off, he bade defiance to his fate, and
resolved to meet the worst as a man. After advancing a few paces, the icy hand
was drawn back. The knight stopped to wait till it should again lay hold of
him, and lead him farther; but waited in vain; he groped around, expecting to
find his guide, whom he fancied to be near, but he was gone. Not a footstep or
the most distant sound was heard through the whole building. Not a single ray
of light broke through the dismal darkness, which surrounded him, yet he
proceeded with extended arms and advanced about thirty steps, when something
impeded his passage, he endeavored to examine it with his hand, but it seemed
suddenly to start back; he once more stretched out his hand, and felt a heap of
skulls and bones. Horror and a chilly tremor shook his whole frame. The awful
stillness, which surrounded him, was still uninterrupted.

The knight was fixed to the ground, wildly staring through the impenetrable
darkness. At length a hollow broken sound was heard, which seemed at a great
distance. After a long pause, it vibrated in his ear a second time. The idea
that he had nothing more to lose, and that every means of effecting an escape
from that residence of horror was cut off, entirely subdued his fear, and
prompted him to follow that sound. A few paces brought him to a stone
staircase. Having descended five steps, a doleful groan seemed to proceed from
a room not far distant. The knight advanced slowly, and with the utmost
circumspection, musing on his perilous situation, when at once he felt the
passage obstructed by a door, which opened without difficulty. The room to
which it led was also a residence of darkness and dismal silence. The knight
was resolved to enter it boldly. Fortunately he examined the entrance with his
foot, before he proceeded, and found with unspeakable horror, that it was
bottomless. The hollow dismal sound again struck his ear from a small distance.
He shuddered violently, and staggered onward. Every thing was now lonely and
silent all around; at length he came to a second staircase, ascended seven
steps, and then descended as many, when his eyes suddenly beheld a faint
glimmer of light, which seemed to emerge from below, at a great distance.
Coming nearer, the knight observed that he was standing on the brink of a deep
abyss, from which the glimmer broke forth. An old half rotten staircase led
down; he however resolved to risk every thing, and pulling off his shoes to
avoid making a noise, began to descend. When he came to the eighth step, the
hollow sound was again repeated: the knight stopped a moment, and then went on
with returning courage. When he had reached the middle, the light suddenly
disappeared, and impenetrable darkness surrounded him once more. He stopped to
consider what could be done, when a stone got loose beneath his feet, and
rolled down with a thundering noise against the door of the vault. Who disturbs
my rest? the hollow, well known voice exclaimed. Sir Reginald was rivetted to
the ground in dread expectation; terror sealed his lips. The door of the vault
opened slowly, and a pale white figure appeared, with a candle in one hand. It
advanced two steps, lifted up one hand in a menacing manner, and disappeared.
The sight of this dreadful apparition almost petrified him on the spot, his
senses seemed to forsake him, and the blood congealed within his veins.

The knight having recovered a little the use of his senses, with difficulty
regained the top of the steps, and from thence perceived a passage quite
different from the other, and following it he arrived at the foot of a spiral
staircase. He ascended many steps, at length a partition impeded him, he pushed
forcibly against it with his right hand, and shivered a glass pane into a
thousand pieces. 'Who is there?' a rough voice exclaimed. At the same time a
door opened, and a most alarming discourse filled the knight with dismal
apprehensions. 'Have you sharpened the knife?' one of the talkers asked. 'Yes,
it is bright and sharp,' replied another voice, his blood shall flow
abundantly. With these words the door burst open. Horror and despair now winged
Sir Reginald's steps. He flew down the staircase, and had scarcely reached the
bottom, when he was suddenly seized by the ice-cold hand, which he had felt on
his entrance in that abode of terror. Here the knight's senses fled, and he
dropped down in a swoon.

When Sir Reginald opened his eyes, he found himself in a splendid room, lying
at his ease on a superb bed, and a girl with two servants sitting by the
bedside, chaffing his temples. 'Where am I?' were the first sounds he uttered.
They assured him, he was in good hands; on enquiring to whom the castle
belonged, he was informed it was the property of the Lady Countess of Darbis,
who would see him in the morning. An excellent supper was soon after placed on
the table, and the servants retired after he had finished his meal.

When left to himself, the knight began to muse on the adventures of that
eventful and alarming evening. A thousand ideas crowded upon his imagination,
and no clue could be found to extricate himself from the mazes of wonder and
astonishment in which he was lost, the fearful apprehension of whose power he
was in, and what would become of him, lay heavy on his heart; impatient to have
the mystery of his situation unfolded, and yet dreaded that period. Hope and
fear crowded alternately upon his soul, until at length he fell asleep,
overcome by fatigue of body and mind.

Sir Reginald awoke at ten o'clock in the morning, and after breakfast, was
conducted by a page through three magnificent apartments; in the fourth, the
lady of the castle, dressed in black, with a veil of the same color, was
seated on a sofa. She rose on his entering the room, and courtsied very
civilly, then retook her seat. After a long pause, the knight said something in
a faultering accent, which was meant as an excuse for his intruding visit. The
lady kindly bade him welcome to her castle, and moreover desired him to be
seated. This kindness dispelled all perplexity, and gave him new courage; he
related his adventures of the preceding evening, at which the lady of the
castle smiled often, and promised the knight, that the whole mysterious
adventure should be elucidated. After dinner, the servants were called into the
room, and Sir Reginald found every strange event, that had filled him with such
terror, so natural, that he even blushed at his childish fears. The ice-cold
hand -- the skulls and bones -- the spectre, etc. were found to be the
necessary appendages to every castle. The cold hand belonged to the phlegmatic
porter. He drew his hand suddenly back, because the knight trembled violently
and struggled to disengage himself, and was obliged to return and light the
torch, which the wind had extinguished. Sir Reginald, with staggering steps,
had reached a remote part of the castle, where the Countess had erected a kind
of Mausoleum to her deceased husband; and his hand had touched the skulls and
bones it was decorated with. The groans and sighs, which he heard, came from an
old domestic, who had a violent toothache. When the stone rolled down, she
went out of the cellar, where she was suffered to lie, to see who was there;
she threatened him with her hand, and went back, because she mistook him for
one of the servants, and fancied the stone had been thrown down on purpose to
frighten her. The door, which led to the bottomless room, belonged to an old
cellar, where the steps had been destroyed by the ravages of time, and which
the servants had left open by carelessness. The room on the spiral staircase,
where the knight had broken the glass pane, was inhabited by the cook and
butler. Their discourse, part of which he overheard, concerned a hog, which was
to be killed the next day. When he was hurrying down the staircase, the porter
received him in his arms, to prevent his falling, and carried him, during his
swoon, to the apartment, where he recovered the use of his senses.

Sir Reginald was ashamed that this accidental concurrence of circumstances
could have rendered him so ridiculously fearful and cowardly. This adventure,
said the knight to himself, shall teach me to bridle my impetuous imagination,
to examine every thing uncommon by the torch of reason, and thus to guard my
understanding against the dangerous delusions of a lively impetuous fancy.

THE HERMIT OF WARKWORTH.
FIT THE FIRST Fit was the word used by old minstrels to signify a part or
division of their historical songs.
.
DARK was the night, and wild the storm,
And loud the torrent's roar;
And loud the sea was heard to dash
Against the distant shore.
Musing on man's weak hapless state,
The lonely hermit lay;
When, lo! he heard a female voice
Lament in sore dismay.
With hospitable haste he rose,
And waked his sleeping fire;
And, snatching up a lighted brand,
Forth hied the reverend sire.
All sad beneath a neighboring tree
A beauteous maid he found,
Who beat her breast, and with her tears
Bedewed the mossy ground.
'O weep not, lady, weep not so;
'Nor let vain fears alarm:
'My little cell shall shelter thee,
'And keep the safe from harm.'
'It is not for myself I weep,
'Nor for myself I fear;
'But for my dear and only friend,
'Who lately left me here.
'And while some sheltering bower he sought
'Within this lonely wood,
'Ah! sore I fear his wandering feet
'Have slipped in yonder flood.'
'O! trust in Heaven,' the hermit said,
'And to my cell repair:
'Doubt not but I shall find thy friend,
'And ease thee of thy care.'
Then climbing up his rocky stairs,
He scales the cliff so high;
And calls aloud, and waves his light
To guide the stranger's eye.
Among the thickets long he winds,
With careful steps and slow:
At length a voice returned his call,
Quick answering from below:
'O tell me, father, tell me true,
'If you have chanced to see
'A gentle maid I lately left
'Beneath some neighboring tree:
'But either I have lost the place,
'Or she has gone astray;
'And much I fear this fatal stream
'Hath snatched her hence away.'
'Praise Heaven, my son,' the hermit said;
'The lady's safe and well:'
And soon he joined the wandering youth,
And brought him to his cell.
Then well was seen these gentle friends;
They loved each other dear:
The youth he pressed her to his heart;
The maid let fall a tear.
Ah! seldom had their host, I ween,
Beheld so sweet a pair:
The youth was tall, with manly bloom;
She slender, soft, and fair.
The youth was clad in forest green,
With bugle-horn so bright;
She in a silken robe and scarf,
Snatched up in hasty flight.
'Sit down, my children,' says the sage*
'Sweet rest your limbs require:'
Then heaps fresh fuel on the hearth,
And mends his little fire.
'Partake,' he said, 'my simple store,
'Dried fruits, and milk, and curds;'
And, spreading all upon the board,
Invites with kindly words.
'Thanks, father, for thy bounteous fare.'
The youthful couple say;
Then freely ate, and made good cheer,
And talked their cares away.
'Now say, my children (for perchance
'My counsel may avail),
'What strange adventure brought you here
'Within this lonely dale?'
'First tell me, father,' said the youth,
'(Nor blame mine eager tongue)
'What town is here? What lands are these?
'And to what lord belong?'
'Alas! my son,' the hermit said,
'Why do I live to say,
'The rightful lord of these domains
'Is banished quite away?
'Ten winters now have shed their snows
'On this my lowly hall,
'Since valiant Hotspur (so the North
'Our youthful lord did call)
'Against Fourth Henry Bolingbroke
'Led up his Northern powers,
'And, stoutly fighting, lost his life,
'Near proud Salopia's towers.
'One son he left, a lovely boy,
'His country's hope and heir;
'And, oh! to save him from his foes,
'It was his grandsire's care.
'In Scotland safe he placed the child
'Beyond the reach of strife;
'Nor long before the brave old Earl
'At Bramham lost his life.
'And now the Percy name, so long
'Our Northern pride and boast,
'Lies hid, alas! beneath the cloud;
'Their honor's rest and lost.
'No chieftain of that noble house
'Now leads our youth to arms;
'The bordering Scots despoil our fields,
'And ravage all our farms.
'Their halls and castles, once so fair,
'Now moulder in decay;
'Proud strangers now usurp their lands,
'And bear their wealth away.
'Not far from hence, where yon full stream
'Runs winding down the lea,
'Fair Warkworth lifts her lofty towers,
'And overlooks the sea.
'Those towers, alas! now stand forlorn,
'With noisome weeds overspread,
'Where feasted lords and courtly dames,
'And where the poor were fed.
'Meantime far off, mid Scottish hills
'The Percy lives unknown;
'On strangers bounty he depends,
'And may not claim his own.
'O! might I with these aged eyes
'But live to see him here,
'Then should my soul depart in bliss!' --
He said, and dropped a tear.
'And is the Percy still so loved
'Of all his friends and thee?
'Then bless me, father,' said the youth,
'For I, thy guest, am He.'
Silent he gazed; then turned aside
To wipe the tears he shed;
And, lifting up his hands and eyes,
Poured blessings on his head:
'Welcome, our dear and much loved lord,
'Thy country's hope and care:
'But who may this young lady be,
'That is so wondrous fair?'
'Now, father, listen to my tale,
'And thou shall know the truth:
'And let thy sage advice direct
'My unexperienced youth.
'In Scotland I Have been nobly bred
'Beneath the Regent's hand,
'In feats of arms, and every lore
'To fit me for command.
'With fond impatience long I burned
'My native land to see;
'At length I won my guardian friend,
'To yield that boon to me.
'Then up and down, in hunter's garb,
'I wandered as in chase,
'Till in the noble Neville's house,
'I gained a hunter's place.
'Some time with him I lived unknown,
'Till I Would the hap so rare,
'To please this young and gentle dame,
'That baron's daughter fair.'
'Now, Percy,' said the blushing maid,
'The truth I must reveal;
'Souls great and generous, like to thine,
'Their noble deeds conceal.
'It happened on a summer's day,
'Led by the fragrant breeze,
'I wandered forth to take the air,
'Among the green-wood trees.
'Sudden, a band of rugged Scots,
'That near in ambush lay,
'Moss-troopers from the border side,
'There seized me for their prey.
'My shrieks had all been spent in vain;
'But Heaven, that saw my grief,
'Brought this brave youth within my call,
'Who flew to my relief.
'With nothing but his hunting spear
'And dagger in his hand,
'He sprung like lightning on my foes,
'And caused them soon to stand.
'He fought till more assistance came:
'The Scot's were overthrown:
'Thus freed me, captive, from their bands,
'To make me more his own.'
'O happy day!' the youth replied;
'Blest were the wounds I bare!
'From that fond hour she deigned to smile,
'And listen to my prayer.
'And when she knew my name and birth,
'She vowed to be my bride;
'But, oh! we feared, alas! the while,
'Her princely mother's pride:
'Sister of haughty Bolingbroke,
'Our house's ancient foe,
'To me, I thought, a banished wight,
'Could never such favor show.
'Despairing then to gain consent;
'At length to fly with me,
'I won this lovely timorous maid;
'To Scotland bound are we.
'This evening, as the night drew on,
'Fearing we were pursued,
'We turned adown the right hand path,
'And gained this lonely wood:
'Then lighting from our weary steeds,
'To shun the pelting shower,
'We met thy kind conducting hand,
'And reached this friendly bower.'
'Now rest ye both,' the hermit said,
'A while your cares sorego:
'Nor, lady, scorn my humble bed;
' -- We'll pass the night below. Adjoining to the cliff, which contains the
chapel of the hermitage, are the remains of a small building, in which the
hermit dwelt. This consisted of one lower apartment, with a little bedchamber
over it, and is now in ruins.

THE HERMIT OF WARKWORTH.
FIT THE SECOND.
LOVELY smiled the blushing morn,
And every storm was fled;
But lovelier far, with sweeter smile,
Fair Eleanor left her bed.
She found her Henry all alone,
And cheered him with her sight;
The youth, consulting with his friend,
Had watched the live-long night.
What sweet surprise o'erpower'd her breast!
Her cheek with blushes dyed,
When fondly he besought her there
To yield to be his bride!
'Within this lonely hermitage,
'There is a chapel meet:
'Then grant, dear maid, my fond request,
'And make my bliss complete.'
'O Henry! when thou deign'st to sue,
'Can I thy suit withstand?
'When thou, loved youth, have won my heart.
'Can I refuse my hand?
'For thee I left a father's smiles,
'And mother's tender care;
'And whether weal or woe betide,
'Thy lot I mean to share.'
'And will thou then, O generous maid!
'Such matchless favor show,
'To share with me, a banished wight,
My peril, pain, or woe?
'Now Heaven, I trust, has joys in store
'To ^rown thy constant breast;
'For, now, fond hope assures my heart
'That we shall soon be blessed.
'Not far from hence stands Coquet Isle,
'Surrounded by the sea;
'There dwells a holy friar, well known
'To all thy friends and thee. In the little island of Coquet, near Warkworth,
are still the ruins of a cell, which belonged to the Bendictine monks of
Tinemouth-Abbey.

''Tis father Bernard, so revered
'For every worthy deed;
'To Raby castle he shall go,
'And for us kindly plead.
'To fetch this good and holy man
'Our reverend host is gone;
'And soon, I trust, his pious hands
'Will join us both in one.'
Thus they in sweet and tender talk
The lingering hours beguile:
At length they see the hoary sage
Come from the neighboring isle.
With pious joy and wonder mixed
He greets the noble pair,
And, glad, consents to join their hands,
With many a fervent prayer.
Then strait to Raby's distant walls
He kindly wends his way:
Meantime in love and dalliance sweet
They spend the livelong day.
And now, attended by their host,
The hermitage they viewed,
Deep hewn within a craggy cliff,
And over-hung with wood.
And near a slight of shapely steps,
All cut with nicest skill,
And piercing through a stony arch,
Ran winding up the hill.
There decked with many a flower and herb
His little garden stands;
With fruitful trees in shady rows,
All planted by his hands.
Then, scoop'd within the solid rock,
Three sacred vaults he shows;
The chief a chapel, neatly arched,
On branching columns rose.
Each proper ornament was there,
That should a chapel grace;
The lattice for confession framed,
And holy water vase.
Over either door a sacred text
Invites to godly fear;
And in a little scutcheon hung
The cross, and crown, and spear.
Up to the altar's ample breadth,
Two easy steps ascend;
And near a glimmering solemn light,
Two well-wrought windows lend.
Beside the altar rose a tomb
All in the living stone:
On which a young and beauteous maid
In goodly sculpture shone.
A kneeling angel, fairly carved,
Leaned hovering over her breast;
A weeping warrior at her feet;
And near to these her crest.
The cliff, the vault, but chief the tomb,
Attract the wondering pair:
Eager they ask, what hapless dame
Lies sculptured here so fair?
The hermit sighed, the hermit wept;
For sorrow scarce could speak:
At length he wiped the trickling tears,
That all bedewed his cheek.
'Alas! my children, human life
'Is but a vale of woe;
'And very mournful is the tale,
'Which ye so fain would know.
THE HERMIT's TALE.
'Young lord, thy grand-sire had a friend,
'In days of youthful fame;
'Yon distant hills were his domains:
'Sir Bertram was his name.
'Where'er the noble Percy fought,
'His friend was at his side;
'And many a skirmish with the Scotts
'Their early valor tried.
'Young Bertram loved a beauteous maid,
'As fair as fair might be;
'The dew-drop on the lily's cheek
'Was not so fair as she;
'Fair Widdrington the maiden's name,
'Yon towers her dewlling place;
'Her sire an old Northumbrian chief
'Devoted to thy race.
'Many a lord, and many a knight,
'To this fair damsel came:
'But Bertram was her only choice;
'For him she felt a flame.
'Lord Percy pleaded for his friend:
'Her father soon consents:
'None but the beauteous maid herself
'His wishes now prevents.
'But she with studied, fond delays
'Defers the blissful hour;
'And loves to try his constancy,
'And prove her maiden power.
'That heart, she said, is lightly prized,
'Which is too lightly won;
'And long shall rue that easy maid,
'Who yields her love too soon.
'Lord Percy made a solemn feast
'In Alnwick's princely hall;
'And there came lords, and there came knights,
'His chiefs and barons all.
'With wassel, mirth, and revelry,
'The castle rung around:
'Lord Percy called for song and harp,
'And pipes of martial sound.
'The minstrels of thy noble house,
'All clad in robes of blue,
'With silver crescents on their arms,
'Attend in order due.
'The great achievements of thy race
'They sung: their high command:
'How valiant Manfred over the seas
'First led his Northern band.
'Brave Galfred next to Normandy
'With venturous Rollo came;
'And from his Norman castles won
'Assumed the Percy name.
'They sung, how in the conqueror's fleet,
'Lord William shipped his powers,
'And gained a fair young Saxon bride
'With all her lands and towers.
'Then journeying to the Holy Land,
'There bravely fought and di'd;
'But first the silver crescent won,
'Some Paynim Soldan's pride.
'They sung how Agnes, beauteous heir,
'The queen's own brother wed,
'Lord Josceline, sprung from Charlemagne,
'In princely Brabant bred.
'How he the Percy name revived,
'And how his noble line
'Still foremost in their country's cause
'With godlike ardour shine.
'With loud acclaims the listening crowd
'Applaud the master's song;
'And deeds of arms and war became
'The theme of every tongue.
'Now high heroic acts they tell;
'Their perils past recall:
'When, lo! a damsel, young and fair,
'Stepp'd forward through the hall.
'She Bertram courteously addressed;
'And kneeling on her knee;
'Sir knight, the lady of thy love
'Hath sent this gift to thee.
'Then forth she drew a glittering helm
'Well-plated many a fold,
'The casque was wrought of tempered steel,
'The crest of burnished gold.
'Sir knight, thy lady sends thee this,
'And yields to be thy bride,
'When thou have proved this maiden gift,
'Where sharpest blows are tried.
'Young Bertram took the shining helm,
'And thrice he kissed the same:
'Trust me, I Will prove this precious casque
'With deeds of noblest fame.
'Lord Percy, and his barons bold,
'Then fix upon a day
'To scour the marches, late oppressed,
'And Scottish wrongs repay.
'The knights assembled on the hills
'A thousand horse and more:
'Brave Widdrington, though sunk in years,
'The Percy standard bore.
'Tweed's limpid current soon they pass,
'And range the borders round:
'Down the green slopes of Tiviotdale
'Their bugle-horns resound.
'As when a lion in his den
'Hath heard the hunter's cries,
'And rushes forth to meet his foes;
'So did the Douglas rise.
'Attendant on their chief's command,
'A thousand warriors wait:
'And now the fatal hour drew on
'Of cruel, keen debate.
'A chosen troop of Scottish youths
'Advance before the rest;
'Lord Percy marked their gallant mien,
'And thus his friend addressed.
'Now, Bertram, prove thy lady's helm;
'Attack yon forward band;
'Dead or alive I Will rescue thee,
'Or perish by their hand.
'Young Bertram bowed with glad assent,
'And spurred his eager steed,
'And, calling on his lady's name,
'Rush'd forth with whirlwind speed.
'As when a grove of sapling oaks
'The livid lightning rends;
'So fiercely, 'mid the opposing ranks,
'Sir Bertram's sword descends.
'This way and that he drives the steel,
'And keenly pierces through;
'And many a tall and comely knight,
'With furious force he slew.
'Now closing fast on every side,
'They hem Sir Bertram round;
'But, dauntless, he repels their rage,
'And deals forth many a wound.
'The vigor of his single arm
'Had well nigh won the field;
'When, ponderous, fell a Scottish axe,
'And clove his lifted shield.
'Another blow his temples took,
'And rest his helm in twain;
'That beauteous helm, his lady's gift!
' -- His blood bedewed the plain.
'Lord Percy saw his champion fall
'Amid the unequal fight;
'And now, my noble friends, he said,
'Let's save this gallant knight.
'Then rushing in, with stretched out shield,
'He over the warrior hung;
'As some fierce eagle spreads her wing
'To guard her callow young.
'Three times they strove to seize their prey,
'Three times they quick retire.
'What force could stand his furious strokes,
'Or meet his martial fire?
'Now gathering round on every part,
'The battle raged amain;
'And many a lady wept her lord,
'That hour untimely slain.
'Percy and Douglas, great in arms,
'There all their courage showed;
'And all the field was strewn with dead,
'And all with crimson flowed.
'At length the glory of the day
'The Scotts reluctant yield,
'And, after wondrous valor shown,
'They slowly quit the field.
'All pale, extended on their shelds,
'And weltering in his gore,
'Lord Percy's knights their bleeding friend
'To Wark's fair castle bore. Wark Castle, a fortress belonging to the English,
and of great note in ancient times, stood on the Southern bank of the river
Tweed, not far from Kelso. It is now almost entirely destroyed.

'Well have thou earned my daughter's love,
'Her father kindly said;
'And she herself shall dress thy wounds,
'And tend thee in thy bed.
'A message went; no daughter came;
'Fair Isabel never appears;
'Beshrew me, said the aged chief,
'Young maidens have their fears.
'Cheer up, my son; thou shall her see,
'So soon as thou can ride;
'And she shall nurse thee in her bower;
'And she shall be thy bride.
'Sir Bertram at her name revived;
'He blessed the soothing sound:
'Fond hope supplied the nurse's care,
'And healed his ghastly wound.'
THE HERMIT OF WARKWORTH.
FIT THE THIRD.
'ONE early morn, while dewy drops
'Hung trembling on the tree,
'Sir Bertram from his sickbed rose;
'His bride he would go see.
'A brother he had, in prime of youth,
'Of courage firm and keen;
'And he would tend him on the way,
'Because his wounds were green.
'All day over moss and moor they rode,
'By many a lonely tower;
'And 'twas the dew-fall of the night
'E'er they drew near her bower.
'Most drear and dark the castle seemed,
'That wont to shine so bright;
'And long and loud Sir Bertram called,
'E'er he beheld a light.
'At length her aged nurse arose,
'With voice so shrill and clear:
'What wight is this, that calls so loud,
'And knocks so boldly here?
''Tis Bertram calls, thy lady's love,
'Come from his bed of care:
'All day I Have ridden, over moor and moss,
'To see thy lady fair.
'Now out alas! (she loudly shrieked)
'Alas! how may this be?
'For six long days are gone and past,
'Since she set out to thee.
'Sad terror seized Sir Bertram's heart,
'And ready was he to fall;
'When now the drawbridge was let down,
'And gates were opened all.
'Six days, young knight, are past and gone,
'Since she set out to thee;
'And sure, if no sad harm had happ'd,
'Long since thou would her see.
'For when she heard thy grievous chance,
'She tore her hair, and cried,
'Alas? I Have slain the comeliest knight,
'All through my folly and pride!
'And now to atone for my sad fault,
'And his dear health regain,
'I'll go myself, and nurse my love,
'And soothe his bed of pain.
'Then mounted she her milk white steed
'One morn at break of day;
'And two tall yeomen went with her
'To guard her on her way.
'Sad terror smote Sir Bertram's heart,
'And grief overwhelmed his mind:
'Trust me, said he, I never will rest
''Till I thy lady find.
'That night he spent in sorrow and care;
'And with sad boding heart,
'Or ever the dawning of the day,
'His brother and he depart.
'Now, brother, we'll our ways divide,
'O'er Scottish hills to range:
'Do thou go North, and I Will go West;
'And all our dress we'll change.
'Some Scottish earl has seized my love,
'And borne her to his den;
'And never will I tread English ground
''Till she is restored again.
'The brothers strait their paths divide,
'O'er Scottish hills to range;
'And hide themselves in quaint disguise,
'And often then dress they change.
'Sir Bertram clad in gown of gray,
'Most like a palmer poor,
'To halls and castles wanders round,
'And begs from door to door.
'Sometimes a minstrel's garb he wears,
With pipes so sweet and shrill;
'And wends to every tower and town;
'O'er every dale and hill.
'One day as he sat under a thorn
'All sunk in deep despair,
'An aged pilgrim passed him by,
'Who marked his face of care.
'All minstrels yet that ever I saw,
'Are full of game and glee:
'But thou art sad and woe begone!
'I marvel whence it be!
'Father, I serve an aged lord,
'Whose grief afflicts my mind;
'His only child is stolen away,
'And fain I would her find.
'Cheer up, my son; perchance (he said)
'Some tidings I may bear:
'For often when human hopes have failed,
'Then heavenly comfort's near.
'Behind yon hills so steep and high,
'Down in a lowly glen,
'There stands a castle fair and strong,
'Far from the abode of men.
'As late I chanced to crave an alms
'About this evening hour,
'Methought I heard a lady's voice
'Lamenting in the tower.
'And when I asked, what harm had happ'd,
'What lady sick there lay?
'They rudely drove me from the gate,
'And bade me wend away.
'The tidings caught Sir Bertram's ear;
'He thanked him for his tale;
'And soon he hasted over the hills,
'And soon he reached the vale.
'Then drawing near those lonely towers,
'Which stood in dale so low,
'And sitting down beside the gate,
'His pipes he 'gan to blow.
'Sir porter, is thy lord at home
'To hear a minstrel's song?
'Or may I crave a lodging here,
'Without offense or wrong?
'My lord, he said, is not at home
'To hear a minstrel's song:
'And should I lend thee lodging here,
'My life would not be long.
'He played again so soft a strain;
'Such power sweet sounds impart;
'He won the churlish porter's ear,
'And moved his stubborn heart.
'Minstrel, he said, thou play'st so sweet;
'Fair entrance thou should win;
'But, alas! I am sworn upon the rood
'To let no stranger in.
'Yet, minstrel, in yon rising cliff
'Thou'lt find a sheltering cave;
'And here thou shall my supper share.
'And there thy lodging have.
'All day he sits beside the gate,
'And pipes both loud and clear:
'All night he watches round the walls.
'In hopes his love to hear.
'The first night, as he silent watched,
'All at the midnight hour,
'He plainly heard his lady's voice
'Lamenting in the tower.
'The second night the moon shone clear,
'And gilt the spangled dew;
'He saw his lady through the grate;
'But 'twas a transient view.
'The third night, wearied out, he slept
''Till near the morning tide;
'When, starting up, he seized his sword,
'And to the castle hied.
'When, lo! he saw a ladder of ropes
'Depending from the wall;
'And over the mote was newly laid
'A poplar strong and tall.
'And soon he saw his love descend
'Wrapt in a tartan played;
'Assisted by a sturdy youth
'In highland garb yclad.
'Amaz'd, confounded at the sight,
'He lay unseen and still;
'And soon he saw them cross the stream,
'And mount the neighboring hill.
'Unheard, unknown of all within,
'The youthful couple fly.
'But what can 'scape the lover's ken,
'Or shun his piercing eye?
'With silent steps he follows close
'Behind the flying pair,
'And saw her hang upon his arm
'With fond familiar air.
'Thanks, gentle youth, she often said;
'My thanks thou well have won:
'For me what wiles have thou contrived?
'For me what dangers run?
'And ever shall my grateful heart
'Thy services repay: --
'Sir Bertram would no further hear;
'But cried, Vile traitor, stay!
'Vile traitor, yield that lady up!
'And quick his sword he drew.
'The stranger turned in sudden rage,
'And at Sir Bertram flew.
'With mortal hate their vigorous arms
'Gave many a vengeful blow:
'But Bertram's stronger hand prevailed,
'And laid the stranger low.
'Die, traitor, die! -- A deadly thrust
'Attends each furious word.
'Ah! then fair Isabel knew his voice,
'And rushed beneath his sword.
'O stop, she cried, O stop thy arm!
'Thou do thy brother slay! -- '
And here the hermit paused and wept:
His tongue no more could say.
At length he cried, 'Ye lovely pair,
'How shall I tell the rest! --
'E'er I could stop my piercing sword,
'It fell, and stabbed her breast.'
'Wert thou thyself that hapless youth?
'Ah! cruel fate!' they said.
The hermit wept, and so did they:
They sighed; he hung his head.
'O blind and jealous rage,' he cried,
'What evils from thee flow?'
The hermit paused; they silent mourned;
He wept, and they were woe.
'Ah! when I heard my brother's name,
'And saw my lady bleed,
'I raved, I wept, I cursed my arm,
'That wrought the fatal deed.
'In vain I clasped her to my breast,
'And closed the ghastly wound;
'In vain I press his bleeding corpse,
'And raised it from the ground.
'My brother, alas! spoke never more:
'His precious life was flown.
'She kindly strove to soothe my pain,
'Regardless of her own.
'Bertram, she said, be comforted,
'And live to think on me:
'May we in heaven that union prove,
'Which here was not to be!
'Bertram, she said, I still was true;
'Thou only had my heart:
'May we hereafter meet in bliss!
'We now, alas! must part.
'For thee I left my father's hall,
'And flew to thy relief;
'When, lo! near Chiviot's fatal hills
'I met a Scottish chief.
'Lord Malcolm's son, whose proffered love
'I had refused with scorn;
'He slew my guards, and seized on me
'Upon that fatal morn;
'And in these dreary hated walls
'He kept me close confined;
'And fondly sued and warmly pressed,
'To win me to his mind.
'Each rising morn increased my pain,
'Each night increased my fear;
'When, wandering in this Northern garb,
'Thy brother found me here.
'He quickly formed this brave design
'To set me, captive, free;
'And on the moor his horses wait
'Tied to a neighboring tree.
'Then haste, my love, escape away,
'And for thyself provide;
'And sometimes fondly think on her,
'Who should have been thy bride.
'Thus, pouring comfort on my soul
'Even with her latest breath,
'She gave one parting fond embrace,
'And closed her eyes in death.
'In wild amaze, in speechless woe,
'Devoid of sense, I lay:
'Then sudden, all in frantic mood,
'I meant myself to slay:
'And, rising up in furious haste,
'I seized the bloody brand:
'A sturdy arm here interposed,
'And wrench'd it from my hand.
'A crowd, that from the castle came,
'Had missed their lovely ward;
'And seizing me, to prison bare,
'And deep in dungeon barred.
'It chanced that on that very morn
'Their chief was prisoner taken:
'Lord Percy had us soon exchanged,
'And strove to soothe my pain.
'And soon those honored dear remains
'To England were conveyed;
'And there within their silent tombs,
'With holy rites were laid.
'For me, I loathed my wretched life,
'And long to end it thought;
'Till time, and books, and holy men*
'Had better counsels taught.
'They raised my heart to that pure source,
'Whence heavenly comfort flows:
'They taught me to despise the world,
'And calmly bear its woes.
'No more the slave of human pride,
'Vain hope, and sordid care;
'I meekly vowed to spend my life
'In penitence and prayer.
'The bold Sir Bertram now no more,
'Impetuous, haughty, wild;
'But poor and humble Benedict,
'Now lowly, penitent, mild;
'My lands I gave to feed the poor,
'And sacred altars raise;
'And here, a lonely Anchoret,
'I came to end my days.
'This sweet sequestered vale I chose,
'These rocks and hanging grove;
'For ost beside that murmuring stream
'My love was wont to rove.
'My noble friend approved my choice;
'This blessed retreat he gave:
'And here I carved her beauteous form,
'And scoop'd this holy cave.
'Full fifty winters, all forlorn,
'My life I Have lingered here;
'And daily over this sculptured saint
'I drop the pensive tear.
'And thou, dear brother of my heart,
'So faithful and so true,
'The sad remembrance of thy fate
'Still makes my bosom rue!
'Yet not unpitied passed my life,
'Forsaken or forgot,
'The Percy and his noble sons
'Would grace my lowly cot.
'Oft the great Earl from toils of state,
'And cumbrous pomp of power,
'Would gladly seek my little cell,
'To spend the tranquil hour.
'But length of life is length of woe;
'I lived to mourn his fall:
'I lived to mourn his godlike sons,
'And friends and followers all.
'But thou, the honors of thy race,
'Lov'd youth, shall now restore;
'And raise again the Percy name
'More glorious than before.
He ceased; and on the lovely pair
His choicest blessings laid:
While they with thanks and pitying tears
His mournful tale repaid.
And now what present course to take
They ask the good old sire;
And, guided by his sage advice,
To Scotland they retire.
Meantime their suit such favor found.
At Raby's stately hall,
Earl Neville and his princely spouse
Now gladly pardon all.
She suppliant at her King Henry V. Anno 1440.
nephew's throne,
The royal grace implored:
To all the honors of his race,
The Percy was restored.
The youthful Earl still more and more
Admired his beauteous dame:
Nine noble sons to him she bore,
All worthy of their name.
THE TREASURY OF WIT.
A ROGUE'S MODESTY.
A CULPRIT, who was on the point of suffering an ignominious death for his
depredations on mankind, unwillingly permitted Jack Ketch to put the halter
about his neck; but being equipped with it, he thus remonstrated with the
minister of justice: -- 'I wish, Mr. John,' (touching the cord) I say, I wish,
Mr. John, you could find a more eligible situation for me, for really I do not
like this line of life.

A KICK FOR A BITE.
IN the course of a very severe engagement between an English privateer and a
French one, the English boatswain had both his legs taken off by a shot; and as
he lay in that plight, called out to his Captain, to request that he would ram
both his legs into a cannon, and fire them off at the French, that he might
have the satisfaction of one kick at them before he died.

THE RETORT.
MR. COLT, superintendent of the canal at Fort Stanwix, being provoked at an
Irishman, gave him a sturdy kick. -- 'By St. Patrick,' retorted the Hibernian,
if you kick so, while you are a Colt, what will you do, when you come to be a
Horse.

ANECDOTE OF DR. RADCLIFFE.
DR. Radcliffe was not a more rigid observer of the aphorisms of Hyppocrates,
than of the precepts of Bacchus; he was almost equally devoted to the god of
physic and the god of wine. One evening, as he was sacrificing at the shrine of
the purple god, in a tavern, a gentleman entered in great haste, and almost
breathless -- Doctor, my wife is at the point of death, make haste, come with
me. Not until I have finished my bottle, however, replied the doctor. The man,
who happened to be a fine athletic fellow, finding entreaty useless, snatched
up the doctor, hoisted him on his back, and carried him out of the tavern. The
moment he set the doctor upon his legs, he received from him, in a very
emphatic manner, the following threat: -- Now, you rascal, I Will cure your wife
in revenge. The doctor (as the story adds) kept his word.

THE REPLY.
A LAWYER once pleaded with great ability the cause of his client for near an
hour. When he had done, his antagonist, with a supercilious sneer, said, he did
not understand a word the other had said -- Who neatly replied, I believe so,
Sir, for I was speaking LAW.

REAL COURAGE.
THE brave Crillon, one of the greatest captains of Henry the Fourth, was
hearing a discourse upon the passions, and the preacher giving a very pathetic
description of the scourging of our Savior -- the warrior was moved even to
tears, rose up, and laying his hand on his sword, exclaimed, O! where wast
thou, Crillon? Where wast thou?

IMAGINARY COURAGE.
A GENTLEMAN, who assisted the Count de Cabra in putting on his armor before a
battle, perceiving him tremble in a pitiful manner, asked, what caused that
strange emotion. The Count answered, My flesh trembles at the prodigious danger
into which my undaunted soul will certainly lead it.

LAST WORDS OF DON FRANCIS.
PERICO de Ayala, the buffoon of the Marquis de Villena, came to see Don
Francis, the buffoon of Charles the Fifth, when he lay on his deathbed.
Perico, seeing him in so bad a way, said, Brother Don Francis, I request you by
the great friendship, which has always subsisted between us, that when you go
to Heaven (which I believe must be very soon, since you have always lived such
a pious life) you will beseech God to have mercy on my soul. Francis answered
-- ' Tie a thread on this finger, that I may not forget it.' These were his
last words; and he instantly expired.

GREAT CONSOLATION FOR THE LOSE OF AN EYE.
A POOR clown, losing an eye, by the unskilful management of Seraphini, a quack
doctor, went to reproach him for stripping him of his money, and also depriving
him of his sight, and threatened to lay the case before the chief magistrates
of the city. Dr. Seraphini put himself in a great passion, and exclaimed, You
scoundrel, you rascal, would you presume to have two eyes forsooth, when honest
men, nay, the Magistrates themselves, and even princes have no more! The clown,
terrified beyond measure, asked the doctor's pardon, and thought himself lucky
to escape with one eye.

THE MAN OF FORTITUDE.
AN Italian Doctor of Law, seeing a criminal, who was condemned to be publicly
whipped through the streets, walking very slowly during the operation, asked
him why he did not hasten, that he might have fewer stripes; adding many
learned arguments to prove that the slower he walked, the more he must suffer.
To which the criminal, standing entirely still notwithstanding they were
beating him on every side, and looking the Doctor in the face, replied with the
greatest composure, When you are whipped through the street, you may walk as
you please, and I will thank you to allow me the same liberty.

DON SANCHO IN DISTRESS.
THERE is no country, in which so many names of baptism are given as in Spain.
-- A poor Spaniard, who had no company, save that of a lean old horse, came to
a little village in England, where there was but one inn. It was past midnight,
and it rained abundantly. Having knocked at the door, the landlord opened a
window, and asked who was there; ' It is,' answered the Spaniard, Don Sancho
Alfonzo Ramirez Juan Pedro Carlos Francisco Domingo, de Rohas, de Stuniga, de
las Fuentes. The landlord, who knew he had but one bed to spare, answered
bluntly, that he had no room for so many; and returned to his bed, leaving the
Spaniard to travel eight miles further in the rain, to find a lodging for all
his names.

A PROPHECY FULFILLED.
SAM Foot, being in a church, where the singing was performed in a wretched
manner, observed to Mr. Quin, that the prophecy of Amos was now fulfilled,
where he says, And the songs of the temple shall be howlings.

A MILITARY ANECDOTE.
A GERMAN peasant, newly enlisted in the army, was scarcely arrived at the
regiment, when he was sent with others upon a skirmishing party; and
approaching a wood in which a party of the French were posted, who immediately
fired upon the Germans, and while the musket balls were flying very thick, the
honest peasant stepped out of the ranks, making a sign to the enemy to desist,
at the same time bawled out -- Why what the devil are you firing for, do'nt you
see there are people a coming?

PREACHING WELL APPLIED.
A CERTAIN Bishop had a servant, whom he ordered one festival day to go to a
butcher, who was called David, for a piece of meat; and then to come to church,
where the Bishop was to preach. The Bishop, in his sermon, bringing
authorities, from the scriptures, to prove his discourse, in this manner, '
ISAIAH says thus, 'JEREMIAH says thus, EZEKIEL says thus; at last, happening to
turn toward the door, just as his servant come in, went on, ' and what says
DAVID?' Upon which the servant roared out, DAVID swears that if you do not pay
what you owe him, you never need send to his stall again.

PRAYING MADE EASY.
A VERY devout fellow not being able to please his nice piety, in his prayers
used only to repeat the alphabet, and then to add, O Lord God, put these
letters into syllables, and these syllables into words, and these words into
sentences, that may be most for my real good.

A DISPUTABLE FACT.
A GENTLEMAN of Modena, not very rich, was obliged to take a very stupid fellow
for his servant, who was a dull and sleepy dog. His master going one day to
visit a friend, who lived a little way from the town, alighted at the gate of
the house, and desired Martin, his servant, to hold his horse, till he came
back. He was no sooner gone, than Martin, holding the bridle in his hand, fell,
as usual, into a profound sleep. A poor soldier passing by took a sudden
affection for the horse; and seeing the keeper lost in sleep, he slipped the
bridle off the horse's head, and leaving it in Martin's hand, mounted the steed
and set out a full gallop. After some time, Martin, being awaked by a servant
of the house, stupefied with surprise, exclaimed, Be I Peter Martin, or be I
not? If I am Peter Martin, I have lost a horse; if I am not Peter Martin, I
have found a bridle.

COMPARISONS OF DRUNKENNESS.
AS drunk as an owl; as drunk as a sow; as drunk as a beggar; as drunk as the
devil; as drunk as a lord. These are the principal comparisons of drunkenness,
and the explanation is as follows: A man is as drunk as an owl, when he cannot
see; he is as drunk as a sow, when he tumbles in the dirt; he is as drunk as a
beggar, when he is very impudent; he is as drunk as the devil, when he is
inclined to mischief; and as drunk as a lord, when he is every thing that is bad.

FORTUNE OF A LIAR.
A NOTORIOUS rogue, being to be tried for his life, confessed the robbery he
was charged with. The judges hereupon directed the jury to find him guilty,
upon his own confession. The jury, having laid their heads together, brought
him in not guilty. The judges bid them consider of the case again: but they
still brought in their verdict, not guilty. The judges asked the reason; the
foreman replied with great solemnity, There is reason enough, we cannot believe
him, for we all know him to be one of the greatest liars in the world.

LIBERTY AND EQUALITY.
A blacksmith, of a certain village in the neighborhood of Paris, was
sentenced to die (for asserting, that the English would never admit of a visit
from Buonaparte and his army, except they went by land) the chief peasants of
the place joined together, and begged of the officer of justice, that the
blacksmith might not suffer, because he was necessary to the place, which could
not do without a blacksmith, to shoe horses and make their farming utensils,
but the officer said, How then can I fulfill my duty? To which they answered, We
have two weavers in the village, and for so small a place, one is enough; hang
the other. -- The officer of justice, not knowing how to act, applied to the
Directory, who returned them orders to act as the majesty of the people
demanded; of course the poor weaver was put to death, to the great satisfaction
of the blacksmith, notwithstanding the grumbling of the weaver's wife and seven
small children.

TEARS OF AFFECTION.
A YOUNG swindler hiring a lodging, said to the landlady, I assure you madam, I
am so much liked, that I never left a lodging but my landlady shed tears.
'Perhaps, said she, you always went away without paying.

DEAD ALIVE.
CAPTAIN Christie, an Irish officer, who served with considerable credit in
America, had the misfortune to be dreadfully wounded in one of the battles
there. As he lay on the ground, an unfortunate soldier, who was near him, and
was also severely wounded, made a terrible howling, at which Christie
exclaimed,: D -- mn your eyes, what do you make such a noise for, do you think
no body is killed but yourself?

WONDERFUL POWER OF MAGNETISM.
A GENTLEMAN traveling in foreign parts, happened to be benighted, far from
any place of accommodation: to avoid the dreariness of the night, in a strange
place, he thought it advisable to seek for some shelter, and having discovered
a cave, he dismounted his horse, which he fastened by the bridle on the outside
of the cave, and then went in and laid himself down in his clothes, and being
much fatigued, fell asleep, nor did he awake till the daylight appeared; when
lo! to his great astonishment, he found himself suspended by his heels from the
roof of the cave. He made many efforts to free himself from so disagreeable a
situation, when at length he shuffled his legs out of his boots and came to the
ground, almost stunned by the fall; when looking up he perceived the cause of
this disaster was owing to the cave being formed out of a rock of loadstone,
and he unfortunately having steel spurs on, was attracted up in the manner
described; and some say the boots are hanging there yet.

A CURE FOR THE ITCH OF DUELLING.
AN old officer of distinction, and of tried valor, refused to accept a
challenge sent him by a young adventurer; but returned the following answer: I
fear not your sword, but the anger of my God. I dare venture my life in a good
cause, but cannot hazard my soul in a bad one. I will charge up to the cannon's
mouth, for the good of my country; but I want courage to storm hell.

A GLIMPSE OF COSMOGRAPHY.
A STRANGER being much addicted to lying, was telling to a gaping crowd the
many countries and cities he had been in; when one of the company asked him, if
he had ever been in Cosmography. The stranger, thinking this the name of some
city, said, We saw it at a distance, but could not visit it, being in great
haste.

THE WOODEN GOD.
A PORTUGUESE sculptor, who was suspected of free-thinking, was at the point of
death. A Jesuit, who came to confess him, holding a crucifix before his eyes,
said, Behold that God you have so much offended. Do you recollect him now? '
Alas! yes, Father,' replied the dying man; it was I, who made him.'

A RECEIPT, BY WHICH TWO MEN CAN MAKE FIFTY ARMED MEN RUN.
A traveller, relating some wonderful adventures, which happened to him in his
travels through Egypt, told the company, that he and his servant made fifty
armed Arabs run. Which startling them, his servant observed, there was no great
matter in that; ' For,' says he, we ran, and they ran after us.

AN INDISPUTABLE FACT.
ON the inquest taken on the body of a poor tailor, who lately cut his throat;
a journeyman of the deceased was examined touching the evident signs of lunacy
betrayed by the deceased, previous to his committing the horrid act. The
journeyman, when after speaking of him as an honest and sober minded person,
solemnly declared on his oath, that he never knew his master guilty of such an
act before, in all his life.

A SOLDIER'S REPLY.
A soldier passing through a country village, a large mastiff ran at him, and
he stabbed the dog with a spear, he had in his hand. The master of the dog
carried the soldier before a justice of the peace, who asked him, why he had
not rather struck at the dog with the butt end of his weapon. ' So I should,'
said the soldier, if the dog had run at me with his tail.

STORY OF AN ASS, WHO CONTRADICTED HIS MASTER.
A MAN went to borrow an ass of a neighbor, who said the ass was not at home.
-- Meanwhile the animal happened to bray: upon which the borrower exclaimed,
How! did you not tell me the ass was not at home? you certainly meant to
deceive, for I hear him bray. The other replied, in a great passion, Why
neighbor, will you take the ass's word before mine?

A HANGING MATTER.
TWO fellows meeting, one asked the other, why he looked so sad. I have very
good reason for it, answered the other; poor Jack Wilson, the greatest crony,
and best friend I had in the world, was hanged but two days ago. -- 'What had
he done?' said the first. 'Alas,' replied the other, he did no more than you or
I should have done on the like occasion; he found a halter in a man's pasture,
and carried it off. 'What!' answered the other, hang a man, for finding a
halter? That is hard, indeed. To tell the truth of the matter, said the other,
there was a horse at one end of it.

A DISQUISITION ON COLORS.
THREE citizens walking in the fields, one said, We shall have a great year of
blackberries; for said he, 'the last week I plucked a handful of the finest red
blackberries, that I ever saw.' A second person laughed at him, saying red
blackberries is a bull. But the third person, with much gravity, justified what
the former had said, and very sagely asked, Are not blackberries always red
when they are green?

A RECEIPT TO PREVENT ANY BAD ACCIDENT BY FALLING FROM A TREE.
A PEASANT, having ascended a chestnut tree, to gather the nuts, fell down and
broke his leg. Minaco, a wag, comforting him, said, that if he would follow his
advice, he should never have another fall from a tree; the peasant, begging,
with great earnestness, to hear the receipt. Minaco said, Never come down,
faster than you go up.

THE MAN OF FEELING.
A SWISS Captain, burying pell-mell in the field of battle both the dead and
the wounded, it was represented to him, that some of those, whom he thus
buried, were not quite dead, and with care might perhaps recover. 'Poh! poh!'
said he, if you take their word for it, there is not a man of them will own
himself dead.

THE MAN OF FAILING.
THE late Colonel Chatres, reflecting on his ill life and character, told Mr.
Garrick, that if such a thing, as a good name, was to be purchased with money,
he would freely give ten thousand pounds for one. Mr. Garrick told him, it
would certainly be the worst bargain he ever made in his life. 'Why so?' said
the honest Colonel. -- ' Because,' answered Garrick, you would lose it again in
less than a week.

SURPRISING INSTANCE OF FORGETFULNESS.
A COUNTRY Clergyman meeting a neighbor, who never came to church, although an
old fellow of above sixty years of age; the pious priest gave him some severe
reproof on that account, and asked him, if he ever read his bible at home.
'No,' replied the old man, 'I cannot read.' 'Now, I dare say,' said the parson,
you do not know who made you. 'Not I, in good truth,' cried the countryman. A
little boy happened to come by at the same time; Who made you, child? said the
parson. 'God, Sir,' answered the boy. 'Why, look you there,' quoth the honest
clergyman, are you not ashamed to hear a child of four or five years old tell
me, who made him, when you, that are so old a man, cannot? ' Ah!' said the
countryman, it is no wonder, that he should remember, he was made but the other
day; you must know, it is a long while since I was made.

A DOUBTFUL CASE.
A SCHOLAR, meeting a man, said to him, with great seeming surprise, Bless me,
Sir, I heard you was dead. To which the other answered, Oh! no; it is not true;
you see I am still alive. The scholar replied, Perhaps you are; but, upon my
word, I don't know how to believe you, for he, who told me you were dead, is a
man of much more credit than you.

AN UNACCOUNTABLE WHIM.
A PERSON, happening to call one day upon an old acquaintance, found him
exercising his wife with a leather strap; and being hurt at the ungenerous
task, undertaken by his friend, he begged him, by all the ties of honor, to
forbear; at the same time asking him the occasion of such severe treatment. The
occasion is, said the enraged husband, she will not be mistress in her own
house. His friend expressed great astonishment at the answer, and observed, The
omission was such as he believed no woman ever gave her husband occasion to
thrash her for before. 'Ah! by the lord,' said the husband, 'my wife will not be
mistress, because she wants to 'be master.

A VIRGIN'S REQUEST.
A YOUNG blooming girl, being warmly importuned by her lover for the last
favor, said to him, I will grant your request, after you have granted mine,
which is, for you to give me what you have not, what you cannot have, and yet
may easily give me -- A HUSBAND.

FRUITLESS PRECAUTION.
A GREAT philosopher sealed a wine vessel he had, but his servant bored a hole
in the bottom, and stole the liquor. He was astonished at the liquor's
diminishing, though the seal was entire; and another saying, Perhaps, it is
taken out at the bottom, the philosopher answered, Most foolish of men, it is
not the under part, but the upper that is deficient.

A REMARKABLE CASE.
A SCHOLAR, wanting money, sold his books, and wrote to his father in the
following manner: Rejoice with me, my dear father, for now my books maintain me.

NOUGHT'S WIFE.
A MR. Dobson, who was famed for nothing but his stupidity and indolence, as he
was going from home one day, was desired by his wife not to be gone so much, as
she was afraid to be left alone so much. 'Poh! Poh!' said he, 'nought 'is never
in danger. 'I know that, very well,' said she, 'but nought's wife is.'

THE DEAF MAN STUNNED.
ALTHOUGH the infirmities of nature are not proper subjects to be made a jest
of, yet when people take a great deal of pains to conceal what every body
knows, there is nothing more ridiculous: Of this sort was old Smith, the
player, who, being very deaf, did not care any body should know it. Honest Joe
Miller, going with a friend one day along Fleet Street, and seeing old Smith on
the other side of the way, told his acquaintance, he should see some sport: so
beckoning to Smith with his finger, and stretching open his mouth as wide as he
could, as if he halloed to him, though he said nothing, the old fellow came
puffing from the other side of the way. What a pox, said he, do you make such a
noise for? do you mean to stun me, or do you think I am deaf and cannot hear
you.

TIT FOR TAT.
A COUNTRY fellow was just come to London, gaping about in every shop he came
to, at last he came to ^ lottery office, where seeing only one man sitting at a
desk, he could not imagine what commodity was sold there; but calling to the
clerk, 'Pray Sir,' said he, what do you keep to sell here? 'Loggerheads,' cried
the clerk. 'Do you,' answered the countryman: by the living jingo, then, you
have a special good trade, for I see you have but one loggerhead left.

REMARKABLE ACCIDENT OF A GUN, WHICH WENT OFF, WITHOUT BEING CHARGED.
A GENTLEMAN in England, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, owned a gun, which
was made in such a wonderful manner, and of such a curious construction, that
it really went off (upon a thief's coming into the house) although it was not
charged. This affair excited great speculation among the learned; but the owner
of the gun confessed, it was the thief carried it off, and what was worse,
before he had time to charge him with it.

THE POOR SCHOLAR.
A BEGGAR asking alms under the name of a poor scholar, a gentleman, to whom he
applied himself, asked him a question in Latin, the poor fellow, shaking his
head, said, he did not understand him: 'Why' said the gentleman did you not
just now tell me you were a poor scholar? 'Yes,' replied the other, a poor one
indeed, Sir, for I do not understand one word of Latin.

THE BLOODY-MINDED PARSON.
YOUR unchristian virulence against me, said a clergyman, will cost hundreds of
people their lives. This menace brought the author into trouble; he was cited
to a court of justice, and charged with harboring the most bloody designs
against his fellow subjects. However, it was proved in court that his real
meaning was, if he was not allowed to preach, he would practice as a physician.

THE OLD SPORSTMAN OUTWITTED.
A BRIDEGOOM, the first night he was in bed with his bride, said unto her; When
I solicited your chastity, if you had condescended, I would never have made you
my wife, for I did it only to try thee. 'Faith!' said she, I did imagine as
much, but I had been cozened so three or four times before, and I was resolved
not to be fooled so again.

THE GREAT BISHOP'S BEARD.
A BISHOP, being at a table, let some of his victuals drop on his beard, which
was most extravagantly long, his new butler said to him with the greatest
simplicity, My lord there is something on the beard of your greatness; but
seeing the austere Bishop frown at him, in the most solemn manner; he
immediately thought he had expressed himself improperly, and explained by
saying My lord there is something on the greatness of your beard.

THE GENEROUS CONQUEROR.
TWO men fighting a duel, one overthrew the other, and disarmed him. Now beg
your life of me and take it; said he, you are now at my mercy. 'I will die
first:' answered the other. ' Nay, says,' he replied, if your life is not
worth your asking, it is not worth my taking; and so he let him depart, with a
whole skin.

ILL EFFECTS OF EARLY RISING.
A father blaming his son for not rising early in the morning, gave him an
example of one, who, going abroad early, found a purse of gold. ' Ay, father,'
said the son, but was not he abroad earlier, who lost the purse?

UNFORTUNATE SPECULATION.
A GENTLEMAN lately returned from the East Indies, enquired of his neighbor,
after a very particular friend of his, who was hanged soon after he left the
country, for forgery, was told that he made some speculations, 'and died soon
after. 'And did he continue in the grocery line?' cried the former. 'Oh! no,'
(answered the other) 'he was quite in a different line when he died.

THE CONTENTED WIFE.
A VERY beautiful Lady, who had been a celebrated coquette, having married a
remakably ugly husband, was ask how it was possible she could put up with such
a husband, answered, Gallants ought to be handsome, but husbands as it pleases
God.

HORSEMANSHIP.
AN Irish sailor, as he was riding, made a stop for a few minutes -- The horse
in beating off the flies, caught his hind foot in the stirrup; the sailor
observing it, said, How now, dobbin, if you are going to get on, I Will get off,
for damme if I Will ride double with you.

EXTREME MODESTY.
A PHYSICIAN went to visit a young lady, daughter of a nobleman. Desiring her
arm, to feel her pulse, the damsel from pride, covered the place with the
sleeve of her shift. The Physician also drew down his coat sleeve, and applying
it, said, ' A linen pulse must have a woolen Physician.'

LAW EXPLAINED.
A POOR fellow, condemned to be hung, told the late Justice Burnet, it was a
very hard thing, to be hanged for stealing a horse. No, friend, said the Judge,
you are not hanged for stealing 'a horse; but that horses may not be stolen.'

THE PARSON BROUGHT TO TERMS.
THE famous Sir George Rooke, when he was a Captain of Marines, was quartered
at a village, where he buried a pretty many of his men; at length the parson
refused to perform the ceremony of their interment any more unless he was paid
for it; which being told Captain Rooke, he ordered six men of his company to
carry the corpse of the soldier then dead, and lay him upon the parson's hall
table. This so embarrassed the priest, that he sent the Captain word, if he
would fetch the man away, he would bury him and all his company for nothing.

SIGNS OF CIVILIZATION.
THE writer of a modern book of Travels, relating the particulars of his being
cast away on an unknown shore, thus concludes:

After having walked eleven hours without tracing the print of a human soot, to
my great comfort and delight, I saw a man hanging upon a gibbet, my pleasure at
seeing this cheering prospect was inexpressible, for it convinced me, that I
was in a civilized country.

A PERFECT HUNCH-BACK.
A GOOD friar, preaching upon the wonderful power of God, said, he had never
created any thing but what was perfect in its kind, a round-shouldered wag,
waiting for him at the door, said, Father, I thank you for your sermon; but do
you really think that I am perfect in my kind? 'Yes,' said the father gravely,
you are surely a very perfect hunch-back.

HOW TO CUT A CHEESE IN THE BEST PLACE.
DANIEL Burgess, supping with a gentlewoman of his acquaintance, and a large
uncut Cheshire cheese being brought upon the table; he asked her, where he
should cut it. She replied, 'Where you please, Mr. Burgess.' Upon which he gave
it to a servant in waiting, bade him carry it to his house, and he would cut it
at home.

PRAYER AT SEA.
AN atheistical fellow, in a storm at sea, began to use this rhetoric to God
for his life: O Lord, I beseech thee to hear my prayer at this time, for thou
know I trouble thee but seldom.

HISTORICAL ANECDOTE.
THE Marshal de Grammont besieging a place, the Governor capitulated, after a
slight resistance. When the Governor walked out, he said to the Marshal, I
will confess to you, in confidence, that I only asked to capitulate, because I
wanted powder. To return your confidence, answered the Marshal, I only granted
your 'demand, because I wanted ball.'

SUM TOTAL OF A LORD MAYOR'S TALENTS.
KING James the Second passing through Colchester, it was resolved, that the
Mayor should compliment him on his arrival. It so happened, that this chief
magistrate was eminently stupid (which is looked upon as no strange thing in
England). The town clerk was appointed to attend him at his back, and whisper
what he was to say to the King. When they came into his Majesty's presence, the
clerk, desiring to encourage the mayor, whispered, Hold up your head and look
like a man. Hold up your head and look like a man! did the mayor bawl to the
King. The clerk, astonished, whispered, What the devil do you mean? The mayor
bawled out, What the devil do you mean? The clerk, sweating with fear and
vexation, whispered, 'By Heaven! you will ruin us all.' The mayor immediately
repeated, ' By Heaven! you will ruin us all.' The clerk, in a violent rage,
said, Oh! you blundering puppy, I wish you had never come here. The mayor again
bawled, Oh! you blundering puppy, I wish you had never come here. The clerk on
this immediately took to his heels, and the mayor followed him, leaving the
King in a violent fit of laughter, though not without rage.

SPECIMEN OF ENGLISH SKILL IN WIT AND WARFARE.
AN English and a French gentleman had a dispute, which nation most excelled in
wit. The English gentleman insisted, that wit was common in England, even among
the mob; and to convince the Frenchman of the English superiority, he carried
him to Charing Cross, where a man stood in the pillory, for keeping a
disorderly house. The populace, looking on it as an inconsiderable offense, did
not throw any thing at him, or ill treat him, as is usual for crimes of a
different nature; therefore the fellow was quite easy and unconcerned, and
lifted the upper part of the pillory, sometimes higher, and then let it lower
again, just to suit himself. Upon which one of the spectators, who stood there
with a load upon his head, seeing the offender so dextrous, said, It is my
opinion, this fellow has served his time to the pillory, he is so handy about
it. To which a droll rogue, in a leather apron, replied, Served his time to it!
why you may be sure he has; for do you not see he is set up for himself? ' Set
up!' says another, How can you say he is set up, when you see he is standing
up? Why you foolish dog, says another, do you not know it is a standing
business? And now a fellow in a woolen cap calls out to the man in the pillory,
' Harkee, 'Cockey, says he, had you not rather jokes should fly about than the
rotten eggs? Aye, sure enough, master, replies the man in the pillory, though
it was on account of some sort of jokes, that I got my head into this hole. At
this time, a wheelbarrow woman added one more to the assembly; when a
blacksmith accosts her with, Well, Moll, what brought you here? To which she
answered, Curiosity and my legs, Jack; now I hope the fool is answered. '
Fool!' says the fellow, what do you mean by that, you slut? Why' rejoined she,
you must be a fool, because you can neither read nor write. ' Very true,'
replied the blacksmith, but I can set my mark! and immediately striking her in
the face, gave her a black eye: this brought on a battle between the
blacksmith, and a sailor, who took the woman's part; in a few moments the
blacksmith, two colliers and a chimney-sweeper joined in the contest. The
French seeing the English fight so like bull-dogs, said ' The English shine in
'WAR, as well as WIT,

ORATORY.
WHEN Sir Richard Steel was fitting up his great room in York buildings, which
he intended for public orations, he happened at a time to be pretty much
behindhand with his workmen; and coming one day amongst them, to see how they
went forward, he ordered one of them to get into the rostrum and make a speech,
that he might observe, how it could be heard. The fellow mounting, and
scratching his pate, told him he knew not what to say, for in truth he was no
orator. 'Oh!' said Sir Richard, 'no matter for that; speak any thing that comes
uppermost. ' Why, here, Sir Richard,' says the fellow, we have been working for
you these six weeks, and cannot get one penny of money; pray, Sir, when do you
intend to pay us? ' Very well, very well,' said Sir Richard, Pray, come down, I
have heard enough; I must own, you speak very distinctly, but I cannot say I
like your subject.

THE GOOSE AND HIS LORDSHIP.
A NOBLE lord asked a clergyman, who dined with him, why the goose, if there
was one, was always placed next to the parson. Really, said the parson, I can
give no reason for it; but your question is so odd, that I shall never see a
goose again, without thinking of your lordship.

A ROGUE CAUGHT IN BAD COMPANY.
THE Duke of Ossona, being Viceroy of Naples, went on board the Spanish
galleys, on a festival, to make use of his right of delivering one wretch from
punishment. He interrogated many, and asked, why they came there. All excused
themselves on various pretenses, save one, who confessed his crimes, and said,
that his punishment was too light for them. The Duke exclaimed, Here, take away
this villain; lest he should corrupt all these honest men! and he instantly set
him free.

COUNT DE GRANCE.
THE Count de Grance being wounded in the knee with a musket ball, the surgeons
made many incisions in the flesh to find it. The Count losing patience at last,
asked them, why they cut and carved him so cruelly? We are seeking the ball;
said they. Why the devil did you not speak before, said the Count, I took it
out myself and have it in my pocket.

VOLTAIRE.
VOLTAIRE* having lampooned a nobleman, was one night in his way home,
intercepted by him, and handsomely cudgelled for his licentious wit. Upon which
Voltaire applied to the Duke of Orleans, who was then regent, and begged him to
do justice in the affair. ' Sir', replied the regent smiling, ' it has been
done already.'

THE LINGUIST.
A FELLOW who had picked up a few scraps of the French tongue, and was entirely
ignorant of the Latin, accosted a gentleman, in French, ' Quelle heure est il,
Monsieur?' [What o'clock is it, Sir?] To which the gentleman answered in Latin,
' Nescio.' [I don't know.] D -- mn it, said the fellow, I did not think it was
near so late! and ran off as if he had something of consequence to do.

THE REPOSITORY OF GEUIUS. HUMOROUS AND ENTERTAINING EPIGRAMS.
TRUE WIT.
TRUE wit is like the brilliant stone
Dug from the Indian mine;
Which boasts two different powers in one,
To cut, as well as shine.
Genius, like that, if polished right,
With the same gifts abounds;
Appears, at once, both keen and bright,
And sparkles while it wounds.
THE MORALIST.
AS Tom was one day in deep chat with his friend*
He gravely advised him his manners to mend;
That his morals were bad, he heard it from many.
' They lie,' replied Tom, for I never had any.'
A COURT AUDIENCE.
OLD SOUTH, a witty churchman reckoned,
Was preaching once to Charles the second,
But much too serious for a court,
Who at all preaching made a sport.
He soon perceived his audience nod,
Deaf to the zealous man of God!
The preacher stopped; began to call,
'Pray, wake the earl of Lauderdale.
'My lord! why, it is a monstrous thing!
You snore so loud -- You Will wake the King.'
THE KNIGHTS OF THE SHEERS.
QUEEN Bess once in council was given to know,
That a corpse of her cavalry fled from the foe;
But in telling the tale, it come out unawares,
That the troops were all tailors, and mounted on mares;
'Nay,' cries the Queen, 'let the rogues run away,
'Since I Have neither lost Man nor Horse in the fray.'
THE LAWYER AND CLIENT.
TWO lawyers, when a knotty cause was over,
Shook hands, and were as good friends as before.
'Zounds!' says the honest client,' how come you
'To be such friends, who were such foes just now?'
'Thou fool,' says one, 'we lawyers, though so keen,
'Like sheers, never cut ourselves, but what is between.'
UPON A MILL.
THIS house of wheels, sure seems to look,
Much like a monstrous wooden clock;
Yet with this difference one may say,
Clocks tell how much Time steals away,
But Millers manage Toll so well,
Though mills clack loud, they never tell!
LORD LYTTLETON TO LADY BROWN.
WHEN I was young and debonnaire,
The Brownest nymph to me was fair;
But now I Am old, and wiser grown,
The fairest nymph to me is Brown.
ON MATRIMONY.
TOM praised his friend, who changed his state,
For binding fast himself to Kate,
In union so divine;
'Wedlock's the end of life,' he cried;
'Too true, alas,' said Jack and sighed,
''Twill be the end of mine.'
TRUE BENEVOLENCE.
THE other day, says Ned to Joe,
(Near Bedlam's confines passing)
'Whene'er I hear the cries of woe,
'My hand is always open.'
'I own,' says Joe, 'that to the poor,
'(You prove it every minute)
'Your hand is open to be sure;
'But then, there is nothing in it.'
A RHAPSODY.
AS I walked by myself, I said to myself,
And myself said again unto me,
'Look to thyself, take care of thyself,
'For nobody cares for thee.'
Then I said to myself, and thus answered myself,
With the self same repartee,
'Look to thyself, or look not to thyself,
''Tis the self same thing to me.'
THE FRIEND.
THUS, with kind words, Sir Edward cheered his friend:
'Dear Dick, thou on my friendship may depend;
'I know thy fortune is but very scant;
'But be assured, I Will never see Dick in want.'
Dick's soon confined -- his friend no doubt would free him;
His word he kept -- in want he never would see him.
LINES WRITTEN IN A LADY'S MILTON.
WITH virtue strong as yours had Eve been armed,
In vain the fruit had blushed, or serpent charmed:
Nor had our bliss by penitence been bought;
Nor had frail Adam fell; nor Milton wrote.
YOUNG TONY'S REASON FOR DRINKING.
QUOTH Hodge to his son, who good swigging did love,
'Each glass that you drink, will your enemy prove.'
Quoth Tony, 'Dear father, we must love our foes.'
So he turned up the bottle, and hickup'd, ' kere goes.'
THE COMPARISON.
JACK eating rotten cheese did say,
'Like Sampson, I my thousands flay.'
'I vow,' quoth Roger, 'so you do,
'And with the self same weapon too.'
THE FASHIONS.
What Is fashionable, I Will maintain,
'Is always right,' cries sprightly Jane.
'Ah! would to Heaven,' cries graver Sue.
'What's right were fashionable too.'
THE MODERN COUPLE.
'TWIXT John and his wife, in lieu of affection,
Perpetual contests arose:
In judgment and taste, each assumed the direction.
And both were proceeding to blows:
When John exclaimed, 'Hold -- my error I see,
'Your argument's weighty and true;
'You have taste; for in marriage you made choice 'of me;
'I've none -- for I made choice of you.'
THE KINGS OF EUROPE.
WHY pray, of late, do Europe's kings
No jester in their courts admit?
They Are grown such stately solemn things,
To bear a joke, they think not fit.
But though each court a jester lacks,
To laugh at monarchs to their face
All mankind, behind their backs,
Supply the honest jester's place.
A REPARTEE.
CRIES Sylvia, to a reverend Dean,
'What reason can be given,
'Since marriage is a holy thing,
'That there is none in heaven?'
'There are no women,' he replied.
She quick returns the jest --
'Women there are, but I Am afraid,
'They cannot find a priest.'
WHAT THIS WORLD IS LIKE.
THIS world is a prison, in every respect,
Whose walls are the heavens in common;
The jailer is sin, and the prisoners men;
And the fetters are nothing but -- women.
SIR TOPEWELL.
WHEN Topewell thought fit from the world to retreat,
As full of Champagne, as an egg's full of meat;
He waked in the boat, and to Charon he said,
He would be rowed back -- for he was not dead.
'Trim the boat, and sit quiet,' stern Charon replied;
'You may have forgot, you were drunk when you died.'
THE DEAD ALIVE.
A JOVIAL fellow, full of spunk,
The other day, by chance, got drunk.
His friend, who was a knowing crony,
Wished to convert him into money;
So putting him into a sack,
He carried him, upon his back,
Unto a surgeon of great fame,
And for two guineas sold the same.
The bargain closed; the corpse began
To groan, just like a living man!
'Ho!' cried the surgeon, 'what is here,'
'The dead is now alive I fear?'
'It is no matter,' said the vender,
'You buy the body that I render,
'And therefore set your heart at ease,
'For you can kill him, when you please.'
THE FAIR THIEF.
I TELL, with equal truth and grief,
That little Kit's an arrant thief;
Before the urchin well could go,
She stole the whiteness of the snow;
And more -- that whiteness to adorn,
She stole the blushes of the morn;
Stole all the softness Ether pours,
On primrose buds, in vernal showers.
There Is no repeating all her wiles,
She stole the Graces winning smiles;
'Twas quickly seen she robbed the sky,
To plant a star in either eye;
She pilfer'd orient pearl for teeth,
And stole the cow's ambrosial breath;
The cherry, steeped in morning dew,
Gave moisture to her lips and hue.
These were her infant spoils, a store,
To which, in time, she added more;
At twelve, she stole from Cyprus' queen
Her air, and love-commanding mien;
Stole Juno's dignity, and stole,
From Pallas, sense to charm the soul;
She sung -- amazed the sirens heard,
And, to assert their voice, appeared:
She played -- the muses from their hill,
Wondered who thus had stole their skill;
Apollo's wit was next her pray,
And then the beams that light the day;
While Jove, her pilfering thefts to crown,
Pronounced these beauties all her own;
Pardoned her crimes, and praised her art;
And to other day she stole -- my heart.
Cupid! if lovers are thy care,
Revenge thy votary on the fair;
Do justice on her stolen charms,
And let her prison be -- my arms.
FASHIONABLE SONGS, FOR THE YEAR 1798.
SONG I. ALL FOR A SONG.
A SONG, a song, is the cry of mankind,
All know what to singing belongs;
It Is interest governs us all, you will find,
And gives us the pitch of our songs.
The miser with riches, who is never content,
Can tell what is right or is wrong,
For he joins in the chorus of twenty per cent.
And owns it a very good song.
Behold next the merchant, the federal lad,
Who hopes that the union is strong,
But says it is money that makes the heart glad,
And hammers away with a song.
The merchant is punctual -- to see himself paid,
And wishes for credit that is long,
Yet strike up the ditty of commerce and trade,
How quickly he joins in the song.
The lawyer and parson do know very well,
The things that to singing belong,
One fingers the fee, ere a word he can tell,
One turns off his flock with a song.
And Washington too, the hero and sage,
To heaven he carols this song: --
'The blessings, which thou to Columbia gave,
'Oh heaven! I pray thee prolong.'
SONG II. ROW, DOW, DOW.
ON Entick's green meadows where innocence reigns,
Where pleasure and plenty forever preside,
I romp'd with the maidens and pretty young swains,
And Ralph fancied soon he should call me his bride;
When I first heard the drum, with the row, dow, dow,
Its music was sweeter than soft serenade:
I scorned all the rest for the row, dow, dow,
And sighed for the Captain with a smart cockade.
The first I ever saw, he marched over our green,
His men all behind him, by two and by two;
Such a sight in our village had never been seen,
The men all in ranks were drawn out to view;
When I first heard the drum, with a row, dow, dow,
Young Cupid awaked, such a bustle he made,
My heart beat a march, with a row, dow, dow,
And went over to the Captain with a smart cockade.
My face took his fancy -- he swore at my feet
All his laurels he would lay, if I Would give him my hand;
No maid could refuse a lover so sweet;
To the church then I marched by the word of command:
Now I follow the drum, with a row, dow, dow,
Nor ever have repented the vow that I made;
No music's to me like the row, dow, dow,
No youth like the Captain with a smart cockade.
SONG III. HEATHEN MYTHOLOGY.
SONGS of shepherds in rustical roundelays,
Formed in fancy and whistl'd on reeds,
Sung to solace young nymphs upon holidays,
Are too unworthy for wonderful deeds.
Sottish Silenus to Phoebus the genius
Was sent by dame Venus, a song to prepare,
In phrase nicely coined, and verse quite refined,
How the states divine hunted the hare.
Stars quite tired with past times Olympical,
Stars and planets that beautiful shone,
Could no longer endure that men only should
Revel in pleasures, and they but look on.
Round about horned Lucina they swarmed;
And quickly informed her how minded they were,
Each god and goddess to take human bodies,
As lords and ladies to follow the hare.
Chaste Diana applauded the motion,
And pale Proserpina sat down in her place,
To guide the welkin, and govern the ocean,
While Dian conducted her nephews in chase.
By her example, their father to trample,
The earth old and ample, they soon leave the air:
Neptune the water, and wine Liber pater,
And Mars the slaughter, to follow the hare.
Young god Cupid was mounted on Pegasus,
Borrowed of the Muses with kisses and prayers;
Stern Alcides upon cloudy Caucasus
Mounted a centaur that proudly him bears.
The postilion of the sky, light heeled Sir Mecury,
Made his swift courser fly fleet as the air;
While tuneful Apollo the pastime did follow,
To whoop and to hollow, boys after the hare.
Drowned Narcissus, from his metamorphosis
Roused by Echo, new manhood did take.
Snoring Somnus upstarted from Cim'ries:
Before, for a thousand years he did not wake.
There was lame club-footed Mulciber booted;
And Pan, too, promoted on Corydon's mare.
Aeolus flouted; with mirth Momus shouted;
While wise Pallas pouted, yet followed the hare.
Grave Hymen ushers in lady Astrea,
The humor took hold of Latona the cold.
Ceres the brown, too with bright Cytherea,
And Thetis the wanton, Bellona the bold;
Shamefaced Aurora, with witty Pandora,
And Maria with Flora did company bear;
But Juno was stated too high to be mated,
Although, Sir, she hated not hunting the hare.
Three brown bowls of Olympical nectar
The Troy born boy now presents on his knee:
Jove to Phoebus now carouses in nectar,
And Phoebus to Hermes, and Hermes to me*
Wherewith infused, I piped and mused,
In language unused their sports to declare,
Till the vast house of Jove like the bright spheres did move,
Here Is a health, then, to all that love hunting the hare.
SONG IV. TOM TACLL. A much admired song, composed by Mr. Dibdin, in his
entertainment of castles in the air.
TOM Tacle was noble, was true to his word;
If merit brought titles, Tom might be my lord,
How gally his bark through life's ocean would sail,
Truth furnished the rigging, and honor the gale;
Yet Tom had a failing, if ever man had,
That as good as he was, made him all that was bad;
He was paltry and pitiful, scurvy and mean,
And the sniv'lingest scoundrel, that ever was seen;
For so said the girls and the landlords 'long shore,
Would you know what his fault was, Tom Tacle was poor.
'Twas once on a time, when we took a galleon,
And the crew touched the agent for cash to some tune,
Tom took a trip to gaol an old messmate to free,
And sour thankful prattlers soon sat on his knee*
Then Tom was an angel, from heaven down sent,
While they had hands he his goodness should never repent;
Returned from next voyage, he bemoaned his sad case,
To find his dear friend shut the door in his face;
'Why do you wonder,' cried one, 'you're served 'right, to be sure;
'Once Tom Tackle was rich, now Tom Tacle is 'poor.'
I ben't, you see, versed in high maxims and such,
But don't this same honor concern poor and rich?
If it don't come from good hearts, I cannot see wherefrom;
And d -- m me if ever a tar had a good heart, it was Tom:
Yet some how or other Tom never did right,
None know better the time when to spare or to fight,
He by finding a leak once preserved crew and ship,
Saved the commodore's life, then he made such rare flip;
And yet for all this no one could Tom endure,
I fancy as how 'twas, because he was poor.
At last an old shipmate, that Tom might hail land,
Who saw that his heart sailed too fast for his hand,
In the riding of comfort a mooring to find,
Reef'd the sails of Tom's fortune, that shook in the wind;
He gave him enough through life's ocean to steer,
Be the breeze what it might, steady thus or not near;
His pittance is daily, and yet Tom imparts,
What he can, to his friends; and may all honest hearts,
Like Tom Tacle, have what keeps the wolf from the door,
Just enough to be generous, too much to be poor.
SONG V. TUG AT THE OAR.
O THINK on my fate; once I freedom enjoyed,
Was happy as happy could be,
But pleasure is fled; even hope is destroyed,
A captive, alas! on the sea!
I was taken by the foe; 'twas the fiat of fate,
To tear me from her I adore!
When thought brings to my mind my once happy state,
I sigh, while I tug at the oar.
Hard, hard is my fate! oh how galling my chain!
My life's steered by misery's chart;
And though against my tyrants I scorn to complain,
Tears gush forth to ease my full heart:
I disdain even to shrink, though I feel the sharp lash,
Yet my breast bleeds for her I adore.
While around me the unfeeling billows will dash,
I sigh, and still tug at the oar.
How fortune deceives! I had pleasure in tow,
The port where she dwelt we'd in view,
But the wished nuptial morn was o'erclouded with woe,
And, dear Anna, I was hurried from you:
Our shallop was boarded, and I borne away,
To behold my dear Anna no more,
But despair wastes my spirits, my form feels decay,
He sighed, and expired at the oar.
SONG VI. THE GIRL OF MY HEART.
IN the world's crooked path, where I Have been,
There to share in life's gloom my poor heart,
The sunshine, that softened the scene,
Was -- a smile from the girl of my heart.
Not a swain, when the lark quits her nest,
But to labor with glee will depart,
If at eve he expects to be blessed
With a smile from the girl of his heart.
Come then crosses and cares as they may,
Let my mind still this maxim impart,
That the comfort of man's fleeting day,
Is -- a smile from the girl of his heart.
SONG VII. THE GENEROUS LOVER.
I LIKE each girl, that I come near,
Though none I love but Mary;
Oh! she is my darling, only dear,
Bewitching little fairy.
I asked a kiss, and she looked down,
Her cheeks are spread with blushes;
'By Jove,' says I, 'I'll take the town,'
Me back she gently pushes --
I like each girl, etc.
When off 'twas blown, and 'twas my place
To fly for Mary's bonnet,
So charming looked her lovely face
There I stood gazing on it:
Dressed all in white she tripp'd from home,
And set my blood a thrilling,
'O, zounds!' says I, 'the French are come,'
Sweet Mary looked so killing.
I like each girl, etc.
When to our Colonel at review,
A Duchess cried, so airy,
'How does your Royal Highness do?'
Says I, 'I thank you, Mary:'
To quick time marching the other day,
Our fifes played Andrew Carey,
To every girl I gave the way,
In compliment to Mary.
SONG VIII. IT IS NO FAULT OF MINE.
YOUNG Damon has wooed me a monstrous long time;
I dare say, it is a twelvemonth at least;
But courtship's so pleasant, when youth's in its prime,
The date of it cannot be guessed.
Oh, how I did laugh, when I thought I could vex,
Or cause him in anguish to pine!
Indeed, it is the fashion with all our kind sex;
So you know it is no fault of mine.
The more constant he grew, the more flippant was I;
In his sighs I enjoyed fresh delight;
When he asked for a kiss, though I longed to comply,
Yet I tortured myself out of spite;
When he found me resolved all his hopes to perplex,
He forsook me, and left me to pine,
Indeed it is the fashion with that cruel sex;
So you know it was no fault of mine.
How short were the moments when Damon was near!
Now each minute's as long as a day,
And winters dark mantle envelopes the year,
Though then every season was May.
I Will seek the dear youth, and heal the keen smart,
Declare I to pity incline;
If then he refuses my hand and my heart,
Why, you know 'twill be no fault of mine.
SONG IX. NANCY, OR THE SAILOR'S JOURNAL.
'TWAS past meridian half past four,
By signal I from Nancy parted;
At six she lingered on the shore,
With uplift hands, and broken hearted:
At seven, while taughtening the fore-stay,
I saw her faint, or else 'twas fancy;
At eight we all got under way,
And bid a long adieu to Nancy.
Night came on, and now eight bells had rung,
While careless sailors, ever cheary,
On the mid watch so jovial sung,
With tempers labor cannot weary.
I little to their mirth inclined,
While tender thoughts rushed on my fancy,
And my warm sighs increased the wind,
Looked on the moon, and thought of Nancy.
And now arrived that jovial night,
When every true bred tar caroules,
When, over the grog, all hands delight
To toast their sweathearts and their spouses.
Round went the can, the jest, the glee,
While tender wishes filled each fancy;
And when, in turn, it came to me,
I heaved a sigh, and toasted Nancy.
Next morn, a storm came on at four,
At six, the elements in motion,
Plunged me and three poor sailors more
Headlong within the foaming ocean.
Poor wretches! they soon sound their graves,
For me it may be only fancy,
But love seemed to forbid the waves,
To snatch me from the arms of Nancy.
Scarce the foul hurricane was cleared,
Scarce winds and waves had ceased to rattle,
When a bold enemy appeared,
And, dauntless, we prepared for battle.
And now, while some loved friend or wife,
Like lightning, rushed on every fancy,
To Providence I trusted life,
And put up a prayer, and thought on Nancy.
At last, 'twas in the month of May,
The crew, it being lovely weather,
At three, A. M. discovered day,
And England's chalky cliffs together.
At seven, up channel how we bore,
While hopes and fears rushed on my fancy,
At twelve I gaily jumped ashore,
And to my throbbing heart pressed Nancy.
SONG X. POOR TOM, OR THE SAILOR'S EPITAPH.
HERE a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling,
The darling of our crew,
No more he will hear the tempest howling,
For death has broached him too.
His form was of the manliest beauty,
His heart was kind and soft,
Faithful below he did his duty,
And now he is gone aloft.
Tom never from his word departed,
His virtues were so rare,
His friends were many, and true-hearted,
His Poll was kind and fair:
And then he would sing so blithe and jolly,
Ah! many's the time and often,
But mirth is turned to melancholy,
For Tom is gone aloft.
Yet shall poor Tom find pleasant weather,
When he, who all commands,
Shall give, to call life's crew together,
The word to pipe all hands.
Thus death, who kings and tars dispatches,
In vain Tom's life has doff'd,
For, though his body's under hatches,
His soul is gone aloft.
SONG XI. A FAVORITE SCOTCH AIR.
WHEN Donald first came wooing me,
'Twas on Cromarty Green,
The lad had long been loving me,
Though I was but nineteen:
He sung of that, and talked of this,
And many things said he,
At length he cried, and took a kiss,
'Sweet love, I Will marry thee;
'My bonny, blithsome, winsome lass,
'Sweet love, I Will marry thee.'
'I winna, canna marry you,'
Said I, 'so let me go;'
He kissed, he pressed, what could I do,
While he kept teazing so?
'And will thou ever prove false?' I said,
'O try me, love;' said he;
'Why then,' says I, 'I think we'll wed,
'Sweet love, I Will marry thee:
'My bonny, blithsome, winsome lad,
'Sweet love, I Will marry thee.'
I told him plain, it munna be,
For why, I was too young;
And was for tripping over the lea,
In spite of all he sung:
'Stop, lassy, stop awhile, he cried,
And pulled me on his knee,
'I tell thee, thou shall be a bride,
'Sweet love, I Will marry thee:
'My bonny, blithsome, winsome lass,
'Sweet love, I Will marry thee.'
SONG XII. THE NEGLECTED FAIR.
OF Columbia's boast the praise be mine;
What Is that, but American beauty?
With rapture I Would invoke the nine,
Ye men, learn hence your duty:
The sex were blessings all designed,
With rapture then enjoy them;
Nor so debase a female mind,
To conquer, then destroy them.
Then, O protect Columbia's fair,
Be mindful of your duty;
May vengeance never the villain spare,
A foe to love and beauty.
That tender form you first seduced,
Why is it now neglected?
Behold her sad, by grief reduced,
Pale, meagre, and dejected!
Behold her begging with a sigh,
Behold her disregarded!
Then view the anguish in her eye,
And say, is love rewarded?
Then, O protect, etc.
Each female heart is free from guile,
'Till crafty men infect it;
With artful tale, or magic wile,
He wins, and then neglects it:
Her pining soul finds no relief,
Sad tears flow fast and melt her;
Her over fraught bosom bursts with grief,
And in the grave finds shelter!
Then, O protect, etc.
When fortune frowns and friends forsake,
Still lovely woman cheers us;
Our grief or raptures they partake,
Distresses but endear us:
While man's professions all will fly,
Nor dying will abet you,
But meat your corpse as passing by,
And with a sigh forget you.
Then, O protect, etc.
While round your bed the mouring fair
Hangs like a drooping willow,
Each pang or sigh still anxious share,
Nor leave your woe-worn pillow! --
Then charge your glasses to the fair,
May beauty never be slighted --
That source of bliss, by whom we are
Conceived, brought forth, delighted.
Then, O protect, etc.
SONG XIII. IN PURSUIT OF THE FASHION.
HARK forward's the word, and all join in the chase,
Ambition and politics now must give place;
After fancy and folly we eagerly fly
In pursuit of the fashion -- Hark forward's the cry.
Pell-mell, after cupid, each heart wounding dame,
From sixteen to sixty's pursuing the game;
With their full flowing tresses, some hobble, some fly,
In pursuit of the fashion -- Hark forward's the cry.
Ding dong, helter skelter, the sweet scented beaux
Either lead the pursuit, or fall in at the close;
With their pockets so low, and their collars so high,
Pursuing the fashion -- Hark forward's the cry.
Let the fashion be changed, it has lasted too long,
If its conquest we aim at, we are all in the wrong;
To the fame of our country let each have an eye
And her foes be the game, when hark forward's the cry.
SONG XIV. IN THE DEAD OF THE NIGHT.
IN the dead of the Night, when, with labor oppressed,
All mortals enjoy the sweet blessings of rest,
A boy knocked at my door, I awoke with the noise,
Who is it, said I, that my rest thus destroys?
He answered so softly, so gently, so mild,
'I am a poor little unfortunate child,
'It's a cold rainy night, I am wet to the skin,
'And I have lost my way, so pray let me in.'
In compassion I rose, and striking a light,
I opened the door, when a boy met my sight,
He had wings at his shoulders, the rain from them dripp'd,
And with bow and arrow, the boy was equipped.
I stirred up my fire, set him down by my side,
And with a warm napkin the wet from him dried:
I chass'd him all over to keep out the cold air,
And the wet I wrung out with my hand from his hair,
No sooner from wet and from cold he found ease,
When, taking up his bow, said, 'Madam, if you 'please,
'If you please, I would fain by experience know,
'If the rain has not damaged the string of my bow.'
Then straight from his quaver an arrow he drew,
Which aiming at my heart, twang went the yew;
'My bow is not damaged nor yet is my dart,
'But you will find some trouble in bearing the smart.
SONG XV.
THE eve her silver vestment wore*
And closed the sultry day,
The cottagers their toil forbore,
And homeward bent their way:
Save one poor maid, who, all forlorn,
The tear of sorrow shed,
Meek as the primrose 'neath the thorn,
That rears its modest head.
'Twas lovely Marian that sighed,
And mourned her sorrows free;
Since fate young Sandy's love denied,
And sent him far to sea;
Wide over the billows doomed to roam,
He fled her longing arms,
And left his friends and native home,
To brave rude war's alarms.
Now three long months were gone and over,
When, ah! one fatal day,
As musing at her her cottage door,
A sailor bent his way --
'Twas Sandy's friend, who sought the fair,
Sad tidings to relate:
For grief of heart, joined with despair,
Had closed his hapless fate,
Yet, ere he died, her bliss he planned,
For all his little wealth
He fondly left, with lavish hand,
To Marian herself:
But what availed the golden store?
Sweet peace her bosom fled:
'He's gone,' she cried, 'for evermore,'
Then sighing joined the dead.
SONG XVI. HAIL COLUMBIA.
HAIL, COLUMBIA! happy land,
Hail, ye Heroes -- Heaven-born band!
Who fought and bled in freedom's cause,
Who fought and bled in freedom's cause,
And when the storm of war was gone,
Enjoyed the peace your valor won.
Let Independence be your boast
Ever mindful what it cost;
Ever grateful for the prize,
Let its altar reach the skies.
Firm -- united -- let us be,
Rallying round our liberty:
As a band of brothers joined,
Peace and safety we shall find.
Immortal Patriots! rise once more,
Defend your rights, defend your shore;
Let no rude foe with impious hand,
Let no rude foe with impious hand,
Invade the shrine where sacred lies
Of toil and blood the well earned prize.
While offering peace, sincere and just,
In heaven we place a manly trust,
That truth and justice will prevail,
And every scheme of bondage fail.
Firm -- united -- let us be, etc.
Sound, sound the trump of fame,
Let WASHINGTON's great name,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Let every clime to Freedom dear,
Listen with a joyful ear;
With equal skill, with godlike power,
He governs in the fearful hour
Of horrid war, or guides with ease
The happier times of honest peace.
Firm -- united -- let us be, etc.
Behold the Chief who now commands,
Once more to serve his country stands --
The rock on which the storm will beat,
The rock on which the storm will beat,
But armed in virtue firm and true;
His hopes are fixed on heaven and you.
When hope was sinking in dismay,
When glooms obscured Columbia's day,
His steady mind from changes free,
Resolved on death or liberty.
Firm -- united -- let us be, etc.
SONG XVII. ADAMS AND LIBERTY.
YE sons of Columbia, who bravely have fought
For those rights, which unstained from your sires had descended;
May you long taste the blessings your valor has bought,
And your sons reap the soil which your fathers defended.
'Mid the reign of mild peace, may your nation increase,
With the glory of Rome, and the wisdom of Greece;
And never may the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls in waves.
In a clime whose rich waves feed the marts of the world,
Whose shores are unshaken by Europe's commotion,
The trident of Commerce should never be hurled,
To incense the legitimate powers of the Ocean.
But should pirates invade,
Though in thunder arrayed,
Let your cannon declare the free charter of trade --
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls in waves.
The fame of our arms, of our laws the mild sway,
Had justly ennobled our nation in story
Till the dark clouds of faction obscured our young day,
And envelop'd the sun of American glory.
But let traitors be told
Who their country have sold,
And bartered the God for his image in gold --
That never will the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls in waves.
While France her huge limbs bathes recumbent in blood,
And society's base threats with wide dissolution,
May peace, like the dove, who returned from the flood,
Find an ark of abode in our mild Constitution.
But though peace is our aim,
Yet the boon we disclaim,
If bought by our sov'reignty, justice or fame:
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls in waves.
It Is the fire of the (...), each American warms;
Let Rome's haughty victor beware of collision!
Let them bring all the vassals of Europe in arms,
We Are a world by ourselves, and disdain a division!
While with Patriot pride,
To our laws we are allied,
No foe can subdue us -- no faction divide.
For never shall the sons of Columbia be saves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls in waves.
Our mountains are crowned with imperial Oak,
Whose roots, like our liberties, ages have nourished,
But long ere our nation submits to the yoke,
Not a tree shall be left on the field where it flourished.
Should invasion impend,
Every grove would descend,
From the hill tops they shaded, our shores to defend.
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant, or the sea rolls in waves.
Let our Patriots destroy anarch's pestilent worm,
Lest our liberty's growth should be checked by corrosion;
Then let clouds thicken round us, we heed not the storm;
Our realms fear no shock, but the earth's own explosion.
Foes affail us in vain
Though their fleets bridge the main,
For our altars and laws with our lives we'll maintain,
And never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant, or the sea rolls in waves.
Should the tempest of war overshadow our land,
Its bolts could never rend freedom's temple asunder,
For, unmoved at its portal, would Washington stand,
And repulse, with his breast, the assaults of the thunder.
His sword from the sleep
Of its scabbard would leap,
And conduct with its point every flash to the deep.
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls in waves.
Let Fame to the world sound America's voice;
No intrigue can her sons from their Government fever;
Her pride is her Adams -- his laws are her choice,
And shall flourish till liberty slumber forever.
Then unite, heart and hand
Like Leonidas' band,
And swear to the God of the ocean and land,
That never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant, or the sea rolls in waves.
SONG XVIII. THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION AND THE PRESIDENT FOR EVER.
POETS may sing of their Helicon streams,
Their gods and their heroes are fabulous dreams;
They never sang a line
Half so grand, so divine,
As the glorious toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution boys and Liberty for ever.
ADAMS, the man of our choice, guides the helm,
No tempest can harm us, no storm overwhelm:
Our sheet anchor's sure
And our bark rides secure,
So here is to the toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution, and the President for ever.
A free Navigation, Commerce and Trade,
We'll seek for no foe, of no foe be afraid;
Our frigates shall ride,
Our defense and our pride;
Our tars guard our coast
And huzza to our toast,
The Federal Constitution, Trade and Commerce boys for ever.
Montgomery, Warren, still live in our songs,
Like them our young heroes shall spurn at our wrongs,
The world shall admire
The zeal and the fire
Which blaze in the toast
We Columbians boast
The Federal Constitution and its Advocates for ever.
When an enemy threats, all party shall cease,
We bribe no intriguers to buy a mean peace,
Columbians will scorn,
Friend or foe to suborn.
We'll never stain the toast
Which as freemen we boast
The Federal Constitution and Integrity for ever.
Fame's triumph shall swell in great WASHINGTON's praise,
And time grant a furlough to lengthen his days,
May health weave the thread
Of delight round his head:
No nation can boast
Such a name -- such a toast --
The Federal Constitution boys and WASHINGTON for ever.
Finis.

