A COLLECTION OF SONGS, SELECTED FROM THE WORKS OF MR. DIBDIN, TO WHICH ARE
ADDED, THE NEWEST AND MOST FAVORITE AMERICAN PATRIOTIC SONGS.

Let there be Music, let the Master touch
The sprightly String, and softly breathing Flute.
-- E^'n Age itself is cheered with Music;
It wakes a glad remembrance of our youth,
Calls back past joys, and warms us into transport!
(...) If to be merry's to be wise, to be wise is to be merry.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY J. BIOREN FOR H. and P. RICE, AND SOLD BY J. RICE,
BALTIMORE. 1799.

DIBDIN's SELECTED SONGS.
SONG -- IN THE WEDDING RING.
I SAW what seemed a harmless child,
With wings and bow,
And aspect mild,
Who sobb'd, and sighed, and pined,
And begged I would some boon bestow
On a poor littJe boy stone blind.
Not aware of the danger, I instant complied,
When he drew from his quiver a dart,
Cried
'My power you shall know,'
Then he levelled his bow,
And wounded me right in the heart.
BALLAD -- IN THE DESERTER.
THERE was a miller's daughter
Lived in a certain village,
Who made a mighty slaughter:
For I Would have you to know
Both friend and foe,
The clown and the beau,
She always laid low;
And her portion, as I understand,
Was three acres of land,
Besides a mill,
That never stood still,
Some sheep and a cow,
A harrow and plough,
And other things for tillage:
What do you think of my miller's daughter?
This miller's pretty daughter
Was a damsel of such fame sir,
That knights and squires sought her;
But they soon were told
That some were too bold,
And some too cold,
And some too old;
And she gave them to understand
That, though there were grand,
She Would never be sold:
For says Betty, says she,
Since my virtue to me
Is ^^arer than gold,
Let 'em go from whence they came sir.
What do you think of my miller's daughter?
But when the miller's daughter
Saw Ned the morris dancer,
His person quickly caught her;
For who so clean
Upon the green
As Ned was seen,
For her his queen:
Then b^ithe as a king,
His bells he would ring,
And dance, and sing,
Like any thing: --
Says he, 'My life,
'Woot be my wife?'
A blush, and yes, was Betty's answer.
What do you think of my miller's daughter?
BALLAD -- IN THE WATERMAN.
TWO youths for my love are contending in vain;
For, do all they can,
Their sufferings I rally, and laugh at their pain;
Which, which is the man
That deserves ^e the most? Let me ask of my heart; --
Is it Robin, who s^^rks, and who dresses so smart?
Or Tom, honest Tom, who makes plainness his plan?
Which, which is the man?
Indeed to be prudent, and do what I ought,
I do what I can;
Yet surely papa and mamma are in fault;
To a different man
They, each, have advised me to yield up my heart,
Mamma praises Robin, who dresses so smart:
Papa honest Tom, who makes plainness his plan:
Which, which is the man?
Be kind then, my heart, and but point out the youth,
I Will do what I can
His love to return, and return it with truth;
Which, which is the man?
Be kind to my wishes, and point out, my heart,
Is it Robin, who smirks and who dresses so smart?
Or Tom, honest Tom, who makes plainness his plan?
Which, which is the man?
BALLAD -- IN THE WATERMAN.
AND did you not hear of a jolly young waterman,
Who at Black friar's bridge used for to ply;
And he feathered h^s oars with such skill and dexterity,
Winning each heart, and delighting each eye
He looked so neat, and rowed so steadily,
The maidens all flocked in his boat so readily,
And he eyed the young rogues with so charming an air,
That this waterman never was in want of a fare.
What sights of fine folks he often rowed in his wherry,
'Twas cleaned out so nice, and so painted withal;
He was always first oars when the fine ci^y ladies
In a party to Rane^agh went, or Vauxhall
And oftentimes would they be giggling and leering,
But (...) is all one to Tom, their (...) and jeering,
For loving or liking he (...) care*
For this waterman (...) want of a fare.
And yet but to see how strang^ly things happen,
(...) thinking of ^^thing at all,
(...) by a damsel so lovely and charming.
(...), and so st^ai^way in love he did fall.
And would this young d^msel but banish his sorrow,
(...) her to n^ght, before tomorrow,
And how should this^ a^erman ever know care,
When he is married, and never in want of a fare.
BALLAD -- IN THE WATERMAN.
THEN farewell my trim-built wherry,
Oars, and coat, and badge farewell;
Never more at Chelsea ferry,
Shall your Thomas take a spell.
But to hope and peace a stranger,
In the battle's heat I Will go,
Where exposed to every danger,
Some friendly ball may lay me low.
Then, may-hap, when homeward steering,
With the news my messmates come,
Even you, the story hearing,
With a sigh may cry poor Tom!
BALLAD -- IN THE WATERMAN.
INDEED, Miss, such sweethearts as I am,
I fancy you will meet with but few,
To love you more true I defy them,
I always am thinking of you.
There are maidens would have me in plenty,
Nell, Cicely, Priscilla, and Sue,
But instead of all these were there twenty,
I never should think but of you.
False hearts all your money may squander,
And only have pleasure in view,
Never from you a moment I Will wander,
Unless to get money for you.
The tide, when it is ebbing and flowing,
Is not to the moon half so true,
Nor my oars to their time when I Am rowing,
As my heart, my fond heart is to you.
BALLAD -- IN THE COBBLER.
'TWAS in a village, near Castlebury,
A cobbler and his wife did dwell;
And for a time no two so merry,
Their happiness no tongue can tell,
But to this couple, the neighbors tell us,
Something did happen that caused much strife,
For going to a neighboring alch^use,
The man got drunk and beat his wife.
But though he treated her so vilely,
What did this wife, good creature do?
Kept snug, and found a method slily
To wring his heart quite through and through:
For Dick the tapster and his master,
By the report that then was rise,
Were both in hopes, by this disaster,
To gain the cobler^s pretty wife.
While things went on to rack and ruin,
And all their furniture was sold,
She seemed to approve what each was doing,
And got from each a purse of gold.
So when the cobler's cares were over.
He swore to lead an altered life,
To mind his work, never be a rover,
And love no other than his wife.
BALLAD -- IN THE SERAGLIO.
THE world's a strange world, child, it must be confessed,
We all of distress have our share;
But since I must struggle to live with the rest,
By my ^r^th it is no great matter where.
We all must put up with what fortune has sent,
Be therefore one's lot poor or rich,
So there is but a portion of ease and content,
By my troth it is no great matter which.
A living's a living, and so there is an end;
If one honestly gets just enough,
And something to spare for the wants of a friend,
By my troth it is no great matter how.
In this world about nothing we busied appear;
And I Have said it again and again,
Since quit it one must, if ones conscience be clear,
By my troth it is no great matter when.
RONDEAU -- IN THE SERAGLIO.
Blow high, blow low, let tempests tear,
The main mast by the board;
My heart, with thoughts of thee, my dear,
And love well-stor'd,
Shall brave all danger, scorn all fear,
The roaring winds, the raging sea,
In hopes on shore
To be once more
Safe moored with thee.
Aloft while mountains high we go,
The whistling winds that scud along,
And the surge roaring from below,
Shall my signal be
To think on thee
And this shall be my song.
Blow high, blow low, etc.
And on that might when all the crew
The memory of their former lives,
Over flowing cans of flip renew.
And drink their sweethearts and their wives,
I Will heave a figh, and think on thee;
And, as the ship rolls through the sea,
The burden of my song shall be
Blow high, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE SERAGLIO.
THE little birds, as well as you,
I Have marked with anxious care,
How free their pleasures they pursue,
How void of every care.
But birds of various kinds you will meet,
Some constant to their loves:
Are chatt'ring sparrows half so sweet
As tender cooing doves?
Birds have their pride, like human kind,
Some on their notes presume,
Some on their form, and some you will find
Fond of a gaudy plume.
Some love a hundred; some you will meet
Still constant to their loves;
Are chatt'ring sparrows half so sweet
As tender, cooing doves?
SONG -- IN POOR VULCAN.
VENUS now no more behold me,
But an humble village ^^ame,
Coarse and homely trappings fold me,
And Mistress Maudlin is my name.
Yet here no less is paid that duty
Ever due to Venus's worth,
Not more insensible of beauty
Than gods in heaven, are men on earth.
BALLAD -- IN POOR VULCAN.
THAT nature's every where the same,
Each passing day discovers;
For that in me
Some charms they see,
Behold me, though a country dame,
Leading a crowd of lovers.
My sporting squire to keep at bay
The course I Will double over,
Whilst he, intent
On a wrong scent,
Shall always find me stole away
When he cries 'Hark to cover.'
With new-coin'd oaths, my grenadier
May think to storm and bluster,
And swear by Mars,
My eyes are stars,
That light to love: -- he will soon find here
Such stuff will never pass muster.
Thus will I serve those I distrust,
First laugh at, then refuse 'em;
But, ah! not so
My shepherd Joe?
He like Adonis looked, when first
I pressed him to my bosom.
BALLAD -- IN POOR VULCAN.
THE moment Aurora peeped into my room,
I put on my clothes, and I called to my groom;
And, my head heavy still, from the fumes of last night,
Took a bumper of brandy to set all things right;
And now were well saddled Fleet, Dapple, and Gray,
Who seemed longing to hear the glad sound hark away.
Will Whistle by this had uncoup^ed his hounds,
Whose extacy nothing could ke^p within bounds;
First forward came Jowler, then Scent well, then Snare,
Three better staunch harriers never started hare;
Then Sweetlips, then Driver, then Staunch, and then Tray,
All ready to open at hark, hark away.
'Twas now by the clock about five in the morn,
And we all galloped off to the sound of the horn;
Jack Gater, Bill Babbler, and Dick at the gun,
And by this time the merry Tom Fairplay made one,
Who, while we were jogging on blithsome and gay,
Sung a song, and the chorus was -- Hark, hark away.
And now Jemmy Lurcher had every bush beat,
And no signs of madam, nor trace of her feet;
Nay, we just had began our hard fortunes to curse,
When a^l of a sudden out starts mistress Puss;
Men, horses, and dogs all the glad call obey,
And echo was heard to cry -- Hark, hark away.
The chase was a fine one, she took over the plain,
Which she doubled, and doubled, and doubled again;
Till at last she to cover returned out of breath,
Where I an^ Will Whistle were in at the death;
Then in triumph for you I the ^are ^id display,
And cried, to the horns my boys, hark, hark away.
BALLAD -- IN PO^R VULCAN.
COME all ye gem'men volunteers,
Of glory who would share,
And leaving with your wives your fears,
To the drum head repair;
Or to the noble sergeant Pike,
Come, come, without delay,
You Will enter into present pay,
My lads the bargain strike.
A golden guinea and a crown,
Besides the Lord knows what renown,
His majesty the donor,
And if you die,
Why then you lie
Stretched on the bed of honor.
Does any 'prentice work too hard,
Fine clothes would any wear,
Would any one his wife discard,
To the drum head repair.
Or to the, etc.
Is your estate put out to nurse,
Are you a cast-off heir,
Have you no money in your purse,
To the drum head repair.
Or to the, etc.
BALLAD -- IN POOR VULCAN.
COME, every man now give his toast,
Fill up the glass, I Will tell you mine,
Wine is ^he mistress I love most,
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
Well said my lad, never let it stand,
I give my Chloe, nymph divine,
My love and wine go hand in hand; --
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
Fill up your glasses to the brink,
Hebe let no one dare decline,
It Was Hebe taught me first to drink: --
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
C^m'men I give my wife, do you see;
May all to make her blessed combine,
So she be far enough from me; --
This is my toast, now give me thine*
Let constant lovers at the feet
Of pale-sa^'d wenches sigh and pine,
For me the first kind girl I meet
Shall be my toast -- now give me thine.
You toast your wise, and you your lass,
My boys, and welcome: here is the wine,
For my part, he who fills my glass
Shall be my toast -- now give me thine.
Spirit, my lads, and toast away,
I have still one with yours to join;
That we may have enough to pay:
This is my toast -- now give me thine.
BALLAD -- IN POOR VULCAN.
MADAM, you know my trade is war,
And what should I deny it for?
Whenever the trumpet sounds from far,
I long to hack and hew;
Yet madam credit what I say,
Were I this moment cal^'d away,
And all the troops drawn in array,
I Would rather stay with you.
Did dru^^ and sprightly trumpets sound,
Did Death and Car^^age stalk around,
Did dying ^orses ^ite the ground,
Had we no hope in view;
(...) the whole army lost in smoke,
Were they the la^t words that I spoke,
I Would ^ay, and dam'me i^ I joke,
I Would rather stay with you.
Did the foe charge us front and rear,
Did even the bravest face appear
Impressed with signs of mortal f^ar,
Th^ugh never veteran knew
So terrible and hot a ^^ght,
Though all my laurels it should blight,
Though I should loose so fine a sight.
I Would rather stay with you.
DUET.
JOE. WHEN Sergeant Belswagger, that masculine brute,
One day had been drinking to swear a recruit,
He kissed you, I saw him, or else may I die,
And you cruel Maudlin, never once cried O f^e!
Again, when the squire had come home from the chase,
You received him, O Gods, with a smile on your face,
Henceforth, then, my sheep harum skarum may run,
For Maudlin is faithless, and I am undone.

MAUDLIN. Ah, Joe! you're a good one; one day in my place --
My husband at home -- I was forced to send Grace:
I know for a truth, which you cannot gainsay,
You touzled her well on a cock of new hay.
Nay, swore you would be hers -- and, what is worse yet,
That you only loved me just for what you could get;
As for charms then I never will believe I have one,
For Joey is faithless, and I am undone.

JOE. Will you know then the truth on it? I touz'd her I own,
Though I rather by half would have left it alone;
But I did it to see if you jealous would prove,
For that, people say, is a sure sign of love.

MAUDLIN. And for me, if the squire said soft things in my ear,
I suffered it, thinking he would call for strong beer;
And as to the sergeant, it is always a rule,
One had better be kissed, than be teased -- by a fool.

BALLAD -- IN THE QUAKER.
I LOCKED up all my treasure,
I journi^u many a mile,
And by my gri^f did measure
The passing time the while.
My business done and over,
I hastened back back amain,
Like an expecting lover,
To view it once again.
But this delight was stifled,
As it began to dawn:
I sound the casket rifled,
And all my treasure gone.
SONG -- IN THE QUAKER.
WOMEN are Will of the Wisps it is plain,
The closer they seem, stlil the more they retire;
They teaze you, and jade you,
And round about lead you,
Without hopes of shelter,
Ding dong, helter skelter,
Through water and fire;
And, when you believe every danger and p^in
From your heart you may banish,
And you're near the possession of what you desire,
That instant they vanish,
And the devil a bit can you catch them again.
By some they are not badly compared to the sea,
Which is calm and tempestuous within the same hour,
Some say they are Sirens, but, take it from me
They Are a sweet race of angels over man that has power,
His person, his heart, nay his reason to seize,
And lead the poor devil wherever they p^ease.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUAKER.
A Kernel from an apple's core
One day on either cheek I wore,
Lubin was placed on my right cheek,
That on my left did Hodge bespeak;
Hodge in an instant dropped to ground,
Sure token that his love's unsound,
But Lubin nothing could remove,
Sure token his is constant love.
Last May I sought to find a snail,
That might my lover's name reveal,
Which finding, home I quickly sped
And on the hearth the embers spread;
When, if my letters I can tell,
I saw it mark a curious L:
O may this omen lucky prove,
For L's for Lubin and for love.
RONDEAU -- IN THE QUAKER.
WHILE the lads of the village shall merrily ah,
Sound their tabors, I Will hand thee along,
And I say unto thee, that merrily ah,
Thou and I will be first in the throng.
Just then, when the youth who last year won the dower,
And his mate shall the sports have begun,
When the gay voice of gladness resounds from each bower,
And thou long'st in thy heart to make one,
While the lads, etc.
Those joys that are harmless what mortal can blame?
It Is my ^axim that youth should be free;
And to prove that my words and my deeds are the same,
Believe thou shall presently see,
While the lads, etc.
BALLAD -- IN ROSE AND COLIN.
I lost my poor mother
When only a child,
And I feared such another,
So gentle and mild,
Was not to be found:
But I saw my mistake,
For scarce was she gone,
But I proved I had mother and father in one:
And though at this minute he makes my heart ach,
There Is not such another search all the world round.
I Would reached my teens fairly,
As blithe as a be,
His care, late and early,
Being all to please me:
No one thing above ground
Was too good for his Rose;
At wake, or at fair,
I was dressed out so gaily, lord, people would stare,
And I say it again, though he is peevish, God knows,
There Is not such another, search all the world round.
But love, who, they tell us,
Do^s many strange things,
Makes all the world jealous,
And mad -- even kings
They say he can wound.
This love is the sore: --
Since Colin came here,
This father so kind is a father severe;
Yet still will I say, though he scolds more and more,
There Is not such another, search all the world round.
BALLAD -- IN ROSE AND COLIN.
Here Is all her geer, her wheel, her work;
These little bobbins to and fro,
How often I Have seen her fingers j^rk,
Her pretty fingers, white as snow*
Ea^h object to me is so dear,
My heart at sight on it throbbings goes;
'Twas here she sat her down, and here
She told me she was Colin's Rose.
This poesy for her when she is dressed,
I Have brought alas! how happy I*
Could I be, like these flowers, caressed,
And, like them, on her bosom die.
The violet and pink I took,
And every pretty flower that blows;
The rose too, but how mean twill look
When by the side of my sweet Rose.
BALLAD -- IN ROSE AND COLIN.
There was a jolly shepherd lad,
And Colin was his name,
And all unknown to her old dad,
He sometimes to see Peggy came --
The object of his flame.
One day of his absence too secure,
Her father thundered at the door,
When, fearing of his frown,
Says she, 'dear love the chimney climb;'
'I cannot,' cries he, 'there is not time
'Besides, I should tumble down.'
What could they do, taken unawares?
They thought, and thought again;
In closets underneath the stairs
To hide himself 'twere all in vain,
He Would soon he found, 'twere plain:
'Get up the chimney, love yo must,'
Cried she, 'or else the door he will burst,
'I would not for a crown;'
Young Colin seeing but this shift,
Even mounted u^ -- P^g lent a ^ift,
And cried, 'don't tumble down.'
With throbbing heart, now to the door,
P^or Peggy runs in haste;
Thinking to trick her father sure;
But (...), the proverb says, makes waste,
Which proverb's here well placed.
Her father scolded her his best,
Called names, and said, among the rest,
'Pray have you seen that clown?'
She scarce had time to answer no,
When all over black as a crow,
Poor Colin tumbled down.
BALLAD -- IN ROSE AND COLIN.
EXCUSE me, pray ye do, dear neighbor,
But Rose, you know, and I
Have often partook one sport or labor,
While you have pleased stood by.
And since from little children playing
You Have kindly called me son,
I thought to Rose I might be saying
'Good day,' and no harm done.
When you and father gravely counted,
One morning in the barn,
To how much in a day it mounted
That both of us could earn,
Since then you down the law were laying,
And calling me your son,
I thought to Rose I might be saying
'Good day,' and no harm done.
BALLAD -- IN ANNETTE AND LUBIN.
YOUNG, and void of art or guile,
From ill intention free,
If love I Have cherished all this while,
It came in spite of me.
When you have to me* and I Have to you,
Tried who could kindest prove,
If that was love -- what then to do
To fly from this same love?
When absent from you I have mourned,
And thought each hour a score;
When on a sudden you returned,
I Have thrilled with joy all over;
They say 'twas love -- I thought 'twas you
Had made my heart thus move;
Alas what can a poor girl do,
To fly from this same love?
To every thing that you can ask,
What should I say but yes?
It is because I like the task,
I freely grant each kiss.
You're all to me -- I Am all to you --
This truth our deaths would prove,
Were we to part: -- What then to do
To fly from this same love?
DUET -- IN ANNETTE AND LUBIN.
BAILIFF. THEY tell me you listen to all that he says;
That each hour of the day you are full of his praise;
That you always together your flocks lead to graze:
Is this true damsel?

ANNETTE. Yes, Mister Bailly.

BAILIFF. They tell me also you are so void of grace
As to brag that dear form, and that dear pretty face,
That young dog shall be welcome to kiss and embrace:
Is this true damsel?

ANNETTE. Yes, Mister Bailly.

BAILIFF. The neighbors all say, though I credit them not,
They have heard you declare that, content with your lot,
Any king you would refuse for that lout and a cot:
Is this true damsel?

ANNETTE. Yes, Mister Bailly.

BAILIFF. But one thing I vow frights me out of my life,
It Is allowed on all hands, that is, barring the strife,
That you both live together just like man and wife:
Is this true damsel?

ANNETTE. Yes, Mister Bailly.

DUET -- IN ANNETTE AND LUBIN.
LUBIN. It Is true that often, in the same mead,
We both have led our flocks to feed,
Where by each other's side we have sat;

ANNETTE. Alas! there was no harm in that.

LUBIN. It Is true for thee this cot I rose,
Where thou take pleasure to repose*
For which I found the greenest plat:

ANNETTE. Alas! there was no harm in that.

LUBIN. It Is true when tired thou fain would rest,
And thy dear lips to mine I Have pressed,
Thy breath, so sweet! I Have wondered at:

ANNETTE. Alas! there was no harm in that.

LUBIN. Ah, but it is true, when thou have slept,
Closer and closer have I crept;
And while my heart went pit-a-pat --

ANNETTE. Alas! there was no harm in that.

BALLAD -- IN ANNETTE AND LUBIN.
A PLAGUE take all such grumbling elves,
If they will rail, so be it;
Because we are happier than themselves,
They cannot endure to see it.
For me, I never shall repine,
Let whatever fate overtake us;
For love and A^^ette shall be mine,
Though all the world forsa^^^*
Then, dear Annette, regard them not,
The hours shall pass on gaily,
In spite of every share and plot
Of that old doting Bailly.
No, never, Annette, thou wilt repine,
Let whatever fate overtake us;
For love and Lubin shall be thine,
Though all the world forsake us.
BALLAD -- IN ANNETTE AND LUBIN.
MY Lord, and please you, he and I,
Morn, noon, and night, in every weather,
From little children, not this high,
In the same cottage lived together.
Our parents left me to his care,
Saying, let no one put upon her:
'No, that I will not,' says he, 'I swear;'
And he never lies, and like your honor.
As I was saying, we grew up,
For all the world sister and brother,
One never had nor bit nor sup,
Unless it was partook by the other:
And I am sure, instead of me,
Were it a duchess, he had won her;
He is so good, and I Have, do you see,
A tender heart, ank like your honor.
But, woe is ours, now comes the worst,
Today our sorrows are beginning,
What I thought love -- oh, I shall burst --
That nasty Bailly says was sinning.
With Lubin, who, of all the bliss
I ever tasted is the donor,
I took delight to toy and kiss,
Till I Am with child, and like your honor.
BALLAD -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
BROTHER soldiers why cast down?
Never, boys, be melancholy:
You say our lives are not our own,
But therefore should we not be jolly?
This poor tenement, at best,
Depends on fickle chance: mean while,
Drink, laugh, and sing; and, for the rest,
We'll boldly brave each rude campaign;
Secure, if we return again,
Our pretty landlady shall smile.
Fortune his life and yours commands,
And this moment, should it please her
To require it at your hands,
You can but die, and so did Caesar.
Our span, though long, were little worth,
Did we not time with joy beguile:
Laugh then the while you stay on earth,
And boldly brave, etc.
Life's a debt we all must pay,
It Is so much pleasure, which we borrow,
Nor need, if on a distant day
It is demanded, or tomorrow.
The bottle says we are tardy grown,
Do not the time and liquor spoil,
Laugh out the little life you own,
And boldly brave, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
SING the loves of John and Jean,
Sing the loves of Jean and John;
John, for her, would leave a queen,
Jean, for him, the noblest don.
She Is his queen,
He Is her don;
John loves Jean,
And Jean loves John.
Whatever rejoices happy Jean,
Is sure to burst the sides of John,
Does she* for grief, look thin and lean,
He instantly is pale and wan:
Thin and lean,
Pale and wan,
John loves Jean.
And Jean loves John.
'Twas the lily hand of Jean
Filled the glass of happy John;
And, heavens! how joyful was she seen
When he was for a license gone!
Joyful seen,
They Will dance anon,
For John weds Jean,
And Jean weds John.
John has taken to wife his Jean,
Jean's become the spouse of John,
She no longer is his queen,
He no longer it her don.
No more queen,
No more don;
John hates Jean,
And Jean hates John.
Whatever it is, that pleases Jean,
Is certain now to displease John;
With scolding they are grown thin and lean,
With spleen and spite they are pale and wan.
Thin and lean,
Pale and wan,
John hates Jean,
And Jean hates John.
John prays heaven to take his Jean,
Jean at the devil wishes John;
He Will dancing on her grave be seen,
She Will laugh when he is dead and gone.
They Will gay be seen,
Dead and gone.
For John hates Jean,
And Jane hates John.
BALLAD -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
WHEN thou shall see his bosom swelling,
When soft compassion's tear shall start,
As my poor father's woes you are telling,
Come back and claim my hand and heart.
The cause blessed eloquence will lend thee;
Nay, haste, and ease my soul's distress;
To judge thy worth, I Will here attend thee,
And rate thy love by thy suceess.
BALLAD -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
'TWAS not her eyes, though orient mi^es
Can boast no gem so bright that glows;
Her lips, where the deep ruby shines,
Her checks, that shame the blushing rose,
Nor yet her form, Minerva's mien.
Her bosom, white as Venus' dove,
That made her my affection's queen,
But 'twas alone her filial love.
The ruby lip, the bril^iant eye,
The rosy cheek, the graceful form,
In turn for commendation vie,
And justly the fired lover charm:
But transient these -- the charm for life,
Which reason never shall disapprove,
Which truly shall ensure a wife,
Faithful and kind, is filial love.
SONG -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
LET your courage boy be true to ye,
Hard and painful is the soldier's duty;
It Is not alone to bravely date,
To fear a stranger,
Each threatening danger,
That whistles through the dusky air;
Where thundering jar
Conflicting arms,
All the alarms,
And dreadful havoc of the war.
Your duty done, and home returning,
With self-commended ardour burning,
If this right pride
Foes should deride,
And from your merit turn aside,
Though than the war the conflict's more severe,
This is the trial you must learn to b^ar.
BALLAD -- IN THE FRIENDLY TARS.
WHILE up ^he shrouds the sailor goes,
Or ventures on the yard,
The landsman, who no better knows,
Believes his lot is hard.
But Jack with smiles each danger meets,
Casts anchor, heaves the log,
Trims all the sails, belays the sheets,
And drinks his can of grog.
When mountians high the waves that swell
The vessel rudely bear,
Now sinking in the hollow dell,
Now quivering in the air.
Bold Jack, etc.
When waves against rocks and quicksands roar
You never hear him repine,
Freezing near Greenland's icy shore,
Or burning near the line.
Bold Jack, etc.
If to engage they give the word,
To quarters all repair,
While splinter'd masts go by the board,
And shot sing through the air.
Bold Jack, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE FRIENDLY TARS.
I SAILED in the good ship the Kitty,
With a smart blowing gale and rough sea,
Left my Polly, the lads call so pretty,
Safe here at an anchor, Yo Yea.
She blubbered salt tears when we parted,
And cried now be constant to me;
I told her not to be down hearted,
So up went the anchor, Yo Yea.
And from that time* no worse nor no better,
I Have thought on just nothing but she;
Nor could grog nor flip make me forget her,
She Is my best bower anchor, Yo Yea.
When the wind whistled larboard and starboard,
And the storm came on weather and lee,
The hope I with her should be harbored
Was my cable and anchor, Yo Yea.
And yet, my boys, would you believe me,
I returned with no rhino from sea,
Mistress Polly would never receive me,
So again I heaved anchor, Yo Yea.
BALLAD -- IN THE FRIENDLY TARS.
IF it is love to wish you near,
To tremble when the wind I hear,
Because at sea you floating rove:
If of you to dream at night,
To languish when you're out of sight,
If this be loving -- then I love.
If, when you're gone, to count each hour,
To ask of every tender power
That you may kind and faithful prove;
If void of falsehood and deceit,
I feel a pleasure now we meet,
If this be loving -- then I love.
To wish your fortune to partake,
Determined never to forsake,
Though low in poverty we strove;
If, so that me your wife you would call,
I offer you my little all;
If this be loving -- then I love.
BALDAD -- IN THE FRIENDLY TARS.
Yet though I Have no fortune to offer,
I Have something to put on a par;
Come then, and accept of my proffer,
It Is the kind honest heart of a tar.
Never let such a trifle as this is,
Girls, be to my pleasure a bar,
You Will be rich, though it is only in kisses,
With the kind honest heart of a tar.
Besides, I am none of your ninnies;
The next time I come from afar
I Will give you your lap full of guineas,
With the kind, honest heart of a tar.
Your lords, with such fine baby faces,
That strut in a garter and star,
Have they, under their tambour and laces,
The kind, honest heart of a tar.
I Have this here to say, now, and mind it,
If love, that no hazard can mar,
You are seeking, you will certainly find it
In the kind honest heart of a tar.
BALLAD -- IN THE OLD WOMAN OF EIGHTY.
Come here ye rich, come here ye great,
Come here ye grave, come here ye gay,
Behold our blessed, though humble fate,
Who, while the sun shines, make our hay.
The gay plumed lady, with her state,
Would she in courts a moment stay.
Could she but guess our happy fate,
Who, while the sun shines, make our hay.
Nature we love, and art we hate,
And, blithe and cheerful as the day,
We sing, and bless our humble fate,
And, while the sun shines, make our hay.
Hodge goes a courting to his mate,
Who never coquets, nor says him nay,
But shares content, an humble fate,
And, while the sun shines, they make hay.
The captain puts on board his freight,
And cuts through waves his dangerous way,
But we enjoy a gentler fate,
And, while the sun shines, make our hay.
See Hodge, and Dick, and Nell, and Kate,
In the green meadow frisk and play,
And own that happy is our fate,
Who, while the sun shines, make our hay.
Come then, and quit each glittering bait,
Simplicity shall point the way
To us, who bless our humble fate.
And, while the sun shines, make our hay.
BALLAD -- IN THE OLD WOMAN OF EIGHTY.
HOW kind and how good of his dear majesty,
In the midst of his matters so weighty,
To think of so lowly a creature as me,
A poor old woman of eighty.
Were your sparks to come round me, in love with each charm,
Says I, I have nothing to say to ye;
I can get a young fellow to keep my back warm,
Though a poor old woman of eighty.
John Strong is as comely a lad as you will see,
And one that will never say nay to ye;
I cannot but think what a comfort he will be
To me, an old woman of eighty.
Then fear not, ye fair ones, though long past your youth,
You Will have lovers in scores beg and pray to ye,
Only think of my fortune, who have but one tooth,
A poor old woman of eighty.
BALLAD -- IN THE TOUCHSTONE.
PARENTS may fairly thank themselves,
Should love our duty master,
Checking his power, the senseless elves
But tie the knot the faster.
To trick such dotards, weak and vain,
Is duty and allegiance,
Whilst love, and all his pleasing train,
To fly were disobedience.
As fickle fancy, or caprice,
Or headlong whim, advises,
Children, and all their future peace,
Become the sacrifices:
Then trick these dotards, weak and vain,
It Is d^ty and allegiance;
Whilst love, and all his pleasing train,
To fly were disobedience.
SONG -- IN THE TOUCHSTONE.
THIS life is like a troubled sea,
Where, h^lm a-weather or a-lee,
The ship will neither stay nor wear,
But drives, of every rock in fear;
All seamanship in vain we try,
We cannot keep her steadily,
But, just as fortune's wind may blow,
The vessel's tosticated to and fro;
Yet, come but love on board,
Our hearts with pleasure stored,
No storm can overwhelm,
Still blows in vain
The hurricane,
While he is at the helm.
BALLAD -- IN THE TOUCHSTONE.
MY name's Ted Blarney, I Will be bound,
And man and boy, upon this ground,
Full twenty years I Have beat my round,
Crying Vauxhall watch:
And as that time's a little short,
With some small folks that here resort,
To be sure I have not had some sport,
Crying Vauxhall watch.
Oh of pretty wenches dressed so tight,
And macaronies what a sight,
Of a moonlight morn I Have bid good night,
Crying Vauxhall watch.
The lover cries no soul will see,
You are deceived my love, cries she,
Dare's that Irish taef there -- meaning me --
Crying Vauxhall watch.
So they goes on with their amorous talk,
Till they gently steals to the dark walk,
While I steps aside, no sport to balk,
Crying Vauxhall watch.
Oh of pretty wenches, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WIVES' REVENGE.
CURTIS was old Hodge's wife,
For virtue none was ever such,
She led so pure, so chaste a life,
Hodge said 'twas vartue over much:
For says sly old Hodge, says he,
Great talkers do the least do you see.
Curtis said if men were rude
She Would scratch their eyes out, tear their hair;
Cried Hodge, I believe you are wondrous good,
However, let us nothing swear.
For says, etc.
One night she dreamt a drunken fool
Be rude with her in spite would fain;
She makes no more, but, with joint stool,
Falls on her husband might and main.
Still says, etc.
By that time she had broke his nose,
Hodge ^^de shift to wake his wife;
Dear Hodge, said she, judge by these blows,
I prize my vartue as my life.
Still says, etc.
I dreamt a rude man on me fell;
However I his project marred:
Dear wife, cried Hodge, it is mighty well,
But next time don't hit quite so hard.
For says, etc.
At break of day Hodge crossed a style,
Near to a field of new-mown hay,
And saw, and cursed his stars the while,
Curtis and Numps in am'rons play*
Was'nt I right, says Hodge, says he,
Great talkers do the least do you see.
GLEE -- IN THE WIVES' REVENGE.
YOUNG Paris was blessed just as I am this hour,
When proud Juno offered him riches and power,
When stately Minerva of war talked and arms,
When Venus beamed on him a smile full of charms.
Venus' charms gained the prize, what an idiot was he!
The apple of gold I Would have parted in three;
And, contenting them all by this witty device,
Given juno, and Pallas, and Venus a slice.
BALLAD -- IN THE SHEPHERDESS OF THE ALPS.
WHEN jealous out of season,
When deaf and blind to reason,
Of truth we have no belief;
With rage we are overflowing,
Nor why, nor wherefore knowing,
And the heart goes throb with grief.
But when the fit is over,
And kindness from the lover
Does every doubt destroy,
Away fly thoughts alarming,
Each object appears charming,
And the heart goes throb with joy.
BALLAD -- IN THE SHEPHERDESS OF THE ALPS.
BY love and fortune guided,
I quit the busy town;
With cot and sheep provided,
And vestments of a clown.
Thus have I bartered riches
For a shepherd's little stock;
A crook to leap over ditches,
And well to climb each rock:
A faithful dog, my steps to guide,
A scrip and hautboy by my side,
And my horn, to give the alarm,
When wolves would harm
My flock.
Ah, say then, who can blame me?
For beauty it is I roam;
But, if the chase should tame me,
Perhaps I may come home.
Till then I Will give up riches, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE SHEPHERDESS OF THE ALPS.
THE rising sun Lysander found,
Shedding tears over Phillis' tomb,
Who swore he never would leave the ground,
But pass his life in that dear gloom.
Tearing his hair, the frantic youth
Cried, food and raiment I deny;
And with my life shall end my truth,
For love of Phillis will I d^e.
The radient god made half his tour,
The kine sought shelter from his heat,
Which passed within the cottage door,
Where poor Lysander drank and eat.
His dinner finished, up he rose,
Stalked, sighing, silently and slow,
To where were hung his Sunday's clothes.
Then took a walk to chase his woe.
The sun to Thetis made his way,
When, underneath a friendly shade,
A shepherd sung in accents gay,
His passion for a gentle maid.
O lovers, what are all your cares!
Your sighs! your sufferings! tell me what!
To Daphne it is Lysander swears,
And lovely Phillis is forgot.
SONG -- IN THE TOUCHSTONE.
MY tears -- alas! I cannot speak!
Must thank this goodness, sure, divine!
For had I words -- words are too weak,
Too poor to vent such thoughts as mine.
The sun, in its meridian height,
Will gratitude like this inspire;
Whose kindly heat and piercing light,
We wonder at, and we admire.
BALLAD -- IN THE SHEPHERDESS OF THE ALPS.
THE coy Pastora Damon wooed,
Damon the witty and the gay;
Damon, who never fair pursued
But she became an easy prey.
Yet, with this nymph, hit every power
In vain he tries, no language moves;
Thus do we see the tender flower
Shrink from the sun whose warmth it loves.
Piqued at the little angry puss,
Cried he, she sets me all on fire!
Then plagues herself, and makes this fuss,
Only to raise her value higher.
For, that she loves me every hour,
Each moment some new instance proves:
Thus do we see the tender flower
Shrink from the sun, whose warmth it loves.
How to resolve then? what resource?
By fair means she will near come to;
What of a little gentle force?
Suppose I try what that will do?
I know she will tears in torrents pour;
I know her cries will pierce the groves:
Thus do we see the tender flower
Shrink from the sun, whose warmth it loves.
RONDEAU -- IN THE SHEPHERDESS OF THE ALPS.
AH men! what silly things you are,
To woman thus to humble,
Who, fowler like, but spreads her snare,
Or, at her timid game
Takes aim,
Pop, Pop, and down you tumble.
She marks you down, fly where you will,
Over clover, grass, or stubble;
Can wing you, feather you, or kill,
Just as she takes the trouble.
Ah men, etc.
Then fly not from us, it is in vain,
We know the art of setting,
As well as shooting, and can train
The shyest man our net in.
Ah men, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE SHEPHERDESS OF THE ALPS.
BRIGHT gems that twinkle from afar,
Planets, and every lesser star,
That darting each a downward ray,
Console us for the loss of day,
Begone! even Venus, who so bright,
Reflects her visions pure and white,
Quick disappear, and quit the skies,
For lo! the moon begins to rise!
Ye pretty warblers of the grove,
Who chant such artless tales of love,
The th^^stle, gurgling in his throat,
The linnet with his ^^lver note,
The soaring lark, (...) whistling thrush,
The mellow blackbird, goldfinch, hush,
Fly, vanish, disappear, take wing,
The nightingale begins to sing.
BALLAD -- IN THE SHEPHERDESS OF THE ALPS.
HERE sleeps in peace, beneath this rustic vase,
The tenderest lover a husband could prove;
Of all this distress, alas! I am the cause,
So much I adored him, heaven envied my love.
The sighs I respire every morn I arise,
The misery I cherish, the grief, and the pain,
The thousand of tears that fall from my eyes,
Are all the sad comforts for me that remain.
When, his colors displayed, honor called him to arms,
By tender persuasions I kept him away,
His glory forgetting for these fatal charms,
And to punish me he is deprived of the day.
Since when to his memory I Have raised this sad tomb,
Where to join him, alas! I shall shortly descend;
Where sorrow, nor pain, nor affliction can come,
And where both my love and my crime shall have end.
BALLAD -- IN HARLEQUIN FREEMASON.
IN all your dealings take good care,
Instructed by the friendly square,
To be true, upright, just, and fair,
And thou a fellow-craft shall be:
The level so must poise thy mind,
That satisfaction thou shall find,
When to another fortune's kind: --
And that is the drift of masonry.
The compass the other two compounds.
And says, though angered on just grounds,
Keep all your passions within bounds,
And thou a fellow craft shall be.
Thus symbols of our order are
The compass, level, and the square;
Which teach us to be just and fair:
And that is the drift of masonry.
BALLAD -- IN HARLEQUIN FREEMASON.
THE Sun's a free-mason, he works all the day,
Village, city, and town to adorn;
Then from labor at rest,
At his lodge in the west,
Takes with good brother Neptune a glass on his way.
Thence ripe for the fair,
He flies from all care,
To Dame Thetis' charms,
Till roused from her arms
By the morn.
So do we, our labor done,
First the glass,
And then the lass,
And then
Sweet slumbers give fresh force
To run our course,
Thus with the rising sun.
The course of the sun all our mysteries defines:
F^^st masonry rose in the east,
Then, to no point confined,
His rays cheer mankind;
Besides, who will deny but he well knows the signs?
The Grand Master he
Then of masons shall be,
Nor shall ought the craft harm,
Till to shine and to warm
He has ceased.
Then like him* our labor done, etc.
BALLAD -- IN HARLEQUIN FREEMASON.
AT a jovial meeting of gods once on high,
Ere Bacchus was hatched from old Jupiter's thigh,
This one told his story, and that sung his song,
And did what he could lest the time should seem long.
Apollo read verses, the Graces wreathed flowers,
The Muses of harmony sung forth the powers,
Bully Mars cracked his joke, and sly Momus his jest;
Yet their mirth wanted something to give it a zest.
Said Jove, our assembly to-day's pretty full,
Yet, I don't know how it is, we are horridly dull;
We have all the ingredients that mirth should inspire,
But some clay-born alloy damps our heavenly fire,
I have it -- in this I Will a mixture enclose
Of all the delights whence good fellowship slows,
And we'll taste of its produce, for mirth's bad at best
When there is any thing wanting to give it a zest.
So saying, so doing, he buried the shrine,
Which quickly sprung up in the form of a vine,
The leaves broad and verdant, the fruit deepest blue,
Whence a juice flowed that health, love, or youth might renew.
Its influence to feel, they came round it in swarms,
Mars took draughts of courage, and Venus drank charm^;
Momus swallowed bon mots, Cupid love -- so the rest,
While Jove, spurning nectar, cried -- This is the zest.
BALLAD -- IN HARLEQUIN FREEMASON.
HERE I was, my good masters, my name's Teddy Clinch,
My cattle are found, and I drives to an inch;
From Hyde Park to White Chapel I well know the town,
And many's the time I Have took up and set down:
In short, in the bills I Will be bound for it there is not
A young youth who, like Ted^^, can tip the long trot.
Oh the notions of life that I see from my box,
While faces of all kinds come about me in flocks;
The sot whom I drive home to sleep out the day,
The kind one who plies for a fare at the play;
Or, your gents of the law, there, who, four in a lot,
To Westminster Hall I often tip the long trot.
My coach receives all, like the gallows and sea,
So I touch but my fair you know all is one to me;
The men of the gown, and the men of the sword,
A ma'am, or a gambler, a rogue, or a lord;
To wherever you're going I well know the spot,
And, do you tip a tizzy, I Will tip the long trot.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
THE ladies' faces, now adays,
Are various as their humors,
And on complexions often we gaze,
Brought home from the perfumer's.
Hid as it were beneath a cloak,
The beauty's false that wins you,
Then parpon me, by way of joke,
If I prefer my Dingy.
A handkerchief can rub away
Your roses and your lillies;
The more you rub, the more you may,
My Dingy dingy still is.
Besides, her hair is black as jet,
Her eyes are gems from India;
Rail as you list then, I shall yet,
For joke's sake love poor Dingy.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
DID fortune bid me choose a state
From all that is rich, and all that is great,
From all that ostentation brings,
The splendour, pride, and pomp of kings;
These gifts, and more, did she display,
With health, that felt not life's decay,
I Would spurn with scorn the useless lot,
Were my Camilla's name forgot.
But did she for my fate assign,
That I should labor in a mine;
Or, with many wretches more,
In slavery chain me to an oar;
Or from the sight of men exiled,
Send me to a Siberian wild,
For this and more would she atone,
Were my Camilla all my own.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
WHEN Yanko dear fight far away,
Some token kind me send;
One branch of olive, for dat say
Me wish de battle end.
The poplar tremble as him go,
Say of die life take care,
Me send no laurel, for me know
Of that him find him share.
De ivy say my heart be true,
Me droop say willow tree,
De torn he say me sick for you,
De sun-flower tink of me.
Till last me go, weep wid the pine,
For fear poor Yanko dead;
He come, and I de myrtle twine,
In chaplet for him head.
SONG -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
I WILL mount the cliffs, I Will watch the coast,
Anxious some welcome tidings soon to bear,
Nor let your fortitude be lost,
Confiding still in honest Yanko's care,
Though to my comrades I Am untrue,
Honor shall infidelity applaud,
And call in charity to you,
My broken faith to them a pious fraud.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
ORRA no talk, no say fine word,
No dress him, no look gay,
Vay little sing you hear von bird,
Him mate be gone away.
Orra tell true, she have no grace
Of lady for him part,
Dare beauty all be in him face,
But Orra in him heart.
Orra do little, all she do;
Frogive, for she no gall,
To every ting she promise true,
Love Yanko, and dat all.
But Orra, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
POOR Orra tink of Yanko dear,
Do he be gone forever,
For he no dead, he still live here,
And he from here go never.
Like on a sand me mark him face,
De wave come roll him over,
De mark him go, but still the place
It Is easy to discover.
I see fore now de tree de flower,
He droop like Orra, surely,
And den by'm bye there come a shower,
He ho^d him head up purely:
And so some time me tink me die,
My heart so sick he grieve me,
But in a lily time me cry
Good deal, and dat relieve me.
SONG -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
PASSION is a torrent rude,
Which rapid bears down every height,
A turbulent, unruly flood,
Which with the ocean would unite.
Reason's a fountain, calm serene,
Which, near gay fields, and laughing bowers,
While it reflects the enchanting scene,
Is born among a bed of flowers.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
A BED of m^ss we'll straight prepare,
Where, near him gently creeping,
We'll pat his cheeks, and stroke his hair,
And watch him while he is sleeping.
Sweet flowers of every scent and hue,
Pinks, violets, and roses,
And blooming hyacinths we'll strew,
As sweetly he reposes.
And we'll with fond emotion start,
And while, with admiration,
We softly feel his fluttering heart,
Partake its palpitation.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
COME, courage lads, and drink away,
A man upon his wedding day
Ought rarely well his part to play
At Stingo, or October:
For, who would be that stupid elf
For whim, caprice, or love, or pelf,
To poison, hang, or drown himself,
Or marry when he is sober.
^or madam's will at nothing stops,
She must have balls, and routs, and sops,
And often ransack all the shops,
In gay attire to robe her:
Then drink the day you take a wife,
As the last comfort of your life:
For, ever after, noise and strife
Are sure to keep you sober.
BALLAD -- INTENDED FOR THE QUAKER.
THOU'ST heard those old proverbs, never lean on a rush,
A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush,
It Is the money paid down that decides who is the winner,
Who waits upon fortune's never sure of a dinner:
Out of sight out of mind, delaying breeds danger,
He ought to be cozened who trusts to a stranger*
Heaven take my friend, and the old one my brother,
Promising's one thing, performing another.
Much may fall out 'twixt the cup and the lip,
The builder's receipt's the best sail in the ship,
It Is a good thing to lend, but a better to borrow,
Pay me today, and I Will trust you tomorrow.
Brag is a good dog, but hold-fast a better,
You may guess at a word when you know the first letter,
There Is not the most fire where you see the most smother,
Promising's one thing, performing another.
BALLAD -- IN THE MISCHANCE.
O THINK on the time when you came home at night,
And supped upon muscles, no lily more white,
When I u^ed to provide you with many a treat
Of as fine Melton oysters as ever were eat.
Now see what a change! all the muscles for me
May be trod under foot, or thrown into the sea;
My Joey is false! and the once sprightly tone
With which I cried oysters is sunk to a drone!
When the last kit of salmon we sat down to broach.
And you told me your heart was as sound at a roach,
How sweet was my temper! what joys did I fell,
Little thinking you would slip through my hands like an eel.
But my temper's now changed -- I, that once was so mild,
I was thought to be gentle and meek as a child,
So crusty am grown, I never speak a word civil,
And my customers say I Am as cross as the devil.
My stall was so clean, and my tubs were so white,
They were perfectly -- people would tell me -- a fight:
I listened with joy when the folks told me so,
For my stall and my tubs were both scower'd for Joe.
But now they are all dirty, neglected they lie,
I often take them up, and as often throw them by,
For his sake I pleasure in cleaning them found,
He has left me, and now they are as black as the ground.
BALLAD -- IN PANDORA.
What naughty things we women are,
Who long for fruit forbidden;
Though 'twere our bane, we cannot bear
The least thing from us hidden.
But what we see will we believe,
Though ill on ill we are heaping,
Though to this day, from mother Eve,
We have always paid for peeping.
Thus curious girls, urged by their youth,
Thoughtless what they were doing.
Have falsehood found disguised like truth,
And masked like pleasure, ruin.
Instead of s^iling, who must grieve,
Whose joys are turned to weeping,
And who too late, like mother Eve,
Find they have paid for peeping.
Should I to my desires give way,
I may encounter sorrow,
And that I think a good today,
May prove an ill tomorrow.
Yet, cautious prudence, by your leave,
The secret's in my keeping;
I am weak woman, and, like Eve,
Cannot refrain from peeping.
BALLAD -- IN THE REASONABLE ANIMALS.
-- A Wolf who had been a Lawyer. --
By roguery, it is true,
I opulent grew,
Just like any other professional sinner;
An orphan, do you see,
Would just wash down my tea,
And a poor friendless widow would serve me for dinner.
I was, to be sure,
Of the helpless and poor
A guardian appointed to manage the pelf;
And I managed it well,
But how -- says you -- tell?
Why I let them all starve, to take care of myself.
With these tricks I went on
Till, faith sir, anon,
A parcel of stupid, mean-spirited souls,
As they narrowly watched me,
Soon at my tricks caught me.
And, in their own words, haul'd me over the coals.'
In the pillory, that fate
For rogues, soon or late,
I stood, for the sport of a dissolute mob;
Till my neck Master Ketch
Was so eager to stretch,
That I gave the thing up as a dangerous job.
Now a wolf -- from their dams
I steal plenty of lambs,
Pampered high, and well fed -- an insatiable glutton --
In much the same sphere
When a man, I move here,
Make and break laws at pleasure, and kill my own mutton.
Then since, for their sport,
No one here moves the court,
Nor am I amenable to an employer,
I shall ever prefer,
With your leave, my good sir,
The life of a wolf to the life of a lawyer.
BALLAD -- IN THE REASONABLE ANIMALS.
-- A hog who had been an alderman --
FOR dainties I Have had of them all,
At taverns, Lord Mayor's, and Guildhall,
Where the purveyors, nothing stingy,
To fill the wallet,
And pamper the palate,
Have rarities brought from India.
Then what signifies what one takes in,
For, when one's crammed up to the chin,
Why, really, good friend to my thinking,
If on venison and wines,
Or on hogwash, one dines,
At last it is but eating and drinking.
Besides, I Have no books I arrange,
Nor at two need I ever go to change;
Have no business with note, bond, or tally,
Nor need I, from any ill luck,
Either bull, or a bear, or lame duck,
Ever fear waddling out of the alley.
For dainties, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE REASONABLE ANIMALS.
-- A bull who had been an Irishman --
IS IT my story you would know? -- I was Patrick Mulrooney,
A jolman, and Ireland my nation,
To be sure I was not a tight fellow too, honey,
Before my transmogrification.
I did not at all talk of flames and of darts,
To conquer the fair -- the dear jewels!
And wid husbands, becase why I won their wives' hearts,
I did not fight plenty of duels.
Then arrah, bodder how you can,
You Will never persuade me, honey,
For I shall always, bull or man,
Be Patrick Mulrooney.
When at Almack's, or White's, o^ at Brookes's, or Boodle's,
I Have sat up all night in the morning,
Amongst black legs, and coggers, and pigeons, and noodles,
The calling to use I was born in:
To be sure many honest gold guineas it yields,
But, since it is a service of danger,
I Am a better man now I Am a bull in the fields,
To popping and tilting a stranger.
BALLAD -- IN LIBERTY-HALL.
WERE Patience kind to me
Oh he de nos!
Far plyther than a coat I Would be,
On he de no^!
Leap, skip, and pound, would poor Ap Hugh,
And capriole, and caper too,
And frisk, and jump, and dance, look you,
Oh he de nos!
But Patience very cruel is,
Oh he de nos!
With jibes, and cheers, and mockeries,
Oh he de nos!
Which makes to sigh and sob Ap Hugh
And whining, his sad fortune rue,
And crieve, and croan, and cru^^, look you,
Oh he de nos!
BALLAD -- IN LIBERTY-HALL.
WHEN faintly gleams the doubtful day,
Ere yet the dew drops on the thorn,
Borrow a luster from the ray
That tips with gold the dancing corn,
Health bids awake, and homage pay
To him who gave another morn.
And, well with strength his nerves to (...),
Urges the sportsman to the chase.
Do we pursue the timid hare,
As trembling over the lawn she bounds?
Still of her safety have we care,
While seeming death her steps surrounds,
We the defenseless creature spare,
And instant stop the well taught hounds:
For cruelty should never disgrace
The well-earn'd pleasure of the chase.
Do we pursue the subtle fox,
Still let him breaks and rivers try,
Through marshes wade, or climb the rocks,
The deep-mouthed hounds shall following fly
And while he every danger mocks,
Unpitied shall the culprit die:
To quell this cruel, artful race,
Is labor worthy of the chase.
Returned, with shaggy spoils well stored,
To our convivial joys at night,
We toast, and first our country's lord,
Anxious who most shall do him right;
The fair next crowns the social board,
Britons should love as well as fight --
For he who slights the tender race,
Is held unworthy of the chase.
SONG -- IN LIBERTY-HALL.
WHO to my wounds a balm advises,
But little knows what I endure;
The patient's pain to torture rises
When medicine's tried, and fails to cure.
What can the wisest counsel teach me,
But sad remembrance of my grief?
Alas! your kindness cannot reach me,
It gives but words -- I ask relief.
BALLAD -- IN LIBERTY-HALL.
JACK RATLIN was the ablest seaman,
None like him could hand, reef, and steer,
No dangerous toil but he would encounter,
With skill, and in contempt of fear:
In fight a lion -- the battle ended,
Meek as a bleating lamb he would prove;
Thus Jack had manners, courage, merit,
Yet did he figh, and all for love.
The song, the jest, the flowing liquor,
For none of these had Jack regard;
He, while his messmates were carousing,
High sitting on the pendant yard,
Would think upon his fair ones beauties,
Swear never from such charms to rove,
That truly he would adore them living,
And, dying, sigh -- to end his love.
The same express the crew commanded
Once more to view their native land,
Among the rest, brought Jack some tiding^,
Would it had been his love's fair hand ^
Oh fate -- her death defaced the letter,
Instant her pulse forgot to move,
With quivering lips, and eyes uplifted,
He heaved a sigh -- and died for love!
GLEE -- IN LIBERTY HALL.
WHAT if my pleasures fools condemn,
Because I am not dull, like them,
Because no minute I let pass,
Unmarked by a convivial glass?
Or else retired from strife and noise,
I tempt the fair to softer joys;
A mortal with a soul divine,
Alternate crowned with love and win^.
These shall on earth my being share,
And when I Am gone, if in my heir
My spirit live, let him not mourn,
But see embossed upon my (...).
Bacchus and Venus in a wreath,
With this inscription underneath:
"This mortal had a soul divine,
"Alternate crow'd with love and wine."
BALLAD -- IN LIBERTY-HALL.
WHEN fairies are lighted by night's silver queen.
And feast in the meadow, or dance on the green,
My Lambkin aside lays his plough and his ^^ail,
By you oak to sit near me, and tell his fond tale.
And though I Am assured the same vows were believed
By Patty and Ruth, he forsook and deceived,
Yet, so sweet are his words, and like truth so appear,
I pardon the treason, the traitor's so dear.
I saw the straw bonnet he bought at the fair,
The rose-colour'd ribbon to deck Jenny's hair,
The shoe-^ies of Bridget, and still worse than this,
The gloves he gave P^ggy for stealing a kiss.
All these did I see, and with heart-rending pain,
Swore to part; yet I know, when I see him again,
His words and his looks will like truth so appear,
I shall pardon the treason, the traitor's so dear.
BALLAD -- IN LIBERTY HALL.
SEE the course thronged with gazers, the sports are begun
The confusion but hear! -- I Will bet you fir -- done, done;
Ten thousand strange murmurs resound far and near,
Lords, hawkers, and jockies, assail the tired ear:
While with neck like a rainbow, erecting his crest,
Pampered, prancing, and pleased, his head touching his breast
Scarcely snuffing the air, he is so proud and elate,
The high-mettled racer first starts for the plate.
Now renard's turned out, and over hedge and ditch rush,
Hounds, horses, and huntsmen, all hard at this brush;
They run him at length, and they have him at bay,
And by scent and by view cheat a long tedious way:
While, alike born for sports of the field and the course,
Always sure to come thorough, a staunch and fleet horse;
When fairly run down, the fox yields up his breath,
The high-mettled racer is in at the death.
Grown aged, used up, and turned out of the stud.
Lame, spavin'd, and windgall'd, but yet with some blood;
While knowing postillions his pedigree trace,
Tell his dam won the sweepsteakes, his sire gained that race;
And what matches he won to the ostlers count over,
As they loiter their time at some hedge ale house door,
While the harness sore galls, and the spurs his sides goad,
The high-mettled racer's a hack on the road.
Till at last, having labored, drudg'd early and late,
Bowed down by degrees, he bends on his fate,
Blind, old, lean, and feeble, he tugs round a mill,
Or draws sand, till the sand of his hourglass stands still:
And now, cold and lifeless, exposed to the view,
In the very same cart which he yesterday drew,
While a pitying crowd his sad relics surrounds,
The high-mettled racer is sold for the hounds.
BALLAD -- IN LIBERTY HALL.
DO salmonds love a lucid stream?
Do thirsty sheep love fountains?
Do Druids love a doleful theine?
Or goats the craggy mountains?
If it be true these things are so,
As truly she is my lovey,
And os wit I yng carry I,
Roo^ fit dwyn de garie di,
As ein, dai, tree, pedwar, pimp, chweck go
The bells of Aberdovey.
Do kessels love a whisp of hay?
Do sprightly kids love prancing?
Do curates crowdies love to play?
Or peasants morice dancing?
If it be true, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE BENEVOLENT TAR.
A PLAGUE of those musty old lubbers,
Who tell us to fast and to think,
And patient fall in with life's rubbers,
With nothing but water to drink,
A can of good stuff! had they twigg'd it,
'Twould have set them for pleasure agog,
And, spite if the rules
Of the schools,
The old fools
Would have all of 'em swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
My father when last I from Guinea
Returned, with abundance of wealth,
Cried Jack, never be such a ninny
To drink: -- said I -- father your health.
So I showed him the stuff, and he twigg'd it,
And it set the old codger agog,
And he swigg'd, and mother,
And sister, and brother,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
The Other day as the chaplain was preaching,
Behind him I curiously slunk,
And while he our duty was teaching,
As how we should never get drunk,
I showed him the stuff, and he twigg'd it,
And it soon set his reverence agog.
And he swigg'd, and Nick swigg'd,
And Ben swigg'd, and Dick swigg'd,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
Then trust me there is nothing like drinking,
So pleasant on this side the grave;
It keeps the unhappy from thinking,
And makes even they aliant more brave.
As for me, from the moment I twigg'd it,
The good stuff has so set me agog,
Sick or well, late or early,
Wind soully or fairly,
Helm a-lee or a-weather,
For hours together,
I Have constantly swigg'd it,
And, dam'me, there is nothing like grog.
BALLAD -- IN THE BENEVOLEWT TAR.
WHAT argufies pride and ambition?
Soon or late death will take us in tow;
Each bullet has got its commission,
And when our time's come we must go.
Then drink and sing -- hang pain and sorrow,
The halter was made for the neck;
He that is now live and lusty -- tomorrow
Perhaps may be stretched on the de^k.
Then drink and sing -- hang pain and sorrow,
The halter was made for the neck;
He that is now live and lusty -- tomorrow
Perhaps may be stretched on the deck.
There was little Tom Linstock of Dover
Got killed, and left Polly in pain,
Poll cried, but her grief was soon over,
And then she got married again.
Then drink, etc.
Jack Junk was ill used by Bet Crocker,
And so took to guzzling the stuff,
Till he tumbled in old Davy's locker,
And there he got liquor enough.
Then drink, etc.
For our prize money then to the proctor,
Take of joy while it is going our freak;
For what argufies calling the doctor
When the anchor of life is apeak.
Then drink, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE BENEVOLENT TAR.
A Sailor's love is void of art,
Plain sailing ^o his port, the heart,
He knows no jealous folly:
'Twere hard enough at sea to war
With hoisterous elements that jar --
All Is peace with lovely Polly.
Enough that, far from sight of shore,
Clouds frown, and angry billows roar,
Still is he brisk and jolly:
And while carousing with his mates,
Her health he drinks -- anticipates
The smiles of lovely Polly.
Should thunder on the horizon press,
Mocking our signals of distress,
Even then dull melancholy,
Dares not intrude: -- he braves the di^,
In hopes to find a calm within
The snowy arms of Polly.
BALLAD -- IN THE MILK MAID.
SWEET dities would my Patty sing,
Old Chevy Chase, God save the King,
Fair Rosemy, and Sawny Scot,
Lilebularo, the Irish Trot,
All these would sing my blue-ey'd Patty.
As with her pail she would trudge along,
While still the burden of her song
My hammer beat to blue-ey'd Patty.
But nipping frosts and chilling rain
Too soon alas choked every strain;
Too soon, alas! the miry way
Her wet shod feet did sore dismay,
And hoarse was heard my blue-ey'd Patty.
While I for very mad did cry;
Ah could I but again, said I,
Hear the sweet voice of blue-ey'd Patty!
Love taught me how -- I worked, I sung,
My anvil glowed, my hammer rung,
Till I had formed from out the fire,
To bear her feet above the mire,
An engine for my blue-ey'd Patty.
Again was heard each tuneful close,
My fair one on the patten rose,
Which takes its name from blue-ey'd Patty.
BALLAD -- IN HARVEST HOME.
AS Dermot toiled one summer's day,
Young Shelah, as she sat behind him,
Fairly stole his pipe away --
Oh den to hear how she would deride him.
Where, poor Dermot is it gone,
Your lily lily loodle?
They Have l^ft you nothing but the drone.
And that is yourself, you noodle.
Beum bum boodle, loodle lo,
Poor Dermot's pipe is lo^t and gone,
And what will the poor devil do?
Fait, now I am undone and more,
Cried Dermot -- ah will you be aesy?
Did not you stale my heart before?
Is it you would have a man run crazy?
I Have nothing left me now to moan,
My lily lily loodle,
That used to cheer me so is gone --
Ah Dermot you are a noodle.
Beum bum boodle, loodle lo,
My heart, and pipe, and peace are gone --
What next will cruel Shelah do?
But Shelah hearing Dermot vex,
Cried she, 'twas little Cupid moved me,
Ye fool to steel it out of tricks,
Only to see how much you loved me.
Come cheer thee Dermont, never moan,
But take your lily loodle,
And for the heart of you that is gone,
You shall have mine, you noodle.
Beum bum boodle, loodle lo,
Shela's to church with Dermot gone,
And for the rest -- what is dat to you.
BALLAD -- IN CLUMP AND CUDDEN.
THIS, this my lad's a soldier's life,
He marches to the sprightly fife,
And in each town to some new wife,
Swears he will be ever true;
He Is here -- he is there -- where is he not?
Variety's his envied lot.
He eats, drinks, sleeps, and pays no shot,
And follows the loud tattoo.
Called out to face his country's foes,
The tears of fond domestic woes
He kisses off, and boldly goes
To earn of fame his due.
Religion, liberty, and laws,
Both his are, and his country's cause --
For these, through danger, without pause,
He follows the loud tattoo.
And if at last, in honor's wars,
He earns his share of danger's scars,
Still he feels bold, and thanks his stars
He Is no worse fate to ^ue:
At Che^sea, free from toil and pain,
He wi^lds his crutch, points out the slain,
And, in fond fancy, once again,
Follows the loud tattoo.
BALLAD -- IN TOM THUMB.
IS it little Tom Thumb that you mean, and his battles?
Arrah send him for playthings some whistles and rattles:
At the fight of a sword all his nerves would be quaking,
He fight! he kill giants! is it game you are making?
As well may you tell us that eagles fear larks,
That mice eat up lions, and sprats swallow sharks:
Then talk not of any such nonsense to me --
Wid your confounded boderum bumboodle liddle lee.
Tom Thumb! such a shrimp sure no eyes ever saw --
(...) handles his arms as a fly hugs a straw:
To be sure in the wars dangers certain to quit him,
^^r the taes's such a flea dare's no bullet can hit him.
And then as to courage, my jewel -- hoot, hoot!
(...) did not I find him chin deep in my boot?
Then talk not of any such nonsense to me,
Wid your confounded boderum bumboodle liddle lee.
Tom Thumb marry you! -- mus^a honey be aesy,
Were it not for your sense, I should think you gone crazy
Shall a fine stately ostrich thus wed a cock-sparrow?
'Twere a halb^rd stuck up by the side of an arrow --
Or a fly on a church, or a mountain and mouse,
Or a pi^^ire that crawls by the side of a house:
Then talk not of any such nonsense to me,
Wid your confounded boderum, bumboodle liddle lee.
BALLAD.
THAT all the world is up in arms,
And (...) but (...) charms,
(...) crowd (...) near and far,
Come all to (...) this blazing star,
Is true -- who has not heard on it.
But that she all at distance keeps,
And that her virtue never sleeps --
I don't believe a word on it.
That for one lover had she ten,
In short, did she from all the men
Her homage due each day receive,
She has good sense, and, I believe,
Would never grow absurd on it:
But for soft dalliance she would refuse
Some favorite from the crowd to choose --
I don't believe a word on it.
That in the face of standers-by
She Is modesty itself's no lie;
That then were men rude things to say,
'Twould anger her -- oh I would lay
A bottle and a bird on it:
But to her bedchamber, do you see,
That Betty has no private key
I don't believe a word on it.
BALLAD.
I Thought we were fiddle and bow,
So well we in concert kept time,
But, to strike up a part base and low,
Without either reason or rhyme:
What a natural was I so soon
With pleasure to quaver away!
For I Am humm'd, I think, now to some tune,
She has left me the piper to pay.
I plainly perceive she is in glee,
And thinks I shall be such a flat
As to shake, but she is in a wrong key,
For she never shall catch me at that.
Whoever to the crotches of love
Lets his heart dance a jig in his breast,
'Twill a bar to his happiness prove,
And shall surely deprive him of rest.
BALLAD.
I sing of a war set on foot for a toy,
And of Paris, and Helen, and Hector, and Troy,
Where on women, kings, generals, and cobblers you stumble,
And of mortals and gods meet a very strange jumble,
Sing didderoo bubberoo, oh my joy,
How sweetly they did one another destroy!
Come, fill up your bumpers, the whisky enjoy,
May we never see the like of the siege of Troy!
Menelaus was happy wid Helen his wife,
Except that she led him a devil of a life,
Wid (...) handsome ta^e Paris she would toy and she would play,
Till they packed up their alls, and they both ran away.
Sing didderoo, etc.
Agamemnon, and all the great chiefs of his house,
Soon took up the cause of this hornified spouse,
While Juno said this thing, and Venus said that,
And the gods ^^ll a wrangling they knew not for what.
Sing didderoo, etc.
Oh den such a slaughter, and cutting of trotes,
And slaying of bullocks, and offering up goats!
Till the cunning Ulysses, the Trojans to cross,
Clapped forty fine fellows in one wooden horse.
Sing didderoo, etc.
Oh den for to see the maids, widows, and wives,
Crying some for their virtue, and some for their lives;
Thus after ten years they would defended their town,
Poor dear Troy in ten minutes was all burnt down!
Sing didderoo, etc.
But to see how it ended's the best joke of all,
Scarce had wronged Menelaus ascended the wall,
But he bl^bb'ring saw Helen, and, oh strange to te^l,
The man took his ^^are, and so all was we^l.
Sing didderoo, etc.
BALLAD.
I Sing Ulysses and those chiefs
Who, out of near a million,
So luckily their bacon fav'd
Before the walls of Ilion.
Yankee doodle doodle do,
Black negro he get fumbo,
And when you come to our town
We'll make you drunk with bumbo.
Who having taken, sacked, and burnt,
That very first of cities,
Returned in triumph, while the bard.
All struck up amorous ditties.
Yankee doodle, etc.
The Cyclops first we visited,
Ulysses made him cry out,
For he eat his mut^on, drank his wine,
And then he pok'd his eye out.
Yankee doodle, etc.
From thence we went to Circe's land,
Who says a girl of spunk is,
For she made us drunk, and changed us all
To asses, goats, and monkies.
Yankee doodle, etc.
And then to hell and back again,
Then where the Sirens Cara,
Swell cadence, trill, and shake, almost
As well as Madam Mara.
Yankee doodle, etc.
To fell Charibdis next, and then
Where yawning Scylla grapples
Six men at once, and cats them all,
Just like so many apples.
Yankee doodle, etc
From thence to where Apollo's bulls
And sheep all play and skip so,
From whence Ulysses went alone
To the Island of Calypso.
Yankee doodle, etc.
And there he kissed, and toy'd, and played,
It Is true upon my life sir,
Till, having turned his mistress off,
He Is coming to his wife sir.
Yankee doodle, etc.
GLEE.
WE, on the present hour relying,
Think not of future, nor of past,
But seize each moment as it is flying,
Perhaps the next may be our last.
Perhaps old Charon, at his wherry,
This moment waits to waft us over;
Then charge your glasses, and he merry,
For fear we never should charge them more.
With (...) austere, and head reclining,
Let (...) age, and haggard care
^^ow ^our, and at our joy repining,
(...) p^e^sures which they cannot share.
Put round the glasses, and be jolly,
In spite of all such idle stuff,
Whether it is wisdom or it is folly,
It Is pleasure boys and that is enough.
BALLAD.
I HAVE made to marches Mars descend,
Justice in jigs her scales suspend,
Magicians in gavots port^^d.
And Furies black wigs bristle:
To prestos Pallas Aegis' blaze,
Snakes twist to fugues a thousand ways,
And Jove whole towns with lightning raze,
At sound of the prompter's whistle.
I Have made a sun of polished tin,
Dragons of wood, with ghastly grin,
A canvas sea, the which within
Did leather Dolphins caper;
I Have strung with packthread Orpheus' lyre,
Made sheep and oxen dance with wire,
And have destroyed, with painted fire,
Grand temples of cartridge paper.
I Have made a swain, his love asleep,
Chide warbling birds and b^eating sheep,
While he himself did bawling keep,
Like boatman at a ferry:
I Have racks made that no blood could spill,
Foul poison that could do no ill,
And daggers queens and princes kill,
Who are alive and merry.
BALLAD.
WHEN last from the straights we had fairly cast anchor,
I went, bonny Kitty to hail,
With quintables stored, for our voyage was a spanker,
And bran new was every sail:
But I knew well enough how, with words sweet as honey,
They trick us poor tars of our gold,
And when the ^ly gypsies have fingered the money,
The bag they poor Jack give to hold.
So I chased her, do you see, my lads, under false colors,
Swore my riches were all at an end,
That I Would sported away all my good-looking dollars,
And borrowed my togs of a friend:
Oh the^ had you seen her, no longer my honey,
'Twas varlet, audacious and bold,
Begone from my sight -- now you have spent all your money
For Kitty the bag you may hold.
With that I took out double handfuls of shiners,
And scornfully bid her good bye,
'Twould have done your heart good had you then seen her fine airs,
How she would leer, and she would sob, and she would sigh;
But I stood well the broadside, while jewel and honey
She called me, I put up the gold,
And bearing away, as I sacked all the money,
Left the bag for Ma'am Kitty to hold.
BALLAD -- INTENDED FOR THE QUAKER.
THOU man of firmness turn this way,
Nor time by absence measure,
The sportive dance, the sprightly lay
Shall wake thee into pleasure:
Spite of thy formal outward man,
You Are gay, as we shall pr^ve thee;
Then cheer thee, laugh away thy span,
And let the spirit move thee.
None are more just, more true, more fair,
More upright in their dealings,
Than men of thy profession are,
But are they without feelings?
Even now I know thy honest heart
Full sorely does reprove thee;
Be gay then, in our joy take part,
And let the spirit move thee.
BALLAD.
IN Paris, as in London,
Vice thrives, and virtue's undone;
Errors, passions, want of truth,
Folly, in age as well as youth,
Are things by no means rare,
But honest usurers, friends since^e,
And judges with their conscience clear,
C'est qu'on ne voit guere.
In Paris All things vary,
Sixteen and sixty marry;
Men presuming on their purse,
Heirs with their estates at nurse,
Are things by no means rare:
But doctors who refuse a fee,
And wives and husbands who agree,
C'est qu'on ne voit guere.
In Paris idle passion
And folly lead the fashion;
Attention paid to show and dress,
Modest merit in distress,
Are things by no means rare:
But friendship in sarcastic sneers,
And honesty in widow's tears,
C'est qu'on ne voit guere.
BALLAD.
BEHOLD the fairies' jocund band,
Who firm, though low of stature,
Against giant vice shall make a stand.
Pourtraying human nature.
We Have characters of every mould,
All tempers, forms, and sizes,
The grave, the gay, the young, the old,
Hid under quaint disguises.
Then hey for the fairies, etc.
We have a priest who never swears,
But who is always ready
With money, or advice, or prayers,
To help the poor and needy.
Then hey for the fairies, etc.
A man and wife, who both on crutch
Are now obliged to hobble,
Who fifty years, or near as much,
Have never had a squabble.
Then hey for the fairies, etc.
A magistrate upright and wise,
To whom no bribe is given,
And who before two charming eyes
Can hold the balance even.
Then hey for the fairies, etc.
A learned physician of great skill,
All cures, like Galen, pat in,
Who never does his patients kill,
Take fees, or jabbers latin.
Then hey for the fairies, etc.
A country squire who hates the smell
Of Stingo and October,
A modern poet who can spell,
And a musician sober.
Then hey for the fairies, etc.
Away then, comrades, beat to arms,
Display your sportful banners,
Strike hard at vice, explore false charms,
And catch the living manners.
Then hey for the fairies, etc.
BALLAD.
CHAIRS to mend, old chairs to mend.
Like mine to botch is each man's fate,
Each toils in his vocation --
One man tinkers up the state,
Another mends the nation.
Your parsons preach to mend the heart,
They cobble heads' at college;
Physicians patch with terms of art
And latin want of knowledge.
But none for praise can more contend
Than I,
Who cry
Old chairs to mend.
Your lawyer's tools are flaws and pleas;
They manners mend by dancing;
Wigs are patches for degrees,
And lovers use romancing:
Fortunes are mended up and made,
Too frequently, with places --
With rouge, when their complexions fade,
Some ladies mend their faces.
But none for praise, etc.
BALLAD.
A Tinker I am,
My name's Natty Sam,
From morn to night I trudge it;
So low is my fate,
My personal estate
Lies all within this budget.
Work for the tinker ho, good wives,
For they are lads of mettle --
Twere well if you could mend your lives,
As I can mend a kettle.
The man of war
The man of the bar,
Physicians, priests, free-thinkers,
That rove up and down
Great London town,
What are they all but tinkers?
Work for the tinker, etc.
Those among the great
Who tinker the state,
And badger the minority,
Pray what is the end
Of their work, my friend,
But to rivet a good majority?
Work for the tinker, etc.
This mends his name,
That cobbles his fame,
That tinkers his reputation:
And thus, had I time,
I could prove th my rhyme,
Jolly tinkers of all the nation.
Work for the tinker, etc.
BALLAD.
ART one of those mad wags, whose brain
Intruder reason cannot contain,
Who are of such unruly minds,
They buffet waves, and split the winds;
In blanket robe, and crown of straw,
Who to mad subjects deal mad law?
If this it is makes thy bosom swell,
Hie demoniac to thy cell.
Or art thou drunk -- a frenzy too,
One of that hair-brained, noisy crew,
Who vigils keep at Bacchus' shrine,
And drown good reason in bad wine?
Every desire in life who think
Comprised in a desire to drink!
If by this demon thou'r^ possessed,
Hie the good drunkard home to rest.
Or art in love, and so gone mad?
Do in with folded arms? art sad?
Do sigh? do languish? do play pranks?
For which contempt is all thy thanks?
Do pant? do long for some frail charms,
Devoted to another's arms?
Is this thy madness, stupid elf?
Hie thee away and hang thyself.
BALLAD -- IN CLUMP AND CUDDEN.
WHEN in order drawn up, and adorned in his best,
If my soldier appears with more grace than the rest,
If his gaiters are jet, his accoutrements fine,
If his hair's tied up tight, and his arms brightly shine,
Let him turn, wheel, or face, march, kneel, stoop, or stand,
Anxious still to obey every word of command;
Erect like an arrow, or bending his knee,
It Is not for the general, it is all to please me.
If with smoke and with dust covered over by turns,
To gain a sham height, or false bastion, he burns;
If, of danger in spite, and regardless of fear,
He rushes to fight when there is nobody near:
In short, let him turn, etc.
BALLAD -- IN CLUMP AND CUDDEN.
A Novice in love, and a stranger to art,
As pure as my wishes my unpracticed heart;
When I rose with the lark, and out-warbled the thrush,
Free from falsehood or guile, for I knew not to blush:
Those past days I deplore.
When innocence guarded my unsullied fame,
When to think, and to act, and commend were the same;
When on my face,
In artless grace,
Danced frolic sport and pleasure -- now no more.
Ere I listened and loved, ere man smiled, and betrayed,
Ere by horror appalled, and of conscience afraid;
Lost to each fond delight that ever woman adorned,
By a hard judging world looked at, pitied, and scorned,
Those past joys I deplore:
Those joys, ere by man's artful treachery forsook,
Which, guiltless and pleased, with the world I partook:
When on my face,
With artless grace,
Danced frolic sport and pleasure -- now no more.
DUET -- IN CLUMP AND CUDDEN.
PLATOON. SAY Fanny, will thou go with me?
Perils to face, by land and sea,
That tongue can never tell ye?
And will thou all these dangers scorn,
Whilst in these arms
I hold thy charms,
Enraptured every opening morn,
When the drum beats reveillez.

FANNY. Yes, yes, Platoon -- I Will go with thee
In danger, whatsoever it be --
Believe it is truth I tell you:
My constant mind shall peril scorn,
Brave all alarms,
So in my arms
I hold thee every opening morn,
When the drum beats leveillez.

PLATOON. Still Fanny will thou go with me?
Suppose the cruel fates decree,
Alas how shall I tell you?
The news should come -- thy soldier fell,
And thou sha^t hear,
Appalled with fear,
Next morning his fatal passing bell,
When the drum beats reveillez.

FANNY. Still fearless will I go with thee,
Resigned to cruel fate's decree,
And bravely this I tell you:
When on the spot my soldier fell
I Would shed a tear,
The world should hear,
Mingling with his, my passing bell,
When the drum beats reveillez.

BOTH. To the world's end I Would go with thee.
Where thou art, danger never can be.
My j^y no tongue can tell ye^
And sure such love may perils scorn,
Brave all alarms,
While in my arms
I hold thee every opening morn,
When the drum beats reveillez.

BALLAD.
NOSEGAYS I cry, and, though little you pay,
They are such as you cannot get every day.
Who Will buy,? who will buy? -- it is nosegays I cry.
Who Will buy? who will buy? -- it is nosegays I cry.
Each mi^^ing, ambling, ^^sping blade,
Who smiles, and talks of blisses
He never felt, is here portray'd
In form of a Narcisses.
Nosegays I cry, etc.
Statesmen, like Indians, who adore
The sun, by courting power,
Cannot be shown their likeness more
Than in the humble sun-flower.
Nosegays I cry, etc.
Poets I Have here in sprigs of bays,
Devils in the bush are friars;
Nettles are critics, who damn plays,
And satirists are briars
Nosegays I cry, etc.
BALLAD -- IN TOM THUMB.
THE younker, who his first essay
Makes in the front of battle.
Stands all ag^ast, while (...) play,
And bullets round him ^attle
But pride steps in, and now no more
Fell fear his jav'li^ lances,
Like dulcet flutes the canno^s roar,
And groans turn country dances
So frights, and flurries, and what not,
Upon my fancy rushes,
I fear I know not why or what,
I Am covered over with blushes,
But let the honey season fly,
To second well my clapper,
The kitchen's whole artillery
Shall grace my husband's napper.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
IT IS said we venturous die-hards, when we leave the shore,
Our friends should mourn,
Left we return
To bless their sight no more:
But this is all a notion
Bold Jack cannot understand,
Some die upon the ocean,
And some on the land:
Then since it is clear,
However we steer,
No man's life's under his command.
Let tempests howl,
And billows roll,
And dangers press:
Of those in spite, there are some joys
Us jolly tars to bless,
For Saturday night still comes my boys,
To drink to Poll and Bess.
One seaman hands the sail, another heaves the log,
The purser swops
Our pay for slops,
The landlord sells us grog;
Then each man to his station,
To keep life's ship in trim,
What argufies noration?
The rest is all a whim:
Cheerly my hearts,
Then play your parts,
Boldly resolved to sink o^ swim;
The mighty surge
May ruin urge,
Of those in spite, etc.
For all the world just like the ropes aboard a ship,
Each man's rigged out
A vessel stout,
To take for life a trip:
The shrouds, the stays, and braces
Are joys, and hopes, and fears,
The halliards, sheets and traces,
Still, as each passion veers,
And whim prevails,
Direct the sails.
As on the sea of life he steers:
Then let the storm
Heaven's face deform,
And danger press:
Of those in spite, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
THE grey-ey'd Aurora, in saffron array,
'Twixt my curtains in vain took a peep,
And though broader and broader still brightened the day,
Naught could wake me, so sound did I sleep.
At length rosy Phoebus looked full in my face,
Full and fervent but nothing would do,
Till the dogs yelp'd impatient, and longed for the chase,
And shouting appeared the whole crew.
Come on, yoics honies, hark forward my boys,
There never was so charming a morn,
Follow, follow, wake Echo, to share in our joys --
Now the music, now echo -- mark! mark!
Hark! hark!
The silver-mouth'd hounds, and the mellow ton'd horn.
Fresh as that smiling morn from which they drew breath,
My companions are ranged on the plain,
Blessed with rosy contentment, that nature's best wealth,
Which monarchs aspire to in vain:
Now spirits like fire every bosom invade,
And now we in order let out,
While each neighboring valley, rock, woodland, and glade,
Re-vo^lies the air-rending shout.
Come on, etc.
Now renard's unearth'd, and runs fairly in view,
Now we have lost him so subtily he turns,
But the scent lies so strong, still we fearless pursue,
While each object impatiently burns:
Hark! Babbler gives tongue, and Fleet, Driver, and Sly,
The fox now the covert forsakes,
Again he is in view, let us after him fly,
Now, now to the river he takes.
Come on, etc.
From the river poor renard can make but one push,
No longer so proudly he flies,
Tired, jaded, worn out, we are close to his brush,
And conqer'd, like Caesar, he dies.
And now in high glee to board we repair,
Where sat, as we jovially quaff,
His portion of merit let every man share,
And promote the convivial laugh.
Come on, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
FROM prudence let my joys take birth,
Let me not be passion's slave,
Approved by reason, sweet's the mirth,
Vice of pleasure is the grave.
Then still to reason's dictates true,
Select the sweets of life like bees;
Thus your enjoyments will be few
But such as on reflection please.
Wine exhilirates the soul,
Inspires the mirth of every feast,
But gluttons so may drain the bowl,
Till man degenerates to beast:
Then mirth and wisdom keep in view,
And freely on the b^ttle seize;
What though your pleasures are but few!
They Are such as on reflection please.
Love the source of human joys,
The mind with bliss that sweetly ^^lls,
Too often its own end destroys,
And proves the source of human ills.
Here reason's dictates keep i^ view,
Or, farewell freedom, farewell ease,
The real joys of life are few
But such as on reflection please.
Then while we meet, let us only own
Joys that do honor to the heart,
And ceasing to prize these alone,
Deplore our frailty, sigh, and part;
Meanwhile to reason's dictates true,
Select the sweets of life like bees,
Thus your enjoyments will be few
But such as on reflection please.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
THE spangled green confessed the morn,
The rose bud dropped a tear,
And liquid prisms bedecked the thorn,
When Sandy sought his dear:
Sure never loon was ever so crossed --
Ye shepherds swains impart,
Where did she gang? ah me! I Have lost
The lassy of my heart.
Her charms are felt as soon at kenn'd,
Eyne bright at brilliant gem,
But of her beauties there is no end,
Why need I talk of them?
Each shepherd swain finds, to his cost,
What power they can impart,
But most poor Sandy, who has lost
The lassy of his heart.
But mine is the fault, and mine is the grief,
How could I rashly dare!
Oh I have finn'd beyond relief,
Against all that is sweet and rare:
But see, she comes! cease heart to bound,
Some comfort ah impart?
She smiles! ah shepherds I have found
The lassy of my heart!
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
OF all sensations pity brings,
To proudly swell the ample heart,
From which the willing sorrow springs,
In others grief that bear a part.
Of all sad sympathy's delights,
The manly dignity of grief
A joy in mourning that excites,
And gives the anxious mind relief:
Of these would you the feeling know,
Most generous, noble, greatly brave,
That ever taught a heart to glow,
It Is the tear that bedews a soldier's grave.
For hard and painful it his lot,
Let dangers come he braves them all;
Valiant perhaps to be forgot,
Or undistinguished doomed to fall:
Yet wrapped in conscious worth secure,
The world, that now forgets his toil,
He views from a retreat obscure,
And quits it with a willing smile.
Then trav'ler one kind drop bestow,
'Twere graceful pity, nobly brave;
Naught ever taught the heart to glow
Like the tear that bedews a soldier's grave.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
GO patter to lubbers and swabs do you see
'Bout danger, and fear, and the like,
A tight water boat and good sea-room give me,
And t'ent to a little I Will strike;
Though the tempests top gallant masts smack smooth should smite,
And shiver each splinter of wood,
Clear the wreck, stow the yards, and bouze every thing tight,
And under reef'd foresail we'll ^^ud:
Avast! nor don't think me a milk-sop so soft
To be taken for trifles aback,
For they says there is a providence sits up aloft
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Why I heard the good chaplain palaver one day
About souls, heaven, mercy, and such,
And, my timbers, what lingo he would coil and belay,
Why, 'twas just all as one as high D^tch:
But he said how a sparrow cannot founder do you see,
Without orders that comes down below,
And many fine things that p^o^'d clearly to me
That providence takes us in tow;
For, say^ he, do you mind me, let storms ever so often
Take the topsails of sailors aback,
There Is a sweet little cherub that sits up aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
I said to our Poll, for you see she would cry,
When last we weighed anchor for sea,
What argufies sniv'^ing, and piping your eye,
Why what a damned fool you must be!
Cannot you see the wor^d's wide, and there is room for us all,
Both for seamen and lubbers ashore,
And if to old Davy I should go, friend Poll,
Why you never will hear of me more:
What then, all is a hazard, come don't be so soft,
Perhaps I may laughing come back,
For do you see there is a cherub sit smiling aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Do You mind me a sailor should be every inch
All as one as a piece of the ship,
And with her brave the world without offering to flinch,
From the moment the anchor's a trip.
As for me, in all weathers, all times, sides, and ends,
Nought's a trouble from duty that springs,
For my heart is my Poll's, and my Rhino's my friend's,
And as for my life it is the king's;
Even when my time comes, never believe me so soft
As for grief to be taken aback,
That same little cherub that sits up aloft
Will look out a good birth for poor Jack.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
WHAT though from Venus Cupid sprung,
No attribute divine
-- Whatever the bawling ba^ds have sung --
Had he, his bow till Bacchus strung,
And dipped his darts in wine:
Till old Si^enus plunged the boy
In nectar from the vine,
Then love, that was before a toy,
Became the source of mortal joy;
The urchin shook his dewy wings,
And careless levelled clowns and kings,
Such power has mighty wine.
When Theseus on the naked shore
Fair Ariadne lest,
Do You think she did her fate deplore,
Or her fine locks or bosom tore,
Like one of hope bereft:
Not she indeed, her fleeting love
From mortal turns divine,
And as gay Bacchus' tigers move,
His car ascends amidst a grove
Of vines, surrounded by a throng,
Who lead the jolly pair along,
Almost half gone with wine.
Ma'm Helen loved the Phrygian boy,
He thought her all his own,
But hottest love will soonest cloy,
He never had brought her safe to Troy
But for the wife of The One.
She, merry gossip mixed a cup
Of tipple, right divine,
To keep love's flagging spirits up,
And He en drank it every sup;
This liquor is amongst learned elves,
Nepenthe called, but 'twixt ourselves,
'Twas nothing more than wine.
Of Lethe and its flowery brink
Let musty poets prate,
Where thirsty souls are said to drink,
That never they again may think
Upon their former state,
What is there in this soulless loss,
I pray you so divine?
Grief finds the palace and the cot,
Which, for a time, were well forgot;
Come here then, in our let he share,
The true oblivion of your care
Is only found in wine.
RONDEAU -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
SMILING grog is the sailor's best hope, his sheet anchor,
His compass, his cable, his log,
That gives him a heart which life's cares cannot canker,
Though dangers around him
Unite, to con^ound him,
He br^^es them, and tips off his grog.
It Is grog, only grog,
Is his rudder, his compass, his cable, his log,
The sailor's sheet anchor is grog.
What though he to a friend in trust
His prize money convey,
Who to his bond of faith unjust,
Cheats him and runs away:
What Is to be done? he vents a curse
Against all false hearts a^^ore,
Of the remainder clears his purse,
And then to sea for more.
There Is smiling grog, etc.
What though his girl, who often swore
To know no other charms,
He finds, when he returns ashore,
Clas^'d in a rival's arms:
What Is to be done? he vents a curse
And seeks a kinder she,
Dances, gets groggy, clear^ his purse,
And goes again to sea.
To crosses born, still trusting there,
The waves less faithless than the fair;
There into toils to rush again,
And stormy perils brave -- what then?
Smiling grog, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
YANKO he tell, and he no lie,
We near one pretty brook,
Him flowing hair, him lovely yie^
Sweetly on Orra look:
Him see big world fine warrior men,
Grand cruel king love blood;
Great king! but Yan^o say what den
If he no honest good?
Virtue in foe be virtue still,
Fine stone be found in mine,
The sun one dale, as well one hill,
Make warm wherever him shine.
You brod^r him, him brother you,
So all the world should call,
For nature say, and she say true,
That men be brother all.
If cruel man, like tiger grim,
Come bold in thirst of blood,
Poor man: -- be noble -- pity him,
That he no honest good:
Virtue in foe be virtue still,
Fine stone be found in mine,
The sun one dale, as well one hill,
Make warm wherever him shine.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
I am a jolly fisherman,
I catch what I can get,
Still going on my betters' plan,
All Is fish that comes to ^^t;
Fish, just like men, I Have often caught,
Crabs, gudgeous, poor John, Codfish,
And many a time to market brought,
A devilish sight of odd fish.
Thus all are fishermen through life,
With weary pains and labor,
This baits with gold, and that a wife,
And all to catch his neighbor;
Then praise the jolly fisherman,
Who takes what he can get,
Still going on his betters' plan,
All Is fish that comes to net.
Then pike to catch the little fry,
Extends his greedy jaw,
For all the world as you and I,
Have seen your men of law:
He who to laziness devotes
His time, is sure a numb fish,
And members who give silent votes
May fairly be called dumb fish:
False friends to eels we may compare,
The roach resembles true ones!
Like gold fish we find old friends rare,
Plenty as herrings new ones.
Then praise, etc.
Like fish then mortals are a trade,
And trapp'd, and sold, and bought;
The o^d wife and the tender maid
Are both with tickling caught;
Indeed the fair are caught, it is said,
If you but throw the line in,
With maggots, flies, or something red,
Or any thing that is shining:
With small fish you must lie in wait
For those of high condition,
But it is alone a golden bait
Can catch a learned physician.
Then praise, etc.
SONG -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
ARMED with javelin, armed with dart,
With mighty arm and steady heart,
We to the battle go;
Yet, 'ere we part,
We join with all our friends so dear,
And fervent adoration pay
To the bright orb that gave us day.
Then void of fear,
We rush to meet the foe;
Station'd on impervious ground,
We watch their number scattered round;
The subtle ambush then prepare,
And see they fall into the snare
Hid as in the woods we lay,
They tread the unsuspected way;
Sudden and fierce from every bush,
Upon the astonished foe we rush,
Bold and resolved: -- and now around,
Hark! the dreadful war-whoop sound,
Confusion, terror, and dismay,
It scatters as it wings its way:
They fly! confusion in their train,
And slaughter treads the sanguine plain
Hark of our friends the welcome cry,
Proclaims for us the victory?
Then fervent adoration pay
To the bright orb that gave us day.
See the festive train advance,
Breathe the music, lead the dance!
Sound the cymbals!
Beat the tymbals!
Haste, in glad procession come
To our anxious friends at home,
(...) our reception who prepare,
While acclamations rend the air,
And loudly a whole nation cry,
Honor, glory, victory.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
BE it known to all those whoso^^^r it regard^,
That we fingers of baliads were always ca^l'd bards;
And from Ida to Grub-street the muses who follow
Are each mother's son the true spawn of Apollo:
Thus recording great men, or a flea, or a star,
Or the spheres, or a jew's-harp, we are all on a par;
Nor in this do I tell you a word of a lie,
For Homer sung ballads and so do I.
Don't you know what the ancient's were -- great things they talked,
How they rode upon Pegasus -- that is to say, walked --
That near kindred gods they drove Phoebus's chariot,
The English of which is -- they lived in a garret:
And thus they went forward, Diogenes quaff'd,
Heraclitus cried, and Democritus laughed,
Menander made multitudes both laugh and cry,
But Homer sung ballads and so do I.
Thus did they strange whimsical notions pursue,
Some argued on one leg, and some upon two;
To which last my pretensions are not hypothetic,
For it is certainly clear I Am a perapatetic:
Lycurgus and Solon 'bout laws made a pother,
Which went in at one ear, and then out at the other.
Old songs such as mine are will nobody buy?
Come, Homer sung ballads and so do I.
Historic was Pliny, and Plato divine,
Ovid wrote about love, and Anacreon wine,
Great Cicero argued to every man's palate,
And when he was out -- 'twas a hole in the ballad:
Thus to great men of old, who have made such a rout,
My (...) to call cousin I Have fairly made out,
And if any hereafter my right should deny,
Te^^ em Homer sung ballads, and so do I.
BALLAD -- IN THE BY STANDER.
Look fair^y all the world around,
And, a^ you truth deliver,
Tell me what character is found
A real savoir vivre?
Who truly merits sober same --
To find you need not wander,
None can detect life's fraudful game
So well as the By-stander.
The lover cogs, and palms, and slips,
The easy fair to buffle,
And still ^o win that slake her lips,
Will deal and cut, and shuffle:
Still will he ply each subtle art,
Till he has quite trapann'd her,
And then is sure to trump her heart,
If absent the By-stander.
Preferment is a bowling green,
Where, placed in each position,
Bowls jostling in and out are seen,
To reach the Jack ambition.
The bias interest still they try,
Twist, turn, and well meander,
Yet their maneuvers, rub or sly,
Are known to the By-stander.
The law's a game at whist, wherein
The parties nine are both in,
Where tricks alone the game can win,
And honors go for nothing:
And while they, a sure game to nick,
Their client's money squander,
Fu^l many more than one odd trick
Discovers the By-stander.
The coxcomb plays at shuttlecock,
The wit commands and questions,
The carping cits to commerce ^lock,
Each follows his suggestions.
Yet he alone who merits fame,
Who blunts the shafts of slander,
And on the square life's mo^ely game
Best plays is the By-stander.
BALLAD -- IN THE GRACES.
AT first like an infant appearing,
With neither his bow nor his darts,
To his wiles we attend without fearing,
Till he creeps by degrees to our hearts.
When soon for our folly requited,
This guest the sole master we find,
For scarce to the bosom invited,
He lords it at will over the mind.
BALLAD -- IN THE GRACES.
SAY, fluttering heart,
Why after days of sweet delight,
Where conscious innocence bore part,
Serene as smiling morn, peaceful as silver night,
Or gay as gaudy noon, when Phoebus' beams shone bright.
Say, how one hour,
One little instant could remove
That vacant careless joy? what power
Inflict the torments we now prove;
Cynthia forbid it ever should be love.
Dear goddess, for fair honor's sake,
Relieve the torments we partake!
Teach us to cure our amorous fires,
Or else permit us our desires:
And this with zealous care perform,
Swift as the wind that rules the storm;
Swift as the glowing god of day
Darts from afar a downward ray,
And so shall vot'ries to thy praise
A thousand, thousand altars raise.
BALLAD -- IN THE HONEST IMPOSTORS.
THAT girl who fain would choose a mate,
Should never in fondness fail her,
May thank her lucky stars if fate
Should splice her to a sailor.
He braves the storm, the battle's heat,
The yellow boys to nail her;
Diamonds, if diamonds she could eat,
Would seek her honest sailor.
If she would be constant, still his heart
She Is sure will never fail her;
For, though a thousand leagues apart,
Still faithful it her sailor.
If she be false, still he is kind,
And absent does bewail her,
Her trusting as he trusts the wind,
Still faithless to the sailor.
A butcher can procure her prog,
Three threads to drink a tailor,
What Is that to buiscuit and to grog,
Procured her by her sailor.
She who would such a mate refuse,
The devil sure must a^l her;
Search round, and, if your wi^e, you will choose
To wed an honest sailor.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
'TWAS in the good ship Rover
I sailed the world around,
And for three years and over,
I never touched British ground;
At length in England landed,
I lest the roaring main,
Found all relations stranded,
And went to sea again.
That time bound straight to Portugal,
Right fore and aft we bore;
But when we made Cape Ortugal,
A ga^e blew off the shore:
She lay, so did it shock her,
A log upon the main,
Till, saved from Davy's locker,
We stood to sea again.
Next in a frigate sailing,
Upon a squally night,
Thunder and lightning hailing
The horrors of the fight,
My precious limb was loop'd off,
I, when they would eased my pain,
Thanked God I was not popp'd off,
And went to sea again.
Yet still am I enabled
To bring up in life's rear,
Although I Am quite disabled,
And lie in Greenwich tier;
The king, God bless his royalty,
Who saved me from the main,
I Will praise with love and loyalty,
But never to sea again.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
THE morning breaks,
Those ruddy streaks
Proclaim the opening day,
With glowing health,
The sportsman's wealth,
Away boys, come away.
The mellow horn
On the still morn
Pours sounds which echo mocks,
While following bound
Man, horse, and hound,
TO unearth the wily fox.
Hark echo mocks
The winding horn,
That on the expanded wing of morn,
Though sweet the sound in dreadful yell,
Tolls out a knell
To the devoted fox.
Now off he is thrown,
The day's our own,
See yonder where he takes;
To cheat our eyes,
In vain he tries
The rivers and the brakes.
The mellow horn
Breaks on the morn,
And leads over hills and rocks;
While following bound
Man, horse, and hound,
TO entrap the wily fox.
Hark echo mocks, etc.
Now, now he is seized,
The dogs well pleased
Behold his eye balls roll;
He yields his breath,
And from his death
Is born the flowing bowl.
The mellow horn
That through the morn
Led over hills and rocks,
Now sounds a call
To see the fall
Of the expiring fox.
GLEE -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
COME around me and weep, to your hearts take despair:
It Is a cause that all nature must mourn,
Poor Hylas, of love from all had a share,
From our wishes for ever is torn.
That Hylas to whom we looked up for a smile,
As we blessings from heaven would obtain,
Whose form was so faultless, whose tongue knew no guile,
Is gone, and our wishes are vain.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
IT IS true the marks of many years
Upon my wrinkled front appears,
Yet have I no such idle fears
This will my fortune spoil:
Gold sti^ some happiness bestows,
Even where no youthful ardour glows;
For proof dear girl, take these rouleaus,
And give a sweet smile.
It Is true upon my haggard face
No marks of beauty can you trace,
Nor wears my figure ought of grace
To ensure the lover's bliss?
Yet am I no such horrd fright
But that bank notes may set things right,
Take then these bills all drawn, at sight,
And give me a sweet kiss.
It Is true I know not to be kind.
And that within my hardened mind
To more a jewel can you find
Then beauty in my face:
But one within this casket here
May make a ^ends, its lustre's clear,
Nor shall I think I Have sold it dear
Paid by a sweet embrace.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
COME painter, with thy happiest slight,
Portray me every grace
In that blessed region of delight,
My charming Silvia's face:
And hear me painter, to enhance
The value of thine art,
Steal from her eyes that very glance
That stole away my heart,
Her forehead paint, in sway and rule,
Where sits, with pleasure graced,
A form like Venus beautiful,
And like Diana Chaste:
Then paint her cheeks -- come, paint and gaze,
Guard well thy heart the while,
And then her mouth, where Cupid plays
In an eternal smile.
Next draw -- presumptuous painter hold;
Ah think to thee 'twas given
To paint her bosom? -- would so bold
Presume to copy heaven!
Nay leave the task, for it is above;
Far, far above thine art!
Her portrait's drawn -- the painter love,
The tablet my fo^d heart.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
A Sailor's life's a life of woe,
He works now late now early,
Now up and down, now to and fro,
What then he takes it cheerly:
Blessed with a smiling can of grog,
If duty call,
Stand, rise, or fall,
To fate's last verge he will jog:
The cadge to weigh,
The sheets belay,
He does it with a wish!
To heave the lead,
Or to cat-head
The pondrous anchor fish:
For while the grog goes round,
All sense of danger drowned,
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, and laugh a little,
And work a little, and swear a little,
And fiddle a little, and foot it a little,
And swig the flowing can.
If howling winds and roaring seas
Give proof of coming danger,
We view the storm, our hearts at eas^,
For Jack's to fear a stranger;
Blessed with the smiling grog we fly,
Where now below
We headlong go,
Now rise on mountains high;
Spite of the gale,
We hand the sail,
Or take the needful reef,
Or man the deck
To clear some wreck,
To give the ship relief:
Though perils threat around,
All sense of danger drowned,
We despise it to a man.
We sing a little, etc.
But yet think not our fate is hard,
Though storms at sea thus treat us,
For coming home, a sweet reward,
With smiles our sweethearts greet us!
Now too the friendly grog we quaff,
Our amorous toast.
Her we love most,
And gayly sing and laugh:
The sails we furl,
Then for each girl
The petticoat display;
The deck we clear,
Then three times cheer,
As we their charms survey;
And then the grog goes round,
All sense of danger drowned,
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, etc.
CATCH -- IN THE BY-STANDER.
HERE lies a philosopher, knowing and brave,
From whom madam nature never hid the least wonder,
Who looking to heaven, tumbled into his grave,
And disdained that same earth where he rotting lies under.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
AWAY and join the rendezvous,
Good fellowship reigns here,
Joys standard flying in your view,
To invite each volunteer.
Hark! pleasures drum
Cries come, come, come,
Obey the kind salute,
The echoing hall
Resounds the call,
To welcome each recruit.
Behold the dinner in array,
A column it appears;
While pyramids of whips display
A corpse of grenadiers.
Hark! pleasure's drum, etc.
See rivers, not of blood, poured out,
But nectar, clear and strong,
Young Ganemede's become a scout,
Hebe an aid-de-camp.
Hark! pleasure's drum, etc.
Mow down the ranks, see, see, they fly,
Attack them glass in hand;
Close quarters, rally, fight or die,
It Is Bacchus gives command.
Hark! pleasures drum, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
To Bachelor's-Hall we good fellows invite,
To partake of the chase that makes up our delight;
We have spirits like fire, and of health such a stock,
That our pulse strike the seconds as true as a clock.
Did you see us you would swear, as we mount with a grace,
That Diana had dubbed some new gods of the chase.
Hark away, hark away, all nature looks gay,
And Aurora with smiles ushers in the bright day.
Dick Thickset came mounted upon a (...) black,
A better fleet gelding never hunter did back;
Tom Trig rode a bay, full of mettle and bone,
And gaily B^b Buxom rode proud on a roa^;
But the horse of all horses that rivall'd the day
Was the squire's Neck-or-Nothing, and that was a gray.
Hark away, etc.
Then for hounds, there was Nimble, so well that climbs rocks,
And Cocknose, a good one at scenting a fox,
Little Plunge, like a mole who will ferret and search,
And beetle-brow'd Hawk's-eye, so dead at a lurch.
Young Sly-looks, who scents the strong breeze from the sou^h,
And musical Echo-well, with his deep mouth.
Hark away, etc.
Our horses thus all of the very best of blood,
It Is not likely you will easily find such a stud*
And for hounds our opinions with thousands we'd back,
That all England throughout cannot produce such a pack.
Thus, having described you dog^, horses, and crew,
Away we set off, for the fox is in view.
Hark away, etc.
Sly renard's brought home, while the horns sound a call,
And now you're all welcome to Bachelor's Hall,
The sav'ry sirloin grateful smoaks on the board,
And Bacchus pours wine from his favorite hoard.
Come on then, do honor to this jovial place,
And enjoy the sweet pleasures that spring from the chase;
Hark away, hark away, while our spirits are gay,
Let us drink to the joys of the next coming day.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
LET bards elate,
Of Sue and Kate
And Moggy take their fill O,
And pleased rehearse
In jingling verse
The lass of Richmond hill O:
A lass more bright
My amorous flight,
Impelled by love's fond workings,
Shall loudly sing,
Like any thing,
It Is charming Peggy Perkins.
Some men compare
The favorite fair
To every thing in nature;
Her eyes divine
Are suns that shine,
And so on with each feature.
Leave, leave, ye fools,
The hackneyed rules,
And all such subtle quirkings,
Sun, moon, and stars
Are all a farce,
Compared to Peggy Perkins.
Each twanging dart
That through my heart
From Cupid's bow has morric'd,
Were it a tree,
Why I should be
For all the world a forest;
Five hundred fops,
With shrugs and hops,
And leers, and smiles, and smirkings,
Most willing she
Would leave for me,
Oh what a Peggy Perkins.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
'TWAS Saturday night the twinkling stars
Shone on the rippling sea,
No duty called the jovial tars,
The helm was lashed a-lee;
The ample can adorned the board:
Prepared to see it out,
Each gave the lass that he adored,
And pushed the grog about.
Cried honest Tom, my Peg I Will toast,
A frigate neat and trim,
All j^lly Portsmouth's favorite boast:
I Would venture life and limb.
Sail seven long years, and never see land,
With dauntless heart and stout,
So tight a vessel to command --
Then push the grog about.
I Will give, cried little Jack, my Poll,
Sailing in comely state,
Top gan't sails set, she is so tall,
She looks like a first rate:
Ah! would she take her Jack in tow,
A voyage for life throughout,
No better birth I Would wish to know,
Then push the grog about.
I Will give, cried I, my charming Nan,
Trim, handsome, neat, and tight,
What joy so fine as ship to man,
She is my heart's delight!
So well she bears the storms of life,
I Would sail the world throughout,
Brave every toil for such a wife,
Then push the grog about.
Thus to describe Poll, Peg, or Nan,
Each his best manner tried;
Till, summoned by the empty can,
They to their hummocks hied:
Yet still did they their vigils keep,
Though the huge can was out,
For, in soft visions gentle sleep
Still pushed the grog about.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
THAN marriage and music can ought be more like?
Both are bound and cemented by strong chords;
Hymen's chains, though they gall, yet with ecstasy strike,
Exactly like discords and concords:
Like hooting of owls and of bats on the wing,
Strife all wedding happines^ garb^es,
But when hearts born for p^easure in unison sing,
It Is the mellow-ton'd nightingale warbles.
When the wife or the husband a note sounds too sharp,
In alt both immediately soar;
On family discords they mutually harp,
Nor will either come down a note lower.
Thus like hooting, etc.
All harmony's powers in wedlock we trace,
Dutch harmony, nor Italiano;
She thunders the counter, he grumbles the bass,
And the children squall out the soprano.
Thus like, etc.
RONDEAU -- IN THE ODDITIES.
ALAS where shall I comfort find?
My peace is gone, distressed my mind,
My heart beats high,
I know not why,
Poor heart! ah me, ah me!
So tender, artless, and so young,
I listened to his flattering tongue,
Nor did I ever
Suspect a snare
From one who went to sea.
For sailors kind and honest are,
They injured virtue make their care,
One, only one, did ever depart
From that proved rule, and he,
Ah me!
Was born to break my simple heart.
Alas, etc.
When absent from my longing arms,
Each hour was fraught with new alarms,
Each rising morn beheld my tears,
The softest breeze, in my fond fears,
Did the horizon straight deform,
And zephyr grew into a storm:
Yet to be cheated of my bliss,
And was I then so kind for this?
Alas, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
HOW much I love thee girl would kn^w,
Better than rosin loves the bow,
Than treble shrill the growling bass
Or spruce guitars a tawdry case.
No more then let us solo play,
To Hymen's temple jig away,
There when we get,
In a duet,
Of pleasure will we take our swing.
Joy's fiddle shall play,
Love's bells shall ring:
And while we celebrate the day,
We'll frisk away,
And laugh and play,
And dance and sing,
And frisk away like any (...)*
I love thee more, I really think,
Than dancers jigs, or fiddlers drink;
Than dancing-masters love a kit,
Or jolly sailors sal dral tit.
No more then, etc.
I love thee Griddy Oh much more
Than singers love a loud encore,
Than curates crowdies love to scratch,
Or roaring drunkards love a catch.
No more then, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
THE wind was hushed, the fleecy wave
Scarcely the vessel's sides could lave,
When in the mizen top his stand
Tom C^ueline taking, spied the land.
Oh what reward for all his toil!
Once more he views his native soil,
Once more he thanks indulgent fate,
That brings him to his bonny Kate.
Soft as the ^^ghs of Z^phyr flow,
Tender and plaintive as her woe,
S^rene was the attentive eve,
That heard Tom's bonny Kitty grieve.
'Oh what avails*' cried ^he, 'my pain?
'He's swa^low'd in the greedy main:
'Ah never shall I welcome home,
'With tender joy, my honest Tom.'
Now high upon the faithful shroud,
The land awhile that seemed a cloud,
While objects from the mist arise,
A feast present Tom's longing eyes.
A riband near his heart which lay,
Now see him on his hat display,
The given sign to show that fate
Had brought him safe to bonny Kate.
Near to a cliff, whose heights command
A prospect of the shelly strand,
While Kitty fate and fortune blamed,
Sudden, with rapture, she exclaimed,
'But see, oh heaven! a ship in view,
'My Tom appears among the crew,
'The pledge he swore to bring safe home,
'Streams on his hat -- it is honest Tom.'
What now remains were easy told,
Tom comes, his pockets lined with gold,
Now rich enough do more to roam,
To serve his king, he stays at home.
Recounts each toil, and shows each scar,
While Kitty and her constant tar
With reverence teach to bless their fates
Young honest Toms and bonny Kates.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
WHY I be squire Ned of Gobble-hall,
I be come to London town with father,
And they that ^^^tle I a goose goes to call,
Should call me a fox much rather.
I be silent and sly,
And cunning, and dry,
And with a kawk's-eye
To watch what is said and done am ready;
So they that goes to hope
To hang me for a fool,
Will find in the rope
A knave, that he wool:
So you never must
To faces trust,
For I be sly,
And queer, and dry
And they that thinks to make a fool of ^,
Are all deceived in little Neddy.
When the comely captain on his knees I find,
Who to mother has vowed, and kissed her
Why it is nothing more than kind after kind,
For the dancing master kisses sister:
So they thinks me to chouse,
While I goes about the house,
As tame as a mouse,
By the nick name of simple Teddy;
But it is all one to me
If, in day time, do you see,
They meets their spark,
I kiss maids in the dark,
So you never must
To faces trust, etc.
If father be in love with a bouncing dame,
Thinking I be a lout, and no better,
He spells me out good madam's name,
And gives me a guinea and a letter,
What does I do, do you think?
To myself while I wink,
I pockets the chink,
Burns the letter, and makes love to the lady:
Thus, while down to the ground,
I tricks them all round,
Pretty sister and mamma,
And my reverend pappa:
So you never must
To faces trust, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
BEN Backstay loved the gentle Anna,
Constant as purity was she,
Her honey words, like succ'ring manna,
Cheered him each voyage he made to sea.
One fatal morning saw them parting,
While each the other's sorrow dried,
They, by the tear that then was starting,
Vowed to be constant till they died.
At distance from his Anna's beauty,
While howling winds the sky deform,
Ben sighs, and well performs his duty,
And braves for love the frightful storm:
Alas in vain -- the vessel battered,
On a rock splitting, opened wide,
While lacerated, torn, and shattered,
Ben thought of Anna, sighed, and died.
The semblance of each charming feature,
That Been had worn around his neck,
Where art stood substitute for nature,
A tar, his friend, saved from the wreck.
In fervent hope while Anna, burning,
Blushed as she wished to be a bride,
The portrait came, joy turned to mourning,
She saw, grew pa^e, sunk down, and died!
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
ABERGAVNEY is fine, Aberistwith also,
And the lasses it is fine when to market they go;
The birds and the pretty finches sing fine in the grove,
But the finest bird of all is that little rogue luff.
Luff me I pray you now, luff me as your life,
And Taffy and Griddy shall soon be man and wife.
The mountains are high, and the fallies are low,
And from Radnor to Glamorgan's a long fay to co;
But I Would co, and I Would run, and I Would fly, and I^d rove,
If when I came there I should meet with my luff.
Luff me, etc.
Toil and labor is hard, and the time's very long,
From the lark's pretty chant to the nightingale's song.
But I Would toil and I Would labor throughout the whole year,
And think it a day, were I blessed with my dear.
Luff me, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
RESPLENDENT gleam'd the ample moon,
Reflected on the glittering lee,
The bell proclaimed night's awful noon,
And scarce a ripple shook the sea,
When thus, for sailors, nature's care,
What education has denied,
Are of strong sense, a bounteous share
By observation well supplied:
While thus, in bold and honest guise,
For wisdom moved his tongue,
Drawing from reason comfort's drop
In truth and fair reflection wise,
Right cheerfully sung
Little Ben that kept his watch on the main top,
Why should the hardy tar complain?
It Is certain true he weathers more
From dangers on the roaring main
Than lazy lubbers do ashore.
Never let the noble mind despair,
Though roaring seas run mountains high,
All things are built with equal care,
First rate or wherry, man or fly:
If there is a power that never errs,
And certainly it is so --
For honest hearts what comfort's drop --
As well as kings and emperors,
Why not take in tow
Little Ben that keeps his watch in the main top?
What though to distant climes I roam,
Far from my darling Nancy's charms,
The sweeter is my welcome home,
To blissful moorings in her arms.
Perhaps she on that sober moon
A lover's observation takes,
And longs that little Ben may soon
Relieve that heart which sorely achs.
Never fear, that power that never errs,
That guards all things below --
For honest hearts what comfort's drop --
As well as kings and emperors,
Will surely take in tow
Little Ben, that keeps his watch in the main top.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
CROWN me Bacchus, mighty god,
The victory it thine,
Cupid's bow yields to thy rod,
And love submits to wine:
Love, the dream of idle boys,
That makes the sage an ass,
Love cannot vie with those sweet joys
That crown the sparkling glass.
To plunge in care let lovers whine,
Such fools who will be may,
Good fellows glass in hand combine
To drive pale care away:
With grief of heart, how many a boy
Goes mad to please some lass;
We too go mad, but it is with joy,
Fired by the sparkling glass.
How many dangle on a tree
Who buckle to love's tether,
True to our honest purpose we
Hang too, but it is together:
The lover numbers, by his sighs,
The moments as they pass,
We count them in a way more wise.
By putting round the glass.
See in his cage the husband sing,
Wife, children, squall sonorous,
We make the air and glasses ring,
While singing freedom's chorus:
No never shall presumptuous love
The joys of wine surpass,
Worn out by bickerings, even Jove
Seeks Bacchus and his glass.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
OF the ancients is it speaking my soul you would be after,
That they never got how came you so?
Would you seriously make the good folks die with laughter?
To be sure their dogs tricks we don't know.
Wid your smalliliow nonsense, and all your queer bodderns,
Since whisky's a liquor divine,
To be sure the old ancients, as well as the moderns,
Did not love a sly sup of good wine.
Apicius and Aesop, as authors assure us,
Would swig till as drunk as a beast,
Den what do you tink of that rogue Epicurus?
Was not he a tight hand at a feast!
Wid your smalliliow, etc.
Alexander the Great, at his banquets who drank hard,
When he no more worlds could subdue,
Shed tears to be ^^re, but 'twas tears of the tankard,
To refresh him -- and pray would not you?
Wid your smalliliow, etc.
Den dat the other old fellow they called Aristotle,
Such a devil of a tipler was he,
That one night, having taken too much of his bottle,
The taef staggered into the sea.
Wid your smalliliow, etc.
Den they made what they call of their wine a libation,
Which, as all authority quotes,
They threw on the ground, musha what boderation,
To be sure 'twas not thrown down their troats.
Wid your smalliliow, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
I sailed from the Downs in the Nancy,
My jib how she smack'd through the breeze,
She Is a vessel as tight to my fancy
As ever sailed on the salt seas.
So adieu to the white clifts of Briton,
Our girls, and our dear native shore,
For if some hard rock we should split on,
We shall never see them any more.
But sailors were born for all weathers,
Great guns let it blow high, blow low,
Our duty keeps us to our tethers,
And where the gale drives we must go.
When we entered the gut of Gibraltar,
I verily thought she would have sunk,
For the wind so began for to altar,
She yaw'd just as thof she was drunk.
The squall tore the mainsail to shivers,
Helm a weather the hoarse boatswain cries,
Brace the foresail athwart, see she quivers,
As through the rough tempest she flies.
But sailors, etc.
The storm came on thicker and faster,
As black just as pitch was the sky,
When truly a do^^ful disaster
Befell three poor sailors and I.
Ben Buntline, Sam Shroud, and Dick Handsail,
By a blast that came furious and hard,
Just while we were furling the mainsail,
Were every soul swept from the yard.
But sailors, etc.
Poor, Ben, Sam, and Dick cried peccavi,
As for I, at the risk of my neck,
While they sunk down in peace to old Davy,
Caught a rope, and so landed on deck.
Well what would you have, we were stranded,
And out of a fine jolly crew
Of three hundred that sailed, never landed
But I and I think twenty-two.
But sailors, etc.
After thus we at sea had miscarried,
Another guess way sat the wind,
For to England I came, and got married
To a lass that was comely and kind!
Bu^ whether for joy or vexation
We know not for what we were born,
Perhaps I may find a kind station,
Perhaps I may touch at Cape Horn.
For sailors, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
SURE 'ent the world a masquerade,
Wid shrugs and queer grimaces,
Where all mankind a roaring trade
Drive underneath bare faces?
Pray don't the lover, let me ask,
Hid by a fascine battery,
Steal hearts away? and what is his mask?
To be sure it is not flattery.
Then join the general masquerade,
That men and manners traces,
To be sure the best masks dat are made
For cheating 'ent bare faces.
Weigh yonder lawyer -- I Will be bail,
So able are his talents,
The devil himself, in the other scale,
Would quickly kick the balance.
See that friar to a novice preach,
To holiness to win her,
Their masks dropped off, what are they each?
He a taef and she a sinner.
To be sure they 'ent, etc.
For her husband see you widow cry,
She Will never have another;
By my soul she weeps wid but one eye,
For she is leering with the the other.
You courtier see, who, in a ^ra^k,
Will promise fifty places,
By my soul his friends scarce turn their back
But he laughs before their faces.
To be sure he don't, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
DEAR Yanko say, and true he say,
All mankind, one and the other,
Negro, mulatto, and malay,
Through all the world be brother.
In black, in yellow, what disgrace,
That scandal so he use 'em?
For d^re no virtue in de face,
De virtue in the bosom.
Dear Yanko say, etc.
What harm dear in a shape or make?
What harm in ugly feature?
Whatever color, form, he take,
The heart make human creature,
Then black and copper both be friend,
No color he bring beauty,
For beauty Yanko say attend
On him who do him duty.
Dear Yanko say, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
I AM jolly Dick the lamplighter,
They say the sun's my dad,
And truly I believe it, sir,
For I Am a pretty lad.
Father and I the world delight,
And make it look so gay,
The difference is I lights by night,
And father lights by day.
But father's not the likes of I
For knowing life and sun,
For I queer tricks and fancies spy
Folks never show the sun:
Rogues, owls, and bats cannot bear the light,
I Have heard your wise ones say,
And so do you mind I sees at night
Things never sees by day.
At night men lay aside all art,
As quite a useless task,
And many a face and many a heart
Will then pull off the mask:
Each formal prud^ and holy wight
Will throw disguise away,
And sin it openly all night
Who fainted it all day.
His darling hoard the miser views,
Misses from friends decamp,
And many a statesman mischief brews
To his country over his lamp:
So father and I, do you take me right,
Are just on the same lay,
I barefaced sinners light by night,
And he false saints by day.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
SWEET is the dew-drop on the thorn,
That, like a prism, reflects the morn;
Sweet is the cheering solar ray,
That compasses the ample day;
Sweet is the balmy evening's close,
That shuts the soliage of the rose:
These to creation joys impart
Like those which warm the grateful heart,
The little songsters on the spray
Spontaneous chant their grateful lay,
Or, to the pebbly rivulet driven,
They sip, and lift their heads to heaven;
Or, for the worm or insect sly,
To seed their craving progeny:
Feelings a lesson that impart
To stimulate the grateful heart.
Mark vegetation, wondrous sight!
See how the germ breaks into light!
The fruitful shower the tree receives,
And fresher green adorns its leaves:
Man cultivates the grateful soil,
And flowers and fruit reward his toil:
Plants, birds, all nature thus impart
Joys such as warm the grateful heart.
SONG -- IN THE ODDITIES.
FIRST choose a pretty melody,
To take in all the flats:
Then change your drift,
And suddenly
Prepare to shift
The key;
Then growl
Like dogs, and mio^l
Like cats:
Then chatter like monkies -- now low, and now high,
Then whine and then sigh,
And all through the nose,
And then swim and die,
And then come to a close.
Among the flats and sharps now a tedious journey travel,
Then lose yourself in knots of chords,
And then those knots unravel:
Then sigh, and die,
And faint in bliss extatic,
And then the half tones try,
For a touch of the chromatic.
Then where you set out come again,
And now -- you're welcome home again.
Then once more the melody,
To take in all the flats:
Then change your drift,
And suddenly
Prepare to shift
The key;
Then growl
Like dogs, and miowl
Like cats,
Then chatter like monkies -- now low, and now high,
And all through the nose;
And then swim and die,
And then come to a close.
Yet not shabbily,
But with a fine contabile,
In which go high and low boy,
Still followed by the hautboy,
And all through the nose,
And then swim and die,
And then come to a close.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
I AM the world's epitome,
Look round it, and then say,
Nature and m^n may sit to me,
Their likeness to pourtray:
As nature, in her motley round,
Often shifts from day to night,
So sickle man is varying found,
Still changing wrong and right.
The application's prompt and ripe,
I of all nature am the type,
So turn me round,
I shall be found,
From right to left, and left to right,
Look how you will,
To vary still,
From white to black, and black to white.
Do but that learned counsel see,
Who proves that wrong is right,
And presently augment his fee,
His argument takes flight:
And now, unswearing what he swore,
The burden of his song
Reverses what he said before,
And proves that right is wrong.
The application's prompt and ripe,
I of that lawyer am the type:
For turn me round, etc.
Behold you lordly statesman frown,
At mention of a bribe,
As if disgrace it had brought down
On him and all his tribe:
But left behind, he will instant seize
Upon the well-fill'd sack,
Nor could the strength of Hercules
Have power to get it back.
The application's prompt and ripe,
I of that statesman am the type:
For turn me round, etc.
When basking in prosperity,
Each friend to serve you burns,
And boasting his sincerity,
The smiling white side turns:
But let uncertain fortune frown,
And take her blessings back,
Instant the friendly white is flown,
And every man looks black.
The application's prompt and ripe,
I of all nature am the type:
For turn me round, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
WHAT a plague cried young Colin would Chloe be at?
^ never will be caught in a noose:
Odds wounds I Am resolved, and who'd wager against that,
Were it even a guinea, he would lose:
I told the young baggage, says I, to her face,
Toy as much as you will, but no priest shall say grace.
Cried young Thyrsis, pray Colin this blustering hold,
What you have uttered is only through fear;
In the absence of danger all cowards feel bold,
But you would soon change your tone were she near:
She has honor and truth, and I say it to your face,
With her you will never toy till the priest shall say grace.
Away then cried Colin a soldier I Will go,
In each quarter to find out a wife;
I Will roar and I Will rant, rake a little, or so,
But no one shall snap me for life;
For in spite of their fancies, I Will say it to their face,
Toy as much as you will, but no priest shall say grace.
As he uttered those words, charming Chloe came by,
Unaffected and lovely as May;
Adieu then poor Colin cried she, with a sigh,
While the sun shines begone and make hay.
Cried Thyrsis, do you hear, you may well hide your face!
With such beauty would toy till the priest should say grace.
Odd rot it, cried Colin, woot let me alone,
With vexation my heart how it boils;
Why for her peace of mind I would forfeit my now --
Woot forgive me sweet Chloe? -- She smiles!
See, see glad consent lightens up in her face!
Then let us to church, where the priest shall say grace.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
WHAT th^f I be a country clown,
For all the f^ss that you make,
One need not to be born in town
To know what two and two make:
S^uire sop th^re thinks his empty ^ate
Worth all ours put together.
But how can that have any weight
That Is only made of (...).
Then duont ye be so proud, do you see,
It 'ent a thing that is suiting;
C^n one than the other better be,
When both are on a footing?
Now here is a man who seas and land
Has dreamt that he can cross over,
That all the world's at his command,
For he is a great philosopher:
That to each secret he no bars
Ever finds but can unlock it,
And conjure down the moon and stars,
And put them in his pocket:
But when you have caught him where is the prize
So mighty to the getter?
For sartin he can make us wise,
But can he make us better?
My lady there, because she is dressed
In lappets, frils, and flounces,
See how with pride her fluttering breast
Throbs, heaves, and jumps, and bounces.
And then it is said they makes a face,
New spick and span each feature,
As if they thought that a disgrace
That Is ready made by nature.
The money for a head so high,
Such scollops and such carving,
Would keep an honest family
A month or more from starving.
As for the doctors and their pill,
Odds waunds I cannot endure them,
For sartin they their patients kill
More oftener than they cure them.
And as for master poet here,
Who writes for fame and glory,
I th^nks as he is a little que^r
Poor soul in the upper story.
I Have yet another wipe to spare,
For wounds I Will give no quarter,
Next time you would find a fool, take care
You do not catch a taratr.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
TO look upon dres, upon show, upon birth,
As the noblest distinction of life,
On riches as all that give pleasure on earth,
And that only cure sorrow and strife;
And though to these maxims one might say quoi bon,
Yet this is the life of a lady of ton.
Stale virtue and vice to erase from their list,
Those of life make a pitiful part,
Things certainly in people's mouths that exist,
But have nothing to do with the heart:
To maxims like these one may well say quoi bon,
Yet this is the life of a lady of ton.
Upon prudence as vulgar, and honesty low,
On each man of merit a brute,
As an angel an ape, or, it is all one, a beau,
Dreft out in an elegant suit;
To maxims like these one may well say quoi bon.
Yet this is the life of a lady of ton.
To be short -- in a church as the best place to make
Appointments, or charms to display.
And the time most commode of all others to take
On Sunday for cheating at play:
These maxims it is certain ne sont pas trop bon,
Yet this is the life of a lady of ton.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
I WAS, do you see, a waterman,
As tight and spruce as any,
'Twixt Richmond town
And Horsley down
I earned an honest penny:
None could of fortune's favors brag
More than could lucky I,
My cot was snug, well filled my cag,
My grunter in the sly:
With wherry tight
And bosom light
I cheerfully did row,
And, to complete this princely life,
Sure never man had friend and wife
Like my Poll and my partner Joe.
I rolled in joys like these awhile,
Folks far and near carress'd me,
Till, woe is me,
So lubberly
The press-gang came and pressed me:
How could I a^ these pleasures leave?
How with my wherry part?
I never so took on to grieve,
It wrung my very heart.
But when on board
They gave the word,
To foreign parts to go,
I ru'd the moment I was born,
That ever I should thus be torn
From my Poll and my partner Joe.
I did my duty manfully
While on the billows rolling,
And, night or day,
Could find my way
Blindfold to the main-top ^owling:
Thus all the dangers of the main,
Quicksands and gales of wind,
I braved, in hopes to taste again
The joy^ I (...) behind:
In climes afar,
The hotest war,
Poured broadsides on the foe,
In hopes these perils to relate,
As by my side attentive fate,
My Poll and my partner Joe.
At last it pleased his majesty
To give peace to the nation,
And honest hearts
From foreign parts,
Came home for consolation:
Like lightning -- for I felt new life,
Now safe from all alarms --
I rushed, and found my friend and wife,
Lo^k'd in each other's arms!
Yet fancy not
I bore my lot
Tame like a lubber: -- No;
For seeing I was finely tricked.
Plump to the devil I fairly kicked
My Poll and my par^ner Joe.
BALLAD.
COTCHELIN sat all alone,
Devil a soul beside her,
While from Taddy, who was gone,
Oceans did divide her;
His pipes, which she would been used to hear,
Careless left behind him,
She thought she would try; her woes to cheer,
Till once again she would find him.
'Twill not do, you loodle*
Arrah now be aesy,
Tad was born with grief to make
Cotchelin run crazy.
She takes them up, and lays them down,
And now her bosom's panting,
And now she would sigh, and now she would frown,
Caze why? dore's something wanting:
And now she plays the pipes again,
The pipes of her dear Taddy,
And makes them tune his favorite strain,
Arrah be aesy Paddy.
Ah 'twill not do, you loodle loo,
Arrah now be aesy,
Tad was born with grief to make
Cotchelin run crazy.
Taddy from behind a bush,
Where he would long been listening,
Now like lightening forth did rush,
His eyes with with pleasure glistening,
Snatching up his pipes, he p^ay'd,
Pouring out his pleasure,
While half delighted, half afraid,
P^t the time did measure:
Ah well will do this loodle loo,
Arrah now be aesy,
Tad was born with joy to make
Cotchelin run crazy.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
HERE, a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling,
The darling of our crew,
No more he will hear the tempest howling,
For death has broached him too:
His form was of the manliest beauty,
His heart was kind and soft,
Faithful below he did his duty,
And now he is gone aloft.
Tom never from his word departed,
His virtues were so rare,
His friends were many, and true-hearted,
His Poll was kind and fair:
And then he would sing so blithe and jolly,
Ah many's the time and often!
But mirth is turned to melancholy,
For Tom is gone aloft.
Yet shall poor Tom find pleasant weather,
When he who all commands
Shall give, to call life's crew together,
The word to pipe all hands.
Thus death, who kings and tars dispatches,
In vain Tom's life had doff'd;
For though his body's under hatches,
His soul is gone aloft.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
THE storm had ceased, the vessel, striving,
Lay on the frightful breakers, torn,
When the drowned crew scarcely surviving,
Jack pined his destiny forlorn*
Where are those friends whom late I cherished,
That manly, noble, honest band,
Ah do I live, my messmates perished,
To wail them in a foreign land.
Where is my love, my charming Kitty,
Alas unmindful of my grief,
To others woes she gives her pity,
Nor thinks her Jack most wants relief.
But see what numbers curious thronging,
To view our misery, crowd the strand!
Hard fate's perhaps my life prolonging,
For murder in a foreign land.
But do my flattering eyes deceive me,
Or, if they do, what out-stretch'd arms
Are these thus tendered to relieve me?
It Is she, it is she, in all her charms.
My faith and truth, to so much beauty.
Fate to reward with partial hand,
This pattern sends of love and duty,
To save me in a foreign land.
BALLAD -- IN THE WHIM OF THE MOMENT.
I vow I thought you, at first sight,
A moppet, a baboon, a fright,
Or some hobgoblin of the night,
That guilty creatures waken:
With nose and chin like ram's horns curled,
And brows in furrowed wrinkles furled,
Well, it is amazing in this world,
How one may be mistaken.
For now I see, with half an eye,
You are not old, nor made awry,
Nor do your sh^mbling trotters ply,
As if by palsy shaken:
You're young as G^nemede and fair,
Narcissus had not such an air,
Well, it is amazing I declare,
How one may be mistaken.
BALLAD.
ONCE on a time to mighty Jove,
Complaints came from afar,
From men of unsuccessful love,
Miscarriages in war:
In law the want of equity,
Of mirth at city feasts,
Of pathos in their poetry,
And of good works in priests.
So loud and clamorous were these clods,
That Jove, never left at rest,
Convened a synod of the gods,
And (...) amongst the rest:
He, merry wag, knew what on earth
Thus caused them to repine,
And instant sent them genuine mirth,
Cask'd up in tons of wine.
The lover drank and eased his care,
Heroes grew high in fame,
A comely paunch marked each Lord M^yor,
And lawyers just became.
B^rds sung divine priests put up prayers,
^^r such a blessing given,
And Bacchus to this day declares,
There Is no such drink in heaven.
BALLAD.
WHEN last in the Dreadful your honor set sail,
On Newfoundland banks, there came on a hard g^^e.
There was thunder, red lightening, and co^d whist^ing ha^^,
Enough the old gemman to scare;
One who threatened your life, dashed below by a wave,
Your own hand I saw snatched from a watery grave;
And you said 'twas well done, for that still with the brav^
The noblest of g^ory's to spare.
When yard arm and yard arm long side of a foe,
When the blood from the scuppers rained on ^s below,
When crippled enough to be taken in tow,
To strike we saw M^unseeur prepare:
If a broad side below, or a volley above,
The men were ready to give her for love,
How often has your honor cried not a hand move,
A hero's true glory's to spare.
SONG.
FAR from strife and loves alarms,
With joyous heart, and mind at ease.
Time was when resistless charms,
Bacchus knew the way to please.
When while the merry glee went round,
Gaily I saw each minute pass,
Nor ever had I heard a sound
Like the sweet tink^ing of the glass.
My flask now broke, and spilt my wine,
For Cupid Bacchus' joys I quit,
The myr^le ki^s the b^^ghted vine,
And love, turned Fate, cries out submit.
BALLAD.
I WENT to sea with heavy heart,
Of her I loved the scorn,
Yet from my thoughts did never depart
Her image, night or morn:
Storms lour'd, waves rolled, and lightning slew,
Yet did I wish to live,
St^ll willing, for my poor heart was true,
To forget and to forgive.
The first word, when on English ground,
I (...) was her false name,
And soon upon enquiry sound
-- For scandal flies -- her shame:
She loved a youth before the wind,
Who cut and let her drive;
A ^^st, cried I, 'twere now too kind,
To forget and to forgive.
W^i^e of these thoughts my mind was full,
While adverse hopes and ^^ars,
Li^^ winds did this and that way pull,
She came to me in tears:
^^wn went my colors, and I swore
For her a^^ne I Would live,
Kissed her, and promised over and over,
To forget and to forgive.
BALLAD.
THE boatswain calls, the wind is fair,
The anchor heaving,
Our sweethearts leaving,
We to duty must repair,
Where our stations well we know:
Cast off halliards from the cleets,
Stand by well, clear all the sheets;
Come my boys,
Your handspi^es poise,
And give one general huzza:
Yet sighing as you pull away,
For the tears ashore that flow,
To the windlass let us go,
With yo heave ho!
The anchor coming now apeak,
Left the s^ip, striving,
Be on it driving,
That we the tap^ring yards must seek,
And back the ^oretop-sail well we know:
A pleasing duty! from aloft
We (...) see those charms were often,
When returning.
With passion burning,
We f^ndly gaze, those eyes that seem
In parting with big tears to stream;
But come, lest ours as safe should flow,
To the windlass once more go,
With yo heave ho!
N^w the ship is under weigh,
The breeze so willing,
The (...) filling,
The pr^st triangle cracks the stay,
So taugh^ to haul the sheet we know:
And now (...) we gaily sail,
The ^^assy beam receive^ the gale,
While ^reed from duty
To (...) b^auty,
L^^t on the ^^s^'ning shore (...),
A (...) every ^ar,
(...) at ^low,
(...) love he should go,
With yo heave ho!
BALLAD -- IN THE LONG ODDS.
AND did you hear what sad disaster,
Poor Peg of Mapledown betel,
For love that stoutest hearts can master,
Alas! that those who love so well,
In sorrow's train
Should mourn in vain:
Her story does such grief impel,
That woe is me the while I tell.
She loved a youth of honest kindred;
At church behold the happy pair;
And ask what 'twas their bliss that hindered,
For he was young, and she was fair:
Accursed be wars,
And party jars,
Why must the handsome danger share:
Alas it fills me with despair.
Onward to his liege lord's dwelling
A rebel rout had cut their way;
What shrieks ensued! and what a yelling!
For he a true man must away;
He swore the fight
Would end ere night,
And he would return with garlands gay,
Sweet trophies for his wedding day.
Night came, and saw the youth returning?
A^^urs'd (...) wa^'s destr^ctive kn^^e;
She ran t^ ^l^sp, with passion burning,
Her wedded lord -- depriv^d of life!
Oh cruel spite,
What! not one night,
Is not her tale with misery ri^e?
At once a maiden and a wife.
BALLAD -- IN THE LONG ODDS.
A Sailor, and an honest heart,
Lake s^ip and helm, are never apart
For, Low should one st^m win^ and tide
If the other should refuse to guide?
With that she freely cuts the waves.
And so the tar,
When clashing waves around him jar,
Consults his heart and dangers braves
Where duty calls; nor asks for more
Than grog aboard, and girl ashore.
It Is not a thousand leagues from home
More horrid than the billows foam?
It Is not that gentler is the breeze
In channel than in distant seas;
Danger surrounds him far and near:
But honest tar,
Though winds and water round him jar,
Consults his heart and scorns to fear,
The risks he runs endears him more
To grog aboard, and girl ashore.
It Is not that in the hottest fight
The murderous ball will sooner light
On that than any other spot,
To face the cannon is his lot;
He must of danger have his share:
But honest tar,
Though fire, and winds, and water jar,
Consults his heart, and shakes off care:
And when the battle's heat is over,
In grog aboard, drinks girl ashore.
BALLAD -- IN HARVEST HOME.
WOUNDS, here is such a coil! I am none of your poor
Petty varlets, who flatter, and cringe, and procure;
I Am a freeman, a nabob, a king on his throne,
For I Have chattles, and goods, and strong beer of my own:
Besides, it is a rule that good fellows never fail
To let any thing wait but the generous ale.
My interest I love; thee I love too, good wife,
But still I love better a jovial life:
And for thee, or my lady, with duty devout
I'^l run to Old Nick, when the dobbin's drank out.
But it is always a rule that good fellows never fail
To ^et any thing wait, but the generous ale.
SONG -- IN HARVEST HOME.
AWAY, pale fear and ghastly terror!
Fly, at a parent's voice away!
Correcting every youthful error,
^he deigns to bid, and I obey:
And Oh, my heart! thou murmur'st treason,
Perturb'd and frightened thus, to move;
This ^^^rifice I make to reason,
L^e still, poor ^^utt'rer, and approve!
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
TRULY friend Gil thou choosest well,
Taking a helpmate homely,
For often times sad tales they ^^ll,
Of wives who are too comely:
But cheer thee Perez, and be ^^y,
From furnished brows (...),
For how can she ever go astray
Who n^^er will be tempted.
For thieves do never rob the poor,
A pebble's not a jewel,
Fruits do not blossom on a moor,
Fire burns not without fuel:
Up with thy heart then Gil, be gay,
From furnished brows exempted,
Thy wife can never go astray,
For she will never be tempted.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
AH let not an instant of life pass in vain,
The moments escape us, and age brings on pain,
Life's too precious, to fugitive joy,
The flowers which yesterday zephyr disclosed,
Drooped their heads on their stalks before Phoebus reposed,
Thus one single day serves to form and destroy.
Then think not of ought but the moment that flies,
To learn to be happy's to learn to be wise,
Seize pleasure while pleasure's our own,
Fear nothing, you are mine, it is al^o^ted above,
Chance but obeyed Fate, and blessed with thy love,
I envy no king on his throne.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
THIS life's a days journey, we rise in the morn,
The sun, trees, and flowers our prospect adorn,
When, perhaps, we have scarce^y been set out an hour,
But slap we are o'ertaken and soused in a shower:
To shelter then quickly, and see now it is over,
And in pretty good spirit we set out once more,
Now up hill, now down, now even, and now
We are covered with dust, and now popp'd in a slough.
Thus we jog on till dinner, now wet and now dry,
And now we have a lowering, and now a clear sky,
With the fire, the good landlord, the wine, and the cheer,
Now refreshed we set forward to end our career:
But the roads are uneven, we trip, are bemired,
And jolted, and jostled, and tumbled, and tired,
Yet we keep a good heart, and our spirits are light,
In hopes we shall meet with a good inn at night.
BALLAD.
FORGIVE me if thus I presuming
Come hither your heart to surprise,
Smile, smile, and my hopes re-illumine:
But my pardon I read in your eyes:
No impostor the passion I own is,
And heaven what delight could I be
As truly to you an Adonis,
As you are a Venus to me.
The gods who so often delighted
In borrowed forms, some fair nymph to pursue,
Might confess they were never excited
By an object so charming as you.
No impostor, etc.
BALLAD.
OUR Jupiter has near his throne,
Two vessels which he fills,
The one with benefits alone,
The other crams with ills:
From the good vessel, health, content,
Plenty and bliss he gives,
While from the evil sorth are sent
Gout, stone, and scolding wives.
Thus to mankind with heedful care,
In just proportion weighed,
The lot to each, each best can bear,
By Jove's decree conveyed:
Unless his patience when to rub,
Juno the devil drives,
Then headlong from the left hand tub,
Go troops o^ ^olding wives.
O^t his complaint on me like air,
From men still passed away,
Till that same type of Juno there
Let loose her tongue today:
But now entreating Jove I Will go,
To chequer not their lives
With any other spot of woe,
Who Are plagued with scolding wives.
BALLAD -- IN THE ODDITIES.
CELIA's an angel, by her face
The rose and lily's shamed,
The tresses of love's queen, for grace,
With here is can never be named:
The gods, cried one, that face with care
Formed in their best of humors,
What pity it is both face and hair
Were bought at the perfumer's.
Celia has sworn to love till death;
For words so full of bliss.
I could have longed, but for her breath,
To steal an ardent kiss:
Rapture itself is poor and cold,
To joy that she discovers,
What pity she the same has told
To fifty other lovers.
Celia is young, behold her mien,
Alert from top to toe,
My aunt, says she, was just fifteen
Some thirty years ago:
Thus youth and beauty's best delights
Sweet Celia are adorning,
For she a Venus is at nights,
A sybil in the morning.
BALLAD.
THE wind blew hard, the sea ra^ high,
The dingy scud drove cross the (...),
All was safe lashed, the bowl was slung
When careless thus Ned Haulyard sung:
A sailor's life's the life for me,
He takes his duty merrily,
If winds can whistle, he can sing;
Still faithful to his friend and king,
He gets beloved by all the ship,
And toasts his girl, and drinks his flip.
Down topsails boys, the gale comes on,
To strike top-gallant yards they run,
And now to hand the sail prepared,
Ned cheerful sings upon the yard:
A sailor's life, etc.
A leak, a leak! -- come lads be bold,
There Is five foot water in the hold,
Eager on deck see Haulyard jump,
And hark while working at the pump:
A sai^or's life, etc.
And see! the vessel naught can save,
She strikes and finds a watery grave!
Yet Ned preserved, with a few more,
Sings as he tre^ds a foreign shore:
A sailor's life, etc.
And now -- unnumbered perils past,
On land as well as sea -- at last
In tatters to his Poll and home
See honest Haulyard singing come:
A sailor's life, etc.
Yet for poor Haulyard what disgrace,
Poll swears she never saw his face;
He d^mns her for a faithless she,
And singing goes again to sea:
A sailor's life, etc.
WELSH BALLAD.
I PRAY you when your sweetheart pouts,
And fleers, and flouts,
And glours, and glouts,
Never mind the pursing of her prow,
But pout again I pray you now:
Is it not true that females sex,
Plague, and perplex
The other sex,
With whimsies in their heads that grow,
And fantisies I pray you now?
Rack poor men's powels, prains, and hearts,
Do not their arts,
And whims, and starts,
Plue ^iffles in their heads that crow,
And jealousies I pray you now?
Then mind not nonsense of the fair,
But change your air,
And shake off care
Nor to their tricks and fancies pow,
But let them ko I pray you now.
BALLAD.
IF, my hearty, you would not like a lubber appear,
You must very well know how to hand, reef, and steer,
Yet a better maneuver amongst seamen is found,
It Is the tight little maxim to know how to sound:
Which a sailor can tell from a bay to a shoal,
But the best sort of sounding is sounding the bowl.
I Have sounded at land, and I Have sounded at sea,
I Have sounded a weather, and sounded a lee,
I Have sounded my quine, at the randivoo house,
And I Have sounded my purse without finding a souse:
What then, we have a brother in each honest soul,
And sailors can never want for sounding the bowl.
All men try for soundings wherever they s^eer,
Your nabobs for soundings strive hard in Cape Clear,
And there is not a soul from the Devil to the Pope,
That could live but for the sounding the Cape of Good Hope:
No fear then nor danger our hearts shall control,
Though at sea, we are in soundings while sounding the blow.
BALLAD.
IN which of all thy various joys,
The tongue of fame that so employs,
Did thou best taste, say mighty Jove,
The pure, unmixed delights of love?
Not with Europa: -- there recourse
Thou boldly had to brutal force;
Her wishes took with thee no part,
She gave her person, not her heart.
Not with the beauteous Theban dame,
When thou assumedest her husband's name;
For, though ingenious was the whim,
She knew not thee, but thought of him:
Not then when in a glittering sh^wer
Thou visit'st Danae in the tower:
The gold prevailed it is true, and she
Yielded to interest, not to thee.
Nor Semele, whom to obey
Thou came in terrible array,
She, proud one, yielded not to love,
But to ambition, and to Jove:
No; 'twas Menosyne, sweet fair,
Thy joys, indeed, were perfect there,
Joys had thou not, no bard had sung,
For thence the immortal sisters sprung.
BALLAD.
LIKE a very gallant will I compliment all:
I must leer and ogle the pretty.
Tell the short ones they are neat, and majestic the tall,
And call all the homely on^s witty.
Thus agreeable falsehood still passing for truth,
I shall tickle their vanity snugly,
Talk of prudence to age, and of pleasure to youth,
And console with a fortune the ugly.
To the pale I Will on delicate lillies begin,
To the florid I Will hold forth on roses,
Call squinting a leer, find a smile in a grin,
And proportion where chins kiss with noses:
Thus agreeable falsehood still passing for truth,
I Will their vanity tickle so snugly,
That I Will please tall and short, far and lean, age and youth,
And reconcile even the ugly.
BALLAD.
IF tars of their money are lavish,
I say brother take this wipe from me,
It Is because we are not muck worms, nor slavish,
Like lubbers who never go to sea.
What Is cunning, and such quivication,
And them sly maneuvers to we,
To be rougish is no valuation
To hearties who plough the salt sea.
As for cheating -- light weights, and short measures,
And corruption, and bribery do you see,
These never embitter the pleasures,
Of good fellows who plough the salt sea:
You Have ashore actions, writs, cesseraries,
And a regiment of counsel to see,
Jack knows not of such like vagaries --
We never trust lawyers at sea.
It Is said that with grog and our lasses,
Because jolly sailors are free,
That money we squander like asses,
Which like horses we earned when at sea:
But let them say this, that, or the other,
In one thing they are forced to agree,
Honest hearts find a friend and a brother
In each worthy that ploughs the salt sea.
GLEE.
WOULD ye know where freedom dwells,
Where jovial hearts carouse and sing.
Haunt these grots, explor^ these ce^ls,
Here every subject is a king!
Sprightly mirth inhabits here,
And joy that knows no listless pause;
For how should we dull sorrow fear,
Who square our lives by pleasure's laws?
What Is fortune! -- is it chance or worth?
Peasant and prince their race must run --
Nor is there that poor spot on earth
But's cherished by the genial sun.
BALLAD -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
AN infant defence'ess, of succor berest,
On this rude barren wild was I thrown,
My sole ray of comfort I had not been left,
To brood over my sorrow's alone:
To see cataracts falling, and hear lions roar,
Or the awful loud war in the deep,
Is the fate poor Flametta was born to deplore.
Which she often would wish kinder, and weep.
To all this assemblage of horrors enured,
What yet greater ills could one prove,
Could one think for a heart which had so much endured,
Fate should store up a torment like love.
It Is too much, I Have decided, and who shall relate
When her and her miseries sleep,
The ta^e of Flametta, will sure wish her fate,
Poor wretch, had been kinder, and weep.
BALLAD.
DEVOTED to Celia, and blessed in her arms,
How I thrilled with delights as I ran over her charms,
When methought on each grace at I gazed with surprise,
For pre eminence pleaded her mouth and her eyes:
Like counsel this opened, and the other replied,
Appealing to me as the judge to decide.
Her mouth opening sweetly, thus said with a smile,
''Tis I who the torments of lovers beguile;
'I can speak, I can sing, I can vent the fond sigh,
'And vain may eyes promise, if I should de^y:
'Then while rows of pearls vermeil lips sweetly hide,
'On our different charms 'twere not hard to decide.'
With ineffable sweetness, while looking me through,
Her eyes careless cried -- 'Why I can speak too;
'And in such charming language* so made to control,
'That of sensible lovers it goes to the soul:
'Mouths may fib, but while eyes to the heart are the guide,
'Twere no difficult task on our charms to decide.'
Transported with rapture, I cried with an oath,
'Charming eyes, charming mouth, I Am in love with you 'both:
'To express your sweet influence no language has terms,
'One makes me a promise which the other confirms:
'Your words and your looks are my joy and my pride,
'Oh your different claims then now can I decide?'
BALLAD.
TO a slight common wound it is some diminution,
Diverting its throbbing, to smile at the smart,
But where is the firm mind can boast such resolution,
On the face to wear smiles when the wound is in the heart?
The wand'rings and errors of folly are treason,
And should be condemned as disloyal to love:
But reverence is due to the errors of reason,
Which, though they are a weakness, we are forced to approve.
Then pray cease to jest: were my griefs superficial,
Unconcerned, like yourself Sir, I merry might be,
But such cruel jes^s can but prove prejudicial,
And though pastime to you, may be mortal to me:
Yet let me not wrong you by any rude mention,
Or word that the fairness of candor might blot,
But gratefully just, may alone the intention
In my memory be cherished, the action forgot.
BALLAD.
CURSED be the sordid wretch of yore,
Who from the bowels of the earth,
First drew crude heaps of shining ore,
Stamped the rude mass, and gave it worth
Ere yet distinctions and degrees
In lovers wishes bore a part,
Truly to love was then to please,
And heart was made the price of heart.
Henceforth ye lovers nothing hope,
Your fire is dead, your ardour cold:
Love has no influence, power or scope,
But that which it derives from gold:
Long you may languish, long expect,
Vows lavish, wi^hes, sighs employ,
A brittle temp^e to cree^,
Which go^d can in an hour destroy.
BALLAD.
PROPITIOUS gods that rule our fate,
Whose ears are tired with (...) prayers
To banish (...) that men create,
And chase imaginary cares:
And first they ask, in rank and power,
A fate from every care exempt?
Vain hope! -- ambition lasts its hour,
Then dwindles into just contempt.
Next reputation in the field,
Renown, and to be great in story,
In all such horrid honors yield,
No brother's b^ood shall by my glory.
A sumptuous pace, georgeous board,
A train of followers next they crave:
Poor ^o^l! his guests retired, the lord
Is but a solitary slave.
Next to their memories they would erect,
A statue, lasting fame to give: --
I ask but reason, and expect
My little pleasures while I live.
Happy in honors, power, wealth,
I^ you but grant my fond desire,
A blameless heart, unshaken health,
My friends, my bottle, and my ^yre.
BALLAD.
SUCH love as holy hermits bear,
The shrine where they put up their prayer,
As love the feathered race the air,
Or sportive fish the sea:
Such as in breasts of Seraphs spring,
When on the expa^se of heaven they wing
To greet that power by whom they sing,
Such love I bear to thee.
Such thankful love at warm must glow
In those who sunk in night and snow,
When welcome beams first faintly show
The long-lost sun they see.
As pleasure youth comfort the old,
Virtue the good, or fame the bold,
As health the sick, or misers gold,
Such love I bear to thee.
BALLAD.
GIVE round the word dismount, dismount,
While echoed by the sprightly horn,
The toils and pleasures we recount
Of this sweet health-inspiring morn.
'Twas glorious sport, none ever did lag,
Nor drew amiss, nor made a stand,
But all as firmly kept their pace,
As had Acteo^ been the s^ag,
And we had hunted by command
Of the goddess of the chase.
The hounds were out and snuffed the air,
And scarce had reached the appointed spot,
But pleased they heard a layer, a layer,
And presently drew on the slot.
'Twas glorious sport, etc.
And now over yonder plain he fleets,
The deep-mouthed hounds begin to bawl:
And echo note for note rep^^ts,
While sprightly horns resound a call.
'Twas glorious sport, etc.
And now the stag has lost his pace,
And while war-haunch the ^untsman cries,
His bosom swells, tear^ wet his face,
He pants, he struggles, and he dies,
'Twas glorious sport, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
WOULD you hear a sad story of woe,
That tears from a stone might provoke,
It Is concerning a tar you must know,
As honest as ever biscuit broke:
His name was Ben Block, of all men
The most true, the most kind, the most brave,
But harsh treated by fortune, for Ben
In his prime sound a watery grave.
His place no one ever knew more:
His heart was all kindness and love:
Though on duty an eagle he would soar,
His nature had most of the dove:
He loved a fair maiden named Kate,
His father to interest a slave,
Sent him far from his love where hard fate
Plunged him deep in a watery grave.
A curse on all slanderous tongues,
A false friend his mild nature abused,
And sweet Kate of the vilest of wrongs,
To poison Ben's pleasure abused:
That she never had truly been kind,
That false were the tokens she gave,
That she scorned him, and wished he might find,
In the ocean a watery grave.
Too sure from this cankerous elf,
The venom accomplished its end;
Ben, all truth and honor himself,
Suspected no fraud in his friend:
On the yard, while suspended in air,
A loose to his sorrows he gave,
Take thy wish, he cried, ^alse cruel fair;
And plunged in a watery grave.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
TO ask would you come for to go
How a true-hearted tar you would discern,
He Is as honest a fellow I Would have you to know
As ever stepped between stem and stern:
Let furious winds the vessel waft,
In his station amidships, or fore, or aft,
He can pull away,
Cast o^^, belay,
Aloft, allow,
Avast, yo ho!
And hand, reef, and steer,
Know each halliard and jeer,
And of duty every rig;
But his joy and delight
Is, on Saturday night,
A drop of the creature to swig.
The first voyage I made to sea,
One day as I hove the lead,
The main top gallant mast went by the lee,
For it blew off the Devil's Head;
Tumble up there, bear a hand, turn to,
While I, the foremost of the crew,
Soon could pull away,
Cast off, belay,
Aloft, allow,
Avast, yo ho!
And hand, reef and steer,
Know each halliard and jeer,
And of duty every rig;
But my joy and delight;
Was, on Saturday night,
A drop of the creature to swig.
There was Kit with a cast in his eye,
And Tom with the timber toe,
And shambling Will, for he hobbled awry,
All wounded a fighting the foe:
Three lads though crazy grown and crank,
As true as ever bumbo drank,
For they would pull away,
Cast off, belay,
Aloft, allow,
Avast, yo ho!
And hand, reef, and steer,
Know each halliard and jeer,
And of duty every rig;
And their joy and delight
Was, on Saturday night,
A drop of the creature to swig.
Then over life's fortune I Will jog,
Let the storm or the Spaniards come on,
So but sea room I get, and a skin full of grog,
I fear neither devil nor don:
For I Am the man that is spract and daft,
In my station amidships, or fore, or aft,
I can pull away,
Cast off, belay,
Aloft, allow,
Avast, yo ho!
And hand, reef, and steer,
Know each halliard and jeer,
And of duty every rig,
But my joy and delight
Is, on Saturday night,
A drop of the creature to swig.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
WE bipeds, made up of frail clay,
Alas are the children of sorrow;
And though brisk and merry today,
We all may be wretched tomorrow:
For sunshine's succeeded by rain,
Then fearful of life's stormy weather,
Lest pleasure should only bring pain,
Let us all be, happy together.
I grant the best blessings we know
Is a friend, for true friendship's a treasure,
And yet, lest your friend prove a foe,
Oh haste not the dangerous pleasure:
Thus friendship's a ^limsey affair,
Thus riches and health are a bubble,
Thus there is nothing delightful but care,
Nor any thing pleasing but trouble.
If a mortal would point out that life
Which on earth could be nearest to heaven,
Let him, thanking his stars, choose a wife
To whom truth and honor are given:
But honor and truth are so rare,
And horns, when they are cutting, so tingle,
That, with all my respect to the fair
I Would advise him to sigh and live single.
It appears from these premises plain
That wisdom is nothing but folly,
That pleasure's a term that means pain,
And that joy is your true melancholy:
That all those who laugh ought to cry,
That 't^s fine frisk and fun to be grieving,
And that since we must a^l of us die,
We should taste no enjoyment while living
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
ADIEU, adieu, my only life,
My honor calls me from thee,
Remember you are a soldier's wife,
Those tears but ill become thee:
What though by duty I am called,
Where thundering cautions rattle,
Where valor's self might stand appalled,
When on the wings of thy dear love
To heaven above
Thy fervent orisons are flown,
The tender prayer
Thou put'st up there
Shall ca^l a guardian angel down,
To watch me in the battle.
My safety thy fair truth shall be,
As sword and buckler serving,
My life shall be more dear to me,
Because of thy preserving:
Let peri^ come, let horror threa^,
Let thundering cannons rattle,
I Will fear^ess seek the conflicts heat,
Assured when on the wings of love
To heaven above, etc.
Enough, with that benignant smile
So^^e kindred god inspired thee,
Who knew thy bosom void of guile,
Who wondered and admired thee:
I go assured, my life adieu,
Though thundering cannons rattle,
Though murdering carnage stalk in view,
When on the wings of thy true love
To heaven above, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
I BE one of they sailors who thinks it is no lie,
That for every wherefore of life there is a why,
That be fortune's strange weather, a calm or a squall,
Our births, good or bad, are chalked out for us all:
That the stays and the braces of life will be sound
To be some of 'em rotten and some of 'em sound,
That the good we should cherish, the bad never seek,
For death will too soon bring each anchor a-peak.
When astride on the yard, they top-lists they let go,
And ^^com'd, like a shot, plump among 'em below,
Why I c^t^h'd at a halliard, and jumped upon deck,
And so broke my fall, to save breaking my neck:
Just like your philosophers, for all their jaw,
Who l^ss than a rope, gladly catch at a straw;
Thus the good we should cherish, the bad never seek,
For death will too soon bring each anchor a-peak.
Why now that there cruise that we made off the banks,
Where I peppered the so, and got shot for my thanks,
What then she soon struck, and though crippled on shore,
And laid up to resit, I had shiners galore:
At length live and looking, I tried the false main,
And to get more prize money, got shot at again:
Thus the good we should cherish, the bad never seek,
For death will too soon bring each anchor a-peak.
Then just as it comes, take the bad with the good,
One man's spoon's made of silver, another's of wood,
What Is poison for one man's another man's balm,
Some are safe in a storm, and some lost in a calm:
Some are rolling in riches, some not worth a souse,
Today we eat beef, and tomorrow lobs-souse:
Thus the good we should cherish, the bad never seek,
For death will too soon bring each anchor a-peak.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
The sun's descending in the wave,
I go, I go, my fate to brave:
Ghosts of dead yncas now appear,
Shriek as ye come
Cold from the tomb,
And see if Moniaco knows to fear,
Oh sun my sire!
Lend me all thy noble fire:
Illia Moniaco to thy tomb,
Oh Atabalipa soon shall come;
Cover me with scars,
Naught can control
The dauntless soul,
That shall live among its kindred stars.
What it is to die? to leave this clay,
And breathe in everlasting day,
For robes celestial shake off dust,
Among the blessed
From care to rest,
And emulate the virtues of the just:
Then sun, my sire,
Lend me all thy noble fire,
Illia Moniaco, etc.
Adieu ye friends, vain world adieu,
Bliss is for me, but woe for you:
While I, new born, shall go to find
The upper heaven
You shall be driven,
Like scattered chaff, before false fortune's wind,
Now sun, my sire,
I feel, I feel thy noble fire!
Illia Moniaco, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
I WAS the pride of all the Thames,
My name was natty Jerry,
The best of smarts and flashy dames
I Have carried in my wherry:
For then no mortal soul like me
So merrily did jog it,
I loved my wife and friend, do you see,
And won the prize of Dogget:
In coat and badge, so neat and spruce,
I rowed all blithe and merry,
And every waterman did use
To call me happy Jerry.
But times soon changed, I went to sea,
My wife and friend betrayed me,
And in my absence treacherously
Some pretty fro^ics played me:
Returned, I used them like a man,
But still 'twas so provoking,
I could not enjoy my very can,
Nor even fancy smoking:
In tarnish'd badge, and coat so queer,
No longer blithe and merry.
Old friends now passed me with a sneer,
And called me dismal Jerry.
At sea as with a dangerous wound,
I lay under the surgeons,
Two friends each help I wanted found
In every emergence:
Soon after my sweet friend and wife
Into this mess had brought me,
These two kind friends who saved my life
In my misfortunes sought me:
We Are come cried they, that once again
In coat and badge so merry,
Your kind old friends, the watermen,
May ha^l you happy Jerry.
I Am Peggy, once your soul's desire,
To whom you proved a rover,
Who since that time in man's attire
Have sought you the world over:
And I cried the other, am that Jack
When boys you used so bad^y,
Though now the best friend to your back
Then prithee look not sadly:
Few words are best, I seized their hands,
My greatful heart grew merry,
And now in love and friendship's bands,
I Am once more happy Jerry.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
BOLD Jack the sailor here I come,
Pray how do you like my nib,
My trowsers wide, my trampers rum,
My nab, and flowing jib:
I sails the seas from end to end,
And leads a joyous life.
In every mess I find a friend,
In every port a wife.
I Have heard them talk of constancy,
Of grief, and such like fun,
I Have constant been to ten, cried I,
But never grieved for one:
The flowing sails we tars unbend,
To lead a jovial life,
In every mess to find a friend,
In every port a wife.
I Have a spanking wife at Portsmouth gates,
A pigmy at Gorce,
An orange tawny up the Straits,
A black at St. Lucia:
Thus whatsomedever course I bend,
I leads a jovial life,
In every mess I find a friend,
In every port a wife.
Will Gast, by Death, was taken aback,
I came to brink the news,
Poll whimper'd sore, but what did Jack?
Why, stood in William's shoes:
She cut, I chased, but in the end
She loved me as her life,
And so she got an honest friend,
And I a loving wife.
Thus be we sailors all the go,
On fortune's sea we rub,
We works, and loves, and fights the foe,
And drinks the generous bub:
Storms that the mast to splinters rend,
Cannot shake our jovial life,
In every mess we find a friend,
In every po^t a wife.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
HARK the din of distant war,
How noble is the clangor,
Pale death ascend his ebon car,
Clad in terrific anger:
A doubtful fate the soldier tries,
Who joins the gallant quarrel:
Perhaps on the cold ground he lies,
No wife, no friend, to close his eyes,
Though nobly mourned,
Perhaps returned,
He Is crowned with victory's laurel.
How many who, disdaining fear,
Rush on the desperate duty,
Shall claim the tribute of the tear
That dims the eye of beauty?
A doubtful fate, etc.
What nobler fate can fortune give?
Renown shall tell our story,
If we should fall, but if we live,
We live our country's glory.
It Is true a doubtful fate, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
THE wind was hushed, the storm was over,
Unfurled was every slowing sail,
From toil released, when Dick of Dover,
Went with his messmates to regale:
All danger's over, cried he, my neat hearts,
Drown care then in the smiling can,
Come bear a hand, let us toast our sweethearts,
And first I Will give you buxom Nan.
She Is none of those that is always gigging,
And stem and st^rn made up of art:
One knows a vessel by her rigging,
Such ever slight a constant heart:
With straw hat and pink streamers flowing,
How often to meet me has the r^n:
While for dear life would I be rowing,
To meet with smiles my buxom Nan,
Jack Jollyboat went to the Indies,
To see him stare when he came back,
The girls were all off of the hinges
His Poll was quite unknown to Jack:
Tant masted all, to see who is tallest,
Breastworks, top gant-sails, and a fan,
Messmate, cried I, more sail than ballast,
Ah still give me my buxom Nan.
None in life's sea can sail more quicker,
To show her love, or serve a friend,
But hold, I Am preaching over my liquor,
This one word then, and there is an end:
Of all the wenches whatsomedever,
I say then find me out who can
One half so tight, so kind so clever,
Sweet, trim, and neat as buxom Nan.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
LOVELY woman, pride of nature,
Good, and sweet, and kind, and fair
Than man a higher style of creature,
Perfect as ce^estials are:
S^e Myra come, like stately Juno,
Ever fair, and ever young,
Completely like, as I and you know,
For Myra, like Juno, has a tongue.
Young Celia's charms that beam so sweetly,
To paint ah what can words avail,
She Is Venus' self, and so completely,
That Celia is, like Venus, frail:
To woo the charming Gloriana,
A^d^city would stand afraid;
She chaste and icy as Diana,
And, like Diana, an old maid.
Thus women boast a near relation,
It Is plain to the celestial race,
Thus we of their divine creation
A family resemblance trace:
If then some ^aults of this complexion,
Like spots upon that sun, their fame,
Rust this ^ame model of perfection,
The stars, not women, are to blame.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
Two real tars, whom duty called
To watch in the foretop,
Thus one another overhaul'd
And took a cheering drop:
I say, Will Hatchway, cried Tom Tow,
Of conduct what is your sort,
At through the voyage of life you go,
To bring you safe to port?
Cried Jack, you lubber, don't you know?
Our passions close to reef,
To steer where honor points the prow,
To hand a friend relief:
These anchors get but in your power,
My life for it that is your sort;
The bow^r, the sheet, and the best bower
Shall bring you up in port.
Why then you're out, and there is an end,
Tom cried out blunt and rough,
Be good, be honest, serve a friend,
Be maxims well enough:
Who swabs his bows at other's w^^,
That tar's for me your sort,
His vessel right ahead shall go
To find a joyful port.
Let storms of life upon me press,
Misfortunes makes me reel,
Why, dam'me, what is my own distress?
For others let me feel:
Ay, ay, if b^und with a fresh gale
To heaven this is your sort,
A handkerchief's the best wet sail
To bring you safe to port.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
I AM dashing Dick the dustman,
None my calling can degrade,
For I am not the first man
Who has driven a dirty trade:
Dust ho! dust ho! I rings my bell and cries,
My tricks, if you would find 'em,
Pretty early you must rise,
For watch me still,
However you will,
I bears off many a prize,
And when I wants to blind 'em,
I throws dust in their eyes.
Why what is your man of honor?
And what is your madam fame?
A ji^t when he has wo^ her,
That proves a dirty name:
Victory! victory! each draws his sword and cries,
In the midst of slaug^ter find him,
See where the savage flies,
He spares no life,
No friend, nor wife,
Wherever he finds a prize,
Till death, at last, to blind him,
Throws dust in his eyes.
The lawyer, the physician,
And even the learned divine,
Each drives, in his condition,
As black a trade as mine:
Fees ho! fees ho! each draws his purse and cries,
Their conscience cannot bind 'em,
The wretched patient dies,
All prayers fail,
While in a jail,
The ruined client lies,
Unless you throw to blind 'em
Gold dust in their eyes.
And so, do you see, men bustle,
To see who is dirty first,
And one another hostle.
And all to raise the dust:
Dust ho! dust ho! each draws his purse and cries,
And he, Old Nick, behind him,
Will take, to mount up tries.
All scrambling go,
Both friend and foe,
To bear a way some prize,
And each throws dust to blind him
Plump in his neighbors eyes.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
IF bold and brave thou can not bear,
Thyself from all thou love to tear,
If, while winds war, and billows roll,
A spark of fear invade thy soul,
If you are appalled, when cannons roar,
I pri^hee messmate stay ashore:
There, like a lubber,
Whine and blubber,
Still for thy ease and safety busy,
Nor dare to come,
Where honest Tom,
And Ned, and Nick,
And Ben, and Phil,
And Jack, and Dick,
And Bob, and Bill,
All weathers sing, and drink the swizzy.
If, should thou lose a limb in fight,
She who made up thy heart's delight,
Poor recompense that thou art kind,
Shall prove inconstant as the wind,
If such hard fortune thou'st deplore,
I prithee messmate stay ashore,
There like a lubber, etc.
If prisoner in a foreign land,
No friend, no money at command,
That man thou trusted had alone,
All knowledge of th^e should disown;
If this should vex thee to the core,
I prithee messmate stay ashore.
There like a lubber, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
WHY don't you know me by my scars?
I Am soldier Dick come from the wars;
Where many a head without a hat
Crowds honor's bed -- but what of that?
Beat drums, play fifes, it is glory calls,
What argu^^es who stands or falls;
Lord what should one be sorry for?
Life's but the fortune of the war:
Then rich or poor, or well, or sick,
Still laugh and sing shall soldier Dick.
I used to look two ways at once,
A bullet hit me on the sco^^e.
And dowsh'd my eye, do you think I Would wince?
Why lord I Have never squinted since.
Beat drums, etc.
Some distant keep from war's alarms,
For fear of wooden legs and arms,
While others die safe in their beds
Who all their lives had wooden heads.
Beat drums, etc.
Thus gout or fever, sword or shot,
Or something sends us all to pot:
That we are to die then do not grieve,
But let us be merry while we live.
Beat drums, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
AVERT you omen, gracious heaven,
The ugly scud,
By rising winds resistless driven,
Kisses the flood.
How hard the ^ot for sailor's cast,
That they should roam
For years, to perish thus at last
In sight of home!
For if the coming gale we mourn,
A tempest grows,
Our vessel's shattered so and torn,
That down she goes!
The tempest comes, while meteors red
Portentous fly;
And now we touch old ocean's bed,
Now reach the sky!
On sable wings, in gloomy flight,
Fiends seem to wait,
To snatch us in this dreadful night,
Dark as our fate:
Unless some kind, some pitying power
Should interpose,
She labors so within this hour
Down she goes.
But see, on rosy pinions borne,
Over the mad deep,
Reluctant beams the sorr'wing morn,
With us to weep:
Deceitful sorrow, cheerless light,
Dreadfu^ to think,
The morn is risen, in endless night,
Our hopes to sink!
She splits! she parts! -- through sluices driven,
The water flows;
Adieu ye friends, have mercy heaven!
For down she goes!
RONDEAU -- IN THE WAGS.
ONE negro, wi my banjer,
Me from Jenny come,
Wid cunning yiei
Me savez spy
De buckra world one hum,
As troo a street a stranger
Me my banjer strum:
My missy for one black dog about the house me kick,
Him say, my nassy tawny fa^e enough to make him sick;
But when my massa he go out, she then no longer rail,
For first me let the captain in, and then me tell no tale:
So aunt Quashy say,
Do tabby, brown, or black, or white,
You see um in one night,
Every sort of cat be gray.
One Negro, etc.
To fetch a lily money back, you go to law they call,
The court and all the tie-wig soon strip you shirt and all;
The courtier call him friend and foe,
And fifty story tell,
To day say yes, to morrow no,
And lie like any hell:
And so though negro black for true,
He black in buckra country too.
One negro, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
BARDS call themselves a heavenly race,
Topers find heaven in wine,
We truly boast who love the chase,
An origin divine.
The deities all hunters are:
Great Jove, who spends his life
In hunting of the willing fair,
Is hunted by his wife.
Then come and wake the drowsy morn,
While the swift game we follow:
The feathered throng and tuneful horn
Shall join the hunter's hollow.
Gay Bacchus, on his tun, that hack,
Toasts for view hollows gives,
While Mercury, with his Bow-street pack,
Scours heaven to hunt for thieves:
Bold Mars, a blood hound, hunts for same,
Nor till its latest breath,
Will he ever leave the panting game,
But comes in at the death.
Then come, etc.
Diana in her sacred grove
Saw rash Acteon near,
And though she seemed to scorn his love,
See took him for her deer:
Yet vexed to think this hint so sly
On the fool she could not pass,
From his own hands she made him fly,
And killed him for an ass.
Then come, etc.
Great Juno, wretched, restless fair,
On jealous fury bent,
Still in full cry is hunting care,
And still on a wrong s^^nt.
Indeed the fair olt mount their nag,
By the hunting mania struck,
And if Acteon was a stag,
Poor Vulcan was a buck.
Then come, etc.
RONDEAU -- IN THE WAGS.
WHILE whim, and glee, and jest, and song,
Display their charming treasure,
Mingling in gay laughter's throng,
Come to the camp of pleasure.
All human beings have their cares,
Life's made of joy and sorrow;
To balance life then our affairs
Should of our pleasures borrow:
Youth's joy's season, so is age,
Each temper, sex, complexion,
In mirth may harmlessly engage,
As well as in reflection.
While whim, etc.
You who proudly roll in wealth,
You whose means are slender,
You whose lungs proclaim your health,
You whose frames are tender:
You who wear grave wisdom's wigs,
You who deal in folly,
You who merry are as grigs,
You who are melancholy: --
While whim, etc.
Where Is amongst them all the cynic elf,
Of joy the open scorner,
But doff'd the sage, and to himself
Took pleasure in a corner?
In short who sets up to despise
Those joys the mirth awaken,
I will not rudely say he lies,
But surely he is mistaken.
While whim, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
THE tar's a jolly tar that can hand, reef, and steer,
That can nimbly cast off and belay,
Who in darkest of nights finds each halliard and jees,
And dead reckoning knows well and lee way:
But the tar to please me,
More jolly must be,
He must laugh at the waves as they roar;
He must rattle,
And in battle
Brave danger and dying,
Though bullets are flying,
And fifty things more:
Singing, quaffing,
Dancing laughing,
Take it cherrily,
And merrily,
And all for the sake of his girl ashore.
The tar's a jolly tar who his rhino will spend,
Who up for a messmate will bring,
For we sailors all think he that is true to his friend
Will never be false to his king.
But the tar to please me,
More jolly must be,
He must venture for money galore;
Acting duly,
Kind and truly,
And nobly inherit
A generous spirit,
A prudent one more;
Singing, laughing,
Dancing, quaffing,
Take it cherrily,
And merrily,
And save up his cash for his girl ashore.
The tar's a jolly tar who loves a beauty bright,
And at sea often thinks of her charms,
Who toasts her with g^ee on a Saturday night,
And wishes her moored in his arms:
But the tar to please me
More jolly must be,
Though teased at each port by a score,
He must, sneering
At their leering,
Never study to delight 'em,
But scorn 'em, and slight 'em,
Still true to the core;
Singing, laughing,
Dancing, quaffing,
Take it cherrily,
And merrily.
And constant return to his girl ashore.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
FAR removed from noise and smoke,
Hark I hear the woodman's stroke,
Who dreams not as he fells the oak,
What mischief dire he brews.
How art shall shape his falling trees,
For aid of luxury and ease,
He weighs not matters such as these,
But sings, and hacks, and hews.
Perhaps, now se^l'd by this bold man,
That tree shall form the spruce sedan,
Or wheelbarrow, where oyster Nan
So runs her vulgar rig;
The stage where boxers crowd in flocks,
Or else quacks, perhaps, the stocks,
Or posts for signs, or barb^r's blocks,
Where smiles the parson's wig.
Thou make bold peasant, oh what grief,
The gibbet on which hangs the thief,
The seat where sits the great Lord Chief,
The throne, the cobler's stall:
Thou pamper'st life in every stage,
Make folly's whims, pride's equipage,
For children toys, crutches for age,
And coffins for us all.
Yet justice let us still afford,
These chairs, and this convivial board,
The bin that holds gay Bacchus' hoard,
Confess the woodman's, stroke*
He made the press that bled the vine,
The butt that holds the generous wine,
The hall itself, where tiplers join,
To crack the mirthful joke.
VAUXHALL BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
TIME was, for oh there was a time,
Sweet Phoebe by my side,
The softest verse I sung in rhyme,
Where falling pools do glide:
But, Phoebe hence, I Am left alone,
Nor verse nor rhyme can please,
And pools stand still to see me moan,
In whispers through the trees.
The pride of laughing nature stood
In fertile heaths confessed,
When birds, in yon impervious wood,
With Phoebe saw me blessed.
But laughing nature's now in tears,
The heaths begin to mourn,
Birds hoot in my melodious ^ars,
For Phoebe's glad return.
To shun fierce sol's meridian heat,
Upon yon verdant green,
How often, at close of eve, I Would meet,
Sweet Phoebe, beauty's queen:
But lost the sun shine of her charms,
The verdant green's all brown,
And I, with nothing in my arms,
Lie hard on beds of down.
Then come sweet fair, and leave behind
All sorrow, pain, and woe,
The birds shall smile, and the north wind
Like Boreas gently blow:
So shall the daisy-mantling green,
The cowslip-studded brook,
In sable robes all crimson seen,
Reflect each azure look.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
SO sweet I Will dress my Zootka fair,
Such pretty toys her charms shall deck,
The nails of foes shall grace her hair,
Their eyes and teeth adorn her neck:
A hut I Will build her of catalps,
And sweetly hang it round with scalps,
And as we frantic skip and sing,
And join to form the mystic ring,
And symbals twang,
And tymbals bang,
And jump and prance,
And f^isk in wedlock's devious dance,
We'll drink and yam,
And make the banjer cry giam, giam.
The rose let Europe's beauties boast,
Asia the saffron's sickly die,
Let Ebon wives grace Afric's coast: --
Can these with lovely Zootka vie?
Her olive cheek the gloss outshines,
That decorates the copper mines --
Com^^hen and frantic, etc.
Some shave their eyebrows for the ^^ir,
Others for love pull out their teeth,
Some by the roots tear up their hair,
To form a pretty marriage wreath:
My loving fist at Zootka's nose
Shall aim a hundred tender blows,
And as they frantic, etc.
RONDEAU -- IN THE WAGS.
IN peace, when sprightly drum and fife
Quick marches sweetly play,
Then charming is the soldier's life,
To lounge it all the day:
How different the trade is
From war's destructive call,
He ogles all the ladies,
And dances at the ball.
The sash so sweet a zone is,
So powerful are its charm^,
That Mars becomes Adonis,
Reclines in Venus' arms.
No more upon the dangerous plain,
Death grimly stalks abroad,
No more
The gasping and unpitied slain,
Weltering in gore,
For unavailing help implore:
Their spirits issue with a groan,
Their eyes are closed in endless night,
Beholders are with horror awed,
And dread a sat, sad fate of woe,
That soon may be their own.
No time for pity now! -- the fight Grows hot,
The trumpet sounds a charge,
Soldiers and steeds with ardour glow,
Stern carnage takes the field,
And traverses his boundaries long and large:
The word is die or yield,
And mercy is forgot: --
Such is the dreadful ardour of the war;
Yet different far
When all these horrors cease,
And soldiers taste the joys of smiling peace
Sweet peace, etc.
The well packed column, like a rock,
While they the war sustain
Greatly receive an army's shock,
The glorious terror of the plain:
Advancing near,
The foe is struck aghast,
The panic spreads,
Pale scar
Gains on 'em ^all;
To order's post confusion now succeeds,
And now the front becomes the rear;
All re^^^ution's gone,
While^ wan d^spair,
Turned general, to destruction leads 'em on:
They fly,
Follow the victors cry,
War's dreadful tempest comes,
Trumpets and drums,
Shouts, groans, and thundering cannons rend the sky!
The banners fluttering late in air,
Now from the beaters grasp are torn,
And on the spear
Of victory borne: --
The stroke's decisive! -- glutted war,
Descending from his sanguine car,
Tired soldiers from their post release,
To taste the joys of ^^^ling peace.
Sweet peace, etc.
RONDEAU -- IN THE WAGS.
JACK dances and sings, and is always content,
In his vows to his lass he will never fail her,
His anchor's a-trip when his money's all spent --
And this is the life of a sailor.
Alert in his duty, he readily flies
Where winds the tired vessel are ^^inging,
Though sunk to the sea gods, or tossed to the skies.
Stil^ Jack is found working and singing:
(...) side of an enemy, boldly and brave,
He Will with broadside on broadside regale her,
Yet he'^l sigh to the soul over that enemy's grave,
(...) noble's the mind of a sailor.
(...) loud, bursts their side^ let the bombs,
(...) the winds a dread hurricane rattle,
The r^ugh and the pleasant he takes as it comes,
And laughs at the storm and the battle:
In a (...) power while Jack puts his trust,
As (...) comes, smilling he will hail her,
Resigned, still and manly, since what must be must,
And this is the mind of a sailor.
Though careless and headlong, if danger should press,
And ranked amongst the free list of rovers,
Yet he will melt into tears at a tale of distress,
And prove the most constant of lovers:
To rancour unknown, to no passion a slave,
Nor unmanly, nor mean, nor a railer,
He Is gentle as mercy, as ^ortitude brave
And this is a true hearted sailor.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
BLESSED Friendship hail! thy gifts possessing,
That happy mortal's rich indeed:
Thou willing giv'st each earthly blessing
To all but those who stand in need:
Thy words are sweet as Hybla's honey,
In accents kind, and mild, and civil,
Flows thy advice: -- thou giv'st not money,
For money is the very devil:
And rather than the foul temptation
Should into scrapes thy friend betray,
Disint'rested consideration,
Thou kindly take it all away.
Are his affairs at rack and manger,
Lest a bad world thy friend should chouse,
No time for thee to play the stranger,
Thou deign'st to manage all his house:
To make him thy good pleasure tarry,
To kiss thy feet, to leap over sticks,
To run, to hop, to fetch, to carry,
And play a thousand monkey tricks.
Nay, if thy liquorish chops should water,
To ease him of domestic strife,
Thou rid'st him of a flirting daughter,
Or, kinder still, thou steal'st his wife.
Come then, my friend, prevent my pleasure,
And out of doors politeness kick,
With me and mine pray keep no measure,
Drench me with bumpers, make me sick:
My ce^lar bleed, devour my mutton,
Upon my vitals dine and sup:
Come on thou kind, thou friendly glutton,
Kill, barbecue, and eat me up.
Then, to the last a friend, desert me,
That wise by dear experience grown,
And having no kind friend to hurt me,
I may, at last, become my own.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
WHAT song shall I chant? while I sing Venus sparrows,
Her ces^us, her dove,
Shall I hold forth on love?
Source of so many blessings and ills,
On which so many Cupids have blunted their arrows,
And so many poets their quills!
All its pains and its pleasures, its mischiefs and joys,
Have been sung over and over, by fond girls and vain boys,
Not a single new thought the Pierian spring
On love can inspire: -- nor of love will I sing.
While I celebrate uproar, and bottles and glasses,
That fools think divine,
Shall my song be on wine?
Source of so many surfeits and feasts.
Where so many topers have toasted their la^ses,
And so many men become beasts!
Let those describe wine who can drink till they r^el,
'Twere folly to write on a theme I cannot feel;
How can I, who never drink but what flows from health's spring,
Find words the delight of a drunkard to sing?
While I ce^ebrate men who all comfort and pleasure
Leave at home for a name,
Shall I descant on fame?
Source of so many murders and wo^^,
Where so many heroes have plundered for t^easure,
And so many friends become foes!
A stranger to battles, and all their delight,
Fond of peace and its joys, I cannot shudder and write:
The best plume that ever hero bore off from Fame's wing
Should not tempt me a scene of such horror to sing.
What shall be my song? Shall I celebrate riches?
Whose grasp can combine
Love, glory, and wine!
Source of each mortal man's rise and fa^l:
That thing youth and age, high and low, that bewitches!
A nothing that comprehends all!
Be the theme of these of others, they cannot be mine: --
Till love's led by prudence, by temperance wine,
Till war shall sweet peace, and gold charity bring,
Reason smiles, and torbids me such folly to sing.
BALLAD -- IN THE WAGS.
BUT, perhaps, while thus boldly exposing each elf,
A d^pe to passion, or folly, or pelf,
I the critic severest become of myself,
Presuming to hope for your favors --
What is it to me who sings great, or sings small,
Or whether knave first every knave likes to call,
Or who is roguish, or honest -- Lord nothing at all,
But to eke out the crotchets and quavers.
Advice from a lawyer, a smile from his grace,
From a hypocrit treachery with a s^ooth face,
From a bishop a blessing, a g^^e^ter ames ace,
The public receive for their favors:
Thus in their vocation all earn^^tly join,
For what should a man circulate but his own coin?
Let us humbly entreat then you will not refuse mine,
Though composed but of crotchets ana quavers.
Every piece is full weight, nor debased by vile art,
Ster^ing gratitude still will be found in each part,
The lively impression was made on my heart,
For what less can purchase your favors?
Thus I fearless submit to pass through, your (...),
When assayed, should you find there is no counter^eit in it,
The stamp of your kind approbation imprin^,
To pass current my crotchets and quavers.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
TIGHT lads have I sailed with, but none ever so fightly,
As ^one^t Bill Bobi^ay, so kind and so true:
He Would sing like a mermaid, and soot it so lightly,
The forecastle's pride, and delight of the crew?
But poor as a beggar, and often in tatters
He went, though h^^ ^ortune was kind without end;
For money, cried Bill, and them there sort of matters,
What Is the good on it do you see, but to succor a friend.
There Is Nipcheese the purser, by grinding and squeezing,
First plund ring, then leaving, the ship like a rat,
The eddy of fortune stands on a stiff breeze in,
And mou^ts, fierce as fire, a dog-vane in his hat.
My bark, through hard storms on life's ocean should rock her,
Though she roll in misfortune, and pitch end for end,
No, never shall Bill keep a shot in the locker,
When by handing it out, he can succor a friend,
Let them throw out their wipes, and cry, 'Spight of their 'crosses,
'And forgetful of toil that so hardly they bore,
'That sailors, at sea, earn their money like horses,
'To squander it idly like asses ashore.'
Such lubbers their jaw would coil up, could they measure,
By their feelings, the generous delight without end,
That gives birth in us tars to that truest of pleasure,
The handing our rhino to succor a friend.
Why what is all this nonsense they talks of, and pother,
About rights of man? What a plague are they at?
If they mean that each man to his messmate's a brother,
Why the lubberly swabs, every fool can tell that.
The rights of us Britons we knows to be loyal,
In our country's defense our last moments to spend,
To fight up to the ears to protect the blood royal,
To be true to our wives, and to succor a friend.
RONDEAU -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
BEAUTY I sell, who will buy? Who Will buy?
Roses and lilies girls, here am I:
Neither black, brown, nor fair, shall have cause for complaint,
They shall look like angels, and all without paint:
Who Will buy? Who Will buy?
Here am I.
Come maids and be beautiful, easy's the task,
Use the rouge newly taken from modesty's mask;
As it blooms shall fair truth show your heart in the flush,
And duty's enamel shall polish the blush,
For duty gives charms that shall last all your lives:
None but dutiful daughters make beautiful wives.
Beauty I sell, etc.
Now Is your time, all ye wives, would ye beautiful grow,
Draw some drops from content's lucid fount as they flow;
Take the mildness of love, throw away all the art,
Mix these in endearment's alembic, the heart,
Let the fire of attention the whole gently boil,
Then add nature's best gloss, a perpetual smile,
Beauty I sell, etc.
Come round me, I Have waves for maid, widow, and wife:
This essence of truth to the eyes gives a life,
This tincture of sweetness shall lilies disclose,
And from this, virtue's balm, shall spring beauty's best rose;
Then while art's in fashion, how can you refuse,
That which nature and re^ason permit you to use?
Beauty I sell, etc.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
TO the plain, to the plain, hark! hark we are summoned away;
The birds with new notes thrill the heart through the ear;
Trees and flowers fresh liv'ry have put on today,
And the sun with new glory begins his career!
Some splendid occasion Arcadia invites
To the court of its loved, its illustrious lord,
Where, while pleasures and sports blend their various delights,
Plenty empties her well-loaded horn on the board.
What, what can it mean?
For our hearts' king and queen
May just fate thus each day so^e new pleasures prepare*
The sports now begun!
It Is the nuptials propitious of Fred'rick their son,
And the song, and the dance, and the clarion so loud,
And those acclamations we hear from the crowd,
'All hail the royal pair.'
Now louder it grows! it is the bridegroom and bride;
What loyalty rent the glad air as it rung,
H^^a Mars in his ca^, Venus she, by his side;
He a hero, and (...) from a hero's race sprung.
Venus here finds her court; three sweet Graces are seen,
Than Cytherea more lovely, more mild than her dove,
The fair stranger to hail, in their hearts to reign queen,
Each a sister in beauty, a sister in love:
And see the glad throng,
For the dance and the song
With eager respectful affection prepare!
The sports are begun,
George sanctions the nuptials of Frederick his son,
While the song, etc.
Again a loud burst! What new shouts rent the air!
A fond brother a bride to a fond brother gives!
While a father, a mother, a progeny rare,
Each alike imparts transport, and transport receives.
Long, long may their joys in a tide of love flow,
Pure, unmixed from the conjugal fount whence they spring:
The first title of human perfection we know
Is the parent whose virtues illustrate the king.
And see the glad throng,
For the dance and the song
With eager respectful attention prepare!
The sports are begun,
George sanctions the nuptials of Frederick his son:
While the song, etc.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
I THAT once was a ploughman, a sailor am now,
No lark that aloft in the sky,
Ever fluttered his wings to give speed to the plough
Was so gay or so careless as I:
But my friend was a carfindo aboard a king's ship,
And he ax'd me to go just to sea for a trip,
And he talked of such t^^ngs,
As if sailors were kings,
And so teizing did keep,
That I left my poor plough to go ploughing the deep:
No longer the horn
Call me up in the morn,
I trusted the carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
I did not much like for to be aboard a ship;
When in danger there is no door to creep out:
I liked the jolly tars, I liked bumbo and slip,
But I did not like rocking about:
By and by comes a hurricane, I did not like that:
Next a battle that many a sailor laid flat:
Ah, cried I, who would roam
That like me had a home?
Where I Would sow, and I Would reap,
Ere I left my poor plough, to go ploughing the deep:
Where sweetly the horn
Called me up in the morn,
Ere I trusted the carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
At last safe I landed and in a whole skin,
Nor did I make any long stay,
Ere I found by a friend, whom I ax'd for my kin,
Father dead, and my wife ran away:
Ah who but thyself, said I, have thou to blame,
Wives losing their husbands, often lose their good name;
Ah why did I roam,
When so happy at home,
I could sow, and could reap,
Ere I left my poor plough, to go ploughing the deep:
When so sweetly the horn
Called me up in the morn:
Curse light upon the carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
Why if that be the case, said this very same friend,
And you ben't no more minded to roam,
Gis a shake by the fist, all your cares at an end,
Dad's alive, and your wife safe at home!
Stark staring with joy, I leapt out of my skin,
Buss'd my wife, mother, sister, and all of my kin:
Now cried I, let them roam,
Who want a good home;
I am well, so I Will keep,
Nor again leave my plough to go plo^^^hing the deep:
Once more shall the horn
Call me up in the morn,
Nor shall any damned carfindo, nor the inconstant wind,
Ever tempt me for to go, and leave my dear behind.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
THE peasant in his humble cot,
The Ethiope on the sandy Nile,
The mole-like Laplander, whose grot
Boasts little genial nature's smile:
These, blessed with virtue, are not poor;
Her cheering voice such thrilling comfort brings,
It throws around the thatch obscure
A joy that shames the palaces of kings.
Oh virtue, sorrowing man's relief,
In pity by kind heaven sent,
That tear'st away the thorn of grief,
And plant'st instead the rose content! --
Thy smallest spark such luster owns,
With it such truth and dignity it brings,
It throws obscurity on thrones,
And beams to dim the diadem of kings!
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
SWEET sung the lark, high poised in air,
When on as sweet a morn,
In Hymen's fane, one fate to share,
Anna and I were sworn.
Sweetly the thrush, in varied song,
The vacant joy increased,
When kindly came the village throng
To join the marriage feast.
But sweeter sang the nightingale,
Love's herald of the grove,
When Cynthia, through the silver vale,
Led to the bower of love!
The lark's sweet morning song of joy
Is known by that content,
A lovely girl and blooming boy,
Are given us to ^^ment:
The thrush still merrily at noon,
In varied cadence sings,
When smiling fortune often some boon,
To cheer our labor, brings:
Nor, time far distant, shall we grieve,
Though blessing now and blessed,
When Philomel, at nature's eve,
Shall lull us into rest.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
DEAR John prithee tell me, cried Ruth;
To Gubbins, her husband, one day,
Do not think, in good sooth,
I should swear but the truth
Did I swear what I am going to say?
That wedlocks's a state,
In good humor, that fate
Contrived to bless woman and man,
And that Giles here is an ass,
Who such fortune lets pass?
All should marry as soon as they can.
Why Goody, cried Gubbins, you know
My thoughts of the things before to day,
Nor, as I shall show,
Need one many miles go
To prove what I am going to say.
Did wives ever scold,
Were they ugly, or old,
A spouse were a miserable man:
But smooth is their tongue,
They Are all comely and young!
Giles get married as soon as you can.
If one's children one wished in their grave,
Still plaguing one day after day,
The girls fashion's slaves,
Thy boys puppies and knaves,
One then might have something to say;
But brats are no evil,
They never play the devil,
Nor have wives from their duty ever ran,
Then since, my friend Giles,
Wedlock greets you with smiles,
Get married as soon as you can
Cried Ruth, will you let your tongue ru^
Here you scurvy old villain I rule!
Rogues there are, said the son,
But, old Quiz, am I one?
Cried the daughter, my father's a fool
Don't you see, Gubbins cried,
I Have the tenderest bride,
And best children that ever blessed man!
Giles would you be driven,
To bedlam or heaven,
Get married an soon as you can!
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
LET sons of sloth dream time away,
Regardless what may follow,
And rail at us who wake the day
With horn, and hound, and hollow:
We their pursuits should find the same,
To their secrets were we privy,
Each man to hunt some favorite game
Through life goes on tantivy.
The book-worm hunts the ancient schools,
And walks with Aristotle,
Black-legs and ladies hunt for fools,
The toper hunts his bottle.
Thus should we find, whatever the name,
To their secrets were we privy,
Mankind to hunt, etc.
When doctors come in at the death,
For true bred hunters these are,
The patient cries, with his last breath,
"Et tu Brute! then fall Caesar."
Thus we with safety might proclaim,
To their secrets were we privy,
Mankind to hunt, etc.
The misanthrope hunts out for woes,
Muck-worm^ are for gold pursuing,
While neck and nothing, as he goes,
The spend thrift hunts his ruin.
Bold tars for honor hunt the wind,
Outrageous saints hunt sinners,
While with round belly, capon-lin'd,
Fat aldermen hunt dinners.
Thus should we find men's views the same,
To their secrets were we privy,
All, to hunt, etc.
Fame courtiers hunt from place to place,
Rakes hunts new sets of features,
While generous hearts urge on the chase,
To relieve their fellow creatures:
Let us, while to our action's aim,
Regardless who are privy,
In chase of pleasure, as fair game,
Through life go on tantivy.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
POOR Peggy loved a soldier lad,
More, far more, than tongue can tell ye,
Yet was her tender bosom sad
Whenever she heard the loud reveliez:
The fi^es were screetch owls to her e ars,
The drums like thunder seemed to rattle,
Ah too prophetic were her fears,
They called him from her arms to battle!
There wonders he against the foe
Performed, and was with laurels crowned,
Vain pomp! for soon death laid him low
On the cold ground.
Her heart all love, her soul all truth,
That none her fears or flight discover,
Poor Peg, in guise a comely youth,
Followed to the field her lover.
Directed by the fife and drum,
To where the work of death was doing,
Where of brave hearts the time was come,
Who, seeking honor, grasp at ruin.
Her very soul was chilled with woe,
New horror came in every sound,
And whispered death had laid him low
On the cold ground.
With mute affliction as she stood,
While her woman's fears confound her
With terror all her soul subdued,
A mourning train came thronging round her:
The plaintive fife and muffl'd drum
The martial obsequies discover,
His name she heard, and cried I come,
Faithful to meet my murdered lover!
Then heart-rent by a figh of woe,
Fell, to the grief of all around,
Where death had laid her lover low
On the cold ground!
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
MANKIND all get drunk, ay and womankind too,
As by proof I shall presently show you: --
See that upstart, to power who unworthily grew,
With good fortune so drunk he don't know you.
Then round with the bowl, the tree's known by its trunk,
It Is not liquor our natures can vary;
And power as completely can make a man drunk
As claret, or sack, or canary.
Why reels that poor wretch? Why his eyes does he roll!
Why mutter and storm in that fashion?
What wine has he drank? How often emptied the bowl!
Not at all sir, the man's in a passion!
Then round with the bowl, the tree's known by its trunk!
It Is not liquor our natures can vary,
And passion as easy can make mortals drunk
As claret, or sack, or canary.
See that whimsical creature, now cry, and now laugh,
Now rave, and now storm, and now sidge^!
He Is not drunk sir, for all he is so like a great calf,
It Is jealousy makes him an idiot!
Then round with the bowl, the trees known by its trunk,
It Is not liquor our natures can vary,
And love as completely can make a man drunk
As claret, or sack, or canary.
See those beautiful creatures like angels come on,
Formed us fellows to keep to our tether,
Say, 'ent it a pity they are all half gone!
Not with wine, but a cap and a feather!
Then round with the bowl, the tree's known by its trunk,
It Is not liquor our natures can vary,
And fashion as easy can make ladies drunk
As claret, or sack, or canary.
Thus passion, or power, or whim, or caprice,
Poor mortals can make non se ipse;
We swill like a sponge, or a mayor at a feast,
The men drunk, and the l^^ies all tipsey!
Then round with the bowl, the tree's known by its trunk,
It Is not liquor our natures can vary,
And solly as easy can make mortals drunk
As claret, or sack, or canary.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
DAPPER Ted Tattoo is my natty name,
For a roll or a trevally,
Among the girls loud sounds my fame,
When I their quarters rally.
For with fife and drum
I smirking come,
Leer, cock my hat,
Swear and all that,
Nor never dread
A broken head
Where the cause of strife's a doxy:
But as for wars,
And wounds, and scars.
And fighting foes,
And thumps, and blows,
I Would rather fight by proxy.
When chiefs and privates mingled lie,
And gasp without assistance,
In baggage wagon, perched up, I
Stand umpire at a distance:
And with fife and drum
I smirking come,
Amongst soldier's wives,
Who lead merry lives,
Nor ever dread
A broken head
Where the cause of strife's a doxy:
Let their husbands go,
And, against the foe
Gain glory's scars
In honor's wars:
I Would rather fight by proxy.
Yet think ye I am not renowned
In foreign wars and civil,
Why, sir, when safe at home and sound,
Zounds I could fight the devil?
And with fife and drum,
Can smirking come,
And cock my hat,
Leer and all that,
Nor never dread
A broken head,
When the cause of strife's a doxy:
Let others go,
And, against the foe,
Gain glory's scars
In honor's wars:
I Would rather fight by proxy.
Thus through the world I make a noise
Wherever I Am a sojourner,
The mighty wonder and surprise
Of every chimney corner!
Where with fife and drum
I smirking come,
And rap out zounds,
And talk of wounds,
Nor ever dread
A broken head
Where the cause of strife's a doxy:
They Are fools who go,
And, against the foe,
In glory's wars
Gain honor's scars:
I Am wise, and fight by proxy.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
LADIES and gentlemen I Am a beau,
A beau I have been all my life,
And yet may the devil fetch me if I know
How I, whose whole trade is
To tickle up the ladies,
Have never yet got me a wife.
I started in life 'bout the year sixty two,
My small clothes were scarlet, my stockings were blue,
My shoes were half-boots, pudding fleeves too I wore,
My hat in the true pistol cock, and the more
Over the fair to prevail,
I sported a fine ramilie for a cue,
For what is a beau or a monkey without a tail?
Fashion thus yields to fashion, as night yields to day,
The huge hat that was cocked with an air
Soon was kicked out of doors, of the smart Nivernois
The charmed world sung the praises,
The belles put on jaxies,
And the beaux sported now their own hair.
By that time it came to the year seventy-two,
The fashions of mixture of old were and new;
Your hair like a bushel might look or a wig,
Or nine hairs of a side, with the tail of a pig,
For me over the fair to prevail,
I had seven yards of ribbon to make me a queue,
For what is a beau or a monkey without a tail?
Again with the varying modes did I jump,
Of fashion I gave the grand pas;
My coat hung to my heels, or was tucked to my rump,
In all circles shoving,
A beau, or a sloven,
With a slouch, or a chapeau de bras:
Thus I sported my figure about eighty-two,
Drove a two-story gig, that four pony rats drew,
Wore a coat with seven capes, thirteen waistcoats in one,
And, that I might never be in folly outdone,
With the fair to prevail,
A large porter's knot would have scarce held my queue,
For what is a beau or a monkey without a tail?
Thus in all sorts of modish assembles the first,
Have my purse, health, and spirits been hacked,
But the polish worn off, nothing left but the rust,
I of fashion's strange stages,
Like Shakespeare's Seven Ages,
Play the farce, though I Am in at the last act.
Arrived to year of Our Lord ninety-two,
I dress, and I coax, and I flirt, but will not do;
At a hundred and one I should still be a fop,
But done up, and nick named by the world the gray crop,
Can I hope to prevail,
To play gallantry's part I have now lost my cue,
For what is a beau or a monkey without a tail.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
ALAS! the battle's lost and won,
Dick Flint's borne off the field
By death, from whom the stoutest run,
Who makes whole armies yield!
Dick well in honor's footstep trod,
Braved war and its alarms,
Now death beneath the humble sod
Has grounded his arms!
Dick's marched before us, on a rout.
Where every soldier's sent,
His fire is dead, his courage out,
His ammunition spen^
His form so active's now a clod,
His grace no longer charms,
For death beneath the humble sod
Has grounded his arms!
Come fire a volly over his grave,
Dead marches let us beat;
War's honors well become the brave,
Who sound their last retreat.
All must obey Fate's awful nod,
Whom life this moment warms,
Death soon or late, beneath the sod
Will ground the soldier's arms!
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
ADIEU my gallant sailor, obey thy duty's call,
Though false the sea, there is truth ashore;
Till nature is found changing, you are sure of constant Poll:
And yet, as now we fever,
Ah much I fear that never
Shall I alas behold thee more.
Jack kissed her, hitch'd his trowsers, and hied him to begone,
Weighed anchor, and lost sight of shore,
Next day a brisk south wester a heavy gale brought on,
Adieu cried Jack for ever,
For much I fear that never
Shall I, sweet Poll, behold you more.
Poll heard that to the bottom was sunk her honest tar,
And for a while lamented sore;
At length cried she, I Will marry; what should I tarry for?
I may lead apes for ever,
Jack's gone, and never, never
Shall I alas, behold him more!
Jack safe and sound returning, sought out his faithful Poll,
Think you, cried she, that false I swore,
I Am constant still as ever, it is nature's changed, that is all;
And thus we part for ever,
For never, sailor, never
Shall I behold you more!
If, as you say* that nature like winds can shift and veer,
About ship for a kinder shore,
I heard the trick you played me, and so, do you see, my dear,
To a kind heart for ever
I Have spliced myself, so never
Shall I false Poll, behold you more.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
SPANKING Jack was so comely, so pleasant so jolly,
Though wind^ blew great guns, still he would whistle and sing,
Jack loved his friend, and was true to his Molly,
And, if honor gives greatness, was great as a king:
One night, as we drove with two reess in the main sail,
And the scud came on lowering upon a lee shore,
Jack went up aloft, for to hand the top gantsail,
A spray washed him off, and we never saw him more:
But grieving's a folly,
Come let us be jolly,
If we have troubles on sea boy, we have pleasures 'shore.
Whiffling Tom still of mischief, or sun in the middle,
Through life in all weathers at random would jog,
He Would dance, and he would sing, and he would play on the fiddle,
And swig with an air his allowance of grog:
Long side of a Don, in the Terrible frigate,
As yard arm and yard arm we lay off the shore,
In and out whiffling Tom did so caper and jig it,
That his head was shot off, and we never saw him more*
But grieving's a folly, etc.
Bonny Ben was to each jolly messmate a brother,
He was manly and honest, good natured and free,
If ever one tar was more true than another,
To his friend and his duty, that sailor was he:
One day with the davit to weigh the cadge anchor,
Ben went in the boat on a bold craggy shore,
He over board tipped, when a shark and a spanker,
Soon nipt him in two, and we never saw him more!
But grieving's a folly, etc.
But what of it all lads, shall we be down hearted
Because that mayhap we now take our last sup?
Life's cable must one day or other be parted,
And death in safe moorings will bring us all up:
But it is always the way on it, one scarce finds a brother
Fond as pitch, honest, hearty, and true to the core,
But by battle, or storm, or some damned thing or other,
He Is popp'd off the hooks, and we never see him more
But grieving's a folly, etc.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
ARRAH if it is no lie in this world we are living,
And it en't, for it is seen every day,
That the truest of joys honest hearts are receiving
Are those they are giving away.
Sure men are all sisters, and cousins, and brothers,
And it is clear to the stupidest elf
That the best kind of comfort a man gives to others,
Is that which he takes to himself:
Thus this bodder and game, this same meum and tuum,
Means the devil a meaning but suum.
For your friend's peace of mind should you let your mouth water,
And be getting the wish you obtain,
In possessing his purse, or his wife or his daughter,
What delight would the joy be but pain.
Then let knav'ry alone, the vain work's useless labor,
Be It for love, or for power or for pelf,
For every wrong that a man does his neighbor,
Sure is he not doing himself?
Thus this bodder, etc.
If I Am rich, and should choose to do good to another,
Arrah fait for the selfish design
Devil tank me, for if you allow I Am his brother,
Fait and conscience sure is not he mine?
But, says musty Morality, choose objects fitting;
Just your sermons lay by on the shelf;
Why you stupid old big wig, arrah sure 'ent I getting
For one joy of his ten for myself.
Thus this bodder, etc.
Then from such bothoration in pity release us,
Fortune all you bestow will repay,
And though poor as Job. you will all be as rich as Craesus
For you will keep what you have given away:
The ^ine generous maxim then while you're pursuing
Spend your all to hoard mountains of pelf,
Soar high while you're sinking, be prosperous in ruin,
And give joy to enjoy it yourself.
And thus have I proved, etc.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
BLEAK was the morn when William left his Nancy
The fleecy snow frowned on the whitened shore,
Cold as the f^ars that chilled her dreary fancy,
While she her sailor from her bosom tore:
To his filled heart a little Nancy pressing,
While a young tar the ample trowsers eyed,
In ^eed of firm^ess, in this state distressing,
Will checked the rising sigh, and fondly cried,
Never fear the perils of the fickle ocean,
Sorrow's a ^otion,
Grief all in vain;
Sweet love take heart,
For we must part
In joy to meet again.
Loud blew the wind, when leaning on that willow
Where the dear name of William stood,
When Nancy saw, tossed by a faithless billow,
A ship dashed against a rock that topp'd the flood:
Her tender heart with frantic sorrow thrilling,
Wild at the storm that howled along the shore,
No longer could resist a stroke so killing,
It Is he, she cried, nor shall I see him more!
Why did he ever trust the fickle ocean,
Sorrow's my portion,
Misery and pain!
Break my poor heart.
For now we part,
Never to meet again.
Mild was the eve, all nature was smiling,
Four tedious years had Nancy passed in grief,
When, with her children the sad hours beguiling,
She saw her William fly to her relief?
Sunk in his arms with bliss he quickly found her,
But soon returned to life, to love, and joy,
While her grown young ones anxiously surround her,
And now Will clasps his girl and now his boy:
Did I not say, though it is a fickle ocean,
Sorrow's all a notion,
Grief all in vain?
My joy how sweet,
For now we meet,
Never to part again!
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
LIFE'S a jest, says the poet, arrah sure it is a pun --
Men call black for white through some quibbling pretense,
And expressions still use where the sound is all one,
Though as distant as London from Dublin the sense
Then let 'em now just go their gig and their fun,
This life by my soul's nothing more than a pun,
Where men play on our passions to turn us all fools,
And make puns and quibbles, that we may make bulls
That he is over head and ears the fond lover declares,
And must marry or hang -- the dear creature beset,
Consents, little dreaming he puns while he swears,
For the taef does not mean he is in love, but in debt.
Then let them now just go their gig and their fun,
This life by my soul's nothing more than a pun,
Where fine dashing lovers fond widows turn fools,
And make puns and quibbles, that they may make bulls.
That sweet babe, says old Bolus, I Will quickly restore
To that mother from whom the dear creature had birth;
Punning rogue, by and by sir the child is no more,
So he lies and speaks truth, for he meant mother earth!
Then let them now just go their gig and their fun,
This life by my soul's nothing more than a pun,
And thus learned physicians their patients turn fools,
And make puns and quibbles, that they may make bulls.
Says the courtier, my friend, you shall have a snug place,
A douceur or two more and your suit cannot fail!
The dear punning courtier gets into disgrace,
And you get sure enough a snug place in a jail!
Then let 'em now just go their gig and their fun,
This life by my soul's nothing more than a pun,
And thus courtiers turn their dependants and fools,
And make puns and quibbles that they may make bulls.
Thus one thing they say, and another express,
Thus feathers cut throats, thus are sycophants civil,
Don't bishops and ladies say no, and mean yes?
Don't we call women angels for playing the devil?
Then let them now just go their gig and their fun,
This life by my soul's nothing more than a pun.
Thus men laugh in their sleeves, while they turn their friends fools,
And make puns and quibbles, that they may mak^ bulls
RONDEAU -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
WHO calls? -- Who calls?
Who Wisdom cal^s by Momus' name?
Who needs a sample of my quality?
Momus and wisdom are the same,
Wisdom's gods the god of jollity.
Let the dark sage who low'rs and scowls,
And broods over melancholy,
Seek creeping snakes and hooting owls,
And call all pleasure folly:
If this be truth, truth speaks in lies,
This axiom naught can vary,
If to be merry's to be wise,
To be wise is to be merry.
Who calls? etc.
Be mortals motives what they may,
Power, love, ambition, treasure,
In spite of all wise fools can say,
The end proposed is pleasure.
That truth which contradicts me, lies;
This axiom ought can vary,
If to be merry's to be wise,
To be wise is to be merry
Who calls? etc.
See laughter at my beck appears,
And holds up men and manners,
Haste joy's recruit's, Whim's volunteers,
List under Momus' banners:
I Folly dress in Wisdom's guise,
Nor can my maxims vary:
If to be merry's to be wise,
To be wise is to be merry.
Who calls? etc.
RONDEAU -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
A MIGHTY sultan once for fun
Indulged an inclination,
It Is odds by them my story's done
You Will make its application.
A wag he sent for to his court,
Who, each way you can mention,
To furnish whim, and fun, and sport,
Still tortured his invention.
To please this sultan, etc.
Amongst Folly's sons and daughters too
With Satire did he wander,
And still attempting something new,
Relying on the candor
Of this mighty sultan, etc.
At length his frolics at an end,
Cried one, I do not bam you,
B^t as you merit, my good friend,
He Will either save or dam you,
Will this mighty sultan, etc.
But, for your comfort, he is just,
An I easily contented,
Nor to him ever did any trust
Who afterward repented.
You are the sultan who for fun
Indulge an inclination,
I am the wag -- my story's done --
Now make its application.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
IN the motley feathered race
Mankind you may distinctly trace,
Evermore on pleasure's wing
Idly roving,
Fighting, loving,
They chatter, croak, and hoot, and sing.
Nor is my simile unfair,
Among the people of the air
Are birds of night and birds of day,
Birds that on each other prey,
Birds that whistle, birds that croak,
Birds that are a standing joke,
Birds that decoy, and mock and call,
So like to birds are mortals all:
That in the motley feathered race,
Mankind you may distinctly trace,
Evermore on pleasure^ wing,
Idly roving,
Fighting, loving,
They charter, croak, and hoot, and sing.
Thou have seen upon the prowl,
Grave as any judge, an owl,
On birds and mice at ^a^dom seize,
For wren, or linnet,
Watch the minute,
And make a snatch by way of fees
Lawyers, who deal in froth and words,
What are they all but humming-birds?
Geese art those wh^ go to law,
A hoarding miser's a jackdaw,
Pond doves, like lovers, kiss and toy,
A bulsinch is an Irish joy,
Neglected worth's the humble wren,
While corm'rants are all aldermen!
Thus in the mot^ey f^ather'd race, etc.
Vain peacocks thou have seen, who hide
Their ugly feet, though puffed with pride;
Thus, while they bask in sunshine's hour,
Spacious wonders,
Hide the blunders
Of gaudy peacocks, plumed with power:
^ools so love knaves one cannot desery
The dove-house from the rookery:
The meerest dolt can tell you who
Are like the wagtail and cuckoo:
And all know those who swear and lie
Are like the noisy chatt'ring pie:
A hen's a flirt, with frizzl'd top,
And what is the duck-tail'd-jay? -- A crop!
Thus in the motley feathered race, etc.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
WHEN I comet to town with a load of hay,
Mean and lowly though I seem,
I knows pretty well how they figures away,
While I whistles and drives my team:
Your natty sparks, and flashy dames
How do I love to queer,
I runs my rigs,
And patters, and giggs,
And plays a hundred comical games,
To all that comes near:
Then in a pet
To hear 'em fret,
A mobbing away they go --
("The scoundrel deserves to be horse whipped!"
'Who, me ma'am?')
Woe Ball, woe!
So to mind them I never seem,
But whistles and drives my team!
So as I seems thinking of nothing at all,
And driving as fast as I can,
I pins a queer thing against the wall,
Half a monkey, and half a man!
The mob came round him to put up his blood,
While he is trembling from top to toe,
My whip it goes spank,
I tips Ball on the flank,
Ball plunges, and paints him all over with mud,
Queers his stockings, and spoils the beau!
Then then the sweet pretty dear
Ah could you but hear,
("Odds curse you, I Will make you know,
"You infernal villain!"
'Lord bless your baby face, I would not hurt your 'spindle shanks for the
world!')
Woe Ball, woe!
So to mind 'em I never seem,
But whistles and drives my team.
And so gets the finest fun
And frisk that ever you saw,
Of all I meets I can queer every one
But you gemmen of the law:
Though they can scarcely put me down,
Says I, to their courts when I Am led,
Where their tails of a pig
They hide with a wig,
How many ways in London town
They dresses a calf's head.
Then every dunce
To hear open at once,
Like mill-clacks their clappers go,
("Oh that is the fellow I saw grinning through the horse "collar in the county,"
'I fancy you're the fellow I saw grinning through the 'pillory in London!')
Woe Ball, woe!
So to mind 'em I never seem,
But whistles and drives my team.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
I SING of that life of delight beyond measure
That tars calmly lead on the boisterous main,
Where toil is enjoyment, where trouble's all pleasure,
And where men lose their lives, a sure fortune to gain
Where you fear no diseases but sickness and scurvy,
Where the water stinks sweetly, by way of a zest.
Where you walk on your legs, when you're not topsy turvy,
And where, though you sleep soundly, you're never at rest!
Then push round the can, oh you have not a notion
Of sailors, their grog, and their sweethearts, and wives,
Ah give me, my soul, the tight lads of the ocean,
Who though they are so wretched, lead such happy lives.
Then you're always of billows and winds in the middle,
That so dash, and so whistle, and bodder your ears,
And play a duet with the tar's song and fiddle,
So sweetly that sounds, and nobody hears:
Then to see the tight lads, how they laugh at a stranger,
Who fears billows can drown, and nine pounders can kill
For you're safe sure enough, were you not in such danger,
And might loll at your ease, if you could but sit still.
Then push round the can, etc.
What of perils that, always the same, are so various,
And through shot holes and leaks leave wide open Death's doors,
Devil a risk's in a battle, were not so precarious,
Storms were all gig, and fun, but for breakers and shores:
In short, a tar's life, you may say dat I told it,
Who leaves quiet and peace, foreign countries to roam,
Is, of all other lives, I Will be bound to uphold it,
The best life in the world, next to staying at home.
Then push round the can, etc.
BALLAD -- IN PRIVATE THEATRICALS.
THIS here is what I does -- I, do you see, forms a notion
That our troubles, our sorrows and strife,
Are the winds and the billows that foment the ocean,
As we work through the passage of life:
And for fear on life's sea lest the vessel should sounder,
To lament, and to weep, and to wail,
Is a pop gun that tries to out roar a ninepounder,
All the same as a whiff in a gale.
Why now I, though hard fortune has pretty near starved me,
And my togs are all ragged and queer,
Never yet gave the bag to the friend that had served me,
Or caused ruined beauty a tear,
Now there the other day, when my messmate deceived me,
Stole my rhino, my chest, and our Poll;
Do you think in revenge, while their treachery grieved me,
I a court martial called? -- Not at all,
This here on the matter was my way of arg'ing,
It Is true they have not left me a ^ros^,
A vile wife and false friend though are gone by the bargain,
So the gain do you see's more than the loss.
For though fortune's a jilt, and has, etc.
The heart's all -- when that is built as it should, sound and clever,
We go before the wind like a sly,
But, if rotten and crank, you may luff up for ever,
You Will always sail in the wind's eye:
With palaver and nonsense I Am net to be paid off,
I Am a drift, let it blow then great guns,
A gale, a fresh breeze, or the old gemmen's head off,
I take's life rough and smooth as it runs:
Content, through hard fortune, etc.
FINALE -- IN THE COALITION.
LAWYERS pay you with words, and fine ladies with vapors,
Your parsons with preaching, and dancers with capers,
Soldiers pay you with courage, and some with their lives,
Some men with their fortunes, and some with their wives:
Some with fame, some with conscience, and many throw both in,
Physicians with latin, and great men with nothing;
I, not to be singu^^r in such a throng,
For your kindness pay you with he end of a song.
But pleading, engrossing, declaring, and vap'ring,
And fighting, and hectoring, and dancing, and capering,
And preaching, and swearing, and bu^lying -- prescribing,
And coaxing, and wheed^ing, and seeing, and bribing,
And every professional art of hum-drumming
Is clearly in some sort of species of humming;
Humming! -- nay, take me with you, the term's very strong,
But I only meant humming the end of a song,
For all who this evening have paid me attention
I would I had language of some new invention
My thanks to return, for where is the expression
Can describe of your kindness the grateful impression?
May every desire of your hearts be propitious,
Be lasting success the result of your wishes,
Unimpair'd be your joys, your lives happy and long!
And now I am come to the end of my song.
BALLAD -- IN SHE IS MAD FOR A HUSBAND.
OH money, thou master of all things below,
Of each chain thour'^ the principal link:
What can purchase a friend, or can buy off a foe,
Or make black appear, like the chink?
Your lawyers physicians, in short every tribe,
Who to eat dip the pen in their ink,
Would they write, or advise, or consult, or prescribe,
Were it not for the sake of the chink?
Of men and of women, high, low, great and small,
It Is the life, it is victuals, the drink;
It Is a good universal acknowledged -- all, all
Revive at the sound of the chink.
No more talk of Cupid, for thine far above,
His power to nothing ca^ sink;
I dote to distraction, could have her I love,
Alas! if I had but the chink.
BALLAD -- IN SHE IS MAD FOR A HUSBAND.
ALAS! where is my lover gone?
In all the world I have but one,
Near to my heart his image sits,
And 'twas for him I lost my wits.
Where art thou fled, my ^^ly dear?
To find thee they have sent me here;
Thou Wilt cure, they say, these lovesick fits,
And give me back again my wits.
Haste then, to pleasure show the way,
For now in doubt and fear I stray,
My brain with dubious torments splits;
Haste, haste, and give me back my wits.
BALLAD -- IN SHE IS MAD FOR A HUSBAND.
To be mad for a husband is not a thing new:
The widow who swore to her first to be true,
And the moment he is dead at a route goes to cards,
And a week after marries Dick Trim of the guards;
Because truly Dick was a lusty young lad:
What a plague do you call such a woman but mad?
The young lady, brimful of the last new romance,
Who ogles the footman, as if 'twere by chance;
Who gets out of her room by a ladder of ropes,
And at last, with her John, who to Scotland elopes,
Leaving, sore in affliction, her worthy old dad;
What a plague do you call such a woman but mad?
She, because he is rich, and because she is poor,
Who weds with a battered old rake of fourscore:
She at seventy-seven who marries a boy;
For title and rank, she who barters all joy;
Those who marry for motives like these or as bad,
What a p^ague do you call all these women but mad?
BALLAD -- IN SHE IS MAD FOR A HUSBAND.
HE ran to the farm-yard, and there bit a hog
That, in less than ten minutes, barked just like a dog;
The hog bit a horse that was just come from hunting,
And presently after the horse fell a grunting;
Such grunting, and barking, and barking, and grunting
And grunting, and barking, and barking, and grunting,
The village will never have done with the talk on it,
Though the wisest man there cannot make hog or dog on it.
A fine brindled cow, near a hay-stack was straying,
Which, bit by the horse, was soon after heard neighing;
The cow bit a man, who was driving the plough,
When he walked on four legs, and low^d just like the cow.
Such lowing, and neighing, and barking, and grunting,
And grunting, and barking, and neighing, and lowing,
The villiage will never have done with the talk on it,
Though the wisest man there cannot make hog or dog on it.
The man bit a Jack-ass, that soon after ran
Half a mile on two legs, and talked just like the man;
The Jack-ass encountered a sheep in his way,
And it is not to be mentioned how loud he did bray.
Such braying, and talking, and talking, and braying
And barking, and grunting, and lowing, and neighing,
The village will never have done with the talk on it,
Though the wisest man there cannot make hog or dog on it.
The sheep bit a wolf, which was soon heard to bleat,
The wolf more dumb things than I Have time to repeat;
But the worst that was bit, was, alas! my poor wench!
Heaven keep us, I say, from mad dogs and the French!
Such bleating, and talking, and barking and braying,
And grunting, and bleating, and lowing, and neighing,
The village will never have done with the talk on it,
Though the wisest man there cannot make hog or dog on it.
BALLAD -- IN SHE IS MAD FOR A HUSBAND.
YOUNG Doll a comely village girl
Was courted by a huge rich squire,
Who offered diamonds, gold, and pearl,
Or gossip fame's a wounded liar:
But to honest Doll
Virtue was all,
So he could never get nothing by her;
And for all his jeer,
With a flea in his ear,
She packing sent this huge rich 'squire.
One day as he had hunting been,
Come cross the fields this huge rich 'squire,
On the finest horse that ever was seen,
And spying Doll, wai all on fire.
Doll, in a fright,
Saw him alight,
And run over bramble and over briar;
But, in the nick,
What a cunning trick,
The gipsy played this huge rich 'squire.
Finding herself quite overtook,
She cried out to this huge rich 'squire,
I fear my father sees us -- look
'Over the hedge a little higher.
While he upon
This work was gone,
Doll mounts his horse, and in the mire,
Of hope bereft,
She fairly left,
To curse his stars, this huge rich 'squire.
BALLAD -- IN ENGLAND AGAINST ITALY.
WHY is the devil in you,
Or are you such a ninny
To believe of you she will ever think, persuade her all you can
No, no, whatever believe you,
Your hopes will all deceive you,
For a girl of sense will yield to -- not a monkey but a man.
Zounds can that hat and feather,
Or the coxcomb altogether,
A 'squire of silk, and mandrake -- a mere flash in the pan
His pretty self admiring,
Be ought but hate inspiring,
When a woman always yields to -- not a monkey, but a man.
Then give this folly over,
Nor longer play the lover,
For I plainly tell you it is a mighty silly plan;
Or, spite of all your vapouring,
I Will so finely spoil yonr capering,
You shall own this arm belongs to -- not a monkey, but a man.
SONG -- IN ENGLAND AGAINST ITALY.
ON Crochetini loves attend,
Each day some beauty to discover;
In prudent age to find a friend,
And make of every youth a lover.
The ravished birds in throngs appear,
Where, with her notes, the woods are ringing,
And nightingales with pleasure hear,
To borrow sweetness from her singing.
BALLAD -- IN THE FORTUNE HUNTER.
THE willing soul well pleased delights
To heal the stranger's grief;
Nor will its hospitable rights
From worth withhold relief:
But still we should -- deceitful lest
The tear we wish to dry --
Distinguish 'twixt the generous guest,
And the insidious spy.
Our passions each should, station'd well,
Have some good post apart,
And, as a wary ^entinel,
Prudence should guard the heart.
Thus, like a camp, the human breast
Might a surprise defy:
Rewarding still the generous guest,
And punishing the spy.
BALLAD -- IN THE FORTUNE HUNTER.
FOR wedlock's a voyage, where, should boisterous billows;
Arise to disturb of our lives the calm sea,
Peace, joy, and delight, would, deserting our pillows,
Leave behind a strong wish once again to get free.
Domestic disquiet, like quicksand or shallow,
Would the vessel of Love shock in every part,
Rocks of Anger would, bruise her, or Hates ocean swallow,
And the tempest of Marriage would shipwreck the heart.
But gayly her course through the sea of life bending,
With a surface that kisses the generous gale,
Each effort, each wish, each affection, still tending
To steer by Love's compass, and hoist Reason's sail.
The senses, that crew of the mind, all in motion,
To make the voyage prosperous exert every art,
While the vessel towers on the face of the ocean,
'Till in wedlock's kind haven rides safely the heart.
BALLAD -- IN THE MISCHANCE.
FOR I am the girl that was made for my Joe,
And Joe is the lad that was modeled for me,
Our tempers agree;
And all the world over with him would I go,
And work late or early, nor think it a pain,
For I never loved my Joe for the lucre of gain.
If so be, by good chance, such a fortunate thing
Was to happen, for me to be crowned a queen,
'Twould quickly be seen,
If they did not consent to make Joey a king,
That for Bet they might get who they would for to reign,
For I never loved my Joe for the lucre of gain.
O'Conner, he in the pea-aches that plies,
Ap Skenkin, the Welchman, Mac Pherson the Scot,
For his sake went to pot;
Nay, (though many a girl would have thought him a prize),
I refused a Jew broker, from Petticoat-lane,
For I never loved my Joe for the lucre of gain.
BALLAD -- IN ALL IS NOT GOLD THAT GLITTERS.
I AM a chairman my name is Mc Gee,
No flower in May was so blithe as me,
Till that bastard Cupid, lodged in disguise
In pretty Bridget's two good looking eyes.
Arrah is it you, the urchin cried,
I Have a strong bow I never tried;
Like a shelalah he then chose a dart,
And what a whack it gave my heart.
And since that time I grunt and sigh,
And sob, and moan, bec^se as why
I strive to hate, but am never the nigher,
By her frosty looks I Am all on fire.
Oh! Bridget, Bridget, ease my pain,
Or give me back my heart again,
Or else, in troth, do all I can,
My partner'll soon be an odd man.
BALLAD -- IN ALL IS NOT GOLD THAT GLITTERS.
A WORD in your ear if you please Mr. Fop,
No more in this pickle be roaming;
But pull off your fool's jacket, step home to your shop,
And gentlemen's pig-tails be combing.
Be advised by a fool, by my soul, and dat's me,
Though we fancy it never so greedy,
It Is not for the likes of such people as we,
To be aping my lord and my lady.
For you, Mrs. Bridget, if just in the room
Of being dressed out like an actor,
You were twirling your mop round, or handling your broom,
'Twould be more, I be'ieve, in character.
Be advised by a fool, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE OLD WOMAN OF EIGHTY.
To every favorite village sport
With joy thy steps I Will guide;
Thy wishes always will I court,
Nor ever stir from thy side.
But when the spright^y fife and drum,
With all their dread alarms,
Echo afar
The cry of war,
When chiefs are heard to cry we come,
And Honor calls -- To arms.
Thy pain and pleasure will I share,
For better and for worse,
And if we have a prattling care,
I Will be its tender nurse.
But when, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE OLD WOMAN OF EIGHTY.
I HAVE health, and I have spirits too,
Of work I Have had my share;
And when you go, for love of you,
I will your knapsack bear.
Nor this resolve ever will I rue,
We both alike will fare;
And still content, for love of you,
I will your knapsack bear.
Though thunders growl, and lightenings blue
In flashes cleave the air,
I'^l march content, for love of you
And will your knapsack bear.
All dangers, hazardous and new,
One smile shall make me dare;
Rememb'ring it is for love of you,
That I your knapsack bear.
BALLAD -- IN ENGLAND AGAINST ITALY.
THE falcon, towering high in air,
D^scries afar the turtle dove,
Watching his nest with anxious care,
And waiting for his willing love.
Nor can the victim's harmless cries,
His foe's insatiate vengeance stay,
On rapid pinions down he flies,
And pounces on his tender prey.
BALLAD -- IN THE RAZOR GRINDER.
COME all you maids who fain would -- marry,
Learn, learn of me the way to -- choose,
Rather by ha^f till doomsday -- tarry,
Than beauty to an old man -- lose.
Ah tell me, how can wrinkles -- charm you,
What joys can age excite or -- prove,
Let, then, your dangerous state -- alarm you,
And choose a young man that can -- love.
An old man always will be -- weezing,
No feeling, hearing, taste, or -- sight;
A young man always will be -- pleasing,
Sprightly all day, and kind at -- night.
Ah tell me how, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
THIS life is like a country dance,
The world a spacious ball room,
In which so many take a prance,
They scarcely find for all room.
Fiddlers, and pipers, in a row,
See how the ranks are closing,
Each strives his neighbor's faults to show,
While he is his own exposing.
(Pray Ma'am what dance have you called? Matrimony Ma'am. The figure is
extremely easy, you turn single, run away with your partner, lead up the
middle, back to back, part, and change partners.)

Thus busied in the fond turmoil,
They time by folly measure,
Turn all their pleasures into toil,
And fancy toil a pleasure.
Some in full dance with ardour burn,
And swim, and glide, and wander;
While others, waiting for their turn,
Sn^er, smile, and deal out slander.
"And so the Count must run away!"
"Why really I Am afraid so;
"His flirt has ruined him at play:"
"Poor man, I always said so."
"(Oh no doubt about it: -- kept by a physician before she came to the count!
-- duel with a young apothecary! -- syringes loaded with analeptic pills! --
It Is your turn to begin Sir: -- Sir I beg your pardon."

Thus busied in the fond turmoil, etc,
Away they prance it, small and big,
Brown, ginger, fair, and grizzle,
"Lord ma'am you disconcert my wig,
"It Was you sir tous'd my frizzle!"
"Right hand and left, the figure mind,
"Lord what are you about ma'am?
"My dear Miss Giggle you are blind,
"My Lady Fuzz you're out ma'am?
("Lord ma'am you should consider that the dance is My Lord Mayor's Feast: --
it begins with a set to, and finishes with a reel.)"

Thus busied in the fond turmoil, etc.
Thus dance succeeding after dance,
As if old Nick had got 'em,
They scandal vent, and flirt, and prance,
And foot it to the bottom.
Thus having made for others sport,
In regular rotation,
With swinging interest they retort
On them the obligation.
"(Lord, did you ever see such a fright as that woman! rubbed it all off one
side of her face! But look at that man, with his false calves turned before! --
Come, come, ladies and gentlemen, a new dance. -- Strike up none so Pretty)."

Thus busied, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
PRAY ladies think no^ I presume
The art of love to teach you;
Proficients long ago become,
My counsel could no^ reach you:
A hint I offer, nothing more,
For your determination,
Love's mysteries would you explore,
Observe the feathered nation.
^s in a mirror, may you there,
Of love, make your elections,
As you choose ribbands at a fair,
To suit with all complexions.
The cuckoo, that one fulsome tale,
Vaunts over so, and over,
May sooner than the dove prevail,
With some, by way of lover:
But I have heard the laughing loves,
More truly aim their arrows,
When Venus harnesses her doves,
Than when she is drawn by sparrows:
But if the smallest hint by you
To this should be objected,
With defference, so much your due,
I soon shall stand corrected.
The peacock, with such stately pride,
His haughty bosom throbbing,
May scorn, while hopping by his side,
The blessed, though humble robin:
But, sparingly true joy is lent,
To envy, pride, and malice:
It Is said a cottage, and content,
Sometimes outweighs a palace:
Yet may, against my playful verse,
No fit of anger seize you:
I would not, for the universe,
Do ought that could displease you.
Jays, pies, and all the chattering crew,
To folly given, and pleasure,
May turn to jest the chosen few,
Who love by virtue measure:
Not so the grateful nightingale,
Who soon as evening closes,
His orgies offers in the vale,
To heaven, ere he reposes.
Of this you will judge, as of the rest,
Yet, while the smile's beginning,
Ere you turn counsel to a jest,
Take care that laughing's winning.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
WOULD ye see the world in little,
Ye curious here repair,
We'll suit you to a tittle,
At this our rustic fair.
We Have glittering baits to catch you,
As tempting at a court;
With whim for whim we'll match you,
And give you sport for sport.
From a scepter to a rattle,
We Have every thing in toys,
For infants that scarce prattle,
To men who still are boys.
Cock horses, and state coaches,
In gingerbread are sold,
Cakes, parliament, gilt watches,
And horns all tipped with gold.
Then if for fine parade you go,
Come here and see our puppet show.
Walk in here ladies and gentlemen; here you see the Queen of Sheba, and King
Solomon in all his glory; you think that figure's alive, but he is no more
alive than I am!

While the pipes and the tabors rend the air,
Haste neighbors to the fair.
What Is your sweepstakes, and your races,
And all your fighting cocks,
To our horse collar grimaces,
And gi^ls that run for smocks?
Our Hobs can swivle noses,
At sing^e-stick who fight,
As well as your Mendozas,
Though not quite so polite:
In their deceptions neater,
Are your keen rooks al^ow'd,
Than is yonder fire eater,
Who queers the gaping crowd?
Then boast not tricks so noxious,
That genteel life bespeaks,
Our jugler's hixious doxious,
Shall distance all the greeks.
Can Pharaoh and his host be found,
To match our mimble merry-go-round?
Put in here, put in, put in! every blank a prize! down with it and double it,
twenty can play as well as one.

While the pipes, etc.
Hear you mountebank assure ye,
Of diseases, by the score,
A single dose shall cure ye:
Can Warwick Lane do more?
Wid vi^ligigs, tetotums,
Yon jew's imposhing faish,
Shall cheat you here in no times,
All one as in Duke's place.
Hark, yonder, making merry,
Full many a happy clown!
For champaign who drink perry,
As good as that in town.
Then for sights, we have apes, and monkies,
Some on four legs, some on two;
Tall women, dwarfs, cropped donkies,
For all the world like you.
Then would ye Ranelagh find out,
What think ye of our Roundabout!
Walk in ladies and gentlemen! the only booth in the fair; here ye may make the
whole tower of the world; would ye ride in the caravan, the expedition, the
land frigate, or the dilly! fourteen miles in fifteen hours, ladies and
gentlemen!

While the pipes, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
YOUNG Mog, arrived at woman's growth,
Felt something in her bosom move:
'Twas neither joy, nor pain, yet both,
Young Ralph o'th woodland said 'twas love.
Ralph loved young Moggy as his life,
Was wealthy, warm, and well to do:
But Moggy saw the soldiers come,
Beheld the glittering arms so gay,
Was charmed with the loud trumpets bray,
Delighted with the sprightly fife,
And deafened with the thundering drum:
While soldiers marched to the loud tattoo,
And though to honest Ralph still true,
She listened to the loud tattoo,
I Have said that Mog was debonair,
Nor was their admiration small:
She was thought artless, young, and fair,
By the regiment, pioneers, and all.
Each would have taken her for his wife,
A la militaire, as soldiers do;
The smock-sac'd ensign named his sum,
The sergeant promised, swore, and prayed,
The trumpeter her praises brayed,
To charm her loudly squeak'd the fife,
The drummer braced his thundering drum,
To win her heart with a loud tattoo.
Thus strove, to make young Mog untrue,
Pike, trumpet, fife, and loud tattoo.
Mog soon found reason to condemn
The nonsense of each blustering elf:
And, looking with contempt on them,
Some little shame took to herself.
Determined now to be the wife
Of honest Ralph, so kind and true,
Cried she to the ensign, child go home
To your mamma. -- For you, old Bluff,
Your trumpet's like yourself, a puff!
I Will not be whistled after, fife,
Nor, drummer, shall your hollow drum
To me beat Wedlock's loud tattoo.
True to my Ralph, to honor true,
Hence trumpet, fife, and loud tattoo.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
WHAT art thou, facinating war,
Thou throphied, painted pest,
That thus men seek, and they abhor,
Pursue, and yet detest?
Are Honor and Remorse the same?
Does Murder Laurels bring?
Is Rapine Glory? Carnage Fame?
Flies Crime on Vict'ry's wing?
Their wrongs, who never shall return,
Their woes, that but survive to mourn
Even when the battle rages high,
When to the charge the legions fly,
And trumpets strike the ear,
Shall from the bravest wrest the sigh,
That starts soft Pity's tear.
Where will ambition's folly reach!
Sure nature never designed
Her noble gifts an art should teach,
To man, to thin his kind!
Well they deserve their county's care,
In its defense who fight,
Who bulwarks of their nation are,
Its glory, its delight:
Yet for their wrongs, who never return;
Their woes, who but survive to mourn,
Even when the battle rages high,
When to the charge the legions fly,
And trumpets cleave the ear,
The truly brave shall heave a sigh,
Shall vent kind Pity's tear.
Then do not, for an empty name
A phantom thus pursue:
Think, that if Glory mark thy fame,
Murder shall mark it too.
Reason, and Peace, and Love dwell here,
And, if for others woe,
We heave the sigh, and start the tear,
From guilt they never flow.
Ah stay, lest thou should never return,
Lest I should but survive to mourn,
Lest when the battle rages high,
When to the charge the legions fly,
And trumpets cleave the ear,
Thy fate demand the generous sigh,
And mine the pitying tear.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
THE passing bell was heard to toll,
John wail'd his loss with bitter cries,
The parson prayed for Mary's soul,
The sexton hid her from all eyes.
"And art thou gone,"
Cried wretched John,
Oh dear 'twill kill me, I am dying:
Cried Neighbor Sly,
While standing by,
"Lord how this world is given to lying!"
The throng retired, John left alone,
He meditated amongst the tombs,
And spelt out on the mouldering stones,
What friends were gone to their long homes:
"You're gone before,"
Cried John, no more --
"I shall come soon, I Am almost dying:"
Cried Neighbor Sly,
While standing by,
"Lord how this world is given to lying!"
'Here lies the bones, heaven's will be done,
'Of farmer Slug: -- reader would know
'Who to his memory raised this stone?
'Twas his disconsolate widow.'
Cried John, 'Oh oh!
"To her I Will go,
"No doubt with grief the widow's dying:"
Cried Neighbor Sly,
Still standing by,
"Lord how this world is given to lying!"
Their mutual grief was short and sweet;
Scarcely the passing bell had ceased,
When they were sped; -- the funeral meat
Was warmed up for the marriage feast!
They v^w'd, and swore,
Now over and over.
They never would part till both were dying:
Cried Neighbor Sly,
Still standing by,
"Lord how this world is given to lying!"
Again to heat the passing bell,
John now a sort of hank'ring feels;
Again his help-mate brags how well
She can trip up a husband's heels:
Again to the tomb
Each longs to come,
Again with tears, and sobs, and fighing,
For Neighbor Sly,
Again to cry,
"Lord how this world is given to lying!"
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
RAIL on at joys that are not thine,
That thus thou leer'st, with Envy's blink,
It Is not because we drink good wine,
But it is that thou have none to drink
What though two roads before us lie,
We on no crooked path shall fall,
For that we may not walk awry,
We'll drink till we cannot walk at all.
Thou say that wine's the cause of strife,
That to the brain when it ascends,
We quarrel, so do man and wife,
And then, like them, we are better friends:
But here thou shall not have thy will,
Nor coax good fellows to a brawl;
Rather than of our friends think ill,
We'll drink till we cannot think at all.
Thou call'st the glass a foe to love,
Why fool it is Cupid's dearest boast,
What fair did celebrated prove,
Till celebrated as a toast?
But imperfections should there be,
That sometimes to their lot may fall,
Rather than faults in ladies see,
We'll drink till we cannot see at all.
Thou say that treason lurks beneath,
And our convivial pleasure sours;
Thou lie, that monster does not breathe,
That dare^ profane a king like our's
But our fi^m loyalty to prove,
And choke thee with thy ran^'rous gall,
Rather than in a faction move,
We'll drink till we cannot move at all.
Yet, after all, abuse our joy,
Indulge this cynic spite of thine;
When thou have said thy worst, old boy,
Thou can not say we drink bad wine.
We envy no man's pleasures, we;
Still ready at each generous call;
Nay, rather than speak ill of thee,
We'll drink till we cannot speak at all.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
COME all hands ahoy to the anchor,
From our friends and relations to go;
Poll blubbers and cries, devil thank her,
She Will soon take another in tow.
This breeze, like the old one, will kick us,
About on the boisterous main,
And one day, if death should not trick us,
Perhaps we may come back again.
With a will ho then pull away jolly boys,
At the mercy of fortune we go;
We Are in for it then damme what folly boys
For to be downhearted, yo ho!
Our Boatswain takes care of the rigging,
More spessiously when he gets drunk;
The Bobstays supplies him with swigging,
He the cable cuts up for old junk:
The studding-sail serves for his hammoc,
With the clue-lines he bought him his call,
While Ensigns and Jacks in a mammoc
He sold to buy trinkets for Poll.
With a will ho, etc.
Of the Purser this here is the maxim,
Slops, grog, and provision he sacks:
How he would look, if you was but to ax him,
With the Captain's clerk who it is goes snacks:
Oh he would find it another guess story,
That would bring his bare back to the cat,
If his Majesty's honor and glory,
Was only just told about that.
With a will ho, etc.
Our Chaplain's both holy and godly,
And sets us for heaven agog;
Yet to my mind he looks rather oddly,
When he is swearing and drinking of grog:
When he took on his knee Betty Bowser,
And talked of her beauty and charms,
Cried I which is the way to heaven now sir?
Why you dog, cried the Chaplain, her arms.
With a will ho, etc.
The Gunner's a devil of a bubber,
The Carfindo cannot fish a mast,
The Surgeon's a lazy land lubber,
The Master cannot steer if he is ast,
The Lieutenants conceit are all wrapped in,
The Mates scarcely merit their flip,
Nor is there a swab, but the Captain,
Knows the stem from the stern of the ship.
With a will ho, etc.
Now fore and ast having abused them,
Just but for my fancy and gig,
Could I find any one that ill used them,
Damn me but I Would tickle his wig.
Jack never was known for a railer,
'Twas fun every word that I spoke,
And the sign of a true hearted sailor,
Is to give and to take a good joke.
With a will ho, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
THE surge hoarsely murmuring, young Fanny's grief mocking,
The spray rudely dashing as salt as her tears,
The ships in the offing, perpetually rocking,
Too faithful a type of her hopes and her sears.
'Twas here, she cried out, that Jack's vows were so many,
Here I bitterly wept, and I bitterly weep:
Here heart-whole he swore to return to his Fanny,
Near the trembling pine that nods over the deep.
Ah mock not my troubles ye pitiless breakers,
Ye winds do not thus melt my heart with alarms,
He is your pride and mine, in my grief then partakers,
My sailor in safety waft back to my arms.
They are deaf and ungrateful: -- these woes are too many;
Here here will I die, where I bitterly weep:
Some true lover shall write the sad fate of poor Fanny,
On the trembling pine that hangs over the deep.
Thus her heart sadly torn with its wild perturbation
No friend but her sorrow, no hope but the grave;
Led on by her grief to the last desperation,
She ran to the cliff, and plunged into the wave.
A tar saved her life: -- the fond tale shall please many;
Who before wept her fate, now no longer shall weep:
'Twas her Jack, who, returning, bad sought out his Fanny,
Near the trembling pine that hangs over the deep.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
As Wit and Beauty, for an hour,
The other day were jarring,
Which held over man superior power,
They almost came to sparring:
Cried Reason, W^t you're grown a fool,
You look quite ugly, Beauty:
Come take me with you, both be cool,
Sure mortals know their duty:
To them submit,
Whether it is Wit,
They most admire, or Beauty.
So said, so done, out they both set,
With Reason to protect 'em,
Resolved that the first men they met,
Should to the truth direct 'em.
Instant they asked a midnight throng,
Who, to Bacchus paid their duty,
Wit, cried out they, teems in our song,
But it is inspired by Beauty.
Learn wisdom, Wit,
Like us, submit
To the sweet power of Beauty.
Cried Wit, no tricks on travelers here,
I saw you smile, you gipsy;
'Twas brib'ry and corruption clear;
Besides, the rogues were tipsy:
You bard the truth will quickly hit:
Come, poet, do your duty:
Do you not owe your fame to Wit;
To Wit fool! -- no, to Beauty.
Adieu to Wit,
When men submit
To be the slaves of Beauty.
Quaint rogue, with his satiric page,
The fellow is a lover:
If I Am condemned by yonder sage,
I Will give the matter over.
Did not the world, say Hermit, quit,
Imposing this hard duty,
Better to contemplate on Wit?
"No, to reflect on Beauty."
Then, in fond fit,
He turned from Wit,
And squeezed the hand of Beauty:
"Wit rules the mind, Beauty the heart,
"Friend one, and wife the other;
"Thus, cleaving to the better part,
"Men leave friend, father, brother:
"Hence, cried the sage -- my presence quit:
"Adieu friend, know thy duty:"
Then, shutting rude the door on Wit,
Was left alone with Beauty!
Since when, poor Wit,
Glad to submit,
Has owned the power of Beauty.
RONDEAU -- IN THE QUIZES.
OH the camp's delightful rigs,
At which such crowds are peeping,
Where chaises, dillies, cars, and gigs
Serve both to ride and sleep in.
Oh the joys that there abound,
Where, lured by the line weather,
Warriors of every rank are found,
Who, higgledy piggledy, on the ground,
Like gypsies pig together.
The morning gun
Begins the sun,
Reveilles next the drum beats,
The sprightly fife,
So full of life,
And then the silver trumpets.
And these, with all their might,
Announce a fine sham fight;
Marches, retreats, attacks, and routs,
Proclaimed by guns, and shrieks, and shouts,
The air with various clangors fill;
While ranks of foot, and troops of horse,
Resistless in their headlong course,
Bear down, while sidling, shifting, trimming,
Beaux, bells, jew pedlars, and old women;
Who, left in topsy turvy plight,
Exhibit, O ye gods! a sight
That beggars Greenwich hill!
Now either army stilly stands,
The neighing horses cease to prance,
The trumpet, that erst cried advance,
Now sounds retreat;
Drums cease to beat;
Foes, turned to friends, eager shake hands;
On neither side the winner:
No longer armed for a sham fight,
They tooth and nail unite
To exterminate -- the dinner.
Oh the camp's delightful rigs, etc.
Oh for a muse of fire, to sing
The conflict of the day!
Upon a plain, in form a ring,
The foe within entrenchments lay;
A covered way
Hid each division: -- At the sight
The heroes, eager for the fight,
Arm, and the enemy invest.
Each charge fresh vigor brings,
They thin the ranks,
Attacking flanks
And wings:
Legs, heads, and carcases around
They in one shapeless heap confound,
And, risen to such a savage heat,
Not only kill, but all they kill they ^at!
And see, to urge their furious course,
Light troops the foe now reinforce;
On the instant, at they stand amazed,
New works are raised,
Like magic, to their wondering eyes,
Bastions, redoubts, and rav'lins rise.
Again the signal's given;
Again with headlong fury driven;
Comfits, now discomfited,
Lie in promiscuous ruin spread;
Trifles, blanc mange, and jellies quake,
While, as with rage they teem,
Whole islands they devour of cake,
And drink whole seas of cream.
Again the general cries, charge all!
The word's the king!
Forward they spring,
And drink in savage joy the blood
Drawn from the grape, in purple flood,
And strew with mangled heaps the plain,
And fight the battle over again,
And slay the slain!
And now, the foe all killed or fled,
While those that can walk off to bed:
The solemn trumpet's slowly sounded,
Leave's given to carry off the wounded,
And bury all the dead.
Oh the camp's delightful rigs, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
WHILE woman, like soft Music's charms,
So sweetly bliss dispenses,
Some favorite part each fair performs
In the concert of the senses*
Love, great first fiddle in the band,
Each passion que^ls and raises,
Exploring, with a master's hand,
Nice Modulation's mazes;
'Till the rapt soul, supremely blessed,
Beams brightly in each feature,
And lovely woman stands confessed
The harmony of Nature.
Hark! with the pensive, in duet,
The sprightly how it mingles!
The prude's the flute, and the coquette.
The lively harp that tinkles.
One boldly sweeps the yielding strings,
While plaintive the other prates it;
Like Caesar, this to victory springs,
Like Fabius, that awaits it.
With various gifts, to make us blessed,
Love skills each charming creature:
Thus lovely woman stands confessed
The harmony of Nature.
Maids are of virginals the type,
Widows the growling tymbal,
Scolds are the shrill and piercing pipe,
Flirts are the wiry cymbal.
All wives piano fortes are,
The bass how old maid thump it,
The bugle-horn are archers fair,
An amazon's a trumpet.
Thus, with rare gifts, to make us blessed,
Love skills his favorite creature;
And thus sweet woman stands confessed,
The harmony of Nature.
BALLAD -- IN THE QUIZES.
WHILE Fancy, as she rules the mind,
Sits cock-horse on the brain,
A thousand methods mortals find
Elysium to obtain.
It Is ^ound by soldiers in brave deeds,
Tars trust it to the breeze,
Wives hope to find it in their weeds,
Physicians in their fees.
Thus expectation in us plants
Alternate hope and fear,
I know of one whose bosom pants
To find elysium here.
The toper fancies he pursues
Elysium in the bowl,
The hunks in pelf he dare not use,
No, not to save his soul.
The slanderer when he can revile,
The churl when he can warn,
The lover in his mistress' smiles,
The parson in his barn.
Thus as they rule the mind by turns,
Hope soars above the fear;
I Have half a mind to tell who burns
To find elysium here.
I cannot resist -- hence prudence law's
I Will finish the dispute;
Of that elysium, your applause,
I Am now in warm pursuit:
But then, say you, to gain this heaven,
What rignt can you assert?
Let it be by your goodness given,
It cannot by my desert.
So shall ye bid my labors live,
So shall each following year,
While you confer, and I receive,
Both find elysium here.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
WHY am not I that fragrant flower,
Near to heart Spinnetta placed;
Which proudly living a sweet hour,
Died on that bosom it had graced?
Why am not I that gentle gale
That plays around her coral lips,
Her breath like violets to exhale,
Which there eternal nectar sips?
Why am I not that crystal wave,
At sultry noon with pride that heaved:
To which her heavenly form she gave,
Which thought 'twas Venus it received?
Gods, had I been the limpid stream! --
But whither do my senses love?
Sunk in a dear delicious dream,
All things seem possible to love.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
LOVE'S a cheat; we over-rate it;
A flatt^ring, false, deceitful joy;
A very nothing can create it,
A very nothing can destroy.
The light'ning's flash, which wondering leaves us,
Obscured and darker than before;
The glow-worm's tinsel, which deceives us,
A painted light, and nothing more.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
PRAISE is a mirror, that flatters the mind,
That tells us of goodness, and virtues, and graces;
As that on our toilet instructs us to find
The dimples and smiles which appear on our faces;
To which our attention we cannot refrain,
Though we draw off confused, yet but see its attraction,
In spite of ourselves we return back again,
Regard, are abused, and yet feel satisfaction.
I know I Am deceived, and I say to my heart,
You believe that sincere which is naught but profusion;
Call pleasure what soon will severe make you smart,
And hug that for a substance you will find but delusion.
Your praises are flattery, I know it as plain
As if you had said, "I am false and deceive you:
But truth, reason, every thing, argues in vain;
For such is my weakness, I blush and believe you.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
GO, proud lover, go!
Take vour heart back again;
For me it is too low,
Too unworthy a chain.
Be haughty, imperious, this gipsy despise;
You rise but to fall, while I fall to rise.
True love, never erring,
Has no selfish fears;
That, the more it is conferring,
The nobler appears:
It has no sordid views, no vile ends for its guide,
It Is ungoverned by interest, uninfluenc'd by pride.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
YES, yes, thank heaven, I Have broke my chain;
And, while my liberty I gain,
While I my heart redeem,
Indifference succeeds at last,
And my egregious follies past
Appear an idle dream.
Thus from a false injurious snare,
The linnet timid, unaware,
Hardly escapes with pain;
The feathers he has left behind.
Are lessons to him to remind
Not to be caught again.
The warrior bravely counts each scar,
Describes the peril of the war,
Well pleased his dangers over:
The slave at last exempt from pain,
With smiles behold that very chain
Which held him to the oar.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
WHEN we promise an heir or a miser,
This gold, that his father's free land,
We pause and look grave, to seem wise^,
And his fortune read in his hand.
If Miss at fifteen would discover
When she will like her mother be wife,
To promise a handsome young lover
Her fortune we read in her eyes.
But if husbands with jealousy quaking,
Would know if they are -- you know how,
We consider -- our heads gravely shaking --
And their fortunes read on the brow.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
CONTENTMENT lost, each other treasure
To ease the mind essays in vain,
Riches and pomp take place of pleasure,
And misery leads the splendid train.
Fortune possessing, not enjoying,
Feasting the senses, not the mind,
In vague pursuits our time employing,
We grasp at all, and nothing find.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
COME here, ye fair; come here each lover,
That lot Dame Fortune would conceal,
But cross my hand, and I Will discover:
I Am mistress of her and her wheel.
To trembling age we boldly promise,
In spite of nature, years of health;
Widows receive new husbands from us,
And young men all their fathers' wealth.
We give the fair, Love's influence under,
Young lovers, constant all there lives;
Nay, we even dare -- a greater wonder --
To promise husbands faithful wives.
BALLAD -- IN THE WATERMAN.
IN vain, dear friends, each art you try;
To neither lover's suit inclined,
On outward charms I Will never rely,
But prize the graces of the mind.
The empty coxcomb, which you chose,
Just like the flower of a day,
Shook by each wind that folly blows,
Seems born to flutter and decay.
Your choice an honest aspect wears;
To give him pain I often have grieved;
But it proceeded from my fears;
Than me much wiser are deceived:
I thank you both, then, for your love,
Wait for my choice a little while;
And he who most shall worthy prove,
My hand I Will offer with a smile.
BALLAD -- IN IMITATION OF ANACREON.
CUPID, cried Vulcan, it is no jest,
I Will forge thy darts no longer, boy!
I cannot get a moment's rest,
Thy folly gives me such employ.
Not against Pallas, no, nor Mars,
My worn-out patience so revolts,
To furnish arms for all their wars --
Nor even to forge Jove's thunderbolts.
Their conscience is in their demands
But thou would tire me out in sooth
Had I Briareus' hundred hands --
Cries Cupid -- Dad, wilt hear the truth!
The darts, thou make, so blunt are found;
Scarce do I draw my bow at men,
But instantly heals up the wound,
And all my work's to do again.
Vainly I lavish heaps of darts,
And empty quiver after quiver;
Which, while they guard their well armed hearts,
These lovers into atoms shiver.
Find out some surer temper, new --
So shall, like Jove's resistless fiat,
My power grow fixed as fate -- and you --
Will henceforth live a little quiet.
Old Mulciber began the work --
Forged dart the first -- quoth Love, let us see!
Then poised his bow, and, with a jerk,
He made his co^p d'essai on me.
The stroke had power each wavering trace
Of folly from my mind to sever;
And now I feel, one lovely face
Has fixed my willing heart for ever.
BALLAD -- IN THE WATERMAN.
TOO yielding a carriage,
Has often before marriage,
To ruin and misery pointed the way;
You're shunned if complying,
But your lover once slying,
How eager he will follow and beg you to stay.
A coquette never proclaim me,
Ye maids, then, nor blame me,
If I wish to be happy, whenever I Am a wife;
Each lover's denial,
Was only a trial,
Which is he that is most likely to love me for life.
BALLAD -- IN HARVEST HOME.
BE others the ungracious task
Of judging my too thoughtless sex,
By envy dressed in Candor's mask,
That even Virtue's self suspects.
Mine be the better, kinder part,
While I examine well my own,
To pity and forgive the heart,
That has transgressed from love alone.
Stern Justice with unshaken hand,
Sprung from necessity and time,
That laws he kept which rule mankind,
May fix the forfeit price of crime.
Judges of a softer kind,
Frail error well has reason given:
Pity -- per^ection of the mind,
And Mercy -- favorite child of heaven.
BALLAD -- IN THE COBBLER.
SUCH usage as this is, what wise but myself
Would put up with, and not sigh and sob;
No cross in her pocket, no food on the shelf,
Or what husband would let her but Snob?
And yet, let me hope, though for every crime,
He had more than there is days in the year,
That his heart is so good, I should still see the time,
When a different man he would appear.
But if I Am deceived, while another guess wife,
So treated, would scold and revile;
Though poor, though confined in a prison for life,
With him I Would endeavor to smile.
I love him, and every way I Will pursue,
That I can, his affections to keep:
And if then he should slight me, I Have nothing to do,
But to wish he were kinder, and weep.
BALLAD -- IN THE COBBLER.
AH have you forgot then, unkind at you are,
When housemaid I lived at the Squire's
All the wine and good things that I crib'd with such care,
Every morn when I lighted the fires?
And have you forgot how I leaned on my broom,
And in rapture heard all that you said,
Till scolded I got for not sweeping the room,
And beat for not making the bed?
When you told me you would have me, my brush and my mop
Kept time while with pleasure I Would sing;
And soon 'twas the talk at the chandler's shop,
You had purchased the license and ring.
But when you had married, and carried me home
How sweetly my time passed away:
You swore that you loved, that no longer you would roam,
And I thought it would never be day.
BALLAD -- IN NONE SO BLIND AS THOSE WHO WILL NOT SEE.
SHE who linked by her fate,
To a four churlish mate,
And to some smart young flatterer dares not be kind;
Who a look fears to steal,
That her flame would reveal,
What would that woman give, were her husband but blind.
She in youth's early bloom,
By a too severe doom,
To decrepid old age, whose hard parents have joined
How blessed would she be,
Till death set her free,
Could she add to his gout, that her husband was blind.
In short, we all choose,
With our different views,
And it is right each should pick out a mate to her mind;
For me, let my dear,
Since men see so clear,
Be blessed with a spanking large fortune -- and blind.
BALLAD -- IN THE LONG ODDS.
A SAYING 'twas, when I was young,
That golden carts take hay in;
And in my ears my mother rung,
Often times this self same saying.
My dad, who, the main chance did think,
Of human cares the dearest,
Would cry, whenever thou go to drink,
The deepest stream's the clearest.
I had an uncle, and his saw
Was take and never render,
And this he gave me as a law,
While yet my years were tender.
My aunt had her good adage too,
Who also was my tutor:
Says she, whoever comes to woo,
A dower's a handsome suitor.
Let me good sir, add mine to theirs,
Tell not your name for nothing,
A rule I Have found in all affairs,
Meat, washing, drink, and clothing.
My girl, who has her parent's knack,
For maxims adds a right one;
No crows are found that are not black,
Yet a rich crow's a white one.
SONG -- IN THE SALOON.
ALAS! when once the book of life
Draws toward the last page,
What folly then to take a wife!
Our days are on the close;
And, as at one door comes in age,
Love out at the other goes.
Is it not truth,
That youth loves youth,
Just as the zephyr loves the rose.
This law I own's severe, though just;
But let us since submit we must,
Submit with a good grace;
Laughing at Love with all his train,
And as reason takes its reign,
The table and the chase,
The jovial song, the sparkling wine,
And a true friend, that gift divine!
Shall well supply the place.
BALLAD -- IN HARVEST HOME.
THERE IS something in women their lovers engage,
Of whatever complexion, or stature, or age;
And she who would frighten a mere stander by,
Is a Venus herself in the fond lover's eye.
If she is pale, never swan was a tenth part so fair;
If tawny, like jet, are her eyes and her hair,
If Xantippe herself, her scolding's thought wit;
If me^k, all good wives to their husbands submit.
If a pigmy, how neat are her air and her mien!
If a steeple, she is graceful, and walks like a queen;
If a girl in her teens, all is handsome that is young;
If ^ighty, her fortune says -- World hold your tongue.
In short to dear women it is given to please,
And though the whim often should take them to teaze,
To perplex, to torment, and a thousand things more;
They Are the deities men were all born to adore.
GLEE.
BACCHUS come, thy vot'ry own me,
It Is said that thou all cares can end:
A perjured fair has basely flown me,
Fled with a false perfidious friend.
Let Us drink! -- it is true my sorrows pass:
New joys exhilerate my soul,
I find a friend in every glass,
And a kind mistress in the bowl.
BALLAD -- IN THE GYPSIES.
WOULD error leave, to follow truth,
Would all thy cares should end,
Turn here thy steps, misguided youth,
And listen to a friend.
Nor to Severity austere,
Nor fond Indulgence, lean;
But seek fair Moderation, here
She holds the golden mean.
From that hand which profusely gives,
Can any blessing fall?
Or who a joy from that derives
Which churl refuses all?
Turn then, thy errors to atone,
And steer a course between;
Fair Moderation it is alone
That holds the golden mean.
BALLAD -- IN THE COBBLER.
GAY Bacchus, and Mercury, and I,
One evening a strange frolic took,
And left the queer dons of the sky,
To take at queer mortals a look:
But our visit never altered the scene;
The same folly, the same senseless mirth
We still found, and it is this mortals mean
When they tell us of heaven upon earth.
We joined a convivial crew,
Who pushed round the claret with spunk;
Bacchus swore it was nectar, and grew,
Like a lord, or a tinker, soon drunk.
To their concerts, that tortured my ears,
Noise and Diseord so fairly give birth,
That I thought 'twas a crash of the spheres,
And thus music is heaven upon earth.
At Pharaoh we punted and cocked,
Till we such an example were made,
That Mercury retired, quite shocked,
To be foiled at his own proper trade,
In love mortals all riot run,
Beauty, honor, esteem, private worth,
Politely give place to crim con:
And thus love is heaven upon earth*
As to me, my poor portion of wit
In two minutes was knocked out of joint,
By pun, jeux d'esprit, lucky hit,
And quibble, conundrum, and point.
Thus below they act over the same scene
We play here, the same clamor and mirth,
And this is the nonsense they mean
When they tell us of heaven upon earth.
GLEE -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
SWEETLY, sweetly, let us enjoy
The smiling moments made for love;
And while we clasp the dimpled boy,
The glass to you, to you shall move.
And drinking, laughing, jesting neatly,
The time shall pass on sweetly -- sweetly.
Love's arrows, dipped in rosy wine,
To the charmed heart like lightning pass;
And Mars feels transport more divine,
When smiling Venus fills his glass.
GLEE -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
WITH mingled sound of drum and fife,
We follow the recruiting life;
And as we march through every fair,
Make girls admire, and bumkins stare.
With bumpers full we ply Sir Clown,
Or else produce the well-tim'd crown;
And listing first the sturdy elves,
We gain their sweethearts for ourselves.
GLEE -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
TELL me, neighbor, tell me plain,
Which is the best employ?
Is it love, whose very pain
They say is perfect joy?
Is it war, whose thundering sound
Is heard at such a distance round?
Is it to have the miser's hoard?
Is it to be with learning stored?
Is it gay Pegasus to rein,
Tell me, neighbor, tell me plain?
No, no, will answer every honest soul,
The best employ's to push about the bowl.
SONG -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
A WHILE in every nation
War may b^aze around,
Still spreading desolation,
Yet there is hopes of peace.
Awhile the billows raging,
May sky and sea confound,
Yet winds and waves assuaging,
Storms at last will ceas^.
But man by vice o'ertaken,
A tempest in his mind,
His warring passions shaken,
Are reeds as in the wind.
Rare is the eloquence that has the charm,
To rule that pestilence, or quell the storm.
BALLAD -- IN THE CHELSEA PENSIONER.
WHEN well one knows to love and please,
What distresses can one prove,
What can rob that heart of ease
Possessed of pleasure, rich in love?
Alas! without this sovereign good,
Whose power no emperor can stay,
Riches, rank, or noble blood,
Honors, titles, what are they?
One tender look's to lovers worth
More treasure than the Indies own;
Smiles are the empire of the earth,
The arms of those we love a throne.
SONG -- IN THE SHEPERDESS OF THE ALPS.
IN the month of May,
The morning gray,
Firsts peeps a doubtful light;
Three strikes the clock,
The village cock
Next crows with all his might.
Each waking bird,
Chirping is heard;
Tinges of red the sky adorn;
Bird, man, and beast,
Regard the east,
And, pleased, salute the rising morn.
The shepherd now his flock unfolds;
Night, like a thief, steals slow away;
His dingy hue,
Ugly to view,
Is changed to a delightful blue;
All nature's gay;
And now the villager beholds,
His mowers mow, his ploughers plough,
Sheep bleat, birds sing, and oxen low:
Each rural sound salutes his ears;
He whistles to make one:
And now,
Ushered by all this fine parade,
In every splendid pomp arrayed,
Appears
The radient sun.
So, after abundance of toilet affairs,
And Betty has nine times run up and down stairs,
For lappets and ribbands, and one thing and the other,
And the house top and bottom's alarmed with the pother.
And a hundred things more are done equally risible,
The lady, at last condescends to be visible.
SONG -- IN THE ISLANDERS.
THIS strange emotion at my heart
Oh how shall I explain?
It Is joy, it is grief, it is ease, it is smart,
It Is pleasure, and it is pain!
The busy trembling flutterer plays,
It knows not how or why?
And throbs and beats a thousand ways --
Ah quiet prithee lie!
Cease, and sensations such as these
With careful heed destroy:
What good is in the same degrees
Of mingled pain and joy?
BALLAD.
I MADE a promise to be wise,
But 'twas a promise out of season;
So much so, that I Am sure he lies
Who says he always follows Reason.
I soon grew tired of Wisdom's dream,
And turning from pale melancholy,
Fell on the opposite extreme:
But I at last grew tired of Folly.
Thus separate: what was next to do?
Perhaps 'twould keep them to their tether
If I could work upon these two
To live in harmony together.
After, of course, a little strife,
'Twas settled, without farther ^other,
One should be treated a^ a wife,
And only as a mistress the other.
Her portion of my joys and cares
Now each, by my appointment, measures;
Reason conducts all my affairs,
And Folly manages my pleasures.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
OFTEN has the world been well defined,
By sayers and by singers,
I called a belfrey, and mankind
I call the jolly ringers.
Through major bobs, and triple bobs,
Each emulously ranges;
And while each anxious bosom throbs,
All try to ring the changes,
These college youths are sent to school,
And afterward to college.
And thence return by square and rule,
Well versed in worldly knowledge.
As genius leads, to cram his maw,
Each art's close lab'rynth ranges,
And on religion, physic, law,
Completely ring the changes.
The fortune hunter swears and lies,
And courts the widows jointure;
Then with a richer heiress flies,
Nor minds to disappoint her.
The widow too has her arch whim,
Nor thinks his conduct strange is;
A titled heir, succceds to him,
And thus she rings the changes.
The waiter pillages the greek,
The greek the spendthrift fleeces,
The spendthrift makes dad's fortune squeak,
Dad rackrents and grants leases.
The tenants break gazette reports
Each difference arranges,
T^ll pro and con, through all the courts,
The lawyers ring the changes.
Thus like the bells, each fear and hope,
Hangs wavering and suspended;
All tug away, while some a rope
Get, more than they intended.
In merry cadence as their roll,
We'll rove where reason ranges;
Nor shall the bell of sadness toll,
Till death shall ring the changes.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
THE breeze wan fresh, the ship in stays,
Each breaker hushed, the shore a haze,
When Jack, no more on duty called,
His true love's tokens overhaul'd:
The broken gold, the braided hair,
The tender motto, writ so fair,
Upon his 'bacco-box he vi^ws,
Nancy the poet, Love the muse:
"If you loves I as I loves you,
"No pair so happy as we two."
The storm -- that like a shapeless wreck,
Had strewed with rigging all the deck,
That tars for sharks had given a feast,
And left the ship a hulk -- had ceased:
When Jack, as with his messmates dear
He shared the grog, their hearts to cheer,
Took from his 'bacco-box a quid,
And spelt, for comfort, on the lid,
"If you loves I as I loves you,
"No pair so happy as we two"
The battle -- that with horror grim,
Had madly ravaged life and limb,
Had scuppers drenched with human gore,
And widowed many a wife -- was over:
When Jack, to his companions dear,
First paid the tribute of a tear,
Then, as his 'bacco-box he held,
Restored his comfort, as he spelled
"If you loves I as I loves you,
"No pair so happy as we two."
The voyage -- that had been long and hard,
But that had yielded full reward,
That brought each sailor to his friend,
Happy and rich -- was at an end:
When Jack, his toils and perils over,
Beheld his Nancy on the shore,
He then the 'bacco-box displayed
And cried, and seized the willing maid,
"If you loves I as I loves you,
"No pair so happy as we two."
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
IF ever a sailor was fond of good sport,
Amongst the girls, why that sailor was I,
Of all sizes and sorts, I Would a wife at each port,
But, when that I sawed Polly Ply,
I hailed her my lovely, and gov'd her a kiss,
And swore to bring up once for all,
And from that time black Barnaby splic'd us to this
I Have been constant and true to my Poll.
And yet now all sorts of temptations I Have stood,
For I afterward sailed round the word,
And a queer set we saw of the devil's own brood,
Wherever our sails were unfurled:
Some with faces like charcoal, and others like chalk'
All ready one's heart to o'erhaul,
Don't you go to love me, my good girl,' said I 'walk
I Have sworn to be constant to Poll.'
I met with a squaw out at India, beyond,
All in glass and tobacco pipes dressed,
What a dear pretty monster! so kind, and so fond,
That I never was a moment at rest.
With her bobs at her nose, and her quaw, quaw, quaw,
All the world like a barthelmy doll,
Says I, 'You Miss Copperkin, just hold your jaw,
'I've sworn to be constant to Poll'
Then one near Sumatra, just under the line,
As fond as a witch in a play,
'I loves you,' says she. 'and just only be mine,
'Or, by poison, I Will take you away.'
'Curse your kindness,' says I, 'but you cannot frighten 'me,
'You don't catch a gudgeon this haul,
'If I do take your ratsbane, why then, do you see,
'I shall die true and constant to Poll.'
But I 'scap'd from them all, tawny, lily, and black,
And merrily weathered each storm,
And, my neighbors to please, full of wonders came back,
But, what is better, I Am grown pretty warm.
And so now to sea I shall venture no more,
For you know, being rich, I Have no call,
So I Will bring up young tars, do my duty ashore,
And live and die constant to Poll.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
THE martial pomp, the mournful train
Bespeak some honored hero slain;
The obsequies demote him brave;
Hark! the volley over his grave:
The awful knell sounds low and lorn,
Yet cease ye kindred brave to mourn.
The plaintive fife, and muffled drum,
The man may summon to his silent home;
The soldier lives! -- his deeds to trace,
Behold the Seraph Glory place
An ever-living laurel round his sacred tomb.
Nor deem it hard, ye thoughtless gay,
Short's man's longest earthly stay;
Our little hour of life we try,
And then depart: -- we are born to die.
Then lose no moment dear to fame,
They longest live who live in name.
The plaintive fife, etc.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
SINCE Zeph'rus first tasted the charms of coy Flora,
Sure Nature never beamed on so lovely a morn,
Ten thousand sweet birds court the smile of Aurora,
And the woods loudly echo the sound of the horn:
Yet the morn's not so lovely, so brilliant, so gay,
As our splendid appearance, in gallant array,
When all ready mounted, we number our sorces,
Enough the wild boar or the tiger to scare:
Pity fifty stout beings, count dogs, men, and horses,
Should encounter such peril -- to kill one poor hare!
Little wretch, thy fate's hard! -- thou were gentle and blameless;
Yet, a type of the world in thy fortune we see;
And Virtue, by monsters as cruel and shameless,
Poor, defenseless, and timid, is hunted like thee.
See! vainly each path how she doubles and tries:
If she escape the hound Treachery, by Slander she dies!
To overcome that meek fear for which men should respect her,
Every art is employed, every subtle snare --
Pity those who were born to defend and protect her,
Should hunt to her ruin -- so timid a hare!
Thus it fares with poor Merit, which mortals should cherish,
As the heaven-gifted spark that illumines the mind;
As Reason's best honor: lest with it should perish
Every grace that Perfection can lend to mankind.
Hark! Envy's pack opens; the grim lurcher, Fear,
And the mongrel, Vexation, skulks sly in the rear:
The rest all rush on, at their head the whelp Slander,
The fell mastiff Malice, the greyhound Despair!
Pity beings best known by bright Truth and fair Candor
Should hunt down -- shame to manhood -- so harmless a hare.
Their sports at an end, harsh Reflection's begui^er
To some thoughtless oblivion their souls they resign;
The seducer takes pleasure, revenge the reviler,
The hunter's oblivion, more harmless, is wine.
Thus, having destroyed every rational j^y
That can dignify Reason, they Reason destroy:
And yet not in vain, if this lesson inspirit
Ought of reverence for Genius, respect for the Fair:
So the tear of lost Virtue and poor ruined Merit
The sad manes shall appease of the innocent hare.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
THE world's a good thing, ah how sweet and delicious
The bliss and delight it contains;
Dev'^ a pleasure but joy Fortune crams in our dishes,
Except a few torments and pains.
Then wine's a good thing, the dear drink's so inviting,
Where each toper each care sweetly drowns,
Where our friends we so cherish, so love and delight in,
Except when we are cracking their crowns.
Sing didderoo whack, take the good with the bad,
So put round the claret and sherry;
If the cares of this world did not make as so sad,
'Twould be easy enough to be merry.
Fait a wife's a good ting, sure to charm and content ye,
To cherish and love you she is born;
Show'ring joys on your brow, like the goddess of plenty,
So sweet, just excepting the horn.
Arrah sait the dear law a nice good ting to trust is,
Just your all to its mercy devote;
You Will be sure to get bed, board, and cl^athing from Justice,
Except when she strips off your coat.
Sing didderoo, etc.
En't a place a good ting? wh^re the loaves and the fishes,
So neatly are handed about,
Where you turn while your in, till you get all your wishes,
Except when they are turning you out.
Is not fame a good ting? ah her trump sound so glorious,
And so sings forth the deeds of the brave!
Nothing hinders their ^iving long, great, and notorious,
Except that they are snug in the grave!
Sing didderoo, etc.
Then a friend's a good ting, ah he soothes all your sorrow
And softens each care of your life,
And nothing, kind soul, in return ever borrows,
Except just your purse or your wife.
By comparisons then since each good ting's a treasure,
As the foil shows the diamond's true gla^e,
Let us in this life, cherish only the pleasure,
Except when we are tasting the care.
Sing didderoo, etc.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
BE quiet that blackbird and thrush,
So gallanting,
And chanting,
And whistling,
And brist^ing,
And warbling your song in the grove.
That goldfinch and linnet pray hush;
Poor Taffy is sighing,
And also it crying
And moreover dying
For love.
What a noise, only hark!
Why you imprudent lark!
The loud little devils to hear
Gives her torture, and torment, and smart;
For though honey their notes to her ear,
They are bitter as gall to her heart,
Her cannot for her sou^ be glad
When Winifred's away;
Yet it is wrong, and it is bad
To chide their pretty lay;
That love that makes poor Taffy sad,
Makes all the grove so gay.
Pipe on, merry blackbird, and thrush,
Sing your ditty,
So pretty,
And whiver it,
And quiver it,
Nature smiles, and the spring's in its prime:
From each spray, and each tree, and each bush,
Your madrigals pouring,
Some hopping
Some soaring,
Your song will be over in
Good time.
What a noise, only hark!
Now Is your time, Mr. Lark,
When tomorrow sweet Win shall appear,
You Will not make this noise, and this stir,
Then a much sweeter ditty to hear,
You Will leave singing, and listen, to her.
Then Taffy be no longer sad,
Though Winifred's away,
But smile with nature, and be glad,
And like the grove be gay,
Tomorrow pleasure's to be had,
Then do not grieve today.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
COME away then at my call,
High, low, rich, poor, fat, lean, short, tall;
I undertake to furnish all
A panacea to cure care.
Would the old renew their youth,
Would Falsehood learn to charm like Truth,
Would Honor in life's game be winner,
Or modest Merit find a dinner,
To Hope still turning black Despair,
Come build castles in the air.
Here the cit, through clouds of smoke,
In coffee-house who cracks his joke,
Whom, at his desk, the cobwebs choke,
Still imitates the spider's care:
Of ton the very life and soul,
Near some Hockley in the Hole,
To all the guttling city beasts,
Shall give such monst'rous sumptuous feasts,
Genteel as any dancing bear,
In his castle built of air.
Would spendthrift's never put down their gigs,
Would needy curat^s count tithe pigs,
Would Gout dance rigadooos and jigs,
Would Greeks play only on the square,
Would guilt a waking conscience blind,
Would tabbies handsome husbands find,
Would lawyers fight poor orphans' battles,
Preserving them their goods and chattles,
Would pigeons escape a well-laid snare,
Come build castles in the air.
Would country hicks become polite,
Would Avarice give, would Cowardice fight,
Would Envy praise, would dunces write,
Would Fraud fair Honor's vestments wear,
Would misers know when they would enough,
Would gluttons root^ and water stuff,
Would gambling cease to be alarming,
Worth to be prized, or beauty charming,
Would lovers cease to lie and swear,
Come build castles in the air.
In short, all those who Nature force.
Who put Life's cart before the horse,
Turn Times and Seasons from their course,
Build hopes by Folly's rule and square --
For instance, now, did I appear,
From conscious diffidence or fear,
T'indulge one moment such a slander
That any here were void of candor,
My hopes ought all to be despair,
And all my castles built in air.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
LORD what be all the rich and great,
The pride of courts and cities?
Their fuss, and rout, and pomp, and state,
Lord how a body pities.
The gouty squire, in coach and fix,
My lady with her ph^hisic,
His worship with the rheumatics,
All sick from sloth and physic.
How different we ploughmen be,
Through bog, and briar, and thistle,
Who work with health, and strength, and glee,
And over the furrow whistle.
That thing, the young squire, my landlord's heir,
You Would for a doll mistake it;
Set on a shelf, like China ware,
For fear the maids should break it:
Then miss loves scandal, cheats at play,
Gets tonish, bold, and spunky,
Hates nasty man, then runs away,
To prove it, with a monkey.
How different from these imps, so spruce,
With pride that swell and bristle,
Are ours, formed ploughmen to produce.
Who over the furrow whistle.
A nab^b, dressed in stars, comes down,
To our village, worth a million;
His villa's here, his house in town,
By the sea side his pavilion.
Poor man, he would thank his stars to seize,
For his, my humble station;
Why he is dy^ng of a new disease,
They calls a complication.
With sickness then what is high degree?
What garter, bath, and thistle?
Oh that the nabob could, like me,
Blithe over the furrow whistle!
Thus honest Clump, severe, though kind,
Did wit with pity season;
Blessed with that manly strength of mind,
Taught by content and reason.
In artless wit, unconscious sense,
He pitied imperfection;
Not ran^our, but be^^ficence,
Inspiring each reflection.
My wish against haughty pomp, cried he,
At the poor who puss and bristle,
Is -- May they taste such joys as we,
Who over the surrow whistle!
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
THE auctioneer mounts, and -- first hawing and hemming --
Addresses his audience with -- Ladies and gemmen,
Permit me to make on this sale a few s^rictures
It Is compri^ed of some choice allegorical pictures.
Lot one is a portrait of Truth: -- bid away!
For Truth, la'es and gentlemen, what shall we say?
Suppose we say twenty thousand pounds for Truth: te^ thousand: five: one: five
hundred: one hundred: twenty guineas: one guinea. Nobody put in Truth? No lover
nor lawyer in company stands in need of a little truth? Any thing to begin
with. 'Sixpence!' "And a halfpenny!!" Thank you Sir.

A going, a going, a going -- come, spirit, bid on;
Will nobody bid more? A going -- gone.
Set down Truth to the gentleman in the ragged cassoe.
Lot two is Frugality, modest and meek,
Mild Content in her eye, the fresh rose on her cheek,
The offspring of Prudence, the parent of Health,
Who, in Nature's scant wishes, finds Craesus's wealth.
What do you say for Frugality, ladies? O fle!
What nobody bid! Nobody!! -- John, put Frugality by.
Lot three: Dissipation. That Is engaged: I could have sold them if I had had a
thousand. Lot four: Crim Con. Oh Lord that is disposed of, by private contract.
Lot five, Fashion. Come, ladies, what shall we say for Fashion? 'Twenty
thousand pounds.' -- Thank you Ma'am. "Twenty-five." -- 'Thirty.' --

A going, a going, a going -- come, spirit, bid on --
What nobody bid more?
'Mr. Smiler, to save trouble, you may send Fashion to my h^use upon your own
terms.' Much obliged to your Ladyship.

-- Going -- gone.
Set down Fashion to Lady Kitty Cockahoop.
Next lot is the Cardinal Virtues: -- why John
Some strange metamorphose they have all undergone:
Why Fortitude trembles and looks like a sheep!
While Temperance is tipsy! and Justice asleep!
And as for Ma'am Prudence, she is quite in her airs!
Here, John, kick the Cardinal Virtues dawn stairs.
Let me see, what have we else? Conscience. Oh Lord! Honor. Worse and worse! A
parcel of antiquated stuff. What Is this? Anarchy!! Why John what business has
Anarchy here? I thought you knew that it was sold, long enough ago, for
exportation. -- And now you talk of exportation, you know this portrait of
Popularity is to be sent, as a public gift to the Royal Br^^hers, upon the
continent. Loyalty.

A hundred thousand pounds -- two hundred thousand -- three -- four -- five --
six -- seven -- eight -- a million -- two million -- three million -- A going,
a going, a going -- come, courage, bid on:
A going, a going --
Ten million in five hundred places! Oh I knew it was utterly impossible ever
to find a single purchaser for Loyalty.

-- Going, gone.
Set down Loyalty to the whole nation.
What remains there a little occasion to heed;
Of Honor and Worth you have none of you need;
Good Humor, and Fr^lic, and Laughter, so plump,
I Have sold you again and again, in a lump.
The last lot's Content, of sweet Pleasure the twin.
Come purchase Content, and I Will throw Pleasure in.
Come, ladies and gentlemen, what shall we say for Content? It is your interest
to buy Content. What beauty can smile, what alderman guttle, without Content? I
had once an idea of buying it in, but my content receives all its value from
the reflection of yours. Come, I Will take nods and smiles for money. Much
obliged to you, Sir: -- particularly favored, Ma'am: -- highly honored, Sir:
-- you flatter me exceedingly, Miss?

A going, a going, a going -- come, courage, bid on:
A going, a going --
Infinitely above the full value! I am overwhelmed with gratitude!

-- A going -- gone.
Set down content to the present company.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
WHEN to man the distinguishing form
And the nature of angels were given,
His mind was imbued with a charm
That marked him the favorite of heaven.
'Twas smiling Benighity's grace,
To the warm throbbing bosom so dear,
That celestially beamed in his face,
As he shed Sensibility's tear.
Ye who Nature have learnt to subdue.
Who your hearts against compassion can steel,
Who know not the joys of the few,
Who are happy because they can feel,
In luxury and ease as ye ro^l,
Learn that bliss to the bosom so dear,
It Is the luxury, supreme, of the soul,
To indulge Sensibility's tear.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
THE village was jovial, the month was May,
The birds were sweetly singing;
Of Numps and Madge 'twas the wedding day,
The bells were merrily ringing.
The bridegroom came in his holiday clothes,
The bride with ribbands as red as a rose;
Never did revelry so abound,
The drums beat, and the joke went round:
All manner of instruments loudly played,
The hautboy squeak'd, and the bassoon brayed.
Then to see them all foot it, and jig it, and prance,
Stump, figit, and reel, in the mazy dance;
Thus, from when the lark rose till the stocking wa^ thrown,
The fun, and the frisk, and pastime went on.
Such whim and such frolic sure never was seen,
Till wondering so long they had tarried,
Young Ralph of the village and Sue of the green,
Cry -- what a rare thing to be married!
Now scarcely past the honey moon
Still Numps and Madge are singing,
But not exactly the same tune.
For the bells her clapper's ringing.
The Squire steps in, Numps smells a rat,
Love and dear, are changed to dog and cat;
Their loves turned hate, and grief their joys,
Contentment's strife, and pleasure noise:
Say a crooked word, and I Will kill you, cries he!
Rams horns, if I die for it, cries out she!
Night and day thus, at vic^uals, or up, or abed,
He curries her hide, and she combs his head,
In torment, vexation, and misery they dwell,
Converting that heaven, called marriage, to hell.
The neighbors maliciously viewing the scene,
While charmed that so long they had tarried,
Young Ralph of the village, and Sue of the green,
Cry -- what a queer thing to be married!
At length to make sport of the bridegroom and bride,
Whose jars in droll ditty they are singing,
The wags of the village now skimmington ride,
While backward the bells they are ringing.
The ladles, the skimmers, the broomsticks they wield,
The porringer helmet, the potlid shield,
The ample ^am's horns that so grace the parade,
And the petticoat rampant so gaily displayed,
Denote jars domestic, and family strife,
Where the dolt takes the distaff, the cudgel the wife.
Thus hissing, and hooting, and grunting of hogs,
And squalling of children, and barking of dogs,
And shrill penny trumpets, salt boxes, and bells,
And drums, and cow horns, and a hundred things else,
Compose of confusions the drollest ever seen,
While charmed that so long they had tarried,
Young Ralph of the village, and Sue of the green,
Cry -- what a damned thing to be married.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
TOM Tackle was noble, was true to his word,
If merit bought titles, Tom might be my lord;
How gaily his bark through Life's ocean would sail,
Truth furnished the rigging, and Honor the gale.
Yet Tom had a failing, if ever man had;
That good as he was, made him all that was bad,
He was paltry and pitiful, scurvy and mean,
And the snivlingest scoundre^ that ever was seen:
For so said the girls, and the landlords long shore,
Would you know what this fault was -- Tom Tackle was poor!
'Twas once on a time when we took a galloon,
And the crew touched the agent for cash to some tune,
Tom a trip took to jail, an old messmate to free,
And four thankful prat'lers soon sat on his knee.
Then Tom was an angel, down right from heaven sent!
While they would hands he his goodness should never repent:
Returned from next voyage, he bemoaned his sad case,
To find his dear friend shut the door in his face!
Why do you wonder, cried one, you're served right to be sure.
Once Tom Tackle was rich -- now -- Tom Tackle is poor?
I ben't you see versed in high maxims and sitch,
But don't this same honor concern poor and rich?
If it don't come from good hearts, I cannot see where from,
And dam'me if ever tar had a good heart 'twas Tom.
Yet, some how or another, Tom never did right:
None knew better the time when to spare, or to ^ight;
He, by finding a leak, once preserved crew and ship,
Saved the Commodore's life -- then he made such rare flip!
And yet, for all this, no one Tom could endure;
I fancy's as how 'twas -- because he was poor.
At last an old shipmate, that Tom night hail land,
Who saw that his heart failed too fast for his hand,
In the riding of Comfort a mooring to find,
Reef'd the sails of Tom's fortune that shook in the wind:
He gave him enough through life's ocean to steer,
Be the breeze what it might, steady, thus, or no near;
His pittance is daily, and yet Tom imparts
What he can to his friends -- and may all honest hearts,
Like Tom Tackle have what keeps the wolf from the door,
Just enough to be generous -- too much to be poor.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
SAYS my father, says he, one day to I,
Thou know by false friends we are undone,
Should my lawsuit be lost, then thy good fortune try,
Among our relations in London:
Here Is Sukey the poor orphan child of friend Grist,
Who once kept thy father from starving,
When thy fortune thou'st made, thou shall take by the fist,
For a wife, for she is good and deserving:
But mind th^e in heart this one maxim, our Jack,
As thou'st read thy good sat in a book,
Make honor thy guide, or else never come back
To Father, and Mother, and Suke.
So I buss'd Suke and mother, and great^y concerned,
Off I set, with my father's kind blessing,
To our cousin, the wine merchant, where I soon learned
About mixing, and brewing, and pressing:
But the sloe-juice, and ratsbane, and all that fine joke,
Was soon in my stomach a rising,
Why dom it, cried I, would you kill the poor folk?
I thought you sold wine, and not poison:
Your place, my dear cousin, will not do, for you lack,
To Make your broth, another guess cook;
Besides, without honor, I cannot go back
To Father, and Mother, and Suke.
To my uncle, the doctor, I next went my ways,
He teach'd me the mystery, quickly,
Of those that were dying to shorten the days,
And they in good health to make sickly.
Oh the music of groans! cried my uncle dear boy,
Vapors set all my spirits a flowing,
A fit of the gout makes me dancing for joy,
At an ague I Am all in a glowing!
Why then my dear uncle, cries I, you're a quack,
For another assistant go look,
For you see without honor I munna go back
To Father, and Mother, and Suke.
From my cousin, the parson, I soon com'd away,
Without either waiting or warning,
For he preached upon soberness three timet one day,
And then com'd home drunk the next morning.
My relation, the author, stole other folks' thoughts,
My cousin, the bookseller, sold them,
My pious old aunt found in innocence faults,
And made Virtue blush as she told them!
So the prospect around me quite dismal, and black,
Scarcely knowing on which side to look,
I just saved my honor, and then I com'd back,
To Father, and Mother, and Suke.
I found them as great as a king on his throne,
The law suit had banished all sorrow:
I Am come said I father my honor's my own,
Then thou shall have Sukey tomorrow.
But how about London? It will not do for a clown,
There Vice rides with folly behind it,
Not, you see, that I says there is no honor in town,
I only says I could not find it.
If you sent me to starve, you found out the right track,
If to live, the wrong method you took,
For, I poor went to Londom, and poor I Am com'd back,
To Father, and Mother, and Suke.
RONDEAU -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
AS dulcet found on ether floats,
In soft, melodious measure,
Smoothly glide the even notes
That lull the soul to pleasure.
Plunged in Care, beset with Pain,
Hunted by Misery's fell train,
Still with each varying passion Sound shall following g^,
Through all the wide vicissitudes of Joy and Woe.
Shall laugh with Mirth, with Anger dare;
Shall shriek with Fear;
With Caution creep;
With pitying Sympathy shall weep;
Intrude where Melancholy pensive sits,
Mock Jealousy, that loves and hates by fits,
And into Madness urge despair!
Then, while the extremes of Joy and Misery
Clash madly, like an agitated sea,
Over the soothed senses shall she shed a balm,
The storm of Passion lulling to a calm,
Her mighty magic mark!
Hark!
As dulcet sound on ether float, etc.
When Music's powerful charms excite,
The poorest passion grows delight:
Wine is not mirth, the lyre unstrung,
Beauty's not beauty, if unsung.
Mark! how the organ's solemn air
Adds piety to prayer!
Without the aid of willing sound,
Joy is not pleasure, pomp not state,
Love tender, nor ambition great:
Without it what were heroes found,
Who seek for glory, and meet fate?
What consecrates their deeds and name
But Music's trumpet, lent to Fame?
Nor will the meanest her^ fight,
If Music lend not her delight.
Let but the drum, and cheerful fife
Assail his ear,
He knows not fear,
The sound inspires him with new life.
Fired with the sprightly martial band,
The foe he charges hand to hand:
Rushes resistless through the ranks,
With Glory fired!
And takes those thanks
Due to that valor Music had in spired.
Sweet Music take me to thy ear,
Breathe in my soul thy vital air;
That when unruly thoughts transform
My mind, with Passion's swelling storm,
Conflict on conflict as they swell,
And make my tortured mind a hell!
As dulcet sound on ether floats, etc.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
A Watchman I am, and I knows all the round,
The houskeepers, the strays, and the lodgers,
Where low dev'^s, rich dons, and high rips, may be found,
Odd dickies, queer kids, and rum codgers:
Of money, and of property, I Am he that takes the care,
And cries, when I see rogues go by, Hey! what are you doing there?
'Only a little business in that house: -- You understand 'me?' "Understand
you! -- well, I believe you are an honest man. Do you hear, bring me an odd
silver candlestick --

Then to my box I creep,
And then fall fast asleep.
Saint Paul's strikes one,
Thus after all the mischief's done,
I goes and gives them warning,
And loudly bawls.
As strikes Saint Paul's
Past one o'clock, and a cloudy morning.
Then round as the hour I merrily cries,
Another fine mess I discover,
For a curious rope ladder I straightway espies,
And Miss Forward expecting her lover.
Then to each other's arms they fly,
My life, my soul, ah ah!
Fine work, Miss Hot-upon't, cries I,
I Will knock up your Pappa.
'No, no, you will not.' "I shall; worthy old soul, to be treated in this manner."
'Here, here, take this.' "Oh you villain, want to bribe an honest watchman! --
and with such a trifle too!" 'Well, well, here is more.' "More! You seem to be
a spirited lad -- now do make her a good husband -- I am glad you tricked the
old hunks -- good night -- I wish you safe at Gretna Green! --

Then to my box I creep,
And then fall fast asleep.
What Is that? St. Paul's strike two,
The lovers off, what does I do,
But gives the father warning,
And loudly bawls, etc.
Then toward the square, from my box as I looks,
I hears such a ranting, and tearing;
It Is Pharoah's whole host, and the pigeons, and rooks,
Are laughing, and singing, and swearing.
Then such a hubbub, and a din,
How they blaspheme, and curse!
That thief has stole my diamond pin,
Watch, watch, I Have lost my purse!
'Watch, here I charge you,' 'and I charges you,' "'It Is a mavelous thing that
honest people cannot go home without being robbed: Which is the thief?" 'That's
the thief that tricked me out of two hundred pounds this evening,' "Ah that you
know is all in the way of business, but which is the thief that stole the
gentleman's purse?" 'That's him.' "What Sam Snatch? Give it to me Sam. He has
not got your purse -- you are mistaken in your man. Go home peaceably, and
don't oblige me to take you to the watch-house. --

Then to my box I creep,
And then fall fast asleep
What Is that? St. Paul's strikes three --
Thus from all roguery I gets free,
By giving people warning,
And loudly bawls, etc.
BALLAD -- IN THE RAZOR GRINDER.
TOM Turnwell is my name, my boys,
I Will strike a stroke with any,
The trade that all my time employs,
To get an honest penny,
As good, as just, as most you will find.
With rubbing stone,
And strop, and hone,
I whet the very sharpest steel;
And cry the while I turn my wheel,
Pen-knives, scissars,
Cleavers, Razors,
Chopping knives to grind.
I Am useful throughout all the town,
The smooth and pampered glutton,
When ever to dinner he sits down,
Can never carve his mutton,
Unless his knife is to his mind.
With rubbing stone, etc.
The pretty dame who sweet can smile,
Who is for ever smirking,
And who the minutes can beguile,
With love as well as working,
Would she her scissars sharpened find.
With rubbing stone, etc.
My friend the barber over the way,
Who daily lathers many,
And picks up pretty well each day,
By shaving for a penny;
To me his razors are confign'd.
With rubbing stone, etc.
AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
ALL endeavors fruitless prove
Former pleasure to regain,
Sunk in helpless, hopeless love --
Can the slave escape his chain?
Leave, O leave me to endure,
Probe not wounds that rend my heart;
When the patient's part a cure,
Medicine but augments his smart.
AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
THE trifling maid, who, idly vain,
Contemns a faithful lover's pain,
His torment all her joy;
Who, changeful as an April day,
With captive hearts delight to play,
As infants with a toy:
Deserves of Cupid's bitter draught,
To taste a drop, and from his shaft
A stroke or two to feel;
Then tremble, Nymph, for, taught by me,
Strephon shall soon give wounds to thee,
No vanity can heal.
AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
MY bosom is proof against transports and vows,
The fawning of treacherous man,
Who by artful grimaces, by cringing and bows,
Ensnares every woman he can.
His transport is false, and his vows are a cheat,
His oaths and his cringing a lie,
Each practiced alone their desires to complete,
And gain what we ought to deny.
Poor Daphne too soon owned the flame in her breast,
Too easy, too quickly was won;
Her swain from that moment a rover confessed,
Forsook her, a maiden undone:
And knew, if young Str^phon had conquered my heart,
To my wish were none p^easing as he,
I sooner would die, than this secret impart,
'Till I proved he as truly loved me.
AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
YE flowers that bloom in yonder mead,
Where flows the crystal tide,
And nibling lambkins sportive feed
Along the current's side,
Ye often have seen, and smiled to see,
My love to him, his love to me.
Witness ye flocks, ye herds, ye fawns,
That over the pastures stray,
Witness, ye mountains, groves, and lawns,
Each painted child of May:
The greatest bliss I ere can prove
Is to return my shepherd's love.
DUETTO -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
Strephon. TURN, O turn, relentless fair,
Pity hapless Strephon's pain,
Raise him from the last despair,
Smile, and bid him live again.

Caelia. Prithee lay aside your folly;
How can I or take or give
Sprightly mirth, or melancholy;
But if that contents you -- live.

Strephon. Too well you know your art and power,
Every way my woes to calm,
The wound will heal from that sweet hour
Wherein you pour a friendly balm.

Caelia. Truth I pity your condition,
But if your poor heart must bleed
'Till I act your kind physician --
Your case is desperate indeed.

AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
IN every fertile valley
Where nature spreads the grass,
Her silly conduct rally
To every lad and lass;
Where weary reapers labor,
With Sylvia gay, be seen,
O^ to the pipe and tabor,
Light tripping over the green.
Where cowslips sweetly smiling,
Bedeck the verdant shade,
Appear the hours beguiling.
Or head some gay parade.
Pursue these methods boldly,
Nor sink in hopeless grief;
The fair once treated coldly,
Will quickly grant relief.
AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
HAUGHTY Caelia, still disdaining,
Never shall triumph over my heart;
Never will I with mean complaining
Sue for comfort to my smart;
I Will appear the careless rover,
Let her coquettish airs affect,
Like a gay a happy lover,
Treat contempt with cold neglect.
Never, ye fair ones, damp the passion
Where with honor love attends,
Never cross with indignation
Love that fairest truth commends.
Constant minds alike disdaining
Insincerity and fraud,
Are their utmost wish obtaining,
While their hope their hearts applaud.
AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
SINCE artful man so often betrays,
By subtle wiles, and hardy ways,
Our weak unguarded sex;
By oaths, dissembled sigh's and fears,
To melt the heart, to charm our ears,
And still our minds perplex:
In revenge I Am determined to treat him with scorn,
And show him a nymph can perplex in her turn.
But Strephon's heart with purest fire,
With kindest love, and fond desire,
Has ever warmly glowed:
Yet his mny be like all the rest,
A treacherous bait to snare the breast,
And so my fears forbode:
Those fears then shall teach me to treat him with scorn
And show him a nymph can ensnare in her turn.
AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
THE God of love will ever
Heap blessing's on the pair,
Where pleasing's the endeavor,
Both of the swain and fair.
Believe me kind goodnature,
Of beauty stands in place,
Gives bloom to every feature,
To every action grace:
Then never flight the lover,
Or d^aw too tight his chain,
Least in the end the rover
Succeeds the dying swain.
AIR -- IN THE SHEPHERD'S ARTIFICE.
A SHEPHERD long sighed for a beautiful fair,
And in rapture discovered his love;
Not doubting the nymph would dispel his fond care
And his amorous transport approve:
Though she to compassion insensible grown,
No gl^mpse of delight would impart;
When he sighed at her feet she replied with a frown,
And rejoiced at his sufferings and smart.
He suffered long time this impertinent scorn,
Nor thought of upbra^ding the fair,
But secretly pined in the bower forlorn,
Involved in the keenest despair;
'Till his friend who observed him heart-wounded with grief,
Lamenting his fruitless desire,
Resolved that the nymph should afford him relief,
And in turn feel the force of love's fire.
Too artful, her passion she never had owned,
Though it triumphed alone in her breast;
But laughed while the shepherd in misery moan'd,
And wandered a stranger to rest:
Advised then his bosom no longer to vex:
But her haughtiness treat with disdain;
He owned a feigned courtship, her breast to perplex,
And convert to delight all his pain.
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
THE Phoenix, we are told, has the Sun for his ^ire,
That he lives to five cent'ries or more:
That he then gathers gums and reeds in good store,
With these makes a fire;
In the midst of which fire being seated.
His wings are the bellows
Which kindle it up till it is properly heated;
And farther they tell us,
When no longer in flame this combustible flashes,
A spick and span new one jumps out of the ashes.
Another wise tale to a dragon gave birth,
Whole teeth, it is said, were but sown in the earth,
When it is gravely attested, and let who will smile.
That a regiment of soldiers appeared rank and file.
These stories, it is granted, are very absurd;
No man ever saw such a dragon or bird
Yet folly and love to be met with asunder,
I hold a phenomenon of such a kind,
A rarity so much more worhty to brag on,
That sooner than set out this wonder
To find --
I Would be bound to produce you both phoenix and dragon.
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
I AM up to all your tricks, my dear,
How the winds you make your letters bear,
My care and vigilence to queer,
But little are you winning:
You know it is true my pretty youth,
You send 'em East, West, North, and South,
Don't laugh -- lest the other side your mouth,
You should be after grinning.
You Master! don't believe it, love;
I Am Juno still, and you are Jove;
Whom Fate has placed me far above,
Nor her decrees could alter:
Then yie^d with grace the sovereign rule,
Not think to make me thus a tool,
For those who hang me for a fool,
Will find a knave in the halter.
RONDEAU -- IN THE CESTUS.
THINK not here to drive your gig,
Madam Juno;
I Will make you know,
Who Is at home, or burn my wig,
Why, I Will know the reason.
You may grin, but I Will bet twenty,
Her Lord and Master,
I shall cast her;
And as to witnesses, I Have plenty,
In 'good time and season.
Think not, etc.
Shall I by her -- my goods and chattels,
Be led by the nose here,
Nor dispose her
As I list -- Why, Sir, these battles,
Against me are petty treason.
Think not, etc.
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
WITH that begirt, each dowdy girl
Gets every charm, does she but ask it;
Her teeth become a row of pearl,
Enclosed within a coral casket.
Carnations bloom upon her cheeks,
Roses take place of blotch and pimple;
The air's perfumed whenever she speaks,
And Cupids play in every dimple.
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
WHO calls on her whose powerful art,
Erects a throne in every heart;
Whose love all court, whose anger fear --
Venus yclept -- behold her here.
Sighs some fond youth his love unkind,
Would he some watchful Argus blind?
Glows some fair virgin's modest cheek,
With wishes that she dare not speak?
Who calls, etc.
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
FINE sport, indeed, for god and godlin,
To see great Jove become Moll Codlin;
And threat his wife with fist and horsewhip,
Because she loves a little gossip,
Yet he, forsooth, can trot and amble,
And after scores of misses ramble;
Leave, gods, at Hercules your grinning,
The master of the world's a spinning.
Though while such worthy work is doing,
Slap goes the universe to ruin;
The trumpet sounds wars rude and civil,
Convulse the earth, while to the devil
They go their own way, and no wonder,
His light'ning's out -- asleep his thunder.
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
HEAR the merry minstrel sound,
On the ear it rings,
While all the strings,
Are one entire vibration,
The tinkling pleasure spreads around.
And as it plays,
Sweetly conveys,
From sense to sense,
Soft eloquence,
In thrilling circulation.
But stringless, broken, out of tune,
Time^s thrown away;
For did you play.
Without the least cessation,
And strum from January till june;
You still may bang,
At every twang,
The dismal hum,
The more you thrum.
But speaks its mutilation.
But hear, etc.
Just so let down its pegs, the heart
In sadness sits,
Nor once admits
Of any c^nsolat^on;
But screw it into tune, each smart,
And anxious care,
Dissolves to air,
Alone its joys
The mind ^mploys,
And all is jubilatio^.
So hear the, etc.
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
HOW happy she, who never can know
The misery of the great;
Who, far from reach of sceptered woe,
Finds in her low estate,
Joy in her innocence -- delight
In scenes that still present;
Pleasures that health and strength excite,
And transport in content:
One brook, her mirror and her drink,
The happy wanderer seeks;
And as her lambs play round its brink,
Good Nature paints her cheeks.
Few are her wants, certain her joy;
For reason's glad consent
Points out her innocent employ,
And guides her to content.
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
SPORTSMEN who are staunch and true,
Never the timid hare pursue;
Quivering, quaking;
Shivering, shaking;
Trembling, tott^ring in her flight,
She their pity wou^d excite.
But who, a badger set at bay,
Wishes not to make his prey?
Where Is the heart compassion shocks
To ensnare the subtle fox?
Come on, then, and partake the spoils,
Cunning Reynard's in the toils.
Sly and artful I Will prepare,
For my madam such a snare,
So close and cunning a wise gin,
With her eyes open she will run in.
'Ware haunches, Juno, for I Will follow
Hard at your heels with a view hollow!
AIR -- IN THE CESTUS.
MEEK I Will be as Venu's dove?
Your presence court, your absence mourn;
Love shall be the price of love,
And kindness ask a kind return.
Folly shall never my mind defile,
From prudence will I never depart,
My face shall wear a constant smile,
And duty govern my heart.
AIR -- IN GREAT NEWS.
COME buy my straw, and I Will give you a song,
I don't say my song any satire contains,
I do'nt say it touches on physic or law,
The knave's cunning thrift, or the usurer's gains;
I don't say it execrates cheating at play,
Or points out to scorn every knave in life's throng;
Or dispises the slanderer, the utmost I say,
Is, buy my straw, and I Will give you a song.
I don't say the man, who disseminates strife,
Through a land, the world's wonder rich prosperous and brave,
That protection affords to his children, and wife,
Is a good deal a fool, and a little a knave.
I don't say the thief, who your purse steals away,
Is more honest than the the other who does you foul wrong,
Under friendship's fair vizzard, the utmost I say
Is, buy my straw, and I Will give you a song.
I don't say young gentlemen, cause it is the rage
To be rendered notorious by public eclat,
While poor beauty, and youth, loose their power to engage,
Are wrong to steal off, with some spruce grandmama.
Against monkeys and apes, I don't mean to inveigh,
Nor do I assert that their feelings are wrong,
Who wish worth at the devil: the utmost I say
Is, buy my straw and I Will give you a song.
I don't say that honor, fair dealing, and truth,
Are better than fraud, and chicanery and lies,
That the mastiffs of age, and the puppies of youth,
However we may pity, we still must despise.
Nay did one whip sol^y, even thou^h one should flay,
Her own baek for materials to furnish the thong,
Do I say she^d ^e callous, the utmost I say
Is, buy my straw, and I Will give you a song.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
BESEECH you, would ye, gentle folks,
Dame fortunes gifts reveal;
I can at will turn all the spokes,
That guide her fickle wheel:
Nor dregs of tea, nor coffee grounds,
That mystic apparatus,
Need I to show life's ups and downs
To every Fortunatus:
The smiling road to human bliss,
Would you pursue, the myst'ry's this --
He that is content has fortune found,
Cheerly with him her wheel goes round.
Gluttons blame fortune for that gout
They from intemp'rance feel,
While yonder iron muscled lout
Enjoys his scanty meal:
The indolent poor fortune curse
To fill up life's hiatus,
While the industrious find the purse,
And cap of Fortunatus.
The smiling road to human bliss,
Thus court your steps, the myst'ry's this
He that is content, etc.
Then customs idiots, do not say
Fortune can blindly err,
If to her fane you miss the way,
It Is you are blind, not her.
The even path before us lies
To where her gifts await us,
And he contentment has made wise,
Is the true Fortunatus.
The smiling road to human bliss,
Come then and tread, the myst'ry's this,
He that is content, etc.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
INSPIRED by so grateful a duty,
In terms strongest art can devise,
Bards have written those raptures on beauty,
That lovers have wasted on sighs:
I, to fill the sweet theme more completely,
Sing the beauty of goodness the while,
For every face is dressed sweetly,
Where beams a benevolent smile.
While the heart some beneficent action,
Contemplates, with joy the eyes speak,
On the lip quivers mute satisfaction,
And a glow of delight paints the cheek.
Bliss pervades every feature completely,
Adding beauty to beauty the while,
And the loveliest face looks more sweetly,
Where beams a benevolent smile.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
SWEET is the ship that under sail,
Spreads her white bosom to the gale,
Sweet, oh! sweets the flowing can;
Sweet to poise the laboring oar,
That tugs us to our native shore,
When the boatswain pipes the barge to man;
Sweet sailing with a favoring breeze;
But oh! much sweeter than all these,
Is Jack's delight his lovely Nan.
The needle faithful to the north,
To show of constancy the worth,
A curious lesson teaches man:
The needle time may rust, a squall
Capsize the binacle and all,
Let seamanship do all it can:
My love in worth shall higher rise,
Nor time shall rust, nor squall's capsize,
My faith and truth to lovely Nan.
When in the bilboes I was penned,
For serving of a worthless friend,
And every creature from me ran;
No ship performing quarentine,
Was ever so deserted seen,
None hailed me woman, child, nor man;
But though false friendship's sails were furled.
Though cut a drift by all the world,
I Would all the world in lovely Nan.
I love my duty, love my friend,
Love, truth, and merit to defend,
To moan their loss who hazard ran;
I love to take an honest part,
Love beauty and a spotless heart,
By manners love to show the man;
To sail through life, by honor's breeze --
'Twas all along of loving these
First made me dote on lovely Nan.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
DON'T you see that as how I Am a sportsman in style,
All so kickish, so slim, and so tall;
Why I Have searched after game and that many's the mile,
And seed no bit of nothing at all;
My license I pockets, my poney I strides,
And I pelts through the wind and the rain,
And, if likely to fall, sticks the spurs in the sides,
Leaves the bridle and holds by the mane;
To be sure dad at home kicks up no little strife,
But dabby what is that, en't fashion and life?
At sporting I never was know'd for to ^ag,
I was always in danger the first,
When at Epsom last Easter they turned out the s^ag,
I Am the lad that was rolled in the dust;
Then they call me a Nincom why, over the fields,
There a little beyond Dulwich Common,
I a chick and a goose, tumbled head over heels,
And two mudlarks, besides an old woman:
Then let miserly dad, kick up sorrow and strife,
I Am the lad that is genteel, and knows fashion and life.
But don't go for to think I neglects number one,
Often when my companions, with ardour,
Are hunting about with the dog and the gun,
I goes and I hunts in the larder:
There I springs me a woodcock or flushes a quail,
Or finds puss, as she sits under cover,
Then so ho! to the barrel, to start me some ale,
And when I have dined and fed rover,
Pays my landlord his shot, as I ogles his wife,
While the daughter cries out, lord what fashion and life.
Then I buys me some game, all as homeward we jog,
And when the fo^ks a^ how I got 'em,
Though I shooted but once, and then killed the poor dog,
I swears and then stand's to it I shot 'em;
So come round me ye sportsmen that is smart and what not,
All stilish and cutting a flash,
When your piece will not kill game, charged with powder and shot,
To bring 'em down, down with your cash;
And if with their jokes, and their jeers, folks are rife
Why dabby says you, 'ent it fashion and life.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
SEE, see to join the revel rout,
All hopping, skipping, prancing,
With squeak and squall, and shriek and shout,
A^l sorts and sizes prancing,
As old as poles and big as tuns,
Three graces lead the revels,
Then devils tame as lambs,
And Nuns as impudent as devils.
'Do you know me?' -- "Oh! yes, excellent well -- you are a fish monger:" --
'No I en't; I am a methodist preacher.' -- "Then I would you were so honest a
man."

Thus leaving every care behind,
The pack stale reason scorning,
Chase pleasures of the night to find,
The head ache of the morning.
See all conditions, sexes, years,
Unite to keep the farce on,
A swearing quaker next appears,
And next a drunken parson;
Beaux, chattering nonsense loud in peals,
Bells, furnished well with clappers,
Tumblers, and dancers without heels,
And lawyers without nappers.
'Do you know me?' -- "Oh! ye^, very well -- you are Venus." -- 'Will you be my
Mars?' -- "With all my soul." -- 'Come unmask, and let me behold the beauties
of the Cyprian Queen.' -- "Let us unmask together." -- 'Agreed.' -- "Oh! plague
and misfortune, my husband!" -- 'Oh! hell and the devil, my wife!'

Thus leaving every care behind,
The pack stale reason scorning,
Chase pleasures of the night, to find
The head ache of the morning.
At last to close their noisy mirth,
At finis to this kick up,
From the supper room they issue forth,
And roar, and rant, ana hiccup;
My angel -- when -- zounds, pull his nose,
Sir do you mean to bam me?
I Have lost my wig -- he is spoilt my clothes,
A ring, boo, scoundrel, da^me.
'An old clothes man to call the grand Turk a scoundrel! -- Satisfaction.' "A
ring." 'Dabby, I never boxes.' "Kick him out." 'Yea I will.' "I was never see
any thing so droll in my life." 'Ah! there'll be murder.' "Arrah fait that is
right, exchange addresses.' I Will eat him up alive -- I Will maul the villain."
'Hark forward -- Oh! its a fine row, dabby I love a row.'

The pack thus leaving care behind,
And musty reason scorning,
Chase pleasures of the night, to find
The head ache of the morning.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
SAY soldier which of glory's charms,
That heroes' souls inflame,
Gives brightest luster to their arms,
Or best ensures their fame?
Is it her lion-mettled rage,
Let loose from ardour's den,
Legion with legion to engage,
And make men slaughter men?
Is it to a defenseless foe,
Mild mercy to forbear,
And glut the call of vengeance? No;
The brave delight to spare:
It Is clemency pale misery's friend,
Foremost in glory's van,
To dry the starting tear, and blend
The hero with the man.
Then on the wretch fall double shame,
Who, in foul slander lored,
Knows war alone by murder's name,
The soldier by the sword:
(...) out of evils come,
(...) once the conflict cease,
The eagle brings the halcyon home,
War courts the smiles of peace:
Yet, he to higher merit vaults,
Who glory's track has trod,
Great, generous merit that exalts,
A mortal to a God:
It Is clemency, pale misery's friend,
Ever in glory's van,
To dry the starting tear, and blend
The hero with the man.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
ANACREON tells us that mortals mere clods,
By the drink they love best are exalted to gods,
And fate there is no lie in the truth on it, don't wine,
Though as beastly as devils, make topers divine?
Three treads in a trice makes a god of poor snip,
Tars are every one Neptunes when ever they drink flip,
To be Jove, or Apollo, or Mars, would ye choose,
Ah! you have nothing to do but get drunk with Rambooze.
Then a natural transition from heaven, if you go
Down to hell, ah! you will find them all drinking below,
Each striving in Lethe to hurry his care;
The seducer forgets when he ruined the fair,
Greeks the pillory forget they so richly deserve,
The usurer forgets when he let the man starve,
The perjurer forgets that he died in his shoes,
But let us all such rascals forget in Rambooze.
Our Shelah, cried out, one day, making her moan.
From my arms, where I held him fast, Taddy is gone,
And though in my presence he always will stay,
For ever the wanton young rogue's fled away:
I Am dead, and I Am kilt, and shall never recover,
Heaven take me, or give me that heaven, my lover,
Teach me how to be mad, or my senses to lose,
My dear creature, cried I, just get drunk with Rambooze.
When hard at the whiskey an Irishman pulls,
In search of Europas, he rides upon bulls,
Of liquors large libations Italians scare swallow,
But every squalini becomes an Apollo:
Then each fair one's a goddess, don't every she,
Like an angel, talk scandal, whenever she drinks tea,
You most Helicon sip, would you turn to a muse,
And, if you would be Bacchus, get drunk with Rambooze.
But did I not stop I should never have done,
In me all the Deities center in one;
I Am as valiant as Mars, and as mighty as Jove,
As cunning as Mercury, as amorous as Love:
I Am Apollo and Momus, together for wit,
And I boast an Olympus my godship to fit,
For what better heaven, upon earth, can I choose,
Than good health, a kind wife, a true friend and Rambooze?
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
WHERE a learned physician who writes for all ills,
'Stead of taking a guinea obliged to take pills,
Or compelled to examine mortality's bills,
For his own and his brethren's slaughter:
Were an ideal widow her spouse given over,
At the moment a promise she made to her lover,
Advertised that her husband began to recover,
Both these would be fish out of water:
Odd fish, queer fish, strange fish, droll fish --
In short they would be fish out of water.
Did a methodist preacher, leave fleecing his flock,
Did witlings let in common sense, should she knock,
Did a toper reel homewards before three o'clock,
Did puppies find taste when they sought her,
Were a rook, by a pigeon, choused out of his booty,
Did a wife, kind and handsome, and true to her duty,
Meet a brute, unattracted by goodness or beauty,
All these would be fish out of water,
Odd fish, etc.
Should true limbs of the law, while extending their palms,
From honor or conscience, be troubled with qualms,
Should spendthrifts grow prudent, or misers give alms,
Or honesty tempt a defaulter,
Did a lover, in high expectation, when ready,
At the place of appointment, sequestered and shady,
Encounter a broomstick instead of a lady,
All these would be fish out of water.
Odd fish, etc.
Did a tar, or in private, or public strife,
For his king, or his friend, fear to venture his life,
Did a jolman, from Ireland, in search of a wife,
Expect fortune, and meet with her daughter,
In short from mankind, did one strip off the vizard,
Without fear of, passing for witch, or for wizzard,
One might see 'twould so cursedly stick in each gizzard,
That they would all appear fish out of water:
Odd fish, etc.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
THE squirrel that jingles his bells in his cage,
Is the type of that folly and strife,
Called the fashion, the ton, or the kick, or the rage,
That makes up the bustle of life:
On the wheel of dame fortune, now high, and, now low,
As they amble, and gallop, and pace,
While in search of that phantom called pleasure they go,
Each strives to be first in the chase:
So round, round, round goes scug in his cage,
And jingles his bells with a fuss and a rage,
Still turning about and about,
And when tired with his journey remains in the place,
Exactly where first he set out.
In search after knowledge, the book worm explores,
Where nature's wide regions expand,
But though fancy conducts him to numberless shores,
He never once touches on land:
His bark's tossed in storms of opinions that rage,
Nor truth's trackless path can he trace,
Till error and doubt bring the night of old age,
Fair certainty's day to deface.
So round, etc.
The novice goes forward in search of a friend,
To share both his heart and his pelf,
Till humbled and tired with his toil without end,
He at last makes a friend of himself:
One who fairness professed, picked his pocket at play,
One deceived him, and laughed in his face,
One he showed to his mistress, soon stole her away,
One was mean and another was base.
So round, etc.
Thus men miss the substance, and grasp at the name,
Thus projectors find midnight at noon,
Thus heroes chase bubbles, and fancy them fame,
And thus children cry for the moon.
Those are pleasures alone that lead reason's f^ir train,
The rest bring but shame and disgrace,
And though you may start them again and again,
Vexed and tired you will give over the chase.
So round, etc.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
'TWAS one day at Wapping his dangers o'erhauling,
Jack Junk cocked his jemmy and broached a full can,
While a possee of neighbors of each different calling,
Cried only but hear what a mavelous man:
Avast, cried out Jack, what is there mavelous in it?
When his time's come the stoutest of hearts must comply.
Why now you master tallow chandler, by way of throwing a little light on the
subject, don't you think it is better to be extinguished when one's fighting in
defense of one's country, than to stay at home lingering and go out like the
snuff of a candle?

Then like men do your duty, we have all our minute,
And at sea or ashore we shall live till we die,
Hurraw, hurraw, hurraw boys let us live till we die.
Why now you master Plumber, that marvels at billows,
I shall founder at sea, and you will die in your bed;
What of that? some have sods, and some waves for their pillows,
And 'its likely enough we may both die of lead:
And as for the odds, all the difference that is in it,
I shall pop off at once, and you will lingering lie.
Why smite my crooked timbers, who knows but master Snip, there, may slip his
cable and break his back with taking the ninth part of a fall off the shopboard
into his own hell.

Then like men, etc.
As for you master Bricklayer to make out your calling,
A little like mine e'n't a matter that is hard,
Pray may not you from a ladder or scaffold be falling,
As easy as I from a rattling or yard:
Then for you its commission a tile may bring in it,
As soon as a shot or a splinter for I.
As for master Doctor, the Undertaker, and Sexton, they don't want no wipe from
me, they sends too many folks contented to their long home, not to know how to
go there contentedly themselves.

Then like men, etc.
And when Captain Death comes the reckoning to settle,
You may clear ship for action as much as you like,
And behave like a man, but he 'as such weight of metal,
At the very first broadside the bravest must strike.
And when you have said all you can what is there in it,
Who to scud against a storm but a lubber would try.
For as to qualms of conscience, cheating customers, betraying friends, and
such like, being a set of honest tradesmen, men, I dare say you are perfectly
easy about these sort of things.

Then like men, etc.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
IN one thou'd'st find variety,
Cried Dick, would thou on wedlock fix?
I rather should expect, cried I,
Variety in five or six;
But never was thy counsel light,
I Will do^t my friend -- so said, so done.
I Am noo^'d for life, and Dick was right,
I find variety in one.
Her tongue has more variety
Than music's system can embrace;
She modulates through every key,
Squeaks treble, and growls double base;
Divisions runs, and trills, and shakes,
Enough the noisy spheres to stun;
Thus, as harsh discord music makes,
I find variety in one.
Her dress boasts such variety,
Such ^orms, materials, fashions, hues,
Each animal must plundered be,
From Russian bears to cockatoos.
Now it is a feather, now a zone,
Now she is a gipsy, now a nun,
To change like the camelon prone,
En't this variety in one?
In wedlock's wide variety,
Thought, word, and deed, we both concur,
If she is a thunder storm to me,
So I Am an April day to her:
Devil, and Angel, black, and white,
Thus as we Hymen's gauntlet run,
And kiss, and scold, and love, and fight,
Each finds variety in one.
Then cherish love's variety,
In spite of every sneering elf,
We Are nature's children, and en't she,
In change, variety itself?
Her clouds, and storms are willed by fate,
More bright to show her radiant sun;
Hail then blessed wedlock in whose state,
Men find variety in one.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
IF you will only just promise you will none of you laugh,
I'^l be after explaining the French Telegraph;
A machine that is endowed with such wonderful power,
It writes, reads, and sends news fifty miles in an hour:
Then there is watch words, a spy glass, an index or hand,
And many things more none of us understand;
But which, like the nose on your face, will be clear,
When we have, as usual, improved on them here.
Oh! the dabblers in lotteries will grow rich as Jews,
Steap of flyi^g of pigeons, to bring them the news,
They Will a Te^egraph place, upon Old Ormond Quay,
Put another 'board ship, in the midst of the sea:
And so on to town each to tell through the rank,
The first thousand pound prize was that morn drawn a blank,
And thus if the air should but chance to be clear,
In two hours will the news of Dear Dublin fly here.
When the Newmarket squad to the races go down,
By confederates, and Telegraphs, stationed in town,
They Will get news long before the mail coaches come in,
Plates, matches, and sweepstakes, who lose, and who win:
And how after a crossing, and joss^ing, dead heat,
That Black Legs, and Rook were by Beelzebub beat,
Ah! just let them alone by my soul there is no fear,
But the turf will improve on the Telegraph here.
Ah! then what a sure guide will the Telegraph prove,
To promote their designs who are dying for love,
If an old married lady should court a young man,
Cannot she make a spy glass with the sticks of her fan?
Then suppose an appointment, the hour to be two,
Cannot the index point thus and the watch word be boo?
Sure didn't I tell you I Would make it appear,
'Twill be mighty convenient improved upon here.
Adieu penny posts, mails, and coaches adieu,
Your occupation is gone, it is all over wid you,
In your place Telegraphs, on our houses we'll use,
To tell time, conduct lightning, dry shirts, and send news:
Thus while signals, and flags* stream on top of each street,
The town, to a bir^, will appear a grant fleet,
And since England's grand fleet, to the French convey fear,
Sure shant we improve on their Telegraph here.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
WHEN I first went to school it was all my delight,
To con something or other from morning to night;
I would never conform, nor confess, nor consent,
And however conjured, I never was content:
But so well I Would confuse, and conceal and contrive,
And cons^i^e, and concert, and control, and connive,
And confute and contest, and confound, and so on,
No boy in the school was so pat at a con.
Scarcely did I emancipate, manners to know,
But a strange predilection I cherished for pro;
I proceeded with care, would propose, and protest,
And promoting but little, a great deal professed.
Procured rich connections, old friends to provoke,
With a titter provided, prolonged my lord's joke,
And pronounced each man's friend, and producing no foe,
I left little con, and stuck tightly to pro.
Thus well with the world, my next thought after this,
Was to yield to the ton, and to keen a fine miss,
But here I miscarried, was after misled,
Mismatched, and mislaken, and every way sped:
Miss's conduct misgave me, and full of mistrust,
I set my miss down where I took her up first,
Glad I Would met with no mishap, nor worse mischief than this,
And resolved my next frolic should not be amiss.
Still playing on words, and resolved to get rich,
I learnt there were hows -- but then how to find which,
Fortunes were to be nabbed, I find out now and then,
And knew something of where, but I could not tell when:
Scarce an if had formed hope, when a but produced fear,
Then in searching out there, I soon lost myself here,
'Till betwixt and between, this and that, somehow, I,
In search of the wherefore, lost sight of the why.
Thus ringing the changes on life's wordy war,
I found its sheet anchor existed in for;
And, by prudence forwarned, folly's joys to forbear,
Soon did all nonsense forsake, and forswear;
For the world, for society, destined to live,
When by any one wronged I forget and forgive,
Keep my fortune in petto for honourab^e ends,
Just enough for myself, and the rest for my friends.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
TELL me not of men's follies, their whims and caprices,
That the sum of their vices each moment increases,
That ^ike monsters of prey every friend his friend fleeces,
Still striving to cheat, to cajo^e and trapan:
If nature implanted the passions that rule us,
If custom her shadow deludes us and fool us,
Acquitted by candor where rigor would school us,
Lay the blame on the manners and not on the man.
Should a beauty involved in the vortex of pleasure,
Where of bliss flimsy fashion supplies the gay measure,
Yield some villain accomplished her virtue's sole treasure,
And in that abyss plunge that no ray of hope cheers:
While you grieve that simplicity's charms were denied her,
That of innocence little she ever had to guide her,
Though fal^'n never to rise, do not scorn, nor deride her,
But, forg^tting her errors, ah! pity her tears.
Should a youth, for an opulent station intended,
On whom lavish parents large sums have expended,
'Stead of virtues and talents distinguished and splendid,
Confirm vice at college imbibed when at school;
Low his mind, with no firmness, no discrimination,
From Pieria's fount stead of making libation,
Should he roll down the torrent of wild dissipation,
In his loss to society pity the fool.
These, these, as I look through the world, are my feelings;
For, deal with mankind on a par with their dealing
From accused, and accuser, the eternal appealings,
Soon justice would wreck on chicanery's shelf:
Then hypocrites pity, the saint hides a sinner,
Of the poet buy nonsense, the man wants a dinner,
Thus, lose whoever may. still shall you be a winner,
For in pitying others you honor yourself.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
TOM TRUE LOVE wooed the seweetest fair,
That ever to tar was kind,
Her face was of a beauty rare,
More beautiful her mind;
His messmates heard, while with delight,
He named her for his bride,
A sail appeared, ah fatal sight!
For grief his love had died;
Must I, cried he, those charms resign,
I loved so dear, so well?
Would they had tolled instead of thine,
Tom Truelove's knell.
Break heart at once and there is an end,
Thou all that heaven could give!
But hold, I have a noble friend,
Yet, yet for him I Will live:
Fortune, who all her baleful spite,
Not yet on Tom had tried,
Sen^ news, one rough, tempestuous night,
That his dear friend had died:
And thou too! must thee resign,
Who honor loved so well?
Would they had tolled instead of thine,
Tom Truelove's knell.
Enough, enough, a salt sea wave,
A healing balm shall bring;
A sailor you cried one, and brave?
Live still to serve your king!
The moment comes, behold the foe;
Thanks generous friend, he cried,
The second broadside laid him low,
He named his love and died:
The tale, in mournful accents sung,
His friends still sorrowing tell,
How sad, and solemn, three times rung,
Tom Truelove's knell.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
I HAVE thought and I Have said it sin I were a boy,
That what folks get at easy they never enjoy;
Why I was the same, at what is homely I Would scoff,
But how fine if it comed a good many miles off:
So big with this fancy, though but a poor clown,
I hied me away for to see the great town,
Where they pushed me, and thronged me all as one as a fair,
Then they would titter, and snigger, and laugh, then I Would stare,
Why bumkin did ever see such sin'ry as this,
In your place, cried a monkey in trowsers, why yes!
You Would your joke master coxcomb, and now I Will have mine,
I Have seen peacocks and gold finches t^n times as fine:
So I left master whissle, and whistled along,
Then humm'd to myself the fag end of a song;
The good that we wish for may not match what we have got,
Their minds are their kingdom, who are pleased with their ^ot,
And to whatever place discontented folks roam,
At last they will be forced to say this of their home,
Our friends are as true, and our wives are as comely,
And damn it home's home, be it ever so homely.
So since for strange sights, I to town took my range,
Faith I zeed sights in plenty, and all of them strange,
I zeed folks roll in riches, who pleasure never knew,
I zeed honest poverty rich as a Jew;
Time and often dressed lamb fashon I zeed an old ewe,
I zeed madam's monkey as smart as her beau,
I zeed beauty, and virtue, that never knew shame,
And I zeed vice caressed under modesty's name,
I zeed a fine head dress, worth more than the head,
I zeed folks with their brains out before they were dead,
I zeed rogues of their knavery making their brags,
And I zeed fools in coaches, and merit in rags;
And still through the crowd as I whistled along,
I hummed to myself the fag end of a song,
The good that we wish for may not match what we have got,
Their minds are their kingdom, who are pleased with their lot:
And to whatever place discontented folks roam.
At last they will be forced to say this of their home,
Our friends are as true, and our wives are as comely,
And damn it, home's home, be it ever so homely.
But what zickened me most was, one day in the Park,
As the guns were all firing, a queer looking spark,
Cried, what nonsense and stuff with their fuss and parade;
Stuff and nonsense, said I, Oh! what that that you said?
Why they fire for a victory, and you have your choice
To go home or with all honest subjects rejoice;
Mighty well, cried my spark, but a word in your ear,
The affairs of the nation are cursedly que^r;
Nay it is true, we are done up, 'twill be seen by and by,
How much did they give you to catch me, said I,
The country's a good one, all good men perceive it,
And they that don't like it, why damn't let 'em leave it;
So I left my queer, spark and went whistling along,
Then I hummed to myself, the fag end of a song,
The good that we wish so* may not match what we have got,
Their minds are their kingdom, who are pleased with their lot:
And to whatever place discontented folks roam,
At last they will be forced to say this of their home,
Our friends are as true, and our wives are as comely,
And damn it, home's home, be it ever so homely.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
NOW you shall see what you shall see,
Lady, gemmen come,
One very great curiosity,
What makes to speak ^e dumb;
Vat green, and red, and brown, and blue,
And black, and white can paint,
Vat make Jew Christian, Christian Jew,
Make good come out of evil,
Vat make a devil of a saint, and of a saint a devil,
"Peep troo dat little hole, Sir -- Vat you see there? Eh," -- 'What do you
say, master Shewman, it will make black white? -- The devil's in it if it
will not! -- Why it is a large purse of money!'

Now you shall see, vat you see, fine ting before you go,
Come gentleman and lady see my Raree Show.
Now you shall see, vat you shall see,
Please to look in there,
One very great curiosity,
Vat make the people stare;
One terrible, one shocking, ting
In horror dat abound;
Before your face I go to bring
One horrible production;
Look quick and you shall be surround
Vid death, and vid destruction.
"Vele saar vat you see now? Eh!" -- 'Ah! master Shewman, you be a wag -- Death
and destruction with the devil to it! -- Why it be a Pothecary's shop.'

Now you shall see, etc.
Now you shall see vat you shall see,
Please to put your eyes;
One very great curiosity,
Vat give you great surprise;
More shocking as the toder sight,
You never have see such,
Come look, make haste, don't you be fright,
You shall see one place spacious,
All fill up vid great many much,
Strange animal voracious.
"Why, master Shewman, this be a cuter joke than the the other -- I wish I may die
if it ben't the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at dinner!"

Now you shall see, etc.
Now you shall see vat you shall see,
Please to look once more,
Vat give you more delight and glee,
As all you see before;
Great pleasure and great bliss vat give
To all the Englitch race,
Vat make them all so happy live,
Vat blessing can impart,
Vat make the smile in all the face,
The joy in all the heart.
"Ah! master Shewman, you did never say a truer thing in your life -- Why, Lord
love him, it is the King's Majesty."

Now you shall see, etc.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
I NEVER shall survive it, cried Lumkin in despair,
She Is gone and I shall ever wail and cry,
I Have lost my charming Caelia, the fairest of the fair:
Will no one comfort send me,
Why then these hands shall end me,
Hung by his garter on that tree I Will die;
Let none my fame be mangling,
While dangling, dangling, dangling,
On you tree I die.
Young Kitty of the cottage, and, Jenny of the mill,
And bonny Suke, and sprightly Peggy Sly,
And Fan and Nan, and Poll and Doll, I know will try their skill,
Tricked out in all their beauty,
To lure me from my duty:
But I can tell them they are deceived -- I Will die!
These girls will all be angling:
'Twont do for dangling, dangling,
All for love I Will die.
I own that Kitty's eye brows some trait of Caelia's bear,
Suke has her nose, and ^eg her sparkling eye;
Both Fan and Nan, her dimples, and Poll and Doll her hair;
But these shall all be slighted,
For Caelia's charms united,
Not all her sex combined can boast -- I Will die!
Then let them all be wrangling,
And pulling caps for dangling,
They shall see me die.
And yet on recollection, Young Daelia formed to please,
Her dimples has, her hair, and sparkling eye;
Nay, Daelia is like Caelia as ever were two peace,
Has all those charms that won me,
Would she take pity on me!
But lord she would never think of me -- I Will die!
While hopes and fears are jangling,
I Will dangling, dangling, dangling,
All for Caelia die.
'Twixt hanging, and 'twixt marriage, still doubtful which to choose,
As Lumkin paused, came Daelia tripping by,
Ads wounds, cried he, would thou consent, I Would tie the other noose,
She smiles, good bye poor Caelia,
I go to marry Daelia,
Not in a halter, but in her arms to die;
Better in wedlock wrangling,
Than dangling, dangling, dangling,
On a tree to die.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WHISP.
ON Olympus blue summit as loud vacant mirth,
Shook with laughter the sides of the gods,
Were not nectar, cried Bacchus, forbid sons of earth;
'Twere rare sport to celestialize clods:
Say, shall they a nectar possess of their own,
That like ours with delight shall be rise?
I Have hit it, let Punch, by my fiat, be known,
A liquor the Symbol of Life.
Of the elements four, that the universe sway,
Our nectar celestial we make,
So pun^^h^ that henceforward shall moisten man's clay,
Of the passi^ns of man shall partake:
The sweets that from godlike benevolence flows,
Shall correct the sharp acid of strife,
While the spirit of rage temperance mean shall compose,
So shall punch be the Symbol of Life.
Punch shall be the first fiddle in life's motley hand,
That, un^uned, scrapes harsh discords and hoarse.
But when screwed to its pitch by a masterly hand,
Shall most excellent music discourse:
Punch, unmade, will a chaos misshapen disclose,
Rude atom with atom at strife,
But, which tempered, to beauty and symetry grows,
Thus, is Punch, the true Symbol of Life.
When in sloth, li^e's warm water, mankind are immersed,
And sweet luxury's sought from afar,
Rage, and four heart burnings, by indolence nursed,
Blaze in all the dread fury of war:
But when temperate reflection takes rule in the mind,
Cruel war is disarmed of his knife,
And the blessings of peace shed their balm on mankind,
And thus Punch is the Symbol of Life.
As pleasure on pleasure in wedlock you meet,
If, thoughtless, you surfeit and feed,
Sullen, sour discontent shall corrode every sweet,
And luke warm indifference succeed:
But when wedlock's ingredients, in mean true and even,
Are blended in husband and wife;
Such a pair, so well mated, on earth find a heaven,
And thus Punch is the Symbol of Life,
Thus in all their concerns, shall this liquor divine,
Some moral instruction impart,
That the medium of truth may correct and refine,
Each crude feeling that springs from the heart:
Be your lives then nor mankish, strong, sour nor yet sweet,
But a mixture of all, to shun strife;
So men's joys shall be next to celestials complete,
So shall Punch be the Symbol of Life.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
'TWAS a hundred years ago,
Or there-about, I believe,
Lived a wife you must know,
As I quickly shall show,
A true bred daughter of Eve:
For this wife, though spouse, was civil,
For so the story ran,
Was tempted to evil,
But not by the devil,
But a devi^ish handsome young man.
This young man was an officer gay,
With a mien so militaire,
An ensign on half-pay,
Though no colonel, some say,
Had so fierce, and so noble an air:
Now the husband had but one eye.
And for this his crafty bride,
Chose him out by the bye,
Half her faults to espy,
And to catch him upon the blind side.
The husband was gone from home,
She tricked out smart and neat,
Now the officer's come,
Cupid braces his drum,
And a parley is presently beat:
When Betty, who closely watched,
Cried out, as she come unawares,
'If a lie cannot be hatched,
'We are all of us catched,
'For my master's a coming up stairs.'
Cried the wife, 'I have hit on it sure;
'Come, come, it is no time to flinch!
'We're from danger secure,
'Get behind the door,
'Wit never left wife at a pinch:
Then the husband came in fight:
Cried she in a counterfeit scream,
'What joy and delight,
'Does your presence excite,
'Dear Husband I dreamt a dream.
'A dream so extraordinary and rare,
'Pray heaven it prove not a lie,
'I dreamt in that chair,
''Tis as true at you're there,
'That fate had restored your blind eye:
Cried he, "What a rout, and a pother:"
'Nay, nay, at my hopes do not scoff;
'The blind eye's like its brother,
'Let me cover the other,'
''This doing, the lover stole off.
Her Mars safe retreated, she cried,
'Well love is the fight wholly lost?'
"Yes wife your dream lied,
"Though 'till doomsday you tried,
"I should yet see no more than a post:"
Then the devil take dreamt I say,
For I Am more disappointed than you,
Quoth the husband, nay, nay,
When next I Am away,
Let us hope all your dreams may come true.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
WHILE music lends its heavenly art,
And banners are unfurled,
Hail, hail, the first commercial mart,
Throughout the peopled world:
See its chief magistrates to grace
London in pomp and show,
The source of its great riches trace,
To all the winds that blow*
The companies to silver Thames,
Move on in slow parade,
Each bearing as its banner names,
A pageant of its trade:
Then while sweet music lends its art,
And banners are unfurled,
Hail, hail the first commercial mart,
Throughout the peopled world.
First, minstrelsy and loud acclaim,
That sweet musicians bring,
Musicians of fair London's fame,
Still emulous to sing:
And, hark! the armourers cleave the wind,
By one in armor led,
While memory tells the patriot mind,
At Agincourt who bled:
Then, while sweet music lends its art,
And banners are unfurled,
Hail, hail the first commercial mart,
Throughout the peopled world.
Nor let the shipwrights by us slip,
In high commercial fame
First in the rank, for from a ship
Fair London took its name:
Now while the crowd each trade surrounds,
That joy and use supplies,
Hark! where the massy anvil sounds,
See! where the shuttle flies:
Then, while sweet music lends its art,
And banners are unfurled,
Hail, hail the first commercial mart,
Throughout the peopled world.
These fit with art the even joint,
Those dress the supple skin,
Others the industrious needle point,
Or decorative pin:
Some sing of Blaze and dress the wool,
Some shape the wheels of time,
The ever lengthening wire some pull,
Some teach the bells to chime:
Then, while sweet music lend its art,
And banners are unfurled.
Hail, hail the first commercial mart,
Throughout the peopled world.
Those, friendshi^'s emblem, bring the square,
These bear the gordian ring,
And now, while trumpets rend the air,
And sweet musicians sing,
Haste to the feast where while the band,
The social hour prolong,
The loyal toast from plenty's hand,
Relieves the loyal song:
Then, while sweet music lends its art,
And banners are unfurled,
Hail, hail the first commercial mart,
Throughout the peopled world.
Last at the ball-room see the fair,
Each fair a British toast,
Lovely in charms, in virtue rare,
Blessed England's pride and boast*
But did I to my theme give way,
By fancy led along,
Soon were the poet's teeming lay,
A history, not a song:
Yet while sweet music lends its art,
And banners are unfurled,
Hail, hail the first commercial mart,
Throughout the peopled world.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
IF lobberly landsmen to gratitude strangers,
Still curse their unfortunate stars,
Why what would they say, did they try but the dangers
Encountered by true hearted tars:
If life's vessel they put before the wind, or they tack her,
Or whether bound here, or there,
Give 'em sea room good fellowship, grog and tobacker,
Well then damme if Jack cares where.
Then your stupid Old Quid Nun^s to hear them all clatter,
The devil cannot tell you what for,
Though they don't know a gun from a marlinspike, chutter
About and concerning of war:
While for King, wife, and friend, he is through every thing rubbing,
With duty still proud to comply,
So he gives but the foes of Old England a drubbing,
Why then, (...), if Jack cares why.
And then when good fortune has crowned his endeavors,
And he comes home with shiners galore,
Well what if so be he should lavish his favors,
On every poor object long-sh^^:
Since money's the needle that points to good nature,
Friend, enemy, false or true,
So it goes to relieve a distressed fellow creature,
Well then, damme, if Jack cares who.
Don't you see how some different thing every one's twigging,
To take the command of a rib,
Some are all for the breast-work, and so^e for the rigging,
And some for the cut of her jib,
Though poor, some will take her in tow to defend her,
And again, some are all for the rich;
As to I, so she is young, her heart honest and tender,
Why then, damme, if Jack cares which.
Why now if they go for to talk about living,
My eyes -- why a little will serve,
Let each a small part of his pittance be giving,
And who in this nation can starve?
Content's all the thing -- rough or calm be the weather,
The wind on the beam or the bow,
So, honestly, he can splice both ends together,
Why then, damme if Jack cares how.
And then for a bring up -- do you see, about dying
On which such a racket they keep,
What argusies if in a church yard you are lying,
Or find out your grave in the deep:
Of one thing we are certain, whatever our calling,
Death will bring us all up -- and what then?
So his con^^^ence's tackle will bear overhauling,
Why then, damme, if Jack cares when.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
IS IT my country you would know? I Am an Irishman born,
And they christened me Paddy O'Blarney,
In haymaking time I stepped over one morn,
All the way from the Lakes of Kilarney:
Turned my hand to just whatever came in my way,
To be sure while the sun shined I did not make hay.
Well then you know the wives and daughters of the farmers will not -- well they
will not
Have plenty of ^^use to remember the day,
When first they saw Paddy O'Blarney.
Then what does I do the next calling I seeks,
Ah! the world for the Lakes of Kilarney,
I cries macker^l alive that were caught for three weeks,
Ah! let alone P^ddy O'Blarney,
Then fresh gathered strawberries, so sound and so sweet,
With just half a dozen a top ^it to eat --
'Ah! madam, you need not examine them bless your two good looking eyes, they
are full to the bottom, paper and all.' "Well, I Will trust to you -- I dare say
you will not cheat me."

So I coaxes her up, and herself makes her cheat,
Ah! ^ait let alone Paddy O'Blarney.
Next I turned to a chairman, and got a good job,
Ah! the world for the Lakes of Kilarney,
I harangued at a famous election the mob,
Ah! let alone Paddy O'Blarney.
Then to see how his honor and I did cajole,
He knocked down his flats with words, and I mine with my pole --
Then you know when they came to chair him, I was no longer, you see, an odd
man, there was a pair of chairm^n.

And sure such a pair was never seen, by my soul,
As his honor and Paddy O'Blarney.
But this notion of greatness was none of the worst,
Oh! the world for the Lakes of Kilarney,
Having played second fiddle, I thought I Would play first,
Cannot ye let alone Paddy O'Blarney:
So, swearing, to plunder, and never to squeak,
I my qualification took out and turned greek --
Ah! to be sure we did not make a pretty dovehouse of our Pharaoh Bank -- Let
me see, we pigeoned, aye fait and plucked them completely too --

Four tradesmen, and six banker's clerks in one week,
Will you let alone Paddy O'Blarney.
A big man in all circles so gay and polite,
Ah! the world for the Lakes of Kilarney,
I found one who larnt grown up jolman to write,
Just to finish gay Paddy O'Blarney:
I first larnt my name, 'till so fond of it grown,
I Would don't say I Would better have let it alone --
But by my soul and conscience it had like to have finished me in good earnest,
for you see, I just wrote --
Another jolman's signature 'st^ad of my own,
What a devil of a Paddy O'Blarney.
But since fate did not choose for to noose me that day,
Ah! the world for the Lakes of Kilarney,
With a Venus of ninety I next ran away,
What a fine dashing Paddy O'Blarney.
So marriage turned out the best noose of the two,
The old soul's gone to heaven I Am as rich as a Jew --
'So that if any jolman has an occasion for a friend, or a lady for a lover,
or, in short, if any body should wish to be disencumbered of the uneasiness of
a wife, or a daughter, or a purse, or any such kind and civil service that can
be performed

By a gentleman at large that has nothing to do,
Let me recommend Paddy O'Blarney.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
'TWAS post meridian, half past four,
By signal I from Nancy parted,
At six she lingered on the shore,
With uplift hands and broken hearted,
At sev'n, while taughtening the forestay,
I saw her faint, or else 'twas fancy,
At eight we all got under weigh,
And bid a long adieu to Nancy.
Night came, and now eight bells had rung,
While careless sailors, ever cheary,
On the mid watch so jovial sung,
With tempers labor cannot weary:
I, little to their mirth inclined,
While tender thoughts rushed on my fancy,
And my warm sighs increased the wind,
Looked on the moon, and thought of Nancy.
And now arrived that jovial night,
When every true br^d tar carouses,
When, over the grog, all hands delight
To toast their sweethearts and their spouses:
Round went the can, the jest, the glee,
While tender wishes filled each fancy,
And when, in turn, it came to me,
I heaved a sigh, and toasted Nancy.
Next morn a storm came on at four,
At six, the elements in motion,
Plunged me and three poor sailors more,
Headlong within the foaming ocean:
Poor wretches! they soon found their graves,
For me, it may be only fancy,
But love seemed to forbid the waves,
To snatch me from the arms of Nancy.
Scarce the soul hurricane was cleared,
Scarce winds and waves had ceased to rattle,
When a bold enemy appeared,
And, dauntless, we prepared for battle:
And now, while some loved friend, or wife,
Like lightning, rushed on every fancy;
To providence I trusted life,
Put up a prayer, and thought of Nancy.
At last, 'twas in the month of May,
The crew, it being lovely weather,
At three A. M. discovered day,
And England's chalky cliffs together:
At seven up channel how we bore,
While hopes and fears rushed on my fancy,
At twelve I gayly jumped ashore,
And to my throbbing heart pressed Nancy.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
LIFE'S as like as can be to an Irish Wake,
Where their tapers they light,
And they sit up all night,
Wid their why would you leave your poor Paddy to moan,
Arrah how could you be such a ca^e?
Musha what will I do,
Lilly, lilly, lilly, la loo,
Oh hone!
Fait we are left all together alone:
But when the grief the liquor puts out, the fun is all changed in a crack;
Away like smoke goes the whiskey about,
And they foot it, cross over, and back to back,
With their tiptelery, whack,
Poor miss, bolted safe wid a good lock and key,
Like Thisbe, may call
Through the hole in the wall,
How hard's my misfortune, I Am left here to moan,
Will no one take pity on me?
Musha, what will I do,
Lilly, lilly, lilly, la loo,
Oh hone!
I shall after be lying alone.
But when the rope ladder affords her relief,
And she turns on her mother her back;
Among her friends and relations, she leaves all her grief,
And away to Scotland they trip in a crack,
With their tiptelary whack.
The toper, next morning, low, sick, and in pain,
The glasses all breaks,
Beats his head 'cause it aches,
And wishes that wine may to poison be grown,
If ever he gets tipsey again:
With his what will I do,
Lilly, lilly, lilly, la loo,
Oh hone!
From this moment I Will drinking disown;
But when, in a possee, come Bacchus's troop,
He changes his tone i^ a crack;
They drink, and they sing, and they hollow, and whoop,
Till they don't know the color of blue from black,
And its tiptelary whack.
And so it is through life, widows left in the nick,
Dying swains in disgrace,
Patriots turned out of place,
Don't they, cursing their stars, make a horrible moan,
Just like when the devil was sick?
Wid their what will I do,
Lilly, lilly, lilly, la loo,
Oh hone!
Fait we are left all to grunt and to groan:
But when the widow gets married again,
When the lover is taken back,
When the patriot (...) a place shall obtain,
Away to the devil goes care in a crack,
And it is tiptelary whack.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
THE gloomy night stalked ^^ow away,
The twilight spoke the doubtful day,
When on a rock poor Peg reclined,
Mad as the waves, wild as the wind.
Give me my love, she frantic scream'd,
I saw his ghost as by it gleam'd,
I Will dive, I Will search the briny gloom,
And snatch him from his coral tomb*
Ah! let me, Fate, his relics save,
True lovers should find out one grave.
And now the tempest dims the sky,
How many ways poor sailors die!
See, see, the staggering vessel splits,
She Is lost, like Peg's poor shipwrecked wits:
No, 'twas in battle that he died;
Would no power turn the ball aside?
I saw it as it rent his heart,
I heard him cry -- and must we part?
For Peggy, ah! these relies save,
True lovers should find out one grave.
Where on the deep the cavern yawned,
Now as the purple morning dawned.
The surge, in breakers loud and hoarse,
Her love cast up a lifeless corse:
She raves, she screams, her hands she wrings,
The shock returning reason brings,
Reason returns, alas! too late,
She clasps her love and yields to fate:
Their mourning friends their relics save,
And these true lovers find one grave.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
THE world still judges by the mien,
For habit holds the yellow glass,
And through that jaundiced medium seen,
Shall wisdom's self for folly pass.
It Is not because you vapid smart,
Strays, carelessly, from reason's rules,
That he hates reason, has no heart,
It Is that he is one of fashion's fools.
The toper, over the bowl, has joke
Who vents against his dearest friends,
Next morn would fain the bowl were broke,
And he would been dumb to make amends:
For honor well his heart can touch,
He well knows golden friendship's rules,
His fault is that he drinks too much,
And thus he is one of fashion's fools.
The Bouncer swears that brown is blue,
And moulds at will dame nature's law,
And talks of joys he never knew,
And fancies charms he never saw:
It Is not that he would fain renounce
Fair truth and all her sacred rules,
But it is that its genteel to bounce,
And thus he is one of fashion's fools.
If merit pine away forgot,
If rakes at sacred honor sneer,
If wedlock prove no gordian knot,
And lovers dread to be severe*
It Is not that men so much delight
To deviate from honor's rules,
But that its vulgar to be right,
And thus they are all fashion's fools.
Say what conclusion's to be drawn?
Are we to fancy, or to feel,
To live awake, or in a yawn,
To be consistent or genteel:
Soon the election may be made --
Let Us square our lives by reason's rules,
So far be fashion's modes obeyed,
But let us not be fashion's fools.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
I AM a cook for the public, can suite every palate,
With some savory bonne bouche, from the soup to the sallad,
Are you partial to fish? I Have for dunces, cod's joles,
Carp, and crabs, for plain dealers, for topers good ^o^es:
I thought I Would some maids, but I made a mistake,
I Have a rich liquorish old wife for any poor rake,
I Have a plaise for a courtier, for jokers I Have grigs,
I Have gudgeons for quacks, and I Have flounders for ^eagues,
Coming, coming, you will see that I Have told you no fable,
This way, if you please gemmen, dinner's on the table.
I Have some fine devilled lawyers, some sinners disguised,
Some patriots stewed, and some generals surprised;
Then, if cayenne you love, and would wish something nice,
Lord, I Will roast you a a nabob, dear sir, in a trice,
Then for sops, who to make themselves fools take such pains,
I Have a fine thick calf's head, with the tongue and the brains;
I Have mushrooms for upstarts, for Welshmen I Have leeks,
Ducks and drakes for stock jobbers, and pigeons for greeks:
Coming, coming, you will see that I Have told you no fable,
This way, if you please gemmen, dinner's on the table.
And then the desert, I have all sorts of cakes,
I Have islands of moonshine, in sylabub lakes,
I Have a fig for ill nature, I Have raisins in glut^,
And then, for all those fond of secrets, I Have nuts.
Such as through fashion's maze pass their lives in a dream.
May sicken on trifles, and ice, and whipped cream,
Vain coxcombs on flummery may feast till they burst,
Then I Have got for your true snarling critic a crust:
Coming, coming, you will see that I have told you no fable,
This way, if you please gemmen, dinner's on table.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
YOU have heard of the man who such virtues possessed,
That he wished a glass window were placed at his breast,
To the world all his actions as plain to display,
As the nose in your face, or the sun at noon day.
So I put on my spectacles, look mighty wise,
And read in a trice peoples hearts through their eyes;
While the catalogue, large, of their whims I run over,
And of life's motly crew the deceptions discover,
Though my questions are malapropos and uncouth,
I, in sight of their teeth, make their tongues to tell truth.
When a flirting coquette for fresh conquests agog,
One who loves and adores her treats worse than a dog,
Gives him rivals she hates, appears vexed when she is glad,
For the dear harmless pleasure of making him mad;
I put on my spectacles, look mighty wise,
Read her whimsical heart through her beautiful eyes,
As you hope to be married, ma'am, quick answer me,
Do you hate this man! Lord what a creature, cries she,
Must I then be sincere! Well, I love the sweet youth,
As dear as my life, sir, and now you have the truth.
To follow up next the coquette with the prude,
Who pretends every man that regards her is rude,
Who cannot abide flirts, rails at each amorous elf,
Who flirts never, excepts in a corner, herself:
I put on my spectacles, look mighty wise,
Read her warm yielding heart through her cold frigid eyes;
'Are you this man hater, good ma'am, you pretend?'
"And pray who gave you leave to school me my good friend?"
"Do You expect I shall own that I Have yet a colt's tooth:
"Well I do love young fellows, and that is the truth."
I could instance a thousand things, various and true,
Where one thing men say, and another thing do,
Nay, I now could dispel all my own anxious fear,
But there is no occasion for spectacles here:
Nay, were I to wear them, to look ere so wise,
I could then, but as now, read your hearts in your eyes;
Mister Dibdin, says you, we are here on your behalf,
And, while your wit's harmless, and you make us laugh,
You may banish each fear from your mind, for, in sooth,
We shall willing applaud you, and that is the truth.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
NO more of waves and winds the sport,
Our vessel is arrived in port;
At anchor see she safely rides,
And gay red ropes adorn her sides:
The sails are furled, the sheets belayed,
The crimson peticoats displayed,
Deserted are the useless shrouds,
And wenches come a board in crowds.
Then come, my lads, the flip put round,
While safely moored on English ground,
With a jorum of diddle,
A lass, and a fiddle,
Never shall care in the heart of a tar be found:
And, while upon the hollow deck,
To the sprightly jig our feet shall bound,
Take each his charmer round the neck,
And kiss in time to the merry sound.
Bess hears the death of honest Jack,
Who sw^re he would safe, and sound, come back,
She calls him scurvy, lying swab,
And then she kindly takes to Bob:
Ben asks the news of Bonny Kate,
Who said she would prove a constant mate,
But winds, and girls, are false, for she
Took Ned the morn Ben went to sea.
Well come, says Ben, the flip put round,
While safely moored on English ground,
With a jorum of diddle,
A lass, and a fiddle
Never shall care in the heart of a tar be found;
And, while upon the hollow deck,
To the sprightly lig our feet shall bound,
Take each his charmer round the neck,
And kiss in time to the merry ^ound.
By will and power, when last ashore,
His rhino Tom to Poll made over;
Poll touched the prize money, and pay,
And with the agent ran away:
And Jenny just as cute a trick,
His back once turned, played whistling Dick,
Dick left her clothes to cut a flash,
She sold 'em all and spent the cash.
But come, says Dick, the flip put round,
While safely moored on English ground,
With a jorum of diddle,
A lass, and a fiddle,
Never shall care in the heart of a tar be found;
And, while upon the hollow deck,
To the sprightly jig our feet shall bound,
Take each his charmer round the neck,
And kiss in time to the merry sound.
While feet and tongues, like lightning go,
With -- what cheer Suke -- and how do Joe,
Dick Laniard chooses Peg so spruce,
And buxom Nell take Kit Caboose.
Thus, amongst the girls they left behind,
A lot of true and false they find,
While they bewail those shot, or drowned,
And welcome home the safe and sound,
Still thankful while the flip goes round,
They Are safely moored on English ground,
With a jorum of diddle,
A lass and a fiddle,
Never shall care in the heart of a tar be found;
And, while upon the hollow deck,
To the sprightly jig our feet shall bound,
Take each his charmer round the neck,
And kiss in time to the merry sound.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
I AM one of those pretty, tonish smarts, my good old man,
Who under love's sweet contribution lay all the fair O,
I make them die, and sigh,
And consent, and repent,
With a ran, dan, dan --
Why I have a hundred times had the felicity, so sweet,
Of seeing some yielding easy daughter, or wife.
Begging, and imploring at my feet --
"Hey, sir! how often did you say you had this felicity?"
'Never in the whole course of my life,
With a ran, dan, dare O.'
Then, since amors are nothing without confidents, my good old man,
How often when bursting with good fortune and success, so rare O,
Hare I, to my friends, told stories of yielding nieces, and aunts,
With a ran, dan, dan,
Dressed out in all their facinating charms,
With all their simperings, and whimperings,
Their fond love to disguise,
While they were longing to fly to my arms --
"And pray was all this truth that you told your friends?"
'Oh, no, a parcel of infernal lies!
With a ran, dan, dare O.'
Why would you believe that with the lovely Myrtilla it chanced to hap, my good
old man,
Who seemed as if all the powers of virtue made her their care O,
That I should contrive, while those pretty, watchful guardians were taking a
nap,
With a ran, dan, dan --
To kneel, pant, entreat, implore, heave sigh, start tear,
And address, with all the force of eloquence and grace,
Till struggling in my arms at last she -- Oh dear!
"Well, what did she do?
'Why gave me a slap in the face,
With a ran, dan, dare O.'
Another time, when I was flatly refused, my good old man,
Oh, it is a business that will make you stare O!
Every one of the family round I fairly abused,
With a ran, dan, dan --
Hamstrung the pigs, pulled the spiggot out of the ale,
Poisoned the lap dog, killed the canary birds, put jalap in the tea,
Threw the cat out of the window, cut off the monkey's tail --
"Go on, sir, go on."
'Kicked the husband -- Oh no, damme, he kicked me!
With a ran, dan, dare O.'
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
I HAVE heard, cried out one, that you tars tack and tack,
And, at sea, what strange hardships befell you,
But I don't know what is moorings -- what don't you said Jack,
Man your ear Tackle then and I Will tell you:
^uppose you would a daughter quite beautiful grown,
And, in spite of her prayers and implorings!
Some scoundrel abused her, and you knocked him down,
Why, do you see, he would be safe at his moorings.
In life's voyage should you trust a false friend with the helm,
The top lifts of his heart all akimbo,
A tempest of treachery your bark will overwhelm,
And your moorings will soon be in limbo:
But if h^s heart's timbers bear up against pelf,
And he is just in his reckonings and scorings;
He Will for you keep a look out the same as himself,
And you will find in his friendship safe moorings.
If wedlock's your port, and your mate true and kind,
In all weathers will stick to her duty,
A calm of contentment shall beam in your mind,
Safe moored in the haven of beauty:
But if some frisky skiff, crank at every joint,
That listens to vows and adorings,
Shape your course how you will, still you will make Cuckold's Point,
To lay up like a beacon at moorings.
A glutton's safe moored, head and stern, by the gout,
A drunkard's moored under the table,
In straws drowning men will Hope's anchor find out,
While a hair's a philosopers cable:
Thus mankind are a ship, life a boisterous main,
Of Fate's billows where all hear the roarings,
Where for one calm of pleasure, we have ten storms of pain,
Till death brings us all to our moorings.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
LOOK all over the world, round and square, and throughout,
We a^l know that best we know nothing about,
Don't ignorant gypsies pretend to teach Fate,
And pray who now like cobblers can tinker the state:
Blind as mill-posts ourselves we can all guide a friend,
Because why it is more easy to find fault than mend;
In short no sweet creatures lead such happy lives,
Or are half so well managed as bachelor's wives.
If I Would this man's fortune, or the other man's wit,
Unnoticed do you think I Would so quietly sit?
No, my cash should do good, and my writings should be,
Ah! fait Shakespeare himself should be nothing to me:
Thus we all to mend merit of others are prone,
And how nobly we spend that that is none of our own;
Who the reins has not got, always furiously drives,
And, thus, none are managed like bacehlor's wives.
That battle that made such a devil of a rout,
Why don't you and I know they were all of them out?
Had this general advanced, and that troop come in play,
'Twould have been, by my conscience, a glorious day!
Thus at home, we best know how abroad matters pass,
Ah! give me a brave bottle fought over the glass!
Threatened people live long, and the envied man thrives,
Just as none are so managed as bachelor's wives.
What we have we don't want, because why dat we have got;
Your true style of enjoyment's to have what you have not,
What eats so delicious as fish not yet catched,
Or as fruit in the blossom, or chicken not hatched?
'Tent the dinner today, it is the pleasure I borrow,
While I think on the dinner I Am eating tomorrow,
What Is the present my soul till the future arrives?
Arrah give me for management bachelors wives.
To do what we are able's a thing so absurd,
Arrah who'd walk on foot that could fly like a bird?
Don't we see every moment that lordly ting man
Do each nonsense in nature except what he can
In short, our desires look from Ireland to Rome,
Are the harvest that is growing, the cloth in the loom,
The honey we have taken before we have bought hives,
And who will after this rail at bachelors wives.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
THE poet says that love's like fire,
Which kindly heat and joy imparts,
For every purpose, and desire,
That warms, and that expands our hearts:
But, trust th^s fire, where is the bound,
That shall its devastation stay?
Relentless ruin stalks around,
And horror marks its trackless way:
Thus both we dread, and both admire,
Thus poets say that love's like fire.
The toper says, that love's like wine,
And that its power, 'bove human ken,
Can lift the soul, and so refine
Our joys, that gods might envy men:
But, from this elevation sunk,
The moment reason leaves the feast,
H^s godship finds a god, when drunk,
Is little better than a beast:
Thus both are beastly, both divine,
Thus topers say that love's like wine.
Your sportsmen say, love's like the chase
That ^eads us many a weary mile,
Through many a rude and dangerous place,
Over mound, and hedge, and ditch, and style:
But when his pleasures, with his toil,
Are fairly counted, what is the gain?
Fatigued, and tired, he makes a coil,
And puts up game not worth the pain:
Thus love's without a goal, a race,
Thus sportsmen say, love's like the chase.
True lovers say, love's like the devil,
Who turns a hundred devious ways,
With, saint-like face, and heart of evil,
And smiles the most when he betrays:
Does not the devil take every hue,
And in all forms and fashions move!
Is not he black, and white, and blue,
And hot and cold? -- and so is love:
And thus to love are lovers civil,
As Indians court from fear the devil.
Let carping idiots still condemn,
Where reason bids them most rejoice,
For if they err the faults in them,
And in the objects of their choice:
The lover that shall all excel,
Let him but choose a faithless fair;
His love shall prove a very hell,
No Lethe to relieve his care:
Let him of reason take advice,
And love shall be a paradise.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
LIFE'S a general chase, and the world is the field,
Where friends, friends hunt, and brothers hunt brothers,
Where to day, fairly hunted, to us others yield,
And tomorrow we are hunted by others:
Through calling, profession, and trade, to get rich,
All wrangle, and squabble, and scramble,
Through wood, dale, and bottom, over hedge, style, and ditch,
Through bush, and through briar, and through bramble,
Then, come round me all hunters -- in Life's hark away
We have portions of pleasure and sorrow,
And the man after game that is a hunter today,
May be game for some hunter to-worrow.
The poor poet, of virtue who'd fain be the friend,
Cries the age is corrupt, and he will show it;
But while hunting his brains the world's manners to mend,
Pale poverty hunts the poor poet:
While hunting in battle for glory and fame,
Grim death hunts the soldier and sailor,
And the heir, out of cash, who can start no more game,
Is at last hunted down by his tailor:
Then, come round me all hunters -- in Life's hark away
We have portions of pleasure and sorrow,
And the man after game that is a hunter today,
May be game for some hunter tomorrow.
Country squires dash away, nor their noddles concern,
'Bout the world, or its jostlings, and crossings,
Till, at length, to die bottom, Actaeon's they turn,
Eaten up by their dogs and their horses:
Indiscriminate pleasures who chases in view,
While to pleasure in time fall a martyr,
And the bold fortune hunter who ran down a shrew,
Will find he was caught by a tarter:
Then, come round me all hunters -- in Life's hark away
We have portions of pleasure and sorrow,
And the man after game that is a hunter today,
May be game for some hunter tomorrow.
The hunks who hunts riches, is hunted by care,
Those who joy hunt are hunted by trouble,
The chemist hunts gold through fire, water, and air,
And is run down at last by a bubble:
Folly hunts the four misanthrope close at the heels,
In the moment at folly he is scoffing,
And even the death hunter, in coffins who deals,
Is, at last, hunted into a coffin:
Virtuosos hunt butterflies, courtiers levees,
Patriots hunt for the good of the nation,
Hungry gluttons hunt turtle, physicians hunt sees,
And are chased, in return, by vexation:
A reciprocal chase are mankind and their joys,
And this maxim obtains the world over,
Then with reason in view, let us hunt pleasure my boys,
Till by time we are hunted to cover:
Then, come round me all hunters -- in Life's hark away
We have portions of pleasure and sorrow,
And the man after game that is a hunter to day,
May be game for some hunter tomorrow.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
A BARD in yonder corner see,
There Is something in this man, says he,
It Is true he cannot write like me,
His wit will not bea^ inspection:
To hit the foolish times was right,
When men neglected genius slight,
My play for instance, damned first night,
The manners want correction:
Certainly they do, and, therefore, so far this man's attempt is meritorious to
be sure. If I had handled the subject it would have been done in a different
sort of a manner; but his bungling wit only proves that his own position is
truth --

For when he takes such foolish fits,
To rail, and scoff, at would be wit^,
He proves, as hard himself he hits,
That he is not all perfection.
An Alderman against fools is rage,
Cries, lord, he is right to lash the age,
Old Shakespeare said the world's a stage,
He merits our protection:
I liked to hear him laugh at fops,
And waists cut short, and flirts and crops,
Intrigues in churches, and at hops,
And fashions strange collection:
And then how I did laugh about the fellow's giving a dinner with nothing to
eat, ha, ha, ha, -- and then he passed a compliment on the city -- He ought to
be encouraged.

But when he rails at hoarded pelf,
And turtle feasts, the stupid elf,
He Is wrong -- but then he owns himself,
We cannot be all perfection.
Miss Twinkle cries, to sister Tab,
I Am pleased he is given you prude^ a dab,
But of coqu^ttish airs to blab,
'Twas done without reflection;
Well now, cries Tab, then I protest,
I likes about coquettes the best;
But when of Prudes he makes a jest,
The man deserves correction.
Well then now fait and troth, said an Irishman, it is all mighty well with his
mixture, and his hope, his good rascal, his honest flatterer, and the rest of
it -- Oh it is all fair game!

But when he talks, the slanderous rogue,
That cards and dice are all the vogue,
Fair, it is too much upon the brogue,
But no one's all perfection.
The will then taken for the deed,
I fancy in each face I read,
I shall, as heretofore, succeed,
And without much objection;
When I was in the scribbling ^it,
Had with my ^eal kept pace my wit,
Even Shakespeare's self had nothing writ,
More worthy of protection.
Nay, big with emulation to merit your applause, had my ability kept pace with
my inclination, I should have given my own Thesis the lie, and produced a
perfect entertainment --

But ardent wishes will not do,
I, therefore, must rely on you,
And should some little praise be due,
Pass by each imperfection.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
THOUGH hard the valiant soldier's life,
They some sweet moments know;
Joy never was yet unmixed with strife,
Nor happiness with woe:
It Is hard, when friend, when children, wife,
Reluctant from him part,
While fancy paints the muffled drum,
The mournful fife,
And the loud volley over his grave,
The solemn requiem to the brave!
All this he hears,
Yet calm's their fears
With smiles while horror's in his heart:
But when the smiling hour shall come,
To bring him home at last,
How sweet his constant wife to greet,
His children, friends,
And in their circling arms to find amends,
For all his sufferings past.
It Is hard when, desolation spread,
Death whirls the rapid car,
And those invaded hear, and dread
The thunder of the war:
Ah! then, indeed, friend, children, wife,
Have you true cause to fear,
Too soon, alas, the muffled drum,
The mournful fife,
And the loud volley over the grave,
Shall sound sad requiems to the brave,
While those alive,
Faint joy revive,
And blend hope's smile with pity's tear:
But when the smiling hour shall come,
To bring him home at last,
How sweet his constant wife to greet,
His children, friends,
And in their circling arms to find amends,
For all his sufferings past.
BALLAD -- IN WILL OF THE WISP.
OH yes, Oh yes, Oh yes!
Lost, or mislaid,
Or stolen, or strayed,
The character, the decency, the duty of a youth,
Who was famed, 'till this sad accident, for probity and truth;
Who assuaged his parents sorrows, alleviated their cares,
And who, with spotless honor, regulated their affairs:
This young man, as he came out of his father's bankers, was beconed by a lady
in a hackney coach -- He drove to a jeweller's where he bought a diamond
necklace. He dined with a roaring party at a tavern; and, in the evening, was
heard to talk very loud at the opera. He was next introduced to a house not an
hundred miles from St. James's, where it is supposed he could get no supper,
for he was seen at three o'clock in the morning voraciously to swallow dice and
eat cards.

Who to his wretched parents this misguided youth will bring,
Besides the satisfaction
Of doing a good action,
Shall receive a sum far more than Indian mines could ever afford,
They shall see the peace and comfort of a family restored --
God save the King.
O yes, O yes, O yes!
Lost or mislaid,
Or stolen, or strayed,
The tears of a widow, young wealthy and fair,
Who nursed a rich old husband half a year with tender care,
Who loved him not for either her inconvenience, or his pelf,
All which is very true, for she told him so herself.
This unfortunate young lady was seen, about three hours after her husband's
death, to go to the Commons to prove his will, where meeting with a very
handsome young Proctor, it is supposed the fire of his glances absorbed and
dried up the tears of this disconsolate widow, for she has never been seen to
cry since but once, and then she was detected with an onion in her pocket
handkerchief,

Who to this wretched mourner these same precious drops will bring,
Besides the satisfaction,
Of doing a good action,
Shall receive a gracious smile, which is all that can be proffered,
For they will be cried no more, nor no greater reward offered,
God save the King.
O yes, O yes, O yes!
Lost, or mislead,
Or stolen* or strayed,
The knife and fork of an alderman, a counsellor's wig,
The dice box of a grecian, a parson's tithe pig,
The fan of a beauty, her false tooth also.
And a hair powder license belonging to a beau.
As these poor suffers are ruined and deprived of their livelihood by the loss
of these respective articles, they being their working tools, the charitable
and humane are humbly requested to take into consideration their forlorn
condition --

And, whoever to these poor people th^se articles will bring
Besides the satisfaction,
Of doing a good action,
Many thanks shall be given to the charitable donors,
For they are of very little use to any body but the owners*
God save the king.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
As a plain case in point's the best mode of explaining,
To make my position to each judgment clear,
Without further a tip-toe your patience detaining,
I shall ton at Antipodes, show and ton here:
Here conscience for gold,
Never was known to be sold,
There to sale they expose it,
And every one knows it,
For the matter to mince might a good market spoil:
Thus what is meant by reports, which are variously spread.
That we the feet stand on, and they on the head,
Will turn out to be this, without cavil or coil,
We Are the gem and the Antipodeans the foil.
Is a treaty of marriage on foot the dear lady,
Here never to talk of her interest is heard,
Full of love she never asks if the writings are ready,
Nor thinks of a second spouse, much less a third:
Is a counselor learned,
In a law suit concerned,
He gives you his trouble,
For nothing, to double
His fee would that instant the whole business spoil:
There still topsy turvy we different modes see,
Love obeys, the best bidder, and law the best fee,
And thus clear as day, without cavil or coil,
We Are the gem and the Antipodians the foil.
Would you wish farther proof as a prominent feature,
Take this, though 'twill keen sensibility shock,
At Antipodes they have a beautiful creature,
A fine stately bird very like our game cock:
Inflaming its blood,
They mix drugs in its food,
And arm it for fighting,
Then stand round delighting,
While these birds of their plumage each other despoil:
You wonder and gaze, yet it is truth I report,
But since England disdains so unmanly a sport,
No reflection on us from their vice can recoil,
We Are the gem and the Antipodeans the foil.
But to bring the case home, let us speak of their writers,
Who having such food for their frolicksome muse,
Are in satire and ridicule terrible biters,
And, though none they point out, all the cap ^it abuse;
Their case touches me,
But was I ever so free,
In my silly labors,
To laugh at my neighbors?
No; a fair wholesome moral's the jet of my toil:
Besides here no fault could they find did they try,
No, I Would have them to know that my audience and I,
Wha^'er out of envy their cavil and coil,
Are the gem and the Antipodeans the foil.
BALLAD -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
WHEN freedom knew not where to rove,
From conquered Greece, and groaning Rome,
At random driven, like Noah's dove,
Without a shelter or a home:
The expanded world she viewed, where best
She might repose her weary foot;
Saw this our isle, set up her rest,
And bid the spreading oak take root;
Bid it adorn the land, and be
Fair England's tree of liberty.
Thus spoke the goddess -- This fair tree,
The towering forest's kingly boast,
Let my behests kept sacred be,
This tree shall guard your sea girt coast:
Freedom's behests are these -- To know
No faction, no cabal, no cause,
From whose pestiferous breath may grow
Aught against the monarch, or the laws;
Keep sacred these, the oak shall be
Fair England's tree of liberty.
Its friendly arms that, on their way,
Those succor who its aid implore;
A faithful portrait shall display,
Of England's hospitable shore:
Of England's courage this fair tree,
A great example to impart,
To succor law and liberty,
Shall make a rampart of its heart;
Hail sacred oak, then, deign to be
Fair England's tree of liberty.
Then catch the enthusiastic strain,
Hail freedom's tree in fervent hymns,
That freely, on the awful main,
Launches in Britain's cause its limbs:
That mighty walls, and bulwarks forms,
Whence England's thunder shall be hurled,
And, spite of battles and of storms,
That bears our commerce through the world;
Hail freedom's shrine! still deign to be
Fa^r England's Tree of Liberty.
BALLAD -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
WHEN I told you your cheeks wore the blush of the rose,
That the spring was the type of your youth,
That no lily a tint like your neck could disclose,
I made love in the language of truth:
Yet the loveliest rose, once the summer away,
Of its bloom leaves no vestige behind;
But your bloom, when the summer of life shall decay,
Fresh as ever shall glow in your mind.
See the be, as from flower to flower he roves,
The sweets of the garden explore,
And, in winter, to feast on the banquet he loves,
Lay in his industrious store:
So all your employment through life's busy day,
Is the sweets drawn from goodness to find;
Reason's feast to supply, and cheat winter away,
From that source of perfection your mind.
And thus, as the seasons of life pass away,
We enjoy every various scene;
The spring all expanding, the summer all gay,
The autumn all mild and serene:
You are yet in yoar summer; but, when on your head,
While from all admiration you find,
Silver winter its honors shall sacredly shed,
Still summer shall bloom in your mind.
BALLAD -- IN CHIRSTMAS GAMBOLS.
COME here, come here, my pretty dear,
Leave business, care, and labor,
Christmas comes but once a year,
Come lads and lasses, come, and hear
My merry pipe and tabor:
I sell all sorts of curious wares,
Tapes, garters, ribbands, laces:
That give the form enchanting air^,
And set off pretty faces.
And then I Have philters, drugs, and charms,
That, when the nymph's deserted,
Shall lure the shepherd to her arms,
And make him tender hearted.
Come here, come here my pretty dear,
Leave business, care, and labor,
Christmas comes but once a year,
Come lads and lasses, come, and hear
My merry pipe and tabor.
This wonderful love powder see,
Though ever so hard featured,
To a Venus that converts each she,
By making her good natured:
This eye water can power dispense,
To cure each jealous blindness,
And turn, by generous confidence,
All jarring strife to kindness:
Come here, come here, my pretty dear,
Leave business, care, and labor,
Christmas comes but once a year,
Come lads and lasses, come, and hear
My merry pipe and tabor.
When clouds shall wedlock's sky deface,
And dim that brilliant heaven,
Upon your lips this padlock place,
By wary prudence given:
But when, from storms, and tempests free,
The horizon looks propitious;
From kindness hand take pleasure's key,
And open scenes delicious:
Come here, come here, my pretty dear,
Leave business, care, and labor,
Christmas comes but once a year,
Come lads and lasses, come, and hear
My merry pipe and tabor.
BALLAD -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
STANDING one summer's day on the Tower Slip,
Careless how I my time should employ,
It popped in my head that I Would take a trip
Aboard of a Margate Hoy:
I took a few slops, such as shirts and a coat,
For of prog I knew well they would be stored;
Then I hailed a pair of oars, shoved of my boat,
And away I dashed aboard.
'Ah my dear Commodore, who thought of seeing you? "What, Mrs. Garbage! How is
the Alderman?" -- 'There is my husband, Sir;' "Pon my word and dicky I
declare." 'Give me leave, Commodore, to introduce you to my friends: Mr.
Shadrack, Commodore Kelson, Commodore Kelson, Mr. Shadrack.' "Very much at your
sharvice, Sir." 'Miss Minnikin, Commodore Kelson, Commodore Kelson, Miss
Minnikin.' "Very happy to have the pleasure of knowing you Sir." 'Dr. Quibus,
Commodore Kelson, Commodore Kelson, Dr. Quibus; Captain Squash, Commodore
Kelson, Commodore Kelson, Captain Squash; Sir Phelim O'Drogheda, Commodore
Kelson. Commodore Kelson, Sir Phel^m OF Drogheda.' -- Hollo the^e! Cast off the
painter -- Sit still ladies and gentlemen.

So off we went with a flowing jib,
Full of merriment and joy,
The Alderman munching, and prattling his rib,
Sing who so blithe as we,
Who take a voyage to sea,
Aboard of a Margate Hoy.
Then such glee and humor, our joy to prolong,
Pervaded us fore and aft;
Some were telling a story, some whistling a song,
As we turned in and out amongst the craft:
Then we'd talk of our danger, and then we were gay,
Then how we'd astonish the folks,
When at Margate arrived; then, cut out of our way,
To laugh at the watermen's jokes.
'Ho, the ship ahoy.' "Ay, ay." 'Pray have you one Wiseman aboard?' "No, no,"
'Then you are all fools, hey -- ha, ha, ha, went Miss Minnikin.' -- "Dat is
very coot chokes," said the Jew. 'Why, I say, Moses,' said the man that was
affronted, 'are you a bull or bear? Damme, I thinks ^ou look more like a
monkey. And you Miss Dolly Drylips, take a reef in your perriwig, and clap a
stopper on your muzzle, clue up the plaits in your jaw bags, and give your
tongue leave of absence. About ship -- helm's a lee -- here she comes,'

So we made the other tack and lay gunnel to,
Which soon gave a damp to our joy,
Miss Minnikin squalled -- mine cot, cried the Jew,
Sing who so blyth as we,
Who take a voyage to sea,
On board of a Margate Hoy.
The company's merriment now out of joint,
And their tatlers not moving so quick,
Scarce right a-(...) did we twig Cuckold's Point,
But the alderma^^^ ^^gan to be sick:
Then we'd like to (...) of an oyster smack,
The wind freshing toward the Nore,
Then, stretching too fa^ on the larboard tack,
By and by, we came bump ashore.
'Ah we shall all be cast away! my poor dear pattern cap; cashed away! What
shall I do to be shaved?' "Why faith, said I, I fancy we shall have a touch of
the salt water before we get to Margate." 'Yes, Sir,' said the Doctor, 'not
that I have any quarrel with death, but I am afraid we shall take in too large
a dose.' "How do you do, Sir Phelim?" 'Arrah, I should be well enough if I was
not so cursedly sick." She rights, she rights!

Next a gale coming on we did preciously kick,
Which finished completely our joy,
'Twas, madam, how do you do? Oh I am monstrously sick!
S^ng who so blyth as we,
Who take a voyage to sea,
Aboard of a Margate Hoy.
And now 'twould have made a philosopher grin,
To have seen such a concourse of muns;
Sick as death, wet at muck, from the heel to the chin,
For it came on to blow great guns:
Spoilt clothes, and provisions, now clogged up the way,
In a dreary boisterous night;
While apparently dead every passenger lay
With the sickness, but move with the fright.
'Oh, oh, I wish I was at home in my bed!' "Oh that I was a hundred miles off"
"Mashy upon my shi^^.' "Oh, oh, will nobody throw me overboard!" 'Avast
there.' "Ah my poor dear pattern cap's blown into the pond!" "Oh, my soul, what
a devil of a sickness!" "Arrah, stop the ship -- Sir, would you be so kind as
to be after handing me the candle cup?' Land, land, upon the starboard bow.

At last, after turning on two or three tacks,
Margate lights soon restored all our joy;
The men found their stomachs, the women their clacks,
Sing who so blyth as we,
Who take a voyage to sea,
Aboard of a Margate Hoy.
BALLAD -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
THERE were Farmer Thrasher, and he had a cow,
And gammer were very fond on un,
And they would a son Jacky that made a fine bow,
So they fent ^n a prentice to London.
Jacky's master a barber and a hair-dresser were,
Than some squire's 'cod be thought unself bigger,
In the day through the town he would dress and cut hair,
And dressed out at night -- cut a figure.
To ape Jackey's master, were all his delight,
The soap suds and razor both scorning,
He Is been took't by the nose by the same fop at night,
That he took't by the nose in the morning.
Now to see the cow moan, would have made a cat laugh,
Her milk were his food late and early,
And even if Jackey had heen her own calf,
She could not ha loved un more dearly.
She moaned, and she moaned, nor knew what she did ail,
To heart so she took this disaster,
At last roaming about, some rogues cut off her tail,
And then sent her back to her master.
Here Is the kiaw came home, Gammer, come bring out the pail,
Poor creature I'ze glad we have found her,
Cried Dame, ten't our kiaw, she is got never a tail,
Here Roger go take care and pound her.
It Is our kiaw, but you zee she is been maimed by some brute
Why, dame, you are a vool -- give me patience;
So to squabbling they went -- when to end the dispute,
Came home Jacky to see his relations.
His spencer he sported, his hat round he twirled,
As whistling a tune he came bolt in,
And bedocked, and belopped, wounds, he looked all the world
Like trimmed bantums, or magpies a moulting.
Oh dear! it is our Jacky, come bring out the ale,
So Gammer fell skipping around him,
Our Jacky, why, dam't, he is got never a tail --
Here, Roger, go take un, and pound un.
It Is the kick, I say, old one, so I brought it down,
Wore by jemmies so neat, and so spunky;
Ah, Jacky, thou went up a puppy to town,
And now thee be'st come back a monkey.
Gammer stormed, Gasser swore, Jacky whistled, and (...)
'Twas agreed, without any more passion,
To take Jacky in favor as well as the cow,
Because they were both in the fashion.
BALLAD -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
My grandfather's grandfather, valiant and sto^^,
A Briton ever luxury imported the gout,
In the field, in the ball-room, or scampering over rocks,
Could give chase to the foe, or the fair, or the for:
A band of choice friends, at the sound of his horn,
Sailed forth blyth and buxom, to hail the fair morn;
All lusty, and noble, and true and tried men,
And called, for distinction, the Lads of the Glen.
Shall I tell you their names, there was bold Alfred How,
Sprung from Guy, Earl of Warwick, who hunted a cow,
And then, on his courser came valiant Sir Hugh.
Born from that London 'prentice two lions that slew:
Next that dare devil, Hengist, with target and gorge,
Worn, his ancestors write, by the mighty St. George;
Then Owen ap rice, who again and again,
Had been in at the death with the lads of the Glen.
Next Percy, came on, born of that noble race,
Who accomplished such wonders at famed Chevy Ch^c^;
Then Orson the jolly, a bold daring elf,
Sprung from Arthur, nay, some say, from Nimrod himself:
Edwin, Gianville, and Huntingdon, sound men and good,
The last the great grandson of bold Robinhood;
To these add my ancestor, making just ten,
And you will get the whole list of the Lads of the Glen.
It Is writ in fair characters, now in the hall,
What a chase they were led the sly fox to enthral?
He run 'em at length, and then hard at a push,
And now they are miles from him, and now at his brush:
'Till the dogs are so weary that, panting for breath,
They overtake him, but cannot accomplish his death;
Britons spare prostrate foes, so they loosed him again,
To afford future sport for the Lads of the Glen.
Thus rational pleasure was all their delight,
They Would hunt in the morning, and revel at night,
Fair truth and pure honor, dwelt proud in each breast,
And kind hospitality set up her rest:
And from their gay board never yet was the day,
When the poor, and the hungry, went empty away;
Britons all have true hearts, yet, it is hard to say, when
We shall, ever, see the like of the Lads of the Glen.
Then charge high your b^mbers, in chorus loud sing,
Like true subjects let us all drink a health to the King;
He Is a sportsman himself, and long, long may the chase,
Give him health to behold his i^lustrious race:
And would ye, ye Britons, your honor ensure,
As firm as your courage, your rectitude pure,
His virtues but emulate, soon shall, again,
Return the good times of the Lads of the Glen.
BALLAD -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
GIVE ear to me, both high and low,
And, while you mourn hard fates decree,
Lament a tale right full of woe,
Of comely Ned that died at sea.
His father was a commodore,
His King and country, served had he;
But, now, his tears in torrents pour,
For comely Ned that died at sea.
His sister Peg her brother loved,
For a right tender heart had she,
And often to strong grief was moved,
For comely Ned that died at sea.
His sweetheart Grace, once blyth and gay,
That led the dance upon the lea,
Now wastes in tears the lingering day,
For comely Ned that died at sea.
His friends, who loved his manly worth,
For none more friends could boast than he,
To mourn now lay aside their mirth,
For comely Ned that died at sea.
Come then and join, with friendly tear,
The song that, 'midst of all our glee,
We from our hearts chant once a year,
For comely Ned that died at sea.
BALLAD -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
POOR negroe say one ting you no take offense,
Black and white he one color a hundred year hence,
For when massa death kick him into the grave,
He no spare negroe, buckra, nor massa, nor slave.
Then dance, and then sing, and the banjer thrum thrum,
He foolish to ^ink what tomorrow my come,
Lilly laugh and be fat, de best ting you can do,
Time enough to be sad when you kickaraboo.
One massa, one slave, high and low all degrees,
Can be happy, dance, sing, make all pleasure him please;
One slave be one massa, he good, honest brave,
One massa bad, wicked, he worse than one slave:
If your heart tell you good, you all happy, all well,
If bad, he plague, vex you worse and a hell;
Let your heart make you merry, then honest and true,
And you on care no farthing for Kickaraboo.
One game me see massa him play him call chess,
King, queen, bishop, knight, castle, all in a mess,
King kill knight, queen bishop, men castle throw down,
Like card-soldier him scatter, all lie on a ground:
And when the game over, king, bishop, tag, rag,
Queen, knight, all together him go in a bag,
So in life's game at chess, when no more we can do,
Massa death bring one bag, and we Kickaraboo
Then be good, what you am never mind the degree,
Lilly flower good for somewhat as well as great tree;
You one slave, he no use to be sulky and sly,
Worky, worky, perhaps you one massa by'm by.
Savee good and be poor make you act better part,
Than be rich in a pocket and poor in a heart,
Though ever so low, do your duty for true,
All your friend drop one tear when you Kickaraboo.
BALLAD -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
COME round me ye lasses, and lend me an ear,
The almanac says ninety-six is leap year,
Leap year, cries our Margery, well numskull, what then?
Why, wounds, don't the women go courting the men?
And they will make the best on it, and not stand hum drum,
For they will not get another for eight years to come;
Come ladies a truce to each maidenish fear,
Kiss the fellows, and wish them a happy new year.
See the sly little toads how they ogle and grin,
That Is right, squeeze his hand, chuck un under the chin,
See that shrimp with that giant there, prattle and toy,
You're a devilish fine fellow -- nay don't be so coy;
Then she smirks, and she pats him, and so this the trade is,
'Cod these leap years be nice times for the ladies,
That Is right, how they snigger, and simper, and leer,
Kiss 'em up girls, and wish 'em a happy new year.
Then as there is no Jack but a finds out his Jill,
Who knows, hey, but I may of love get my fill,
Let 'em come, who is afraid! wounds, as stout as they be,
I should like for to catch them a courting of me:
She that chooses me out as a person of taste,
I can tell her will find me not very shame-faced,
What do tell me, says I, that thou love me, my dear,
Ge's a buss then, and wish me a happy new year.
But, wounds, while I jokes so in this merry fit,
I maunt let my tongue, do you see, run 'sore my wit;
For, however, one may laugh 'bout the girls and be free,
They have more sense by half in these matters than we:
Give a woman her way, and I Will wager upon her,
She leaves foppery and nonsense to choose truth and honor,
And he may well brag, and his head high up rear,
Whom she kisses, and wishes a happy new year.
Then as each British beauty be constant and loyal,
So much do they dote on his majesty royal,
That now they got leave for to do what they pleases,
'Cod if 'twere not for shame they would all kiss un to pieces;
So as loyalty, truth, and each generous duty,
Be learnt to we men folks by sweetness and beauty,
Let us not be out done in our own proper spear,
But let love merit love, and each year be leap year.
FINALE -- IN CHRISTMAS GAMBOLS.
COME all who love,
Through pleasure's grove,
To take your merry rambles,
Whose hearts so free,
Confirm your glee,
Join our Christmas Gambols.
See the lads and lasses wind,
In mazy labrynth dancing,
The harmless feelings of the mind,
The general joy enhancing:
The world's vicissitudes they trace,
As they the figure measure,
Variety and change of place,
Still giving zest to pleasure,
Come all who love, etc.
The merry hunters and the horn,
That often have waked Aurora,
To unlock the treasures of the morn,
Through the domain of Flora:
Next in quaint form, and vestments gay,
Comes many a mori^e dancer,
While bells that ring, and flutes that play,
In merry cadence answer:
Come all who love, etc.
The pipe and tabor's sprightly tone,
The organ's sound sonorous,
The comic bagpipe and the drone,
Shall join the swelling chorus:
The piercing fife, and deafening drum,
For honest hearts recruiting,
To join the mingling sound shall come,
Of singing, fiddling, fluting:
Come then who love, etc.
At length the trumpet's cheerful call,
Sounds to the feast of pleasure,
When in the hospitable hall,
Plenty unlades her treasure:
See Father Christmas pleased appear,
To crown our institution,
While circling goes the humming beer,
In sportive revolution:
Come then who love, etc.
SONG.
POLL dang't how do you do,
Na'n will not you gi's a buss;
Why what is to do wi' you,
Why here is a pretty fuss:
Say shall we kiss and toy,
I goes to sea no more;
Oh! I Am the sailor boy,
For capering ashore.
Father he apprenti^'d me,
All to a coasting ship;
I being resolved do you see,
To give 'em all the slip:
I got to Yarmouth fair,
Where I had been before;
So father found me there,
A capering ashore.
Next out to India,
I went a Guinea pig;
We got to ^able bay,
But mind a pretty rig;
The ship driven out to sea,
Le^t me and many more,
Among the Hottentots,
A capering ashore.
I loves a bit of hop,
Life's never the worser for it;
If in my wake should drop,
A fiddle, 'that's your sort':
Thrice tumble up ahoy,
Once get the labor over;
Then see the sailor boy,
A capering ashore.
SONG.
A SUP of good whiskey will make you glad,
Too much of the creature will make you mad,
If you take in reason it will make you wise,
If you drink to excess it will close up your eyes.
Yet father and mother,
And sister and brother,
They all take a sup in their turn.
Some preachers will tell you to drink is bad,
I think so too if there is none to be had:
The swadler will bid you drink none at all,
But while I can get it a fig for them all,
Both laymen and brother,
In spite of this pother,
Will all take a sup in their turn.
Some doctors will tell ye 'twill hurt my health,
And justice will say 'twill reduce your weath,
Physicians and lawyers will all agree,
When your money is all gone, you can get no see.
Yet surgeon or doctor,
And lawyer and proctor,
Will all take a sup in their turn.
If a soldier is drunk on his duty found
He soon to the three legged horse is bound,
In the face of the regiment obliged to strip,
A naggin will soften the drummer's whip.
For sergeant and drummer,
And likewise his honor,
Will all take a sup in their turn.
The Turks who arrived from the ports sublime,
They told us that drinking was held a great crime,
Yet after their dinner away they slunk,
And tippled their wine, till they got quite drunk.
The Sultan and Crommet,
And even Mahomet,
They all take a sup in their turn.
The Quakers will bid you from drink abstain,
By yea and by nay* it is a fault in the vain,
Yet some of the broadbr^ms will get to the stuff,
And tipple away till they have tippl'd enough,
For stiff rump or steady,
And Solomon's lady,
Will all take a sup in their turn.
The Germans will say they can drink the most,
The French and Italians will also boast,
Hibernia's the country, for all their noise,
For generous drinking and hearty boys,
There each jovial fellow,
Will drink till he is mellow,
And take off his glass in his turn.
SONG -- IN PRIVATE TAEATRICALS.
RECITATIVE.
BEHOLD two mighty chiefs come on!
Not Hector, nor yet Telamon;
Who, 'stead of fists, cuff'd foes with rocks,
But two tom-tits, or bantum cocks:
Not like two combatants of yore,
Who slew the foe and drank the gore,
Like tigers, or fierce mastiff dogs --
But chiefs from Homer's mice and frogs;
Lank both in form and voice, and taper,
Like an^ee^-skin, or a thread paper;
Who ammunition draw from lungs,
And wield not swords, nor spears, but tongues.
Suppose them entered in the (...),
Their cause of quarrel who was hissed,
Or groan^d at most at either house:
Says general frog to general mouse --
AIR.
'Signor Pantheon
'Vat ting you play on,
"To give Mr. John Bull delight?
"Monsieur Haymarket,
"Pray don't you bark yet,
"Nor show your toose, for you cannot bite*"
'My great big house make people stare,'
"Vat use great house, nobody dare?
"I do de op'ra, you must sing song:"
'Ninety foot wide, hundred yard long,
'And den great many much foot high,
'The chandelier he touch de sky:'
"You Sadler-vells, Astley, Foxhall,
"All D^r^y Down, Tit fol de roll:"
'Your house make mine one servant-hall,'
"I license get, you none at all."
'^ire and fury, devilish in hell,
'Oh vat disgracia,
'To my faccia,
''Tis ferry fell,
'Fiddler, singer, dancer, quick
'To assist your general rush,
'Make haste, shoulder your fiddle-stick,
'And all to piece dis nutshell crush.'
"Nutshell be full, he bring some meat a,
'Your fiddle-stick no good to eat a."
'Oh zounds, cot tam!
'Vat rage I am,
'I could my flesh for anger cat:'
"Ah do, you will get no other meat."
'Shades of creat musicians all,
'In heaven, in hell, or on the deep,
'Quick appear, obey my call!'
"He will not appear, he fast asleep."
'Bononcini,
'Farinelli,
'Piccini,
'lomelli,
'And all de elli,
'And Nelli,
'And rini,
'And cini,
'Great fiddling quire,
'Appear at sound of David's lyre.
'Come, drive dis rogue from English land
'Fat, short, and tall a men,
'Come, follow, follow men,
'David and Soloman,
'One sing, and toder lead the band!'
"Ah you may bawl,
"You cini he vont come at all."
I Will stop your mouth, you villain taef!'
"All dis fine nize dome get roast Leaf!"
"Come dome be fool,
"But let us join,
"your force and mine,
"And den dome fear
"But the next year,
"Wid your fine hell,
"Your tund'ring swell,
"May he, and ha,
"Mister John Bull
"Shall cry hoora!
"Vive L'Opera!"
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
DICK DOCK, a tar at Greenwich moored,
One day had got his beer on board,
When he a poor maimed pensioner from Chelsea saw;
And all to have his jeer and flout,
For the grog once in the wit's soon out,
Cried, how good master Lobster did you lose your claw?
Was It that time in a drunken fray,
Or the other when you ran away?
But hold you Dick, the poor soul has one foot in the grave;
Before slander's wind too fast you fly,
Do You think it fun? -- you swab you lie;
Misfortune ever claimed the pity of the brave.
Old Hanibal, in words as gross,
For he, like Dick, had got his dose,
To try about a wrangling, quickly took a spell
If I Am a Lobster, master Crab,
By the information on your nab,
In some scrimmage, or other, why they have cracked your shell;
And then why how you hobling go,
On that jury mast, your timber toe,
A nice one to find fault, with one foot in the grave;
But halt old Hanibal, halt! halt!
Distress was never yet a fault,
Misfortune ever claimed the pity of the brave.
If Hanibal's your name do you see,
As sure as they Dick Dock call me,
As once it did fall out, I owed my life to you,
Spilt from my horse, once when 'twas dark,
And nearly swallowed by a shark,
You boldly plunged in, saved me and pleased all the crew;
If that is the case then cease our jeers,
When boarded by the same Mounseers,
You, a true English Lion, snatched me from the grave,
Cried cowards, do the man no harm,
Dammee, don't you see he is lost his arm,
Misfortune ever claimed pity from the brave.
Then broach a can before we part,
A friendly one, with all his heart,
And as we put the grog about, we'll chearly sing,
At land and sea, may Briton^s fight,
The world's example and delight,
And conquer every enemy of George our King:
It Is he, that proves the hero's friend,
His bounty waits us to our end,
Though cripple^, and laid up, with one foot in the grave,
Then Tars and (...) never fear,
You shall not wan^ compassion's tear,
Misfortune ever claimed the pity of the brave.
BALLAD -- IN GREAT NEWS.
HAVE you heard of the tax, that such strange consternation,
Has spread through old England, that poor helpless nation,
It Is hair powder, Oh! downfall of guinea^ess beaus,
Wh^, unli^enced, will all look like so many crows:
Hark the ^rizeurs exclaim! as distracted they roam,
Amongst the knights of the curling irons, Chaos is come,
Sing and cry, cry and sing, mingle misery and fun,
England's never so happy as when it is undone
The Hunks, who can boast but a sing^e colt's tooth,
Who, weighed down with age, apes the fopperies of youth,
Says, to some Dulcinea, 'my hairs are all gray,
'So I cannot be taxed,' cries the Siren, "Nay, nay,
"Not all gray -- they are half black:" -- 'Ah! you dear coaxing ninny,
'Well, I Will purchase a license and pay half a guinea.'
Sing and cry, etc.
Then the Knights of the Rainbow -- I say my lord Duke,
On hair powder a tax -- take the news there and look.
I forgot, you cannot read -- the ridiculous fuss,
Why what are such trifles as guineas to us?
Nunky pays for we footmen -- I Will sport a spruce nab,
And Old Quibus come down for it, or demme I Will blab.
Sing and cry, etc.
But the drol^est expedient was that of a fop,
A man milliner, where there were four in a shop;
I Have hit upon it, demme: as lawyers coach call,
And drive four for a shilling to Westminster Hall,
Five and three pence a piece, lads advance, hand it out,
We'll purchase a license and lend it about.
Sing and cry, etc.
Then the tea table see, I declare then I Am vexed,
Cries out, Old Lady Pyeball, 'Our teeth they will tax next,
'I should trick 'em at that though I have but one tooth:'
"'It Is quite right,' cried a beauty all sweetness and truth,
"Take the tax, take each feather, that plays on my head,
"I shall dress the more plain -- but the poor will get bred."
Sing and cry, etc.
Then, my countrymen, emulate this charming fair,
Deck the heart nor regret how neglected the hair,
While Frizeurs, and Footmen, and Fops, cry pecavi,
We shall all dress more decent, and they will man the navy;
Let our rulers go on then of honor secure,
Each tax upon luxury's bread for the poor,
Then hold all this cro^king, and grumbling as fun,
By such nonsense Old England can never be undone.
BALLAD -- IN POOR VULCAN.
A Parody.
DEAR Maudlin come give me bright guineas,
For brighter none sure ever gave,
Nor think that I Am one of those ninnies.
That can tell you how many I Would have.
I Am not to be stinted in pleasure,
So to me if you mean to be kind,
You must ransack old Crump's rusty treasure,
And give me whatever you find.
With a large heavy purse so I fold thee,
I then my dear Maudlin, am thine;
In satins and silks I Will behold thee,
No duchess ever dressed half so fine;
But our pocket at present but thin is,
And soon what we have will be spent,
Then prithee give many more guineas,
Or you will find I shall never be content.
Count the rouleaus at Almack^ they are staking,
Count the bets laid in Newmarket fields,
Count the cash at the bank they are taking,
Count the gold that rich Lombard Street yields:
Give a p^ep at the India-house coffer,
Go number the treasury's store,
And when so many guineas you offer,
I still shall be asking for more.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
THOUGH pleasure's easily d^fin'd,
Droll mortals so employ it,
Scarce any two among mankind
Go the same way to enjoy it.
With some a dying parent's groan,
With others ill got treasure,
A friend betrayed, a wido^'s moan,
An orphan's tears are pleasure.
From no such source my pleasure's flow,
Unfashionably happy;
Reason supplies the joys I know,
Their zest a jug of Nappy.
Their country's downfall, Faction's elves,
For fun, would be pursuing,
Though, Samson like, they were themselves
Crushed in the mighty ruin.
Let them go on, they doubtless see,
Congenial to their natures,
Some pleasure in that misery
They wish their fellow creatures.
For me, protected while I sing,
My wife and children happy,
My favorite toast, church, state, and king,
Shall sweeten my brown Nappy.
Love, as facetiously we are told,
Has blessings out of measure,
And hearts put up, and bought, and sold,
Confer a world of pleasure.
Then for the joys that wine promotes,
Who dares, a lie presuming,
Deny that brawls and cutting throats,
Are something more than human?
Why love and drink's the zest of life,
When Reason bids be happy;
With hallowed lips when a loved wife
Blesses the smiling Nappy.
Yet every mortal to his taste:
Over others no dominion
Do I usurp, I Have only traced,
With deference, my opinion;
And, if mankind in folly sunk,
Find g^orious fun in treason,
In vicious love, in getting drunk,
And taking leave of reason;
Even let them think so, since they will,
My own way I Will be happy;
Of Reason's pleasures take my fill,
And drink my jug of Nappy.
BALLAD -- IN CASTLES IN THE AIR.
THE Yarmouth roads are right ahead,
The crew with ardour burning,
Jack sings out as he heaves the lead,
On tack and half tack turning;
By the dip eleven!
Lashed in the chains, the line he coils,
Then round his head it is swinging;
And thus to make the land he toils,
In numbers quaintly singing,
By the mark seven!
And now lest we run bump ashore,
He heaves the lead, and sings once more,
Quarter less four!
About ship lads, tumble up there, cannot you see!
Stand by, well bark, hark; helm's a lee,
Here she comes, up tacks and sheets, haul, mainsail haul,
Haul off all:
And as the long lost shore they view,
Exulting shout the happy crew;
Each singing, as the sails he furls,
Hey for the fiddles and the girls.
The next tack we run out to sea,
Old England scarce appearing;
Again we tack, and Jack with glee
Sings out as land we are nearing,
By the dip eleven!
And as they name some beauty dear,
To tars of bliss the summit,
Jack joins the jell, the jibe, the jeer,
And heaves the ponderous plummet;
By the mark seven!
And now, while dangerous breakers roar,
Jack cries, lest we run bump a shore,
Quarter less four!
About ship lads, tumble, up there, cannot you see!
Stand by, well hark, hark; the helm's a lee!
Here she comes, up tacks and sheets, haul, mainsail haul,
Haul off all:
And as the long lost shore they view,
Exulting shout the happy crew;
Each singing as the sai^s he furls,
Hey for the fiddles and the girls.
Thus tars at sea, like swabs at home,
By tack and tack are bias'd,
The furthest way about we roam,
To bring us home the nighest;
By the dip eleven!
For one tack more, and before the wind,
Shall we, in a few glasses,
Now make the land both true and kind,
To find our friends and lasses;
By the mark seven!
Then heave the lead, my lad once more,
Soon shall we gaily tread the shore,
And a half four!
About ship, etc.
NEW [AMERICAN] PATRIOTIC SONGS.
SONG ADAPTED TO THE PRESIDENT's MARCH.
HAIL COLUMBIA! happy land,
Hail ye HEROES, heaven born band,
Who fought and bled in Freedom's cause,
Who fought and bled in Freedom's cause,
And when the Storm of War was gone,
Enjoyed the Peace your Valor won,
Let Independence be our boast,
Ever mindful what it cost;
Ever grateful for the prize,
Let its altar reach the skies --
Firm -- United let us be,
Rallying round our Liberty,
As a band of brothers joined,
Peace and Safety we shall find.
Immortal Patriots! rise once more,
Defend your Rights -- defend your shore;
Let no rude foe with impious hand,
Let no rude foe with impious hand,
Invade the shrine where sacred lies,
Of toil and blood the well-earn'd prize.
While offering Peace, sincere and just,
In Heaven we place a manly trust,
That truth and justice will prevail,
And every scheme of bondage fail --
Firm -- United let us be,
Ra'lying round our liberty,
As a band of Brothers joined,
Peace and safety we shall find.
Sound, sound, the trump of fame,
Let Washington's great name,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Let every clime to Freedom dear,
Listen with a joyful ear --
With equal skill with godlike power,
He governs in the fearful hour
Of horrid war, or guides with ease,
The happier times of honest peace,
Firm -- United let us be,
Rallying round our Liberty,
As a Band of Brothers joined,
Peace and Safety we shall find.
Behold the Chief who now commands,
Once more, to serve his country, stands
The Rock on which the Storm will beat,
The Rock on which the Storm will beat,
But armed in virtue, firm and true,
His hopes are fixed on Heaven and you --
When Hope was sinking in dismay,
When glooms obscured Columbia's day;
His steady mind from changes free,
Resolved on Death or Liberty --
Firm -- United let us be,
Rallying round our Liberty,
As a Band of Brothers joined,
Peace and Safety we shall find.
THE NEW YORK PATRIOTIC SONG, CALLED, THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION BOYS AND LIBERTY
FOR EVER.
POETS may sing of their Hellicon streams,
Their Gods and their Heroes are fabulous dreams,
They never sang a line
Half so grand, so divine,
As the glorious toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution boys, and Liberty forever.
ADAMS the man of our choice, guides the helm,
No tempest can harm us, no storm overwhelm:
Our sheet anchor's sure
And our bark rides secure,
So here is to the toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution, and the President forever.
A free Navigation, Commerce and Trade,
We'll seek for no foe, of no foe be afraid;
Our frigates shall ride
Our defense and our pride:
Our Tars guard our coast
And huzza to our toast
The' Federal Constitution, Trade and Commerce, forever.
Montgomery, Warren, still live in our songs,
Like them our young heroes shall spurn at our wrongs,
The world shall admire
The zeal and the fire
Which blaze in the toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution, and its advocates forever.
When an enemy threats all party shall cease,
We bribe no intruders to buy a mean peace,
Columbians will scorn,
Friends or foes to suborn;
We'll never stain the toast
Which as freemen we boast --
The Federal Constitution, and Integrity forever.
Fame's trumpet shall swell in WASHINGTON's praise,
And Time grant a furlough to lengthen his days;
May health weave the thread
Of delight round his head --
No nation can boast
Such a name -- such a toast --
The Federal Constitution boys, and WASHINGTON forever.
BOSTON PATRIOTIC SONG. Tune, Anacreon in Heaven.
YE sons of Columbia who bravely have fought
For those rights, which unstained from your sires had descended
May you long taste the blessings your valor has bought,
And your sons reap the soil which your fathers defended,
Mid the reign of mild peace, may your nation increase,
With the glory of Rome, and the wisdom of Greece;
And never may the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls in waves.
In a clime whose rich vales feed the Marts of the world,
Whose s^ores are unshaken by Europe's commotion,
The trident of commerce should never be hurled
To incense the legitimate powers of the Ocean,
But should Pirates invade,
Though in thunders arrayed,
Let your cannon declare the free charter of trade --
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves, etc.
The fame of our arms, of our Laws the mild sway,
Had justly ennobled our Nation in story,
Till the dark clouds of faction obscured our young day,
And envelop'd the Sun of American glory.
But let traitors be told
Who their country have sold,
And bartered the God, for his Image in Gold --
That never will the sons of Columbia be slaves, etc.
While France her huge limbs bathes recumbent in blood,
And society's base, threats with wide dissolution,
May Peace, like the Dove, who returned from the flood,
Find an ark of abode in our mild Constitution,
But though Peace is our aim,
Yet the Boon we disclaim,
If bought by our sov'reignty, justice or fame:
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves, etc.
It Is the fire of the flint, each American warms;
Let Rome's haughty victors beware of collision!
Let them bring all the vassals of Europe in arms,
We Are a world by ourselves, and disdain a division!
While with Patriot pride,
To our Laws we are allied,
No foe can subdue us -- no faction divide.
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves, etc.
Our Mountains are crowned with Imperial Oak,
Whose roots like our Liberties, ages have nourished,
But long e're our nation submits to the Yoke,
Not a tree shall be left on the field where it flourished,
Should Invasion impend,
Every grove would descend,
From the Hill tops they shaded, our shores to defend.
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves, etc.
Let our Patriots destroy Anarch's pestilent worm,
Lest our Liberty's growth should be checked by corrosion;
Then let clouds thicken round us, we heed not the storm;
Our realms feel no shock, but the earth's own explosion.
Foes assail us in vain
Though their fleets bridge the main,
For our Altars and laws with our lives we'll maintain,
And never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves, etc.
Should the tempest of war overshadow our land,
Its bolts could never rend freedom's temple asunder,
For, unmoved at its portal, would Washington stand,
And repulse, with his breast, the assaults of the thunder!
His sword from the sleep
Of its scabbard would leap,
And conduct with its point, every flash to the deep.
For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves, etc.
Let Fame to the world sound America's voice;
No intrigue can her sons from their government sever;
Her pride is her Adams -- his Laws are her choice,
And shall flourish till liberty slumber forever.
Then unite, heart and hand
Like Leonidas' band,
And swear to the God of the Ocean and Land,
That never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls in waves.
SONG.
OUR country is our ship, d'y'see,
A gallant vessel too;
And of his fortune proud is he,
Who Is of Columbia's crew,
Each man whatever his station be,
When duty stern commands,
Should take his stand,
And lend a hand,
As the common cause demands,
Among ourselves in peace it is true,
We quarrel -- make a route;
And having nothing else to do,
We fairly scold it out: --
But once the enemy in view,
Shake hands -- we soon are friends;
On the deck,
'Till a wreck,
Each the common cause defends.
SONG.
COME all Grenadiers whom your country invites,
To assemble in arms in defense of her rights,
Here let us determine to stand or to fall,
By that glorious cause which makes brothers of all,
No force here compells us our pastimes to yield.
Ourselves by ourselves are called forth to the field,
Then let us all range round Columbia's laws,
Resolved to live free or die in her cause.
Then let us, etc.
Remember our fathers with Washington fought,
And for us Independence most cheerfully bought,
Let us to our children be equally good,
And transmit it, if needful^ enriched with our blood.
That blessing by union for us was procured
And by union alone can by us be secured.
Then let us all range, etc.
"Divide and exterminate" long will prevail,
As the maxim of tyrants where power may fail.
No force from their base can our liberties tear,
If united the banners of freedom we rear.
And though sentiments multiply under the sun,
Americans surely can now have but one.
With courage to range, etc.
Could Montgomery, Mercer, and Warren behold
With what joy we the banners of freedom un^old,
Their blessed shades would rejoice and with rapture exclaim --
"Our example is followed, and guarded our fame."
Let their conduct be held by each patriot dear,
And their virtues be equalled by each Grenadier,
While we manfully range, etc.
Then brother with brother our arms we'll entwine,
And courage and discipline cheerfully join;
Let our steadiness prove those opinions are just
Which place in our conduct unlimited trust:
Nor so hard is the task for mankind to be free --
Let Us determine to be so, and pride bends the knee.
Then let us all range, etc.
SONG. TUNE -- PRESIDENT'S MARCH.
"LO! I quit my native skies --
To arms! my patriot sons arise.
Guard your freedom, rights and fame,
Guard your freedom, rights and fame;
Preserve the clime, your fathers gave;
Heaven's sacred boon from villains save --
Lest such daring, impious foes,
Your grandeur in oblivion close --
Your virtue, wisdom, worth decline,
And gasp, convulsed, at freedom's shrine.
Rise! my sons, to arms arise!
Guard your heaven descended prize;
Prove to France, the world, and me --
COLUMBIA'S SONS ARE BRAVE AND FREE."
We hear, blessed shade, your warning voice;
Approve your call -- pursue your choice --
With hearts united, firm and free.
With hearts united, firm and free.
The sacred boon your valor won,
Shall wake to arms each patriot son;
And glowing with the glorious cause,
Of freedom, country, rights and laws --
The storm of worlds our arms will brave,
Or sink with freedom to the grave.
Peaceful, seek your native skies --
Lo! to arms your sons arise;
Firm and fixed our foes to brave,
Till heaven's trump shall burst the grave.
"Worthy sons of glorious sires;
Behold, the warning shade retires;
Pleased your martial fame to spread --
Pleased your martial fame to spread --
Where immortal patriots stand,
Watching freedom's favorite land;
Charmed to hear such deeds of fame,
In holy choir they will breathe your name,
Till ancient heroes catch the sound,
And thus the heavens with joy rebound --
Happy nation! brave and free;
Friends to man and liberty --
Long enjoy the sacred boon,
Which immortal valor won."
Illustrious shade, to thee we swear,
To freedom's altar we'll repair;
And, like a band of Spartans, brave,
And, like a band of Spartans, brave,
To Pluto's realm each foe convey --
Over lawless tyrants bear the sway --
Till freedom's banner is unfurled
And waves around the darkened world;
Till from the center to each pole,
In rapturous founds shall constant roll --
Hail! sweet freedom, gift divine --
Lo! we bend before thy shrine,
Firmly fixed on this decree --
To FOLLOW DEATH OR LIBERTY.
SONG. Tune, Yankee Doodle.
COLUMBIANS all, the present hour,
As Brothers should Unite us --
Union at home's the only way,
To make each nation right us.
Yankee Doodle, guard your coast,
Yankee Doodle, Dandy --
Fear not then nor threat nor boast,
Yankee Doodle Dandy.
The only way to keep off war,
And guard against persecution,
Is always to be well prepared,
With hearts of resolution.
Yankee Doodle, let us Unite,
Yankee Doodle Dandy,
As patriots, still maintain our right,
Yankee Doodle Dandy,
Great WASHINGTON, who led us on,
And Liberty effected,
Shall see we'll die, or else be free --
We will not be subjected.
Yankee Doodle, guard your coast,
Yankee Doodle Dandy --
Fear not then nor threat nor boast,
Yankee Doodle Dandy.
A Band of Brothers let us be,
While ADAMS guides the nation;
And still our dear bought Freedom guard,
In every situation.
Yankee Doodle, guard your coast,
Yankee Doodle Dandy --
Fear not then nor threat nor boast,
Yankee Doodle Dandy.
May soon the wished for hour arrive,
When PEACE shall rule the nations --
And Commerce, free from setters, prove
Mankind are all relations.
Then Yankee Doodle, be divine,
Yankee Doodle Dandy --
Beneath the Fig Tree and the Vine,
Sing Yankee Doodle Dandy.
SONG. TUNE -- HEARTS OF OAK.
WHILST Europe is wrapped in the horrors of war,
And our ocean is spread with their fleets near and far;
Shall we live undisturbed, or shall party from hell
Divide all the men who their country wish well?
No! we all shall be ready -- steady, boys, steady;
We have fought -- if we ^ight, we shall conquer again.
Though attachments to France boasted legions of friends,
She has basely deceived them to gain her own ends;
Let her threat, let her wheedle, cajole, we disdain
All her schemes and her power -- we are united again.
Let our union be ready -- steady, boys, steady,
And our soldiers gay clad, shall pluck laurels again.
No nation on earth must dispute our strong powers;
Our resources, our calmness how dark ever our hours;
Nor despots in mass, nor ever one on a throne,
Shall tear from our bosoms one terrified groan.
For whoever dare invade us, our sons will not degrade us,
Nor their fathers' white tombs with black infamy stain.
Let hunger -- let cold with his icy clad storm,
All their horrors with fury unitedly form;
For our country we rank, and our children shall know,
That the snakes 'midst ourselves are our deadliest foe.
In vain shall they hiss, they shall certainly kiss
The rod, that their enemies do not merit in vain.
To our Government just, Constitution and Laws,
Let us pay the free tribute of virtuous applause:
No tribute extorted by bribes from a foe,
But such as to merit will cordially flow,
To the honest and just, to the men we can trust,
To the men we can drink without feeling disdain.
If our Country must bleed, let its purest of blood
Tell the earth these thy sons, undivided have stood;
And for every blessed drop let a laurel arise,
Whose gallant gay green shall posterity prize.
Secure in our aid, on our hi^l and our glade,
And fight as we have fought, united again.
To the band that shall bind us in freedom divine
Let the tribute so chaste be libated of wine --
Let that wine be as sound as our hearts without fear,
Are resolved from dissension and faction to steer.
For my toast then be ready -- steady, boys, steady,
Let us live, fight, or die all united again.
SONG.
COME genius of our happy land,
And bless this festive day;
Thy sons are we, a loyal band,
Who love thee and obey:
For should the blast of war be heard,
To threat impending harms,
Secure beneath thy vet'ran bird,
We'll brave the world in arms.
Bold as our Sires, nor born to yield,
But scorn for scorn bestow;
The blossoms which adorn our fields,
Bloom not to deck a foe.
For should the blast of war, etc.
From traitor friends, with serpent smile,
We'll rend the thin disguise,
Who speak of faith, and love the while
They pillage and despise.
For should the blast of war, etc.
Here once, by folly's sons displayed,
The Gallic standard shone;
No ribband now our feasts invade,
There waves our flag alone.
And should the blast of war, etc.
With generous wine your bumpers fill,
Where purple joys resort;
Peace to the Sage of Vernon Hill,
To Adams here is support.
Then should the blast of war, etc.
ODE FOR THE 4th OF JULY 1798.
There Is Ichabod has come to tawn,
From Philadelphia city,
He Is stroll'd the streets all up and dawn,
And brought nice tales to fit ye!
He Is been among the peoplish folks,
And vaws they are rotten clever,
They talk so cute, and crack such jokes,
Would make you stare for ever.
Yankee doodle doodle do,
Yankee doodle dandy.
When times look blue,
The heart that is true,
Is sweet as Treacle Candy.
Some say, you lie -- then Order cry;
Some spi^, some Notions eating;
Some move, some sit as mute and sly,
As Chairman at Town-meeting.
Some talk like yes, and come aut no:
Some laugh at French invasion;
But in a little while -- or so --
We'll see what is the occasion.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Yet we'll love Yankee land the best,
Stand by her flout as sting^,
Though sorely stump'd with such a pest,
As folks with foreign lingo.
These cry for peace, who once croak'd war!
And make tarnation wonder,
Because we can no longer bear
Our Friends to rob and plunder.
Yankee doodle, etc.
There Is some caunt cost with swamping rant,
These crawl, 'that they may clamber,
And ring the room with peoplish cant,
Though big as our barn chamber.
To spare some cents, they twist and turn,
Though fleets and armies crave them;
And should our t^wns be like to burn --
They cannot afford to save them.
Yankee doodle, etc.
For time some talk, and some for spite,
They wince and growl, when ground hard,
And hobble, when they must go right,
Like our old Ball that is foundered.
Though some be weak yet more are strong
As flip, with rum and cider,
And if they all can get along
Our ship -- why let 'em guide her.
Yankee doodle, etc.
If something's wrong, there is more that is right,
The leaks will soon be spied out,
And, with our vessel staunch and tight,
The gale we'll s^ud, or ride out.
Our YANKEE CHIEF shall con our course,
Though foes may gibe or rate him,
And, while he steady keeps, the worse
The Sarpents hiss, and hate him.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Ic saw our Envoy sound and true,
Who left the Cits a frothing,
And is among the nation few
One likes -- for doing nothing:
If nothing it is to assert our Right,
When hollow Friends would shake it,
And bring the old Sarpents schemes to Light,
Nor give a Bribe, nor take it.
Yankee doodle, etc.
He tells us of one Talleyrand
Who strove to hum and fob us;
And if we'd give our purse, and stand --
Mayhap -- they would not rob us.
But let us now tackle to
And join all hands at muster;
We'll keep our cash to fight the crew;
Nor fear their threats or bluster.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Let Us all with honest heart and soul
At soldier's trade be handy;
Curse Ca Ira and Carmagnole,
And march to Doodle Dandy:
Then let them come, with force or hum,
If they will fight fair, we'll beat 'em:
And for their "skill" and tricks -- but mum --
By Zeounds -- we have Folks can cheat 'em.
Yankee doodle, etc.
Our tried old chief is coming forth,
Again to lead and save us;
Again to show his strength and worth,
When foes insult and brave us:
Our nation's boast -- his name a host;
Let foes and traitors fear him;
Be Washington each patriot's toast:
Then rise to hail and cheer him.
Yankee doodle, doodle do
Yanky doodle dandy,
When times run tough, the hearts that is true
Is sweet as 'lasses-candy.
OUR COUNTRY'S EFFICIENCY! Tune -- "To Anacreon in Heaven, etc."
YE sons of Columbia, determined to keep
Those choice Blessings and Rights, that for years have descended,
From the battles and blood of your sires -- who now sleep,
And who gained by the sword, what with life they defended:
Swear, and shout in the song,
In a strain loud and long,
Until heaven like, earth, shall its echo prolong --
That never shall Columbia be robbed of a Right
While the sun rules the day, or the moon rules the night!
Since the period, past, when our sires won the Prize
Which fair Freedom and Justice decreed as their portion;
Lo! their plant, grown a tree, towers over earth to the skies!
And commands from the world, admiration, devotion;
Its once young tender rind,
Felt the blast of each wind;
Now its roots firm are fixed -- nor heeds torrents combined!
And never, etc.
The mild sway of our laws, like the fame of our arms,
Has arisen superior to hate and detraction:
Here, Virtue and Reason need feel no alarms,
From the threats of French gas, nor the power of French faction:
We Are a World separate,
A kingdom each state --
And in numbers, and means, are invincibly great.
And never, etc.
France says we are Divided! and views us her prey! --
But to show her our scorn, and convince her of error,
It Is the pure fire of heaven now lends us its ray,
Light up Truth in her glory, and Vice strikes with terror;
She shall see, feel, and fear,
That the moment is near.
When our country will live, herself sink, disappear!
That never, etc.
The great chief of Columbia, JOHN ADAMS, shall be,
Supported by All who detest broil and faction;
And the world will admire, as our Union they see --
Feeling all with one soul -- and impelled by one action:
Ever determined to fight
To maintain every right,
And Columbia guard safe from all Europe's despite!
No! never etc.
Shall the proud Cock of Gallia ever crow among our hens?
Shall he tread on our foil, to impregnate pollution?
We will soon wring his neck if he is seen through the lens --
And thus rid all mankind of a bane^ul delusion;
Though extinction we hate,
Yet to soften his fate,
Shall his own guil^otine his cursed spirit translate!
And never, etc.
And has not great WASHINGTON, offered again,
To lead, and to march, in support of our nation!
Then, Americans, rouse! to the field and the main,
And there crush every wretch that opposes your station:
Let your cannon and sword,
All protection afford --
Show your firmness, your courage -- so famed so adored.
Swear never, etc.
Woods and rocks, round our shores, should occasion ever be,
Would by, instinct, at once form a navy and a barrier:
And the fowls of the air, and the fish of the sea,
Would repel every Talleyrand, Marat, and Carrier:
Not a beast of the field,
Nor an insect would yield,
'Till their life on the shrine of their country they sealed!
No never, etc.
Old Neptune, enraged, from the ocean would rise,
And overwhelm every foe that should dare an invasion;
And Jove would his thunderbolts hurl from the skies --
And Olympus would arm in defense of our nation!
From the grave would ascend
Every patriot friend,
Who Columbia's liberties died to defend!
No never, etc.
Bellona over Europe may drive her fierce car,
And with anarch keep up a blood-thirsty commotion;
Though the horrors of carnage, and mis'ries of war,
May keep foreign climes to the death-striking motion;
Our Columbia, in peace,
Will be gathering the fleece:
And, in war, shall her wealth, strength and power increase!
And never, and c.
Intrigue and Sedition shall never cut the band
That encircles our Government, Laws, Faith and Union!
We'll support every Claim on the ocean and land,
And with Wisdom and Justice ever be in commotion!
Then let this be our cry --
That "Divided we die:
"And, United we fear not a foe 'neath the sky!"
And never shall Columbia be robbed of a right,
While the sun rules the day, or the moon rules the night!
INDEX.
A
And did you not hear of a jolly young waterman, 3 A kernel from an apples
core, 12 A plague take all such grumbling elves, 18 Ah me! what silly things
you are, 31 At a jovial meeting of Gods, 34 A bed of moss we'll straight
prepare, 38 A plague of those musty old lubbers, 47 A sailor's life is void of
art, 4^ As Dermot toiled one summer's day, 50 A tinker I am, 60 Ar^ one of
those mad wags 61 A novice in love, 62 Armed with javelin, armed with dart, 74
At first like an infant appearing, 76 A sailor's life is a life of woe. 82 Away
and join the rendezvous, 83 Alas where shall I comfort find, 87 Abergavney is
fine, 92 And did you hear what sad disaster, ^12 A sailor, and an honest heart,
112 Away, pale fear and ghastly terror, 114 Ah let not an instant, 114 An
infant defenseless, of succor bereft, 121 Adieu, adieu, my only life, 129
Avert yon omen, gracious heaven, 139 Alas! the battle's lost and won, 164 Adieu
my gallant sailor, 164 Arrah if it is no lie in this world, 166 A mighty Sultan
once for sun, 170 Alas! where is my love gone, 176 A word in your ear if you
please Mr. Fop, 182 As wit and Beauty for an hour, 195 Ah, have you forgot
then, 206 A saying 'twas, when I was young, 207 Alas! when once the book of
life, 208 A while in every nation, 211 As dulcet sound on ether floats 230 A
watchman I am, 231 All endeavors fruitless prove, 233 A shepherd long sighed,
237 Anacreon tells us, 249 A bard in yonder corner see, 284 As a plain case in
point is the best way of explaining, 289 A sup of good whisky will make you
glad, 303
B
Blow high, blow low, let tempests tear, 6 Brother soldier why cast down 19 By
love and fortune guided, 29 Bright gems that twinkle from afar 32 By roguery,
it is true, 41 Behold the fairies' jocund band, 58 Be it known to all those, 75
Ben Backstay loved the gentle Anne, 91 Bold Jack the sailor here I come, 133
Bards call themselves a heavenly race, 141 Blessed friendship hail! 149 But,
perhaps thus boldly exposing each elf, 151 Beauty I sell, who will buy, 152 Bleak
was the morn, 167 Be others the ungracious task, 205 Bacchus come, thy vot'ry
own me, 209 Be quiet that blackbird and thrush, 220 Beseech ye, would ye, 244
Behold two mighty chiefs advance, 304
C
Come all ye gem'men volunteers 8 Come every man now give his toast, 9 Come
here ye rich, 25 Curtis was old Hodge's wife, 28 Come, courage lads, and drink
away, 38 Chairs to mend, old chairs to mend, 59 Come around me and weep, 80
Come painter with thy happiest slight, 81 Crown me Bacchus, mighty god, 93
Cotchelin set all alone, 106 Celia's an angel, by her face, 116 Cursed be the
sordid wretch of yore, 123 Come all you maids who fain would marry, 184 Come
all hands ahoy to the anchor, 193 Contentment lost each others treasure, 203
Come here ye fair, 203 Cupid, cried Vulcan, it is no jest, 204 Come away then at
my call, 221 Come buy my straw, 243 Come here, come here, my pretty dear, 292
Come round me ye lasses, 300 Come all who love, 301 Come all grenadiers whom
your country invites, 318 Columbians all, the present hour, 320 Come genius of
our happy land, 322
D
Did fortune bid me choose a state, 36 Do salmons love a lucid stream, 47 Dear
Yanko say, and true he say, 97 Devoted to Celia, 122 Dear John prithee tell me,
157 Dapper Ted Tattoo is my natty name, 161 Don't you see that as how, 246 Dick
Dock, a tar at Greenwich moored, 307 Dear Maudlin come give me bright guineas,
309
E
Excuse me, pray ye do, dear neighbor, 16
F
For dainties I Have had of them all, 42 From prudence let my joys take birth, 67
First choose a pretty melody, 99 Far from strife and loves alarms, 109 Forgive
me if thus I presuming, 115 Far removed from noise and smoke, 144 For wedlock's
a voyage, 180 For I am the girl that was made for my Joe, 181 Fine sport,
indeed, for god and godlin, 240
G
Go patters to lubbers and swabs do you see, 69 Give round tne word dismount, 125
Go, pro^d lover go, 201 Gay Ba^chus, and Mercury, and I, 209 Give ear to me,
both high and low, 298
H
Here Is all her geer, 14 How kind and how good of his dear majesty, 26 Here
sleeps in peace, 32 Here I was my good masters, 35 Here lies a philosopher,
knowing and brave, 83 How much I love thee girl would know, 88 Here a sheer
hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling, 106 Hark the di^ of war, 134 He ran to the farm
yard, and there bit a hog, 177 Haughty Celia, still disdaining, 236 Hear the
merry minstrel sound, 247 How happy she, 248 Have you heard of the tax, 308
Hail Columbia! happy land, 313
I
I saw what seemed a harmless child, 1 Indeed miss, such sweethearts as I am, 4
I locked up all my treasure, 11 I lost my poor mother, 13 I sailed in the good
ship the Kitty, 23 If it is to wish you near, 24 In all your dealings take good
care, 33 I Will mount the cliffs, 37 Is It my story you would know, 42 Jack Ratlin was
the ablest seaman, 44 Is it little Tom Thumb you mean, 52 I thought we were
fiddle and bow, 53 I sing of a war set on foot for a toy, 54 I sing Ulysses and
those chiefs, 54 I Have made to marches Mars descend, 56 In Paris, as in London,
58 I am a jolly fisherman, 73 I sailed from the downs in the Nancy, 93 I Am
jolly Dick the lamplighter, 97 I am the world's epitome, 100 I was do you see a
waterman, 104 I vow I thought you, at first sight, 108 I went to sea with heavy
heart, 110 I pray you when your sweetheart pouts, 118 If my hearty, 119 In
which of all thy various joys, 119 If tars of their money are lavish, 120 I be
one of thy sailors, 130 I was the pride of all the Thames, 131 I Am dashing Dick
the dustman, 137 If bold and brave, 138 In peace, when sprightly drum and fife,
146 Jack dances and sings, 148 I that once was a ploughman, 154 In the motly
feathered race, 171 I sing of that life of delight, 174 I am a chairman my name
is Mc'Gee, 181 I Have health, and I have spirits too, 183 In vain, dear friends,
203 In the month of may, 212 I made a promise to be wise, 213 If ever a sailor
was fond of good sport, 216 In every fertile valley, 236 I Am up to all your
tricks, my dear, 239 Inspired by so great a duty, 245 In one thou would find
variety, 254 If you will only just promise, 255 I thought and I Have said it, 259 I
never shall survive it, cried Lumkin in despair, 262 If lubberly la^dsmen, 267
Is It my country you would know, I Am an Irishman born, 269 I Am a cook for the
public, 275 I am one of those pretty tonish smarts, 279 I Have heard, cried out
one, 280
L
Let your courage boy be true to ye, 22 Look fairly all the world around, 75 Let
bards elate, 85 Like a very gallant will I compliment all, 120 Lovely woman,
pride of nature, 135 Let sons of sloth dream time away, 158 Ladies and
gentlemen I Am a beau, 162 Life's a jest, says the poet, 168 Lawyers pay you
with words, 175 Love's a cheat; we over rate it 200 Lord what be all the rich
and great, 222 Life's as like as can be to an Irish wake, 272 Look all over the
world, 281 Life's general chase, 283 Lo! I quit my native skies, 319
M
Madam, you know my trade is war, 10 My lord, and please you, he and I, 19 My
name is Ted Blarney, I Will be bound, 27 My tears -- alas! I cannot speak, 30
Mankind all get drunk, 160 My bosom is proof, 234 Meek I Will be at Venus' dove,
243 My grandfather's grandfather, 297
N
Nosegays I cry, and though little you pay, 64 Now you shall see what you shall
see, 260 No more of waves and winds the sport, 277
O
Orra no talk, no say fine word, 37 O think on the time, 39 Of all sensations
pity brings, 68 Of the ancients is it speaking, 94 Once on a time to mighty
Jove, 108 Our Jupiter has near his throne, 116 One negro, wi my banjer, 140 Oh
money, thou master of all things here below, 176 On Cochetini loves attend, 180
Oh the camp's delightful rigs, 196 Often has the world been well defined, 214 On
Olympus blue summit, 263 Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes, 287 Our country's our ship
do you see, 317
P
Parents may fairly thank themselves, 26 Poor Orra tink of Yanko dear, 37
Passion is a torrent rude, 38 Propitious gods that rule our fate, 1^4 Poor
Peggy loved a soldier lad, 153 Pray ladies think not I presume, 185 Praise is a
mirror, 201 Poor negro say one ting you no take offense, 299 Poll dang't how
do you do, 302 Poets may sing of their Helicon streams, 314
R
Resplendent gleam'd the ample moon, 92 Rail on at joys that are not thine, ^92
S
Sing the loves of John and Jean, 20 See the course thronged with gazers, 46
Sweet ditties would my Patty sing, ^0 Says Fanny will thou go with me, 63
Smiling grog is the sailor's best hope, 71 Say fluttering heart, 77 Sure 'ent
the world a masquerade, 96 Sweet is the dew drop on the thorn, 98 Such as love
holy hermits bear, 124 So sweet I Will dress my Zootka fair, 146 Sweet sung the
lark, high poised in air, 156 Spanking Jack was so comely, 165 Such usage as
this is, what wife but myself, 205 She who linked by her fate, 206 Sweetly,
sweetly, let us enjoy, 210 Since Zeph'rus first tasted the charms of coy Flora,
218 Says me father, says he, one day to I, 228 Since artful man so often betrays,
237 Sportsmen who are staunch and true, 242 Sweet is the ship that under sail,
245 See, see to join the revel rout, 247 Say soldiers which of glory's charms,
249 Standing one day on the Tower Slip, 293
T
There was a miller's daughter, 1 Two youths for my love are contending in
vain, 2 Then farewell my trim built wherry, 4 'Twas in a village, near
Castlebury, 4 The world's a strange world, 5 The little birds as well as you, 6
That nature every where is the same, 7 The moment Aurora peeped into my room, 8
There was a jolly shepherd lad, 15 They tell me you listen to all that he says,
17 It Is true that often, in the same mead, 18 'Twas not her eyes, 22 This life is
like a troubled sea, 27 The rising sun Lysander found, 30 The coy Pastora Damon
wooed, 31 The sun's a free-mason, 33 The ladies faces, now a days, 35 Thou'st
heard those old proverbs, 39 This, this my lad's a soldiers life, 51 That all
the world is up in arms, 52 Thou man of firmness turn this way, 57 The younker,
who his first essay, 64 It Is said we venturous die hards, 65 The gray eyed
Aurora, 66 The spangled green confessed the morn, 68 That girl who fain would
choose a mate, 77 'Twas in the good ship Rover, 78 The morning breaks, 79 It Is
true the marks of many years, 80 To Bachelor's ha^l we good fellows invite, 84
'Twas Saturday night the twinkling stars, 86 Than marriage and music, 87 The
wind was hushed the fleecy wave, 89 To look upon dress, 103 The storm had
ceased, 107 The boatswain calls, the wind is fair, 110 Truly friend Gil thou
choosest well, 114 This life's a day's journey, 115 The wind blew hard, 117 To
a slight common wound, 123 To ask would you come for to go, 126 The sun's
descending in the wave, 131 The wind was hushed, 134 Two real tars whom duty
called, 136 The tar's a jolly tar that can hand, 143 Time was, for oh there was
a time, 145 Tight lads have I sailed with, 151 To the plain, to the plain,
hark! 153 The peasant in his humble cot, 155 This here is what I does, 174 To be
mad for a husband, 177 To every favorite village sport, 182 The falcon,
towering high in air, 183 This life is like a country dance, 184 The passing
bell was heard to toll, 190 The surge hoarsely murmuring, 194 Too yielding a
carriage, 205 There Is something in women, 208 Tell me, neighbor, tell me
plain, 211 This strange emotion at my heart, 213 The breeze was fresh, the ship
in stays, 215 The martial pomp, 217 The world a good thing, 219 The auctioneer
mountst and first hawing and hemming, 223 The village was jovial, 226 Tom
Tackle was noble was true to his word, 227 Tom True Love is my name, 233 The
trifling maid, who, idly vain, 234 Turn, O turn, relentless fair, 235 The god
of love will ever, 237 The Phoenix we are told, 238 Think not here to drive your
gig, 239 The squirrel that gingles, 252 'Twas one day at Wapping, 253 Tell me
not of men's follies, 257 Tom True Love, wooed the sweetest fair, 258 'Twas a
hundred years ago, 264 'Twas post meridian, 270 The gloomy night stalked flow
away, 273 The world still judges by the mein, 274 The poet says that love's
like fire, 282 Though hard the valiant soldier's life, 286 There were farmer
Thrasher, 295 Though pleasure's easily defined, 310 The Yarmouth roads are
right ahead, 311 There Is Ichebod hat come to tawn, 32^
V
Venus no more behold me, 7
W
When sergeant Belswagger, 11 Women are Will of the Wisps it is plain, 12 While
the lads of the village, 13 When thou shall see his bosom swelling, 21 While up
the shrouds the sailor goes, 23 When jealous out of season, 29 When Yanko dear
fight far away, 36 What mighty things we women are, 40 Were patience kind to
me, 43 When faintly gleams the doubtful day, 43 Who to my wounds a halm
advises, 44 What if my pleasures fools condemn, 45 When fairies are lighted, 45
What argusies pride and ambition, 48 We, on the present hour relying, 56 When
last from the straights, 57 When in order drawn up, 62 What though from Venus
Cupid sprung, 70 Why I be squire Ned of Gobble-Hall, 90 What a plague cried
young Colin, 101 What thof I be a country clown, 102 When last in the Dreadful,
109 Wounds, here is such a coil! 113 Would ye know where freedom dwells, 121
Would you hear a sad story of woe, 126 We bipeds, made up of frail clay, 128
Why don't you know me by my scars, 139 Whilt whim, and glee, 142 What song
shall I chant, 150 Who calls? -- Who calls? 169 When I comes to town with a
load of hay, 172 Why is the devil in you, 179 Would ye see the world in little,
187 What art thou, fascinating war, 189 While woman, like soft music's charms,
198 While fancy, as she rules the mind, 199 Why am not I that fragrant flower,
200 When we promise an heir, or a miser, 202 Would error leave to follow
truth, 209 With mingled sound of drum and fife, 211 When well one knows to love
and please, 212 When to man the distinguishing form, 225 With that begirt, each
dowdy girl, 240 Who calls on her whose powerful art, 240 Where a learned
physician who writes for all ills, 251 When first I went to school, 256 While
music lends its heavenly art, 266 When freedom knew not where to rove, 290 When
I told you your cheeks, 291 Whilst Europe is wrapped in the horrors of war, 321
Y
Young, and void of art or guile, 16 Yet though I Have no fortune to offer, 24
Young Paris was blessed, 28 Yanko he tell, and he no lie, 72 Young Doll a comely
vilage girl, 178 Young Mog arrived at woman's growth, 188 Yes, yes, thank
Heaven, I Have broke my chains, 202 Ye flowers that bloom, 235 You have heard of
the man, 276 Ye sons of Columbia who bravely have fought, 315 Ye sons of
Columbia determined to keep, 325

