THE GLEBE HOUSE, A TALE.

By A Lady of Distinction.

FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

SALEM, NEW JERSEY: FROM THE PRESS OF BLACK and NORTH. 1799.

THE GLEBE HOUSE, etc.
IN a beautiful vale, watered by a winding river, in D -- shire, was situated
the Glebe House of Mr. Owens, who convinced of the truth and efficacy of those
doctrines it was his duty to instill, ever delivered them with that awfulness
and energy, calculated to catch the most wandering idea, and soften the heart,
if not thoroughly hardened in the school of depravity.

He was much esteemed in his neighborhood, and often brought to mind the good
pastor of Auburn Village -- his virtues and humanity would have adorned the
most exalted station, while his simplicity and content appeared as if none
other than his present humble one would have suited him half so well.

Moderate as was his income, he still reserved some trifle for the children of
affliction -- satisfied, that a small gift from the hand of real charity, would
obtain the blessing of Providence. He knew not the vanities of life, and
thought with Goldsmith,

"Man wants but little here below,
"Nor wants that little long."
His wife with equal simplicity, had a much larger portion of vanity -- nor
could any argument to the contrary persuade her but that more happiness must be
enjoyed in a coach and six, than without one. She yet remembered with pride,
her maiden name of pretty Fan of the Glade, but was fonder, if possible, of
displaying her daughter's perfections than her own; she was, to allow her all
her merits, an excellent house-wife, was reckoned the greatest adept in the
country at Pope-Joan, and had introduced several improving ingredients in
mixing particular puddings.

Her sweet little boy, Jasper as she called him, was now clearly six feet high,
and in his one and twentieth year -- the tints of the lilly, once conspicuous
on his face, had long been usurped by a brown hue, enlivened with the brightest
bloom of health; his hair of the darkest chestnut, luxuriantly thick, hung
carelessly round his neck and forehead, while the fire of his large hazel eyes
might have been played off with dangerous success, against hearts boasting of
peculiar frigidness.

But except a little rustic gallantry with the wood nymphs, poor Jasper had
confined his admiration to ladies who had flourished centuries back, such as
Hebe, Cleopatra, Lucretia, etc. His father had really almost made him a pedant.
-- With such abilities 'twas surely hoped he would establish his family in
prosperity.

Natural are those presages in the paternal heart, and while bounded by reason,
cruel would be the hand which would seek to crush them.

Constantia, their only daughter, was about seventeen, her person of the
midling height was formed with a pleasing delicacy, her face inclining to
roundness and exquisitely fair, was animated by the pure blushes of nature --
her blue eyes sparkled through their long lashes with that resistless look of
which Thompson so eloquently speaks. A smile, ever brought into her cheeks the
sweetest dimples, and her mouth, tempting as the rose-bud, discovered when she
spoke, a set of teeth that might almost be called pearl.

With an artless negligence, her light brown hair flowed down her back, and had
the trees, (as we are told was once the case,) been occupied by Dryads, those
about the Glebe might have regretted her charms, since the pen of pastoral
lovers on their smooth rinds, had made numberless incisions concerning them.

Vivacity and innocence were conspicuous in her every action; she joined in the
merriment of her companions, and she wept at the tale of the unfortunate.

The Glebe-house was a rough old structure -- the ivy crept over one wing
entirely and over the door was a beautiful canopy, of honey suckles; the lawn
on which it stood was hedged round with evergreens and planted with elms, and
the waving poplar; the garden was laid out more for use than show, yet it was
not unpleasing, nor had a shady seat for recreation after the fatigues of the
day, been forgotten.

Such was the Glebe-house and its inhabitants, whom circling years still found
in possession of felicity, and consenting spring shed her own rosy garland on
their heads, when the death of Constantia's sponsor, threw them into a little
commotion. She fulfilled her promise of a legacy, by a bequest of two hundred
pounds to Mrs. Owens.

That good woman shed a flood of tears when she heard the first account of the
death, but soon moderated her grief by quoting an old saying of her husband's
-- "we are all mortal, and must die sooner or later;" in short, she never
rested until she put on her cloak and hat, and speeded away to a particular
friend of here is.

Mrs. Crofts was a lady who had retired to the country to lye-in about six
months after the death of her lamented spouse; finding the people very simple,
and very much what she wanted them to be, she settled near the Glebe-house, now
and then taking a trip to London -- in which, never accompanying her, we cannot
pretend to ascertain her business; no gross vapors of slander ever pursued her
from the metropolis to lessen the esteem she was regarded with in the
neighborhood, whither the purity of the surrounding atmosphere might have
repelled them we cannot determine.

Mrs. Owens sat down puffing and blowing, a tear dropped on her cheek, she felt
another starting and timely wiped it away with the corner of her apron.

My dear friend is gone, said she, answering the interrogations of Mrs. Crofts,
my sweet friend, a sad loss I have sustained -- but, as poor Frank says, we
must all go, my dear friend -- she has left me two hundred pounds.

Mrs. Crofts declared she did not wonder at her grief, her friend was a
valuable person, and she well knew what it was to lose the dearest connexions.
Her husband had been dead these five years, yet she still wept over his memory;
here her tears began to flow, and the afflicted matrons found it requisite to
partake of an admirable cordial which Mrs. Crofts recommended as a most
effectual remedy for grief.

Mrs. Owens asked her advice concerning the disposal of the legacy, hinting her
intention of going to London. Mrs. Crofts declared it was the wisest scheme in
the world -- that perfections such as her children possessed should not be
concealed; they were not born to bloom unseen; in short the journey was
strenuously recommended.

The affair was discussed over and over, preliminaries adjusted; to London Mrs.
Owens was determined to go, and Mrs. Crofts was to give recommendatory letlers
and procure lodgings at a cousin of here is.

When Mrs. Owens returned home -- well Frank, said she, I have settled every
thing about the two hundred pounds; aye, to be sure, said he -- I mean to go to
market next week and buy such a flock of sheep as was not seen in those parts
this some time, Jasper shall have a poney, and the great dyke in the garden
shall be filled up.

No truly, exclaimed she, not one of those things shall be done with my legacy.
I intend going to London with the children; -- Yes, Mr. Owens, continued she,
with more violence, perceiving his astonishment, we are not always to be
secluded, we were not born to bloom unseen; as Mrs. Crofts says.

You jest lovey, said he -- aye, aye, deary, when I am a bishop, you shall go
to London: I believe if we wait for that, replied she, we shall be as gray as
your old goose; no, no, Frank the money was left to me and the money I will
spend, sure in your heart you must know what advantages the children will
receive from seeing the town; Jasper has such a head that I make no doubt of
his getting a fortune; and as for Constance, the little rogue, she shall show
the world what pretty Fan of the Glade was in her youth.

When the poor parson was convinced of the seriousness of her intention, he
earnestly besought her to alter her mind; he pointed out every avenue to
danger, and conjured her to avoid the destruction of their happiness.

My Fanny, he cried, you are too innocent to encounter the wickedness of the
town, our darlings here in their proper sphere, will not behold objects which
will excite wishes -- wishes that create distress from an inability to gratify
them.

All his rhetoric was vain, she was determined: he therefore made a virtue of
necessity, and submitted, -- Yet a tear involuntarily fell.

Since resolved, then exclaimed he, may heaven guard you, and bring you safely
back to the Glebe-house -- but indulge me one moment, my love, while I repeat a
fable, which I think very applicable at this time.

THE FABLE.
IN a sweet sheltered nest, two doves once lived, remarkable for felicity, till
a spirit of wandering seized the female, and to travel she would go. -- The
first day's journey, overtaken by a storm, she sought shelter in a garden,
where an unfeeling creature knocked her down with a stone out of sport, another
attempted to seize her, but she escaped with the loss of a great part of her
plumage.

She now thought of her deserted nest and partner, but still resolved to pursue
her travels, scarcely had the morning light dawned, when two hawks perceived,
and flew after her. By their fighting whose she should be, the fugitive had
time to secret herself, and panting, exclaimed, oh! could I again reach my
peaceful nest, no power should tempt me to forsake my tender mate!

I don't know what you mean, said Mrs. Owens, pettishly, by your doves and
hawks. I suppose you would have me cooing for ever by your side, but no, Mr.
Owens, it will not do, and you must positively hire a carriage to morrow, for
on the next day I am resolved to go, which proves, father, replied Jasper, who
had listened to the whole controversy, she will have her own way, ergo to town
she goes.

The rumor of their intended expedition soon spread through the neighborhood,
and next morning brought a Mr. Coverly to the Glebe-House.

So, Madam, cried he, entering the parlour, where, was only, Mrs. Owens, I hear
you are going to London; -- true enough, exclaimed she, it is full time for the
children and me to enjoy a little of life.

Alas, madam, said he, you have but an incompetent idea of enjoying life, if
you think it can be done no where but in the metropolis.

Oh, Sir, said she, I knew you would side with Frank, but I have conquered him,
I assure you, so you may say what you will -- but this she afforded him no
opportunity of doing, as she quitted the room to prepare for her departure,
leaving him standing at a window seemingly contemplating something, though what
it was, would probably puzzle himself to tell.

The entrance of Constantia roused him, he took her hand, and leading her to a
chair, sat down beside her; so Constantia, said he, you are going to London;
you are rejoiced, I suppose; I really don't know whether I am or not, cried
she. -- This scheme of your mother's, he proceeded, has sadly broke in upon a
thousand little plans I had formed against the next sheep-shearing. I proposed
having the sweetest dance on the grassplat -- I had trimmed up your bower in
the nicest manner -- but all my flattering prospects are blasted -- we shall no
more walk down the dark lane. Oh, Constantia, you will forget every think of
this kind, when a few weeks in town.

I don't think, I shall, she replied. -- Oh, my sweet girl, he resumed, have
you ever allowed me the privilege of a friend, you will therefore excuse the
cautions I presume to give.

In the great world, you will behold objects calculated to dazzle every sense,
you will there find flatterers very different from those rustic ones that have
hitherto surrounded you. Should your guileless heart be susceptible of an
impression, should -- here his voice grew so extremely low, it was quite
inarticulate.

Constantia, said he -- after a hem, of considerable length -- come into the
garden. -- He drew her arm under his, and they went to the shady bench. -- I
shall often visit this, he exclaimed. -- I shall here think upon you -- While
I Am, perhaps, forgotten.

She spoke not, but putting her hand into her pocket, pulled out a little green
silk purse she had knit, and presenting it to him, declared she should ever
rernember with gratitude his kind attentions: He received her gift with
transport, and with an emotion he could not suppress, catching her to his
bosom, cried -- Oh! my lovely, my dearest Constantia, could I replenish as
often as I Would wish -- this purse, you would not, I trust, think of leaving the
fold of these fond arms.

Fearing he had said too much, he quitted his hold with precipitation, and ran
out of the garden.

Poor Constantia pursued him with her eyes, while her bosom experienced strange
feelings. Tears involuntarily trickled down her cheek, and at that instant she
would have heard with pleasure, that her mother meant not to have quit the
Glebe.

Coverly, now in his nine and twentieth year, was tall and thin, a thinness
caused by an innate and secret uneasiness; -- without pretensions to beauty,
his countenance was strongly marked with the resistless expression of
sensibility, while the spirit of his dark eyes, denoted their illuminating
soul, warm, generous and intrepid.

Finances, scarcely amounting to a support compelled him to that obscurity, he
appeared by nature never formed for.

Whether he was a connection of Sir Roger de Coverly's is a point we could never
clearly learn, if so, the good Old Knight's virtues were of an hereditary, or
rather a diffusive kind, and flowed with the stream of life to the heart of his
relation.

Though poor, pity was not all that Coverly bestowed on distress, frequently
has he taken from his table, the simple viands prepared for himself, and
delivered them to the creature enfeebled by poverty and pain.

He had been about five years in the country -- on his first coming, he seemed
sedulous to avoid society, but the benevolent Owens, combatted his despondency
and tempted him to become a constant visitor at the Glebe.

Constantia, then scarcely more than a child, attracted his notice; in her
unfolding mind, he discovered qualities which wanted that cultivation to yield
the most delectable fruit, the thoughts of instructing her in some of those
elegant accomplishments he possessed soothed his melancholy, and those
improvements her father had begun, received their last polish from the tuition
of Coverly.

At this period his affection for her, was that of a brother, as she grew up,
feelings of a more tender, at least a more anxious nature, occupied his breast;
her modesty, her artless innocence, her blushing charms, were to him
irresistible. He had seen the most polished parts of the world, yet he never
beheld her counterpart. The sweets of domestic life would have been balm to his
sorrows, but these were sweets he durst not think of tasting, his narrow income
rendering the maintenance of a family impossible.

Accursed, cried he, with enthusiastic warmth, be that man, who for self
gratification involves a woman he pretends to love, and perhaps a number of
innocents, into the extremes of poverty; Constantia, thy Coverly shall never be
guilty of such villainy.

Her going to London was an unexpected stroke; he knew the credulity and vanity
of Mrs. Owens would expose the lovely blossom, to the infectious blasts of
flattery and vice. -- He sighed to point out the danger, but was acquainted
with her positiveness, and feared the family might impute his caution to
interested motives.

He continued his race, with very little abatement, from the garden to the
adjoining village which was two miles from the Glebe. Here the noise of the
people roused him from his reverie, he feared he had uttered too much; he does
just scarcely wish to excite a passion, before whose completion fate had thrown
so many obstacles. He regretted his abrupt departure, had ten thousand things
to say -- the ensuing morning the journey was to commence. -- He could not bear
to pass the few remaining hours from the Glebe. -- So buying some spiced cakes,
as an excuse for his speedy return, in the evening brought them to Mrs. Owens.

The bustle of preparation was now over, the stage was to take them up early
the next day, and he found Mrs. Crofts writing letters of recommendation.

Coverly felt peevish, he could not control himself, and contradicted the poor
Parson more than once. He wanted to say a thousand things to Constantia without
knowing what they were. Some heavy showers falling, he was debarred the
pleasures of a private walk with her. Supper was early served, and at ten Mrs.
Crofts rose to depart. Coverly of course followed the motion. He saluted Mrs.
Owens, shook Jasper by the hand, and wished him much amusement; then turning to
Constantia, attempted to speak, but sound it impossible. He pressed his cold
lips to here is, a sigh heaved the bosom of both; -- he looked round, the rest
were too busy talking to observe the emotions of love. He strained her to his
breast, snatched another kiss, and was about leaving the room, when the voice
of Mrs. Crofts exclaimed, "Sure Mr. Coverly you will see me home," detained him.

Early in the morning the stage coach took them up: had duty allowed it, the
worthy parson could have wished to be the guardian of his family, but that was
impossible. -- He wept in spite of his efforts.

Mrs. Owens, now sure of going, was also affected -- she shed tears, and gave
old Deb a thousand charges to take care of her master.

Jasper whistled, looked askance, skipped about, felt in his pocket to be
certain of Horace, assured his father that he would be an old Trojan by the
time he came back.

Constantia wanted power to speak, -- never did she appear more attracting.
Dressed in a habit of dimity, her hair in its wonted luxuriance, flowing from
under a straw hat, lined with the palest shade of pink, which gave a faint tint
to her cheeks that were this morning totally pale.

The parson recommended a number of good books to his wife, particularly a
volume of excellent sermons: but whether from mistake or hurry, is not certain,
she took the Fortunate Country Maid in its place.

There were no other passengers in the coach, and they wheeled off with varied
emotions.

As they approached the dwelling of Coverly, Constantia* bent forward; an
uninterested object might have viewed the prospect with pleasure.

The cottage which was small, but elegantly neat, stood on the summit of one of
those low hills which skirted the vale. Some clumps of trees cast a shade upon
the windows, and a winding path led up to the door.

The sloping garden on the ^^^r of the hill, was adorned with the most
beautiful flowers, interspersed with choice old fruit trees; on the bank of the
river winding beneath, was formed a bower, consisting of the interwoven
branches of woodbine, part of which had crept round an old elm, on whose bark
the name of Constantia was engraved.

As she probably conjectured, Coverly was watching their appearance. He called
to the man to stop. Constantia's hand rested on the door; Coverly darted
forward, seized it, and pressed it to his lips, while the glistening tear stood
in either eye -- he hemmed, complained of a cold, and put into the carriage a
handkerchief of fruit just pulled.

Mrs. Owens begged him to visit poor Frank often, and that he would take care
of himself, as he looked very ill, assuring him, that Deb made excellent whey.
He bowed, smiled, and drew back, the coachman whipped his horses, and off they
flew.

Coverly was transfixed, the noise of the wheels still resounded in his ears --
at length he returned to his house. The little boy who attended him, asked if
he was ill? he neither could answer the poor child, nor partake of the
breakfast he assiduously had prepared. Shortly after, he walked out, and soon
found himself in the road the carriage had taken. Ashamed of his weakness, he
changed his course, nor recollected, till the striking of the village clock*
that it was time to visit the parson.

The poor forsaken old man, was sitting down to a solitary dinner, he
brightened up a little at the entrance of Coverly, -- You saw the travelers, I
suppose, exclaimed he, -- they set forward with the exultation of hope. Oh may
they return with that serenity of innocence in which they left me: Yet, alas,
my heart trembles for them, they are all the offspring of simplicity, and
exposed to the machinations of the base. I did all that the gentleness of my
temper would allow, to combat the inclination of my wife. Oh, may she never
have reason to rue her opposition to my wishes.

He wanted Coverly to reside with him during their absence. Coverly promised to
be frequently with him, but could not think of quitting his cottage entirely,
where he could have some private hours for the luxurious indulgence of
concealed grief.

After feeding Constantia's goldfinches he touched her guittar, which had been
a New Year's gift from him, but the strings were discordant, and he found that
with her, Harmony had forsaken the Glebe House.

We shall now bid adieu to the gentlemen for some time, and pursue the
travelers.

Nothing occurred during the first day of their journey worth reciting, on the
second, when arrived at the inn where they were to dine; a gentleman, who had
just alighted from an elegant phaeton, accompanied by a lady, advanced, and
with the utmost politeness handed them out.

Scarce had they entered the parlour, when the hostess followed, presenting the
compliments of the strangers, with an invitation to an entertainment they were
just sitting down to.

Mrs. Owens elated by this unexpected civility, instantly drew up her head, and
with elevated crest, cried, upon my word they are vastly polite; but pray, my
good woman do you know --

Truly, mistress, interrupted the hostess, you need not demur, the gentleman is
my young Lord Stanville -- heaven bless him as pretty a man as one shall see in
a summer's day, as the saying is, and the lady is his ward. -- Oh, Lord bless
me, if you knew the power of money they spend, 'its themselves that would'nt
stand hagling about this thing, and scolding about the other thing, but fling it
from them just as I would do a rotten apple.

No sooner had the sound of a title reached the ears of Mrs. Owens, than she
made but three steps to the glass, fell to adjusting her dress, repeating,
"upon my word they are vastly polite, but I have always the good fortune to
meet with civility, to be sure, there is something in the appearance of some
people, that cannot fail commanding respect; there was a great lord came down
to our country once, -- bless me, -- I forgot his name, but that is neither
here nor there, -- and he was so attentive, and so, -- but I am afraid we shall
keep his lordship, my lord Stanville, waiting."

She was accordingly ushered to the apartment, at the door of which, his
lordship received her, and taking her by the hand, expressed himself
particularly obliged by her condescension.

He seated them at the table, taking care to place himself opposite Constantia,
of whose person, in a sly manner, he took an exact survey, and evidently
appeared enraptured with her.

Having learned their place of residence, he said he had been there, mentioning
several great families he had visited, whom Mrs. Owens knew perfectly, though
they were too exalted for her to have any intimacy with.

I remember, continued his lordship, when there, of a Mr. Owens, a very worthy
divine, who they said had married the greatest beauty in that country, -- she
had some particular name -- bless me, how forgetful I am, -- it was either
Maria, Harriet, or, --

Perhaps, my lord, cried Mrs. Owens, in raptures, she could not conceal, it
might have been Fan, pretty Fan of the Glade.

The same, the same, -- I presume madam, you have seen her, will you be so good
as to inform me, if your opinion coincides with the admiring villagers.

It would be impossible to describe Mrs. Owens countenance, when she faultering
pronounced, "my lord, I had the honor of bearing that name."

Pardon me, dear madam, exclaimed his lordship, with a look of astonishment,
how could I be so stupid; surely, when I heard where you came from, I need no
longer have doubted, since in you I behold all those graces for which she was
so deservedly extolled.

This young lady, I presume, madam, is your daughter -- how lovely a copy -- I
tremble for the safety of the beaux hearts in London.

Your lordship, said Miss Summers, has never yet trembled for your own, you are
very hard to be pleased.

Why hitherto I have been so, my dear, replied he, but the time perhaps
approaches (glancing at Constantia) when I shall be as vulnerable as any other
mortal, to the shafts of cupid.

In the midst of this scene, a waiter entered, to inform them that the coachman
was impatient; a cloud immediately overspread the countenance of Mrs. Owens,
which however was soon dissipated by his lordship, who declared, he could not
relinquish the pleasure of their society; his ward and he proposed going off in
a few days to London -- they would be happy to have the vacant places in their
carriages occupied by them. He urged his request -- much entreaty was not
requisite, their baggage was brought from the stage, and Mrs. Owens was
rejoiced to hear it drive off.

She may with justice be condemned for imprudence in thus putting herself in
the power of total strangers. -- But though vain to excess, she was artless,
and credulity is reckoned the sister of innocence.

The attention of his lordship will not be wondered at, when it is known he was
an intimate of Mrs. Crofts, who had given him a sketch of the family, and from
whom he received the following letter: To Lord Stanville.
I snatch up the pen with rapture and eagerness to inform you, that the Owens'
are setting off for London, to see, as they call it -- the world -- the mother
is conceited and simple, -- the children perfectly artless, you will find my
language too unimpassioned to paint the glowing charms of Constantia, as they
deserve -- little artifice will be necessary to get them into your power,
vanity will make them run headlong into any snare. Adieu, my Lord, that
success may attend your designs, is the wish of yours,

H -- C --




From this intimation, his lordship took such measures as he thought would
accomplish his purposes. His ward was in reality the daughter of a tenant who
had fallen a victim to his wiles.

His carriage came soon after dinner, and carried them to a magnificent house
at seven miles distance.

Lord Stanville frequently said that it was a pity a man like Mr. Owens should
be in so circumscribed a station -- threw out many hints of having livings in
his gift -- that he could distinguish merit, and knew how to reward it.

In short Mrs. Owens' head, was by the time she returned to her chamber,
totally filled with prospects of grandeur; she settled in her own mind that
Constantia had made a conquest of the peer, that he would provide for her
father, give Jasper a genteel employment, and elevate her family to that
grandeur her heart so long had sighed for.

Well, child, said she, I wonder what your father would say now, if we had
staid cooing in the nest like the fusty old doves as he wanted us, things would
never have come to this -- ah, lord, there is nothing like having a person with
some kind of a head to manage affairs -- Mr. Coverly too, would have had us
stay.

Would he, indeed Mamma, cried Constantia -- I dare say ^he and my poor father
are very dull without us.

Oh! never think of that, said her mother, you don't know what may happen, I
always thought there was something great before you.

Constantia felt a sadness cling around her heart she could not conquer, and
availed herself of her mother's falling asleep to peruse a letter which Coverly
had slipped into her hand at parting.

LETTER.
My Constantia goes -- may all good angel's watch and bless her -- yet, the
invocation is unnecessary, for Heaven guards with benignity celestial purity.

May thy happiness be equal to thy merit, though alas! such is the instability
of our state, that the very moment which perhaps elevates thee to felicity,
plunges Coverly in despair.

But away all contracted selfish ideas, henceforth I will harbor no other wish
but for Constantia's welfare.

She once I think, hinted a wish for my portrait; ah! deem me not presumptuous,
if I flatter myself such a momento is unnecessary to recall to thy memory one
of the sincerest of thy friends.

Oh! think sometimes of him, who will think always of thee. -- I am too deprest
to say more, yet can scarcely bring myself to say farewell.


Her tears fell as she perused it -- oh! was thy own felicity perfect, she
cried, what rapture should I feel. Forget thee Coverly, no no -- thou may
perhaps be remembered too tenderly for my peace.

The portrait was wrapped in a paper which contained the following lines.

To seek that bosom, pensive shadow go,
Where lillies droop beneath the purer snow,
Where Virtue dwells, with her attendant Peace;
And soothing Pity shows her cherub face.
Go pensive shadow, feel that beating breast,
Which learns to sigh when others are not blessed
Which pants with anguish at another's woe,
And justly thinks from goodness ease must flow.
With Guido's pencil, had I power to trace
The blushing beauties of that artless face,
Unequal to my task, I still should find
No human power could personify the mind.
To execute the office, then should come
The bantling Cupid, with his lisping tongue,
The pencil he should use, should be his dart,
And stamp the image on my yielding heart.
Constantia very eagerly gazed for the portrait, it was indeed a pensive
shadow, for the limner had thrown into the countenance all that lock of
despondency for which Coverly was so remarkable.

It Is probable she might have staid hours contemplating it, had not her mother
waked and hastily called her to bed.

In the morning they were ushered into a magnificent saloon, where a sumptuous
breakfast was prepared; his lordship, if possible, was more assiduous than the
preceding night.

After breakfast, he conducted them through a long serpentine walk to a plain,
opening in front to a spacious river, and encompassed by an ampitheatre of
trees, an awning of light silk, spread over some of them, formed a kind of
bower -- where they seated themselves on a bank of turf, embroidered with the
gayest flowers.

Two gaudy barges were lying on the river, occupied by a number of young men
dressed in uniform; soft music played, and seemed to steal along the waters, till
at a signal given by his lordship, the barges set off to a small island, the
destined gaol for displaying their abilities.

On their return, the victor immediately landed, and coming to the bower,
modestly bent his knee to Constantia -- his lordship presented her a chaplet of
artificial flowers, and begged she would reward merit -- blushing, and confused
at this piece of gallantry, with a trembling hand she decked the brows of the
youth.

You may now, cried his lordship, esteem yourself the happiest fellow in the
universe, since rewarded by the hands of beauty; Oh! with what rapture would I
be bound with the flowery fetters of love.

Constantia blushed, but made no reply.

Numberless other devices were practiced to divert and beguile the hours.

At length they were led to a rustic building, embosomed among the loftiest
trees; where a collation was laid out, which presented every luxury that wealth
could purchase.

His lordship had, indeed, been assiduous in procuring what he thought most
calculated to tempt, betray and intoxicate the senses; while his unsuspecting
victims gave hopes by the pleasure manifested, that his trouble would be soon
recompensed.

He entreated Constantia to sing in the course of the evening, she at length
yielded to his importunity -- or rather the command of her mother, and sung,
from the Hermit, of Goldsmith The blossoms opening on the day,
The dews by Heaven refined,
Could naught of purity display,
To emulate his mind.


Lord Stanville pressed her hand and sighed -- such was the gentle pressure she
had from Coverly, when sitting by him, she sung in this manner -- such the
profound sigh that heaved his bosom; -- she raised her eyes replete with most
bewitching softness, and gave a look that sunk to his lordship's soul.

Her mother was enraptured with every thing; nor till this period, imagined she
ever knew perfect felicity.

Alas! such is the delusion vice so frequently spreads before our eyes,
thoughtless we rove in its flowery paths; nor perceive till the poignant sting
of sorrow comes, those rocks and quick sands, which so temptingly were covered.

Lord Stanville left them to give some orders to his attendants; -- Miss Summers
was rambling about with Jasper, who was comparing her to all the beauties of
antiquity, as the most finished original, in his opinion, while his mother was
stealing after, to listen to his gallantry.

As Constantia was going to follow them, she felt her gown suddenly twitched,
and turning, perceived a servant, who with a significant look slipped a paper
into her hand, and ran off.

Surprise for a moment deprived her of the power of perusing its contents --
judge of her amazement and horror when she read as follows:

"Let innocence beware; there is treachery on foot. Fly! ere the shades of night
afford an opportunity for the contemplation of the darkest design. -- The
bearer will conduct you to a place of security; -- be guarded if you hope to
escape."

Oh, my father! why did we leave you? oh, Coverly! my Coverly, exclaimed
Constantia, why are you not here to protect us?

A flood of tears relieved her from that distraction, which in the first moment
had overwhelmed her senses -- she resolved on collecting all her fortitude, and
acting with that circumspection, which her unknown guardian had desired.

As she was quitting the retreat, Jasper appeared to acquaint her that Miss
Summers and his mother were going to the house, and requested her to follow.

She instantly communicated the contents of the letter; all on fire at the
designed injury, he was for venting openly the impetuosity of his passion, had
she not conjured him to the contrary.

She represented to him, how unavailing the display of either resentment or
resistance, surrounded as they were, by minions of the monster -- that, their
only resource was, for him to seek the servant; she was assured he would
befriend them, and was determined, with his assistance, to fly the baneful
mansion.

With words like those, Constantia won her brother to conviction, he went in
quest of their humble friend; while she, trembling with horror, pursued the
footsteps of her mother.

When they reached the house, she made an excuse for going to her apartment, to
change her hat, which was damp with dew and unnoticed, whispered her mother to
follow.

After securing the door, she acquainted her with the source of her terrors --
to describe those of her mother at that moment, is impossible, all her
flattering prospects vanished -- humbled to the dust; experiencing all the
agonies of self-accusation.

Raising her streaming eyes to that fair blossom, which she had torn from his
native shade, and exposed to the pestilential blasts of iniquity; like the
wandering dove, how joyfully would she have fled to the sheltering arms of her
husband -- she could not speak.

Constantia, shocked at the distress of her mother wept upon her neck, and
besought her to be composed; -- Heaven, she said, ever protects the virtuous.

Jasper softly tapped at the door, attended by the servant, who conducted them
down the back-stairs, into an orchard, at the extremity of which, was a
bye-road; a coach was prepared, into which they eagerly entered, Jasper first
flourishing his stick, and vowing revenge; declaring, he disapproved highly of
this inglorious flight -- the way would have been -- to challenge -- and in
single combat, chastise -- thus did the heroes of antiquity.

Fast as the horses went, they could not keep pace with the wishes of Mrs.
Owens and her daughter; at length they stopped, as well as they could discern
by the saint light which a few stars afforded at a large edifice.

They were conducted into a parlour, where they beheld a lady and gentleman,
the terrors which had taken possession of them, subsided almost instantly at
their appearance.

The gentleman was old, and from a certain dejection in his look, appeared
perfectly acquainted with sorrow; his gray hair was thinly spread upon his
forehead, a placid luster in his eyes denoted how brilliant they had been in
the gay morning of youth, a faint hectic tinged his cheek; and the softest
sensibility overspread his countenance.

Constantia had eyes for no other object, she felt a pleasing awfulness at his
sight -- her brother, however, thought there was one still more attracting in
the room, and could not forbear gazing at the young lady, though he blushed at
the same time; she was about eighteen, with a beautiful simplicity in her looks.

Welcome! thrice welcome! to this mansion, exclaimed the old gentleman --
forever blessed be the hour in which Providence made me the humble instrument
of preserving a family from destruction -- yes madam, continued he, taking Mrs.
Owens's hand, I consider myself particularly fortunate, in being enabled to
save you from that heart-rending distress you would have experienced, had the
basest of schemes been executed.

He then briefly informed them, that Lord Stanville's man, who was son to a
tenant of his, had told him of their being decoyed to the house, he knew the
whole plot; having found Mrs. Croft's letter in the room where his lordship had
been dressing -- he declared it made him quite sad to think his master should
have the power of ruining an innocent family. His artless representations,
continued the gentleman, so excited my pity and resentment, that I resolved to
do all in my power for their protection, and laid the plan which has so happily
succeeded.

They poured forth their acknowledgments, called him their guardian, and vowed
unalterable gratitude; Mrs. Owens in her present humbled state, hesitated not
confessing her motives for going to London, her husband's dislike to the
excursion, and her opposition.

Alas! cried the benevolent man, such is the waywardness of mankind; they seek
for felicity in every station but their own, where alone they should look for,
and cultivate it.

Oh! most erroneous opinion, to suppose riches only can bestow bliss, I am an
evidence to the contrary, had I been a shepherd swain, with the sweat of my
brow was obliged to till my parent earth and reaped her fruits, I might have
been happy; but born in the lap of affluence how bitter has been my fate.

He was checked by his emotions and paused a few moments, then raising his
head, said, if you will honor me with your attention for a short time, I may,
by reciting the incidents of my life, more fully convince you of the truth of
what I have said.

They entreated him to begin the relation, which he accordingly did, --
Narration of Mr. Montfort.
Evil I may say have been the days of my pilgrimage. Mr. and Mrs. Montfort were
equally distinguished for their ancestry and affluence, I was their only child,
and they vied with each other in adoring me, they thought I must be the darling
of every heart, and the admiration of every eye, and that Heaven smiled
benignly upon them, in bestowing such a child.

They were ambitious of having me allied to a family, illustrious as their own,
and indulged the most flattering presages of my future aggrandizement.

I had attained my two and twentieth year, when chance bro't me acquainted with
the widow of an officer and her daughter, who had taken a small cottage in our
neighborhood.

"The mother was the gentlest. best of women -- the daughter -- but I want
words to give you an idea of her; not that her image is absent from my breast,
oh, no, its fixed here from the first moment I beheld her.

Nature had been profuse of its loveliest gifts, and her mind was as celestial,
as its repository chaste, ingenious, undissembling, while mourning over an
unfortunate father's fate, she endeavored to support her mother, though ill
able herself, to bear up against assaults of affliction.

I pitied, I esteemed, and oh! how soon I loved: nor was she insensible to the
fervor of my passion, when lost in sweet confusion, she acknowledged I was dear
to her.

My love I carefully concealed, as also my visits to the cottage; I knew full
well the ambition of my parents, and that though they adored me, they would
sooner sacrifice me, than their elevated hopes -- how strange that ambition
should have power over the feelings of nature -- time, I thought, would weaken
their pride and subdue the prejudices of education, and convince them that
worth and beauty would dignify any station.

My mother soon noticed a dejection in my manner, and my frequent absence from
home alarmed her exceedingly -- she was of an enterprising spirit, and resolved
to find whether there was any cause for her apprehensions.

She and my father, while I was absent, called the servant, in whom I confided,
he who had often carried trifling presents from me to the widow, and by threats
and bribes subdued his fidelity; great was their rage on discovering my
attachment -- but violence they knew would never succeed, they therefore
concerted measures they were sure would prove effectual.

A few days after, my father pleaded business in London, and asked me to
accompany him, I could not hesitate or refuse; but seized the first moment I
could to repair to the cottage -- the widow was ill, and confined to her bed,
Isabella's tears had ceased a little on beholding me -- but when I mentioned my
intended departure, she streamed afresh.

The time is still present to view; when kneeling by the bed side, the mother
took our hands between hers, and wept over and blessed us -- while I called
upon high Heaven to witness I ever would protect her daughter.

The widow died shortly after my departure, and my mother only waited for her
to be consigned to the earth, ere she visited her orphan.

When Isabella appeared she wondered not, though she regretted, the passion of
her son; she stood motionless for a few moments, at sight of charms, which,
though sickled over by affliction, were yet irresistible.

The deadly paleness of her face, the languishing softness of eyes, denoted how
much she required comfort -- the resentment of Mrs. Montfort was forgotten --
the bursting tear declared her sympathetic feeling; but they were feelings of a
short duration.

At the mention of her name, a faint gleam of pleasure beamed over Isabella's
countenance.

My mother acquainted her with the occasion of her visit -- assured her that my
passion proceeding from thoughtlessness of youth, would soon subside -- that
hereafter, I would bless the power, which prevented me following its impulse; a
union with her would involve us both in wretchedness and incur the eternal
disapprobation of my family; a love not founded on reason would gradually
decrease, and bring endless torture.

Isabella shuddered, she would have said my love was unalterable; but her voice
faultered; and my mother proceeded, --

She represented the meanness of entering into a family so averse to her; the
folly of depending on an impetuous young man for felicity, who disregarded by
his connections, would involuntarily grow to dislike her, who was the cause of
their estrangement -- in short, she painted the misery that would accrue, in
such horrid colors, that Isabella wound up almost to distraction, suddenly
hung herself at my mother's feet, and with uplifted hands, renounced me forever!

But this was not sufficient; enquiring into every particular concerning the
unfortunate girl, she learned there was a young farmer violently in love with
her; she therefore assured her, that while she remained single, passion, fed by
hope, would prompt me not to give her up -- reasoned on the necessity of
choosing a protector in her present situation -- that by such an act, she would
be entitled to the everlasting gratitude of an obliged family -- and save the
man for whom she professed an esteem, from destruction.

Weak, trembling, weeping Isabella said she would do as she pleased, and Mrs.
Montfort hastily extorted her solemn promise, to be another's.

Shortly after, the ceremony was performed in a neighboring chapel; Isabella
appeared almost inanimate, 'till the conclusion.

Oh loveliest victim that ever was sacrificed at the shrine of ambition, what
was then thine agonies?

"She smote wildly her breast; thrice she called upon the name of Montfort,
till quite overpowered, she sunk fainting into his arms, to whom she had
plighted irrevocable vows.

My mother had then removed from that part of the country, experiencing a
barbarous satisfaction at the success of her project.

My first visit on my return, was to the cottage, as I crossed the meadow which
led to it, I looked for the friendly rays of a taper, which, often in the dark
nights of winter had been my leading star; I rapped at the door, it was opened
by an unknown woman, who informed me the widow was dead, and her daughter gone,
he knew not whither.

What I felt -- but I will not retire you with a recital of my feelings, I
continued leaning against the door, till roused by the voice of a servant who
had come to seek me, as the night was far advanced I returned with him; and by
the first light repaired to the churchyard, to seek the widow's grave, which
was distinguished by a white slab, laid over it -- with the name inscribed.

I Am not ashamed to say I wept, and there reiterated my vows of seeking out her
daughter, and cherishing her during life.

"My parents mentioned marriage, I started at the sound, but they were not
urgent, since Isabella was now another's.

To seek the beloved object I set out, and oh! with what anxious solicitude did
I wander, resolved never to relinquish the search, till I had learned something
of her fate.

A year had elapsed, when from a little village, where I had halted for a day
or two, I walked into the country; far I had not gone, when my eyes caught the
form they had so long sought.

'Twas in the beginning of spring, the bower in which she sat was deprived of
its bloom, yet not half so much as was the face of Isabella.

She perceived me, shrieked, and would have fled, but I caught her to my heart
-- oh! sweetest, loveliest, most beloved, I cried, why, why this tedious
separation -- oh! how ceaseless have I mourned -- could you doubt the truth of
Charles, or believe, to the verge of the earth he would not follow you.

She raised her languid head, and with a voice almost stifled by sighs, said,
she never doubted his truth, his sincerity, but --

You are pale, you are ill, my life, I interrupted, oh! Isabella, why not more
attentive to a health so infinitely valuable? let me conduct you home -- you
are not able to bear the coldness of the air -- I long to hear every thing --
to recount my suffering, and find a recompense in your smiles.

No, no, Charles, replied she, in a hurrying manner, I have particular reasons
for your not attending me home -- you will oblige me extremely, by not
attempting it. -- And why, my Isabella, be deprived of your sight, after so
long exile? -- Ask me not, she said, in two hours you shall receive a letter,
which will explain, them, -- she repeated her request with an eagerness I could
not resist, and learning where I lodged, departed.

I waited with impatience for the letter, which arrived within the limited
time, it is engraven in the recesses of my heart.

Oh! cruel chance which led Montfort hither, -- yes, he may wonder, when he
learns that Isabella has prayed, with fervency prayed, never more to behold
him. Know then, my vows are no longer yours, they are irrevocably plighted to
another.

You may call me faithless, but with the rest of my evils, I must bear with the
forfeiture of your good opinion.

Yet should I endeavor to justify myself, but alas! it is unavailing now.

In this moment, when about bidding you a final adieu; in this moment of
sadness; I urge you by the dear idea of former days, by our past esteem, never
to come near me.

I have an infant son, should Fame load me with censure, he must share in the
disgrace, and rise up, perhaps, to revile the memory of his parent.

Oh Montfort! could Isabella heal the wounds she has given, how willingly would
she lay down her life for your peace, as it is, she hastens to the goal, she
has fought the fight which in this world has subdued her, in that which is to
come, she trusts to receive some recompense, then, oh! destroy not that hope,
by trying to make her forget her duty. Farewell! I linger over the word, over
my last adieu to one, who was so kind, so generous a friend; may he forget
there ever was such a being, as ISABELLA!"

Wild, distracted I would have flown into her presence, had not insensibility
stopped my motions, in this state I remained, till roused by the appearance of
her maid, a faithful creature, who had been with her through all the
vicissitudes of fortune, she came without her mistress's knowledge, and
revealed the scene which passed between her and my mother.

Oh! my Isabella, how bright appeared thy virtues to my view; but I will try to
shorten my narrative, as much as possible. I continued two months obscured in
the village, never going out, till late, scarcely regarding any object; but the
cottage that contained my love.

In one of my solitary rambles, I was surprised by the sound of lamentation,
and soon saw a rustic troop attending a funeral, the name of Coverly struck me,
I enquired, and found it was the husband of Isabella.

I cannot describe my emotions, all was confusion within my breast, I flew
home, dispatched my servant to enquire, as from another, about my Isabella, he
swiftly returned, returned to tell me; she had caught a malignant fever from
her husband, and was expected shortly to follow him.

I heard no more, I flew to the house, I entered it distracted, the maid
screamed at beholding me.

Lead on! lead on! I exclaimed, let me see her once more, while she breathes,
she turned, I followed, and entered the apartment; Isabella had just received
the last rites of the church, she was elevated a little by pillows; over her
countenance was diffused a celestial serenity, which seemed to declare, she
already anticipated the joys prepared for her above.

She instantly noticed me, I sunk at the bed side and sobbed aloud; be calm,
Montfort, she cried; few, and full of misery have been the days of my
pilgrimage here; rejoice at my release, for I have something within me, which
inspires hope.

She raised her head, but it sunk immediately on my arm; oh! what happiness,
she continued, to breath my last sigh in your presence and with it, assure you
how very dear you have been; her lips quivered while she spoke; she sighed, she
gasped; she turned her eyes once more toward me, and closed them forever!

[Here Mr. Montfort paused; but, after a few minutes, resumed his narration:]

For hours, all was darkness and horror! I then, actuated by madness, mounted
my horse, and galloping across the country, never stopped, till I reached the
mansion of my parents.

They were equally astonished and shocked at my appearance, I pleaded fatigue,
and in a hasty manner told them, I knew they had long ardently desired to see
me married, that I had just left the house of a young lady, for whom I
entertained the sincerest affection, and besought my mother to order her
carriage, and accompany me thither directly.

She stared, and asked her name, I re-urged my request, declaring with a forced
smile, I would keep her name secret till she saw her, adding, that I was
convinced it would not be unpleasing, that I was confident she would find the
young lady unexceptionable.

She yielded to my entreaties, and we set off; frequently did she express
surprise at the length of the journey, and besought me to acquaint her whether
we were going. The night was far advanced ere we arrived.

"The door was opened by an old woman; there was a gloomy stillness throughout
the place that terrified my mother, I Would rather have carried than led her, for
she was now unable to walk; when, at the chamber door, I exclaimed, 'now I
introduce you to the mistress of my affections!'

Isabella's beautiful form was extended on a couch; her wrapper was of white
muslin, a curtain of the same texture formed a canopy over her head, the tapers
burning at her feet, cast a sickly light around.

My mother started back, she would have fled, I grasped her hands; shrink not
back, madam I cried, survey the sacrifice you have made to Avarice and
Ambition; the woman whose purity, probity and elegance would have graced a
station more exalted than mine, now lies lifeless before you.

Good Heaven! she cried, is this Isabella? It Is Isabella! I told you I would
show you the object of my love; you find her unexceptionable, angels are
unexceptionable, and my Isabella is one now; you compelled her to renounce me,
though to me she had pledged her love; but listen to my vows, I exclaimed,
springing with a kind of desperation to the lovely clay, look down pure and
sainted Isabella, while here I vow, solemnly vow, never to know a second love,
no power on earth shall shake my resolution, may the moment in which I attempt
to swerve, be my last! never shall I know a return of peace, till admitted
among those benign spirits that now surround you; Oh cruel, that a parent
should have robbed me of all that made life valuable.

My mother shrieked and fell senseless. On her return home, she was seized with
a violent fever, and in her delireum called frequently on Isabella, she
recovered only to experience more excruciating sorrows, for my dejection
terminated in insanity; frequently have I wandered by the pale shades of the
moon, to weep over the sod of my Isabella.

My father afflicted and depressed in his old age, died of a broken heart; --
Despair at length finished the existence of my wretched mother; she fell -- a
martyr to ambition.

From violence I sunk into a lethargic state, for which my friends brought me
to several places on the Continent; many years elapsed before it pleased Heaven
to restore me the power of recollection, I then found myself in possession of
affluence -- but a stranger to peace.

Had I been born in a middling station, the woman of my affection would not
have been denied me; but, from an exalted station, I was plunged into an abyss
of despair.

On my return to my native country, I had an ardent wish to discover the son of
Isabella, I understood he was left in distressed circumstances, and indulge a
fond hope of soothing my misery, by rendering him happy; hitherto my search has
been fruitless.

This young lady is a relation, left early an orphan; who has with tenderness
ministered to my afflictions."

Lord, mother, cried Jasper, I Would almost lay a wager, the Mr. Coverly this
gentleman has been seeking, is our Mr. Coverly.



Like enough Jasper, said Mrs. Owens, as sure as day you have guessed;

Why Sir, Mr. Coverly lives just by us, and is as fond of us, as the saying is,
as if we were all of a kin.

He should now, said Mr. Montfort, eagerly, be about nine and twenty, and his
name Edward Coverly.

The same, the same, cried Jasper and his mother in a breath.

Oh Providence! exclaimed the old gentleman accept my thanks, should it indeed
be the son of my Isabella: -- but say my friend -- what is he? -- what is he
like? -- is he all that the son of Isabella should be?

Why Sir, said Jasper, he is tall -- but not so tall as I am -- his face is
neither round nor short; but --

Oh Sir, exclaimed Constantia, with warmth, he is all that the descendant of
that most amiable woman should be; sincerity and wisdom are the inmates of
soul; -- as to his countenance, you shall see -- so saying, she drew forth the
picture.

Good gracious! Con, cried Jasper, staring, how came you by that?

Aye child, said her mother, tell us? it is quite an inexplicable mystery to me.

Constantia recollected herself; and covered with confusion, sunk into a chair.

It Is probable they would have questioned her more minutely, had not their
attention been engrossed by the old gentleman comparing the portrait with one
of Isabella's, and exclaiming, it is indeed the counterpart, the complacence of
features, the same air of dejection; he then put both into his bosom, who, with
an air of chagrin found herself deprived of her plaintive shadow.

Mr. Montfort informed Mrs. Owens he would bring them, the ensuing day, to the
Glebe House, as he longed to see his already beloved Coverly. This happy
change, my friends, said he, is a proof that a good action is ever recompensed;
had I not sought to preserve you from destruction in all probability I never
should have obtained the only felicity this world can bestow.

After supping, they retired to their apartments, filled with gratitude to
Providence for their protection, and astonished at the memorable transactions
of the day.

A coach and six waited for them early in the morning, traveling in such
style, was quite agreeable to Mrs. Owens. Notwithstanding her humiliation, so
powerful was the effect of her spirits, that they gradually rose as she
approached the Glebe; at the beginning of the village she let down the window,
and sat quite on the edge of the seat, that all her neighbors might see her.

When stopped at the house, she felt somewhat confused; but determined to put a
good face on the matter, so running into the parlour, where her husband,
astonished at the appearance of the equipage, was standing almost motionless --
ah, lovey! she exclaimed, embracing him, I believe your head is almost as wise
as mine; in truth I have met with some of these nasty hawks you predicted, and
am again returned, with a determination of remaining in my nest, so say no more
about it lovey, you shall buy the flock of sheep, the poney for Jasper, and
have the great dyke in the garden filled up.

While the parson alternately clasped his wife and children to his breast, he
raised his mild eyes to heaven in thankfulness for their return.

No, my Fanny, cried he, I will never mention an error, which, perhaps, has
been serviceable, by teaching you forbearance, since thus I hold to my heart,
its darlings, be banished every care.

Mr. Montfort now was noticed, their obligations were instantly declared, the
affectionate Owens shed tears upon the hand he pressed; while he poured forth
acknowledgements to him, for warning his artless family of their danger.

Constantia from a window beheld Coverly in an alcove in the garden, she darted
out of the parlour, nor stopped till she gently touched his arm, -- he quickly
lifted his eyes, the book he had been reading dropped out of his hand, he
doubted his senses, so you wont speak to me, Mr. Coverly? exclaimed she.

And are you really returned? cried he, catching her in his arms -- so soon? --
so unexpectedly? -- oh Constantia! this is rapture indeed.

Are you glad I Am come back? said she -- Oh Constantia, what a question!

Jasper at this moment, halloo'd for them to come in directly; they hastened to
obey his summons.

The moment Coverly entered the parlour, Mr. Montfort eagerly caught his hand,
and burst into tears.

Coverly gazed at him; a kind of benign awe overspread his countenance, and he
looked around, as if to enquire who the reverend stranger was.

He is indeed her son, said Montfort, in every feature, I trace the loved
resemblance -- Oh! come to my arms, adopted child of my affections; sole,
precious remains of my adored Isabella.

What Sir? replied Coverly, did you then know the dear parent, of whom I was so
early deprived?

Know her, replied he -- oh! how well did Montfort know and reverence her
virtues?

Montfort! exclaimed Coverly, looking sorrowfully on him -- Oh Sir! is it
possible, in you I behold him.

Yes, said he, and long have I been in search of you, as a treasure which
should bless me; -- it is now found, nor will I lose it, without my existence.

Coverly was unable to reply; but the grateful tear of sensibility bedewed his
cheek.

Mrs. Owens now began to bustle and provide something for the entertainment of
her guests; -- on inspecting the state of her larder, she found that Mr. Owens
had not been very attentive, all she could procure for supper was eggs, cheese
and fruit; -- at this simple fare, what contentment reigned, at the board of
luxry never appeared more smiling countenances.

Montfort and Coverly were pressed to stay at the Glebe; but the former chose
to go to Coverly's house, but left Miss Lucy behind; with whom Jasper had
commenced a flirtation, which, had we heard, we would certainly have put down
as an original of the kind.

Jasper and Constantia rose early in the morning, as neither could taste the
sweets of Morpheus, from some particular sensations of their own; they met
almost the same instant, in the alcove.

Jasper, after some prefacing, began talking of Lucy, and asked his sister's
opinion of her; who gave a very favorable one. -- After some hemming and
stammering, he said he proposed sending her a letter, by way of disclosing some
tender sentiments which she had inspired him with, and desired her assistance;
-- I know, cried he, (flourishing his hand round his temples) girls have heads
-- heads fit for such light frivolous matters.

Well Jasper -- as there never was a letter without eyes, you must begin with
them: --

"Your eyes, dear madam, have pointed the shafts of Cupid, and transfixed through
and through my heart with arrows; -- in you madam, I perceive all constellations
of charms of which youthful poets have so often sung -- What Is the lilly -- the
jessamine -- the rose -- the pink -- or even the violet, that sweetest of all
flowers, when compared to you? The effulgence of your beauty has dazzled me,
and I wrest the palm from the hands of Helen and Cleopatria to put it in yours"

Jasper, whose patience was wound up to the last extremity, started up -- may I
never translate another ecclogue of Virgil, cried he, Con, but I wish you, I
don't know what! -- such an inundation of roses -- lillies -- and violets --
Helen's and Cleopatra's; -- but know Miss, had you even given proper
directions, I should not have taken them, for I have already penned my letter,
by which, you may perceive, I have not read the ancient poets in vain. So
saying, he drew it from his pocket book; and with an elevated voice, read as
follows: TO MISS LUCY MONTFORT.
Oh! lovely Lucy, or rather lovely Lalage, for Lalage you must know madam, was
a favorite of Horace's, your attack on me has proved successful.

The capital of my heart was not so well guarded as the Roman capital, and is
therefore taken; but you will smile upon me, and preserve me from the dull
fetters of despair.

I am with obsequiousness and admiration, fairest madam,

Yours JASPER OWENS.




Constantia laughed at the production, and Jasper walked off in high dudgeon;
she followed him into the house, and perceived him put a letter into a book he
promised to lend Miss Montfort the preceding night, and gave it to her maid,
with his "best respects" to carry up to her Mistress.

Constantia soon followed to pay her compliments and perceiving the book on the
toilette, slily took it from thence, first dropping the note; then repairing to
her chamber, in a disguised hand, returned this answer.

TO JASPER OWENS, ESQUIRE.
You astonish me, sir, I thought you were a Gosling descended from that
illustrious flock of Geese that preserved the Roman capital, and that you would
have been able to defend your own.

As to the attack you mention I made upon you, I Am totally ignorant of its
nature; pray was it in the shining honors of your head I first seized; or the
snowey cambrie which you wear round your neck in the capacity of a cravat?

Indeed Mr. Jasper, I would advise you to mount the funeral pire once or twice
more with your Dido, ere you pen another love-letter. -- Orthography, like
gold, may be purified by fire. -- In return, sweet sir, for your obsequiousness
and admiration,

I remain, Your very humble servant, LUCY MONTFORT.


This letter she conveyed into the book and carried it to Jasper's chamber; who
soon discovered it -- He raged -- whistled -- hemmed -- stamped and went
through all the strange contrarieties of passion, till a summons to breakfast
put a stop to his violence -- He found Mr. Montfort and Coverly in the parlour.
-- After some little conversation, Mr. Montfort asked Coverly had he considered
of what he had been speaking to him about? You must know my dear sir, and my
dear madam, cried he, addressing Mr. and Mrs. Owens, I have been advising my
Son to think of entering into the married state.

Aye and a most comfortable state it sometimes is, said Mrs. Owens, as my Frank
can tell you -- eh, lovey?

Coverly and Constantia blushed; their eyes sympathetically fastened for a
moment on each other.

I know a young lady, resumed Mr. Montfort, possessed of a valuable fortune, to
whom I desire to see him united.

[At the mention of the word 'Fortune,' a sudden gloom overcast the countenance
of Coverly, who had indulged the fond idea that Constantia was in the old
gentleman's thoughts.]

Yes, my son, continued he, such an event would yield a ray of felicity to the
closing evening of my life; I am not disinterested solely in my friendship, and
expect this return for it? -- my wealth, my most perfect esteem shall then be
yours.

Coverly hastily rose from his seat; his cheeks were flushed, and his eyes
sparkled with indignant haughtiness: --

Retain your wealth Sir, he exclaimed, your esteem I wished to preserve, but on
these terms cannot purchase it.

Worlds would be no equivalent for a union that a reluctant heart must render
everlastingly wretched.

Know Sir, I would not give up the delightful privilege of loving, though
despairingly, one of the first in my opinion, of her sex, for the sordid
advantage of rising into splendour.

When your friendship was offered me, I sketched out prospects full of extacy,
and looked to participating my happiness with the only object who could afford
me any; the fabric of my hopes is rased to the dust; but I Am inured to
disappointments, and though this is the severest stroke, I trust it will be
sustained without another complaint.

But surely Sir you will not deprive me of your esteem; my soul already ruffled
by two circumstances would feel yet more disgusted with the world, should the
sweet bond of friendship, it was entering into with you, be thus rudely broken.

Deprive you of my esteem, exclaimed Montfort, rushing into his arms, and
falling on his neck, unable, from his powerful emotions, to utter more.

True son of Isabella, cried he, recovering, such was her spirit, her
nobleness, her fortitude; oh! thou who art bound in my heart and interwoven in
all its affections, did thou suppose I would lead thee from thy pictured
felicity? I mentioned a lady of fortune, and in my estimation she has the most
valuable of all possessions: Virtue, innocence and beauty, great is her dowry,
inestimable her worth; -- take to thy arms oh Coverly, take Constantia to thy
noble breast!

Coverly started! his uplifted clasped hands, and speechless rapture evinced
more strongly than words, his gratitude and joy; the deadly paleness of
Constantia gave way to natural blushes; -- in the height of her agitation, her
cup fell from her hand on Jasper's foot, fortunately the contents were not very
warm, yet sufficiently so, to make him leap from surprise, to the farthest part
of the room.

Need I say Mr. Montfort had occasion to reiterate his words to Coverly, oh!
no, he clasped his Constantia to his heart, a heart which had so long, so
constantly, so sadly sighed for her. -- Oh! Virtue and Sincerity, how great was
thy reward at that moment?

And am I to call Constantia mine? cried he, in half broken accents; -- no
fears to oppose? -- with thee to unite my fate; -- say my beloved, am I really
possessed of such bliss?

Her tears fell -- her tears of joy she could not suppress, -- yes, dear
Coverly, she gently said, ever precious to me will be the remembrance of this
hour.

Serenely, said Montfort, may ye walk through life; and should Providence
afflict, from sympathy and love may balm be derived; but oh! be every ill
averted from your heads; thine be the roses unmixed with thorns, -- so shall my
life, long obscured in clouds, set at last with some degree of brightness.

All now was gratitude and acknowledgements; till the first impetuosity of
those sensations subsiding, they began to grow a little rational and composed.

Mr. Montfort, now noticed the dejection of Jasper's looks; who was sitting
very ruefully rubbing his foot.

As for you my young hero, cried he, we all perceive that you are at least,
vulnerable in your heel, like the great Achilles; -- and I make no doubt but
your heart is also penetrable to the soft influence of a sly urchin,
denominated Love.

I have in some degree, a property like Pope's Aerial, of looking into the
human breast; -- and I think I Have discerned something in yours and a certain
lady's, which looks like sympathetic feeling.

Why, what Sir? exclaimed Jasper, has Miss Lucy discovered? -- if she has upon
my --

Here the parson interrupted him, for he had an aversion to swearing, and saw
an expression in his countenance, that threatened something tremendous.

The anger of Jasper quickly led to a discovery of its cause, and when the
letter was produced, which he had not power to destroy, from beholding the
signature of "Lucy Montfort," nothing except Constantia's confusion, could
equal that of the young lady's.

His sister's embarrassment convinced them she was the culprit: she pleaded
guilty, -- received a chiding from Coverly, -- a rebuke from her mother, for
distressing the sweet child, -- and was told by her father, that she had
deviated from the Golden Rule.

But it is impossible to describe the transports of Jasper -- starting up,
forgetful of pain and ridicule, he caught Lucy's hand to his lips; and seized
Mr. Montfort's with a squeeze, that made the old gentleman hastily strive to
disengage it.

His resentment to his sister was not quite appeased; and he assured her, he
would not write the epithalamium he had long ago planned against her marriage.

To have my fair kinswoman settled, said Montfort, is now all I can desire;
it is certain she and you, my friend Jasper, know each other but a short time;
but in affairs of happiness I always wave ceremony -- there is an artlessness
in both, which at once declares the disposition, and shows time is not wanting
to discover their propensities; -- why then should there be any delay?

Aye, why should there? exclaimed Mrs. Owens, her eyes swimming in tears of
delight, my maxim is to secure good when it is offered; ah, bless you, I Am not
one of those shilly shally folks that stands as if I did not know whether to
take or refuse what I have a desire for.

No, that you are not, my love, said the parson, don't you remember how you
threw me out of my chair, once in your hurry? -- and how another day you broke
the set of candle-cups your aunt Bridget gave you, by your haste?

Mr. Montfort interrupted the parson's enumeration of accidents, by leading
Jasper to the blushing Lucy, who at first hesitated, but as her inclination
coincided with his, (though modesty deemed it necessary at first to oppose) she
soon yielded consent to change her state on the same day with Constantia; and
received from the transported Jasper a string of compliments quite in the
sublime order.

Mrs. Owens appeared scarcely sensible of what she was doing; in vain her
husband preached moderation, all was hurry and schemes of grandeur; and in this
derangement of ideas, she was near demolishing some of his manuscript sermons,
to put under confectionaries, had he not timely entered, and rescued them from
her merciless hands.

The wished for morning at length arrived -- the party walked to the church
without any pomp, innocence and felicity were alone in their train, the birds
from every bough appeared to sing hymeneals, and to their gladdened eyes the
earth wore a more smiling aspect. -- Montfort gave both ladies away, and the
good parson tied the irrevocable knot.

Having now I think (as Adam says) brought my story to the sum of earthly
bliss, I cannot conclude without first relating the establishments of my heroes
and heroines:

Montfort, their generous friend, provided for all;

Coverley's house was enlarged, but still retained all the simplicity of
architecture; from its amiable inmates he experiences that soothing unremitting
attention, which has diffused felicity through his mind; he has made it his
constant abode, and terms it -- "The Residence of True Content."

Jasper took orders, and has a beneficial living about five miles from the
Glebe; -- he perseveres in that path which his father led him from his
infantine days; possessed of conscious rectitude, an amiable wife, and a
blooming progeny he boasts a happiness, even the great might envy.

Pure and unruffled flow on the days of Coverly and Constantia. Montfort's
tears often steal down, from the fullness of joy in beholding theirs; and, in
those moments he withdraws to solitude with his little God-daughter Isabella,
in whose features, he traces a resemblance of his ever beloved.

The parson and his wife, are as happy a couple as live; -- and though she
sometimes takes a short flight from the nest, she always returns to her lovey
with smiles of affection.

Mr. Montfort seeks the dwellings of the wretched, chearing and relieving every
child of sorrow; -- so that the poor inhabitants have reason to bless the hour
he settled near the Glebe House.

We have long detained our readers in a simple mansion, from which, perhaps,
they thought nothing could be observed worthy regard -- though the prospect is
plain and unvariegated, we trust, no object appeared in it, that had not a
tendency to prove that -- a perseverance in prudence and virtue only can bestow
felicity.

We now bid them FAREWELL, and hope if they have found nothing in The Glebe
House to applaud, they will at least be a neutral power, and not condemn.


