A Collection OF RELIGIOUS TRACTS, FROM DIFFERENT AUTHORS. REPUBLISHED FOR THE
INFORMATION AND SERIOUS PERUSAL OF ALL SOBER ENQUIRERS.

BALTIMORE: Printed by WILLIAM PECHIN, No. 15, Market-street. 1799.

A Concise View OF THE CHIEF PRINCIPLES OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION, AS PROFESSED
BY THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS.
BY ROBERT BARCLAY.
THE FIRST PROPOSITION. Concerning the True Foundation of Knowledge.
SEEING the height of all happiness is placed in the true knowledge of God (
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent John xvii. 3.
) the true and right understanding of this foundation and ground of knowledge,
is that which is most necessary to be known and believed in the first place.

THE SECOND PROPOSITION. Concerning immediate Revelation.
SEEING no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals
him Mat. xi. 27.
and seeing the revelation of the Son is in and by the Spirit; therefore, the
testimony of the Spirit is that alone by which the true knowledge of God has
been, is and can be, only revealed; who, as, by the moving of his own Spirit he
converted the chaos of this world in that wonderful order wherein it was in the
beginning, and created man a living soul to rule and govern it so by the
revelation of the same spirit he has manifested himself all along unto the
sons of men, both patriarchs, prophets, and apostles: which revelations of God
by the spirit whether by outward voices and appearances, dreams, or inward
objective manifestations on the heart, were of old the the ^orm^n object of
their says, and remain ye so to be; since the object of the so (...) says as
the same in all ages, though set forth under diverse administrations. Moreover
these divine inward revelations, which we make absolutely necessary for the
building up of true faith, neither do nor can ever contradict the outward
testimony of the scriptures or right and found reason. Yet from hence it will
not follow that these divine revelations are to be subjected to the examination
either of the outward testimony of the scriptures or of the natural reason of
man as to a more noble or certain rule or touchstone; for this divine
revelation, and inward illumination, is that which is evident and clear of
itself, forcing, by its own evidence and clearness, the well disposed
understanding to assent, irresistibly moving the same thereunto; even as the
common principles of natural truths move and incline the mind to a natural
assent; as, that whole is greater than its part; that two contradictory sayings
cannot be both true, nor both false: which is also manifest according to our
adversaries principle; who supposing the possibility of inward divine
revelations, will nevertheless confess with us, that neither scripture nor
found reason will contradict it: and yet it will not follow according to them,
that the scripture, or found reason, should be subjected to the examination of
the divine revelations in the heart.

THE THIRD PROPOSITION. Concerning the Scriptures.
FROM these revelations of the Spirit of God to the saints, have proceeded the
scriptures of truth, which contain 1. A faithful historical account of the
actings of God's people in diverse ages, with many singular and remarkable
providence attending them. 2. A prophetical account of several things, whereof
some are already past and some yet to come. 3. A full and ample account of all
the chief principles of the doctrine of Christ held forth in diverse precious
declarations exhortations and sentances which, by the moving of God's spirit
were at several times, and upon sundry occasions, spoken and written unto some
churches and their paitors: nevertheless, because they are only a declaration
of the Fountain, and not the Fountain itself therefore they are not to be
esteemed the principal ground of all truth and knowledge, nor yet the adequate
primary rule of says and manners. Nevertheless, as that which gives a true
and faithful testimony of the first Foundation, they are and may be esteemed a
secondary RULE, subordinate to the SPIRIT, from which, they have all their
excellency and certainty: for as by the inward testimony of the Spirit we do
alone truly know them, so they testify, that the SPIRIT is that guide by which
the saints are led into an truth; John xvi. 13 Romans viii. 14.
therefore, according to the scriptures, the Spirit is the first and principal
leader. And seeing we do therefore receive and believe the scriptures, because
they proceeded from the spirit; therefore also the Spirit is more originally
and principally the rule, according to that received maxim in the schools,
Prop^er quod (...) of tale, illud ipsum est magis (...), English thus; That for
which a thing is such, that thing itself is more such.

THE FOURTH PROPOSITION. Concerning the Condition of Man in the Fall.
ALL Adam's posterity (or mankind Romans v. 12. 15.
) both Jews and Gentiles, as to the first Adam or earthly man, is fallen
degenerated, and dead, deprived of the sensation of feeling of this inward
testimony or seed of God; and is subject unto the power, nature, and feed of
the serpents which he sows in men's hearts, while they abide in this natural and
corrupted state; from whence it comes, that not their words and deeds only, but
all their imaginations are evil perpetually in the sight of God, as proceeding
from this depraved and wicked seed. Man, therefore, as he is in this state, can
know nothing aright; yea his thoughts and conceptions concerning God and things
spiritual, until he be disjoined from this evil seed, and united to the divine
Light, are unprofitable both to himself and others. Hence are rejected the
Socinian and Pelagian errors, in exalting a naural light; as also those of the
Papists, and most Protestants, who affirm, That man, without the true Grace of
God, may be a true minister of the Gospel. Nevertheless, this seed is not
imputed to infants, until by transgression they actually join themselves
therewith; for they are by nature the children of wrath, who walk according to
the power of the prince of the air.

THE FIFTH AND SIXTH PROPOSITIONS. Concerning the Universal Redemption by
Christ, and also the Saving and Spiritual Light, wherewith every man is
enlightened.
THE FIFTH PROPOSITION.
GOD, out of his infinite love, who delights not in the death of a sinner,
but that all should live and be saved, has so loved the world, that he has
given his only Son a Light, that whosoever believes in him should be saved;
who enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, and makes manifest all
things that are reprova^le, and teaches all temperance, righteousness, and
godliness Ezekiel. xviii. 23. Isa, xlix. 6. John iii, 16. and 1. 9. Tit. ii. II.
Ephesians. v. 13. Heb. ii. 9.
: and this Light enlighteneth the hearts of all in a Ephesians. ii. 1.
day Pro tempore, for a time
in order to salvation, if not resisted. Nor is it less universal than the seed
of sin, being the purchase of his death, who tasted death for every man; for as
in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive I Cor. xv. 22.


THE SIXTH PROPOSITION.
ACCORDING to which principle, or hypothesis, all the objections against the
Universality of Christ's death are easily solved; neither is it needful to
recur to the ministry of angels, and those other miraculous means, which, they
say, God makes use of to manifest the doctrine and history of Christ's passion
unto such who (living in those places of the world where the outward preaching
of the gospel is unknown) have well improved the first and common Grace: for
hence it well follows, that as some of the old Phisolophers might have been
saved, so also may now some who by Providence are cast into those remote parts
of the world, where the knowledge of the History is wanting) be made partakers
of the divine mystery, if they receive and resist not that Grace, a
manifestation whereof is given to every man to profit withal Cor. xii. 7.
. This certain doctrine then being received, to wit, that there is an
evangelical and saving Light and Grace in All, the universality of the love and
mercy of God toward mankind (both in the death of his beloved Son, the Lord
jesus Christ, and in the manifestation of the Light in the heart) is
established and confirmed, against all the objects of such as deny it.
Therefore Christ has tasted death for every man Heb. ii 9.
not only for all kinds of men, as some vainly talk, but for every one of all
kinds; the benefit of whose offering is not only extended to such who have the
distinct outward knowledge of his death and sufferings, as the same is declared
in the scriptures, but even unto those who are necessarily excluded from the
benefit of this knowledge by some inevitable accident; which knowledge we
willingly confess to be very profitable and comfortable, but not absolutely
needful unto such from whom God himself has withheld it; yet they may be made
partakers of the mystery of his death (though ignorant of the history) if they
suffer his Seed and Light enlightening their hearts to take place (in which
Light, communion with the Father and Son is enjoyed) so as of wicked men to
become holy, and lovers of that power by whose inward and secret touches they
feel themselves turned from the evil to the good and learn to do to others as
they would be done by; in which Christ himself affirms all to be included. As
they then have fastly and erroneously taught who have denied Christ, to have
died for all men; so neither have they sufficiently taught the truth who
affirming him to have died for all have added the absolute necessity of the
outward knowledge thereof in order to the obtaining its saving effect; among
whom the Remons^ra^s of (...) have been chiefly wanting and many other
asserters of (...) Redemption, in that they have not placed the extent of this
salvation in that divine and evangelical principle of Light and Life, wherewith
Christ has enlightened every man that comes into the world; which is
excellently and evidently held forth in these scriptures, Genesis vi. 3. Deuteronomy.
xxx. 14, John i. 7, 8, 9, Romans x. 8. Tit. ii. 11.

THE SEVENTH PROPOSITION. Concerning Justification.
AS many as resist not this Light, but receive the same, in them is produced an
holy, pure, and spiritual birth, bringing forth holiness, righteousness,
purity, and all those on her blessed fruits which are acceptable to God; by
which holy birth to wit, Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his works
within us) as we are sanctified, so are we justified in the sight of God,
according to the apostle's words, But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but
ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God
Cor. vi. 11.
. Therefore it is not by our works wrought in our will, nor yet by good works,
considered as of themselves, but by CHIRST, who, is both the gift and the
giver, and the cause producing the effects in us; who as he has reconciled us
while we were enemies, does also in his wisdom save us, and justify us after
this manner, as says the same apostle else where, According to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost
Tit. iii. 5.
.

THE EIGHTH PROPOSITION. Concerning Perfection.
IN whom this Holy and Pure Birth is fully brought forth, the body of death and
sin comes to be crucified and removed, and their hearts united and subjected to
the truth, so as not to obey any suggestion or temptation of the evil one, but
to be free from actual sinning, and transgressing of the law of God, and in
that respect perfect Romans vi. 14. Id. viii. 13. Id. vi. 2, 18. 1 John iii. 6.
. Yet does this perfection still admit of a growth; and there remains a
possibility of sinning, where the mind does not most diligently and watchfully
attend unto the Lord.

THE NINTH PROPOSITION. Concerning Perseverance, and the Possibility of Falling
from Grace.
ALTHOUGH this Gift, and inward Grace of God, be sufficient to work out
salvation; yet in those in whom it is resisted it both may and does become
their condemnation. Moreover, in whom it has wrought in part, to purify and
sanctify them, in order to their further perfection, by disobedience, such may
fall from it, and turn it to wantonness, making shipwreck of faith; and after
having tasted of the heavenly gift, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
again fall away 1 Timothy i. 6. Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6.
Yet such an increase and stability in the truth may in this life be attained,
from which there cannot he a total apostasy.

THE TENTH PROPOSITION. Concerning the Ministry.
AS by this Gift, or Light of God, all true knowledge in things spiritual is
received and revealed; so by the same, as it is manifested and received in the
heart, by the strength and power thereof, every true minister of the Gospel is
ordained, prepared and supplied in the work of the ministry: and by the
leading, moving, and drawing thereof, ought every evangelist and Christian
pastor to be led and ordered in his labor and work of the Gospel, both as to
the place where, as to the persons to whom, and as to the times when, he is to
minster. Moreover, those who have this authority may and ought to preach the
Gospel, though without human commission or literature; as, on the other hand,
those who want the authority of this divine gift, however learned or authorized
by the commissions of men and churches, are to be esteemed but as deceivers,
and not true Ministers of the Gospel. Also, who have received this holy and
unspotted gift, as they are freely received, so are they freely to give Mat. x.
8.
, without hire or bargaining, far less to use it as a trade to get money by it:
yet if God has called any from their employments, or trades, by which they
acquire their livelihood, it may be lawful for such (according to the liberty
which they feel given them in the Lord) to receive such temporals (to wit, what
may be needful to them for meat and clothing) as are freely given them by
those to whom they have communicated spirituals.

THE ELEVENTH PROPOSITION. Concerning Worship.
ALL true and acceptable Worship to God is offered in the inward and immediate
moving and drawing of his own Spirit, which is neither limited to places,
times, or persons: for though we be to worship him always, in that we are to
fear before him; yet as to the outward signification thereof, in prayers,
praises, and preachings, we ought not to do it where and when we will, but
where and when we are moved thereunto by the secret inspiration of his spirit
in our hearts; which God hears and accepts of, and is never wanting to move
us thereunto, when need is, of which he himself is the alone proper judge. All
other worship then, both praises, prayers, and preachings, which man sets about
in his own will, and at his own appointment, which he can both begin and end at
his pleasure, do or leave undone, as himself sees meet; whether they be a
prescribed form, as a liturgy, or prayers conceived ^xtemporarily, by the
natural strength and faculty of the mind they are all but superstitions,
will worship, and abominable idolatry in the sight of God Ezekiel, xiii. Mark. x.
20. Acts. 4. xviii. 5. John iii. 6. and iv, 21. Jude xix. Acts. xvii. 23.
, which are to be denied, rejected and separated from, in this day of his
spiritual arising; however it might have pleased him (who winked at the times,
of ignorance with respect to the simplicity and integrity of some, and of his
own innocent Seed, which lay as it were buried in the hearts of men, under the
mass of superstition) to blow upon the dead and dry bones, and raise some
breathings, and answer them, and that until the day should more clearly dawn
and break forth.

THE TWELFTH PROPOSITION. Concerning Baptism.
As there is One Lord and One faith so there is One Baptism; which not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience before
God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ Ephesians. iv. 5. 1. Peter iii. 21. Romans vi.
4. Gal. iii. 27. Col. ii. 12. John iii. 30.
. And this Baptism is a pure and spiritual thing, to wit, the Baptism of the
Spirit and Fire, by which we are buried with him, that being washed and purged
from our sins, we may walk in newness of life 1 Cor. i. 17.
of which the baptism of John was a figure, which was commanded for a time, and
not to continue for ever. As to the baptism of infants, it is a mere human
tradition, for which neither precept nor practice is to be found in all the
scripture.

THE THIRTEENTH PROPOSITION. Concerning the Communion, or Participation of the
Body and Blood of Christ.
THE communion of the body and Blood of Christ is inward and Spiritual 1. Cor.
x. 16, 17.
, which is the participation of his Flesh and Blood, John vi. 32, 33, 35. 1
Cor. v. 8.
by which the inward man is daily nourished in the hearts of those in whom
Christ dwells; of which things the breaking of bread by Christ with his
disciples was a figure, which they even used in the church for a time, who had
received the substance, for the cause of the weak; even as abstaining from
things strangled, and from blood, the washing one another's feet and the
anointing of the sick with oil Acts. xv, 20. John xiii. 14. James v. 14.
; all which are commanded with no less authority and solemnity than the former;
yet seeing they are but the shadows of better things, they cease in such as
have obtained the substances.

THE FOURTEENTH PROPOSITION. Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate, in
Matters purely Religious, and pertaining to the Conscience.
SINCE God has assumed to himself the power and dominion of the conscience,
who alone can rightly instruct and govern it, therefore it is not lawful for
any whatsoever, by virtue of any authority or principality they bear in the
government of this world, to force the consciences of others Luke ix. 55, 56.
Mat. vii. 12, 29. Tit. iii. 10.
; and therefore all killing, banishing, fining, imprisoning, and other such
things, which men are afflicted with, for the alone exercise of their
conscience, or difference in worship or opinion, proceeds from the spirit of
Cain, the murderer, and is contrary to the Truth: Provided always, that no man,
under the pretense of conscience, prejudice his neighbor in his life or
estate; or do any thing destructive to, or inconsistent with, human society; in
which case the law is for the transgressor, and justice to be administered upon
all, without respect of persons.

THE FIFTEENTH PROPOSITION. Concerning the Salutations and Recreations, etc.
SEEING the chief end of all religion is to redeem man from the spirit and vain
conversation of this world, and to lead into inward communion with God Ephesians. v.
11. i Pot. i John. 44. Jer. x. iii. Acts x. 26 Mat. xv. 13. Col. ii. 8.
, before whom if we fear always, we are accounted happy: therefore all the vain
customs and habits thereof, both in word and deed, are to be rejected and
forsaken by those who come to this fear; such as the taking off the hat to a
man, the bowings and cringings of the body, and such other salutations of that
kind, with all the foolish and superstitious formalities attending them; all
which man has invented in his degenerate state, to feed his pride in the vain
pomp and glory of this world; as also the unprofitable plays, frivolous
recreations, sportings and gamings, which are invented to pass away the
precious time, and divert the mind from the Witness of God in the heart, and
from the living sense of his fear, and from that evangelical Spirit where with
Christians ought to be leavened, and which leads into sobriety, gravity, and
godly fear; in which as we abide, the blessing of the Lord is felt to attend us
in those actions in which we are necessarily engaged, in order to the taking
care for the sustenance of the outward man.

A Short Account OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS; -- THEIR Rise, Religious
Principles and Settlement in America.
BY ANTHONY BENEZET.
THESE People were first distinguished by the Name of Quakers in England, about
the middle of the last century. George Fox was the principal Instrument of
gathering them into a religious society. His outward employment while young,
was chiefly in the care of sheep, and from his infancy being of a grave, solid,
observing turn of mind, was early restrained from the follies incident to
youth; solicitous, above all things, to obtain the favor of God, and to avoid
every thing which either the Scriptures or the inward principle of Divine Grace
taught him to believe was offensive to him; though in so doing many corrupt
practices, which custom had familiarized to the Professors of Christianity,
presented themselves as obstacles in his way, which for a time occasioned him
much anxiety, lest his own particular prospect should mislead him; but as he
retained an inflexible integrity, he gained experience by the things that he
suffered, and as his understanding was gradually illuminated, he received
satisfaction in the many doubts he had long painfully labored under. In the
Year 1647, and 23d year of his age, he traveled through several counties of
England, seeking out such as, in religions tenderness, were inquiring after the
way of life and salvation: these he taught both by precept and example the
benefit of retiring into silence, and instructed them to cease from all
self-performances to turn to the (...) Christ in their own hearts, and wait to
feel the instruction (...) Spirit there, that their knowledge, worship and
religious services, might not stand in the will of man, but in the power of an
endless life.

In this service of love he continued some years, and his labors were so
blessed, that great numbers were convinced by his Ministry and that of others
who were gathered into the same inward divine Principle, who at first were
called, Children of the Light. But the power and reverential awe attending them
so affected their minds, and those of the piously disposed people to whom they
ministered, as often to cause them to tremble before the Divine Majesty, under
an abasing sense of their own unworthiness, whence they were in derision called
Quakers; which name they have since been most generally known by in the world;
though from their mutual love and patient suffering of injuries, which they held
ought ever to mark the Followers of Christ, they styled themselves Friends, or
the Friends of Truth. Thus it was, that a man without any worldly advantages of
station or literature, merely by a continued attention to the guidance of that
Divine Light, which he bore testimony to in the energy and powers of his
ministry, the convincing plainness and clearness of his doctrine, and the
correspondent sanctity of his life, became an instrument in the Lord's hand, to
collect from all professions and most ranks, great numbers of piously disposed
people, who were at length embodied into a religious society, governed by one
of the best systems of Christian Discipline that history affords any account of.

These converts to the Light of Christ in the Soul of Man, were distinguishable
for a grave, sedate deportment; singular uprightness in their dealings;
punctuality in the performance of their promises; a sparingness in discourse;
great temperance and frugality at their tables; and plainness and simplicity in
their dress and behavior. They declined servile and fantastical gestures,
compliments and other customary forms of salutation (...) putting off the hat,
scraping the foot, bending the knee, (...) healths, etc. esteeming them to be
violations of that sincerty and seriousness which becomes Christians; yet
considered it their duty to treat all men with gentleness and respect. Making
use of the singular number (Thou) as most proper and consistent with Scripture
and the most approved ancient writers, avoiding the customary use of the plural
(You) when speaking to a single person, with such other flattering titles of
address as serve to feed the Pride of the human heart, accounting them both
contrary to the simplicity of the gospel and inconsistent with truth. They
disused such names of the months or days of the week as were derived from the
gods of the heathen, believing that under the gospel dispensation those
prophesies were to be fulfilled, by which the Lord declared, he would so
effectually take away the name of Baalim from his people, that they should no
more be remembered by their names Zeeh. xiii. 2. Hosea ii. 17.


They maintained that as the end of true religion is to redeem the minds of
mankind from the spirit of the world, and bring them to an inward communion
with God, that therefore the pursuit of wordly fashions, all diversions, such
as gaming, dancing, stage playing and other amusements of the same baneful
tendency, are to be refrained from, as evidently tending to raise the human
mind, which is prone to vanity, above the preserving fear of God, and to weaken
its desires after those effusions of his love and goodness, wherewith it ought
to seek daily to be leavened. For according to scripture testimony and the
correspondent evidences of Gospel Light, in their own hearts, they found, that
while men's affections are engrossed by the pleasures and delights of this
world, they are dead to a sense of the Divine Life in them; the absolute
necessity of regeneration and the power by which this great work is effected,
are both included in that doctrine of the apostle, If ye live after the flesh
ye shall d^^; but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live: for as many as are led by the Spirit of God they are the Sons of
God. Rom, viii, 13.


It was about thirty years after the first appearan^^ (...) Quakers in England,
that many of them settled in America. In the Year 1681, the province of
Pennsylvania being granted to William Penn, he removed thither with a
considerable number of his friends, mostly of the people called Quakers. It is
worthy of special notice, that most of the settlements in America were made
with little regard to any prior title in the natives; but William Penn did not
think his permission to colonize the tract of land granted to him by king
Charles II. a sufficient title to the country; but assembled the Sachems or
Princes, and obtained their consent to settle upon the extent of land that he
wanted. When it became necessary to extend the settlement, new lands were
purchased from the original possessors, which established so much love and
confidence in them toward William Penn and the first settlers of Pennsylvania,
that his and their names were, and still continue to be, revered amongst them.

Such a toleration and liberty of conscience was established in Pennsylvania,
as promoted and maintained a true sense of religion, which penal laws have ever
failed of effecting; hypocrisy and profaneness were discouraged, and those
Ecclesiastical Establishments which tend to deprive men of their religious and
civil rights avoided. William Penn granted a general toleration to all who
professed to believe in one Supreme Almighty Being; and allowed the different
sects of Christians to hold offices, and to enjoy the highest posts in the
state; as by the Charter of Privileges, dated 28th October 1701, is expressly
provided, viz. Because no people can be truly happy though under the greatest
enjoyment of Civil Liberties, if abridged of the freedom of their Consciences,
as to their religious profession and worship; and Almighty God being the only
Lord of conscience, father of lights and spirits, and the author as well as
object, of all divine knowledge, faith and worship, who only does enlighten the
minds and persuade (...) convince the understandings of people: I do hereby
gr^^ (...) declare that no person or persons inhabiting in this P^^^e or
Territories, who shall confess and acknowledge one almighty God, the creator,
upholder and ruler of the world, and profess him or themselves obliged to live
quietly under the civil government, shall be in any case molested or prejudiced
in his or their person or estate, because of his or their conscientious
persuasion or practice; nor be compelled to frequent or maintain any religious
worship, place or ministry contrary to his or their minds; or to do, or suffer
any other act or thing contrary to their religious persuasion. And that all
persons who also profess to believe in Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world,
shall be capable (notwithstanding their other persuasions and practices in
point of conscience and religion) to serve this government in any capacity,
both legislative and executively.

And in order to guard, as much as was in his power against the instability of
future human councils, William Penn provided, in the most solemn manner, in the
last paragraph of his charter, that this most essential Liberty and Privlege
should be preserved inviolate, in the following memorable conclusion of it,
viz. But because the happiness of mankind depends so much upon the enjoying of
liberty of their consciences as aforesaid, I do hereby solemnly declare,
promise and grant for me, my hiers and assigns, that the first article of this
charter, relating to Liberty of Conscience, and every part and clause therein,
according to the true intent and meaning thereof, shall be kept and remain,
without any alteration, inviolably for ever. And lastly I the said William
Penn, proprietary and governor of the province of Pennsylvania and Territories
thereunto belonging, for myself, my heirs and assigns, have solemnly declared,
granted and confirmed, and do hereby solemnly declare, grant and confirm, that
neither I, my heirs or assigns, shall procure or do, any thing or things,
whereby the liberties in this charter contained, and expressed, nor any part
thereof, shall be infringed or broken; and if any thing shall be procured or
done by any person or persons contrary to these presents, it shall be held of
no force or effect.

This general Liberty of Conscience was the natural effect of the divine
principle of light and truth professed by the Quakers, who hold none excluded
from the favor of God on account of their different religious persuasion,
provided it (...) founded on the fear of God and love to mankind. A government
established upon so liberal and extensive a plan, was an encouragement to great
numbers of different persuasions to emigrate from various countries, where many
had suffered for their non conformity to ecclesiastical requisitions, to settle
under a constitution, the basis of which was religious and civil liberty, to
which wise provision the rapid settlement and improvement of the Province has,
by the blessing of Providence been principally owing. It is a situation of
society beautiful in prospect, and happy in the enjoyment, when men mutually
give and receive liberty to live, with equality and affection; if not as
belonging to the same visible church, yet to the same fraternity of mankind;
agreeable to our blessed Savior's doctrine, One is your master, and all ye are
brethren. M^^^i. 8.
The changes which for a number of years past, have gradually prevailed in this
once peaceful land, principally owing to the great accession of people of
different dispositions from the first settlers, the views of many of whom
having been to amass wealth and aggrandize themselves, has very much reversed
the system of happiness so long and successfully pursued: hence the friendly
disposition of the Indians, conspicuous for a long course of years, in favor
of the inhabitants, has been so changed, that Pennsylvania, after enjoying an
uninterupted peace of more than sixty years, has, in common with the other
colonies, suffered severely from the incursions of the natives.

THEIR DOCTRINES.
The Universality of the Grace of GOD and its saving Effects.
THE Doctrine they principally hold is, that there is one God, almighty, holy,
pure and eternal; who of his infinite love has offered salvation, through Jesus
Christ his son, who should taste death for every man: Heb. ii. 9.
Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the
truth: 1 Timothy ii. 4.
That a gift of saving light and Grace has appeared to all men; teaching us,
that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world: Titus ii. 12.
That this light is Christ, the true Light which lights every man that comes
into the world. John i. 9.


The Divine Principle of redeeming power which under the dispensation of the
law was pointed to in types and ceremonies is by the gospel revealed to be
Christ in you (says the apostle) the hope of Glory, Col. i 27.
that is agreeable to the promise made to the fathers, that all shall know him
(i. e. the Lord) from the least of them to the greatest. Jer. xxxi. 33. I will
put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be
their God and they shall be my people.


The Quakers hold that this law of truth, this test of virtue and vice is not
hid from any part of mankind; but that every man born into the world, is
enlightened by it; the serious and well disposed Heathens, in different ages
and nations, have, under various appellations, expressed their sensibility of
the existence and efficacy of this Divine Principle, this law of God written in
the heart, to deliver from that corruption under which they labored. Socrates,
Plato, Seneca, Epictetus, and several others of the philosophers called their
disciples to an attention to its dictates. These doubtless were some of those
virtuous Heathens commended in the scriptures, Romans ii. 14. Who though they had
not, instrumentally, been taught the law, yet from a conformity to this inward
principle of divine intelligence, do by nature the things contained in the law,
were a law unto themselves, which (says the apostle) show the work of the law
written in their hearts, Ram. ii. 14, 15.
this they maintain to be a light of God's own nature; the Life of him being
the Light of men. John. 1.4.
And therefore superior to and distinct from the mere light of our natural
faculties, because it does not properly appertain to men, as fallen creatures;
but is the gift of God, superadded to them, through Jesus Christ, for their
information and assistance, in pursuing after those things which relate to the
favor of God, and their eternal Salvation. Hence the Quakers hold it as a
fundamental doctrine, that whosoever will carefully and seriously turn into
himself, with a sincere desire to know and practice his duty, will not fail to
find there a sufficient director, a ray from the fountain of light,
illuminating his understanding and assisting him to distinguish good from evil.
As says the prophet, He has showed the O man, what is good, and what does the
Lord require of thee; but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God. Mich. vi. 8.
They are persuaded that as many as resist not this light, in what ever part of
the world they live, or of what mode of religious profession they may be, it
produces holiness, righteousness, purity and other fruits acceptable to God,
agreeable to the declaration made by the apostle Peter, after he had been at
the house of Cornelius, "of a truth I Perceive that God is no respecter of
persons; but in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness,
is accepted with him. Acts. x. 34, 35. Yet shall not thy teachers be removed
into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers; and thine ears
shall hear a word behind thee saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye
turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. Isa. xxx. 20.21.


They esteem the scriptures of the old and new testament above all other
writings, believing them to be given by Divine Inspiration, as a rule of faith
and practice, in subordination to the light and spirit of God, which is the
primary rule -- that much depends on the scriptures being judged of under the
influence of the same Divine Spirit which gave them forth; that otherwise, in
the hands of men actuated by their corrupt propensities, they may and have been
used as a pretext for doing many things abhorrent to the nature and spirit of
the gospel. Witness those terrible persecutions which a false zeal, joined to a
wrong construction of the scripture, have occasioned. They decline to call them
the Word of God, as being a denomination properly attributed to Christ alone;
and they are the more scrupulous in this respect, because people are apt to be
hereby led to think that if they have the scriptures, they have all that is
necessary to salvation, and look for no further Word or Light.

ON WAR.
THE Quakers absolutely declare against being concered in the destruction of
their fellow men, who equally with themselves are the objects of saving grace;
hence they can take no part in war, being persuaded that all wars stand in
opposition to the intent and nature of the gospel: war being the sad effect of
the fall of man; a fall from meekness, purity and love, into sensuality, pride,
revenge and wrath. The apostle James, chap. 4th, has stated the question with
respect to the cause of war so as to preclude all difficulty and doubt about
it, From whence come wars and fightings among you, come they not hence, even of
your lusts. Jam. iv. 1.
The evident fruits of a spirit contrary to the spirit of Christ, opposite both
in its nature and effects to the pure religion he has called men to the
practice of; wherefore they are convinced that the followers of the meek and
peaceable Jesus, ought to take no part in war; but rather to labor in the
ability received from the blessed mediator, to reconcile men unto God and one
unto another. Blessed, says our merciful Savior, are the meek for they shall
inherit the earth; Blessed are the peace makers for they shall be called the
children of God, Matt. v. 5.9.
they will enjoy that peace of God which passes all understanding. And the
apostle speaking of the believers adds, Though we walk in the flesh, we do not
war after the flesh, for the weapons of our warefare are not carnal. 2. Cor. x.
3, 4.
They look upon the gospel of Jesus Christ to be an eminent display of divine
benignity and love to mankind; that the son of God, took upon him flesh, and
suffered, and died, to destroy that enmity which, through sin, had prevailed over
the whole human race, and to restore unto fallen man the first life of purity
and love; leaving us says the apostle an example that ye should follow his
steps. 1 Pet. ii. 21
They believe the wars mentioned in the old Testament afford no argument for
its continuance under the gospel, which is declared to be the bringing in of a
better hope, by the which we draw nigh unto God, Heb. vii. 19.
a dispensation of peculiar love and mercy to mankind, which our Savior
himself distinguishes from the former dispensation, when he says: Ye have heard
that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but I say
unto you, That ye resist not evil; again Ye have heared that it has been said,
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy: but I say unto you, Love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to thom that hate you, and
pray for them which dispitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be the
children of your father which is in heaven. Matt. v. 38, 39, 48, 44, 45.


Agreeable to this is the testimony of most, if not all the ancient fathers,
Jus. Martyr, Tertu. Ambrese C^rys. Hierom, Athan, Cyill. Alex. etc. Isal. ii.
4. Mich. iv. 3. They shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears
into pruning hooks: Nation shall not list up sword against nation -- neither
shall they learn war any more.
and faithful christians of the first three hundred years after Christ, as
their writings clearly show, wherein they declare that the prophecies of Isaiah
and Micah, I uke. ii. 14.
relating to the establishment of the peaceable reign of the Messiah, as well
as the declaration made by the Angels at the birth of Christ, of Peace on
Earth, good will toward men, Romans xii 21.
was verified in the experience of the faithful in their days.

The inspired apostle describes the fruits of the Holy Spirit to be love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekess, temperance, Gal.
v. 22, 23.
so that these important truths experienced, by holy men so early and latter
ages, manifest that this doctrine and firm persuasion of the Quakers is not
new; and it must be allowed, that essential service may arise from their
holding up the efficacy of this divine principle which leads to overcome evil
with good, Romans xii 21.
to a world distracted with wrath, covetousness and pride; nor should it appear
strange that the doctrine of the cross of Christ is mysterious to the carnal
wisdom of man, it was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Creeks
foolishness; but unto them which are called, says the apostle, it is the power
of God and Wisdom of God. 1 Cor. i. 23. 24.


And however threatening the maintenance of this peaceable testimony may appear,
of bringing deep suffering upon those who are faithful therein; yet they
believe that Christ, the blessed Shepherd of his flock, will ever uphold those
who faithfully follow him, in the meek, forgiving, suffering spirit. They
cannot consider victories obtained by the destruction of men, as occasions of
rejoicing; much less as subjects of thanksgiving to a God of love, of peace and
goodness, 1 John. iv. 16. God is love; and he that dwells in love, dwells
in God and God in him.
the creator of mankind; but regard them as occasions of lamentation and
mourning, and that both on account of those who, inflamed with rage, and
defiled with blood, are precipitated into an awful eternity, and those who are
left to share and deplore the desolations of war; also in the consideration,
that the understanding of any, who bear the christian name, should be so
exceedingly blind to the nature of the gospel, as to imagine its Divine Author,
who declares He came not to destroy men's lives; but to save them, Luke ix. 56.
can look, with favor on such addresses, as arise from a conduct totally
repugnant to the great end of his coming.

OF WORSHIP.
THEY look upon Divine Worship to be the most solemn act the mind of man is
capable of being engaged in, and in consideration of the high and inconceivable
majesty of Almighty God, think it their duty to approach him with the greatest
reverence. They assert that the true worship of God is in Spirit and in Truth,
not limited to any place or time, agreeable to our Lord's declaration to the
woman of Samaria; The hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks suck to
worship him. John iv. 23.
but is to be performed through the operation of the Spirit of Jesus Christ our
Lord, who regards the prayer of the humble and contrite, that in sincerity seek
him, and has declared, where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midst of them; Matt. xviii. 20.
to revive the spirit of the humble and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones. Isa. lvii. 15.


They acknowledge no priestly office to subsist under the gospel dispensation,
in any other sense than as every sincere christian may be called a priest as he
others up to God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, from a pure and
contrite heart, in which respect the apostle calls all christians a royal
priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices -- an holy nation, a peculiar
people. 1 Pet. ii. 5, 9.


They apprehend it their duty to be deligent in assembling themselves together
for the public worship of almighty God, when such as are duly prepared by being
gathered into a composed awful frame of mind, are enabled under the influence
of divine grace to worship, in solemn silence, during the whole time of the
meeting, or if moved thereto, to pray or preach (i. e. prophecy) as the Spirit
gives them utterance; agreeable to the practice of the primitive church,
without distinction of quality or sex; every one who is of a sober life and
approved conversation, if divinely called or moved thereto, is permitted to
speak in their assemblies, and as such persevere therein, to the satisfaction
of the congregation, they are recommended as gospel ministers. They say, that
as well at meals as on all other occasions, a sense of gratitude should be
lived in for the blessing, preservation, and support we daily receive,
particularly looking up to God and waiting to feel the motion of his Spirit to
animate to mental prayer, without which all vocal expression is insufficient.

They think men ought to be very careful in their pretensions to the
ministerial gifts, it being very presumptuous and dangerous in any to take upon
them that high office without being divinely called thereto, and that no man
has a sufficient ground to think he is called to the ministry by the Holy
Ghost, without a clear putting forth of the Spirit hi his heart, from a sense
of duty to God, and a feeling, pressing, disinterested love to the brethren, to
the satisfaction of the congregation or meeting he belongs to. This to them
appears to comprehend the substance of the primative ordination in the
apostolic age. To settle salaries and pensions for the maintenance of the
ordained preachers, who afterward exact them as a debt, they look upon as a
dishonor to the ministry of the gospel, degrading it to a worldly traffic:
That agreeable to our Savior's positive command, Having freely received they
ought freely to give. Matt. x. 8.
The apostle Paul declared, That his own hands had ministered unto his
necessities. Acts xx. 34.


As the Ouakers held it a fundamental doctrine, That it is the Spirit that
gives life, 2 Cor. iii. 6. ^ 1 Cor. i. 20.
That God has made foolish the wisdom of this world, they cannot esteem human
learning to be a necessary qualification to the ministry, the apostle declares
to the believers, That not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish things, and the weak
things of the world to (...) the things which are mighty; you and things which
are not, to bring is naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his
presence. And my speech and my preaching was not with (...) of words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of spirit and power; that your faith should not
stand in he wisdom of men, but in the power of God. 1 Cor. i. 26. -- ii. 4, 5.


For the same reason they utterly disclaim that divinity, falsely so called,
taught in the schools, and those degrees conferred in Academies; the nature of
which, they look upon, tends to puff up the vain mind in estimation of its own
importance, to assume lordship and to seek honor one from another, in
opposition to the advice of our Savior to his disciples, Not to be called
Rabbi; but directs to a brotherly equality among his disciples, One is your
Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethen. Matt. xxiii. 8.
They also refuse to pay tithes or to contribute to the support of a hireling
ministry, looking upon the forcible demand of the clergy of all denominations,
who claim a maintenance by laws, to be an usurpation not in the least warranted
by, but contrary to scripture, under the gospel which they are in conscience
obliged to withstand.

They assert that amongst the many mistaken practices which have been
introduced, and correspond not with the voice of Christ the only Shepherd, of
the Soul none appear more opposed to the meek, and humble, self-denying state
of the gospel, than the practice of those Who (...) for hire and divine for
mo^^^, Micah iii. 11.
who are generally ready to prepare war against those who put not (...) their
Mouths, Cap. iii. 5. Heb. viii. 11.
and arrogate to themselves, that they, by virtue of their several ordinations
are the only guides and shepherds, in all Christians, who are to receive the
gospel from their lips, in contradiction to the promise made to the believers,
That all should know the Lord from the least to the grea^^^^

Not withstanding the testimony of the Quakers is against those (...) among the
different denominations, that labor in (...) own will* who preach for hire and
divine for money, yet (...) such among them who are men fearing God and (...)
^^^etousness, and have engaged in that weighty service (...) ^^pre^ension of
duty nor do they deny that the Spirit (...) ^^ace sometimes condescends to
cooperate with the religious ^abours of such: Nevertheless they cannot direct
the searcher^ after truth to the ministry of any man, but to the immediate
teaching of the word ^igh in the heart, even the Spirit of God, which is the
only infallible teacher, the primary adequate rule of faith and practice, which
will lead those who attend to its dictates into the knowledge of truth and
righteousness.

And as there is a general dispensation of Divine Grace, alike to male and
female, who in scripture are declared to be all one in Christ, they admit that
women have a like call to the ministry as the men, and are made equally
partakers of the same enlargement of Spirit, peculiar to the gospel times; as
was clearly prophesied by the prophet Joel and confirmed by the apostle Peter
at the time of pentecost, viz. That God would pour out of his Spirit upon all
flesh and their sons and their daughters should prophesy -- and on my servants
and on my handmaids will I pour out, in those days, of my Spirit, and they
shall prophesy, Acts ii. 17, 18.
the apostle Paul, also, gives directions to both sexes, how they are to behave
themselves in their public praying or prophesying, both which signify speaking
unto men to exhortation and comfort. Whence it may safely concluded, that the
prohibition that apostle lays on a woman's speaking, of which such a handle is
made to deprive the church of so great a benefit, was only intended as a check
to the unwarrantable activity of some women, at that peculiar time, and by no
means in contradiction to what himself had said in confirmation of the
forementioned prophesy.

ON BAPTISM AND THE SUPPER.
THE Quakers being convinced that no outward practice can give a possession in
the kingdom of God, but it is solely the renovation of heart called in
scripture the New Creature, that can justly entitle us to the appellation of
Children of God, agreeable to the apostle's doctrine, Romans xvi. 17.
That the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost, they see no necessity for continuing the use of
water baptism, and the outward supper in the church, esteeming these to have
been used only as figures pointing to the substance, and abstractedly
considered of no greater avail than Washing the feet, circumcision or any
Jewish rite to the renovation of mind we stand in need of; yet believe there
are those who use these signs in uprightness, and that the Lord, who respects
the disposition of the mind more than any outward circumstance, condescends to
favor such with the blessing of peace: They agree that some of the apostles
used water baptism, in the infant state of the church, while the Jewish part of
the believers remained under some attachment to the preceding shadowy
dispensation of the law; but we may observe that Paul the apostle of the
Gentiles, who was not under those prejudices says, That Christ sent him not to
baptize, ^t to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17
and declares the baptizing power of the Holy Ghost to be an essential means of
admission into the church of Christ, For, says he, by one Spirit are we all
baptiszed into one holy, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or
free; and have been all made to drink into one spirit. 1 Cor. xii, 18.
The same apostle expressly declares, That there is one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism. ^ph. iv. 5.
And the apostle Peter, That the baptism which saves, is not the putting away
of the faith of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward, God, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. iii. 21.


Now in this advanced age of the church when Christ is confessed, by all
denominations of christians to be the great Antitype, in whom all the figures
and shadows of the law are fulfilled, for any to insist on the Perpetuation of
these forms, and place their dependence thereon for the accomplishment of that
work of salvation, which can only be wrought by his saving spirit and power,
they apprehend is to derogate from his honor, and tends to stop the seeking
mind in a dangerous dependence on something short of the true object. Thus the
water baptism of John was carefully distinguished, by himself, from that of
Christ by which the purification of the soul is effected, I indeed says he,
baptize you with water unto repentance; but he that comes after me is rightier
than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost and with Fire. Matt. ^^ 11.
Accordingly when in obedience to Christ's directions, the disciples were
asser^led at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, and then experienced the
descent of this baptizing power upon them, it opened their mouths in testimony
to its quickening influences; and when afterward, under the same divine
qualification, Peter began to preach to some at the house of Cornelius, he
says, The Holy Ghost fell on than, as on us at the beginning; Then remembered I
the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with water; but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Acts. xi. 15.16.


The like spiritual acceptance the Quakers give to the Lord's supper, the
outward practice of which they apprehend was only to continue until he came by
his spiritual appearance, who as the antitype, fulfilled the law and put an end
to all the Jewish rites; and that they who experience his coming a second time,
without sin unto salvation, feel the force and propriety of the apostle's
rebuke, and dare not return to the beggarly elements Gal. iv. 8, 9. When you
knew not God ye did service unto them, which by nature are no Gods; bur now
after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to
the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage.
but desire to feed by says on him who testified thus of himself, Whosoever eats
my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day; for my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him; John.
vi. 54, 55, 56.
which declaration clearly points to the communication of his divine nature,
alluded to where he is described as standing at a door, waiting for an entrance
to bless the hungry soul with the enjoyment of it; Behold, I stand at the door
and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him
and will step with him, and he with me. Rev iii. 22.
This is the holy supper and blessed communion of saints, which the living
members of the church experience and is still continued to the followers of
Christ: So that though they reject the use of those outward ceremonies, yet
they are advocates for the true spiritual baptism and the Lord's supper, which
are those inward and spiritual graces to which the figures point.

ON SWEARING.
THEY teach a strict regard to Truth without swearing, according to the
injunction of our blessed Savior, Swear not at all; but let your communication
be yea; nay, nay -- for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil, Matt. v.
34, 37.
and the exhortation of the apostle James, But above all things my brethren
swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath;
but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay ^ lest ye fall into condemnation."
James v. 12.
apprehending that where the mind is under the tie and bond of truth, there can
be no necessity for oaths and asseverations, which are evidently the least
regarded by those who make the freest use of them: Yet willing to submit to any
punishment for false affirming which others are liable to for perjury. And in
this there is reason to believe they follow the example of the fathers of the
five first centuries, who according to Dr. Whitby (in his dissert. de script.
interp. p. 154,) and other authors agree, that oaths of all kinds were unlawful
to christians in the first centuries of the church.

ON SLAVERY.
THE Slavery, which during a long course of years has subsisted in America,
promoted by a cruel and criminal trade, carried on both from Europe and
America, for the fixed purpose of purchasing the African Negroes, in order to
subject them to a state of bondage, being one of the great evils now prevailing
among the professors of christianity, when considered in its nature and
effects, as well to the Negroes, as to their lordly oppressors and their
unhappy offspring, has particularly engaged the attention of this religious
society, who have required all their members to avoid being, in any respct,
concerned in the support of this infamous trassick; and have also enjoined all
their members who hare any of these oppressed people in possession, that they
should, without delay, set them at liberty, and directed that such who refused
to comply with this injunction, shall be considered as no longer in fellowship
with them, and to have renounced their right of membership. And having also
observed the many disadvantages these afflicted people labor under in point of
education and otherwise, a tender care has taken place to promote their
instruction in school learning, and also their religious and temporal welfare,
in order to qualify them for becoming reputable members of society.

Their DISCIPLINE and ECONOMY.
RELIGIOUS Society, in its simplest form, being an agreement of its members to
watch over each other for good, as in this lapsed state of existence, we are
subject to many weaknesses and stand in need of the care and counsel one of
another; hence discipline; for the well government of such a society becomes
necessary. Thus where a number of this people are settled in a neighborhood,
and belong to one established meeting for worship, if any individual falls Into
indigent circumstances, when such case becomes known, relief is administered;
or if any member walk disorderly, or a report is spread to his disadvantage,
that person of the society who first observes or hears thereof, is enjoined
privately to admonish him, carefully avoiding a disclosure of the matter to a
third person, until repeated trials to reclaim him prove ineffectual. He is
then to take a judicious person with him, and if their united endeavors prove
also fruitless, his case is made known to the overseers, of which there are
generally one or more in each particular meeting; whose business is to see that
the order and rules of the society are observed, and who after visiting the
offender, and finding him irreclaimable, first apprize him of their intention,
and then lay his case before the elders, overseers and other members of the
meeting he belongs to, where if none are inclined to visit him again, it is
carried forward to the monthly meeting, which is a meeting generally made up of
the members of several such particular meetings as lie contiguous to it; here a
committee is commonly deputed to use further endeavors to convince and regain
the offender; but if after repeatedly visiting and waiting upon him a proper
time, no sign of amendment is reported, that meeting proceeds to testify its
disapprobation of his conduct, and that he has thereby excluded himself from a
right of membership in the society. This testification it is usual to deliver
him a copy of, and inform him of his right of appeal from their judgment, to
the quarterly meeting, which consists of the members who constitute the monthly
meetings within each county; and from the quarterly meeting appeals also lie to
the yearly meeting, which is a collection of all the quarterly meetings; here
appeals are finally determined, rules for the government of the society are
agreed on; with such advices as from time to time appear necessary.

THE Quakers refusal to unite in any thing of a warlike nature, which proceeds
from a conviction that every measure which tends to the destruction of mankind
is inconsistent with the nature of the Gospel; their refusing to join in
public rejoicing for successes obtained in war; their denying to swear in any
case; to pay tithes, or to contribute to the support of the national ministry;
as well as their nonconformity to the common modes of address, etc. have
subjected them to much obloquy and many grievious sufferings, which
nevertheless have been much mitigated by the indulgence different governments
have extended to them, convinced by their patient sufferings, that their
profession of conscientious scruples were sincere; and that nothing dangerous
to civil society could be apprehended from a people who utterly disclaimed the
use of arms, or of being in any wife concerned in fomenting divisions or civil
commotions, and who think it their duty to contribute their endeavors for the
peace and welfare of every country where their lots are cast, and are willing
cheerfully to comply with every just requisition, for the support of the civil
order of government, not inconsistent with what they apprehend is their duty to
God. They are careful to minister to the necessities of these among them whose
circumstances call for relief, not suffering any of their members to become a
public charge; they moreover cheerfully pay their equal assessment with
others, for the support of the general poor. Nor have any other people
manifested a greater desire and willingness to promote the welfare of civil
society, by their liberality in contributing to the relief of the poor, and in
attention to the care of them; and in the management of those institutions
which have been established for the benefit of the community at large: For a
considerable number of years many of them were concerned with others in the
legislative and executive part of civil government, wherein they manifested a
firm attachment to the constitutional rights of the people; but as acting in
these stations was attended with snares and temptations, it was the concern of
their yearly meeting to excite such a watchful care against deviating from
their christian, peaceable principles; and at length as the inhabitants became
numerous, by emigrations from Europe and otherwise, and the holding public
offices was attended with greater difficulty, services being required which
interfered more immediately with their religious principles, the yearly meeting
advised their members to withdraw therefrom, perceiving that the seeking or
accepting of offices in legislation or magistracy was dangerous, and frequently
injurous to the individuals in a religious sense; more especially when sought
for and accepted for the sake of the profits, emoluments and worldly honors
annexed to them, tending to debase the mind to the odious bondage of ambition
and avarice.

IF upon observing the conduct of many who profess themselves members of this
religious society, any should be offended at the great deviation, which appears
in the practice of such from their principles as set forth in the foregoing
account, they are desired to consider the frailty and corruption of the human
heart in its fallen-state; its natural biass and attachment to the world, to
its delights, its friendship and honors, and remember how repugnant these
propensities are to the precepts and self-denying example left us by our Lord;
that the necessary charge of heart which the gospel proposes, is not gained by
birth, but must be purchased by submission to, and an humble abiding under the
cross of Christ. When this is duly weighed, it will not appear strange if the
instances of defection are many; it was early the case amongst the believers in
the primitive ages of christianity, when they grew numerous, and has been the
case in all religious-societies since that time. Nevertheless it is great cause
of encouragement to the upright enquirer, that a large number of those people
are mercifully preserved, in an eminent degree faithful to their first
principles and doctrine, and upright in their life and conversation, who are
living monuments of the efficacy and all-sufficient grace of God, as witnesses
for him and for his truth and righteousness on earth.

They who are desirous of more full information respecting the doctrine and
principles of this people, are referred to the writings of Robert Barclay,
William Penn, C^orge Whitel^ad and others, by whom they are fully set forth, as
also of late times by Joseph Phipps.

Matt. xvi. 24. Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.
Further Considerations on WAR.
(BY THE SAME AUTHOR.)
THE temporal miseries and wrongs which are the sad effects of war, are neither
to be numbered nor expressed. -- What theivery bears any proportion to that
which with the boldness of drum and trumpet, plunders the innocent of all they
have? and if themselves are left alive, with all their limbs, or their
daughters unravished, they have many times only the ashes of their consumed
houses to lie down upon. -- What honor has war gotten, from its thousands and
tens of hundreds of thousands of men slaughtered on heaps, with as little
regret or concern as at loads of rubbish thrown into a pit -- Who but the fiery
dragon, would put a wreath, of laurel on such heroes heads. Who but he, could
say unto them. Well done, good and faithful servants. But there is still an
evil of war much greater, though less regarded, apparent to those who reflect,
how many hundreds of thousands of men, born into this world, for no other end
but that they may, by being born again of Christ, from sons of Adam's misery,
became sons of God, and fellow-heirs with Christ, in everlasting glory; who
reflects, I say, what nameless numbers of these are robbed of God's precious
gift of life to them, before they have known the one sole benefit of living,
who are not suffered to stay in this world, till age and experience have helped
them to know the inward voice and operation of God's spirit, have helped them
to find and feel that evil, curse, and sting of sin and death, which must be
taken from within them, before they can die the death of the righteous; who
instead of this, have been either violently forced or tempted in the fire of
youth, and full strength of sinful lusts, to forget God, eternity, and their
own souls, and rush into kill or be killed, with as much furious haste and
goodness of spirit, as tiger kills tiger for the sake of his prey. Amongst
unfallen creatures in heaven, God's name and nature is love, light and glory --
to the fallen sons of Adam, that which was love, light, and glory in heaven,
becomes infinite pity and compassion on earth, in a God, clothed with the
nature of his fallen creature, bearing all its infirmities, entering into all
its troubles, and in the meek innocence of a lamb of God; living a life and
dying a death of all sufferings due to sin, Sing! O ye heavens! and shout all
ye lower parts of the earth, for this is our God, that varies not, whose first
creating love knows no change, but into a redeeming pity toward all his fallen
creatures. Look now at warring Christendom, what smallest drop of pity toward
sinners is to be found in it? or how could a spirit, all hellish, more fully
contrive and hasten their destruction; it stirs up and kindles every passion of
fallen nature, that is contrary to all humble, all-meek, all-loving,
all-forgiving, all-saving spirit of Christ -- it unites, it drives, and
compells nameless numbers of unconverted sinners to fall murdering and
murdered, amongst flashes of fire, with the wrath and swiftness of lightning,
into a fire infinitely worse than that in which they died -- O sad subject for
thanksgiving days, whether in popish or protestant churches; for if there is a
joy of all the angels in heaven for one sinner that repents, what a joy must
there be in hell, over such multitudes of sinners, not suffered to repent? And
if they who have converted many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars in
the firmament forever, what Chorazin woe may they not justly fear, whose proud
wreath, and vain glory, have robbed such numberless troops of poor wretches, of
all time and place of knowing what righteousness they wanted for the salvation
of their immortal souls. Most lamentable was the calamity, or rather grievous
judgment, which befell the English State, by means of the intestine wars which
prevailed between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, in support of their
claim to the crown. We are told in history. That above one hundred thousand me^
perished in the several conflicts which ensued on that debate, with great
numbers of the principal men of the nation, amongst whom were more than fifty
of the royal blood, who laid down their lives either in battle or by the hands
of the public executioner. And here an awful consideration occurs -- What did
either party obtain by his lamentable devastation and destruction of their
fellow creatures, their countrymen, their brethen, called to be heirs of the
same salvation.
Here my pen trembles in my hand -- But when, O! when will one single christian
church, people, or language, tremble as the share they have in this death of
sinners -- Again, would you further see the fall of the universal church, from
being led by the Spirit of Christ, to be guided by the inspiration of the great
fiery dragon, look at all European Christendom failing round the globe, with
fire and sword, and every murdering art of war, to seize the possessions and
steal or kill the inhabitants of the Africa and the Indies -- What natural
right of man, what supernatural virtue, which Christ bro't down from heaven, is
not here trodden under foot? -- all that you ever read or heared of heathen
barbarity, was here outdone by christian conquerors. What wars of christians
against christians, blended with scalping heathens, have stained the earth and
the seas with human blood, for a miserable share in the spoils of a plundered
heathen world; a world which should have heard, or seen, or felt nothing from
the followers of Christ, but a divine love that had forced them from distant
lands, and through the perils of long seas, to visit strangers, with those glad
tidings of peace and salvation, to all the world, which angels from heaven, and
shepherds on earth, proclaimed at the birth of Christ.

But to know whether christianity admits of war, christianity is to be
considered as in its right state; now the true state of the world, turned
christian, is thus described by the great Gospel-prophet, who showed what a
change it was to make in the fallen state of the world; It shall come to pass,
in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in
the top of the mountains, and all nations shall flow into it, and many people
shall say, Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord's house, and he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, Isa. ii. 2. Now what follows
from this going up of the nations to the mountain of the Lord's house, the holy
prophet expressly tells you in the following words: They shall beat their
swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks: nation shall not
lift up its sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more, Isa.
ii. 4. Mic. iv. 3. This is the prophet's true Christendom, with one and the
same essential divine mark se^ upon it, as when the Lamb of God said, By this
shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another, as I have
loved you, John xiii. 34. Christ's kingdom is no where come, but where the
works of the devil are destroyed, and men are turned from the power of satan
unto God -- God is only another name for the highest and only good, and the
highest and only good means nothing else but love, with all its works. Would
you farther see when and where the kingdoms of this fallen world are become a
kingdom of God, the Gospel prophet tells you, that it is then and there where
all enmity cease. The wolf, says he, shall dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard shall lie down with the kid: the calf and the young lion, and the
s^tling together, and a little child shall lead them. The cow and the bear
shall feed, and their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall
eat straw like the ox. The sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and
the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den -- for they shall not
heart and destroy in all my holy mountain, Isa. xi. 6. See here a kingdom of God
on the earth; it is nothing else but a kingdom of mere love, where all hurt and
destroying is done away, and every work of enmity changed into one united power
of heavenly love -- but observe again and again, whence this comes to pass,
that God's kingdom on earth is, and can be nothing else, put the power of
reigning love; the prophet tells us, it is because in the days of his kingdom
the earth, shall be fall of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea.

Hence we are enjoined, by our blessed Savior, to pray for, and continually to
watch over every suggestion of our corrupt minds, which may impede the
accomplishment of these gracious promises: Thy kingdom come, thy will be done
in earth, as is done in heaven. The frequent accounts we meet with in the Old
Testament, of wars being carried on in the time of the law, gives no sanction
to the same practice under the gospel; as this last dispensation is a wondrous
display of divine benignity and love, pronouncing those only blessed, who are
found in the actual possession of that poverty of spirit, that meekness and
purity of heart, which was pointed out in types and ceremonies, under the law;
hence the gospel dispensation is declared to be the bringing in of a better
hope, by which we draw nigh unto God, Heb. vii. 19.

We are Christians, not Jews, and are therefore required to attend to the
instruction and practice of our great and good exampler, Jesus Christ, who was
declared from heaven to be the beloved Son of God; and whose appearance on
earth was ushered in by the angels and heavenly host, with a publication of
peace on earth, and good will toward men. The prophecies which preceded our
Savior's coming, clearly pointed to the greater excellency of the
dispensation, which was to take place when He, the peaceable Shiloh, the desire
of nations should come, unto whom the gathering of the people was to be, Hag.
ii. 7.

The primitive christians bore a testimony to the inconsistency of war with the
gospel. Robert Barclay, in his Apology, says, That this was the judgment of
most (if not all) the ancient fathers, (so called) the first three hundred
years after Christ. They affirmed the prophecies of Isa^^ and Micah, respecting
the peaceable reign of the Messiah, to be fulfilled in the christians of their
time. Origin (who wrote in the beginning of the third century) confirms this in
his answer to Celsus, a most virulent adversary, who had charged the christians
with refusing to bear arms, and to enter into military employment. Origin
contra Celsum, lib. 8 P. 426. Cantab editio.
Many of the Reformers favored the same sentiment, particularly John Wickliff;
the first eminent instrument raised in opposition to the errors and corruptions
then prevalent in the world; of whom we are told in the account of his life,
Life of John Wickliff, etc. by W. Gilpin.
That he thought the whole trade of war was sinful.

We find by the accounts we meet within John Fox's Acts and Monuments of the
Church, that the same testimony against war was maintained amongst the
followers of Wickliff. This appears more particularly, from a representation,
called Conclusions and Reformations, laid before the parliament, by those first
Reformers, the 17th of Richard the IId, in the year 1395, as mentioned vol. 1.
p. 579. It farther appears from what John Fox calls, "The godly Declaration of
Walter Brute;"of whose sufferings for the truth, he gives us a large account,
at page 554. An extract of the said Walter's expressions, on that head, are as
follows, viz.

I marvel why wise men, leaving the plain and manifest doctrine of Christ,
whereby he teaches patience, do seek corners of their own imagining, to the
intent they may approve fightings and wars; why mark they not after what manner
Christ spoke to Peter, striking the high bishop's servant, saying, Put up the
sword into the sheath; for every one that shall take the sword shall perish
with the sword.

Again, the apostle writing to the Corinthians, as touching judgment and
contention, which are matter of less weight than are fightings; he writes, Now
verily there is great fault in you, that ye be at law amongst yourselves; why
rather take ye not wrong? why rather suffer ye not deceit. And that apostle
generally in all his epistles, teaches, that patience should be kept, and not
corporal resistance by fightings, because charity is patient, it is courteous,
it s^ffereth all things. I marvel how they justify, and make good the wars by
christians, saving only the wars against the devil and sin. For seeing that it
is plain, that those things which were in the Old Testament, were figures of
things to be done in the New Testament, therefore we must needs say, that
corporal wars being then done, were figures of the christian wars against sin
and the devil, for the heavenly country, which is our inheritance. Wickliff
thought all arts which administered to the luxuries of life, were prohibited by
the gospel. The scripture, he said, tells us that having food and raiment, we
should be therewith content. Be^hner, though a popish writer, gives a very
favorable account of Wickliff's disciples. He says they were men of a serious
modest deportment, avoiding all ostentation in dress; chaste and temperate;
never seen in taverns, or amused by the trifling gaieties of life -- that they
utterly despised wealth, being fully content with bare necessaries. Gilpin's
life of Wickliff.
-- Hence it appears that these first Reformers, as well as the primitive
christians, took our Savioar's injunction, Matt. vi. 19. Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon ca^h, in a more literal sense than it has been
understood by many high professors in more latter days. They were sensible of
the truth of his declaration, Mark x. 23. That it would be hard for those that
had accumulated riches, had added house to house and field to field to enter
the kingdom of heaven.


In the times which preceded our Savior's appearance on earth, every battle of
the warrior was with the confused noise, and garments rolled in blood, but the
warfare which was to be introduced by HIM, the Prince of Peace, of the increase
of whose government there is to be no end, was to be "with burning and fuel of
fire," This expression; Of the increase of whose government, there is to be no
end, appears to point out that the preval^ncy of the suffering spirit of the
gospel in the world, is to be a gradual work, which will be brought about under
suffering to the followers of Christ, as it was to their Master? who was made
parfect through suffering.
Isaiah ix. 5. to the destruction of the man of sin, the corrupt propensity of
nature, and establishment of that purity of heart and universal love, which the
gospel proposes.

The apostle tells the believers, Ephesians. vi. 12. That they warred not after the
flesh. 2 Cor. x. 4. That the weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down the strong holds, casting down every
imagination, and high thins which exalts itself against the knowledge of God,
and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. It was by
meekness and patient suffering, that our Savior overcame and gave a deadly
blow to sin; leaving us an example that we should follow his footsteps. Learn
of me, says this blessed Redeemer, for I am meek and low, and ye shall find
rest to your souls. Blessed are the meek, and merciful, and those who hunger
and thirst after righteousness, (with this blessed promise) for they shall be
filled. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called THE CHILDREN OF
GOD, Mat. v. And to his disciples, when he sent them to preach the Gospel, he
says, behold I send you as lambs amongst wolves. The evangelick prophet had a
clear prospect of the abasement and sufferings of our Savior, when he says, He
was oppressed and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a
lamb to the slaughter and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened
not his mouth, Isa. liii. 7.

The efficacy of this suffering spirit of Christ was contrary to the natural
will, and a mystery to the reasoning part in man; it was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, and still remains a mystery to
the wisdom of the world, 1 Cor. 1.22.

Our Savior himself, in the course of his precepts, clearly distinguished the
greater purity of the doctrine he was about to establish, from the
imperfectness of that practiced in the former dispensations; Mat. v. Ye have
heard that it has been said to them of old times -- an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth, but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil. Again: Ye have
heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine
enemy, but I say unto you, love your enemies, It is certainly as easy to
reconcile the greatest contradiction as these declarations of our Lord's with
the practice of war, resist not evil, which distress and annoy those we are
contending with; love your enemies which contrive every method to spoil, to
make a prey of, and pursue them with fire and sword.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be the children of
your Father which is in heaven. A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another as I have loved you, John xiii. 34.


Hence we have reason to believe, that the injunction and allowance granted to
the Jews, of making war upon their enemies, and one upon another; was in
consequence of that hardness of heart, which prevailed amongst them; and that
this permission was granted from the same motive, as that mentioned by our
Lord, when the Jews were pleading the license given them by Moses, to put away
their wives and marry other women, Mark x. 5 For the hardness of your hearts,
Moses wrote you this precept; but from the beginning of the creation God made
them male and female -- what therefore God has joined together, let no man put
asunder. This, as well as war, slavery, and other practices of the like nature,
were a violence upon that union, purity and brotherly love, which subsisted in
the beginning, in the original constitution of things, whilst man retained his
primative innocence. And that the spilling of human blood was not acceptable in
the eyes of perfect Purity, who the apostle denominates under the appellation
of love, God is Love, appears from the prohibition laid upon king David, not to
build an house unto God, on account of his having been concerned in the
destruction of so many of his fellow creatures, as himself declared, 1 Chronicles.
xxii. 8. The word of the Lord came to me, saying, Thou have shed blood
abundantly, and have made great wars; thou shall not build an house unto my
name, because thou have shed much blood upon the earth in my fight.

That pious, learned man, bishop Tailor, chaplain to king Charles the 1st, in
his dedication to his Discourse on the liberty of Prophesying, printed in
London, 1702; appears to have had a clear prospect of what must be the genuine
effect of the doctrine and power, which our blessed Savior came to communicate
to mankind, even that inexpressible love, which breathing peace and goodwill to
every individual, knows of no enemy; but, in Jesus Christ, embraces with
brotherly affection, the whole creation. He expresses himself as follows at
page 3. etc. As contrary as cruelty is to mercy, tyranny to charity; so is wa^
and bloodshed, to the meekness and gentleness of the christian religion. I had
thought, says he, of the prophecy, That under the gospel, our swords should be
turned into plow shares, and our spears into pruning hooks: I knew that no
tittle spoken by God's Spirit, should return unperformed and ineffectual; and I
was certain, that such was the excellency of Christ's doctrine, that if men
would obey it, christians should never war one against another.

IF People had never seen War kindled in a Country and between neighboring
Nations, they could hardly believe time men would be so inattentive to the
dictates of Reason, the tender feelings of humanity and the more sublime nature
and precepts of the Gospel, Mat. v. 44. Love your Enemies, bless them that
curse you; do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you and persecute you; that ye may be the Children of your Father which is
in Heaven.
as deliberately to engage in battle for the destruction of each other. That
loaded as men are with their own frailties and miseries, they should
industriously labor to increase them and contrive new ways for the ruin and
slaughter one of another. They have but a short and uncertain time to live, a
work of the greatest importance to perform, Philip. ii. 12. Work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling. -- For what is a man profited if he gain the
whole world, and lose his own Soul.
and yet will not suffer those awful moments to pass away in peace. Wars, says
an Ancient Father, are Spectacles by which the devil does cruelly sport with
Mankind. And Bishop Tailor well observes. That as contrary as cruelty is to
mercy; tyranny to charity, so is War and Bloodshed to the Meekness and
Gentleness of the Christian Religion. The apostle James has clearly answered
the question with respect to the occasion of War ^pap. iv. 1. From whence came
Wars and Fightings amongst you? come they not hence even of your lusts? How
extreme then must be that corruption which produces so desperate an effect. It
is now several years since the hand of God has been lifted up in Judgment;
great distress and sufferings have and still do attend us; multitudes of our
Fellow-men have been hurried into Eternity, and yet the people do not appear
humbled nor careful to inquire into the true cause. Sinners are chastised, and
yet remain unconverted. Let us look no where else but in ourselves for the
cause of our miseries; our Sins are our greatest Enemies and draw upon us all
the rest. We fight against those we esteem our Foes, and instead of laboring
to overcome our sins, we basely, yield to their temptations.

It is the Sighing and Supplications of the contrite hearted which God will
hear, and when his anger is passed over, He will remember his former mercies.
Let us, beloved Brethen, not forget our profession as Christians; nor the
blessing promised by Christ to the Peacemakers Mat. v. 9. Blessed are the
Peacemakers; for they shall be called the Children of God.
but let all sincerely address our common Father for ability to pray, not for
the destruction of our Enemies, who are still our Brethren, the Purchase of our
blessed Redeemer's blood; but for an agreement with them. Nor in order to
indulge our passions in the Gain and Delights of this vain World, and forget
that we are called to be as Pilgrims and Strangers in it; but that we may be
more composed and better sitted for the kingdom of God; that in the
dispensations of his good pleasure he may grant us such a Peace, as may prove
to the consolation of the Church, as well as the Nation, and be on earth an
image of the tranquillity of Heaven. Our Savior enjoins us to pray to our
Father, Mat. vi. 10. Thy will be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. --
forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors.


A FEW SERIOUS Queries and Observations. Addressed to the high perfessors of
religion in this day, by one who was long in the profession, but knew not the
power; till it pleased the Lord, by the ministry and writings of the people
called Quakers, to direct him to where alone the power is to he known, within.
By JOHN SPALDING.
WHAT IS A TRUE CHRISTIAN?
IS it one who asserts to and believes certain facts, as recorded in holy writ,
and forms certain principles and opinions thereupon; producing perhaps a
partial reformation, an abstaining from the grosser pollutions of sin, but
denying the possibility of a total cleansing and freedom from sin in this
world? Or is it one who knows not in word only, but in deed and in truth, a
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness; a being born again, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but of God? For, says our
blessed Lord, "except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God." A man may know with Nicodemus, and confess, that Christ is a teacher sent
from God, he may be able to talk much about the doctrines of the gospel, and
fancy himself secure by imputation, but what has this to do with the new birth
so essentially necessary? What can all his wisdom and understanding teach him.
Nay, he cannot come into the new birth till all is parted with. The very nature
of the thing implies a beginning again, a life as different, from his former as
light from darkness. Ye were sometime darkness, says Paul, "but now are ye
light in the Lord." Now he who knows this new birth, not a change of opinion,
not a comprehending the truths of the gospel in his understanding, or joining
this or that society, but who knows the thing itself; not the name, not the
imaginations concerning it, but the nature, the life, the essence, will such a
man be like what he was before.

The forerunner of our Lord expressly told his hearers; when preparing them for
the gospel dispensation, The axe is laid to the root of the trees, and every
tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.
What tree and what root is there meant? Is it outward or inward? Who can answer
that, but he who has felt the axe, and the destruction in a measure of the
corrupt tree? His fan is in his hand, he adds, and he will thoroughly purge his
floor; (mark "thoroughly,") what will remain then? that professors were
concerned to know, and willing to part, with all that stands in the way, that
they may know indeed what it is to be thoroughly purged, instead of denying the
possibility of it; for it is a dreadful thing to oppose or deny the power of
Christ.

Christ said, "Blessed are the pure in heart," but modern Christians, as they
would be thought, say, There is no purity of heart, but it is and must remain
deceitful above all things and desperately wicked? Again it is said, who brings
a clean thing out of an unclean? That the heart is naturally unclean as
allowed, but has not the Lord promised to cleanse his people from all their
uncleanness; mark all, what uncleanness will then remain? Some attempt to
excuse themselves by what Paul once experienced; The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; a law in the members warring against
the law of the mind. That Paul once felt that, is allowed, but did he not after
say, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit, and did he not say, "The law of the
spirit of life had made him free from the law of sin; and how could they who
were dead unto sin live any longer therein?" Does he not again say, I am dead
with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, (not natural sinful self,) but
Christ lives in me?" "I will dwell in them, and walk in them, says the Lord;
and will the Lord dwell in an unholy place? As soon would light dwell with
darkness. Satan can indeed transform himself into an angel of light, yea, he,
as God, sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. The
imagining part in man is sure to be deceived, and worship the appearance
instead of the reality, for the worldby wisdom, man by his natural or humanly
acquired abilities, knew not, nor ever can know God. "If any man, says Paul,
will be wise, let him first become a fool," that his old eye may be closed, and
the new eye which alone can discern the things of God, may be opened.

Again, Christ says, Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect. But modern Christians, as they call themselves, say there is no such
thing as perfection. O that they would consider whom they oppose by so saying.

Does not Pa^^ desire those he was writing to, to cleanse themselves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord;
and pray that others may be perfect and complete in all the will of God? What
does such plain express language mean? O the subtility of that serpent, who can
reason and argue the true meaning away; and O the lamentable state of those who
are so deceived by him, who are sitting down at ease, with the vain imagination
that what Christ has done, as they suppose for them, will be sufficient
without experiencing the work in them; who having eyes see not, and ears hear
not, in the true spiritual sense.

Again, Christ says, "Swear not at all;" but modern Christians say, We may
swear in some cases. We will reason about Christ's words, and judge ourselves
what they mean; how far they are to be obeyed or not. Though James says, "Above
all things, my brethren, "swear not." But how it is; We may swear such and such
oaths. O poor Christendom, how is thy gold become dim!

Again, Christ says, "Whosoever he be of you that forsakes "not all that he
has, he cannot be my disciple; but now Christians can keep all; their own
wisdom, their own wills, the favor of the world, its riches and friendships,
its fashions and customs; though our Lord says, "Whoever is the friend of the
world, is the enemy of God;" and Paul says, If (...) please them, I am not the
servant of Christ.

A FEW REASONS For leaving the National Established Mode of Worship, Addressed
principally to those who attend at the place called ST. GILES's CHURCH, READING.
"Prove all things, hold fast that which is good," 1 These. v. 21.
FRIENDS,
MY mind has been much exercised, at times, since I separated from your
communion, with desires for your real advancement in the spirit and power of
that religion you make profession of; and being persuaded there are those among
you who do really desire to know the truth, I feel a renewed concern to salute
these, in a degree, I hope, of true gospel love; and to offer to your serious
consideration, the reasons which induced me to separate from your society. And
truly, Friends, there were many ties, which nearly united me to you; and very
unwilling I was for a considerable time, to believe that those things I had
been engaged in, and so highly esteemed, were not what they had appeared to be;
but, as I earnestly desired to know the truth, whatever it might cost me, I
felt the axe laid to the root of the tree, and the fine buildings and plausible
appearances were shaken. I became sensible, that the tree must first be made
good, before the fruit could be good; a doctrine essentially different from
what I had heard of men, even of men highly esteemed; by whom I was taught,
that deliverance from sin is not to be expected in this life; and was hearing,
day after day, the uniform acknowledgement of 'being miserable sinners, having
no health,' etc. which I found by the manifestations of that spirit which "is
given to every man to profit withal," 1 Cor. xii. 7, and which discovers the
secret things of darkness, to be not agreeable, but contrary, to the scriptures
of truth; which expressly declare, that the great Author of the gospel
dispensation "came to save his people from their sins," Matt. 1.21, and not in
them: a very essential difference. This I believe must be experimentally known,
feeling sin to be the great disease of the soul, the alone cause of separation
from the most High, in whom alone true happiness is found. I was sensible that
while sin remained, the separation must continue, there being "no communion
between light and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness; 2. Cor. vi. 14,
nor could that gracious promise be fulfilled, "I will dwell in them, and walk
in them, I will be their God, and they shall be my people;" 2 Cor vi. 16, for
the apostle says, "ye are the temple of God, and the temple of God is holy." 1
Cor. iii. 17.

Further, John the Baptist who was sent to prepare the way of the Lord,
describing the nature and effects of his master's kingdom, says "Now (mark now)
is the axe laid to the root of the tree; every tree that brings not forth
good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire." Mat. iii 10. This is a
language surely implying a complete, effectual cleansing from all the
pollutions of sin, even now in this life. Our Lord himself uniformly, in all
his discourses, inculcated this doctrine. In that most excellent sermon on the
Mount, Matt. v. 6.7, he insists on the necessity of a righteousness superior to
that of the law; for says he, "except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharise^^ (...) no case enter into the kingdom
of heaven." What language can be plainer? And that he did not mean an
imaginary, merely imputed righteousness, as I fear, many vainly suppose, is
evident from the conclusion; where he draws the comparison between those who
hear, and do his sayings, and them who hear and do them not; thereby fully
establishing the possibility of doing them* And if due attention is paid to
every part of that discourse, I think it must be obvious, that they who are of
the happy number, who not only hear, but do those sayings; and who our Lord
likens to a building upon a rock, on which they are able to withstand all
opposition; will not be miserable sinners, doing what they ought not to do,
having no health in them; etc. but will know a righteousness wrought in them
far superior to that of the law. For, as the law, the outward law, written on
tables of stone, took cognizance of outward actions; the law of Christ,
written, as the apostle says, in the fleshly tables of the heart, reaches to
the root, and source of action; for, whereas the law said, "Thou shall not
kill," Christ forbids being angry without cause. Again, the law said, "Thou
shall not commit adultery;" Christ forbids lust, thus striking at the root. The
cause being removed, the consequence or effect must unavoidably be done away.
Once more, the law said, "Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy;
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." Christ says, "Resist not evil,
love your enemies, do good to them that hate you;" with much more of like
import, which many who profess to follow him, seem to pay very little attention
to; as though it was an indifferent matter, whether they do them or not. But it
may be well for such to consider whether our Lord would have said, "Be ye
perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect," if he did not mean
that they should be so; and whether they who do as he there exhorts, will not
be perfect. I cannot conceive how it is possible to deduce any other inference
without grossly wresting the scripture "Ye are my friends," said he at another
time, if ye do whatsoever I have commanded you. John xv. 14. He that loves me
keeps my commandments, John xiv. 21. "Not every one that says unto me Lord,
Lord, (that call me master and honor me with their lips,) shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father, which is in
heaven." Matt. vii. 21. "If ye know these things happy are ye if ye do them,"
John xiii. 17. For if the simple belief of Christ's sufferings, resurrection,
etc. be sufficient to save; to what purpose was all his discourses, wherein he
repeatedly insists upon the necessity of regeneration, a being born again;
which certainly implies something more than a change of opinion, a persuasion
of the judgment, and a partial reformation? For as he said to Nicodemus, "That
which is born of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit, is
spirit," John iii. 6. it obviously follows, that they who are really born of
the spirit, will be of the same nature as the spirit. "Old things will be
passed away, and all things become new, and all of God," 2 Cor. v. 17. "A
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump," Luke xiii. 21. "New wine must be put
into new bottles." Mark ii. 22; with many other similitudes, plainly implying
the necessity of a total effectual change. Again to confirm this great and
necessary truth of freedom from sin, he says to his disciples, "if ye continue
in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free," and, to reprove their carnal ideas of a
temporal outward freedom, he adds, "He that commits sin, is the servant of
sin," and "If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed," John viii
31. etc. That this freedom from sin, even from the power, as well as the guilt,
is to be known in this life, is certified again, by his saying of those who die
in their sins, "Whither I go, ye cannot come," John viii. 21. Now if
deliverance from sin is not known in this life, we must of necessity die in our
sins. Therefore it matters not what knowledge a man has, what is his faith, or
what profession he has made, if he has not known deliverance from sin. This
is a point so important, and a mistake therein liable to such baneful
consequences, that I am induced to dwell upon it: knowing from my own
experience, how prevailing is the contrary opinion. Nor is it strange, that
people should prefer and indulge the notion of the possibility of deliverance
from the guilt and punishment of sin, without the power thereof being subdued.
We naturally love ease, an ease which the cross of Christ is decidedly against.
So close does it apply, that it is, in our Lord's own words, as cutting off a
right hand, and plucking out a right eye. Matt. vi. 29.30. "Whosoever," says
he, again and again, "does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my
disciple," Luke xiv. 27. The apostle bears testimony to this important truth,
where he says "They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with its
affections and lusts." Gal. v. xxiv. Surely if lusts and affections, the very
root and seed of sin, are slain, what can remain thereof? In another place he
says, "How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein?" Romans vi. 2.
Another apostle says, Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his
seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God." 1 John
iii. 9.

I have produced a few plain passages of scripture, to show the ground or cause
of my separation; that deliverance from sin, a being cleansed from all
defilement thereof in this life, is not only possible, but indispensibly
necessary; and that the contrary doctrine is fundamentally erroneous; as it
sets up the shadow instead of the substance, an imaginary, instead of a real
holiness. I may probably make some more observations on this most important
point, as I proceed. I shall now offer a few remarks on some of the services
usually performed; comparing them also with the scriptures of truth, which most
professors acknowledge to be the standard or rule; from which comparison they
clearly appear to me, not to be what many call them, means of grace and
ordinances of God; but the mere inventions of man, set up in his own fallen
wisdom, as a substitute for the life and power, which were lost in a long dark
night of apostasy: not the true worship of God, but such bodily exercise as the
apostle says, "profits little, 1 Timothy iv. 8. For be it remembered, the great
Author of the gospel dispensation expressly declared, "that the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth," John iv. 23. And
the apostle confirms it, by saying, "We know not what we should pray for, as we
ought; but the spirit helps our infirmities and makes intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered, Romans vii. 26. Therefore, as this
necessary assistance is not at our command, for people to pretend to worship
the Most High in a prescribed form, or in the studied or extempore productions
of their own natural or acquired abilities, in their own wills, and their own
time, without waiting to feel the influences and movings of the Holy Spirit, in
and through which alone true worship can be performed, appears to me to be
nothing better, whatever it may be called, than will worship. The scriptures
also repeatedly mention a growing in grace, 2 Pet. iii. 18, a going on unto
perfection, Heb. vi. ^ How inconsistent then is the repeated uniform
acknowledgment, "We are miserable sinners, doing what we ought not to do,
having no health in us," etc? Does it not obviously confess, if the truth is
spoken, that no benefit has been received, notwithstanding the frequent (as it
is pretended) waiting upon the Lord? But if it is true, as the scriptures
declare, that Christ came to 'save his people from their sins;' they who make
that confession, acknowledge they are not of that number; for if they are
miserable sinners, they certainly are not saved from their sins, however they
may attempt to reconcile so plain a contradiction. This is a language not
confined to a particular part of the service; the inconsistency of the whole
appears equally obvious; as at one time confessing their sins and wickednesses;
then called upon to address the most High, with pure, humble, penitent, and
obedient hearts; one while returning thanks for creation, preservation and
redemption; again acknowledging having erred and strayed like lost sheep;
desiring to show forth his praise not only with their lips, but in their lives,
by giving themselves up to his service, and walking before him in holiness and
righteousness all their days; but still miserable sinners, doing what they
ought not to do, etc. Can this running backwards and forwards, one time saying
one thing, another time quite the contrary, be acceptable service to that God,
who searches the heart, tries the r^ins, and requires truth in the inward
parts? Again, in repeating the experiences of the royal Psalmist, how is it
possible but many gross falsehoods must be expressed? For if the words of the
mouth do not express the real experimental language of the heart, however
excellent they may be yet they are to those who utter them, not the language of
truth but of falsehood. I should hope a little serious consideration will
convince of this.

Again, respecting the custom or practice of singing, I have a few observations
to make. How inconsistent is it, that they who have just before been confessing
their misery and wretchedness, should appear so quickly and easily to forget
all, and begin singing. Surely it seems evidently to declare, they were not
sincere in their acknowledgments, or that they think it of very little
consequence whether their prayers are answered or not. Besides, not only the
manner to me appears absurd and inconsistent: but the matter in many quite
contrary to truth, and to what has been just before openly avowed. I could
specify many instances in every collection I have seen, but I wish people to
search for themselves. Surely this is trifling with serious things. I am fully
persuaded that the common practice of singing is only calculated to amuse the
creature, to please the outward ear; whatever may be pretended of its warming
the heart and kindling devotion. And if those who practice it would be honest
and candid, I am of opinion they would be constrained to acknowledge that
amusement is the chief object; or why so pleased with tunes and music? Can it
for a moment be supposed, that the Almighty is to be pleased with such
superficial conduct? Surely not, And with respect to its kindling devotion, it
may be well to remember what is said of those, "who kindle a fire, and
encompass themselves about with sparks; they may walk in the light thereof, but
they shall lie down in sorrow," Isa. l. 11. I readily admit what is advanced to
defend this custom, that our Lord and his disciples, the night before he
suffered, sang a hymn, but what or how we are not informed; no doubt the matter
and manner were both proper and seasonable; and that Paul and Silas, in prison,
"sang praises to the Lord," I believe; but I cannot conceive what argument can
be deduced from thence for the present custom of singing whatever may be given
out, suitable or not, whether praise, profession, acknowledgment or petition. I
fully believe this outward inconsiderate singing is very different from that
recommended by the apostle, "Singing with the spirit, and with the
understanding, 1 Cor. xiv. 15. "Singing and making melody in your hearts to the
Lord," Ephesians. v. 19. And I also believe, that the true source of praise, even a
greatful sense of the Lord's mercies, can be more consistently expressed than
in outward jingle and sound.

Indeed, my friends, I fear you are, many of you, agreeably to your own
confession, in a miserable condition. Suffer me to prevail upon you to
consider, whether your continuing year after year miserable sinners, is not the
consequence of your prayers not being heard; and let a concern arise to
enquire, whether you have been seeking aright or not: for our Lord promised
plainly and expressly, "that they who seek shall find," Matt. vii. 5. Now, what
have they found, who continue as they acknowledge, 'miserable sinners having no
health in them etc? Do they not rather confess that the means they have used
are insufficient to cleanse and heal them; that they have not rightly applied
to the great physician, to the balm of Gilead, "to that tree, whose leaves are
for the healing of the nations; but have been spending their money for that
which is not bread, and their Labor for that which satisfies not; instead of
hearkening diligently unto the Lord, and eating that which is good;" Isa. lv.
2. that true bread of life, which our Lord said, "whosoever eat thereof should
live forever?" John vi. 58. It may be well to have recourse to these means
before the possibility of cure is denied; lest they thereby deny the power of
God, that he is not able to "cast out the strong man armed, who keeps his
palace and his goods in peace," Luke xi 21. I think I need not add, who is
there meant by the strong man armed, where is his palace, and what are his
goods. The apostle speaks of some, "who had a form of godliness but denied the
power thereof." 2 Timothy iii. 5. Now, it may be well to consider, in what can the
power of godliness be known, but in dominion over its adversary, which is sin.
And do not they who deny the possibility of sins being subdued, deny the power
of godliness? A serious consideration may not be unprofitable. I have often
admired, that those who plead for sin pretend highly to value the scriptures,
and say, 'the scriptures is the rule;' whereas the scriptures uniformly insist
upon the necessity of holiness; not an imaginary holiness, but a real purity of
heart and of life. "Without holiness," said the apostle, "no man shall see the
Lord." Heb. xii. 14. "Be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because it is
written, Be ye holy for I am holy," 1. Pet. i. 15. "Present your bodies, (mark,
your bodies) a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service," Romans xii. 1. They talk much of the blood of Christ; it is
a subject often in the mouth, but what of the nature and effects of it is
known, let their own acknowledgments testify. The apostle declares it cleanses
from all sin," 1 John i. vii. Now how those who continue 'miserable sinners,
doing what they ought not to do,' etc can be cleansed from all sin, let the
considerate judge.

It is with me now, to answer some objections to this important truth; and to
remark on some passages of scripture, which those who deny the possibility of
sin being subdued, endeavor to cover themselves with. First, that 'The heart
of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it?'
Jer. xvii. 9. That the heart of every man, of every natural unregenerate man,
is truly so, I firmly believe: but be it remembered that the Lord promised to
give his people a new heart and a new spirit: Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. And dare any one
say, that heart is deceitful and wicked? O, beware of depreciating the gift of
God. "Blessed are the pure in heart' says our Lord, for they shall see God."
Matt. v. 8. "A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit." Mark vii. 18. "The seed on the good ground are
they who in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience." Luke viii. 15. For now, in the gospel dispensation,
the axe is laid to the root of the tree, Matt. iii. 10. What is the root of the
tree there alluded to but the heart, from whence words and actions have their
birth? "Thou blind Pharisee," said Christ, "cleanse first that which is within
the cup and the platter, that the outside may be clean also" Matt. xxiii. 26.
And do they not in the sta^ed form, pray that God, 'would cleanse the thoughts
of their hearts, by the inspiration of his holy spirit" a most excellent
petition; but what is it in those who use it and yet deny the possibility of
its being answered, but a solemn mockery? For if the thoughts of the heart are
really cleansed, there can be no sin, for sin defiles and pollutes the heart.

Another objection, is the language of the apostle, where he speaks of 'a law
in his members warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into
captivity to the law of sin, and that in his flesh dwelt no good thing, Romans
vii. That the apostle once was in that state, I think, is beyond a doubt; and
that every real Christian experiences a similar, till the strong man armed is
cast out, and the old leaven purged away. But that he was so at the time of
waiting it, ^o me appears by no means credible, from what he has written just
before and after; or he must grossly contradict himself, which will hardly be
allowed? but rather that he was describing the effects of the law upon the
carnal unregenerate mind: for he says, "The law is spiritual, but I am carnal,
sold under sin." Now can it be supposed that the apostle was then carnal? etc.
Surely not, For just after, he says. 'the carnal mind is enmity against God,
and 'to be carnal minded is death.' chap. viii. 6.7. and that "they who are in
the flesh cannot please God;" but he adds, "Ye are not in the flesh, but in the
spirit, if the spirit of God dwell in you; and if any man have not the spirit
of Christ, he is none of his." It consequently follows, that if the apostle was
then in a carnal state, he was none of Christ's, but at enmity against God. A
little before, he says, "Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him,
that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve
sin: for he that is dead is freed from sin, " chap. vi. 6.7. And in the 2nd
verse, "How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein." And in the
22nd verse, "Being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life."

Now let this plain language, both before and after, written no boubt at the
same time, determine whether the apostle was then in a carnal unregenerate
state or not. And though he elsewhere says, "Not as though I had already
attained, either were already perfect;" Phil. iii. 10. I think it in no respect
favors the construction many put upon it, that the apostle was then in a
sinful state, but rather makes against them, as it plainly condemns the notion,
of being perfectly and for ever justifiable by mere imputation, and evinces the
danger of sitting down at ease, resting satisfied with an imaginary
justification. For in another place, speaking of the Christian progress, he
says, though he did not run as uncertainly, or fight as one that beats the
air, yet he found it necessary to keep under his body and bring it into
subjection, or there was a danger, notwithstanding he had preached to others,
of his being still a cast away, 1 Cor. ix. 26, 27. Another objection is, the
same apostle says, "By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of
yourselves? it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast."
Ephesians. ii. 8, 9. In answer to which, I believe it is very necessary to
distinguish between the works of man, which he does in his own will and
strength, and those works which are wrought of God. Perhaps it is not rightly
knowing this distinction that people cry out against works us though they were
all a self-righteousness. The works of man, of the unrenewed carnal mind, yea
the best of them, are as filthy rags; but I think there should be a great care
not to join the works of God (those which he works in his people) with man's
own works; for in the next verse the apostle says, "Ye are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them." That it is by grace, I believe, no real Christian will
deny, but will, with humble gratitude in all his progress, acknowledge with the
apostle, "by the grace of God I am what I am," 1 Cor. xv, 10. This grace the
same apostle declared, has appeared to all men, (mark that, not to any
particular part) and teaches, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world. He does not
say (it teaches) we must continue in sin, "What," says he in another place,
"shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound, God forbid," Romans vi. 1. That
it is also through faith, who will deny? for "without faith it is impossible to
please God," Heb. xi, 6. But the apostle speaks of a dead faith, James ii. 17.
of a faith the devils have, verse 19. The true faith, he says, works by love,
Gal. v. 6. purifieth the heart, Acts xv. 9. and overcomes the world, 1 John v.
4. Now what faith have those, who say, they are 'tied and bound with the chain
of their sins, that they are miserable sinners, having no health in them" etc.
The tree is known by its fruit.

Again, the words of our Lord, when upon the earth in the days of his flesh, to
those whom he had healed of their diseases, are pleaded in excuse for
continuing in sin, as "Thy faith has saved thee, thy faith has made thee
whole, etc. But be it remembered, that those to whom he said so were completely
cured, received 'perfect soundness;' and, I believe, there is a remnant at this
day, who witness the same works, spiritually accomplished by the powerful
operation of the same word in the heart, even a being made whole, a being (...)
of the great disease of sin, prefigured by the various cures performed on the
bodies of the people.

Once more, another argument adduced is where the apostle says, "If we say we
have no sin we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us," 1 John i. 8. But
a due attention to what follows, I think will clearly explain, that the apostle
does not favor the idea that he was then in that state; for he adds, 'if we
say we have sinned,' plainly alluding to time past, and continues, "if we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness;" and as all unrighteousness is sin, chap.
v. 16. they who are cleansed from all, surely (...) have none remaining. It is
the sincere desire of my mind, that the people would consider for themselves,
and not take things of such importance upon trust, but attend to the advice of
the apostle, "Let every man prove his own work, then shall he have rejoicing in
himself, and not in another, for every man shall bare his own burden." Gal. vi.
4, 5. "Be not deceived," he adds just after, "God is not mocked; whatsoever a
man sows, that shall he reap," whatever be his opinion, knowledge or faith.
And in another place he says, though he had all knowledge, could understand all
mysteries, though he had all faith, even to remove mountains, yet he might be
as nothing, 1 Cor. xiii. 2. Therefore it might be well to have a care of
talking so highly of the scriptures, while the life and conversation is not
agreeable thereto; and remember the words of our Lord to some of old, "Search
the scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they
which testify of me, and ye will not come unto me that ye might have life,"
John v. 39.40. From which it appears, and is worthy the most serious attention,
that those who had the scriptures and valued them, as to think they had eternal
life in them, yet they would not come unto Christ, of whom they testified; and
"who was and is alone the life as well as the light of men," John i. 4.
Therefore it may be well to take care of putting the letter, the testimony, the
declaration, concerning an object, for the object itself; for our Lord did not
say the scriptures is the way; but "I am the way, the truth, and the life, and
no man comes unto the Father but by me," John xiv. 6. And learn the difference
between the letter, the outward word, and the word that was in the beginning,
John i. 1, before the scriptures, "the word high in the mouth, and in the
heart;" Romans x. 8, "which is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged
sword, dividing asunder soul and spirit, joints and marrow, and is a discerner
of the thoughts and intents of the heart, before whom all things are naked and
open," Heb. iv. 12. and of whom, as I before observed, the scriptures testify;
and without whose all powerful aid they remain a dead letter, a sealed book.
The apostle declared, the things of God can only be known but by the Spirit of
God, 1 Cor. ii. 11. They are foolishness to the natural man. Therefore I think
we should be careful how we attempt to comprehend the truths, which are
contained in the scriptures by our own understandings; but rather be willing,
as the apostle recommends, to become fools, that we may be truly wise, 1 Cor.
iii. 18.

I would now offer a few remarks on those two ordinances or ceremonies, Baptism
and the Lord's Supper as they are called.

With respect to the first, as practiced by those I more particularly address
myself to, little need be said; as sprinkling infants is not even an imitation
of true baptism, has no relation to it whatever, nor do I believe, can there be
found a single precept or example for it in any of the scriptures of truth. I
am well persuaded it is, like many other things of the kind, a mere popish
invention, in the times of darkness and apostasy, as a substitute for the
reality; not in any one respect calculated to answer any good purpose whatever.
It may be well seriously to consider a language used at that ceremony, that
'this child is regenerate, and grafted into the body of Christ's church;' and
in the catechism respecting it, that 'he is therein made a member of Christ, a
child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven.' Now let every
considerate person solemnly ask himself, whether he really believes such
effects are really produced by it. If it is possible that any one can think so,
his ideas of regeneration, and Christ's church also, differ very widely from
mine.

Let it be considered also, what people are taught to promise at this ceremony:
To renounce the devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh; to keep God's holy will and
commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of their lives.' Are they
not here required to promise what is believed and confessed to be impossible to
perform; for surely if it was performed, they would not 'be miserable sinners,
doing what they ought not to do,' etc.

That baptism is necessary, absolutely necessary, for every member of Christ's
church, I fully believe; but I believe, no application of water, even when
rightly imitated, is the one true baptism. It is not the putting away the filth
of the flesh, which is all outward elementary water can do, but the baptism of
the Holy Ghost and of Fire,' Matt iii. 11, even a being baptized in the name,
that is nature, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thereby experiencing the
consuming of the earthly part in themselves, and a being cleansed and purified
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the
Lord; for the apostle says, "As many as are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ, "Gal. iii. 27. not imaginarily, but really; and being buried with him,
by this spiritual baptism into death, even a death unto sin: that "like as
Christ was raised from the dead; by the glory of the Father, so they also will
walk in the newness of life," Romans vi 4. And again, If any man be in Christ he
is a new creature, old things are passed away, all things become new, and all
of God:" 2 Cor. v. 17. and if all of God, there can be no sin, for "sin is of
the devil, and not of God." 1 John iii. 8.

With respect to that other ceremony, called the Lord's Supper, notwithstanding
I am sensible of the deep rooted prejudice in favor of it, I feel no
discouragement: under a belief that a glorious day is dawning, when clouds and
shadows, signs and appearances, shall give place to reality, to the pure
essential substance. I am perfectly satisfied in mine own mind respecting it,
and will endeavor to give my reasons, why I believe it is not of that
consequence or obligation many fix upon it.

That our Lord, the night before he suffered, took bread and brake it, and gave
to his disciples, as also the cup, I believe; and that he said, this do in
rememberance of me; but that he enjoined it to be an ordinance I cannot find. I
presume it will be allowed to be a part of the feast of the Jewish passover, as
our Lord said, "With desire, I have desired to eat this passover with you,
before I suffer," Luke xxii. 10. and which was a remarkable type or figure of
Christ, who was the very Paschal Lamb, the substance or antitype itself. That
the bread and wine, as a part of the passover, represented the body and blood
of Christ, to be broken and shed for the remission of sins, I presume will also
be allowed. Now as there is certainly a very essential difference between the
sign and the thing signified, let us consider a little, which is of most
consequence, or whether both are of obligation. I expect none to whom I address
myself will deny, that Christ was and is really the substance and antitype of
every type and figure, under the Mosaic ceremonial dispensation. This then
being one of those figures representing the death of Christ; the substance
being come, the type fulfilled, what need of the shadow; why not give place, as
others are acknowledged to do? The apostle, writing to some, remarks, "As often
as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death, till he
come." 1 Cor. xi. 26. But this I think, by no means implies that it was an
enjoined ordinance, but rather, that those to whom he was writing, continued in
the use or observance of the Jewish passover This I think, cannot appear
improbable, when it is considered, that for a time it was taught by some of the
disciples, that "it was needful to be circumcised, and to keep the l^w of
Moses," Acts xv. 5. of course this among the rest. Therefore it appears to me,
that they, as yet, knew not, in a spiritual sense, the coming of Christ; that
is, his spiritual appearance in their hearts: an inference which seems to be
confirmed by what is recorded of some, who had been baptized with John's
baptism, that is of water, yet had not so much as heard whether there were an
Holy Ghost, Acts xix 2. the promised mode of his coming again, John xvi. 7.
Again, the apostle says, speaking unto wise men, no doubt spiritually wise,
"The cup of blessing we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?
The bread we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?" 1 Cor. x.
15.16. Can it be supposed that he here alludes to outward bread and wine? for
if he did, all who partake of that ceremony, let them be who they may, or what
they may, have communion with Christ. Surely that would be joining light and
darkness, Christ and Belial, righteousness and unrighteousness together, in
direct opposition to the same apostle's plain declaration to the same people.
2. Cor vi. xv. He says again, "Ye cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, and the
cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and the table of
devils." 1 Cor. x. 20. Now it is very obvious, that any can partake of the
outward bread and wine, therefore that cannot be the cup and table of the Lord.
Again, what is recorded of the disciples breaking bread from house to house,
Acts ii. 24, I think by no means implies such a ceremony, but rather a social
way of living among themselves; as it is said, they had all things common verse
44 and, from what immediately follows, "did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart," verse 46, plainly alluding to their common meals. It is
also I think, very observable, that when the apostles were assembled at
Jerusalem, to consider what was necessary to be enjoined to the believing
Gentiles, this ceremony was not even mentioned: which had it been necessary,
would sure not have been omitted, considering the things which were then
enjoined; most of which have since been laid aside, Acts xv. 20. But our Lord's
own words appear to me decidedly to discountenance the outward sign; as where
he emphatically calls himself the "Bread of Life." "That his flesh is meat
indeed, and his blood drink indeed, and that whosoever ate and drank it had
eternal life." John vi. 46, etc. And to reprove their carnal ideas of outward
eating and drinking, verse 52. and to direct their minds to the spiritual
allusion, he adds, "What, and if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where
he was before," verse 62, how will ye eat him then, not in outward bread and
wine, "it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh (or outward food) profits
nothing."

I believe there are among those whom I address myself to, such as are sensible
of the necessity of this spiritual communion, and are truly desirous to partake
thereof. Far be it from me to wound any of these. I do tenderly salute them,
and feel a degree of unity with the least appearance of the true seed of the
kingdom: I would not hurt the lead plant of the Lord's own right hand planting.
However some little differences may appear, yet let me say to these in a spirit
of love and unity, as this is acknowledged to be but a sign or token, why is
this continued, when others of equal authority and obligation are dispensed
with? For instance, that of circumcision, which our Lord submitted to, Luke ii.
21; and which for a time, even after his ascension, was enjoined by his
disciples as I before quoted; Why this laid aside? It may perhaps be answered,
this sign according to the apostle's definition of it, represented the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, Col. ii 11. I fully believe it did, and as it is equally true that bread
and wine is also a sign, there appears to me not a shadow of a reason why the
one should be continued in preference to the other: the thing signified by both
being of equal obligation.

Again, it is worthy of observation that the beloved disciple John, in his
relation, makes not the least mention of this ceremony; but is very particular
in giving an account of our Lord's washing his disciples feet. Why is not this
ceremony observed, as it appears to be more particularly enjoined than the
other? For says Christ "Ye call me Master, and Lord and ye say well, for so I
am; if I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash
one another's feet, for I have given you an example, that ye should do as I
have done unto you" John xiii. 13. Now where can there be found so strong an
injunction for the other, that of bread and wine? If it is answered, that was a
sign or figure to teach humility and love to each other which I readily admit
it was. I think it is necessary to prove, that the other is somewhat more than
a sign, to support its continuance in preference; which I expect will hardly be
attempted. That it was not practiced or observed as an ordinance by the
apostles, I think evidently appears from the whole tenor of their writings.
Paul reproves some for being subject to ordinances. "Touch not, taste not,
handle not," says he, "which all are to perish with the using." Col. ii. 20.
and does not outward bread and wine perish with the using? The apostle well
knew the true living bread is not of a perishable nature. Again, he says, "Let
no man judge you in meat and in drink, or in respect to the holy day, new moon,
or the sabbath, which" he adds, "are a shadow of things to come, but the body,
(the substance) is of Christ, verse 16. In another place he says, "The kingdom
of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost." Romans xiv. 17. And to some others he said "I am afraid of you, left I
have bestowed on you labor in vain," because after they had known God, had
tasted somewhat of the substance, they turned again to the weak and beggarly
elements, whereunto they desired again to be in bondage. Gal iv 9. "Ye observe
days, and months, and times, and years." verse 10, said he, which he had
declared to be but shadows of good things; and I fear the same language is too
applicable to many, who make a very high profession in this day.

From what I have observed on this subject, I think to an unprejudiced mind, it
must appear that the true supper of the Lord is an inward, spiritual communion.
"Behold," says Christ, "I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my
voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me," Rev. iii. 20; and that the outward bread and wine, was nothing more
than a part of the Jewish ceremonial dispensation; neither commanded to, nor
practiced generally by, the Gentiles in the apostle's days. For, I would just
add, if it is a necessary ordinance; if in other words, it is what by many it
is asserted to be, the effects of it would be evident; for our Lord said,
"Whosoever ate his flesh and drank his blood, had eternal life." Now I presume
no one to whom I now address myself, will impute such an effect to outward
bread and wine; therefore it cannot be the Lord's supper. We no where read of
two suppers. The difference between the sign and thing signified, the shadow
and the substance, I believe many are in a degree sensible of; and as the
substance, the reality is to be partaken of, yea absolutely necessary; (for
said our Lord, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you;" John vi. 53.) and as I before observed we read of but
one supper of the Lord; surely it is of consequence rightly to know which is
indeed the true supper.

I have no doubt but there are those who in sincerity and uprightness of heart
continue in the use of the sign; far be it from me to judge ^^ese. I have only
a caution to give in love, that where these signs are regarded, it may be as to
the Lord, and and not unto men. See Rom xiv. 6. I fully believe religion does
not consist in observing, or not observing, outward ceremonies. For as the
apostle says, "In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision; but a new creature;" Gal. vi. 15. It is not a name, a
profession, or any outward observance; but I am not without a fear that many
regard them as to men, and are in bondage unto them, and so settled down at
ease in them, that they will hardly hear the least objection to them. Such
perhaps must be left for ^ time: however, I have given some of my reasons for
absenting myself from your communion, and why I believe the worship there
performed, is not the worship which the Lord requires; that it is not
agreeable, but contrary to, the Scriptures; that it is not the means of grace,
and ordinance of God" but the invention and imagination of man; that it is
wrong in principle and in practice; in principle, because you are taught you
must not expect deliverance from sin in this life, whereas the scriptures
testify the contrary; in practice, because you worship in your own wills, and
teach for doctrines the commandments of men, which our Lord testified against;
Mark vii. 7: yea in an unregenerate state, according to your own confession,
for a sinner is not regenerate. Therefore, what I have heard among you, that
your best services are polluted, is strictly true; for while you yourselves are
in the polluted state, all your performances are polluted also. "For who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean; not one," Job xiv. 4; but it may be well
to remember, it stands an unchangeable truth, "That the sacrifices of the
wicked are an abomination to the Lord," Prove. xxi. 27. and though we may amuse
ourselves with the vain idea that all is well, I do assuredly believe, that to
offer any acceptable sacrifice or service, we must know, experimentally know, a
being washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God. 1 Cor. vi. 11. Therefore remember a language of old to
some who had no health in them, but were unsound from head to foot, as many
confess they now are. "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices," v.
12. "Bring no more vain oblations, incense is abomination to me, the new moons
and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity even
the solemn meeting. When you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes,
yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear." ver. 13, 14. And consider the
exhortation to them, "Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do well," etc. ver. 16. Then
it is added, "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow:
though they be red like crimson they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it."
ver. 18. Oh, how awful is this denunciation now fulfilling around us! It is the
fervent breathing of my spirit, that this highly professing, much favored
nation, who have been calling abundantly upon the Lord with their mouths and
honoring him with their lips, may avert the impending st^oke, by truly
humbling themselves before him? and as his judgments are in the earth, may
indeed learn righteousness, ^fa. xxv. 9.

I know, friends, from a degree of experience, that there are many and various
appearances signs and shadows, set up among professing Christians; some of
which I have pointed out. I now wish to direct, according to the ability I am
at present favored with, to the reality or substance itself; and this
inestimable treasure which I had long in vain sought for without, among the
various appearances, I at last found to be within. I can anticipate the
surprise, and perhaps the indignation, the word within may excite in some
minds, who may be ready to exclaim, Can there be any thing good in man? Yes,
friends, the sovereign good, the only good, is to be found there; and I desire
your patient attention while I endeavor to remove that unjust, delusive, yea
too destructive idea, that nothing good is to be found in man. I believe it is
the grand artifice, the most successful insinuation, of the great adversary of
mankind, to divert the attention, from that which is alone able effectually to
destroy his kingdom or rule in the heart, to objects without, to similitudes
and appearances. (Mystery Babylon.) This good then, though in man is not or
man, it is not natural to him; but a free, spontaneous, unmerited gift. This
good is, with reverence be it spoken even God himself, a truth I believe of the
utmost importance to be experimentally known by every individual; and a truth
abundantly testified to in the sacred writings; as the ground work, the
substance the foundation of real religion; a language also repeatedly expressed
by the professors of Christianity; though the truth, the reality of it, appears
so little known, as by many even to be denied. Do not you frequently read, "I
will dwell in them, and walk in them; I will be their God, and they shall be my
people," 2 Cor. vi. 16. "If a man love me," said our Lord, "he will keep my
words, and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him," John xiv. 23. "The Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth,"
proceeding from the Father, said he, "dwells with you and shall be in you,"
ver. 17. "Know ye not," said the Apostle, "that Jesus Christ is in you except
ye be reprobates?" 2 Cor. xiii. 5, and that your bodies are the temples of the
living God? 1. Cor. vi. 19. I could multiply quotations of Scriptures, to prove
this great important truth, but am sensible that those to whom I address myself
are well acquainted with the words. 'You are frequently reading, of "Christ
within the hope of glory," Col. i. 27* under various similitudes; but what is
the reason, he is not known there? it is an important question. What is the
reason, I again repeat it, that Christ so often read of in the Scriptures as
within, notwithstanding so much talk and imaginations about him, is not known
there in reality? I believe, friends, I can tell you the reason why he, the one
great foundation, is not known, where alone he is truly to ^e known. Because he
is not sought for there, but in something without some appearance or
representation of him, a knowledge gathered from men or books, from the history
or outward letter, which, however highly it may be valued, I believe is merely
notional. The real experimental knowledge is only known by his internal
appearance, his second coming, without sin, unto salvation; Heb. ix. 23, and
the operation and effects thereby produced. See Mal. iii, 3. "The kingdom of
God," said our Lord, "comes not by observation:" man with all his wisdom, is
unable to comprehend it, neither shall they say, "Lo here is Christ, or lo
there," not in any outward appearance, "for behold the kingdom of God is within
you." Luke xvii, 20, 21. "Say not in thine heart," said the apostle, "who shall
ascend into heaven that is to bring Christ down from above, or who shall
descend into the deep, that is to bring Christ again from the dead:" He is not
at a distance, but "the word is nigh thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart. Romans
x. 6, 7, 8. Our Lord represented this great truth by various objects or
similitudes, to convey spiritual instruction to his disciples; as a treasure
hid in a ^ield; Mat. xiii, 44, seed sown in the ground; Mark iv. 26, a grain of
mustard seed; Mat. xiii. 31, a little leaven hid in meal; ver. 33. plainly
alluding to this inestimable treasure as hid in the heart, the earthly part of
man. There were some of whom our Lord said, having ears they heard not; they
could not understand the spiritual meaning of his parables; but to some he
said, "Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God." Mark
iv. 11. Now, friends, it is of consequence to know of which number we are,
whether these are still to us as parables, or whether we know that which
unsolds their true meaning: "I am the light of the world;" said Christ, "he
that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life." John viii. 12.

The apostle says there is no communion between light and darkness. 2 Cor. vi.
14. If we have not light, we must of necessity be in darkness. There is a
spiritual light, as well as a natural. This great apostle to the Gentiles,
declaring his commission to preach the gospel, said it was to turn people from
darkness, to light, from the power of satan unto God. Acts xxvi. 18. Of what
consequence then is it to be acquainted with this light, by which alone we can
discern between good and evil. "All things." said the apostle, "that are
reproved, are made manifest by the light; for whatsoever does make manifest is
light." Ephesians. v. 13. That we may know what this light is the scriptures
abundantly declare. John the Baptist was sent to bear witness of this light,
which is the true light, which lights every man that comes into the world.
John 1. 8, 9. In him, i. e. Christ was life, and the life was the light of men.
ver. 4. This light shines in darkness, even the dark heart of man; though the
darkness comprehended it not. ver. 5. This is the light of the glorious gospel;
therefore, friends, I caution you to beware of calling it a natural light, or a
new lights, as many have done. For I believe the same light, if attended to and
its discoveries obeyed, will eff^^^ the same works spiritually in the heart, or
inner man, as it formerly did on the bodies of the people. Therefore I believe
there is great danger of speaking evil of the light, for whoever do, confess
they are strangers to it, and of course are walking in darkness, for there is
but one true spiritual light. And "If we say we have fellowship with him and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as
he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his son, cleanses us from all sin." 1. John, i. 6, 7.

Our Lord himself plainly declared, that "Every one that does evil, hates the
light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved; but he
that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that
they are wrought in God." John. iii. 20, 21. Therefore it is not strange that
those who plead for sin, which is evil, should speak against this light, and
call it a natural light; or any thing, to excuse themselves; because it cannot
but condemn them. Those things which the light, if attended to, should manifest
to be evil, are too dearly loved, to be parted with, while they can persuade
themselves they are secure in retaining them. I speak from experience, and do
earnestly recommend a turning to this light within from all the 'Lo here is,' and
'Lo there is:' the various appearances, signs, and shadows, set up by the will
and wisdom of men, in the times of darkness and apostasy; even to Christ
within, the hope of glory, the true foundation, 1 Cor. iii. 11; the rock
against which even the gates of hell shall not prevail, Mat. xvi. 18; nor all
the opposition of men, as it is faithfully abode in. This I believe is the
substance of every shadow, the reality of every appearance, the word nigh in
the mouth and in the heart; the true anointing, which is truth and no lie, and
which teaches all things without need of man's teaching. 1. John ii. 27. This
is the new covenant, graciously promised by the Most High. "I will put my law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people; and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord." Jer. xxxi.
33, 34.

Behold, said our Lord, the kingdom of God is within you. Luke xvii. 21. The
seed of the kingdom which is sown in the hearts, though too small for the eye
of man's wisdom to discover, though it is still to the high professing Jew a
stumbling block, and to the worldly wise Greek foolishness; yet it is to those
who hear its call and obey it, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
1. Cor. i. 23, 24. This I believe is the new birth, without which our Lord
declared no one even could see the kingdom of God. John iii. 3. The birth which
is not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God, John, i. 13. For that which is born of the flesh, however high and
specious its appearance, is still flesh; and that which is born of the spirit,
however mean and contemptible in the eye of man's wisdom, is spirit. The gospel
is a spiritual dispensation. The spirit of truth inwardly manifested, our Lord
promised should guide into all truth. John xvi. 13. The apostles were not to
leave Jerusalem till they had received it. Acts i. 4. And then we are informed,
"They spoke as the spirit gave them utterance." Acts ii. 4. We have no reason
to suppose they used any form of words, neither that they spoke when or where
they chose; but we are frequently informed of their going or forbearing; as by
the spirit they were directed; Acts viii, 29. xix. 7, etc. neither are we to
suppose that this influence and direction of the spirit was confined to any
period of time; for, says our Lord, "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end
of the world." Mat. xxviii. 20. What a departure from their example and
precepts is lamentably conspicuous among most professing Christians; who have
invented various images, forms, and modes of worship, which they can perform
when they please; evidently acknowledging that they think the influence and
assistance of the spirit unnecessary; at least that they will begin at a
venture, whether it may come or not. Surely it may be well to consider, whether
it is not offering strange fire before the Lord. Lev. x. 1. The only true
worship under the gospel dispensation, is, agreeably to our Lord's express
declaration, that which is in spirit and in truth, John iv. 24, and as the
influences and movings of the spirit, (although so absolutely necessary, as
that no acceptable worship can be performed without them) are not at our
command; how proper, yea, how needful then, is a humble, silent, dependent
waiting upon Him, who alone can administer this assistance; that thereby the
true preparation of the heart may be experienced, to receive whatever He, who
searches the heart, and who alone knows what is good for those who wait upon
him, may be pleased to administer: whether immediately, by his still small
voice in the secret of the heart; or instrumentally, by whomsoever he may
please to appoint!

"They that wait upon the Lord," said the Prophet, "shall renew their
strength." Isa. xl. 31. It is the professed object of most assemblies for
religious worship, to wait upon the Lord. Now, whether those who in solemn
humble silence, wait to feel the influences of the spirit, to instruct and
enable, when and what to offer, or what immediately to receive from the
fountain of good, are such as that promise applies to; or those who are always
ready to begin, either in a prescribed form, or in the exercise of their own
natural or acquired abilities, whether they may have the assistance so
necessary or not; I think a little serious consideration may determine. Indeed
the plain express meaning of the term, Waiting, appears to me to be a silent
attentive expectation of something; and if it is weightily considered, that, at
such times, we more particularly profess to approach the sacred presence of
Him, "who searches the heart, tries the reins, and requires truth in the
inward parts;" who cannot possibly be deceived or amused by the most plausible
expressions or the most eloquent language; who has decidedly condemned the
practice of drawing near to him with the mouth, and honoring him with the
lips, whilst the heart is far from him; Isa. xxix. 13. surely it is needful at
such times to wait, silently wait, for the reception of spiritual power, lest
we should be like those who offer the sacrifice of fools. Eccles. v. 1. "Let
not thine heart," said the wise man, "be hasty to utter any thing before God,
for God is in heaven and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few." ver.
2. "Without me," said our blessed Lord, "ye can do nothing." John xv. 5. Yet
the practice of many who profess to follow him, evidently declares that they
think they can do without him, for they are, as to words and outward
performances, always ready. The apostle plainly declared, that "we know not
what we should pray for as we ought, but it is the spirit that helps our
infirmities." Romans viii. 26. Then what are all the arts of composition, and the
powers of human eloquence, without this assistance, but as "sounding brass or a
tinkling cymbal?" "When we pray," said our Lord, "use not vain repetitions as
the heathen do: for they think they shall be heard, for their much speaking;"
Mat. vi. 7. a language too applicable I fear, not only to the prescribed formal
prayers, but to the more private extempore productions: as though prayer
consisted in outward expressions, an idea repeatedly condemned in the
Scriptures of Truth.

The apostle, after saving we know not what to pray for, adds, "The spirit
itself makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered," and
Christ called them hypocrites who prayed to be seen of men; Mat. vi. 5, and
directed his disciples to pray in secret to the father, who sees in secret.
ver. 6. The apostle also recommends a praying always, with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit and watching thereunto with all perseverance. Ephesians.
vi. 18. He does not recommend to begin singing as soon as they conclude a
prayer. In another place, he exhorts to a "Continuing instant in prayer;" Romans
xii. 12. again, "Pray without ceasing;" 1. These. v. 17. from all which I think
it must appear that there may be true prayer without words, and that there may
be also words without prayer. I believe, there are those possessed of
considerable abilities, a ready flow of words, and a pleasing eloquent
delivery, who can at any time when they please, deliver what I have heard
called an excellent prayer; without waiting to feel that influence, which can
alone enable to "pray with the spirit, and with true understanding;" but though
such exercises may produce a temporary warmth, both in speaker and hearer, I
believe, it will be found to be only a fire of their own kindling, a mere
appearance, and not the effects of the live coal from the true altar. Isa. vi.
6. The same observations are equally applicable to every other external
performance of worship, public or private: for however it may affect the
outward ear, yea, and kindle sparks as it were producing a temporary warmth; if
it does not proceed from the immediate sensible movings of the spirit of truth,
I much fear the appellation of will worship is too applicable to it.

I have also had a fear, that a language of old, respecting some of whom it was
said, "They limited the Holy One of Israel," Psa. lxxviii. 41. is applicable to
most professing religious societies, where any particular man or set of men,
assume to themselves the exclusive right of teaching or preaching: a practice I
believe totally repugnant to the gospel dispensation, and the uniform example
and precepts of Christ and his apostles. For I fully believe that no human
authority, call, qualification, or ordination, can make a minister of Christ.
That is the perogative of Christ himself. It is absolutely necessary that every
individual Christian should be born of the Spirit; John iii. 5. and surely it
most also be necessary that the ministers of Christ should, in an especial
manner, be so too. Paul said he was made an apostle, "Not of men, neither by
man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father." Gal. i. 1. And, as I before
observed, the dispensation of the gospel being 'a dispensation of the spirit,'
the ministers thereof are ministers of the spirit, and not of the letter: not
ministers of the words only, though scripture words themselves; but of the
"word of eternal life," even of the "word which was in the beginning, which
lives and abides for ever." 1. Pet. i. 23. That word which is "quick and
powerful, discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart." Heb. iv. 12. Words
may have, and no doubt have, their service, as the spirit brings to
rememberance, and gives utterance; but to steal the words of Scripture, see
Jer. xxiii. 30, 31. and put them in a premeditated form, however eloquently
they may be delivered, I believe is not preaching the gospel. But I believe
that they who are particularly called, qualified, and sent by Christ himself,
as I believe every true minister is, will not presume to preach or pray, when,
where, or what they please; but as they are immediately moved and directed by
the spirit of Christ, inwardly revealed; see Gal. i. 1.16. who can alone know
what is needful to be administered, and these as they freely receive, they
will, agreeably to our Lord's command, Freely give, Mat. x. 8, etc. 'without
any view to temporal interest whatever.' And as they are not their own, they
cannot dispose of their time or talents, according to their own wills; but as
He who has called them is pleased to direct.

To conclude: the few observations I have now offered, may perhaps, to
unprejudiced minds, be sufficient to evince the inward spiritual nature of the
gospel dispensation; and that signs and figures, all external ceremonial
performances, are totally abolished from that worship, which can only be
performed in spirit and in truth. John iv. 23, 24.

They may also evince that the only necessary qualification for true worship,
is the influence and direction of the spirit of truth, inwardly revealed: that
this necessary assistance is not confined to time or place, nor to any
particular man or set of men. For as the apostle declared, "The manifestation
of the spirit is given to every man, to profit withal," 1. Cor. xii. 7^ I
believe there are no individuals arrived to the years of discretion, but who
are favored with a sufficient portion thereof, if properly attended to, to
direct them into the paths of true judgment. The word, even the word of eternal
life, is nigh to all, nor need any look to men for instruction; but this same
anointing, if the mind is simply and unreservedly directed to it, teaches all
things and is truth. 1 John ii. 27. Who is there, who has not felt its secret
reproofs for evil, and its approbation for good? To this true teacher, of whose
all sufficient aid I have thankfully to acknowledge a degree of experience, I
do earnestly recommend the particular, unwearied, faithful attention of every
individual.

JOHN SPALDING.
Reading, 30th of 7th Month, 1794.
TWO LETTERS WRITTEN BY SAMUEL CRISP, About the Year 1702, to some of his
acquaintance, upon his change from a Chaplain of the Church of England, to join
the people called QUAKERS.
Prove all Things, hold fast that which is good.

1 THESSALONIANS. v. 21.
FIRST LETTER.
My dear Friend,
I Received a Letter from thee the Week before last, which was sent by thy
Uncle Bolton: There were a great many kind Expressions in it, and in thy Sister
Clopton's likewise. I acknowledge myself much obliged to you both, and to the
whole Family, for many repeated Kindnesses, and if my School had not engrossed
so much of my Time, I would have taken Opportunity to answer my dear Friend's
Letter e're now, and upon that Account my Delay will be the more excusable.

The News thou have heard of my late Change, is really true, I cannot conceal
it, for it is what I glory in; neither was it any Prospect of temporal
Advantage that induced me to it, but a sincere Love to the Truth, and pure
Regard to my own Soul: Neither can I be sufficiently thankful to God, that he
has let me live to this glorious Day, and not cut me off in the Midst of my
Sins and Provocations against Him; He is long-suffering to usward, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance: He has brought
me off from the Forms and shadows of Religion, and let me see in a more
illustrious Manner what is the Life and Substance of it, as he found me in some
Degree faithful to that Measure of Light and Knowledge he has bestowed on me,
whilst I was in the Communion of the Church of England; therefore he was
pleased of late, as I humbly waited upon him, to make known to me greater and
deeper Mysteries of his Kingdom: And I can truly say, that I find by daily
Experience, as I keep low and retired into that pure Gift which he has planted
within me, Things are every Day more and more cleared up to me, and the Truth
shines and prevails greatly over the Kingdom of Darkness; And if I should now
turn my Back upon such Manifestations as these, and entangle myself again with
the Yoke of Bondage, surely I should grieve the Holy Spirit: So that he might
justly withdraw his kind Operations, and never return more to assist and
comfort me: For God is not mocked; Religion is a very serious and weighty
Thing; Repentance and Salvation are not to be trifled with, nor is turning to
God to be put off till our own Time, Leisure or Convenience, but we must love
and cherish the least Appearance of Christ, not slighting or despising the Day
of small Things, but embrace the first Opportunity of following Christ in any
of his Commands: When he speaks, there is such Force and Authority in it that
we cannot stand to cavil, dispute or ask Questions; for unless we will be so
obstinate as to shut our Eyes against the Sun, we must needs confess to the
Truth of his Doctrine, and presently strike in with it. And therefore, when for
several Weeks I had lived more privately and retiredly in London than was
usual, Fasting twice or thrice in a Week, or sometimes more, spending my Time
in reading the Scriptures and in Prayer to God, this was a good Preparation of
my Mind to receive the Truth which he was then about to make known to me: I
lamented the Errors of my past Life, and was desirous to attain a more
excellent Degree of Holiness than I had discovered in the Church of England. In
this religous Retirement God knew the Breathings of my Soul, how sincere I was,
and resigned to him when alone; I wanted him to set me free, and to speak Peace
and Comfort to my Soul, which was grieved and wearied with the Burden of Sin:
For though I had strictly conformed myself to the Orders and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, and had kept myself from running into any great or
scandalous Enormities, the Fear of the Almighty preserving me; (...) still I
had not that Rest and Satisfaction in myself which I desired and greatly longed
for; I found; when I had examined my State and Condition to Godward, that
Things were not right with me.

As for a sober and plausable Conversation in the Eye of the World, I knew that
was a very easy Attainment; a good natural Temper, with the Advantage of a
liberal Education, will quickly furnish a Man with Abilities for that, so that
he shall be looked upon as a Saint, and very spiritual, when perhaps in Chains
of Darkness, in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the very Bond of Iniquity. If
this sort of Righteousness would have done; perhaps I might make as fair
Pretensions that Way as some others: But alas! I soon saw the Emptiness and
Unsatisfactoriness of those Things: This is a covering that will not protect or
hide us from the Wrath of the Almighty, when he comes to Judgment: It Is not a
Man's natural Temper, nor his Education, that makes him a good Christian; this
is not the Righteousness, which the Gospel calls for; nor is this Truth in the
inward Parts, which God requires: The heart and Affections must be cleansed and
purified before we can be acceptable to God; therefore it was Death to me to
think of taking up my Rest in a formal Pretense of Holiness; wherein, yet, I
saw, to my Grief, Abundance of People wrapped themselves; slept securely and
quietly, dreaming of the Felicity of Paradise, as if Heaven were now their own,
and they needed not trouble themselves any more about Religion: I could not
entertain so dangerous an Opinion as this, for then I should be tempted to take
up my Rest by the Way, whilst I was traveling toward the promised Land. I
think I made a little Progress in a holy Life, and through God^s Assistance I
awakened some of my spiritual Enemies whilst I lived in the Communion of the
national Church. I thank my God, I can truly say, Whilst I used those Prayers I
did it with Zeal and Sincerity, in his Fear and Dread; but still, I ceased not
my earnest Supplication to him in private, that he would show me something more
excellent, that I might get a complete Victory over all my Lusts and Passions,
and might perfect Righteousness before him; for I found a great many Sins and
Weaknesses daily attending me: And though I made frequent Resolutions to forsake
those Sins, yet still the Temptation was too strong for me so that often I had
Cause to complain with the Apostle, in the Bitterness of my Soul, O wretched
Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! Who shall set
me free, and give me Strength to triumph over Sin, the World and the Devil?
That I may in every Thing please God, and there may not be the least Thought.
Word or Motion, Gesture or Action, but what is exactly agreeable to his most
holy Will, as if I saw him standing before me, and as if I were to be judged by
him for the Thoughts of my Heart next Moment. O divine Life! O seraphiek Soul!
O that I could always Stand here! for here is no reflection, no Sorrow, no
Repentance! but at God's right Hand there is perfect Peace, and a river of
unspeakable joy. O that we might imitate the Life of Jesus, and be thoroughly
furnished unto every good Word and Work! This was the frequent Breathing of my
Soul to God when I was in the Country, but more especially after I had left my
new Preferment of a Chaplain, and took private Lodgings in London: In this
Retirement I hope I may say, without Boasting, that I was very devout and
Religious, and I found great Comfort and Refreshment in it from the Lord, who
let me see the Beauty of Holiness; and the sweetness that arises from an
humbled mortified Life, was then very pleasant to my Taste, and I rejoiced in
it more than in all the Delights and Pleasures of the World.

And now it pleased God to show me, that if I would indeed live strictly and
holily as becomes the Gospel, then I must leave the Communion of the Church of
England; but knew not yet which Way to determine myself, nor to what Body of
Men I should join, who were more orthodox, and more regular in their Lives. As
for the Quakers, so called, I was so great a Stranger to them, that I had never
read any of their Books, nor do I remember, that ever I conversed with any one
Man of that Communion in my whole Life: I think there was one in Foxly while I
was a Curate there, But I never saw the Man, though I went several times to his
House on Purpose to talk with him, and to bring him off from his wild and mad
Enthusiasm, as I then ignorantly thought it to be: As for that Way, I know it
was every where spoken against; he that had a mind to appear more witty and
ingenious than the rest, would choose this for the Subject of his profane Jests
and Drollery; with this he makes Sport, and diverts the Company; for a Quaker
is but another Name for a Fool or a Madman, and was scarce ever mentioned but
with Scorn and Contempt. As for Drollery, I confess I was never any great
Friend to it; but indeed if all was true that was laid to the Quaker's Charge,
I thought that they were some of the worst People that ever appeared in the
World, and wondered with what Face they could call themselves Christians, since
I was told they denied the fundamental Articles of the Holy Faith, to which I
ever bore the highest Veneration and Esteem; and notwithstanding I had always
lived at the greatest Distance from that People, and was very zealous in the
worship of the Church of England, and upon all Occasions would speak very
honorably of it, moreover was content to suffer some few Inconveniences upon
that Account, (as thou very well know) yet my Father still looked upon me as
inclining to the Quakers; and some Years ago signified to a Friend, he was
afraid I would become an Enthusiast; and whilst I was at Bungan School he sent
me two Books to read that were writ against the Quakers, one of which was John
Faldo's, who has been sufficiently exposed for it by William Penn.

Whilst I lived in London in that private retired Manner (I was just now
speaking of) walking very humbly in the Sight of God, and having Opportunity to
reflect upon my past Life, as I had Occasion to be one Day at a Book-seller's
Shop, I happened to cast my Eye on Barclay's Works; and having heard in the
Country, that he was a Man of great Account among the Quakers, I had a mind to
see what their Principles were, and what Defense they could make for
themselves; for (...), these People are not so silly and ridiculous, nor
maintainers of such horrid Opinions, as the Authors of the Snake, and some
others, would make us believe. I took Barclay home with me, and I read him
through in a Week's Time, save a little Treatise at the End, which I found to
be very philosophical, I omitted; but however, I soon read enough to convince
me of my own Blindness and Ignorance in the Things of God; there I found a
Light to break in upon my mind, which did mightily refresh and comfort me in
that poor, low, and humble state in which I then was; for indeed I was then,
and had been so for a considerable Time before, very hungry and thirsty after
Righteousness, and therefore I received the Truth with all Readiness of mind;
'twas like Balm to my Soul, and as Showers of Rain to the thirsty Earth which
is parched with Heat and Drought.

This Author laid things down so plainly, and proved them with such Ingenuity
and Dexterity of Learning, and opened the Scriptures so clearly to me, that
without standing to cavil, dispute, raise Argument or Objection; or consulting
with Flesh and Blood, I presently resigned myself to God, and weeping for Joy
that I had found so great a Treasure, I often thanked him with Tears in my eyes
for so kind a Visitation of his Love, that he was graciously pleased to look
toward me when my Soul cried after him; so, that though before I was in great
Doubt and Trouble of mind, not knowing which Way to determine myself, yet now
the Sun breaking out so powerfully upon me, the Clouds were scattered: I was
now fully satisfied in my own Mind which Way I ought to go, and to what Body of
People I should join myself. So I immediately left the Communion of the Church
of England and went to Gracious-street Meeting. After I had read Barclay, I
read some other Books of that Kind, among which was an excellent Piece, though in
a small Volume, called, No Cross, No Crown: Thus I continued reading and
frequenting Meetings for several Weeks together, but did not let any one Soul
know what I was about: The first Man I conversed with was G. Whitehead, and
this was several Weeks after I began to read Barclay, and frequent their
Meetings; By him I was introduced into more Acquaintance, and still the farther
I went the more I liked their Plainness, and the Decency and Simplicity of
their Conversation: They do not use the Ceremonies and Salutations of the
Church of England, but shake hands freely and converse together as Brothers and
Sisters that are sprung of the same Royal seed, and made Kings and Priests unto
God. O, the Love, the Sweetness and tenderness of affection I have seen among
this people! By this says Christ, shall all men know that ye are my disciples,
if ye have love one to another. John xiii. 35. Put on therefore, says the
Apostle, ( as the Elect of God holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, Col. iii. 12.

Thus, my dear friend, I have given thee an account of my proceedings on this
affair. As to my bodily state, if thou desire to know what it is, I may
acquaint thee that I have my health as well as ever, and I bless God I have
food and raiment sufficient for me, so that I want no outward thing; and I have
the necessities and conveniences of life liberally. Let us not burden
ourselves with taking care for the vanities and superfluities of it; let us
possess our vessels in sanctification and honor. 1. These. iv. 4. And as we
bring our minds into perfect subjection to the whole will of God, so let us
bring our body to the most simple and natural way of living, being content with
the fewest Things, never studying to gratify our wanton Appetites, nor to
follow the Customs and Humors of men, but how we may so contract our earthly
Cares and Pleasures, that we may bring most Glory to God, most Health and Peace
to our own Souls, and do most Service to the Truth; and if this be our Aim,
certainly a very small portion of the Things of this World will suffice us:
Seeing we are Christians, we should therefore earnestly pursue those Things
which bring us nearest to God, and which are most perfective of human Nature;
for what is more than a Competency seems to be a Burden to a generous
philosophical Soul, which would breathe in a pure Vehicle, that so it may have
a quick Sense and Relish of all Blessings, both of the superior and inferior
Worlds.

Thou know, my dear Friend, that Religion is a very serious Thing, and
Repentance is a great Work, and one precious immortal Soul is of more worth,
than ten thousand perishing Worlds, with all their Pomp and Glory: Therefore
let us take Courage, and be valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, let us not
content ourselves with a Name and Profession of Godliness, let us come to the
Life and Power of it; let us not despond of getting the Victory; we have a
little Strength for God; let us be faithful to him and he will give us more
Strength, so that we shall see the Enemy of our Peace fall before us, and
nothing shall be impossible unto us: I say, my Friend, let us be faithful to
that Measure of Light and Knowledge which God has given us, to be profited and
edified by it in a spiritual Life, and as God sees we are diligent and faithful
to work with the Strength we have, he will more and more enlighten us, so that
we shall see to the End of those Forms and Shadows of Religion wherein we have
formerly lived; but if he sees we are about to take up our Rest in those
Shadows, that we grow cold and indifferent in the pursuit of Holiness, running
out into Notions and Speculations, and have more mind to dispute; and to make a
Show of Learning and Subtility, than to lead a holy and devout Life, then it is
just with God to leave us in a carnal and polluted State, to continue yet but
in the outward Court, where we may please ourselves with beholding the Beauty
and ornaments of a worldly Sanctuary, and never witness the vail being taken
away, and that we are brought by the Blood of Jesus into the Holiest of all,
where alone there is true Peace with God, and Rest to the weary Soul. I could
say much more upon this Head, if Time or Leisure would give Leave.

As for a particular Answer to thy Letter, I have not Time now to give it; and
for the present let this general Answer suffice: and if thou will consider
Things in their pure abstracted Nature, and not suffer the Prejudices of
Education to sway thee, but in Fear and Humility wilt search out the Truth for
thyself, thou will find that there needs no other Answer to thy Letter than
what I have already given; for by waiting on God, and deligently seeking him,
thou will find Answer to it in thy own Bosom, and this will be much more full,
clear, and satisfactory than I, or any other Man living can pretend to give
thee, or any other Friend who has lovingly wrote to me, for whom I desire,
with all the sincere-hearted in the Church of England, that they may come to
witness the Almighty Power of God, to save and redeem them from every Yoke; and
that they may see clearly to the End of those Things which are abolished, and
come to the Enjoyment of spiritual and heavenly Things themselves, is the daily
Prayer and deep Travil of my Soul, God knows. 'Till I can be more particular,
if thou please thou may communicate this to them, and let them know that I
am well, and thank them for their kind Letters. Let us remember to pray for one
another with all Fervency, that we may stand perfect in the whole Will of God,
Amen, says my soul, I am thy most affectionate Friend and servant in Jesus.

SAMUEL CRISP

SECOND LETTER.
My dear Friend,
I LATELY received a kind and brotherly Letter from thee, for which I return
thee many Thanks. I am now in the Communion of the People called Quakers; and I
have Cause to bless God for this happy Change of my Life: I am through Mercy
brought off from the Shadow of Religion, and am pressing forwards to get
Acquaintance with the quickening Power, Life and Virtue of it, if that I may be
a Christian indeed, and not in Name and Profession only. I had a threat while
talked and discoursed of Holiness, but did not understand what it was to talk
with God, to live and dwell in him. Perhaps indeed some may think I made a fair
Show of Piety when I was with you. But alas! I was deeply sensible of my own
Faults and Miscarriages and I resolved through God's Assistance to enquire after
something more Noble and Excellent than I had discovered in that State; and
blessed be his Name for ever, that God has answered the Cry of my Soul, and
let me see a People that are hated and despised by the World, but are dear to
him; for he has revealed to them the Mysteries of the Kingdom; he has carried
them upon Eagles Wings, and cherished them as the Apple of his Eye. As for me,
I have been yet but in the outward Court; and far (...) of that Truth and
Righteousness that is taught and practiced among this People: For they are come
within the Holiest of all, they are come into a near Communion with God, to
behold the Cherubims of Glory that cover the Mercy-Seat, to be fed with the
true Manna. These are Mysteries that are to be revealed unto the Meek and
Lowly, but the Haughty, Insolent and Profane, cannot come near them, nor taste
of the Sweetness nor Comfort of them. Indeed the formal traditional sort of
People of the World, may talk of these Things as they have heard from others,
and in their sober minutes may have some faint Glimmerings that Way; but to
come to a real and inward Enjoyment of them, they can no more pretend to, than
to work the greatest Impossibilities; all their Wit and Subtility, and Learning
cannot reach higher for to handle of the Word of Life; this is peculiar only to
those who are content to forsake all, and become Fools for Christ, they are
those who are in a good Temper to receive and cooperate with the influence of
the Holy Spirit, and have seen the Emptiness and Vanity of all those Things
that are so much admired by the World; the Schools, and Universities, and
Learned Doctors, and Great Rabbis, have not profitted me; they are ravened
from the Spirit of God, and gone out into their own Notions and Speculations,
thinking thereby to search out God and comprehend the Truth. Alas! the
Mysteries of God's Kingdom are far out of their Reach in their carnal minds;
they weary themselves in vain; the Vulture's Eye cannot pierce into these
Secrets; all the great Critic Scholars and Philosophers of the World are Fools
in these things, and whilst they are wearying themselves to find the deep
Things of our God, studying and racking their Heads, tossing and tumbling to
and fro like a wild Bull in a Net, and knows not which Way to disentangle
himself; the more he struggles, the weaker he grows, the faster he is bound; so
the more these vain Talkers read the more they write; the more they cavil and
dispute, the further they are from God, and the more they declare their Hatred
and Enmity to the Spirit of Christ, and to the Simplicity of the Gospel. I have
been a long time aware of the Folly and Impertinency of these Men, and chiefly
the celebrated Fathers of the Church, as they call them; the Councils and
Synods of Old, are now of very small Account with me; I am not ashamed to sit
under the Teachings of Women and Mechanics, howsoever they may seem in the Eye
of the World; for they teach me more Christianity, and instruct me more
perfectly in a divine Life, than all the studied elaborated Sermons and
Discourses that ever I heard at the Universities, or since; their Words are
with Power, they are mightily assisted with the Spirit of God, they speak with
Majesty and Authority, and there is a native Beauty, Clearness and Solidity of
Expression that shines through their Discourses, which is sufficient to answer
that groundless Calumny, viz, The Quakers Preaching is Nonsense, and no Body
could understand them. This I have heard often refuted by many living
Testimonies, so that I do rather think them the best Wits, and the most
ingenious People in the World; for they employ their Parts and Learning in the
Fear of God to his Glory and Service, and to promote the truest Interest of
Mankind. As for the little Jests, Witnesses, and vain Pedantry of the Age,
which I know the World has Esteem for, and nothing will please but what
abounds with such Fooleries. I say, if the Quakers be deficient in any of
these, it is not for want of Abilities, or because they have less Wit than
other Men, but because they have more Prudence and Wisdom to govern it, and
that is the Reason why they avoid such childish Vanities, which are so freely
used and indulged by others, to the great Dishonor of God and the Christian
Religion; and therefore because they do not seek to please a wanton Age, to
make people laugh and be merry, nor to entertain the carnal airy Mind with
pleasant Stories, fine Notions, and witty Expressions of natural Things; from
thence it is that they have been shamefully traduced by the World, as the most
ignorant, blind and foolish People that ever made any Profession of Religion,
and yet this is the People to whom I have now joined myself in a sincere Love
to Truth, God knows; and I glory more in this Fellowship and Acquaintance
with these Lambs of Christ, than if I were related to the greatest Kings, Lords
and Potentates upon the Earth. Oftentimes has my Spirit been refreshed with
theirs, when we have met together to wait upon God; and my Soul still longs and
pants more and more to be filled with these divine Comforts: he is ready always
to pour down Blessings upon us, if we could qualify ourselves for the Reception
of them; If we would put away vain Thoughts, which cloud and darken the Mind,
and so hinders the Favorable Influence and Iradations of Heaven.

And since it has pleased God to visit me of late, and to make known to me
Excellent Things in Righteousness, he alone is to have the Praise and Glory of
all, and now I freely resign myself to the Conduct of the blessed Spirit; now
let the Truth prosper, now let it run and be glorified in the Earth, let it
shine out in its full Lusture, to the Terror and Confusion of all the Enemies
thereof, and to the reviving of the Souls of the Hungry and Thirsty, who are
ready to faint, waiting for and expecting the Consolation of Israel, until the
Times of Refreshment comes from the Presence of the Lord, who will open a
Fountain for Judah and Jerusalem, so that Rivers shall run in dry Places: There
will he speak Peace to his People, and after they have sat silent a little
While in the Dust, suffering patiently the chastizing Rod of his Love to pass
over them, he shall then comfort the Daughter of Sion, and say, Arise thou
afflicted, and weep and mourn no more, but put on thy beautiful Garments. Oh!
Jerusalem, raise thy Head, uncover thy Face, and gird up thy Loins with
Strength, see the Day break, and the Morning spread itself upon the Mountains;
now the sorrowful Nights of Affliction are gone over, the Clouds are scattered
and gone, the Sun is risen in its Brightness, and now Joy and Peace shall be
multiplied; in a little Wrath I hid my Face from thee for a Moment, but with
everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
Oh! let us wait in Humility of Soul, and tenderness of Heart, before the Lord,
that we may witness this great Change and Salvation wrought in us and for us,
that the Scripture may be no more a sealed Book to us, but that we may feel the
precious Truths therein recorded to be fulfilled, in our own Particulars. Then
there we shall never be weary of praying, and reading the holy Scriptures, we
shall never be loath or unwilling to come into God's Presence; for his Love,
and the sweetness of his Ointment, will draw and allure us to dwell always
under his Canopy, that we may feel Life and Power to flow from Him who is the
Ocean that supplies all the Wants of the Children of Men; and how shall we come
to taste of that heavenly Banquet he has prepared for us, that we may eat and
drink at his Table, and that our Souls may delight in Fatness? I say, how shall
we attain to this, but by a strict and mortified Life? Certainly the more we
retire from worldly Joys, and empty ourselves of earthly Comforts and false
Delights, the fitter we shall be to receive those that are spiritual and
heavenly; and not only to receive and rejoice in them for a Time, but to live
and dwell in them for ever, for this is the Life of Jesus and here the Kingdom
of God reigns in the Heart and Soul, by which it is changed from Glory to
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. And now I would ask all the wise and
prudent, all the rich, all the noble and learned Men of the World, what they
think of these Things? Whether this is to be learned in their Courts and
Palaces? Or whether any of the great Scholars and Universities in Christendom
can furnish us with such a System of Divinity as this? No, they hate it, and
despise it, and instead of a sober Answer to my Query, they return Scoffs and
Contempt. This is Canting they say, and an idle Dream, and forged Chimera of my
own Brain, and a great many more opprobrious Names they have for such Enquiries
as these. Sometimes, perhaps, they will suffer the Expression, with an
hypocritical Show, will pretend to pity me, calling it an unhappy Effect of
Melancholy, and too much Retirement from the World; and this they think too
much Condesension, that I ought to think myself beholding to them for giving it
so mild a Character; for at other Times they deal more sharply, and say
confidently that it is Madness, Delusion, Witchcraft, and diabolical Enthusiasm.

But I am content to lie under all these odious Imputations from the World,
knowing very well that better Men than I, have suffered the same Things before
me, and do, at this present Time. As for my Enemies, I can truly say, I thank
God I pity them, and pray for them; they do not hurt me, but themselves. And
now, my dear Friend, before I conclude, suffer me a little to speak of thy
present Circumstances; for, as God knows, my Bowels yearns toward thee in
the tender Love of Jesus. I suppose thou art now where I left thee, viz. with
the Lord Richardson, so called, in the Capacity of a Chaplain, an Office which
I havv had a little Experience of myself, since I last saw thee; but was
quickly so weary of that servile Yoke, so unworthy of that holy Function I
bore, that in ten Days Time I quitted my new Preferment, and left it more
freely than ever I undertook it. What Peace or satisfaction thou can have in
such Employment I know not; for my Part, I could find none; my Soul was grieved
and burdened every Day with seeing and hearing their evil Deeds, beholding
their Vanities and Excesses; this was a sword to my Soul and spirit, it wounded
me very deep; and I do solemnly profess, I had rather beg my bread from Door to
Door, than to live in the like Bondage again, where I must be obliged to such
Ceremonies and Formalities, to flatter Men in their Sins, to cry Peace, peace;
and to sow Pillows under the arm-holes of delicate people, that can never bear
the least Check or Frown, but expect the mercenary Priest should always laugh
or smile in their Faces, even when he sees plainly they are going to Hell and
Destruction; and yet I must tell thee, the Family I was in, was looked upon as
one of the most sober and regular, as the World goes now; and I must needs say,
I did not leave them for any Drinking, Gaming, Swearing or Whoring that I
preceived amongst them; in all these filthy scandalous Practices, as far as I
could see, they were blameless; but yet I saw their Hearts were not right; for
they were Lovers of pleasures, more than Lovers of God; and thou know that
he or they, let them be great or small, if they live in Pleasure, grow fat and
wanton against Christ; such Persons are dead while they live: I say, whatever
their Faith, or Principles, or Professions may be, yet in Religion they are
dead.

I shall say no more, but hasten to a Conclusion. If thou desire a particular
Account of my Convincement, thou may see it in a Letter which I wrote lately
to Richard Lake, Junr. wherein I gave him a fair and true Relation of my
Proceedings in that Matter, what Steps I took, and how God did graciously
assist me when he had raised in me sincere Desires and Enquiries after Truth
and Holiness. Dear Friend, I have no more at present, but to let thee know I do
most heartily pray for thee, that thou may consider Things without Prejudice,
and not suffer any of the Temptations or Allurements of the World to draw thy
Mind from God, and to hinder thee in thy Pursuit of Holiness; he that loves
Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, or any of the Endearments of this world
more than Christ, is not worthy of him; but if thou will come into Communion
with Christ, and chiefly to follow the Guidence of his Light and Spirit, O what
a blessed and happy Rest shall thou find to thy Soul! O what Rivers of Living
Waters will spring up in thee, of which thou may drink freely, and praise God
for all his Mercies and Benefits, that thou may indeed come to such spiritual
Enjoyment and Refreshments as these, is the sincere Desire of

Thy Loving and Affectionate Friend, SAMUEL CRISP.

EXTRACTS FROM THE WRITINGS OF DIVERSE EMINENT AUTHORS, OF DIFFERENT RELIGIOUS
DENOMINATIONS, AND AT VARIOUS PERIODS OF TIME, REPRESENTING THE EVILS AND
PERNICIOUS EFFECTS OF STAGE PLAYS, AND OTHER VAIN AMUSEMENTS.
BY LINDLEY MURRAY, WITH SOME ADDITIONS.
FROM PASCALL.
THERE is nothing more capable of letting us into the knowledge of human
misery, than an inquiry after the real cause of that perpetual hurry and
confusion, in which we pass our lives. The soul is sent into the body, to be
sojourner of a few days. She knows this is but a stop, till she may embark for
eternity; and that a small space is allowed her to prepare for the voyage. The
main part of this space is ravished from her by the necessities of nature, and
but a slender pittance left to her own disposal: and yet, this moment that
remains, does so strangely oppress and perplex her, that she only studies how
to lose it. She feels an intolerable burden, in being obliged to live with
herself, and think of herself; and, therefore, her principal care is to forget
herself, and to let this short and precious moment pass away without
reflection, by being amused with things that prevent her notice of its speed.
This is the ground of all the tumultuary business, of all the trifling
diversions amongst men; in which our general aim is to make the time pass off
our hands, without feeling it, or rather without feeling ourselves; and, by
getting rid of this small portion of life, to avoid that inward disgust and
bitterness, which we should not fail to meet with, if we found leisure to
descend into our own breasts.

We imagine that, at least, some respite, some shelter, may be found, by
agreeing to banish them from our meditation. This is the only natural comfort
which mankind have been able to invent under their numerous calamities. But a
most miserable comfort it proves; because it does not tend to the removal of
these evils, but only to the concealment of them for a short season; and
because, in thus concealing them it hinders us from applying such proper means
as would remove them. Thus, by a strange revolution in the nature of man, that
grief and inward disquiet which he dreads as the greatest of sensible evils,
is, in one respect, his greatest good; because it might contribute, more than
all things besides, to the putting of him in a successful method of recovery.
On the other hand, his diversions, which he seems to prize as his sovereign
good, are, indeed his greatest evil; because they are of all things the most
effctually in making him negligent under his distemper: they do but amuse and
beguile him; and, in the conclusion, lead him down blindfold into the grave. It
is, indeed, one of the miracles of Christianity, that, by reconciling man to
God, it restores him to his own good opinion; that it makes him able to bear
the sight of himself; and, in some cases, renders solitude and silence more
agreeable than all the intercourse and action of mankind. Nor is it by fixing
man in his own person, that these wonderful effects are produced; it is by
carrying him to God, and by supporting him under the sense of his miseries,
with the hopes of an assured and complete deliverance in a better life.

From the PRINCE of CONTI.
"THE call which men have for diversion, is not by far so great as is thought,
and it consists more in imagination or in custom, than in real necessity. Those
who are employed in bodily labor, have only need of a bare cessation from it.
Those who are employed in affairs toilsome to the mind, and but little
laborious to the body, have only need to recollect themselves from that
disposition which those sort of employments naturally cause, and not to
dissipate themselves yet more, by diversions which extremely engage the mind.
It is a jest to fancy that one has need to pass three hours in filling the mind
with follies at a play. Those who find in themselves this need, ought to look
on it, not as a natural weakness, but as a vice of custom, which they must cure
by serious employment."

"If the soul abandon itself to false pleasures, it loses the relish of
spiritual ones, and finds nothing but disgust for God. When one feeds himself
with the vain pleasures of the world, the spiritual senses become stupefied,
and incapable of relishing or understanding, the things of God. -- Now, among
the pleasures of the world, which extinguish the love of God, it may be said
that plays and romances hold the first rank; because there is nothing more
opposed to truth; and the Spirit of God, being a Spirit of truth, can have no
part with the vanities of the world."

"Plays and romances not only indispose the soul for all acts of religion and
piety, but they give it a disgust, in some measure, to all serious and ordinary
actions. As nothing is represented in them but galantries, or extraordinary
adventures, and the discourses are far distant from such as are used in serious
affairs, one insensibly takes from them a romantic disposition of mind: the
head is filled with heroes; and heroines; and women, seeing the adorations
which, in them are given to their sex, have that sort of life so much impressed
on their minds, that the affairs of their family and of common life, become
insupportable to them; and when they return to their houses, with minds thus
evaporated and filled with these follies, they find every thing there
disagreeable, and especially their husbands, who, being taken up with their
affairs, are not always in the humor of paying them those ridiculous
complaisances which are given to women in plays, in romances, and in the
romantic life."

"Those deceive themselves extremely, who think that plays make no ill
impression on them, because they do not find them excite any formed evil
desire. There are many degrees before one comes to an entire corruption of
mind; and it is always extremely hurtful to the soul, to destroy the ramparts
which secured it from temptation."

"One does not begin to fall when the fall becomes sensible; the fallings of
the soul are slow, they have preparations and progressions; and it often
happens, that we are overcome by temptations, only by our having weakened
ourselves in occasions which seemed of no importance: it being certain, that he
who despises little things, shall fall by little and little."

"It must not be imagined that the wicked maxims of which plays are full, are
not hurtful, because people do not go there to form their sentiments, but to
divert themselves: for they do not fail of making impressions, notwithstanding,
without being perceived. -- For instance, the opinion that the chimera of
honor is so great a good, that it must be preserved, even at the expense of
life, is what produces the brutal rage of the gentlemen of France. If those who
fight a duel were ever spoken of but as fools and madmen -- as indeed they are;
if that phantom of honor, which is their idol, were never represented but as a
chimera and a folly; if care were taken never to form any image of revenge, but
as of a mean and cowardly action; the resentment which men feel upon an affront
would be infinitely weaker; but that which exasperates and renders it the more
lively' is the false impression, that there is cowardice in bearing an affront.
Now, it cannot be denied that plays, which are full of these evil maxims, do
greatly contribute to fortify that impression; because the mind being by them
transported, and entirely out of itself instead of correcting those sentiments
abandons itself to them without resistance and delighst to feel the motions
they inspire, which dispose it to produce the like upon occasion." -- "God does
not impute to us the coldness which proceeds from the withdrawing of his light,
or merely from the heaviness of this body; but, no doubt, he imputes to us that
to which we have contributed by our negligence, and our vain diversions. It is
his will that we should esteem nothing so much as the gracious gift which he
has made us of his love; and that we should be careful to preserve it by giving
it nourishment. This command he has intimated to us in the persons of the
priests in the ancient law, whom he ordains always to maintain the fire on the
altar, and to take care to put wood upon it every day in the morning. This
altar is the heart of man, and every Christian is the priest; who ought to be
careful to nourish the fire of charity on the altar of his heart, by putting
wood every day upon it; that is to say, maintaining it by the meditation of
divine things, and by exercises of piety. Now, if those who go to plays have
yet any sense of piety, they cannot disown that plays deaden, and tend to
entirely extinguish devotion; so that they should not doubt, God judges them
extremely guilty, for having made so little account of his love, that instead
of nourishing and endeavoring to augment it, they have not feared to
extinguish it by their vain diversions; and that he will impute to them as a
great sin, the abatement or the ^oss of their love to him. For if a dissipation
of the goods of the world and of the earthly riches, by luxury and gaming, is
no little sin, what must be judged of a dissipation of the goods of grace, and
of that precious treasure the Scriptures speaks of which we ought to purchase,
by the loss of all the goods, and all the pleasures of this life?"

From the Same.
"There will be many persons ready to assert, that they have never received any
ill impression from Comedy; but I maintain, either that they are very few in
number, or that they are not sincere, or that they have not reflected enough on
themselves to perceive it, or else, that the only reason why Comedy has not
corrupted their manners, is, because it found them already corrupted, and that
they had left it nothing to do in this matter."

From the Same.
"It is impossible to consider the business of a Player, and to compare it with
the Christian profession, without being sensible that there is nothing more
unworthy of a Child of GOD, and of a member of JESUS CHRIST, than this
employment. I do not speak of the gross irregularities only, and the dissolute
manner in which the women appear on the Stage, because they who justify Plays,
always separate those sort of disorders from them in their imagination, though
they are never separated in effect. I speak only of that which is absolutely
inseparable from them. It Is an employment, the end of which is, the diversion
of others; where men and women appear on a Theater, to represent the passions
of Hatred, Anger, Ambition, Revenge, and chiefly that of Love. They must
express them as lively and as naturally as is possible for them; and they
cannot do so, if they do not in some manner excite them in themselves, and if
their souls no not take all the changes which we see in their faces. Those,
then, who represent a passion, must be in some measure touched with it whilst
they represent it; and it is not to be imagined, that they can presently efface
from their minds that impression which they have voluntarily excited, and that
it does not leave a great disposition to the same passion which they have been
so willingly sensibly of. Thus, Plays are, even in their nature a school and
exercise of vice, since it is an art, in which one must necessarily excite in
himself vicious passions. And if we consider that the whole life of Players is
employed in this exercise, that they pass it entirely either in learning by
themselves, or rehearsing among one another, or in representing to spectators
the image of some vice; and that they have scarce any thing in their minds but
these follies; we shall easily see, that it is impossible to join this
employment with the Purity of our Religion. And thus it must be owned, that it
is a profane employment, and unworthy of a Christian; and that by consequence,
it is not allowable for others to contribute to maintain them in a profession
contrary to Christianity, or to authorize it by their presence."

CAVE, in his account of the PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS, says,
"The Christians of those days went not to public feasts, nor frequented the
shows that were made for the disport, and the entertainment of the people, and
this was so notorious, that the heathens charged it upon them as a part of
their crime; observe how in Minutius Foelix, it is drawn up (says Clemens
Alexandrinus,) the Romans, says he, govern and enjoy the world, while you in
the mean time are careful and mopish, abstaining even from lawful pleasures;
you visit not the shows, nor are present at the pomps, nor frequent the public
feasts; you abhor the holy games, the sacrificial meats and drinks; crown not
your heads with garlands, nor perfume your bodies with sweet odours; a ghastly,
fearful and miserable people:" which by the time that Octavius the Christian
comes to answer he grants it all to be true, and tells him; there was very good
reason why they should abstain from their shows, pomps and divertisements, at
which they could not be present without great sin and shame, without affronting
their modesty and offering a distaste and horror to their minds."

ARCHBISHOP USHER,
speaking of Interludes and Stage Plays, says, "They offend against many
branches of the 7th commandment together, both in the abuse of apparel, tongue,
eyes, countenance, gestures, and all parts almost of the body. For besides the
wantonness therein used, both in attire, speech and action; the man puts on
the apparel of the woman (which is forbidden as a thing abominable: Duet.
22.5.) much filthiness is presented to the beholders, and foolish talking and
jesting, which are not convenient: Lastly, fornication and all uncleanness,
(which ought not to be once named among Christians,) is made a spectacle of joy
and laughter. ( Ephesians. 5.3.4.) Therefore they that go to see such sights, and
hear such words, show their neglect of Christian Duty, and carelessness in
sinning, whereas they willingly commit themselves into the snare of the Devil.
(1. Cor. 15, 33.)

ARCHBISHOP TILLOTSON, mentioning Plays, says,
"They are intolerable, and not fit to be permitted in a civilized, much less a
Christian nation: They do most notoriously minister to vice and infidelity: By
their phrophaneness they are apt to instill bad principles into the mind's of
men, and to lessen that awe and reverence which all men ought to have of GOD
and Religion; and by their lewdness they teach vice, and are apt to infect the
minds of men, and dispose them to lewd and dissolute practices." -- AND

AGAIN, "Some parents are such monsters, as not to give good things to their
children; but instead of Bread give them a Stone, instead of a Fish give them a
Serpent, instead of an Egg give them a scorpion.

"These are evil indeed, who train up their children for ruin and destruction,
in the service of the Devil, and in the trade and mystery of iniquity: Who
instead of teaching them the fear of the LORD, infuse into them the principles
of Atheism, Irreligion and Profaneness; instead of teaching them to love and
reverence religion, they teach them to hate and despise it, and to make a mock
both of sin and holiness; instead of training them up in the knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures, which are able to make men wise unto Salvation, they allow
them to profane that Holy Book.

From Sir MATTHEW HALE.
"Beware of too much recreation. Some bodily exercised is necessary, for
sedentary men especially; but let it not be too frequent nor too long. Gaming,
Taverns, and Plays, as they are pernicious, and corrupt youth; so if they had
no other fault, they are justly to be declined in respect of their excessive
expense of time, and habituating men to idleness and vain thoughts, and
disturbing passions and symptoms when they are past, as well as while they are
used."

CLARKE,
in his Essay on Study, speaking of Plays and Romances, says, "By what I have
seen of them, I believe they are generally very indiscreetly and foolishly
written, in a way proper to recommend vanity and wickedness, rather than
discredit them; have a strong tendency to corrupt and debauch the mind with
silly mischevious notions of love and honor, and other things relating to the
conduct of Life."

WILLIAM LAW, a Clergyman of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
"You own that God has called you to great purity of conversation; that you are
forbid all foolish discourse, and filthy jesting, as expressly as you are
forbid swearing; and that you are told to let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth, and yet you go to a house of corrupt communication; you hire
persons to entertain you with ribaldry, profaneness, rant and impurity of
discourse; who are to present you with poisonous sentiments, and lewd
imaginations, dressed up in elegant language; and to make wicked, vain, and
impure discourse, more lively and delightful, than you could possibly have it
in any other ill company. Is not this sinning with a high hand, and grossly
offending against the plainest doctrines of scripture."

"As prejudices, the force of education, the authority of numbers, the way of
the world, the example of great names, may make people believe; so the same
causes may make people act against all sense and reason, and be guilty of
practices which are utterly inconsistent with the purity of their religion."

"If impure speeches; if wanton amors; if wild passions and immoral rant, can
give us any delight, is it not past all doubt, that we have something of all
these disorders in our nature? and that we nourish and strengthen them by those
gratifications?"

There is no doctrine of our blessed Savior, that more concerns all
Christians, or is more essential to their salvation than this, "Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God." Now take the stage in its best state,
when some admired tragedy is upon it; are the extravagant passions of
distracted lovers, the impure ravings of inflamed heroes, the joys and torments
of love, and refined descriptions of lusts; are the indecent actions, the
amorous transports, the wanton address of the Actors, which makes so great a
part of the most sober and modest tragedies; are these things consistent with
the Christian doctrine of purity of heart?"

"All people who enter into these houses of entertainment, or contribute the
smallest mite toward them, must look on themselves as having been so far
friends to the most powerful instruments of sensuality, and to be guilty of
contributing to an open and public exercise of splendid impurity and
profaneness. When we encourage any good design, either with our consent, our
money, or presence, we are apt to take a great deal of merit to ourselves; we
presently conclude that we are partakers of all that is good or praise worthy
in it; of all the benefit that arises from it, because we are contributors
toward it. A man does not think that he has no share in some public charity,
because he is but one in ten thousand that contributes toward it (or because
it would go forward without his contribution) but if it be a religious charity,
and attended with great and happy effects, his conscience tells him, that he is
a sharer of all that great good to which he contributed. Now let this teach us
how we ought to judge of the guilt of encouraging any thing that is bad, either
with our consent, our money, or our presence. We must not consider how much our
single part contributes toward it how much less we contribute than several
thousands of other people, nor that the work would go forwards if we did not at
all contribute to it; but we must look at the whole thing itself, and whatever
there is of evil in it; or whatever evil arises from it, we must charge
ourselves with a share of the whole guilt of so great an evil."

"People of fashion and quality have great advantage above the vulgar; their
condition and education give them a liveliness, and brightness of parts from
whence one might justly expect a more exalted virtue. How comes it then, that
we see as ill morals, as little religious wisdom, and as great disorders among
them as among the most rude, uneducated part of the world; it is because the
politeness of their lives, their course of diversions and amusements, and their
way of spending their time, as much extinguish the wisdom and light of
religion, as the grossness and ignorance of the dullest part of the world --
Any way of life that darkens our minds, that misemploys our understanding, that
fills us with a trifling Spirit, that disorders our passions, that separates us
from the spirit of God, is the same certain road to destruction, whether it
arises from stupid sensuality, rude ignorance, or polite pleasures. Had any one
therefore, the power of an Apostle, or the tongue of an Angel, it would e well
employed in exposing, and dissuading from those ways of life, which wealth,
corruption and politeness have brought among us. We indeed only call them
diversions; but they do the whole work of idolatry and infidelity, and fill
people with so much blindness and hardness of heart, that they neither live by
wisdom, nor feel the want of if, but are content to play away their lives, with
scarce any attention to the approaching scenes of death, judgment, and
eternity."

WILLIAM PENN, in his No Cross, No Crown, says,
"How many plays, did JESUS CHRIST and his Apostles recreate themselves at?
What Romances, Comedies, and the like, did the Apostles and Saints make, or
use, to pass away their time withal? I know, they bid all redeem their time, to
avoid foolish talking, vain jesting, profane babblings, and fabulous stories,
as what tend to ungodliness, and rather to watch, to work out their salvation
with fear and trembling, to flee foolish and youthful lusts, and to follow
Righteousness, Peace, Goodness, Love, Charity, and to mind the things that are
above, as they would have Honor, Glory, Immortality, and Eternal Life."

ROLLIN,
Pricipal of the University, of Paris, and a zealous advocate for the moral and
religions education of youth, recites the following passage from the writings
of Rochefoucault, with approbation:

All great diversions are dangerous to a Christian: but of all that have been
invented, there is none we have so much reason to fear as plays. The passions,
in these entertainments, are so naturally and artfully delineated, that they
are excited by them, and imprinted on our hearts, especially that of love; and
this more forcibly, when it is represented as chaste and honest: for the more
innocent it appears to innocent souls, the more strongly are they disposed to
be affected with it.

POLITICAL. Sir JOHN HAWKINS,
speaking of the pernicious effects of Plays, says, Upon setting up or opening
a certain Theater, its contiguity to the City soon made it a Place of resort,
and what was apprehended from the advertisement of the Plays to be exhibited in
that quarter of the town, soon followed; the adjacent Houses became Taverns in
name, but in truth they were houses of lewd Resort, and the former occupiers of
them, useful Manufacturers and industrious Artificers were driven to seek
elsewhere for a Residence.

And he farther remarks that the Merchants of London then a grave sagacious
Body of Men, found the Theater was a temptation to idleness and to pleasure,
that their Clerks could not resist; they regretted to see the corruptions of
Covent-Gardens extended; and the Scats of industry hold forth allurements to
Vice and Debauchery -- And again he observes That although of plays it is said,
that they teach Morality, and of the Stage, that it is the mirror of human
life, these assertions are mere declamation, and have no foundation in truth or
experience, on the contrary a Play House, and the Regions about it, are the
very Hot Beds of Vice; how else comes it to pass that no sooner is a Play House
opened in any part of the Kingdom, than it becomes a Halo (or Circle) of
Brothels. -- Of this truth the neighbor ^ood of the place I am now speaking of
has had Experience; One Parish alone adjacent thereto, having to my knowledge
expended the Sum of L1300 in prosecutions for the purpose of removing those
Inhabitants whom the Play House had drawn thither.

MONTAGUE, in his reflections on the rise and fall of the ancient republics,
observes, on the account given by Plutarch, of the effects of theatrical
entertainments above two thousand years ago.
"Could we raise that venerable sage (Plutarch) from the grave to take a short
survey of the manners of our own countrymen, would he not find an amazingly
exact copy of those of the Athenians? Would he not see the same series of daily
and nightly diversions, adapted to the taste of every class of people, from the
public breakfastings (that bane of the time and industry of the tradesman) up
to our modern orgies, the masquerade etc."

"This strange degeneracy of the Athenian manners, which Plutarch so severely
censures, was first introduced by Pericles -- he procured a law that every
citizen was entitled to a gratuity out of the public money, for not only
attending the courts of judicature and the assemblies of the states, but even
at the entertainments of the theater, etc. thus Pericles bought the people with
their own money; the consequence of this corruption, we may learn from the
writings of Demosthenes, was, that in a few years time the Athenians were no
more the same people."

"Athens, however, by her fall has left us some instructions etc. warned by her
fate we may learn, that luxury and a prevailing fondness for public diversions,
are the never sailing forerunners of universal Idleness, Effeminacy and
Corruption. Reduced at last to a province of the Romans, Athens contributed her
taste, for arts and sciences, toward polishing; and her passion for theatrical
performances, toward corrupting the manners of that people."

"The regular drama (as it is called) was imported with the luxury of Greece,
but every species of this kind of entertainment, whether tragedy, comedy, farce
or pantomime, was comprehended under the general denomination of Stage Plays,
and the different performers alike ranged under the general Term of Players.
The profession itself was scandalous and proper only for Slaves, and if once a
Roman citizen appeared upon the stage, he immediately forfeited his right of
voting, and every other privilege of a free man."

"The generous Spartan, trained up in a state when public virtue still
continued to be the object of public applause, could not behold the ridiculous
assiduity of the Choragi, or magistrates who presided at the public shows, and
the immense sums they lavished in the decorations of a new tragedy, without
indignation.

BRITAINS REMEMBRANCER,
published in England in the year 1745 -- during the time of the Rebellion, the
author in a pathetic expostulation with his countrymen on the dissipation
prevailing, and bringing into view many signal Providential deliverances
extended to Great Britain in times of iminent danger and calamity; expresses
himself on the subject of stage entertainments in the following terms: "Should
I pretend to give a view of the wickedness of the Theater, I should not know
where to begin or to what length the subject would carry me. For whether I
insisted on the lewdness or impiety of most of the plays themselves, on the
infamous characters of the actors and actresses, on the scandalous farces they
commonly tag the gravest plays with, or above all on the inhumanly impudent
dances and songs, with which they lard them between the acts: I say,
whichsoever of these particulars I insisted on, each of them would furnish
matter for a great many pages, and much more, if I should enter upon a fall
view of them all. Indeed the theater is at present on such a footing, that it
is impossible to enter it, and not come out the worse for having been in it;
for now a days a good play is no other than a trap to draw in the modest and
innocent to a love of theatrical entertainments; and the minds of the
spectators are not the safer from being polluted and debauched, though the play
itself be in the main decent and modest; since the ingenious contrivance of the
managers entirely prevents the good effects of any worthy sentiment expressed
in the play by introducing a painted strumpet at the end of every act, to cut
capers on the stage in such an impudent and unwomanly manner, as must make the
most shocking impression on every mind; and lest the audience should chance in
spite of all this, to carry away somewhat that might make their hearts the
better, a ludicrous and shameless farce concludes the whole, and with one
stroke erases all the little traces of virtuous sentiments that were formed by
the play itself.

"I only beg leave to ask you my dear countrymen, for what purpose you support
a sacred order of men to teach you the pure and holy laws of the Christian
Religion, and at the same time encourage by your countenance and your riches a
set of the very dregs of human nature, who make it their business to debauch
your minds by their lewd compositions and wanton gesticulations, to fill them
with impure and vile ideas, and to disappoint the most diligent endeavors of a
christian ministry. Surely it can never be consistent with common sense to
support in the same country, one order of men for the propagation of virtue and
Religion, and another for the destruction of them; to maintain one set of
people for promoting a reformation of manners, and another for promoting an
universal corruption."

"It is the saying of a Great man of the last age, That upon some accounts it
were better that wicked men would fairly renounce christianity than continue to
profess it, and at the same time disgrace it by their scandalous lives: And
indeed it could be no such matter of grief to good men to see a nation or
barbarians overran with vice and debauchery, as to see this nation once
illustrious for its purity in doctrine and practice, celebrated for its
martyrs, and which pretends to be the grand bulwark of the protestant religion;
to see this nation I say thus sunk to a pitch of lewdness in its public
entertainments which at Athens, where they worshipped the unknown God, would
have thrown the celebrated diversions of the stage into utter disgrace."

"And are these favorite pleasures which so wholly engross and bewitch a
christian nation that we can not live without them even while an enemy is
laying waste our country, and expected every hour at our gates?

"And now my dear countrymen, what remains or what more is in the power of any
private person, than after having thus laid before you a brief view of the
national guilt that has brought the late troubles into our land, to conclude
this little tract by earnestly calling upon each particular rank to exert
themselves in their public and private stations for bringing about that general
reformation which is necessary for averting a final and extirpating judgment."

CONCLUSION.
IT must be evident to every sober and unprejudiced mind, that the sentiments
of these enlightened men, on the corrupting influence, and the fatal
amusements, of the theater, merit the most serious and attentive consideration:
and to some minds, it is apprehended, they will appear to be solid and
awakening reflections.

If it be true, that many profane, indecent, and irreligious sentiments are to
be found in the works of dramatic writers, and these sentiments colored with
the softest names, and recommended on the stage by the most captivating
characters and actions; -- if the senses and imagination are so charmed with
the elegance of the scenery, the richness of the dresses, the power of the
music, the address of the performers, and the gai^y and splendor of the whole
surrounding scene, as to deprive the mind of sober reflection, and agitate it
too much for receiving benefit from moral and rational instruction -- if these
passionate and fascinating exhibitions injure the delicacy of our best
feelings, and gradually weaken our abhorrence of immoral indulgences; if they
frequently break down the ramparts of our virtue, and lay us open to the
inroads and government of vice and folly; -- if they chiefly address the
inferior powers of our nature, our senses, imagination, and passions, and
regale them with such high-seasoned enjoyments, as too often vitiate our moral
taste, and not only indispose, but give us a disgust to every composition that
is not much refined, and especially to the Holy Scriptures, and those sober and
religious studies and engagements, which from the great duties of life, and
promote our happiness here and hereafter; -- if the persons who attend these
places of diversions; do neither look for, nor receive, any serious impressions
from them, but, on the contrary, often find their minds enervated, and
accompanied with a vain and romantic spirit; -- if they occupy, in the perusal
and exhibition, in the preparation for them and langour after them, so much of
our precious time, as to prevent us from attending to necessary and important
concerns; and thus also superinduce habits of indolence and dissipation; -- if
they abound with flattering pictures of the world, and present, to the youthful
mind especially, such highly finished and captivating views of human life and
happiness, as are seldom or never realized; and hence, besides an aversion or
indifference to the ordinary duties and affairs of mankind, not unfrequently
produce deep anxiety, disappointment, and discontent through time, -- if it be
of importance to preserve the principles and manners of the rising generation
pure and untainted, to prevent them from being governed by their imagination
and passions, and to encourage in them modesty, humility, moderation, and a
reverence for piety and virtue; -- if religion and goodness must be supported
by constant care and vigilance, and our preservation from evil depends on our
preservation from evil depends on our avoiding temptations, and praying daily
for Divine assistance against it; -- if many great and good men have borne
public testimony against the pernicious tendency of these amusements; and if
numbers of serious and worthy characters of all denominations, have been
convinced of the evils connected with them, and thought it their duty to avoid
and discourage the attendance and support of them; -- it Christianity teaches
us to consider ourselves as strangers and pilgrims, traveling toward a better
country; and admonishes us not to love the world, nor to be conformed to its
vain customs and fashions, but to be transformed by the renewing of our minds,
and to maintain a steady self-denial against the lust of the flesh, the last of
the eyes, and the pride of life; -- if these are the common effects and
consequences of dramatic entertainments, and truths which cannot fairly be
controverted, can we hesitate to acknowledge, that they are of the highest
moment, and that it is incumbent upon us not to expose our principles and
virtue to the influence of temptations, which are the more dangerous, as they
are highly pleasing, little suspected, and seldom opposed?

What advantages can they yield us, that will compensate the loss or hazard of
interests so important. All the pleasures, and all the refinements which their
warmest votaries have ever found in them, are indeed a poor recompense for the
corruption, extravagance, and misery which they have too frequently sown the
seeds of, and produced in human life.

It becomes us then, as rational beings, as Christians, who are called to
renounce the vanities of this transient precarious state, and who have a
permanent and better world in view, to assert the dignity of our nature, and to
act conformably to the importance of our destination. A few fleeting years will
bring us all to the verge of an awful scene, when the vain diversions and
pastimes, which are now so highly prized, will appear in their true light, a
most lamentable abuse of that precious time and talent with which we have been
entrusted, for the great purpose of working out our soul's salvation. At that
solemn period, tho great business of religion, a pious and virtuous life;
dedicated to the love and service of God, will appear of inestimable value,
and, in the highest degree, worthy of the concern and pursuit of reasonable
beings. Happy will it be for us, if we become wise in time, take up the cross
to all ensnaring pleasures, for the few remaining days of our lives, and
steadily persevere, under the Divine Aid, in fulfiling the various duties
assigned us, and in making suitable returns to the Author of all good, for the
unmerited blessings which he has bountifully bestowed upon us. In these
exalted employments we shall experience the noblest pleasure, and feel no want
of empty and injurious entertainments, to occupy our minds, or to fill up our
time. In the scens and productions of nature, and in the useful works of art;
in the faithful narratives of human life, and the description of interesting
objects; in the endearments of social and domestic intercourse; in acts of
charity and benevolence; and in the pleasing reflections of an upright and
self-approving mind, we shall perceive also abundant sources of innocent
refreshment and true cheerfulness, as well as the means of enlarging our
understandings and improving our hearts.

May those persons, therefore, who have doubts respecting propriety of
indulging themselves in theatrical amusements, and, indeed, may all who read
these lines, seriously consider the hazard of such indulgences and give the
subject that attention which its importance demand. May those especially, who
are convinced of their dangerous nature and tendency; reject with abhorrence
the solicitations of appetite and pleasure, and the fallacious reasonings which
are often adduced in their support. May we never be imposed on by the common,
but delusive sentiments, that moral and religious improvement is to be acquired
from such impure mixtures; and that the literary merit, and accurate knowledge
of the human heart, which are displayed in many parts of dramatic works, will
alone for the fatal wounds which innocence, delicacy, and religion, too
frequently suffer from these performances. But being convinced that depraved
nature will ever select what is most congenial to itself; and that the
pleasures derived from refined composition, and the exhibitions of taste and
elegance, may be purchased at too dear a rate, let us resolutely and uniformly
oppose what we believe to be evil, however it may be arrayed; and do our utmost
to discourage by our example and influence, those powerful and destructive
engines of dissipation, profaneness and, corruption.

THE following sentiments, so expressive of the nature and power of true
religion, and its influence upon his own mind was solemnly expressed by GILBERT
BURNET, near the conclusion of his days.
"I WILL conclude with that which is the most important of all things, and
which alone will carry every thing else along with it; which is; to recommend,
in the most solemn and serious manner, the study and practice of religion to
all sorts of men, as that which is both the light of the world, and salt of the
earth.

"Nothing does so open our faculties, and compose and direct the whole man, as
an inward sense of God; of his authority over us; the laws he has set us; of
his eye over us; of his hearing our prayers; assisting our endeavors; watching
over our concerns; of his being to judge, and reward or punish us in another
state, according to what we do in this. Nothing will give a man such a
detestation of sin, and such a sense of the goodness of God, and of our
obligations to holiness, as a right understanding and firm belief of the
Christian religion. Nothing can give a man so calm a peace within, and such a
firm security against all fears and dangers without, as the belief of a kind,
wise providence, and of a future state."

"Integrity of heart gives a man courage and confidence that cannot be shaken.
A man is sure, that by living according to the rules of religion, he becomes
the wisest, the best and the happiest creature that he is capable of being.
Honest industry, the employing of time well, a constant sobriety, an undefiled
purity and chastity, with a quiet serenity, are the best preservatives too of
life and health: so that take a man as an individual, religion is his guard,
his perfection, his beauty, and his glory. This will make him a light in the
world, shining brightly, and enlightening many round about him."

"Thus, religion, if truly received and sincerely adhered to, would prove the
greatest of all blessings to a nation. But, by religion; I understand something
more than the receiving of some doctrines, though ever so true, or the
professing of them, and engaging to support them, not without zeal and
eagerness. What signify the best doctrines, if men do not live suitably to
them; if they have not a due influence upon their thoughts and their lives? Men
of bad lives, with found opinions, are self condemned and lie under a highly
aggravated guilt."

"By religion, I do not mean an outward compliance with forms and customs, in
going to Church, to prayers, to sermons, and to sacraments, with an external
show of devotion; or, which is more, with some inward forced good thoughts, in
which many satisfy themselves, while they have no visible effect on their
lives, nor any ^^ward force to subdue' and rectify their appetites, passions,
and ^ecret designs. Those customary performances, how good and useful soever,
when understood, and rightly directed, are of little value when they rest on
them, and think because they do them, they have acquitted themselves of their
duty, though they continue still proud, covetous, full of deceit, envy and
malice. Even secret prayers, the most effectual means, are designed for a
higher end; which is, to possess our minds with such a constant and present
sense of divine truths, as may make he set live in us, and draw down such
assistance, as to exalt and sanctify our natures."

"So that, by religion, I mean such a sense of divine truth as enters into a
man, and becomes the spring of a new nature within him; reforming his thoughts
and designs, purifying his heart; sanctifying and governing his whole
deportment, his words as well as his actions; convincing him that it is not
enough not to be scandalously vicious, or to be innocent in his conversation,
but that he must be entirely, uniformly, and constantly pure and virtuous,
animated with zeal to be still better and better, more eminently good and
exemplary."

"This is true religion, which is the perfection of human nature, and the joy
and delight of every one that feels it active and strong within him. It is true
this is not arrived at, all at once, and it will have an unhappy alloy, hanging
long even about a good man; but, as those ill mixtures are the perpetual grief
of his soul, so that it is his chief care to watch over, and mortify them, he
will be in a continual progress, still gaining ground upon himself: and as he
attains to a degree of purity, he will find a flame of life and joy growing up
in him. Of this I write with a greater concern and emotion, because I have felt
this the true, and indeed, the only joy which runs through a man's heart and
life. It is that which has been, for many years my greatest support. I rejoice
daily in it, I feel from it the earnest of that supreme joy which I want and
long for; and I am sure there is nothing else which can afford any true and
complete happiness."

FINIS.

