AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT BENNINGTON, Vermont, August 16th, 1799.

In commemoration of The BATTLE of BENNINGTON.

Published at the request of the audience.

By ANTHONY HASWELL.

O let us dr^^ our term of freedom out
In its full length, and spin it to the last,
So shall we gain Bill o^^ day (...).
A day, an have of (...)
Is worth a whole (...) of bondage.
BENNINGTON (...)

SIR,
YOUR Oration delivered on the 16th inst. was not only highly acceptable to the
audience, but we think calculated to render community a service, if made
public. In behalf of the company, therefore, we return you our thanks for your
ingenious performance, and request a copy for the press.

With respect, we are sir, Your friends, Committee of Arrangement.
ELEAZER HAWKS, THOMAS G. WAIT, DAVID ROBINSON, DAVID FAY, EPHBAIM SMITH.

Bennington, August 28, 1799.
To Mr. ANTHONY HASWELL.
ORATION, DELIVERED AT BENNINGTON August 16th, 1799.
ON an occasion like the present, and in all assemblage like that before which
I now stand, I am conscious that great application to a subject is necessary,
in order to instruct, and great ingenuity, in order to entertain. With respect
to the first, that necessary proportion of attention due from the conductor of
an extensive, and in the present crisis, by no means enviable public business,
from the father of a large and in no wise opulent family, (lately berest of its
best support, a remembrance of whose virtues calls the daily sigh, and forces
the nightly tear from my widowed recollection) will proclaim me not to have
been capable of paying on the present occasion. Should I fail in the second
respect, the shortness of my time for preparation, taken into view with my
earnest and sincere wish to please, will make a large draught in my favor, on
your well known and often experienced candor and generosity.

Impressed with these ideas, I shall proceed, without further apology, to lay
the thoughts and researches of a few leisure hours before you, hoping to afford
instruction to some, to give pleasure to others, and, if possible, to avoid
offense to any.

A worthy young gentleman of this vicinity, when lately conducting a periodical
publication, in a neighboring slate, devoted one quarter of it to beautiful
collections and original offays, calculated to raise the geni^s, and to mend
the the heart; and adopted as it; motto, that beautiful and poetical sentiment,
"I have here made a nosegay of culled flowers, and bring nothing of my own but
the thread that ties them." Unhappily for him, his culled flowers, or their
appendages, smelt too strongly like the cultivation of 1777 to suit the
vicinity he had chosen for his residence. How it may fare with my present
effay, is not a matter of very great anxiety to me, want of leisure having
forced me to make very large, and even literal extracts, from various authors.
If therefore, I can produce a fair claim to a handsome "string to tie them,"
the praise of having judiciously selected and arranged important political
truths (in the opinion of the present company) my ambition will be fully
gratified.

An ingenious anonymous author, who wrote about the beginning of the present
revolutionary war in Europe, remarks, "That the world has for ages been flooded
by the blood of its inhabitants, through the caprices of tyrants, under the
denomination of Kings, Emperors, Popes, etc. and the misery of millions demands
of wisdom, where is the power which establishes and connects all the orders of
a community, and on which they all depend? Where is the center to which every
thing tends, the principle from which all is derived the sovereign that can do
everything? Who can point out to us the form, the organization of that moral
person, a society or community, to which unity is necessary and of which
liberty is the effect?"

These are indeed momentuous questions: Satisfactory answers to them is not
interesting to a bare neighborhood, to a state, or to a kingdom, but is of the
most intimate concern to the world, and of the highest importance to the great
family of man.

The sophistry of political writers has been exhausted ^n the comparative
merits of monarchies, (...), and democracies, but (...) in the democ^ati^^^
(...) of the United States, and (...) now spreading through the (...) has been
exhibited, (...) of a society, which may (...) and defend with its while force,
the (...) and property of every one of its members, and in which each
individual, by uniting himself to the whole, shall never theless be obedient
only to himself, and remain fully at liberty to every thing but injury.

If this desirable state of things can exist under any possible form of
government, it must certainly be under tha^ which is the least complicate in
its construction, and which most intimately coincides with the views, and most
critical ^^^^ards the rights of the individual: ^or with confidence I can ask
the question, "Is not the principle established in nature and in reason, that
the supreme power is, and forever ought to be, in the hands of the body of the
people? because that body can have no interest contrary to that of the
individuals of which it is composed, and therefore stands not in need of a
guarantee, to secure the good usage of the citizen: for it is equally
impossible for a political as it is for a natural body, to have a disposition
to hurt itself, or attempt, under the exercise of reason, to injure its members.

It is, perhaps, of as great importance to the existence and well being of
republican governments, as any one principle whatever, that the public voice
should have a mode of expressing itself, and that such mode should form the
basis of every political constitution: For the supreme power itself can never
be deputed, the actual sovereignty resides in the body of the people, and he
who wishes to subvert it, is a traitor to the commonwealth of freedom.

Hence it results, that the act which constitutes the American government (...)
act which constitutes a free government cannot possibly be a contract. There
are no parties existent; it is the absolut^ will of the sovereign people,
constituting rulers and creating subordinate powers (...) and the depositories
of its power, whethe^ called kings, presidents or senates, a^^ not by such
appointments constitute^ masters; they are rightfully subject to their
sovereign the people, are amenable to them for their conduct, and ought to be
treated as traitors when they dare to exceed the limits assigned to them: in
consonance with that eternal law of nature which subjects a part to the whole.

The necessity of government, in civilized society, has in all ages, and
forever will, induce men to sorm social compacts, and depute certain powers to
individuals or public bodies, constituted as actors in behalf of the sovereign
people. But when the people have deputed they are not defunct; the sovereignty
is not annihilated; and however constitutions may point out no way for the
sovereign to make (...) will known, yet, the power exists, its d^^ed^^, votee
is heard at solemn interval, and at its awful utterance tyrants are wont to
tremble.

It may perhaps be argued with propriety, from the preceding, that it would be
the height of wisdom, were all constitutions so formed, as (without waiting for
evils and mal-administrations to gain strength from the supineness of the
people) to call its public functionaries statedly and regularly to an account
for their administration, and to determine publicly, whether they had confined
themselves within the bounds prescribed them. The general will should flow from
all to be agreeable to all, every one subjects himself thus to the conditions
which he imposes on others: this is equitable because common to all; useful
because it can have no object but the general good, and durable because resting
on the public ^trength. The general will is always in ^he right, and being thus
clearly defined, and fully expressed, in an existing constitution, and its
principles statedly recured to in the examination of its administrators, would
inform the public reason, by ^^e necessity of reflection on the events it
produced; effects would thus become causes, and even errors instructions.

If we turn our thoughts on the occasions which have produced the overthrow of
governments, and the general destruction of constitutions in the world, we
shall trace them universally to the linking of the arbitrary power of usurpers,
with the sacerdotal tyranny of excclesiasties. The present appears to be an age
favorable to the investigation of principles, and constitutions are arising
which must apparently exclude the injury, by foreclosing the admission of the
evil. In the demonstrative sciences truths not clearly admited are never
enforced: and truth is never opposed with passion and malignity, but when
enjoined as matter of belief, without suitable demonstration. And as it is with
axioms o^ science, so it would be with those of religion, were that sacred
business left by man as it is left by God: by that God wh^ is the source of
being, whose eye pervade^ immensity, and of whose existence no rational mind
can doubt, without feeling itself involved in inextricable absurdities.

Happy are the American States, supremely happy their national federation, in
rejecting from their constitutions superstitious establishments of every kind,
and leaving to the individual the sacred right of worshipping Jehovah, in such
way as the dictates of his conscience prescribes, secure from injury, and
restrained alone from injuring his fellow men, his family, or himself, by his
religious duties. This is truly a source of exultation to every unbiased mind,
and seems to promise a stability to our constitutions, that no other principle
could have ensured.

Superstition has been involved in the constitutions, and predominated in the
governments of the world universally; sometimes acting as an instrument,
oftener as a director, and forever sheltered from the aproach of reason, by its
assumed sanctity, and the supposed expediency of suporting the very
constitutions, which it was ever secretly, and surreptitiously undermining.

The Romish imposture was perhaps the most remarkable in this respect of any
upon record in the annals of modern history. It approached civil government in
the garb of lowly meekness and disinterested humility; it first sought
toleration, then protection, it afterward gained alocal, and in the course of
time a general dominion, until it nearly obained the wish of Caligula, for
widcextend^d Christendom appeared to have but one neck, on which the pope sat
down his consecrated foot, and established an absolute temporal and
ecclesiastical supremacy over it.

But the world became alarmed, and nations revolted against the sacred
imposition; yet melancholy to relate, they preserved a sacerdotal egg, in
every nest, which under one shape or other has produced a ghostly monster, a
little nicer but as satal quite to prey upon the vitals of liberty; until the
establishment of equal governments in America, under constitutions which
rejected priest-crast altogether, as a state engine, gave an exalted lesion to
mankind, and leaves religion subject to the discernment of every mind, as the
great parent of the world, and him who taught as never man before or since
taught men, has lest that interesting facred business.

Whence then arises the discordant jargon of the present day, about prevailing
atheism, and principles of licentiousness in America? about common sense
declaring war with reason, and refined philosophy seeking to destroy the basis
on which investigation, its exclusive boast, must forever rest: From whom
originates the senseless clamor about a union of church and state, and the
necessity of guarding by ^aw, the avenues through which Jehovah communicates
impressions of his existence to the human soul? Is it not from the ^r reverend
stricklers for infallibility themselves, who urge assertion for fact, and
sophistry for demonstration: From the Monks, the Abbes, the Friars and the
Bishops of humbled Rome, from interested professors of the Scottish Kirk, from
court parasites and pensioners in England, and from partially informed and
impertinently assuming American striplings, just let loose from college, who in
licentious declamation cast forth their little blackenings, to a^perse even the
shade of a Franklin, and if possible to deregate from the merit of a Jefferson.

For forms of government l^^ fools contest,
Whatever is best administered is best.
Have we excellent constitutions as independent states? then let us preserved
them in their simplicity, to ensure our individual happiness.

Have we an excellent national constitution, then let us guard it with our
lives, and denounce the traitor in his first essay to undermine it, in the
least iota; lease light infringements grow to heavy injuries, and slavery
creeps in through hole too large to stop, and rendered so by our supineness and
inattention.

Let us spurn the idea in its every shape, that when the people are assembled
they are omnipotent, but when they have appointed their servants, they have
transferred their omnipotence and sink to nothing.

The first paragraph of our glorious constitution, commencing with those
important words, to freedom sacred as to tyrants dreadful, "We the people,"
emphatically proclaims that this power, and a warm sense of it, exists in the
citizens of (...); and that it is the deter^^ (...) will, that every (...) or
birth, pos^ (...) shall enjoy the great objects of society, liberty property
and security.

These are not words of vague or indefinite signification, their meaning is
well understood, and even our lisping children can give a consistent idea of
their appropriate signification. Indulge me in giring what to me appears as
just and conc^^e a (...) of the te^ms as I recolle^t having (...) with in my
reading.

Liberty, is the power obtitued for every citizent, (...) and engagements of
(...) force, to act for his own happine^s without injuring others, and all
beyond this (...).

The right of property (...) not relate merely to the tenement or land that
forms may convey, but to the necessary justice that men of every condition
should enjoy the advantages of their honest industry, and not be obliged to
sacrifice them to the pride or pleasure of others.

And social security arises from the engagement of the whole community, to
preserve the person, property and liberty of every individual, untouched while
unoffending:

Government has the power of municipal legislation, and its laws are obligatory
upon all: but the nation when arranged, organized, and acting in their capacity
as a sovereign, has authority over the government itself; they have an
indubitable right to disannul existing constitutions, and express its will in a
new mode.

In consonance to this idea, says the declaration of independence, written by
the immortalized patriot Jefferson, against whom the malevolence of toryism has
ever spent its shafts in vain. "We hold these truths to be self-evident; that
all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their (...) with certain
unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness; that to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men,
de^iving their power from the consent of the governed; that whenever any form
of government becomes destructive of those ends, it is the right of the people
to alter or abolish it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation
on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall
seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness."

Again says that incomparable instrument, "when a long train of abuses and
usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to reduce
them (the people under ab^olute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future
security."

To establish these sacred rights on a permanent basis, we resisted the
arbitrary efforts of the British tyrant; for this our forefathers dared to
cross the raging main, to this then savage wild, and for this their freeborn
sons, on this auspicious day, a few years since, fought, bled, and conquered,
near the spot where we are now assembled, and left us free.

O may their memories be forever sacred,
And the rich boon preserved till hoary time
Shakes the last atom from the glass of being,
And suns and systems moulder to decay.
A mention of the event recals to memory the scenes that introduced it. Again a
view of 1775 returns -- Let us indulge a retrospective glance, and adore the
hand which guided us to victory: See the insidious foe is quitting Boston,
under covert of the darksome night, to seize the provincial stores of
Massachusetts deposited at Concord: Hark! an agonizing groan swells in the air,
and bears down full upon us -- the dreadful deed is done -- the blood of
freemen is shed by British hirelings, and every band of union severed as in an
instant. The plains of Lexington are stained with American blood, and see a
band of heroes assemble to avenge their deaths: the British regular bands,
panting high for havoc, and bred to deeds of death; to murder, legalized by
the tyranny of despots; are opposed by a scattering little body of determined
freemen, urged on to war by imperious necessity only, but dreadful as the still
messenger of fate. Their eyes flash fire, and their unerring aim selects the
officers from among the insidious foe, and bids them fall to appease the manes
of their departed friends, and set Columbia free. The Britons fly in wild
disorder, death marks their progress, and dismay attends their steps in each
direction.

Again our feelings are awakened; the work of death has recommenced; Warren has
greatly fallen! But said the orator of Congress, in pronouncing an euloium to
his memory, "he is not dead, his virtuous citizen shall never die! His memory
shall be forever present, and forever dear, to all good men, to all who love
their country. In the short space ^f life of but three and thirty years, he
^^ad displayed the talents of a statesman, the virtues of a senator, and the
soul of a ^^ero!

"Approach all ye whom the same in^erest inspirits, approach your country^an's
still bleeding body, wash with your ^ears his honorable wounds; but hang not ^o
long over his inanimated corpse, return ^o your habitations, to fill them with
detes^^tion of the crimes of tyranny: Let your ^orrible description of it make
each ^air to stand on end upon your children's ^eads, inflame their eyes with
noble rage, ^amp menaces on their brows, and draw ^y their mouths indignation
from their ^earts! Then, then, shall you give them ^ms, and your last, your
fondest wish ^all be, that they may return victorious, ^ may die like Warren!"

This was the sentiment of 1777! It ^^read, swift as the electic flu^d! Our
^^tion fled to arms, and taught the astonished world the important lesson, that
when a nation rises, tyrants sink; that when an empire struggles, mercenary
bands are worsted; that the voice of the people is the voice of God. We strug^
gled through difficulties, the bare recol^ lection of which almost appalls the
heart yet with a general tincture of succe^^ which like the pillow of cloud by
day and shining light by night, kept constantly in view, sufficient to convince
the attentive observer, that virtue is the care of Heaven, and that our
preserver could save by many or by sew.

Perhaps at no period of our revolutionary struggle, was the political horizon
o^ America more thickly overcast, than (...) the important period which the
present celebration was designed to commemorate.

The enemy elate with partial successe^ and vain from superiority of number^
rushed on from post to post. The arm^ of Washington retreated from state (...)
state, from Long Island to Pennsylvania General Lee, to whom America th^^
looked up as second, perhaps, to Washington alone, was in the hands of the
enem^ while in our northern quarter the foe concerted and soon after executed
his ^^sign of forcing us to quit the important posts which guarded our
frontiers, and were generally in flight before the haughty Burgoyne, whose
empty boast of quickly gaining elbow room enough in America, appeared now in a
likely way to be fulfilled.

But the tide had past the flood, the current turned -- Washington checks the
enemy, and gains an important advantage, at Trenton. He arranges his little
army, recrosses the Delaware, again faces the foe, and baffles his expectations
at Trenton, after which by a stroke of generalship, which added new luster to
the records of warlike atchievments, he evacel the exulung, and vastly superior
foe, (...) their rear guard at Princeton, and threw himself into a strong
position where, covered by natural defiles, and passes easily defended, he
fixed secure w^^ter quarters for his army, even in the teeth of the enemy.
While in this northern quarter, but a few months afterward, our friend and
townsman Col. Warner, aided by the intrepid Col. Francis, of New Hampshire,
gave a check to the British at Hubbardton, and placed their names high on the
lift of same. Who can revoke irrevocable sat? The gallant Francis, opposing
mighty odds, and baffling every effort of mercenary skill, pour' forth the
purple current of his heart, a rich libation at the shrine of freedom ^ on this
affecting event transpiring, the brave Col. Warner, oppressed by superiority of
numbers, made a good retreat, being preserved by munificent providence, to
yield important aid, in a more brilliant scene, the battle of Bennington.

Do not our hearts once more respond the feelings they that day experienced.
Methinks I see the fire once more enflaming every man, and glancing from each
eye, while the gentle fair lift up a supplicating voice, and lisping infants
join the prayer for victory. See the aged matron bids her husband and her sons
adieu who fly to meet the foe. The tender sister, the betrothed maiden, cling
to their brothers and expected husbands, then dropping from their arms resign
them to their sat, and to the guard an care of an Almighty friend. The female
groupe assemble! where to fly, or how to act, they anxiously enquire! Enquire,
alas! in vain, for none can answer. Hark! the dreadful battle rages --
thundering cannons roar, and to the affrighted tremblers seem to rend the
vaulted sky. See the aged mat^on slowly moves, oppressed alike with age and
terror, to seek a place of safety! the tender mother clasps her trembling
infants to her bosom, her weeping daughters aid her, and divide her care; they
fly ^^om place to place, dreading a savage ^oe in every covert, and fainting at
the ^ustling of a leaf; they seek for comfort ^n some calm placid countenance,
some ^ind sustaining look, but seek alasin vain; ^he brave are all in the
field, and the poor ^embling innocents they quitted, are for^^d to gather
consolation from among themselves, and trull in ^im on whom even ^ate depends.
How happy such reliance! ^ow sure a refuge is the God of Justice! ^ow breast the
country that enjoys his miles, upon a righteous contest.

Never, O never can Vermont forget ^er brave allies from Berkshire -- Never ^an
the all darkening shades of time erase the memory of the gallant Stark, with
his New Hampshire heroes from our minds. They rushed with open bosoms to oppose
the foe, to check his progress, or to share our sat: Heaven smiled upon their
efforts, of them it scarce was flattery to say,

"They came, they saw, they conquered." The late of America at that time
appeared suspended with an even beam, and this the pivot on which all must
turn. The defeat of Baum, under providence, decided the fate o^ Burgoyne, and
the surrender of Burgoyne the fate of America. Thus as Jonathan and his armor
bearer, by divine assistance, smote a Philistine garrison, and changed the
aspect of a bloody war, so the intrepid Stark, near this devoted village,
discomfited an equally impious host, and firmly held by the Almighty hand, laid
the fair corner stone of American freedom, in Vermont.

Beneath the shadow of the tree of liberty we sought, we conquered, and beheld
^ free and equal government arising like a phoenix from the ashes of sacrificed
tyranny, and under the auspices of a Washington, great in the council, glorious
in the field, we established our inestimable federal constitution, the pride of
America and the admiration of the world.

O let us watch our government with a careful but a scrutinizing eye. Wifely
have we left a means, even in the constitution itself, to amend its errors, on
discovery; let us touch it cautiously, but if occasion arises, let us do it
resolutely. -- The youth of nations, says a celebrated writer, is the age most
favorable to their independence. It is the time of energy and vigor. Our souls
are not yet surrounded by that apparatus of luxury, which serves as hostage to
a tyrant. -- God grant they never may be, but that we may cautiously guard
against the encroachments of the great, the solly of the weak, and the designs
of the wicked; correcting their errors by the force of reason, and thus
averting the dire necessity of an appeal to arms. But, if at any suture time,
by the insidious wiles of wicked and designing men, our independence should be
endangered, our property rendered insecure, and our substance lavished on
courtiers, sycophants, and tools of tyranny, may the spirit of 1777 reanimate
our zeal, may we seize the sword as the dernier resort, and live respected or
expire at freedom's shrine, establishing the doctrine with our blood, that an
oppressed people have the right of resisting their oppressors; and that
resistance to tyrants is obedience to God.

End of the Oration.
ODES, SONGS, etc. performed on the occasion.
Previous to the Oration.
THE day the blissful day returns,
That freed us from the foe,
Each patriot's breast with rapture burns,
Which patriots only know:
The thundering cannos cease to roar,
Sweet peace her timbrel founds;
The din of arms is heard no more,
But love and joy abounds.
O Liberty, Columbia's boast,
May thy pure sweets abound,
Diverge to our remotest coast,
And flow to realms around:
Till time dissolves the sacred tie,
Unites each rolling sphere,
And through the rended furling sky
Bids deathless scenes appear.
Hymn of Grateful Remembrance, sung August 16th, 1799. After the Oration.
COLUMBIA rejoice,
Let praises resound,
For mercies received
Each bosom should glow;
When tumult and bloodshed
Encompast us round,
King heaven in mercy,
Defeated the foe.
He banished our fears,
And saved us from death,
When How and Burgoyne,
Invaded the land,
Let joy in Jehovah
Enliven each breath,
While cheerful we reverence
The work of his hand.
See Fay breathe his last,
See Walbridge expire,
See Warner and Clark
Existence resign,
See Comstock and Coburn,
And Mall'ry retire,
And Chandler bow low
To the summons divine.
Peace, peace to their shades,
Survivors shall say,
(Who honor the cause,
They died to sustain,)
Long long shall our voices
F^esound with the lay,
Life is but a toy,
Such a prize to obtain
May virtue and worth,
Our region adorn,
Distinguish each class,
Each station delight,
True valor and wisdom
Shine forth as the morn,
'Till stars tade away,
And the sun sets in night.
Concluding Song for August 16th, 1799.
By ANDREW SELDOM, Esquire
Let Us charge the smiling glass now,
Who will pleasure disavow!
Let Us charge the smiling glass now,
It Is time we all were drinking,
And while tite juices of our vine,
Comprest into the sparkling wine,
High flover'd in our glasses shine,
Be of old patriots thinking.
Let Franklin's memory rise friends,
Who bafled all the British fiends:
Let Franklin's memory rise friends,
And toast him friend and stranger
Who dared to climb the heavenly pyre,
And bid its fierce destructive fire,
Prone on his rod in peace expire,
Nor human race endanger.
Here Is peace to Hancock's shade, who
Nobly braved the British crew,
Here Is peace to Hancock's shade, who
Arous'd his country sleeping;
His able voice, his fluent pen,
Peod^im'd the equal rights of men,
And taught his friends with ease to ken,
The wily courtier creeping.
To Washington the brave chief,
Who repel'd the British thief,
To Washington the brave chief,
And plume of deathless story;
'Twas this undaunted worthy name
Who drove the Briton's off with shame,
And placed us on the page of fame,
First in the files of glory.
To Adams, now the first man,
May he do all the good he can,
To Adams, now the first man
Selected to command boys;
If he will the righteous cause pursue,
And keep the people's good in view,
Promote no servile fawning crew,
We'll toast him heart and hand boys.
To Jefferson the sage boys,
Founder of our country's joys;
To Jefferson the sage, boys,
We'll poise the glass full smiling:
He dares the traitor's wiles defy,
He guards our rights with jealous eye,
He scorns the slanderous shafts which fly,
The honest would beguiling.
Come charge the glass to toast those,
Who destroyed the British foes;
Come charge the glass to toast those,
Who saved this town from slaughter;
Let all their loudest plaudits yield,
To those who on the martial field,
With life or blood the victory sea'ld,
And cheered each wife and daughter.
Come toast our native land boys,
Social friendship never cloys;
To toast our native land boys,
All other toasts surpasses:
The brave who still the tyrants dare.
The great, the good, the wise, the fair,
May all the heaven's peculiar care,
While time and motion lasts.
Here Is another glass, too
Bids to each a fond adieu,
Fill each brother's glass too,
And part with love and greeting;
When we from festive boards retire,
We'll fan the flame of heavenly fire,
Nor let the lamp of love expire
Till our next annual meeting.
An irregular ODE, for August 16th, 1799
WHEN the horrors of war sounding loud from each quarter,
Produced a wide and sid d^^may,
While blood thirsty sivages thirsted for slaughter,
Elate with conquests of a day:
Regardless of age, or of sex, or condition,
Rule hav^ck their aim, to distress their commission,
They spread far and wide the fell work of perdition,
Witness the murdered Miss M'Crea.
From the fortress of Ty' all our troops had retrea^nd,
While hostile tories smiled with glee,
Brave Francis was slain, and our Warner defeated,
And fortune frowned un^n the free;
Burgoyne with his F^^ssions, and tories and indians,
And yer^ more is sernally base British minions,
With (...), sword, and flames though it to waste our dominious,
But heaven averts the sad decree.
Baum artiv'd at Walloomsack, his party entrenched,
And made a formal grand display,
Our seems and our flocks from our hands to be wrenched,
Were ^id the horrors of the day:
But the (...) to turn the Green Mountain Boys roused,
New hampshire and Berkshire the quarrel ^sp^used,
Our wives and our babes they could not see unhoused,
They sought and victory led the way.
They joined the old Green Mountain train,
To face their foes and beat them,
They scale the hill and scour the plain
To conquer and defent them.
Sing yankee doodle one and all,
With fowling pleess handy,
They role that freedom's foes may fall,
Sing Yankee Doodle Dandy.
Securely guarded to their chins,
The foe displayed his cannon,
And fired about the yankees shins,
Yet no one urged his man on.
Like light ning over their works they fly,
Stark led the van to glory,
Yet scarcely to the rear could cry,
We scamper'd here before you.
The hessian grunt and indian yell
Was quickly turned to praying,
But who their sullenness can tell
While down their arms they are laying.
Says Yankee Doodle pile your arms,
The tories string and pinion,
To lead them off a negro charms
From our released dominion.
The battle over what sounds of joy
From sisters, wives, and sweethearts!
What grateful thanks their tongues employ
While hearts risemp to meet hearts!
Sing yaukee doodle, virtuous love,
And freedom's sweets are handy,
Exceil'd alone by joys above,
Sing yankee doodle dandy.
But hark! a recall to the theme first in hand sir,
Alas! what means that general sigh!
Brave Comstock and Coburn, with Mall's and Chandler
In freedom's cause have dir'd to die,
They mourn too for Walbridge, for Clark, Fay and Warner,
Whose memory Green Mountain bred heroes shall honor,
Till the scythe of Old Time clips creation's last corner.
Till suns decay, and systems fly.
COLUMBIANS will be FREE or DIE.
COLUMBIA's sons awake to glory,
O say not Warren died in vain,
That sages learned, wise, and hoary,
For worse than nothing toiled in pain.
When George the tyrant mischief breeding,
With hessians, indians, satan's band,
And Br^^sh brutes desired the land,
While peace and liberty lie bleeding.
Assert your rights, ye brave,
Nor own ^ home^^ed Lord,
Once more your country save,
By reason, not by sword.
Wide through the world the storm is rolling,
And discord rears her stan^ard high,
Kings, priests, and despots, right controuling,
Decree, republicans shall die.
And shall we sleep (...) such condition?
Forbid it Mercer's soul of fire!
Montgomery every heart inspire,
To save our rights from such perdition.
Our hearts and tongues are free,
Nor will we bow to man,
Shout, shout for liberty,
On our old war-worn plan
Around the board poise high the glasses,
And in the ^^^^iment combine,
The joy all other joy surpasses,
While thus we bow at freedom's shrine;
No tyrant base our laws invading,
Shall gag our mouths, our press restrain,
Our purses fierce, our rights profane,
Or bear us down by gasconading,
More bound to liberty,
Than husband is to wife,
Columbians will be free,
Or quit their claim to life.
Song composed during the celebration of August 16th, 1799, holden in
commemoration of Bennington Battle at the State Arms.
ATTENTION my friends to the matter in hand,
I think I the run of the tale understand,
And in plain common l^nguage c^n soon let you see,
The truth about W. X. Y and Z.
Derry down, down, etc.

Not very long since we to (...) J^y,
To kiss the Queen's hand, and due homage to pay,
He brough^ (...) a treaty, the law of the land,
So sublime as to put common sense to a stand.
Derry down, etc.

The (...) western posts they eng^g'd to restore,
Pay up sp^liations -- and make but few more,
In return we should pay them their merchants demands,
Which would take the loose chink from our niggardly hands.
Derry down, etc. I^ s^cured us our trade, which (...),
They would kindly conduct, (...),
Our produce (...),
Subject only to SEARCH and (...).
Derry down etc.

^u^^he Frend^ to whose harbor, the (...) were (...),
Found such kind of dealing (...),
So they just past an edict to frustrate its ends,
And to use us the same as our very good friends,
Derry down, etc.

Then a dust was kicked up, and it seemed very odd,
By a friend so devoted such tracks should be trod;
We could bear it from Britain, but neighborly France,
Had no reason to lead her ally such a dance.
Derry down, etc.

First Pinckney was sent to demand of Monsieur,
What the deuce he could mean by a motion so queer,
But as he had no plaster prepared for the sore,
They gave him a passport to Holland's cool shore.
Derry down, etc.

Then Marshal and Gerry fat sail for Parie,
And Pinckney was joined least they shouldn't agree,
He had just been kicked ost, but our ministry thought,
That so trifling a thing, would be reckoned for naught.
Derry down, etc.

They came and they labored, but labored in vain,
In pump and parade an admittance to gain,
For the fly Talleyrand wouldn't cringingly see,
That an act of starvation with France would agree.
Derry down, etc.

Then W, X, Y, and Z. came along,
And (...) to our envoys an old fashioned song,
About, "he that gives first is the party bestows,
A return is no g^^t, it but pays what it owes."
Derry down, etc.

But such reasoning as this they could not understand,
It (...) quare with the matter in hand,
And (...) X, Y, and Z and a lady to boot,
(...) sed, is as mad as a coot.
Derry down, etc.

But may a new mission the vapors disperse,
Keep justice in view, and old prospects reverse,
And give us occasion to sing and encore,
We will not go to war for three knaves and a w -- c.
Derry down, etc.

The following toasts were drank at the spacious bower erected by the citizens
of Bennington and its vicinity, opposite the state arms tavern, August 16th,
1799.
1st. The 16th of August 1777, the day which turned the seal of victory in
favor of Columbia.

Song. "When Britons, tories, etc.

2nd. Genesis Stark and his veterans. May the remembrance of their manly and
heroic services, remain as a sacred deposit incur hearts.

3d. The brave who fell on this memorable day a May it never be said that those
who gave up life to purchase freedom, bled in vain.

Solemn music. Song Bennington battle.

4th George Washington, the patriot chief who led our tank to glory. Music,
wash ^gton's March.

5th, The President of the United States. Undaunted by ar stocracy, and the
sheers of the porcupines of their party, may he succeed in his intended
neg^ciation for (...) with the ^^public of France; regardless of (...) talons
of King b^^ds.

6 Thema (...) is too much (...) rioullm and (...) tories and (...).

7^h The (...) in (...) of arist (...)

(...), etc.

(...) those who prefer monarchical to (...), have a Su^arrow for their (...)
for his prim^ minister.

(...). The rogue's march.

(...) of Ireland; like the rebels of (...) obliterate the word, pluck another
(...) the British tyrant's crown, and (...) catalogue of republics.

(...) army; Gentlemen you are (...)

(...) The milicta of the union, the only sure de^^^ (...).

(...) the guardian of (...) and religious (...)

(...) be the (...).

(...) of (...) X, Y, and Z, and the (...) an old women, that a (...) America.

(...) Israel Smith. May (...) by (...) next election.

(...) link in nature's (...) and virtue, may it be (...), etc.

(...) When Britons, to^^^^ (...) printed, several (...) publication.


