AMBROSIO; OR, THE MONK. A ROMANCE.

BY M. G. LEWIS, ESQUIRE. M. P. AUTHOR OF "CASTLE SPECTRE," etc. etc.

THREE VOLUMES IN TWO. VOL. I. THE SECOND AMERICAN, FROM THE FOURTH BRITISH
EDITION. With considerable Additions and Alterations.

Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagos,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque.
HOR. Dreams, magic terrors, spells of mighty power,
Witches, and ghosts, who rove at midnight hour.
PRINTED at BOSTON, by SAMUEL ETHERIDGE, For THOMAS and ANDREWS. Sold by them,
the other Booksellers, and S. ETHERIDGE, in Boston; by I. THOMAS, Worcester; by
THOMAS, ANDREWS and PENNIMAN, Albany; by THOMAS, ANDREWS and BUTLER, Baltimore;
and by E. S. THOMAS, Charleston, (S. C.) JAN. 1799.

PREFACE.
IMITATION OF HORACE. Ep. 20 -- B. 1.
METHINKS, Oh! vain ill-judging book,
I see thee cast a wishful look,
Where reputations won and lost are
In famous row called Paternoster.
Incensed to find your precious olio
Buried in unexplored port-folio,
You scorn the prudent lock and key,
And pant well bound and gilt to see
Your volume in the window set
Of Stockdale, Hookham, or Debrett.
Go then, and pass that dangerous bourn,
Whence never book can back return:
And when you find condemned, despised,
Neglected, blamed, and criticized, Neglected it has not been, but critici^ed
enough of all conscience.

Abuse from all who read you fall,
(If happily you be read at all)
Sorely will you your folly sigh at,
And wish for me, and home, and quiet.
Assuming now a conjuror's office, I
Thus on your future fortune prophesy: --
Soon as your novelty is over,
And you are young and new no more,
In some dark dirty corner thrown,
Moldy with damps, with cobwebs strown,
Your leaves shall be the book-worm's prey,
Or sent to chandler-shop away,
And doomed to suffer public scandal,
Shall line the trunk, or wrap the candle!
But should you meet with approbation,
And some one find an inclination
To ask by natural transition,
Respecting me and my condition;
That I am one, the inquirer teach,
Nor very poor, nor very rich;
Of passions strong, of hasty nature,
Of graceless form and dwarfish stature;
By few approved, and few approving;
Extreme in hating and in loving;
Abhorring all whom I dislike,
Adoring who my (...) strike;
In forming (...) never long,
And for the most part ^udging wrong;
In friendship firm, but still believing
Others are treacherous and deceiving,
And thinking in the p^esent era
(...) is a (...) ^himaera:
More passionate no creature living,
Proud, obstinate, and unforgiving;
But yet for those who kindness show,
Ready through fire and smoke to go.
Again, should it be asked your page,
"Pray, what may be the author's age?"
Your faults, no doubt, will make it clear,
I scarce have seen my twentieth year,
Which passed, kind reader, on my word,
While England's throne held George the Third.
Now then your venturous course pursue:
Go, my delight! -- Dear book, adieu!
Hague, October 28, 1794. M. G. L.

TABLE OF THE POETRY.
PREFACE -- Imitation of Horace, Vol. I. iii. The Gipsy's Song, 42 Inscription
in an Hermitage, 61 Durandarte and Belerma, 88 Love and Age, 227 The Exile, 250
Midnight Hymn, Vol. II. 35 The Water-King, 73 The Erl-King, 77 The Erl-King's
Daughter, 78 Serenade, 86 Alonzo the Brave and Fair Imogine, 104 Giles Jollup
the Grave and Brown Sally Green, 107
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE first idea of this Romance was suggested by the story of Santon Barsisa,
related in The Guardian -- The Bleeding Nun is a tradition still credited in
many parts of Germany* and I have been told, that the ruins of the Castle of
Lauenstein, which she is supposed to haunt, may yet be seen upon the borders of
Thuringia. -- The Water King, from the third to the twelfth stanza, is the
fragment of an original Danish ballad -- And Belerma and Durandarte is
translated from some stanzas to be found in a collection of old Spanish poetry,
which contains also the popular song of Gayferos and Melesindra, mentioned in
Don Quixote. -- I have now made a full avowal of all the plagiar^s^^ of which I
am aware myself; but I doubt not, many more may be found, of which I am at
present totally unconscious.

THE MONK.
CHAP. I.
-- Lord Angelo is precise;
Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
That his blood flows, or that his appetite
Is more to bread than stone.
MEASURE FOR MEASURE.
SCARCELY had the Abbey-bell tolled for five minutes, and already was the
church of the Capuchins thronged with auditors. Do not encourage the idea, that
the crowd was assembled either from motives of piety, or thirst of information.
But very few were influenced with those reasons; and in a city where
superstition reigns with such despotic sway as in Madrid, to seek for true
devotion would be a fruitless attempt. The audience now assembled in the
Capuchin church was collected by various causes, but all of them were foreign
to the ostensible motive. The women came to show themselves, the men to see the
women: some were attracted by curiosity to hear an orator so celebrated; some
came, because they had no better means of employing their time till the play
began; some, from being assured that it would be impossible to find places in
the church; and one half of Madrid was brought thither by expecting to meet the
other half. The only persons truly anxious to hear the preacher, were a few
antiquated devotees, and half a dozen rival orators, determined to find fault
with and ridicule the discourse. As to the remainder of the audience, the
sermon might have been omitted altogether, certainly without their being
disappointed, and very probably without their perceiving the omission.

Whatever was the occasion, it is at least certain, that the Capuchin church
had never witnessed a more numerous assembly. Every corner was filled, every
seat was occupied. The very statues which ornamented the long aisles were
pressed into the service. Boys suspended themselves upon the wings of
Cherubims; St. Francis and St. Mark bore each a spectator on his shoulders; and
St. Agatha found herself under the necessity of carrying double. The
consequence was, that, in spite of all their hurry and expedition, our two new
comers, on entering the church, looked round in vain for places.

However, the old woman continued to move forward. In vain were exclamations of
displeasure vented against her from all sides: in vain was she addressed with,
"I assure you Segnora, there are no places here." "I beg, Segnora, that you
will not crowd me so intolerably!" "Segnora, you cannot pass this way. Bless
me! How can people be so troublesome!" The old woman was obstinate, and on she
went. By dint of perseverance and two brawny arms, she made a passage through
the crowd, and managed to bustle herself into the very body of the church, at
no great distance from the pulpit. Her companion had followed her with timidity
and in silence, profiting by the exertions of her conductress.

"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed the old woman in a tone of disappointment, while she
threw a glance of inquiry round her; "Holy Virgin! what heat! what a crowd! I
wonder what can be the meaning of all this. I believe we must return: there is
no such thing as a seat to be had, and nobody seems kind enough to accommodate
us with theirs."

This broad hint attracted the notice of two cavaliers, who occupied stools on
the right hand, and were leaning their backs against the seventh column from
the pulpit. Both were young, and richly habited. Hearing this appeal to their
politeness pronounced in a female voice, they interrupted their conversation to
look at the speaker. She had thrown up her veil in order to take a clearer look
round the cathedral. Her hair was red, and she squinted. The cavaliers turned
round and renewed their conversation.

"By all means," replied the old woman's companion; "by all means, Leonella,
let us return home immediately: the heat is excessive, and I am terrified at
such a crowd."

These words were pronounced in a tone of unexampled sweetness. The cavaliers
again broke off their discourse: but for this time they were not contented with
looking up, but started involuntarily from their seats, and turned themselves
toward the speaker.

The voice came from a female, the delicacy and elegance of whose figure
inspired the youths with the most lively curiosity to view the face to which it
belonged. This satisfaction was denied them. Her features were hidden by a
thick veil; but struggling through the crowd had deranged it sufficiently to
discover a neck which for symmetry and beauty might have vied with the Medicean
Venus. It was of the most dazzling whiteness, and received additional charms
from being shaded by the tresses of her long fair hair, which descended in
ringlets to her waist. Her figure was rather below than above the middle size:
it was light and airy as that of an Hamadryad. Her bosom was carefully veiled.
Her dress was white; it was fastened by a blue sash, and just permitted to peep
out from under it a little foot of the most delicate proportions. A chaplet of
large grains hung upon her arm, and her face was covered with a veil of thick
black gauze. Such was the female, to whom the youngest of the cavaliers now
offered his seat, while the other thought it necessary to pay the same
attention to her companion.

The old lady with many expressions of gratitude, but without much difficulty,
accepted the offer, and seated herself: the young one followed her example, but
made no other compliment than a simple and graceful reverence. Don Lorenzo
(such was the cavalier's name whose seat she had accepted) placed himself near
her; but first he whispered a few words in his friend's ear, who immediately
took the hint, and endeavored to draw off the old woman's attention from her
lovely charge.

"You are doubtless lately arrived at Madrid?" said Lorenzo to his fair
neighbor: "It is impossible that such charms should have long remained
unobserved; and had not this been your first public appearance, the envy of the
women and adoration of the men would have rendered you already sufficiently
remarkable."

He paused in expectation of an answer. As his speech did not absolutely
require one, the lady did not open her lips. After a few moments he resumed his
discourse:

"Am I wrong in supposing you to be a stranger to Madrid?"

The lady hesitated; and at last, in so low a voice as to be scarcely
intelligible, she made shift to answer, "No, Segnor."

"Do you intend making a stay of any length?"

"Yes, Segnor."

"I should esteem myself fortunate, were it in my power to contribute to making
your abode agreeable. I am well known at Madrid, and my family has some
interest at court. If I can be of any service, you cannot honor or oblige me
more than by permitting me to be of use to you." "Surely," said he to himself,
"she cannot answer that by a monosyllable; now she must say something to me."

Lorenzo was deceived, for the lady answered only by a bow.

By this time he had discovered, that his neighbor was not very conversible;
but whether her silence proceeded from pride, discretion, timidity, or
idiotism, he was still unable to decide.

After a pause of some minutes, "It is certainly from your being a stranger,"
said he, "and as yet unacquainted with our customs, that you continue to wear
your veil. Permit me to remove it."

At the same time he advanced his hand toward the gauze; the lady raised hers
to prevent him.

"I never unveil in public, Segnor."

"And where is the harm, I pray you?" interrupted her companion somewhat
sharply. "Do not you see, that the other ladies have all laid their veils
aside, to do honor, no doubt, to the holy place in which we are? I have taken
off mine already; and surely, if I expose my features to general observation,
you have no cause to put yourself in such a wonderful alarm! Blessed Maria!
Here is a fuss and a bustle about a chit's face! Come, come, child! Uncover it!
I warrant you that nobody will run away with it from you -- "

"Dear aunt, it is not ^he custom in Murcia -- "

"Murcia, indeed! Holy St. Barbara! what does that signify? You are always
putting me in mind of that villainous province. If it is the custom in Madrid,
that is all that we ought to mind; and therefore I desire you to take off your
veil immediately. Obey me this moment, Antonia, for you know that I cannot bear
contradiction."

Her niece was silent, but made no further opposition to Don Lorenzo's efforts,
who, armed with the aunt's sanction, hastened to remove the gauze. What a
seraph's head presented itself to his admiration! Yet it was rather bewitching
than beautiful; it was not so lovely from regularity of features as from
sweetness and sensibility of countenance. The several parts of her face
considered separately, many of them were far from handsome; but, when examined
together, the whole was adorable. Her skin, though fair, was not entirely
without freckles; her eyes were not very large, nor their lashes particularly
long. But then her lips were of the most rosy freshness; her fair and
undulating hair, confined by a simple riband, poured itself below her waist in
a profusion of ringlets; her neck was full and beautiful in the extreme; her
hand and arm were formed with the most perfect symmetry; her mild blue eyes
seemed an heaven of sweetness, and the crystal in which they moved sparkled
with all the brilliance of diamonds. She appeared to be scarcely fifteen; an
arch smile playing round her mouth, declared her to be possessed of liveliness,
which excess of timidity at present repressed. She looked round her with a
bashful glance; and whenever her eyes accidentally met Lorenzo's, she dropped
them hastily upon her rosary; her cheek was immediately suffused with blushes,
and she began to tell her beads; though her manner evidently showed that she
knew not what she was about.

Lorenzo gazed upon her with mingled surprise and admiration; but the aunt
thought it necessary to apologize for Antonia's mauvaise honte.

"'It Is a young creature," said she, "who is totally ignorant of the world. She
has been brought up in an old castle in Murcia, with no other society than her
mother's, who, God help her! has no more sense, good soul, than is necessary to
carry her soup to her mouth. Yet she is my own sister, both by father and
mother."

"And has so little sense?" said Don Christoval with feigned astonishment, "How
very extraordinary!"

"Very true, Segnor. Is it not strange? However, such is the fact; and yet only
to see the luck of some people! A young nobleman, of the very first quality,
took it into his head that Elvira had some pretensions to beauty. As to
pretensions, in truth she had always enough of them; but as to beauty! If I had
only taken half the pains to set myself off which she did! But this is neither
here nor there. As I was saying, Segnor, a young nobleman fell in love with
her, and married her unknown to his father. Their union remained a secret near
three years; but at last it came to the ears of the old marquis, who, as you
may well suppose, was not much pleased with the intelligence. Away he posted in
all haste to Cordova, determined to seize Elvira, and send her away to some
place or other, where she would never be heard of more. Holy St. Paul! How he
stormed on finding that she had escaped him, had joined her husband, and that
they had embarked together for the Indies! He swore at us all, as if the evil
spirit had possessed him; he threw my father into prison -- as honest a
painstaking shoemaker as any in Cordova; and when he went away, he had the
cruelty to take from us my sister's little boy, then scarcely two years old,
and whom in the abruptness of her flight she had been obliged to leave behind
her. I suppose that the poor little wretch met with bitter bad treatment from
him, for in a few month^ after we received intelligence of his death."

"Why, this was a terrible old fellow, Segnora!"

"Oh! shocking! and a man so totally devoid of taste! Why, would you believe
it, Segnor? when I attempted (...) pacify him, he cursed me for a witch, and
wished that, to punish the count, my sister might become as ugly as myself --
Ugly indeed! I like him for that."

"Ridiculous!" cried Don Christoval. "Doubtless the count would have thought
himself fortunate, had he been permitted to exchange the one sister for the
other."

"O! Christ! Segnor, you are really too polite. However, I am heartily glad
that the conde was of a different way of thinking. A mighty pretty piece of
business, to be sure, Elvira has made of it! After broiling and stewing in the
Indies for thirteen long years, her husband dies, and she returns to Spain,
without a house to hide her head, or money to procure her one! This Antonia was
then but an infant, and her only remaining child. She found that her
father-in-law had married again, that he was irreconcilable to the conde, and
that his second wife had produ^^d him a son, who is reported to be a very fine
young man. The old marquis refused to see my sister or her child; but sent her
word that, on condition of never hearing any more of her, he would assign her a
small pension, and she might live in an old castle which he possessed in
Murcia. This had been the favorite habitation of his eldest son; but, since
his flight from Spain, the old marquis could not bear the place, but let it
fall to ruin and confusion: My sister accepted the proposal; she retired to
Murcia, and has remained there till within the last month."

"And what brings her now to Madrid?" inquired Don Lorenzo, whom admiration of
the young Antonia compelled to take a lively interest in the talkative old
woman's narration.

"Alas! Segnor, her father-in-law being lately dead, the steward of his Murcian
estates has refused to pay her pension any longer. With the design of
supplicating his son to renew it, she is now come to Madrid; but I doubt that
she might have saved herself the trouble. You young noblemen have always enough
to do with your money, and are not very often disposed to throw it away upon
old women. I advised my sister to send Antonia with her petition; but she would
not hear of such a thing. She is so obstinate! Well! she will find herself the
worse for not following my counsels: the girl has a good pretty face, and
possibly might have done much."

"Ah, Segnora!" interrupted Don Christoval, counterfeiting a passionate air;
"if a pretty face will do the business, why has not your sister recourse to
you?"

"Oh! Jesus! my lord, I swear you quite overpower me with your gallantry! But I
promise you that I am too well aware of the danger of such expeditions to trust
myself in a young nobleman's power! No, no; I have as yet preserved my
reputation without blemish or reproach, and I always knew how to keep the men
at a proper distance."

"Of that, Segnora, I have not the least doubt. But permit me to ask you, Have
you then any aversion to Matrimony?"

"That is an home question. I cannot but confess, that if an amiable cavalier
were to present himself -- "

Here she intended to throw a tender and significant look upon Don Christoval;
but, as she unluckily happened to squint most abominably, the glance fell
directly upon his companion. Lorenzo took the compliment to himself, and
answered it by a profound bow.

"May I inquire," said he, "the name of the marquis?"

"The marquis de las Cisternas."

"I know him intimately well. He is not at present in Madrid, but is expected
here daily. He is one of the best of men; and if the lovely Antonia will permit
me to be her advocate with him, I doubt not my being able to make a favorable
report of her cause."

Antonia raised her blue eyes, and silently thanked him for the offer by a
smile of inexpressible sweetness. Leonella's satisfaction was much more loud
and audible. Indeed, as her niece was generally silent in company, she thought
it incumbent upon her to talk enough for both: this she managed without
difficulty, for she very seldom found herself deficient in words.

"Oh, Segnor!" she cried; "you will lay our whole family under the most signal
obligations! I accept your offer with all possible gratitude, and return you a
thousand thanks for the generosity of your proposal. Antonia, why do you not
speak, child? While the cavalier says all sorts of civil things to you, you sit
like a statue, and never utter a syllable of thanks, either bad, good, or
indifferent!"

"My dear aunt, I am very sensible that -- "

"Fie, niece! How often have I told you, that you never should interrupt a
person who is speaking! When did you ever know me do such a thing? Are these
your Murcian manners? Mercy on me! I shall never be able to make this girl any
thing like a person of good breeding. But pray, Segnor," she continued,
addressing herself to Don Christoval, "inform me, why such a crowd is assembled
today in this cathedral."

"Can you possibly be ignorant, that Ambrosio, abbot of this monastery,
pronounces a sermon in this church every Thursday? All Madrid rings with his
praises. As yet he has preached but thrice; but all who have heard him are so
delighted with his eloquence, that it is as difficult to obtain a place at
church, as at the first representation of a new comedy. His fame certainly must
have reached your ears?"

"Alas! Segnor, till yesterday I never had the good fortune to see Madrid; and
at Cordova we are so little informed of what is passing in the rest of the
world, that the name of Ambrosio has never been mentioned in its precincts."

"You will find it in every one's mouth at Madrid. He seems to have fascinated
the inhabitants; and, not having attended his sermons myself, I am astonished
at the enthusiasm which he has excited. The adoration paid him both by young
and old, by man and woman, is unexampled. The grandees load him with presents;
their wives refuse to have any other confessor; and he is known through all the
city by the name of the Man of Holiness."

"Undoubtedly, Segnor, he is of noble origin?"

"That point still remains undecided. The late superior of the Capuchins found
him while yet an infant at the abbey-door. All attempts to discover who had
left him there were vain, and the child himself could give no account of his
parents. He was educated in the monastery, where he has remained ever since. He
early showed a strong inclination for study and retirement; and as soon as he
was of a proper age, he pronounced his vows. No one has ever appeared to claim
him, or clear up the mystery which conceals his birth; and the monks, who find
their account in the favor which is shown to their establishment from respect
to him, have not hesitated to publish, that he is a present to them from the
Virgin. In truth, the singular austerity of his life gives some countenance to
the report. He is now thirty years old, every hour of which period has been
passed in study, total seclusion from the world, and mortification of the
flesh. Till these last three weeks, when he was chosen superior of the society
to which he belongs, he had never been on the outside of the abbey-walls. Even
now he never quits them except on Thursdays, when he delivers a discourse in
this cathedral, which all Madrid assembles to hear. His knowledge is said to be
the most profound, his eloquence the most persuasive. In the whole course of
his life he has never been known to transgress a single rule of his order; the
smallest stain is not to be discovered upon his character: and the common
people esteem him to be a saint."

Here Don Christoval was interrupted by an universal murmur, which ran through
the church; it announced the preacher's arrival. Donna Leonella rose from her
seat to take a better view of him, and Antonia followed her example.

He was a man of noble port and commanding presence. His stature was lofty, and
his features uncommonly handsome. His nose was aquiline, his eyes large, black
and sparkling, and his dark brows almost joined together. His complexion was of
a deep but clear brown; study and watching had entirely deprived his cheek of
color. Tranquillity reigned upon his smooth unwrinkled forehead; and content,
expressed upon every feature, seemed to announce the man equally unacquainted
with cares and crimes. He bowed himself with humility to the audience. Still
there was a certain severity in his look and manner that inspired universal
awe, and few could sustain the glance of his eye, at once fiery and
penetrating. Such was Ambrosio, abbot of the Capuchins, and surnamed "The Man
of Holiness."

Antonia, while she gazed upon him eagerly, felt a pleasure fluttering in her
bosom which till then had been unknown to her, and for which she in vain
endeavored ^o account. She waited with impatience till the sermon should
begin; and when at length the friar spoke, the sound of his voice seemed to
penetrate into her very soul. Though no other of the spectators felt such
violent sensations as did the young Antonia, yet every one listened with
interest and emotion. They who were insensible to religion's merits, were still
enchanted with Ambrosio's oratory. All found their attention irresistibly
attracted while he spoke, and the most profound silence reigned through the
crowded aisles. Even Lorenzo could not resist the charm; he forgot that Antonia
was seated near him, and listened to the preacher with undivided attention.

In language nervous, clear and simple, the monk expatiated on the beauties of
religion. He explained some abstruse parts of the sacred writings in a style
that carried with it universal conviction. His voice at once distinct and deep,
was fraught with all the terrors of the tempest, while he inveighed against the
vices of humanity, and described the punishments reserved for them in a future
state. Every hearer looked back upon his past offenses, and trembled: the
thunder seemed to roll, whose bolt was destined to crush him, and the abyss of
eternal destruction to open before his feet! But when Ambrosio, changing his
theme, spoke of the excellence of an unsullied conscience, of the glorious
prospect which eternity presented to the soul untainted with reproach, and of
the recompense which awaited it in the regions of everlasting glory, his
auditors felt their scattered spirits insensibly return. They threw themselves
with confidence upon the mercy of their Judge; they hung with delight upon the
consoling words of the preacher; and while his full voice swelled into melody,
they were transported to those happy regions which he painted to their
imaginations in colors so brilliant and glowing.

The discourse was of considerable length; yet, when it concluded, the audience
grieved that it had not lasted longer. Though the monk had ceased to speak,
enthusiastic silence still prevailed through the church. At length the charm
gradually dissolving, the general admiration was expressed in audible terms. As
Ambrosio descended from the pulpit, his auditors crowded round him, loaded him
with blessings, threw themselves at his feet, and kissed the hem of his
garment. He passed on slowly, with his hands crossed devoutly upon his bosom,
to the door opening into the abbey-chapel, at which his monks waited to receive
him. He ascended the steps, and then, turning toward his followers, addressed
to them a few words of gratitude and exhortation. While he spoke, his rosary,
composed of large grains of amber, fell from his hand, and dropped among the
surrounding multitude. It was seized eagerly, and immediately divided amongst
the spectators. Whoever became possessor of a bead, preserved it as a sacred
rel^que; and had it been the chaplet of thrice blessed St. Francis himself, it
could not have been disputed with greater vivacity. The abbot, smiling at their
eagerness, pronounced his benediction and quitted the church, while humility
dwelt upon every feature. Dwelt she also in his heart?

Antonia's eyes followed him with anxiety. As the door closed after him, it
seemed to her as she had lost some one, essential to her happiness. A tear
stole in silence down her cheek.

"He is separated from the world!" said she to herself; "perhaps, I shall never
see him more!"

As she wiped away the tear, Lorenzo observed her action.

"Are you satisfied with our orator?" said he; "or do you think that Madrid
overrates his talents?"

Antonia's heart was so filled with admiration for the monk, that she eagerly
seize^ (...) opportunity of speaking of him: besides, as (...) longer
considered Lorenzo as an absolute stranger, she was less embarrassed by her
excessive timidity.

"Oh! he far exceeds all my expectations," answered she; "till this moment I
had no idea of the powers of eloquence. But when he spoke, his voice inspired
me with such interest, such esteem, I might almost say such affection for him,
that I am myself astonished at the acuteness of my feelings."

Lorenzo smiled at the strength of her expressions.

"You are young, and just entering into life," said he: "your heart, new to the
world, and full of warmth and sensibility, receives its first impressions with
eagerness. Artless yourself, you suspect not others of deceit; and viewing the
world through the medium of your own truth and innocence, you fancy all who
surround you to deserve your confidence and esteem. What pity, that these gay
visions must soon be dissipated! What pity, that you must soon discover the
baseness of mankind, and guard against your fellow creatures as against your
foes!"

"Alas! Segnor," replied Antonia, "the misfortunes of my parents have already
placed before me but too many sad examples of the perfidy of the world! Yet
surely in the present instance the warmth of sympathy cannot have deceived me."

"In the present instance, I allow that it has not. Ambrosio's character is
perfectly without reproach; and a man who has passed the whole of his life
within the walls of a convent, cannot have found the opportunity to be guilty,
even were he possessed of the inclination. But now, when obliged by the duties
of his situation, he must enter occasionally into the world, and be thrown into
the way of temptation, it is now that it behooves him to show the brilliance of
his virtue. The trial is dangerous; he is just at that period of life when the
passions are most vigorous, unbridled, and despotic; his established reputation
will mark him out to seduction as an illustrious victim; novelty will give
additional charms to the allurements of pleasure; and even the talents with
which nature has endowed him will contribute to his ruin, by facilitating the
means of obtaining his object. Very few would return victorious from a contest
so severe."

"Ah! surely Ambrosio will be one of those few."

"Of that I have myself no doubt: by all accounts he is an exception to mankind
in general, and envy would seek in vain for a blot upon his character."

"Segnor, you delight me by this assurance! It encourages me to indulge my
prepossession in his favor; and you know not with what pain I should have
repressed the sentiment! Ah! dearest aunt, entreat my mother to choose him for
our confessor."

"I entreat her!" replied Leonella: "I promise you that I shall do no such
thing. I do not like this same Ambrosio in the least; he has a look of severity
about him that made me tremble from head to foot. Were he my confessor, I
should never have the courage to avow one half of my peccadilloes, and then I
should be in a rare condition! I never saw such a stern looking mortal, and
hope that I never shall see such another. His description of the devil, God
bless us! almost terrified me out of my wits, and when he spoke about sinners
he seemed as if he was ready to eat them."

"You are right, Segnora," answered Don Christoval. "Too great severity is said
to be Ambrosio's only fault. Exempted himself from human failings, he is not
sufficiently indulgent to those of others; and though strictly just and
disinterested in his decisions, his government of the monks has already shown
some proofs of his inflexibility. But the crowd is nearly dissipated; will you
permit us to attend you home?"

"O Christ! Segnor," exclaimed Leonella, affecting to blush; "I would not
suffer such a thing for the universe! If I came home attended by so gallant a
cavalier, my sister is so scrupulous that she would read me an hour's lecture,
and I should never hear the last of it. Besides, I rather wish you not to make
your proposals just at present."

"My proposals? I assure you, Segnora -- "

"Oh! Segnor, I believe that your assurances of impatience are all very true;
but really I must desire a little respite. It would not be quite so delicate in
me to accept your hand at first sight."

"Accept my hand? As I hope to live and breathe -- "

"Oh! dear Segnor, press me no further if you love me! I shall consider your
obedience as a proof of your affection; you shall hear from me tomorrow, and
so farewell. But pray, cavaliers, may I not inquire your names?"

"My friend's," replied Lorenzo, "is the Conde d'Ossorio, and mine Lorenzo de
Medina."

"'It Is sufficient. Well, Don Lorenzo, I shall acquaint my sister with your
obliging offer, and let you know the result with all expedition. Where may I
send to you?"

"I am always to be found at the Medina palace."

"You may depend upon hearing from me. Farewell, cavaliers. Segnor Conde, let
me entreat you to moderate the excessive ardor of your passion. However, to
prove that I am not displeased with you, and prevent your abandoning yourself
to despair, receive this mark of my affection, and sometimes bestow a thought
upon the absent Leonella."

As she said this, she extended a lean and wrinkled hand; which her supposed
admirer kissed with such sorry grace and constraint so evident, that Lorenzo
with difficulty repressed his inclination to laugh. Leonella then hastened to
quit the church: the lovely Antonia followed her in silence; but when she
reached the porch, she turned involuntarily, and cast back her eyes toward
Lorenzo. He bowed to her, as bidding her farewell; she returned the compliment,
and hastily withdrew.

"So, Lorenzo!" said Don Christoval, as soon as they were alone, "you have
procured me an agreeable intrigue! To favor your designs upon Antonia, I
obligingly made a few civil speeches which mean nothing to the aunt, and at the
end of an hour I find myself upon the brink of matrimony! How will you reward
me for having suffered so grievously for your sake? -- What can repay me for
having kissed the leathern paw of that confounded old witch? Diavolo! She has
left such a scent upon my lips, that I shall smell of garlic for this month to
come! As I pass along the Prado I shall be taken for a walking omelet, or some
large onion running to seed!"

"I confess, my poor Count," replied Lorenzo, "that your service has been
attended with danger; yet am I so far from supposing it to be past all
endurance, that I shall probably solicit you to carry on your amor still
farther."

"From that petition I conclude, that the little Antonia has made some
impression upon you?"

"I cannot express to you how much I am charmed with he^. Since my father's
death, my uncle the Duke de Medina has signified to me his wishes to see me
married; I have till now eluded his hints, and refused to understand them; but
what I have seen this evening -- "

"Well, what have you seen this evening? Why surely, Don Lorenzo, you cannot be
mad enough to think of making a wife out of this granddaughter of 'as honest a
pains taking shoemaker as any in Cordova'?"

"You forget, that she is also the granddaughter of the late marquis de las
Cisternas. But without disputing about birth and titles, I must assure you,
that I never beheld a woman so interesting as Antonia."

"Very possibly; but you cannot mean to marry her?"

"Why not, my dear Conde? I shall have wealth enough for both of us, and you
know that my uncle thinks liberally upon the subject. From what I have seen of
Raymond de las Cisternas, I am certain that he will readily acknowledge Antonia
for his niece. Her birth, therefore, will be no objection ^o my offering her my
hand. I should be a villain, could I think of her on any other terms than
marriage; and in truth she seems possessed of every quality requisite to make
me happy in a wife -- young, lovely, gentle, sensible -- "

"Sensible? Why, she said nothing but Yes, and No."

"She did not say much more, I must confess -- but then she always said Yes or
No in the right place."

"Did she so? Oh! your most obedient! That is using a right lover's argument,
and I dare dispute no longer with so profound a casuist. Suppose we adjourn to
the comedy?"

"It is out of my power. I only arrived last night at Madrid, and have not yet
had an opportunity of ^eeing my sister. You know that her convent is in this
street, and I was going thither when the crowd which I saw thronging into this
church excited my curiosity to know what was the matter. I shall now pursue my
first intention, and probably pass the evening with my sister at the
parlor-grate."

"Your sister in a convent, say you? Oh! very true: I had forgotten. And how
does Donna Agnes? I am amazed, Don Lorenzo, how you could possibly think of
immuring so charming a girl within the walls of a cloister?"

"I think of it, Don Christoval? How can you suspect me of such barbarity? You
are conscious that she took the veil by her own desire, and that particular
circumstances made her wish for a seclusion from the world. I used every means
in my power to induce her to change her resolution; the endeavor was fruitless,
and I lost a sister!"

"The luckier fellow you: I think, Lorenzo, you were a considerable gainer by
that loss: if I remember right, Donna Agnes had a portion of ten thousand
pistoles, half of which reverted to your lordship. By St. Jago! I wish that I
had fifty sisters in the sam^ predicament. I should consent to losing them
every soul without much heart-burning."

"How, Conde?" said Lorenzo, in an angry voice; "Do you suppose me base enough
to have influenced my sister's retirement? do you suppose that the despicable
wish to make myself master of her fortune could -- "

"Admirable! Courage, Don Lorenzo! Now the man is all in a blaze. God grant
that Antonia may soften that fiery temper, or we shall certainly cut each
other's throat before the month is over! However, to prevent such a tragical
catastrophe for the present, I shall make a retreat, and leave you master of
the field. Farewell, my knight of Mount AEtna! Moderate that inflammable
disposition, and remember, that whenever it is necessary to make love to yonder
harridan, you may reckon upon my services."

He said, and darted out of the cathedral. "How wild-brained!" said Lorenzo,
"With so excellent a heart, what pity that he possesses so little solidity of
judgment!"

The night was now fast advancing. The lamps were not yet lighted. The faint
beams of the rising moon scarcely could pierce through the gothic obscurity of
the church. Lorenzo found himself unable to quit the spot. The void left in his
bosom by Antonia's absence, and his sister's sacrifice which Don Christoval had
just recalled to his imagination, created that melancholy of mind which
accorded but too well with the religious gloom surrounding him. He was still
leaning against the seventh column from the pulpit. A soft and cooling air
breathed along the solitary aisles; the moon beams darting into the church
through painted windows, tinged the fretted roofs and massy pillars with a
thousand various shades of light and colors. Universal silence prevailed
around, only interrupted by the occasional closing of doors in the adjoining
abbey.

The calm of the hour and solitude of the place contributed to nourish
Lorenzo's disposition to melancholy. He threw himself upon a seat which stood
near him, and abandoned himself to the delusions of his fancy. He thought of
his union with Antonia; he thought of the obstacles which might oppose his
wishes; and a thousand changing visions floated before his fancy, sad it is
true, but not unpleasing. Sleep insensibly stole over him, and the tranquil
solemnity of his mind when awake, for a while continued to influence his
slumbers.

He still fancied himself to be in the church of the Capuchins; but it was no
longer dark and solitary. Multitudes of silver lamps shed splendour from the
vaulted ^^ofs; accompanied by the captivating chaunt of distant choristers, the
organ's melody swelled through the church; the altar seemed decorated as for
some distinguished feast; it was surrounded by a brilliant company; and near it
stood Antonia arrayed in bridal white, and blushing with all the charms of
virgin modesty.

Half hoping, half fearing, Lorenzo gazed upon the scene before him. Suddenly,
the door leading to the abbey unclosed; and he saw, attended by a long trai^ of
monks, the preacher advance to whom he had just listened with so much
admiration. He drew near Antonia.

"And where is the bridegroom?" said the imaginary friar.

Antonia seemed to look round the church with anxiety. Involuntarily the youth
advanced a few steps from his concealment. She saw him; the blush of pleasure
glowed upon her cheek; with a graceful motion of her hand she beckoned to him
to advance. He disobeyed not the command; he flew toward her, and threw
himself at her feet.

She retreated for a moment; then gazing upon him with evident delight, "Yes,"
she exclaimed, "my bridegroom! my destined bridegroom!"

She said, and hastened to throw herself into his arms; but before he had time
to receive her, an unknown rushed between them: his form was gigantic; his
complexion was swarthy, his eyes fierce and terrible; his mouth breathed out
volumes of fire, and on his forehead was written in legible characters --
"Pride! Inhumanity!"

Antonia shrieked. The monster clasped her in his arms, and, springing with her
upon the altar, tortured her with his odious caresses. She endeavored in vain
to escape from his embrace. Lorenzo flew to her succor; but ere he had time to
reach her, a loud burst of thunder was heard. Instantly the cathedral seemed
crumbling into pieces; the monks betook themselves to flight, shrieking
fearfully; the lamps were extinguished, the altar sunk down, and in its place
appeared an abyss vomiting forth clouds of flame. Uttering a loud and terrible
cry, the monster plunged into the gulf, and in his fall attempted to drag
Antonia with him. He strove in vain. Animated by supernatural powers, she
disengaged herself from his embraces; but her white robe was left in his
possession. Instantly, a wing of brilliant splendour spread itself from either
of Antonia's arms. She darted upwards, and while ascending, cried to Lorenzo,
"Friend! we shall meet above Lovelace dreams, that Clarissa left her robe in
his grasp.
!"

At the same moment the roof of the cathedral opened; harmonious voices pealed
along the vaults; and the glory into which Antonia was received, was composed
of rays of such dazzling brightness, that Lorenzo was unable to sustain the
gaze. His sight failed, and he sunk upon the ground.

When he awoke, he found himself extended upon the pavement of the church: it
was illuminated, and the chaunt of hymns sounded from a distance. For a while,
Lorenzo could not persuade himself that what he had just witnessed had been a
dream, so strong an impression had it made upon his fancy. A little
recollection convinced him of its fallacy: the lamps had been lighted during
his sleep, and the music which he heard was occasioned by the monks, who were
celebrating their vespers in the abbey-chapel.

Lorenzo rose, and prepared to bend his steps toward his sister's convent, his
mind fully occupied by the singularity of his dream. He already drew near the
porch, when his attention was attracted by perceiving a shadow moving upon the
opposite wall. He looked curiously round, and soon descried a man wrapped up in
his cloak, who seemed carefully examining whether his actions were observed.
Very few people are exempt from the influence of curiosity. The unknown seemed
anxious to conceal his business in the cathedral; and it was this very
circumstance which made Lorenzo wish to discover what he was about.

Our hero was conscious that he had no right to pry into the secrets of this
unknown cavalier.

"I will go," said Lorenzo. And Lorenzo stayed where he was.

The shadow thrown by the column effectually concealed him from the stranger,
who continued to advance with caution.

At length he drew a letter from beneath his cloak, and hastily placed it
beneath a colossal statue of Saint Francis. Then retiring with precipitation,
he concealed himself in a part of the church at a considerable distance from
that in which the image stood.

"So!" said Lorenzo to himself; "this is only some foolish love affair. I
believe, I may as well be gone, for I can do no good in it."

In truth, till that moment it never came into his head that he could do any
good in it; but he thought it necessary to make some little excuse to himself
for having indulged his curiosity. He now made a second attempt to retire from
the church. For this time he gained the porch without meeting with any
impediment; but it was destined that he should pay it another visit that night.
As he descended the steps leading into the street, a cavalier rushed against
him with such violence, that both were nearly overturned by the concussion.
Lorenzo put his hand to his sword.

"How now, Segnor?" said he; "what mean you by this rudeness?"

"Ha! is it you, Medina?" replied the new comer, whom Lorenzo by his voice now
recognized for Don Christoval. "You are the luckiest fellow in the universe,
not to have left the church before my return. In, in! my dear lad! they will be
here immediately!"

"Who will be here?"

"The old hen and all her pretty little chickens. In, I say; and then you shall
know the whole history."

Lorenzo followed him into the cathedral, and they concealed themselves behind
the statue of St. Francis.

"And now," said our hero, "may I take the liberty of asking what is the
meaning of all this haste and rapture?"

"Oh! Lorenzo, we shall see such a glorious sight! The prioress of St. Clare
and her whole train of nuns are coming hither. You are to know that the pious
father Ambrosio (the Lord reward him for it!) will upon no account move out of
his own precincts. It being absolutely necessary for every fashionable convent
to have him for its confessor, the nuns are in consequence obliged to visit him
at the abbey; since, when the mountain will not come to Mahomet, Mahomet must
needs go to the mountain. Now the prioress of St. Clare, the better to escape
the gaze of such impure eyes as belong to yourself and your humble servant,
thinks proper to bring her holy flock to confession in the dusk: she is to be
admitted into the abbey-chapel by yon private door. The porteress of St. Clare,
who is a worthy old soul and a particular friend of mine, has just assured me
of their being here in a few moments. There is news for you, you rogue! We
shall see some of the prettiest faces in Madrid!"

"In truth, Christoval, we shall do no such thing. The nuns are always veiled."

"No, no! I know better. On entering a place of worship, they ever take off
their veils, from respect to the saint to whom it is dedicated. But hark, they
are coming! Silence! silence! observe and be convinced."

"Good!" said Lorenzo to himself; "I may possibly discover to whom the vows are
addressed of this mysterious stranger."

Scarcely had Don Christoval ceased to speak, when the domina of St. Clare
appeared, followed by a long procession of nuns. Each upon entering the church
took off her veil. The prioress crossed her hands upon her bosom, and made a
profound reverence as she passed the statue of St. Francis, the patron of this
cathedral. The nuns followed her example, and several moved onwards without
having satisfied Lorenzo's curiosity. He almost began to despair of seeing the
mystery cleared up, when, in paying her respects to St. Francis, one of the
nuns happened to drop her rosary. As she stooped to pick it up, the light
flashed full in her face. At the same moment she dexterously removed the letter
from beneath the image, placed it in her bosom, and hastened to resume her rank
in the procession.

"Ha!" said Christoval in a low voice, "here we have some little intrigue, no
doubt."

"Agnes, by heaven!" cried Lorenzo.

"What, your sister? Diavolo! Then some body, I suppose, will have to pay for
our peeping."

"And shall pay for it without delay," replied the incensed brother.

The pious procession had now entered the abbey; the door was already closed
upon it. The unknown immediately quitted his concealment, and hastened to leave
the church: ere he could effect his intention, he descried Medina stationed in
his passage. The stranger hastily retreated, and drew his hat over his eyes.

"Attempt not to fly me?" exclaimed Lorenzo; "I will know who you are, and what
were the contents of that letter."

"Of that letter?" repeated the unknown. "And by what title do you ask the
question?"

"By a title of which I am now ashamed; but it becomes not you to question me.
Either reply circumstantially to my demands, or answer me with your sword."

"The latter method will be the shortest," rejoined the other, drawing his
rapier;" "come on, Segnor Bravo! I am ready."

Burning with rage, Lorenzo hastened to the attack: the antagonists had already
exchanged several passes, before Christoval, who at that moment had more sense
than either of them, could throw himself between their weapons.

"Hold! hold! Medina!" he exclaimed; remember the consequences of shedding
blood on consecrated ground!"

The stranger immediately dropped his ^word.

"Medina?" he cried. "Great God, is it possible! Lorenzo, have you quite
forgotten Raymond de las Cisternas?"

Lorenzo's astonishment increased with every succeeding moment. Raymond
advanced toward him; but with a look of suspicion he drew back his hand, which
the other was preparing to take.

"You here, marquis? what is the meaning of all this? you engaged in a
clandestine correspondence with my sister, whose affections -- "

"Have ever been, and still are, mine. But this is no fit place for an
explanation. Accompany me to my hotel, and you shall know every thing. Who is
that with you?"

"One whom I believe you have seen before," replied Don Christoval, "though
probably not at church."

"The conde d'Ossorio?"

"Exactly so, marquis."

"I have no objection to entrusting you with my secret, for I am sure that I
may depend upon your silence."

"Then your opinion of me is better than my own, and therefore I must beg leave
to decline your confidence. Do you go your own way, and I shall go mine.
Marquis, where are you to be found?"

"As usual, at the hotel de las Cisternas; but remember that I am incognito,
and that, if you wish to see me, you must ask for Alphonso d'Alvarada."

"Good! good! Farewell cavaliers!" said Don Christoval, and instantly departed.

"You, marquis," said Lorenzo in the accent of surprise; "You, Alphonso
d'Alvarada!"

"Even so, Lorenzo: but unless you have already heard my story from your
sister, I have much to relate that will astonish you. Follow me, therefore, to
my hotel without delay."

At this moment the porter of the Capuchins entered the cathedral to lock up
the doors for the night. The two noblemen instantly withdrew, and hastened with
all speed to the palace de las Cisternas.

"Well Antonia," said the aunt, as soon as she had quitted the church, "what
think you of our gallants? Don Lorenzo really seems a very obliging good sort
of young man: he paid you some attention, and nobody knows what may come of it.
But as to Don Christoval, I protest to you, he is the very phoe^ix of
politeness; so gallant! so well-bred! so sensible, and so pathetic! Well! if
ever man can prevail upon me to break my vow never to marry, it will be that
Don Christoval. You see, niece, that every thing turns out exactly as I told
you: the very moment that I produced myself in Madrid, I knew that I should be
surrounded by admirers. When I took off my veil, did you see. Antonia, what an
effect the action had upon the Conde? And when I presented him my hand did you
observe the air of passion with which he kissed it? If ever I witnessed real
love, I then saw it impressed upon Don Christoval's countenance!"

Now Antonia had observed the air with which Don Christoval had kissed this
same hand; but as she drew conclusions from it somewhat different from her
aunt's, she was wise enough to hold her ^ongue. As this is the only instance
known of a woman's ever having done so, it was judged worthy to be recorded
here.

The old lady continued her discourse to Antonia in the same strain, till they
gained the street in which they lodged. Here a crowd collected before their
door permitted them not to approach it; and placing themselves on the opposite
side of the street, they endeavored to make out what had drawn all th^se
people together. After some minutes the crowd formed itself into a circle; and
now A^tonia perceived in the midst of it a woman of extraordinary height, who
whirled herself repeatedly round and round, using all sorts of extravagant
gestures. Her dress was composed of shreds of various-coloured silks and linens
fantastically arranged, yet not entirely without taste. Her head was covered
with a kind of turban ornamented with vine-leaves and wild flowers. She seemed
much sunburned, and her complexion was of a deep olive; her eyes looked fiery
and strange; and in her hand she bore a long black rod, with which she at
intervals traced a variety of singular figures upon the ground, round about
which she danced in all the eccentric attitudes of folly and delirium. Suddenly
she broke off her dance, whirled herself round thrice with rapidity, and after
a moment's pause she sung the following ballad:

THE GIPSY's SONG.
COME, cross my hand! My art surpasses
All that did ever mortal know:
Come, maidens, come! My magic glasses
Your future husband's form can show:
For it is to me the power is given
Unclosed the book of fate to see;
To read the fixed resolves of heaven,
And dive into futurity.
I guide the pale moon's silver wagon;
The winds in magic bonds I hold;
I charm to sleep the crimson dragon,
Who loves to watch over buried gold.
Fenced round with spells, (...) I (...)
Their sabbath strange where witches keep;
Fearless the sorcerer's circle enter,
And woundless tre^d on shakes asleep.
Lo! here are charms of mighty power!
This makes secure an husband's truth;
And this, composed at midnight hour,
Will force to love the coldest youth.
If any maid too much has granted,
Her loss this philtre will repair.
This blooms a cheek where red is wanted,
And this will make a brown girl fair.
Then silent hear, while I discover
In fortune's mirror what I view;
And each, when many a year is over,
Shall own the Gipsy's sayings true.
"Dear aunt!" said Antonia when the stranger had finished, "is she not mad?"

"Mad? Not she, child; she is only wicked. She is a gipsy, a sort of vagabond,
whose sole occupation is to run about the country telling lies, and pilfering
from those who come by their money honestly. Out upon such vermin! If I were
king of Spain, every one of them should be burnt alive, who was found in my
dominions after the next three weeks."

These words were pronounced so audibly that they reached the gipsy's ears. She
immediately pierced through the crowd, and made toward the ladies. She saluted
them thrice in the eastern fashion, and then addressed herself to Antonia.

THE GIPSY.
"Lady, gentle lady! know,
I your future fate can show;
Give your hand, and do not fear:
Lady, gentle lady! hear!"
"Dearest aunt!" said Antonia, "indulge me this once! let me have my fortune
told me!"

"Nonsense, child! she will tell you nothing but falsehoods."

"No matter; let me at least hear what she has to say. Do, my dear aunt, oblige
me, I beseech you!"

"Well, well, Antonia, since you are so bent upon the thing -- Here, good
woman, you shall see the hands of both of us. There is money for you, and now
let me hear my fortune."

As (...) said this, she drew off her glove, and presented her hand. The gipsy
looked at it for a moment, and then made this reply:

THE GIPSY.
"Your fortune? You are now so old,
Good dame, that it is already told:
Yet, for your money, in a trice
I will repay you in advice.
Astonished at your childish vanity,
Your friends all tax you with insanity,
And grieve to see you use your art,
To catch some youthful lover's heart.
Believe me, dame, when all is done,
Your age will still be fifty-one;
And men will rarely take an hint
Of love from two gray eyes that squint.
Take then my counsels; lay aside
Your paint and patches, whims and pride,
And on the poor those sums bestow,
Which now are spent on useless show.
Think on your Maker, not a suitor;
Think on your past faults, not on future;
And think Time's scy the will quickly mow
The few red hairs which deck your brow."
The audience rang with laughter during the gipsy's address; and -- "fifty-one
-- squinting eyes -- red hair -- paint and patches," -- etc. were bandied from
mouth to mouth. Leonella was almost choked with passion, and loaded her
malicious adviser with the bitterest reproaches. The swarthy prophetess for
some time listened to her with a contemptuous smile: at length she made her a
short answer, and then turned to Antonia.

THE GIPSY.
"Peace, lady! What I said was true.
And now, my lovely maid, to you:
Give me your hand, and let me see
Your future doom, and heaven's decree."
In imitation of Leonella, Antonia drew off her grove, and presented her white
hand to the gipsy, who, having gazed upon it for some time with a mingled
expression of pity and astonishment, pronounced her oracle in the following
words:

THE GIPSY.
"Jesus! what a palm is there!
Chaste and gentle, young and fair,
Perfect mind and form possessing,
You would be some good man's blessing:
But, alas! this line discovers
That destruction over you hovers;
Vicious man and crafty devil
Will combine to work your evil;
And from earth by sorrows driven,
Soon your soul must speed to heaven.
Yet, your sufferings to delay,
Well remember what I say.
When you one more virtuous see,
Than belongs to man to be,
One, whose self no crimes assailing,
Pities not his neighbor's failing,
Call the gipsy's words to mind:
Though he seem so good and kind,
Fair exteriors often will hide
Hearts that swell with lust and pride.
Lovely maid, with tears I leave you,
Let not my prediction grieve you:
Rather with submission bending,
Camly wait distress impending,
And expect eternal bliss
In a better world than this."
Having said this, the gipsy again whirled herself round thrice, and then
hastened out of the street with frantic gesture. The crowd followed her; and
Elvira's door being now unembarrassed, Leonella entered the house, out of
humor with the gipsy, with her niece, and with the people; in short, with
every body but herself and her charming cavalier. The gipsy's predictions had
also considerably affected Antonia; but the impression soon wore off, and in a
few hours she had forgotten the adventure, as totally as had it never taken
place.

CHAP. II.
F^rse se tu gustassi una sol volta
La millesima part delle gioje
Che gusta un cor amato riamando,
Diresti ripentita sospirando,
Perduto e tutto il tempo
Che in amar non si spend.
TASSO.
Had thou but tasted once the thousandth part
Of joys which bless the loved and loving heart;
Your words repentant and your sighs would prove,
Lost is the time which is not passed in love.

THE monks having attended their abbot to the door of his cell, he dismissed
them with an air of conscious superiority, in which humility's semblance
combated with the reality of pride.

He was no sooner alone, than he gave free loose to the indulgence of his
vanity. When he remembered the enthusiasm which his discourse had excited, his
heart swelled with rapture, and his imagination presented him with splendid
visions of aggrandizement. He looked round him with exultation; and pride told
him loudly, that he was superior to the rest of his fellow creatures.

"Who," thought he, "who but myself has passed the ordeal of youth, yet sees no
single stain upon his conscience? Who else has subdued the violence of strong
passions and an impetuous temperament, and submitted even from the dawn of life
to voluntary retirement? I seek for such a man in vain. I see no one but myself
possessed of such resolution. Religion cannot boast Ambrosto's equal! How
powerful an effect did my discourse produce upon its auditors! How they crowded
round me! How they loaded me with benedictions, and pronounced me the sole
uncorrupted pillar of the church! What then now is left for me to do? Nothing,
but to watch as carefully over the conduct of my brethren, as I have hitherto
watched over my own. Yet hold! May I not be tempted from those paths, which
till now I have pursued without one moment's wandering? Am I not a man, whose
nature is frail and prone to error? I must now abandon the solitude of my
retreat; the fairest and noblest dames of Madrid continually present themselves
at the abbey, and will use no other confessor. I must accustom my eyes to
objects of temptation, and expose myself to the seduction of luxury and desire.
Should I meet, in that world which I am constrained to enter, some lovely
female -- lovely as yon Madona --!"

As he said this, he fixed his eyes upon a picture of the virgin, which was
suspended opposite to him: this for two years had been the object of his
increasing wonder and adoration. He paused, and gazed upon it with delight.

"What beauty in that countenance!" he continued, after a silence of some
minutes; "how graceful is the turn of that head! what sweetness, yet what
majesty in her divine eyes! how softly her cheek reclines upon her hand! Can
the rose vie with the blush of that cheek? can the lily rival the whiteness of
that hand? Oh! if such a creature existed, and existed but for me! were I
permitted to twine round my fingers those golden ringlets, and press to my lips
that hand of snow! gracious God, should I then resist the temptation? Should I
not barter for a single embrace the reward of my sufferings for thirty years?
Should I not abandon -- Fool that I am! Whither do I suffer my admiration of
this picture to hurry me? Away, impure ideas! Let me remember, that woman is
for ever lost to me. Never was mortal formed so perfect as this picture. But
even did such exist, the trial might be too mighty for common virtue: but
Ambrosio's is proof against temptation. Temptation, did I say? To me it would
be none. What charms me when ideal, and considered as a superior being, would
disgust me, becoming a woman and tainted with all the failings of mortality. It
is not the woman's beauty that fills me with such enthusiasm: it is the
painter's skill that I admire; it is the Divinity that I adore. Are not the
passions dead in my bosom? Have I not freed myself ^^om the frailty of mankind?
Fear not, Ambrosio! Take confidence in the strength of thy virtue. Enter boldly
into the world, to whose failings you are superior; reflect that you are now
exempted from humanity's defects, and defy all the arts of the spirits of
darkness. They shall know you for what you are!"

Here his reverie was interrupted by three soft knocks at the door of his cell.
With difficulty did the abbot awake from his delirium. The knocking was
repeated.

"Who is there?" said Ambrosio at length.

"It is only Rosario," replied a gentle voice.

"Enter! enter, my son!"

The door was immediately opened, and Rosario appeared with a small basket in
his hand.

Rosario was a young novice belonging to the monastery, who in three months
intended to make it his profession. A sort of mystery enveloped this youth,
which rendered him at once an object of interest and curiosity. His hatred of
society, his profound melancholy, his rigid observance of the duties of his
order, and his voluntary seclusion from the world, at his age so unusual,
attracted the notice of the whole fraternity. He seemed fearful of being
recognized, and no one had ever seen his face. His head was continually (...)
up in his cowl; yet such of his features as accident discovered, appeared the
most beautiful and noble. Rosario was the only name by which he was known in
the monastery. No one knew from whence he came, and when questioned on the
subject, he preserved a profound silence. A stranger, whose rich habit and
magnificent equipage declared him to be of distinguished rank, had engaged the
monks to receive a novice, and had deposited the necessary sums. The next day
he returned with Rosario, and from that time no more had been heard of him.

The youth had carefully avoided the company of the monks: he answered their
civilities with sweetness, but reserve, and evidently showed that his
inclination led him to ^olitude. To this general rule the superior was the only
exception. To him he looked up with a respect approaching idolatry: he sought
his company with the most attentive assiduity, and eagerly feized every means
to ingratiate himself in his favor. In the abbot's society his heart seemed to
be at ease, and an air of gaiety pervaded his whole manners and discourse.
Ambrosio on his side did not feel less attracted toward the youth; wi^h him
alone did he lay aside his habitual severity. When he spoke to him, he
insensibly assumed a tone milder than was usual to him; and no voice sounded so
sweet to him as did Rosario's. He repaid the youth's attentions by instructing
him in various sciences; the novice received his lessons with docility;
Ambrosio was every day more charmed with the vivacity of his genius, the
simplicity of his manners, and the rectitude of his heart: in short, he loved
him with all the affection of a father. He could not help sometimes secretly
indulging a desire to see the face of his pupil; but his rule of self-denial
extended even to curiosity, and prevented him from communicating his wishes to
the youth.

"Pardon my intrusion, father," said Rosario, while he placed his basket upon
the table; "I come to you a suppliant. Hearing that a dear friend is
dangerously ill, I entreat your prayers for his recovery. If supplications can
prevail upon heaven to spare him, surely yours must be efficacious."

"Whatever depends upon me, my son, you know that you may command. What is your
friend's name?"

"Vicentio della Ronda."

"'It Is sufficient. I will not forget him in my prayers, and may our
thrice-blessed St. Francis deign to listen to my intercession! -- What have you
in your basket, Rosario?"

"A few of those flowers, reverend father, which I have observed to be most
acceptable to you. Will you permit my arranging them in your chamber?"

"Your attentions charm me, my son."

While Rosario disposed the contents of his basket in small vases, placed for
that purpose in various parts of the room, the abbot thus continued the
conversation:

"I saw you not in the church this evening, Rosario."

"Yet I was present, father. I am too grateful for your protection to lose any
opportunity of witnessing your triumph."

"Alas! Rosario, I have but little cause to triumph: the saint spoke by my
mouth; to him belongs all the merit. It seems then you were contented with my
discourse?"

"Contented, say you? Oh! you surpassed yourself! Never did I hear such
eloquence -- save once!"

Here the novice heaved an involuntary sigh.

"When was that once?" demanded the abbot.

"When you preached upon the sudden Indisposition of our la^e superior."

"I remember it: that is more than two years ago. And were you present? I knew
you not at that time, Rosario."

"'It Is true, father; and would to God I had expired ere I beheld that day! What
sufferings, what sorrows should I have escaped!"

"Sufferings at your age, Rosario?"

"Aye, father; sufferings, which, if known to you, would equally raise your
anger and compassion! sufferings, which form at once the torment and pleasure
of my existence! Yet in this retreat my bosom would feel tranquil, were it not
for the tortures of apprehension! Oh God! oh God! how cruel is a life of fear!
-- Father, I have given up all; I have abandoned the world and its delights for
ever: nothing now remains, nothing now has charms for me, but your friendship,
but your affection. If I lose that, father! oh! if I lose that, tremble at the
effects of my despair!"

"You apprehend the loss of my friendship? how has my conduct justified this
fear? know me better, Rosario, and think me worthy of your confidence. What are
your sufferings? Reveal them to me, and believe, that if it is in my power to
relieve them -- "

"Ah! it is in no one's power but yours. Yet I must not let you know them. You
would hate me for my avowal! you would drive me from your presence with scorn
and ignominy."

"My son, I conjure you! I entreat you -- "

"For pity's sake, inquire no further! I must not -- I dare not -- Hark! the
bell rings for vespers! Father, your benediction, and I leave you."

As he said this, he threw himself upon his knees, and received the blessing
which he demanded. Then pressing the abbot's hand to his lips, he started from
the ground, and hastily quitted the apartment. Soon after Ambrosio descended to
vespers (which were celebrated in a small chapel belonging to the abbey) filled
with surprise at the singularity of the youth's behavior.

Vespers being over, the monks retired to their respective cells. The abbot
alone remained in the chapel, to receive the nuns of St. Clare. He had not been
long seated in the confessional chair, before the prioress made her appearance.
Each of the nuns was heard in her turn, while the others waited with the domina
in the adjoining vestry. Ambrosio listened to the confessions with attention,
made many exhortations* enjoined penance proportioned to each offense, and for
some time every thing went on as usual, till one of the nuns, conspicuous from
the nobleness of her air and elegance of her figure, carelessly permitted a
letter to fall from her bosom. She was retiring unconscious of her loss.
Ambrosio supposed it to have been written by some one of her relations, and
took it up, intending to restore it to her."

"Stay, daughter," said he; "you have let fall -- "

At this moment, the paper being already open, his eye involuntarily read the
first words. He started back with surprise. The nun had turned round on hearing
his voice: she perceived her letter in his hand, and uttering a shriek of
terror, flew hastily to regain it.

"Hold!" said the friar, in a tone of severity; "daughter, I must read this
letter."

"Then I am lost!" she exclaimed, clasping her hands together wildly.

All color instantly faded from her face; she trembled with agitation, and was
obliged to fold her arms round a pillar of the chapel to save herself from
sinking upon the floor. In the mean while the abbot read the following lines:

"All is ready for your escape, my dearest Agnes! At twelve tomorrow night I
shall expect to find you at the garden-door: I have obtained the key, and a few
hours will suffice to place you in a secure asylum. Let no mistaken scruples
induce you to reject the certain means of preserving yourself and the innocent
creature whom you nourish in your bosom. Remember that you had promised to be
mine, long ere you engaged yourself to the church; that your situation will
soon be evident to the prying eyes of your companions; and that flight is the
only means of avoiding the effects of their malevolent resentment. Farewell, my
Agnes! my dear and destined wife! Fail not to be at the garden-door at twelve!"

"As soon as he had finished, Ambrosio bent an eye stern and angry upon the
imprudent nun.

"This letter must to the prioress," said he, and passed her.

His words sounded like thunder to her ears: she awoke from her torpidity only
to be sensible of the dangers of her situation. She followed him hastily, and
detained him by his garment.

"Stay! oh! stay!" she cried in the accents of despair, while she threw herself
at the friar's feet, and bathed them with her tears. "Father, compassionate my
youth! Look with indulgence on a woman's weakness, and deign to conceal my
frailty! The remainder of my life shall be employed in expiating this single
fault, and your (...) will bring back a soul to heaven!"

"Amazing confidence! What! shall St. Clare's convent become the retreat of
prostitutes? shall I suffer the church of Christ to cherish in its bosom
debauchery and shame? Unworthy wretch! such lenity would make me your
accomplice. Mercy would here be criminal. You have abandoned yourself to a
seducer's pleasure; you have defiled the sacred habit by your impurity; and
still dare you ^hink yourself deserving my compassion? Hence, nor detain me
longer. Where is the lady prioress?" he added, raising his voice.

"Hold! father, hold! Hear me but for one moment! Tax me not with impurity, nor
think that I have erred from the warmth of temperament. Long before I took the
veil, Raymond was master of my heart: he inspired me with the purest, the most
irreproachable passion, and was on the point of becoming my lawful husband. An
horrible adventure, and the treachery of a relation separated us from each
other. I believed him for ever lost to me and threw myself into a convent from
motives of despair. Accident again united us; I could not refuse myself the
melancholy pleasure of mingling my tears with his. We met nightly in the
gardens of St. Clare, and in an unguarded moment I violated my vows of
chastity. I shall soon become a mother. Reverend Ambrosio, take compassion on
me; take compassion on the innocent being whose existence is attached to mine.
If you discover my imprudence to the domina both of us are lost. The punishment
which the laws of St. Clare assign to unfortunates like myself, is most severe
and cruel. Worthy, worthy father! let not your own untainted conscience render
you unfeeling toward those less able to withstand temptation! Let not mercy be
the only virtue of which your heart is unsusceptible! Pity me, most reverend!
Restore my letter, nor doom me to inevitable destruction!"

Your boldness confounds me. Shall I conceal your crime -- I whom you have
deceived by your feigned confession? -- No, daughter, no. I will render you a
more essential service. I will rescue you from perdition, in spite of yourself.
Penance and mortification shall expiate your offense, and severity force you
back to the paths of holiness. What, ho! Mother St. Agatha!"

Father! by all that is sacred, by all that is most dear to you, I supplicate,
I entreat -- "

"Release me. I will not hear you. Where is the domina? Mother St. Agatha,
where are you?"

The door of the vestry opened, and the prioress entered the chapel, followed
by her nuns.

"Cruel, cruel!" exclaimed Agnes, relinquishing her hold.

Wild and desperate, she threw herself upon the ground, beating her bosom, and
rending her veil, in all the delirium of despair. The nuns gazed with
astonishment upon the scene before them. The friar now presented the fatal
paper to the prioress, informed her of the manner in which he had found it, and
added, that it was her business to decide what penance the delinquent merited.

While she perused the letter, the domina's countenance grew inflamed with
passion. What! such a crime committed in her convent, and made known to
Ambrosio, to the idol of Madrid, to the man whom she was most anxious to
impress with an opinion of the strictness and regularity of her house! Words
were inadequate to express her fury. She was silent; and darted upon the
prostrate nun looks of menace and malignity.

"Away with her to the convent!" said she at length, to some of her attendants.

Two of the oldest nuns now approaching Agnes, raised her forcibly from the
ground, and prepared to conduct her from the chapel.

"What!" she exclaimed suddenly, shaking off their hold with distracted
gestures, "is all hope then lost? Already do you drag me to punishment? where
are you, Raymond? Oh! save me! save me!" -- Then casting upon the abbot a
frantic look,

"Hear me!" she continued, "man of an hard heart! Hear me, proud, stern, and
cruel! You could have saved me; you could have restored me to happiness and
virtue, but would not: you are the destroyer of my soul; you are my murderer,
and on you fall the curse of my death and my unborn infant's! Insolent in your
yet unshaken virtue, you disdained the prayers of a penitent, but God will show
mercy, though you show none. And where is the merit of your boasted virtue?
What temptations have you vanquished? Coward! you have fled from it, not
opposed seduction. But the day of trial will arrive. Oh! then when you yield to
impetuous passions; when you feel that man is weak and born to err; when,
shuddering, you look back upon your crimes, and solicit, with terror, the mercy
of your God, oh! in that fearful moment think upon me! think upon your cruelty!
think upon Agnes, and despair of pardon."

As she uttered these last words, her strength was exhausted; and she sunk
inanimate upon the bosom of a nun who stood near her. She was immediately
conveyed from the chapel, and her companions followed her.

Ambrosio had not listened to her reproaches without emotion. A secret pang at
his heart made him feel that he had treated this unfortunate with too great
severity. He therefore detained the prioress, and ventured to pronounce some
words in favor of the delinquent.

"The violence of her despair," said he, "proves that at least vice is not
become familiar to her. Perhaps, by treating her with somewhat less rigor than
is generally practiced, and mitigating in some degree the accustomed penance --
"

"Mitigate it, father?" interrupted the lady prioress: "Not I, believe me. The
laws of our order are strict and severe; they have fallen into disuse of late:
but the crime of Agnes shows me the necessity of their revival. I go to signify
my intention to the convent, and Agnes shall be the first to feel the rigor of
those laws, which shall be obeyed to the very letter. Father, farewell!"

Thus saying, she hastened out of the chapel.

"I (...) my duty," said Ambrosio to himself.

Still did he not feel perfectly satisfied by this reflection. To dissipate the
unpleasant ideas which this scene had excited in him, upon quitting the chapel
he descended into (...) abbey (...). In all Madrid there was no spot more
beautiful, or better regulated. It was laid out with the most exquisite taste;
the choicest flowers adorned it in the height of luxuriance, and, though
artfully arranged, seemed only planted by the hand of Nature. Fountains,
springing from basins of white marble, cooled the air with perpetual showers;
and the walls were entirely covered by jessamines, vines, and honey suckles.
The hour now added to the beauty of the scene. The full moon, ranging through a
blue and cloudless sky, shed upon the trees a trembling luster, and the waters
of the fountains sparkled in the silver beam; a gentle breeze breathed the
fragrance of orange blossoms along the alleys, and the nightingale poured forth
her melodious murmur from the shelter of an artificial wilderness. Thither the
abbot bent his steps.

In the bosom of this little grove stood a rustic grotto, formed in imitation
of an hermitage. The walls were constructed of roots of trees, and the
interstices filled up with moss and ivy. Seats of turf were placed on either
(...), and a ^atural cascade fell from the rock above. Buried in himself, the
monk approached the spot. The universal calm had communicated itself to his
bosom, and a voluptuous tranquillity spread langour through his soul.

He reached the hermitage, and was entering to repose himself, when he stopped
on perceiving it to be already occupied. Extended upon one of the banks, lay a
man in a melancholy posture. His head was supported upon his arm, and he seemed
lost in meditation. The monk drew nearer, and recognized Rosario: he watched
him in silence, and entered not the hermitage. After some minutes the youth
raised his eyes, and fixed them mournfully upon the opposite wall.

"Yes," said he, with a deep and plaintive sigh, "I feel all the happiness of
thy situation, all the misery of my own. Happy were I could I think like thee!
Could I look like thee with disgust upon mankind, could bury myself for ever in
some impenetrable solitude, and forget that the world holds beings deserving to
be loved! Oh! what a blessing would misanthropy be to me!"

"That is a singular thought, Rosario," said the abbot, entering the grotto.

"You here, reverend father?" cried the novice.

At the same time starting from the mossy couch in confusion, he drew his cowl
hastily over his face. Ambrosio placed himself upon the bank, and obliged the
youth to be seated by him.

"You must not indulge this disposition to melancholy," said he* "What can
possibly have made you view in so desirable a light, misanthropy, of all
sentiments the most hateful?"

"The perusal of these verses, father, which till now had escaped my
observation. The brightness of the moon beams permitted my reading them; and,
oh! how I envy the feelings of the writer!"

As he said this, he pointed to a marble tablet fixed against the opposite
wall, on it were engraved the following lines:

INSCRIPTION IN AN HERMITAGE.
Who'er thou art these lines now reading,
Think not, though from the world receding,
I joy my lonely days to lead in
This desert drear;
That with remorse a conscience bleeding
Has led me here.
No thought of guilt my bosom sours:
Free-willed I fled from courtly bowers;
For well I saw in halls and towers
That Lust and Pride,
The Arch-fiend's dearest darkest powers,
In state preside.
I saw mankind with vice incrusted;
I saw that Honor's sword was rusted;
That few for aught but folly lusted;
That he was still deceived who trusted
In love or friend;
And hither came, with men disgusted,
My life to end.
In this lone cave, in garments lowly,
Alike a foe to noisy folly
And brow-bent gloomy melancholy,
I wear away
My life, and in my office holy
Consume the day.
This rock my shield when storms are blowing;
The limpid streamlet yonder flowing
Supplying drink; the earth bestowing
My simple food;
But few enjoy the calm I know in
This desert rude.
Content and comfort bless me more in
This grot, then ever I felt before in
A palace; and with thoughts still soaring
To God on high,
Each night and morn, with voice imploring
This wish I sigh:
"Let me, O Lord! from life retire,
Unknown each guilty worldly fire,
Remorseful (...), or loose desire;
And when I die,
Let me in this belief expire.
To God I fly!"
Stranger, if, full of youth and riot,
As yet no grief has marred thy quiet,
Thou happily throw'st a scornful eye at
The Hermit's prayer:
But if thou have a cause to sigh at
Thy fault, or care;
If thou have known false love's vexation,
Or have been exiled from thy nation,
Or guilt affrights thy contemplation,
And makes thee pine;
Oh! how must thou lament thy station,
And envy mine!
"Were it possible," said the friar, "for man to be so totally wrapped up in
himself as to live in absolute seclusion from human nature, and could yet feel
the contented tranquillity which these lines express, I allow that the
situation would be more desirable, than to live in a world so pregnant with
every vice and every folly. But this never can be the case. This inscription
was merely placed here for the ornament of the grotto, and the sentiments and
the hermit are equally imaginary. Man was born for society. However little he
may be attached to the world, he never can wholly forget it, or bear to be
wholly forgotten by it. Disgusted at the guilt or absurdity of mankind, the
misanthrope flies from it; he resolves to become an hermit, and buries himself
in the cavern of some gloomy rock. While hate inflames his bosom, possibly he
may feel contented with his situation: but when his passions begin to cool;
when Time has mellowed his sorrows, and healed those wounds which he bore with
him to his solitude, think you that Content becomes his companion? Ah! no,
Rosario. No longer sustained by the violence of his passions, he feels all the
monotony of his way of living, and his heart becomes the prey of ennui and
weariness. He looks round, and finds himself alone in the universe: the love of
society revives in his bosom, and he pants to return to that world which he has
abandoned. Nature loses all her charms in his eyes: no one is near him to point
out her beauties, or share in his admiration of her excellence and variety.
Propped upon the fragment of some rock, he gazes upon the tumbling water fall
with a vacant eye; he views without emotion the glory of the setting sun.
Slowly he returns to his cell at evening, for no one there is anxious for his
arrival: he has no comfort in his solitary, un^avoury meal: he throws himself
upon his couch of moss despondent and dissatisfied, and wakes only to pass a
day as joyless, as monotonous as the former."

"You amaze me, father! Suppose that circumstances condemned you to solitude;
would not the duties of religion, and the consciousness of a life well spent,
communicate to your heart that calm which -- "

"I should deceive myself, did I fancy that they could. I am convinced of the
contrary, and that all my fortitude would not prevent me from yielding to
melancholy and disgust. After consuming the day in study, if you knew my
pleasure at meeting my brethren in the evening! After passing many a long hour
in solitude, if I could express to you the joy which I feel at once more
beholding a fellow creature! It Is in this particular that I place the principal
merit of a monastic institution. It secludes man from the temptations of vice;
it procures that leisure necessary for the proper service of the Supreme; it
spares him the mortification of witnessing the crimes of the worldly, and yet
permits him to enjoy the blessings of society. And do you, Rosario, do you envy
an hermit's life? Can you be thus blind to the happiness of your situation?
Reflect upon it for a moment. This abbey is become your asylum: your
regularity, your gentleness, your talents have rendered you the object of
universal esteem: you are secluded from the world which you profess to hate;
yet you remain in possession of the benefits of society, and that a society
composed of the most estimable of mankind."

"Father! father!" it is that which causes my torment. Happy had it been for me,
had my life been passed among the vicious and abandoned; had I never heard
pronounced the name of virtue. It Is my unbounded adoration of religion; it is my
soul's exquis^te sensibility of the beauty of the fair and good, that loads me
with shame -- that hurries me to perdition. Oh! that I had never seen these
abbey walls!"

"How, Rosario? When we last conversed, you spoke in a different tone. Is my
friendship then become of such little consequence? Had you never seen these
abbey walls, you never had seen me. Can that really be your wish?"

"Had never seen you? repeated the novice, starting from the bank, and grasping
the friar's hand with a frantic air -- "You! You! Would to heaven that
lightning had blasted them before you ever met my eyes! Would to heaven that I
were never to see you more, and could forget that I had ever seen you!"

With these words he flew hastily from the grotto. Ambrosio remained in his
former attitude, reflecting on the youth's unaccountable behavior. He was
inclined to suspect the derangement of his senses: yet the general tenor of his
conduct, the connection of his ideas, and calmness of his demeanor till the
moment of his quitting the grotto, seemed to discountenance this conjecture.
After a few minutes Rosario returned. He again seated himself upon the bank: he
reclined his cheek upon one hand, and with the other wiped away the tears which
trickled from his eyes at intervals.

The monk looked upon him with compassion, and forbore to interrupt his
meditations. Both observed for some time a profound silence. The nightingale
had now taken her station upon an orange tree fronting the hermitage, and
poured forth a strain the most melancholy and melodious. Rosario raised his
head, and listened to her with attention.

"It was thus," said he, with a deep drawn sigh, "it was thus that, during the
last month of her unhappy life, my sister used to sit listening to the
nightingale. Poor Matilda! she sleeps in the grave, and her broken heart throbs
no more with passion."

"You had a sister?"

"You say right, that I had. Alas! I have one no longer. She sunk beneath the
weight of her sorrows in the very spring of life."

"What were those sorrows?"

"They will not (...) your pity. You know not the power of those irresistible,
those fatal sentiments to which her heart was a prey. Father, she loved
unfortunately. A passion for one endowed with every virtue, for a man -- oh!
rather let me say for a divinity -- proved the bane of her existence. His noble
form, his spotless character, his various talents, his wisdom solid, wonderful,
and glorious, might have warmed the bosom of the most insensible. My sister saw
him, and dared to love, though she never dared to hope."

"If her love was so well bestowed, what forbade her to hope the obtaining of
its object?"

"Father, before he knew her, Julian had already plighted his vows to a bride
most fair, most heavenly! Yet still my sister loved, and for the husband's sake
she doted upon the wife. One morning she found means to escape from our
father's house: arrayed in humble weeds she offered herself as a domestic to
the consort of her beloved, and was accepted. She was now continually in his
presence: she strove to ingratiate herself into his favor: she succeeded. Her
attentions attracted Julian's notice: the virtuous are ever grateful, and he
distinguished Matilda above the rest of her companions."

"And did not your parents seek for her? did they submit tamely to their loss,
nor attempt to recover their wandering daughter?"

"Ere they could find her, she discovered herself. Her love grew too violent
for concealment; yet she wished not for Julian's person, she ambitioned but a
share of his heart. In an unguarded moment she confessed her affection. What
was the return? Doting upon his wife, and believing that a look of pity
bestowed upon another was a theft from what he owed to her, he drove Matilda
from his presence: he forbade her ever again appearing before him. His severity
broke her heart: she returned to her father's, and in a few months after was
carried to her grave."

"Unhappy girl! Surely her fate was too severe, and Julian wa^ too cruel."

"Do you think so father?" cried the novice with vivacity: "Do you think that
he was cruel?"

"Doubtless I do, and pity her most sincerely."

"You pity her? you pity her? Oh! father! father! then pity me -- "

The friar started; when, after a moment's pause, Rosario added with a
faltering voice, "for my sufferings are still greater. My sister had a friend,
a real friend, who pitied the acuteness of her feelings, nor reproached her
with her inability to repress them. I --! I have no friend! The whole wide
world cannot furnish an heart that is willing to participate in the sorrows of
mine."

As he uttered these words, he sobbed audibly. The friar was affected. He took
Rosario's hand, and pressed it with tenderness.

"You have no friend, say you? what then am I? why will you not confide in me,
and what can you fear? my severity? have I ever used it with you? the dignity
of my habit? Rosario, I lay aside the monk, and bid you consider me as no other
than your friend, your father. (...) may I assume that title; for never did
parent watch over a child more fondly than I have watched over you. From the
moment in which I first beheld you, I perceived sensations in my bosom till
then unknown to me; I found a delight in your society which no one's else could
afford; and when I witnessed the extent of your genius and information, I
rejoiced as does a father in the perfections of his son. Then lay aside your
fears; speak to me with openness; speak to me, Rosario, and say that you will
confide in me. If my aid or my pity can alleviate your distress -- "

"Yours can; yours only can. Ah! father, how willingly would I unveil to you my
heart! how willingly would I declare the secret which bows me down with (...)
weight! But oh! I fear, I fear -- "

"What, my son?"

"That you should abhor me for my weakness; that the reward of my confidence
should be the loss of your esteem."

"How shall I reassure you? reflect upon the whole of my past conduct, upon the
paternal tenderness which I have ever shown you. Abhor you, Rosario? It is no
longer in my power. To give up your society would be to deprive myself of the
greatest pleasure of my life. Then reveal to me what afflicts you, and believe
me while I solemnly swear -- "

"Hold!" interrupted the novice. "Swear that, whatever be my secret, you will
not oblige me to quit the monastery till my noviciate shall expire."

"I promise it faithfully; and as I keep my vows to you, may Christ keep his to
mankind! Now then explain this mystery, and rely upon my indulgence."

"I obey you. Know then -- Oh! how I tremble to name the word! Listen to me
with pity, revered Ambrosio! Call up every latent spark of human weakness that
may teach you^ compassion for mine! Father!" continued he, throwing himself at
the friar's feet, and pressing his hand to his lips with eagerness, while
agitation for a moment choked his voice; "father!" continued he in faltering
accents, "I am a woman!"

The abbot started at this unexpected avowal. Prostrate on the ground lay the
feigned Rosario, as if waiting in silence the decision of his judge.
Astonishment on the one part, apprehension on the other, for some minutes
chained them in the same attitudes, as had they been touched by the rod of some
magician. At length recovering from his confusion, the monk quitted the grotto,
and sped with precipitation toward the abbey. His action did not escape the
suppliant. She sprang from the ground; she hastened to follow him, overtook
him, threw herself in his passage, and embraced his knees. Ambrosio strove in
vain to disengage himself from her grasp.

"Do not fly me!" she cried. "Leave me not abandoned to the impulse of despair!
Listen, while I excuse my imprudence; while I acknowledge my sister's story to
be my own! I am Matilda; you are her beloved."

If Ambrosio's surprise was great at her first avowal, upon hearing her second
it exceeded all bounds. Amazed, embarrassed, and irresolute, he found himself
incapable of pronouncing a syllable, and remained in silence gazing upon
Matilda. This gave her opportunity to continue her explanation as follows:

"Think not, Ambrosio, that I come to rob your bride of your affections. No,
believe me: Religion alone (...) you; and far is it from Matilda's wish to draw
you from the paths of virtue. What I feel for you is love, not licentiousness.
I sigh to be possessor of your heart, not of your person. Deign to listen to my
vindication; a few moments will convince you that this holy retreat is not
polluted by my presence, and that you may grant me your compassion without
trespassing against your vows." -- She seated herself. Ambrosio, scarcely
conscious of what he did, followed her example, and she proceeded in her
discourse: --

"I spring from a distinguished family: my father was chief of the noble house
of Villanegas: he died while I was still an infant, and left me sole heiress of
his immense possessions. Young and wealthy, I was (...) in marriage by the
noblest youths of Madrid; but no one succeeded in gaining my affections. I had
been brought up under the care of an uncle possessed of the most solid judgment
and extensive erudition* he took pleasure in communicating to me some portion
of his knowledge. Under his instructions my understanding acquired more
strength and justness than generally falls to the lot of my sex: the ability of
my preceptor being aided by natural curiosity, I not only made a considerable
progress in sciences universally studied, but in others revealed but to few,
and lying under consure from the blindness of superstition. But while my
guardian labored to enlarge the sphere of my knowledge; he carefully
inculcated every moral precept: he relieved me from the shackles of vulgar
prejudice: he pointed out the beauty of religion: he taught me to look with
adoration upon the pure and virtuous; and, woe is me! I have obeyed him but too
well.

"With such dispositions, judge whether I could observe with any other
sentiment than disgust, the vice, dissipation, and ignorance which disgrace our
Spanish youth. I rejected every offer with disdain: my heart remained without a
master, till chance conducted me to the cathedral of the Capuchins. Then was it
that I first beheld you: you supplied the superior's place, absent from
illness. -- You cannot but remember the lively enthusiasm which your discourse
created. Oh! how I drank your words! how (...) eloquence seemed to steal me
from myself! I scarcely dared to breathe, fearing to lose a syllable; and while
you spoke, methought a radiant glory beamed round your head, and your
countenance shone with the majesty of a God. I retired from the church, glowing
with admiration. From that moment you became the idol of my heart; the never
changing object of my meditations. I inquired respecting you. The reports which
were made me of your mode of life, of your knowledge, piety, and self denial,
riveted the chains imposed on me by your eloquence. I was conscious that there
was no longer a void in my heart; that I had found the man whom I had sought
till then in vain. In expectation of hearing you again, every day I visited
your cathedral: you remained secluded within the abbey walls, and I always
withdrew, wretched and disappointed. The night was more propitious to me, for
then you stood before me in my dreams; you vowed to me eternal friendship; you
led me through the paths of virtue, and assisted me to support the vexations of
life. The morning dispelled these pleasing visions: I awoke and found myself
separated from you by barriers which appeared insurmountable. Time seemed only
to increase the strength of my passion: I grew melancholy and despondent; I
^led from society, and my health declined daily. At length, no longer able to
exist in this state of torture, I resolved to assume the disguise in which you
see me. My artifice was fortunate; I was received into the monastery, and
succeeded in gaining your esteem.

"Now, then, I should have felt completely happy, ^ad not my quiet been
disturbed by the fear of detection. The pleasure which I received from your
society was embittered by the idea, that perhaps I should soon be deprived of
it: and my heart throbbed so rapturously at obtaining the marks of your
friendship, as (...) convince me that I never should survive its loss. I
resolved, therefore, not to leave the discovery of my sex to chance -- to
confess the whole to you, and throw myself entirely on your mercy and
indulgence. Ah! Ambrosio! can I have been deceived? can you be less generous
than I thought you? I will not suspect it. You will not drive a wretch to
despair; I shall still be permitted to see you, to converse with you, to adore
you! Your virtues shall be my example through life; and, when we expire, our
bodies shall rest in the same grave."

She ceased. -- While she spoke, a thousand opposing sentiments combated in
Ambrosio's bosom. Surprise at the singularity of this adventure; confusion at
her abrupt declaration; resentment at her boldness in entering the monastery;
and consciousness of the austerity with which it behoved him to reply; such
were the sentiments of which he was aware: but there were others also which did
not obtain his notice. He perceived not that his vanity was flattered by the
praises best wed upon his eloquence and virtue; that he felt a secret pleasure
in reflecting that a young and seemingly lovely woman had for his sake
abandoned the world, and sacrificed every other passion to that which he had
inspired: still less did he perceive, that his heart throbbed with desire,
while his hand was pressed gently by Matilda's ivory fingers.

By degrees he recovered from his confusion: his ideas became less bewildered:
he was immediately sensible of the extreme impropriety, should Matilda be
permitted to remain in the abbey after this avowal of her sex. He assumed an
air of severity, and drew away his hand.

"How, lady!" said he, "can you really hope for my permission to remain amongst
us? Even were I to grant your request, what good could you derive from it?
think you, that I ever can reply to an affection, which -- "

"No, father, no! I expect not to inspire you with a love like mine: I only
wish for the liberty to be near you; to pass some hours of the day in your
society; to obtain your compassion, your friendship, and esteem. Surely my
request is not unreasonable."

"But reflect, lady! reflect, only for a moment on the impropriety of my
harboring a woman in the abbey, and that too a woman who confesses that she
loves me. It must not be. The risk of your being discovered is too great; and I
will not expose myself to so dangerous a temptation."

"Temptation, say you? Forget that I am a woman, and it no longer exists:
consider me only as a friend, as an unfortunate, whose happiness, whose life,
depends upon your protection. Fear not, lest I should ever call to your
remembrance, that love, the most impetuous, the most unbounded, has induced me
to disguise my sex; or that, instigated by desires offensive to your vows and
my own honor, I should endeavor ^o seduce you from the path of rectitude. No,
Ambrosio! learn to know me better: I love you for your virtues: lose them, and
with them you lose my affections. I look upon you as a saint: prove to me that
you are no more than man, and I quit you with disgust. Is it then from me that
you fear temptation? from me, in whom the world's dazzling pleasures created no
other sentiment than contempt? from me, whose attachment is grounded on your
exemption from human frailty? Oh! dismiss such injurious apprehensions! think
nobler of me; think nobler of yourself. I am incapable of seducing you to
error; and surely your virtue is established on a basis too firm to be shaken
by unwarranted desires. Ambrosio! dearest Ambrosio! drive me not from your
presence; remember your promise, and authorize my stay."

"Impossible, Matilda! your interest commands me to refuse your prayer, since I
tremble for you, not for myself. After vanquishing the impetuous ebullitions of
youth; after passing thirty years in mortification and penance, I might safely
permit your stay, nor fear your inspiring me with warmer sentiments than pity:
but to yourself, remaining in the abbey can produce none but fatal
consequences. You will misconstrue my every word and action; you will seize
every circumstance with avidity which encourages you to hope the return of your
affection; insensibly, your passions will gain a superiority over your reason;
and, far from being repressed by my presence, every moment which we pass
together will only serve to irritate and excite them. Believe me, unhappy
woman! you possess my sincere compassion. I am convinced that you have hitherto
acted upon the purest motives; but though you are blind to the imprudence of
your conduct, in me it would be culpable not to open your eyes. I feel that
duty obliges my treating you with harshness; I must reject your prayer, and
remove every shadow of hope which may aid to nourish sentiments so pernicious
to your repose. Matilda, you must from hence tomorrow."

"Tomorrow, Ambrosio? tomorrow? Oh! surely you cannot mean it! you cannot
resolve on driving me to despair! you cannot have the cruelty -- "

"You have heard my decision, and it must be obeyed: the laws of our order
forbid your stay: it would be perjury to conceal that a woman is within these
walls, and my vows will oblige me to declare your story to the community. You
must from hence. I pity you, but can do no more."

He pronounced these words in a faint and trembling voice; then rising from his
seat, he would have hastened toward the monastery. Uttering a loud shriek,
Matilda followed, and detained him.

"Stay yet one moment, Ambrosio! hear me yet speak one word!"

"I dare not listen. Release me: you know my resolution."

"But one word! but one last word, and I have done!"

"Leave me. Your entreaties are in vain: you must from hence tomorrow."

"Go then, barbarian! But this resource is still left me."

As she said this, she suddenly drew a poignard. She rent open her garment, and
placed the weapon's point against her bosom.

"Father, I will never quit these walls alive."

"Hold! hold, Matilda! what would you do?"

"You are determined, so am I: the moment that you leave me, I plunge this
steel in my heart."

"Holy St. Francis! Matilda, have you your senses? Do you know the consequences
of your action? that suicide is the greatest of crimes? that you destroy your
soul? that you lose your claim to salvation? that you prepare for yourself
everlasting torments?"

"I care not, I care not!" she replied passionately: "either your hand guides
me to paradise, or my own dooms me to perdition! Speak to me, Ambrosio! Tell me
that you will conceal my story; that I shall remain your friend and your
companion, or this poignard drinks my blood."

As she uttered these last words, she lifted her arm, and made a motion (...)
if to stab herself. The friar's eyes followed with ^read the course of the
dagger, and saw that its point already rested upon her bosom.

"Hold!" he cried, in an hurried, faltering voice; "I can resist no longer!
Stay then, enchantress! stay, for my destruction!"

He said: and, rushing from the place, hastened toward the monastery; he
regained his cell, and threw himself upon his couch, distracted, irresolute and
confused.

He found it impossible for some time to arrange his ideas. The scene in which
he had been engaged, had excited such a variety of sentiments in his bosom,
that he was incapable of deciding which was predominant. He was irresolute what
conduct he ought to hold with the disturber of his repose; he was conscious
that prudence, religion, and propriety, necessitated his obliging her to quit
the abbey: but, on the other hand, such powerful reasons authorized her stay,
that he was but too much inclined to consent to her remaining. He could not
avoid being flattered by Matilda's declaration, and at reflecting that he had
unconsciously vanquished an heart which had resisted the attacks of Spain's
noblest cavaliers. The manner in which he had gained her affections was also
the most satisfactory to his vanity: he remembered the many happy hours which
he had passed in Rosario's society; and dreaded that void in his heart which
parting with him would occasion. Besides all this, he considered, that, as
Matilda was wealthy, her favor might be of essential benefit to the abbey.

"And what do I risk," said he to himself, "by authorizing her stay? may I not
safely credit her assertions? will it not be easy for me to forget her sex, and
still consider her as my friend, and my disciple? Surely her love is as pure as
she describes: had it been the offspring of mere licentiousness, would she so
long have concealed it in her own bosom? would she not have employed some means
to procure its gratification? she has done quite the contrary: she strove to
keep me in ignorance of her sex; and nothing but the fear of detection, and my
instances, would have compelled her to reveal the secret: she has observed the
duties of religion not less strictly than myself: she has made no attempt to
rouse my slumbering passions, nor has she ever conversed with me till this
night on the subject of love. Had she been desirous to gain my affections, not
my esteem, she would not have concealed from me her charms so carefully: at
this very moment I have never seen her face; yet certainly that face must be
lovely, and her person beautiful, to judge by what I have seen."

As this last idea passed through his imagination, a blush spread itself over
his cheek. Alarmed at the sentiments which he was indulging, he betook himself
to prayer: he started from his couch, knelt before the beautiful Madona, and
entreated her assistance in stifling such culpable emotions: he then returned
to his bed, and resigned himself to slumber.

He awoke heated and unrefreshed; and started from his couch, heartily ashamed
when he reflected on his reasons of the former night, which induced him to
authorize Matilda's stay. The cloud was now dissipated which had obscured his
judgment; he shuddered when he beheld his arguments blazoned in their proper
colors, and found that he had been a slave to flattery, to avarice and self
love. If in one hour's conversation Matilda had produced a change so remarkable
in his sentiments, what had he not to dread from her remaining in the abbey?
Become sensible of his danger, awakened from his dream of confidence, he
resolved to insist on her departing without delay: he began to feel that he was
not proof against temptation; and that, however Matilda might restrain herself
within the bounds of modesty, he was unable to contend with those passions from
which he falsely thought himself exempted.

"Agnes! Agnes!" he exclaimed, while reflecting on his embarrassments, "I
already feel thy curse!"

He quitted his cell, determined upon dismissing the feigned Rosario. He
appeared at matins; but his thoughts were absent, and he paid them but little
attention: his heart and brain were both of them filled with worldly objects,
and he prayed without devotion. The service over, he descended into the garden;
he bent his steps toward the same spot where on the preceding night he had
made this embarrassing discovery: he doubted not that Matilda would seek him
there. He was not deceived: she soon entered the hermitage, and approached the
monk with a timid air. After a few minutes, during which both were silent, she
appeared as if on the point of speaking; but the abbot, who during this time
had been summoning up all his resolution, hastily interrupted her. Though still
unconscious how extensive was its influence, he dreaded the melodious seduction
of her voice.

"Seat yourself by my side, Matilda," said he, assuming a look of firmness,
though carefully avoiding the least mixture of severity; "listen to me
patiently, and believe that, in what I shall say, I am not more influenced by
my own interest than by yours; believe that I feel for you the warmest
friendship, the truest compassion; and that you cannot feel more grieved than I
do, when I declare to you that we must never meet again."

"Ambrosio!" she cried, in a voice at once expressive both of surprise and of
sorrow.

"Be calm, my friend! my Rosario! still let me call you by that name so dear to
me: our separation is unavoidable; I blush to own how sensibly it affects me,
-- But yet it must be so; I feel myself incapable of treating you with
indifference; and that very conviction obliges me to insist upon your
departure. Matilda, you must stay here no longer."

"Oh! where shall I now seek for probity? disgusted with a perfidious world, in
what happy region does Truth conceal herself? Father, I hoped that she resided
here; I thought that your bosom had been her favorite shrine. And you too
prove false? Oh God! and you too can betray me?"

"Matilda!"

"Yes, father, yes; it is with justice that I reproach you. Oh! where are your
promises? My noviciate is not expired, and yet will you compel me to quit the
monastery? can you have the heart to drive me from you? and have I not received
your solemn oath to the contrary?"

"I will not compel you to quit the monastery; you have received my solemn oath
to the contrary: but yet, when I throw myself upon your generosity; when I
declare to you the embarrassments in which your presence involves me, will you
not release me from that oath? Reflect upon the danger of a discovery; upon the
opprobrium in which such an event would plunge me: reflect, that my honor and
reputation are at stake; and that my peace of mind depends on your compliance.
As yet, my heart is free; I shall separate from you with regret, but not with
despair. Stay here, and a few weeks will sacrifice my happiness on the altar of
your charms; you are but too interesting, too amiable! I should love you, I
should dote on you! my bosom would become the prey of desires, which honor and
my profession forbid me to gratify. If I resisted them, the impetuosity of my
wishes unsatisfied would drive me to madness: if I yielded to the temptation, I
should sacrifice to one moment of guilty pleasure, my reputation in this world,
my salvation in the next. To you, then, I fly for defense against myself.
Preserve me from losing the reward of thirty years of sufferings! preserve me
from becoming the victim of remorse! Your heart has already felt the anguish of
hopeless love: oh! then, if you really value me, spare mine that anguish! give
me back my promise; fly from these walls. Go, and you bear with you my warmest
prayers for your happiness, my friendship, my esteem, and admiration: stay, and
you become to me the source of danger, of sufferings, of despair. Answer me,
Matilda, what is your resolve?" She was silent. -- "Will you not speak,
Matilda? Will you not name your choice?"

"Cruel! cruel!" she exclaimed, wringing her hands in agony: "you know too well
that you offer me no choice: you know too well that I can have no will but
yours."

"I was not then deceived. Matilda's generosity equals my expectations."

"Yes: I will prove the truth of my affection by submitting to a decree which
cuts me to the very heart. Take back your promise. I will quit the monastery
this very day. I have a relation, abbess of a convent in Estremadura: to her
will I bend my steps, and shut myself from the world for ever. Yet tell me,
father, shall I bear your good wishes with me to my solitude? Will you
sometimes abstract your attention from heavenly objects to bestow a thought
upon me?"

"Ah! Matilda, I fear that I shall think on you but too often for my repose."

"Then I have nothing more to wish for, save that we may meet in heaven.
Farewell, my friend! my Ambrosio! And yet, methinks, I would fain bear with me
some token of your regard."

"What shall I give you?"

"Something -- any thing -- one of those flowers will be sufficient." [Here she
pointed to a bush of roses, planted at the door of the grotto.] "I will hide it
in my bosom, and, when I am dead, the nuns shall find it withered upon my
heart."

The friar was unable to reply: with slow steps, and a soul heavy wit^
affliction, he quitted the hermitage. He approached the bush, and stooped to
pluck one of the roses. Suddenly he uttered a piercing cry, started back
hastily, and let the flower, which he already held, fall from his hand. Matilda
heard the shriek, and flew anxiously toward him.

"What is the matter?" she cried. "Answer me, for God's sake! What has
happened?"

"I have received my death," he replied in a faint voice: "concealed among the
roses -- a serpent -- "

Here the pain of his wound became so exquisite, that nature was unable to bear
it: his senses abandoned him, and he sunk inanimate into Matilda's arms.

Her distress was beyond the power of description. She rent her hair, beat her
bosom, and, not daring to quit Ambrosio, endeavored, by loud cries, to summon
the monks to her assistance. She at length succeeded. Alarmed by her shrieks,
several of the brothers hastened to the spot, and the superior was conveyed
back to the abbey. He was immediately put to bed, and the monk who officiated
as surgeon to the fraternity prepared to examine the wound. By this time
Ambrosio's hand had swelled to an extraordinary size: the remedies which had
been administered to him, it is true, restored him to life, but not to his
senses: he raved in all the horrors of delirium, foamed at the mouth, and four
of the strongest monks were scarcely able to hold him in his bed.

Father Pablos (such was the surgeon's name) hastened to examine the wounded
hand. The monks surrounded the bed, anxiously waiting for the decision: among
these the feigned Rosario appeared not the most insensible to the friar's
calamity; he gazed upon the sufferer with inexpressible anguish; and his
groans, which every moment escaped from his bosom, sufficiently betrayed the
violence of his affliction.

Father Pablos probed the wound. As he drew out his instrument, its point was
tinged with a greenish hue. He shook his head mournfully, and quitted the
bedside.

"'It Is as I feared," said he; "there is no hope."

"No hope!" exclaimed the monks with one voice; "say you, no hope?"

"From the sudden effects, I suspected that the abbot was stung by a
cientipedoro: The cientipedoro is supposed to be a native of Cuba, and to have
been brought into Spain, from that island, in the vessel of Columbus.
the venom which you see upon my instrument confirms my idea. He cannot live
three days."

"And can no possible remedy be found?" inquired Rosario.

"Without extracting the poison, he cannot recover; and how to extract it, is
to me still a secret. All that I can do is to apply such herbs to the wound as
will relieve the anguish: the patient will be restored to his senses; but the
venom will corrupt the whole mass of his blood, and in three days he will exist
no longer."

Excessive was the universal grief at hearing this decision. Pablos, as he had
promised, dressed the wound, and then retired, followed by his companions.
Rosario alone remained in the cell; the abbot, at his urgent entreaty, having
been committed to his care. Ambrosio's strength worn out by the violence of his
exertions, he had by this time fallen into a profound sleep. So totally was he
overcome by weariness, that he scarcely gave any signs of life. He was still in
this situation, when the monks returned to inquire whether any change had taken
place. Pablos loosened the bandage which concealed the wound, more from a
principle of curiosity, than from indulging the hope of discovering any
favorable symptoms. What was his astonishment at finding that the inflammation
had totally subsided! He probed the hand; his instument came out pure and
unsullied; no traces of the venom were perceptible; and had not the orifice
still been visible, Pablos might have doubted that there had ever been a wound.

He communicated this intelligence to his brethren: their delight was only
equalled by their surprise. From the latter sentiment, however, they were soon
released, by explaining the circumstance according to their own ideas. They
were perfectly convinced that their superior was a saint, and thought that
nothing could be more natural than for St. Francis to have operated a miracle
in his favor. This opinion was adopted unanimously. They declared it so
loudly, and vociferated "A miracle! a miracle!" with such fervor, that they
soon interrupted Ambrosio's slumbers.

The monks immediately crowded round his bed, and expressed their satisfaction
at his wonderful recovery. He was perfectly in his senses, and free from every
complaint, except feeling weak and languid. Pablos gave him a strengthening
medicine, and advised his keeping his bed for the two succeeding days: he then
retired, having desired his patient not to exhaust himself by conversation, but
rather to endeavor at taking some repose. The other monks followed his
example, and the abbot and Rosario were left without observers.

For some minutes Ambrosio regarded his attendant with a look of mingled
pleasure and apprehension. She was seated upon the side of the bed, her head
bending down, and, as usual, enveloped in the cowl of her habit.

"And you are still here, Matilda?" said the friar at length; "are you not
satisfied with having so nearly effected my destruction, that nothing but a
miracle could have saved me from the grave? Ah! surely heaven sent that serpent
to punish -- "

Matilda interrupted him by putting her hand before his lips with an air of
gaiety.

"Hush; father, hush! you must not talk."

"He who imposed that order, knew not how interesting are the subjects on which
I wish to speak."

"But I know it, and yet issue the same positive command. I am appointed your
nurse, and you must not disobey my orders."

"You are in spirits, Matilda."

"Well may I be so: I have just received a pleasure unexampled through my whole
life."

"What was that pleasure?"

"What I must conceal from all, but most from you."

"But most from me? Nay then, I entreat you, Matilda -- "

"Hush! father, hush! you must not talk. But as you do not seem inclined to
sleep, shall I endeavor to amuse you with my harp?"

"How! I knew not that you understood music."

"Oh! I am a sorry performer! Yet as silence is prescribed you for eight and
forty hours, I may possibly entertain you when wearied of your own reflections.
I go to fetch my harp."

She soon returned with it.

"Now, father, what shall I sing? Will you hear the ballad which treats of the
gallant Durandarte, who died in the famous battle of Roncevalles?"

"What you please, Matilda."

"Oh! call me not Matilda! call me Rosario, call me your friend. Those are the
names which I love to hear from your lips. Now listen."

She then tuned her harp, and afterward preluded for some moments with such
exquisite taste as to prove her a perfect mistress of the instrument. The air
which she played was soft and plaintive. Ambrosio, while he listened, felt his
uneasiness subside, and a pleasing melancholy spread itself into his bosom.
Suddenly Matilda changed the strain: with an hand bold and rapid, she struck a
few loud martial chords, and then chanted the following ballad to an air at
once simple and melodious:

DURANDARTE AND BELERMA.
SAD and fearful is the story
Of the Roncevalles fight;
On those fatal plains of glory
Perished many a gallant knight.
There fel^ Durandarte: never
Verse a nobler chieftain named:
He, before his lips for ever
Closed in silence, thus exclaimed:
"Oh! Belerma! oh! my dear one,
For my pain and pleasure born,
Seven long years I served thee, fair one,
Seven long years my fee was scorn.
"And when now thy heart, replying
To my wishes, burns like mine,
Cruel fate, my bliss denying,
Bids me every hope resign.
"Ah! though young I fall, believe me,
Death would never claim a sigh;
It Is to loose thee, it is to leave thee,
Makes me think it hard to die!
"Oh! my cousin Montesinos,
By that friendship firm and dear
Which from youth has lived between us,
Now my last petition hear:
"When my soul, these limbs forsaking,
Eager seeks a purer air,
From my breast the cold heart taking,
Give it to Belerma's care.
"Say, I of my lands possessor
Named her with my dying breath:
Say, my lips I opd to bless her,
Ere they closed for aye in death:
"Twice a week, too, how sincerely
I adored her, cousin, say:
Twice a week, for one who dearly
Loved her, cousin, bid her pray.
"Montesinos, now the hour
Marked by fate, is near at hand:
Lo! my arm has lost its power!
Lo! I drop my trusty brand.
"Eyes, which forth beheld me going,
Homewards never shall see me hie:
Cousin, stop those ^^ars over flowing,
Let me on thy bosom die.
"Thy kind hand, my eyelids closing,
Yet one favor I implore:
Pray thou for my soul's reposing,
When my heart shall throb no more.
"So shall Jesus, still attending
Gracious to a Christian's vow,
Pleased accept my ghost ascending,
And a seat in heaven allow."
Thus spoke gallant Durandarte:
Soon his brave heart broke in twain,
Greatly joyed the Moorish party,
That the gallant knight was slain.
Bitter weeping, Montesinos
Took from him his helm and (...);
Bitter weeping, Montesinos
Dug his gallant cousin's grave.
To perform his promise made, he
Cut the heart from out the breast,
That Belerma^ wretched lady!
Might receive the last bequest.
Sad was Montesinos' heart, he
Felt distress his bosom rend.
"Oh! my cousin Durandarte,
Woe is me to view thy end!
"Sweet in manners, fair in favor,
Mild in temper, fierce in fight,
Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
Never shall behold the light.
"Cousin, lo! my tears bedew thee,
How shall I thy loss survive?
Durandarte, he who slew thee,
Wherefore left he me alive?"
While she sang, Ambrosio listened with delight: never had he heard a voice
more harmonious; and he wondered how such heavenly sounds could be produced by
any but angels. But though he indulged the sense of hearing, a single look
convinced him, that he must not trust to that of sight. The songstress sat at a
little distance from his bed. The attitude in which she bent over her harp was
easy and graceful: her cowl had fallen more back than usual: two coral lips
were visible, ripe, fresh, and melting, and a chin, in whose dimples seemed to
lurk a thousand Cupids. Her habit's long sleeve would have swept along the
chords of the instrument: to prevent this inconvenience she had drawn it above
her elbow; and by this means an arm was discovered, formed in the most perfect
symmetry, the delicacy of whose skin might have contended with snow in
whiteness. Ambrosio dared to look on her but once: that glance sufficed to
convince him how dangerous was the presence of this seducing object. He closed
his eyes, but strove in vain to banish her from his thoughts. There she still
moved before him, adorned with all those charms which his heated imagination
could supply. Every beauty which he had seen appeared embellished; and those
still concealed fancy represented to him in glowing colors. Still, however,
his vows, and the necessity of keeping to them, were present to his memory. He
struggled with desire, and shuddered when he beheld how deep was the precipice
before him.

Matilda ceased to sing. Dreading the influence of her charms, Ambrosio
remained with his eyes closed, and offered up his prayers to St. Francis to
assist him in this dangerous (...). Matilda believed that he was sleeping: she
rose from her seat, approached the bed softly, and for some minutes gazed upon
him attentively.

"He sleeps!" said she at length in a low voice, but whose accents the abbot
distinguished perfectly: "now then I may gaze upon him without offense; I may
mix my breath with his; I may dote upon his features, and he cannot suspect me
of impurity and deceit. He fears my seducing him to the violation of his vows.
Oh! the unjust! Were it my wish to excite desire, should I conceal my features
from him so carefully? those features, of which I daily hear him -- "

She stopped, and was lost in her reflections.

"It was (...) yesterday," she continued; "but a few short hours have passed
since I was dear to him; he esteemed me, and my heart was satisfied. Now, oh!
now, ^ow cruelly is my situation changed! He looks on me with suspicion; he
bids me leave him, leave him for ever. Oh! you, my saint, my idol! You! holding
the next place to God in my breast, yet two days, and my heart will be unveiled
to you. Could you know my feelings, when I beheld your agony! Could you know
how much your sufferings have endeared you to me! But the time will come, when
you will be convinced that my passion is pure and disinterested. Then you will
pity me, and feel the whole weight of these sorrows."

As she said this, her voice was choked by weeping. While she bent over
Ambrosio, a tear fell upon his cheek.

Ah! I have disturbed him," cried Matilda, and retreated hastily.

Her alarm was ungrounded. None sleep so profoundly as those who are determined
not to wake. The fria^ was in this predicament: he still seemed buried in a
repose, which every succeeding minute rendered him less capable of enjoying.
The burning tear had communicated its warmth to his heart.

"What affection! what purity!" said he internally. "Ah! since my bosom is thus
sensible of pity, what would it be if agitated by love?"

Matilda again quitted her seat, and retired to some distance from the bed.
Ambrosio ventured to open his eyes, and to cast them upon her fearfully. Her
face was turned from him. She rested her head in a melancholy posture upon her
harp, and gazed on the picture which hung opposite to the bed.

"Happy, happy image!" Thus did she address the beautiful Madona; "'it is to thee
that he offers his prayers; it is on thee that he gazes with admiration. I
thought thou would have lightened my sorrows; but thou have only served to
increase their weight; thou have made me feel, that, had I known him ere his
vows were pronounced, Ambrosio and happiness might have been mine. With what
pleasure he views this picture! With what fervor he addresses his prayers to
the insensible image! Ah! may not his sentiments be inspired by some kind and
secret genius, friend to my affection? May it not be man's natural instinct
which informs him --? Be silent! idle hopes! let me not encourage an idea,
which takes from the brilliance of Ambrosio's virtue. It Is religion, not
beauty, which attracts his admiration; it is not to the woman, but the divinity,
that he kneels. Would he but address to me the least tender expression which he
pours forth to this Madona! Would he but say, that, were he not already
affianced to the church, he would not have despised Matilda! Oh! let me nourish
that fond idea. Perhaps he may yet acknowledge that he feels for me more than
pity, and that affection like mine might well have deserved a return. Perhaps
he may own thus much when I lie on my death bed. He then need not fear to
infringe his vows, and the confession of his regard will soften the pangs of
dying. Would I were sure of this! oh! how earnestly should I sigh for the
moment of dissolution!"

Of this discourse the abbot lost not a syllable! and the tone in which she
pronounced these last words pierced to his heart. Involuntarily he raised
himself from his pillow.

"Matilda!" he said in a troubled voice; "Oh! my Matilda!"

She started at the sound, and turned toward him hastily. The suddenness of
her movement made her cowl fall back from her head; her features became visible
to the monk's inquiring eye. What was his amazement at beholding the exact
resemblance of his admired Madona! The same exquisite proportion of features,
the same profusion of golden hair, the same rosy lips, heavenly eyes, and
majesty of countenance adorned Matilda! Uttering an exclamation of surprise,
Ambrosio sunk back upon his pillow, and doubted whether the object before him
was mortal or divine.

Matilda seemed penetrated with confusion. She remained motionless in her
place, and supported herself upon her instrument. Her eyes were bent upon the
earth, and her fair cheeks overspread with blushes. On recovering herself, her
first action was to conceal her features. She then, in an unsteady and troubled
voice, ventured to address these words to the friar:

"Accident has made you master of a secret which I never would have revealed
but on the bed of death: yes, Ambrosio, in Matilda de Villanegas you see the
original of your beloved Madona. Soon after I conceived my unfortunate passion,
I formed the project of conveying to you my picture. Crowds of admirers had
persuaded me that I possessed some beauty, and I was anxious to know what
effect it would produce upon you. I caused my portrait to be drawn by Martin
Galuppi, a celebrated Venetian, at that time resident in Madrid. The
resemblance was striking: I sent it to the Capuchin abbey as if for sale; and
the Jew from whom you bought it was one of my emissaries. You purchased it.
Judge of my rapture, when informed that you had gazed upon it with delight, or
rather with adoration; that you had suspended it in your cell, and that you
addressed your supplications to no other saint! Will this discovery make me
still more regarded as an object of suspicion? Rather should it convince you
how pure is my affection, and engage you to suffer me in your society and
esteem. I heard you daily choral the praises of my portrait. I was an eye
witness of the transports which its beauty excited in you: yet I forebore to
use against your virtue those arms with which yourself had furnished me. I
concealed those features from your fight, which you loved unconsciously. I
strove not to excite desire by displaying my charms, or to make myself mistress
of your heart through the medium of your senses. To attract your notice by
studiously attending to religious duties, to endear myself to you by convincing
you that my mind was virtuous, and my attachment sincere, such was my only aim.
I succeeded; I became your companion and your friend. I concealed my sex from
your knowledge; and, had you not pressed me to reveal my secret, had I not been
tormented by the fear of a discovery, never had you known me for any other than
Rosario. And still are you resolved to drive me from you? The few hours of life
which yet remain for me, may I not pass them in your presence? Oh! speak,
Ambrosio, and tell me that I may stay."

This speech gave the abbot an opportunity of recollecting himself. He was
conscious that, in the present disposition of his mind, avoiding her society
was his only refuge from the power of this enchanting woman.

"Your declaration has so much astonished me," said he, "that I am at present
incapable of answering you. Do not insist upon a reply, Matilda; leave me to
myself, I have need to be alone."

"I obey you; but, before I go, promise not to insist upon my quitting the
abbey immediately."

"Matilda, reflect upon your situation; reflect upon the consequences of your
stay: our separation is indispensable, and we must part."

"But not today, father! Oh! in pity, not today!"

"You press me too hard; but I cannot resist that tone of supplication. Since
you insist upon it, I yield to your prayer; I consent to your remaining here a
sufficient time to prepare, in some measure, the brethren for your departure:
stay yet two days; but on the third" -- (He sighed involuntarily) -- "remember,
that on the third we must part for ever!"

She caught his hand eagerly, and pressed it to her lips.

"On the third!" she exclaimed with an air of wild solemnity: "You are right,
father, you are right! On the third we must part for ever!"

There was a dreadful expression in her eyes as she uttered these words, which
penetrated the friar's soul with horror. Again she kissed his hand, and then
fled with rapidity from the chamber.

Anxious to authorize the presence of his dangerous guest, yet conscious that
her stay was infringing the laws of his order, Ambrosio's bosom became the
theater of a thousand contending passions. At length his attachment to the
feigned Rosario seemed likely to obtain the victory: the success was assured,
when that presumption which formed the ground work of his character came to
Matilda's assistance. The monk reflected, that to vanquish temptation was an
infinitely greater merit than to avoid it; he thought that he ought rather to
rejoice in the opportunity given him of proving the firmness of his virtue. St.
Anthony had withstood all seductions, then why should not he? Besides, St.
Anthony was tempted by Satan, who put every art into practice to excite his
passions; whereas Ambrosio's danger proceeded from a mere mortal woman, fearful
and modest, whose apprehensions of his yielding were not less violent than his
own.

"Yes," said he, "the unfortunate shall stay; I have nothing to fear from her
presence: even should my own prove too weak to resist the temptation, I am
secured from danger by the innocence of Matilda."

Ambrosio was yet to learn, that, to an heart unacquainted with her, vice is
ever most dangerous when lurking behind the mask of virtue.

He found himself so perfectly recovered, that when father Pablos visited him
again at night, he entreated permission to quit his chamber on the day
following. His request was granted. Matilda appeared no more that evening,
except in company with the monks when they came in a body to inquire after the
abbot's health. She seemed fearful of conversing with him in private, and staid
but a few minutes in his room. The friar slept well.

The morning dawned, but he was not disposed to quit his bed: he excused
himself from appearing at matins: it was the first morning in his life that he
had ever missed them. He rose late: during the whole of the day he had no
opportunity of speaking to Matilda without witnesses; his cell was thronged by
the monks, anxious to express their concern at his illness; and he was still
occupied in receiving their compliments on his recovery, when the bell summoned
them to the refectory.

After dinner, the monks separated, and dispersed themselves in various parts
of the garden, where the shade of trees, or retirement of some grotto,
presented the most agreeable means of enjoying the siesta. The abbot bent his
steps toward the hermitage; a glance of his eye invited Matilda to accompany
him: she obeyed, and followed him thither in silence; they entered the grotto,
and seated themselves: both seemed unwilling to begin the conversation, and to
labor under the influence of mutual embarrassment. At length the abbot spoke:
he conversed only on indifferent topics, and Matilda answered him in the same
tone; she seemed anxious to make him forget that the person who sat by him was
any other than Rosario. Neither of them dared, or indeed wished, to make an
allusion to the subject which was most at the heart of both.

Matilda's efforts to appear gay were evidently forced; her spirits were
oppressed by the weight of anxiety; and when she spoke, her voice was low and
feeble; she seemed desirous of finishing a conversation which embarrassed her;
and, complaining that she was unwell, she requested Ambrosio's permission to
return to the abbey. He accompanied her to the door of her cell; and, when
arrived there, he stopped her to declare his consent to her continuing the
partner of his solitude, so long as should be agreeable to herself.

She discovered no marks of pleasure at receiving this intelligence, though on
the preceding day she had be^n so anxious to obtain the permission.

"Alas, father," she said, waving her head mournfully, "your kindness comes too
late; my doom is fixed; we must separate for ever: yet believe that I am
grateful for your generosity, for your compassion of an unfortunate who is but
too little deserving of it."

She put her handkerchief to her eyes; her cowl was only half drawn over her
face. Ambrosio observed that she was pale, and her eyes sunk and heavy.

"Good God!" he cried, "you are very ill, Matilda; I shall send father Pablos
to you instantly."

"No, do not: I am ill it is true, but he cannot cure my malady. Farewell,
father! Remember me in your prayers tomorrow, while I shall remember you in
heaven."

She entered her cell and closed the door.

The abbot dispatched to her the physician without losing a moment, and waited
his report impatiently; but father Pablos soon returned, and declared that his
errand had been fruitless. Rosario refused to admit him, and had positively
rejected his offers of assistance. The uneasiness which this account gave
Ambrosio was not trifling; yet he determined that Matilda should have her own
way for that night, but that if her situation did not mend by the morning, he
would insist upon her taking the advice of father Pablos.

He did not find himself inclined to sleep; he opened his casement, and gazed
upon the moonbeams as they played upon the small stream whose waters bathed the
walls of the monastery. The coolness of the night breeze, and tranquillity of
the hour, inspired the friar's mind with sadness; he thought upon Matilda's
beauty and affection; upon the pleasures which he might have shared with her,
had he not been restrained by monastic fetters. He reflected that, unsustained
by hope, her love for him could not long exist; that doubtless she would
succeed in extinguishing her passion, and seek for happiness in the arms of one
more fortunate. He shuddered at the void which her absence would leave in his
bosom; he looked with disgust on the monotony of a convent, and breathed a sigh
toward that world from which he was for ever separated. Such were the
reflections which a loud knocking at his door interrupted. The bell of the
church had already struck two. The abbot hastened to inquire the cause of this
disturbance. He opened the door of his cell, and a lay brother entered, whose
looks declared his hurry and confusion.

"Hasten, reverend father!" said he, "hasten to the young Rosario: he earnestly
requests to see you; he lies at the point of death."

"Gracious God! where is father Pablos? Why is he not with him? Oh! I fear, I
fear -- "

"Father Pablos has seen him, but his art can do nothing. He says that he
suspects the youth to be poisoned."

"Poisoned? Oh! the unfortunate! It is then as I suspected! But let me not lose
a moment; perhaps it may yet be time to save her."

He said, and flew toward the cell of the novice. Several monks were already
in the chamber; father Pablos was one of them, and held a medicine in his hand,
which he was endeavoring to persuade Rosario to swallow. The others were
employed in admiring the patient's divine countenance, which they now saw for
the first time. She looked lovelier than ever; she was no longer pale or
languid; a bright glow had spread itself over he^ cheeks; her eyes sparkled
with a serene delight, and her countenance was expressive of confidence and
resignation.

"Oh! torment me no more!" was she saying to Pablos, when the terrified abbot
rushed hastily into the cell; "my disease is far beyond the reach of your
skill, and I wish not to be cured of it." Then perciving Ambrosio -- "Ah, it is
he!" she cried; "I see him once again before we part for ever! Leave me my
brethren; much have I to tell this holy man in private."

The monks retired immediately, and Matilda and the abbot remained together.

"What have you done, imprudent woman?" exclaimed the latter, as soon as they
were left alone: "tell me, are my suspicions just? Am I indeed to lose you? Has
your own hand been the instrument of your destruction?"

She smiled, and grasped his hand.

"In what have I been imprudent, father? I have sacrificed a pebble, and saved
a diamond. My death preserves a life valuable to the world, and more dear to me
than my own. Yes, father, I am poisoned; but know that the poison once
circulated in your veins."

"Matilda!"

"What I tell you I resolved never to discover to you but on the bed of death;
that moment is now arrived. You cannot have forgotten the day when your life
was endangered by the bite of a cientipedoro. The physician gave you over,
declaring himself ignorant how to extract the venom. I knew but of one means,
and hesitated not a moment to employ it. I was left alone with you; you slept;
I loosened the bandage from your hand; I kissed the wound, and drew out the
poison with my lips. The effect has been more sudden than I expected. I feel
death at my heart; yet an hour and I shall be in a better world."

"Almighty God!" exclaimed the abbot and sunk almost lifeless upon the bed.

After a few minutes he again raised himself up suddenly, and gazed upon
Matilda with all the wildness of despair.

"And you have sacrificed yourself for me! You die, and die to pres^^ve
Ambrosio! And is there indeed no remedy, Matilda? And is there indeed no hope?
Speak to me, oh! speak to me! Tell me that you have still the means of life!"

"Be comforted, my only friend! Yes, I have still the means of life in my
power; but it is a means which I dare not employ! it is dangerous; it is
dreadful! Life would be purchased at too dear a rate, -- unless it were
permitted me to live for you."

"Then live for me, Matilda; for me and gratitude!" -- (He caught her hand, and
pressed it rapturously to his lips.) -- "Remember our late conversations; I now
consent to every thing. Remember in what lively colors you described the union
of souls; be it ours to realize those ideas. Let us forget the distinctions of
sex, despise the world's prejudices, and only consider each other as brother
and friend. Live then, Matilda, oh! live for me!"

"Ambrosio, it must not be. When I thought thus. I deceived both you and
myself. Oh! since we (...) conversed together, a dreadful veil has been rent
from before my eyes. I love you no longer with the devotion which is paid to a
saint; I prize you no more for the virtues of your soul. The woman reigns in my
bosom, and I am become a prey to the wildest of passions. Away with friendship!
it is a cold unfeeling word: my bosom burns with love, with unutterable love,
and love must be its return. Tremble then, Ambrosio, tremble to succeed in your
prayers. If I live, your truth, your reputation, your reward of a life passed
in sufferings, all that you value, is irretrievably lost. No, no, Ambrosio, I
feel that I must not live!"

"Amazement! Matilda! Can it be you who speak to me?"

He made a movement as if to quit his seat. She uttered a loud shriek, and,
raising herself half out of the bed, threw her arms round the friar to detain
him.

"Oh! do not leave me! Listen to my errors with compassion: In a few hours I
shall be no more; yet a little, and I am free from this disgraceful passion."

"Wretched woman, what can I say to you? I cannot -- I must not -- But live,
Matilda! oh, live!"

"You do not reflect on what you ask. What? live to plunge myself in infamy? to
become the agent of hell? to work the destruction both of you and of myself?"

"Feel this heart, father! It is yet the seat of honor, truth, and chastity: if
it beats tomorrow, it must fall a prey to the blackest crimes. Oh! let me then
die today! Let me die while I yet deserve the tears of the virtuous."

The hour was night. All was silence around. The faint beams of a solitary lamp
darted upon Matilda's figure, and shed through the chamber a dim, mysterious
light. Nothing was heard but her melodious accents. Ambrosio saw before him a
young and beautiful woman, the preserver of his life, the adorer of his person;
and whom affection for him had reduced to the brink of the grave: her life or
death rested upon his decision: which should he sacrifice, his vows or her
existence? A thousand noble feelings, blended with a thousand base ones, impel
him to prefer the former. He (...); his vow is violated! Tremble, Ambrosio
(...) step is taken; and he who breaks his faith with heaven, will soon break
it with man. -- Hark! 'twas the shriek of your better angel: he flies, and
leaves you for ever!

CHAP. III.
-- These are the villains
Whom all the travelers do fear so (...)
-- Some of them are gentlemen,
Such as the fury of ungoverned youth
Thrust from the company of awful men.
TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA.
THE marquis and Lorenzo proceeded to the hotel in silence. The former employed
himself in calling every circumstance to his mind, which related, might give
Lorenzo's the most favorable idea of his connection with Agnes. The latter,
justly alarmed for the honor of his family, felt embarrassed by the presence of
the marquis: the adventure which he had just witnessed forbade his treating him
as a friend; and Antonia's interest being entrusted to his mediation, he saw
the impolicy of treating him as a foe. He concluded from these reflections,
that profound silence would be the wisest plan, and waited with impatience for
Don Raymond's explanation.

They arrived at the hotel de las Cisternas. The marquis immediately conducted
him to his apartment, and began to express his satisfaction at finding him at
Madrid. Lorenzo interrupted him.

"Excuse me, my lord," said he with a distant air, "if I reply somewhat coldly
to your expressions of regard. A sister's honor is involved in this affair:
till that is established, and the purport of your correspondence with Agnes
cleared up, I cannot consider you as my friend. I am anxious to hear the
meaning of your conduct; and hope that you will not delay the promised
explanation."

"First give me your word, that you will listen with patience and indulgence."

"I love my sister too well to judge her harshly; and, till this moment, I
possessed no friend so dear to me as yourself. I will also confess, that your
having it in your power to oblige me in a business which I have much at heart,
makes me very anxious to find you still deserving my esteem."

"Lorenzo, you transport me No greater pleasure can be given me, than an
opportunity of serving the brother of Agnes."

"Convince me that I can accept your favors without dishonor, and there is no
man in the world to whom I am more willing to be obliged."

"Probably you have already heard your sister mention the name of Alphonso
d'Alvarada?"

"Never. Though I feel for Agnes an affection truly fraternal, circumstances
have prevented us from being much together. While yet a child, she was
consigned to the care of her aunt, who had married a German nobleman. At his
castle she remained till two years since, when she returned to Spain,
determined upon secluding herself from the world."

"Good God! Lorenzo, you knew of her intention, and yet strove not to make her
change it?"

"Marquis you wrong me: the intelligence, which I received at Naples, shocked
me extremely, and I hastened my return to Madrid for the express purpose of
preventing the sacrifice. The moment that I arrived, I flew to the convent of
St. Clare, in which Agnes had chosen to perform her noviciate. I requested to
see my sister. Conceive my surprise, when she sent me a refusal: she declared
positively that, apprehending my influence over her mind, she would not trust
herself in my society till the day before that on which she was to receive the
veil. I supplicated the nuns; I insisted upon seeing Agnes; and hesitated not
to avow my suspicions, that her being kept from me was against her own
inclinations. To free herself from the imputation of violence, the prioress
brought me a few lines, written in my sister's well known hand, repeating the
message already delivered. All future attempts to obtain a moment's
conversation with her, were as fruitless as the first. She was inflexible, and
I was not permitted to see her till the day preceding that on which she entered
the cloister, never to quit it more. This interview took place in the presence
of our principal relations. It was for the first time since her childhood that
I saw her, and the scene was most affecting: she threw herself upon my bosom,
kissed me, and wept bitterly. By every possible argument, by tears, by prayers,
by kneeling, I strove to make her abandon her intention. I represented to her
all the hardships of a religious life; I painted to her imagination all the
pleasures which she was going to quit; and besought her to disclose to me what
occasioned her disgust to the world. At this last question she turned pale, and
her tears flowed yet faster. She entreated me not to press her on that subject;
that it sufficed me to know that her resolution was taken, and that a convent
was the only place where she could now hope for tranquillity. She persevered in
her design, and made her profession. I visited her frequently at the grate; and
every moment that I passed with her made me feel more affliction at her loss. I
was shortly after obliged to quit Madrid; I returned but yesterday evening,
and, since then, have not had time to call at St. Clare's convent."

"Then, till I mentioned it, you never heard the name of Alphonso d'Alvarada?"

"Pardon me: my aunt wrote me word, that an adventurer so called had found
means to get introduced into the castle of Lindenberg; that he had insinuated
himself into my sister's good graces: and that she had even consented to elope
with him. However, before the plan could be executed, the cavalier discovered,
that the estates which he believed Agnes to possess in Hispaniola, in reality
belonged to me. This intelligence made him change his intention; he disappeared
on the day that the elopement was to have taken place; and Agnes, in despair at
his perfidy and meanness, had resolved upon seclusion in a convent. She added,
that as this adventurer had given himself out to be a friend of mine, she
wished to know whether I had any knowledge of him. I replied in the negative. I
had then very little idea, that Alphonso d'Alvarada and the marquis de las
Cisternas were one and the same person: the description given me of the first,
by no means tallied with what I knew of the latter."

"In (...) I easily recognize Donna Rodolpha's perfidious character. Every word
of this account, is stamped with marks of her malice, of her falsehood, of her
^alents for misrepresenting those whom she wishes to injure. Forgive me,
Medina, for speaking so freely of your relation. The mischief which she has
done me authorize^ my resentment; and when you have heard my story, you will be
convinced that my expressions have not been too severe."

He then began his narrative in the following manner: --

HISTORY OF DON RAYMOND, MARQUIS DE LAS CISTERNAS.
LONG experience, my dear Lorenzo, has convinced me how generous is your
nature: I waited not for your declaration of ignorance respecting your sister's
adventures, to suppose that they had been purposely concealed from you. Had
they reached your knowledge, from what misfortunes should both Agnes and myself
have escaped! Fate had ordained it otherwise. You were on your travels when I
first became acquainted wit^ ^^ur sister, and as our enemies took care to
conceal from her your direction, it was impossible for her to implore by letter
your pro^ection and advice.

On leaving Salamanca, at which university, as I have since heard, you remained
a year after I quitted it, I immediately set out upon my travels. My father
supplied me liberally with money; but he insisted upon my concealing my rank,
and presenting myself as no more than a private gentleman. This command was
issued by the counsels of his friend the duke of Villa Hermosa, a nobleman for
whose abilities and knowledge of the world I have ever entertained the most
profound veneration.

"Believe me," said he, "my dear Raymond, you will hereafter feel the benefits
of this temporary degradation. It Is true, that as the conde de las Cisternas
you would have been received with open arms, and your youthful vanity might
have felt gratified by the attentions showered upon you from all sides. At
present much will depend upon yourself; you have excellent recommendations, but
it must be your own business to make them of use to you: you must lay yourself
out to please: you must labor to gain the approbation of those to whom you are
pre^ented: they who would have courted the friendship of the conde de las
Cisternas will have no interest in finding out the merits, or bearing patiently
with the faults of Alphonso d'Alvarada: consequently, when you find yourself
really liked, you may safely ascribe it to your good qualities, not your rank;
and the distinction shown you will be infinitely more flattering. Besides, your
exalted birth would not permit your mixing with the lower cla^^es of society,
which will now be in your power, and from which, in my opinion, you will derive
considerable benefit. Do not confine yourself to the illustrious of those
countries through which you pass. Examine the manners and customs of the
multitude: enter into the cottages; and, by observing how the vassals of
foreigners are treated, learn to diminish the ^urthens, and augment the
comforts of your (...) to my ideas of those advantages which a (...) destined
to the possession of power and wealth may reap from travel, he should not
consider as the least essential, the opportunity of mixing with the classes
below him, and becoming an eye witness of the sufferings of people."

Forgive me, Lorenzo, if I seem tedious in my narration: the close connection
which now exists between us, makes me anxious that you should know every
particular respecting me; and in my fear of omitting the least circumstance
which may induce you to think favorably of your sister and myself, I may
possibly relate many which you may think uninteresting.

I followed the duke's advice: I was soon convinced of its wisdom. I quitted
Spain, calling myself by the assumed title of Don Alphonso d'Alvarada, and
attended by a single domestic of approved fidelity. Paris was my first station.
For some time I was enchanted with it, as indeed must be every man who is
young, rich, and fond of pleasure. Yet, among all its gaieties, I felt that
something was wanting to my heart: I grew sick of dissipation; I discovered
that the people among whom I lived, and whose exterior was so polished and
seducing, were at bottom frivolous, unfeeling, and insincere. I turned from the
inhabitants of Paris with disgust, and quitted that theater of luxury without
heaving one sigh of regret.

I now bent my course toward Germany, intending to visit most of the principal
courts. Prior to this expedition, I meant to make some little stay at
Strasbourg. On quitting my chaise at Luneville, to take some refreshment, I
observed a splendid equipage, attended by four domestics in rich liveries,
waiting at the door of the Silver Lion. Soon after, as I looked out of the
window, I saw a lady of noble presence, followed by two female attendants, step
into the carriage, which drove off immediately.

I inquired of the host who the lady was that had just departed.

"A German baroness, monsieur, of great rank and fortune; she has been upon a
visit to the duchess of Longueville, as her servants informed me. She is going
to Strasbourg, where she will find her husband, and then both return to their
castle in Germany."

I resumed my journey, intending to reach Strasbourg that night. My hopes,
however, were frustrated by the breaking down of my chaise: the accident
happened in the middle of a thick forest, and I was not a little embarrassed as
to the means of proceeding. It was the depth of winter: the night was already
closing round us; and Strasbourg, which was the nearest town, was still distant
from us several leagues. It seemed to me that my only alternative to passing
the night in the forest, was to take my servant's horse and ride on to
Strasbourg; an undertaking at that season very far from agreeable. However,
seeing no other resource, I was obliged to make up my mind to it; accordingly,
I communicated my design to the postillion, telling him that I would send
people to assist him as soon as I reached Strasbourg. I had not much confidence
in his honesty; but Stephano being well armed, and the driver, to all
appearance, considerably advanced in years, I believed I ran no risk of losing
my baggage.

Luckily, as I then thought, an opportunity presented itself of passing the
night more agreeably than I expected. On mentioning my design of proceeding by
myself to Strasbourg, the postillion shook his head in disapprobation.

"It is a long way," said he; "you will find it a difficult matter to arrive
there without a guide: besides, monsieur seems unaccustomed to the season's
^everity: and it is possible that, unable to sustain the excessive cold -- "

"What use is there to present me with all these objections?" said I,
impatiently interrupting him: "I have no other resource; I run still greater
risk of perishing with cold by passing the night in the forest!"

"Passing the night in the forest!" he replied. "Oh, by St. Denis! we are not
in quite so bad a plight as that comes to yet. If I am not mistaken, we are
scarcely five minutes walk from the cottage of my old friend Baptiste: he is a
wood-cutter, and a very honest fellow. I doubt not but he will shelter you for
the night with pleasure. In the mean time, I can take the saddle-horse, ride to
Strasbourg, and be back with proper people to mend your carriage by break of
day."

"And, in the name of God," said I, "how could you leave me so long in
suspense? Why did you not tell me of this cottage sooner? What excessive
stupidity!"

"I thought, that perhaps monsieur would not deign to accept -- "

"Absurd! Come, come; say no more, but conduct us without delay to the
woodman's cottage."

He obeyed, and we moved onwards: the horses contrived, with some difficulty,
to drag the shattered vehicle after us. My servant was become almost
speechless, and I began to feel the effects of the cold myself before we
reached the wished for cottage. It was a small but neat building: as we drew
near it I rejoiced at observing through the window the blaze of a comfortable
fire. Our conductor knocked at the door: it was some time before any one
answered; the people within seemed in doubt whether we should be admitted.

"Come, come, friend Baptiste!" cried the driver with impatience, "what are you
about? Are you asleep? Or will you refuse a night's lodging to a gentleman,
whose chaise has just broken down in the forest?"

"Ah! is it you, honest Claude?" replied a man's voice from within: "wait a
moment, and the door shall be opened."

Soon after the bolts were drawn back; the door was unclosed, and a man
presented himself to us with a lamp in his hand: he gave the guide an hearty
reception, and then addressed himself to me:

"Walk in, monsieur; walk in, and welcome. Excuse me for not admitting you at
first; but there are so many rogues about this place, that saving your
presence, I suspected you to be one."

Thus saying, he ushered me into the room where I had observed the fire. I was
immediately placed in an easy chair, which stood close to the hearth. A female,
whom I supposed to be the wife of my host, rose from her seat upon my entrance,
and received me with a slight and distant reverence. She made no answer to my
compliment, but, immediately reseating herself, continued the work on which she
had been employed. Her husband's manners were as friendly as hers were harsh
and repulsive.

"I wish I could lodge you more conveniently, monsieur," said he, "but we
cannot boast of much spare room in this hovel. However, a chamber for yourself
and another for your servant, I think, we can make shift to supply. You must
content yourself with sorry fare; but to what we have, believe me, you are
heartily welcome." -- Then turning to his wife -- "Why how you sit there,
Marguerite, with as much tranquillity as if you had nothing better to do! stir
about, dame! stir about! Get some supper; look out some sheets. Here, here!
throw some logs upon the fire for the gentleman seems perished with cold."

The wife threw her work hastily upon the table, and proceeded to execute his
commands with every mark of unwillingness. Her countenance had displeased me on
the first moment of my examining it: yet upon the whole, her features were
handsome unquestionably; but her skin was sallow, and her person thin and
meagre a lowering gloom overspread her countenance, and it bore such visible
marks of rancour and ill will, as could not escape being noticed by the most
inattentive observer; her every look and action expressed discontent and
impatience; and the answers which she gave Baptiste, when he reproached her
good-humouredly for her dissatisfied air, were tart, short, and cutting. In
fine, I conceived at first sight equal disgust for her, and prepossession in
favor of her husband, whose appearance was calculated to inspire esteem and
confidence. His countenance was open, sincere, and friendly; his manners had
all the peasant's honesty, unaccompanied by his rudeness: his cheeks were
broad, full and ruddy; and in the solidity of his person he seemed to offer an
ample apology for the leanness of his wife's. From the wrinkles on his brow, I
judged him to be turned of sixty; but he bore his years well, and seemed still
hearty and strong. The wife could not be more than thirty, but in spirits and
vivacity she was infinitely older than the husband.

However, in spite of her unwillingness, Marguerite began to prepare the
supper, while the woodman conversed gaily on different subjects. The
postillion, who had been furnished with a bottle of spirits, was now ready to
set out for Strasbourg, and inquired whether I had any further commands.

"For Strasbourg?" interrupted Baptiste; "you are not going thither tonight?"

"I beg your pardon: if I do not fetch workmen to mend the chaise, how is
monsieur to proceed tomorrow?"

"That is true, as you say, I had forgot the chaise. Well, but, Claude, you may
at least eat your supper here? That can make you lose very little time; and
monsieur looks too kind hearted to send you out with an empty stomach on such a
bitter cold night as this is."

To this I readily assented, telling the postillion that my reaching Strasbourg
the next day an hour or two later would be perfectly immaterial. He thanked me,
and then, leaving the cottage with Stephano, put up his horses in the woodman's
stable. Baptiste followed them to the door, and looked out with anxiety.

"'It Is a sharp, biting wind," said he: "I wonder what detains my boys so long!
Monsieur, I shall show you two of the finest la^^ that ever stepped in shoe of
leather: the eldest is three and twenty, the second a year younger: their
equals for sense, courage, and activity, are not to be found within fifty miles
of Strasbourg. Would they were back again! I begin to feel uneasy about them."

Marguerite was at this time employed in laying the cloth.

"And are you equally anxious for the return of your sons?" said I to her.

"Not I," she replied peevishly; "they are no children of mine."

"Come, come, Marguerite!" said the husband, "do not be out of humor with the
gentleman for asking a simple question: had you not looked so cross, he would
never have thought you old enough to have a son of three and twenty; but you
see how many years ill temper adds to you! -- Excuse my wife's rudeness,
monsieur; a little thing puts her out; and she is somewhat displeased at your
not thinking her under thirty. That is the truth, is it not, Marguerite? You
know, monsieur, that age is always a ticklish subject with a woman. Come, come,
Marguerite! clear up a little. If you have not sons as old, you will some
twenty years hence; and I hope that we shall live to see them just such lads as
Jacques and Robert."

Marguerite clasped her hands together passionately.

"God forbid!" said she, "God forbid! If I thought it, I would strangle them
with my own hands."

She quitted the room hastily, and went up stairs.

I could not help expressing to the woodman how much I pitied him for being
chained for life to a partner of such ill humor.

"Ah, Lord! monsieur, every one has his share of grievances, and Marguerite has
fallen to mine. Besides, after all, she is only cross, and not malicious: the
worst is, that her affection for two children by a former husband makes her
play the step mother with my two sons; she cannot bear the sight of them; and,
by her good will, they would never set a foot within my door. But on this point
I always stand firm, and never will consent to abandon the poor lads to the
world's mercy, as she has often solicited me to do. In every thing else I let
her have her own way; and truly she manages a family rarely, that I must say
for her."

We were conversing in this manner, when our discourse was interrupted by a
loud halloo, which rang through the forest.

"My sons, I hope!" exclaimed the woodman, and ran to open the door.

The halloo was repeated. We now distinguished the trampling of horses; and,
soon after, a carriage attended by several cavaliers stopped at the cottage
door. One of the horsemen inquired how far they were still from Strasbourg. As
he addressed himself to me, I answered in the number of miles which Claude had
told me; upon which a volley of curses was vented against the drivers for
having lost their way. The persons in the coach were now informed of the
distance of Strasbourg; and also that the horses were so fatigued as to be
incapable of proceeding further. A lady who appeared to be the principal,
expressed much chagrin at this intelligence; but as there was no remedy, one of
the attendants asked the woodman whether he could furnish them with lodging for
the night.

He seemed much embarrassed, and replied in the negative; adding, that a
Spanish gentleman and his servant were already in possession of the only spare
apartments in his house. On hearing this, the gallantry of my nation would not
permit me to retain those accommodations of which a female was in want. I
instantly signified to the woodman that I transferred my right to the lady: he
made some objections, but I overruled them, and hastening to the carriage,
opened the door, and assisted the lady to descend. I immediately recognized her
for the same person whom I had seen at the inn at Luneville. I took an
opportunity of asking one of her attendants what was her name?

"The baroness Lindenberg," was the answer.

I could not but remark how different a reception our host had given these new
comers and myself. His reluctance to admit them was visibly expressed on his
countenance; and he prevailed on himself with difficulty to tell the lady that
she was welcome. I conducted her into the house, and placed ^er in the arm
chair which I had just quitted. She thanked me very graciously, and made a
thousand apologies for putting me to an inconvenience. Suddenly the woodman's
countenance cleared up.

"A^ last I have arranged it!" said he, interrupting her excuses. "I can lodge
you and your suite, madam, and you will not be under the necessity of making
this gentleman suffer for his politeness. We have two spare chambers, one for
the lady, the other, monsieur, for you: my wife shall give up hers to the two
waiting women: as for the men servants, they must content themselves with
passing the night in and ge^b^rn, which stands at a few yards distance from the
house; there they shall have a blazing fire, and as good a supper as we can
make shift to give them."

After several expressions of gratitude on the lady's (...), and opposition on
mine to Marguerite's giving up her bed, this arrangement was agreed to. As the
room was small, the baroness immediately dismissed (...) male domestics.
Baptiste was on the point of conducting them to the barn which he had
mentioned, when two young men appeared at the door of the cottage.

"Hell and furies!" exclaimed the first, starting back, "Robert the house is
filled with strangers!"

"Ha! there are my sons!" cried our host. "Why, Jacques! Robert! whither are
you running boys? There is room enough still for you."

Upon this assurance the youths returned. The father presented them to the
baroness and myself; after which he withdrew with our domestics, while, at the
request of the two waiting women, Marguerite conducted them to the room
designed for their mistress.

The two new comers were tall, stout, well made young men, hard featured, and
very much sun burnt. They paid their compliments to us in few words, and
acknowledged Claude, who now entered the room, as an old acquaintance. They
then threw aside their cloaks in which they were wrapped up, took off a
leathern belt, to which a large cutlass was suspended, and each drawing a brace
of pistols from his girdle laid them upon a shelf.

"You travel well armed," said I.

"True, monsieur," replied Robert. "We left Strasbourg late this evening, and
it is necessary to take precautions at passing through this forest after dark;
it does not bear a good repute, I promise you."

"How?" said the baroness, "are there robbers hereabout?"

"So it is said, madame: for my own part, I have traveled through the wood at
all hours, and never met with one of them."

Here Marguerite returned. Her step sons drew her to the other end of the room,
and whispered her for some minutes. By the looks which they cast toward us at
intervals, I conjectured them to be inquiring our business in the cottage.

In the mean while, the baroness expressed her apprehensions that her husband
would be suffering much anxiety upon her account. She had intended to send on
one of her servants to inform the baron of her delay; but the account which the
young men gave of the forest rendered this plan impracticable. Claude relieved
her from her embarrassment: he informed her, that he was under the necessity of
reaching Strasbourg that night; and that, would she trust him with a letter,
she might depend upon its being safely delivered.

"And how comes it," said I, "that you are under no apprehension of meeting
these robbers?"

"Alas! monsieur, a poor man with a large family must not lose certain profit
because it is attended with a little danger; and perhaps my lord the baron may
give me a trifle for my pains; besides, I have nothing to lose except my life,
and that will not be worth the robbers taking."

I thought his arguments bad, and advised his waiting till the morning; but, as
the baroness did not second me, I was obliged to give up the point. The
baroness Lindenberg, as I found afterward, had long been accustomed to
sacrifice the interests of others to her own, and her wish to send Claude to
Strasbourg blinded her to the danger of the undertaking. Accordingly, it was
resolved that he should set out without delay. The baroness wrote her letter to
her husband; and I sent a few lines to my banker, apprising him that I should
not be at Strasbourg till the next day. Claude took our letters, and left the
cottage.

The lady declared herself much fatigued by her journey: besides having come
from some distance, the drivers had contrived to lose their way in the forest.
She now addressed herself to Marguerite, desiring to be shown to her chamber,
and permitted to take half an hour's repose. One of the waiting women was
immediately summoned; she appeared with a light, and the baroness followed her
up stairs. The cloth was spreading in the chamber where I was, and Marguerite
soon gave me to understand that I was in her way. Her hints were too broad to
be easily mistaken; I therefore desired one of the young men to conduct me to
the chamber where I was to sleep, and where I could remain till supper was
ready.

"Which chamber is it, mother?" said Robert.

"The one with green hangings," she replied. "I have just been at the trouble
of getting it ready, and have put fresh sheets upon the bed: if the gentleman
chooses to lollop and lounge upon it, he may make it again himself, for me."

"You are out of humor, mother; but that is no novelty. Have the goodness to
follow me, monsieur."

He opened the door, and advanced toward a narrow staircase.

"You have got no light," said Marguerite; "is it your own neck, or the
gentleman's that you have a mind to break?"

She crossed by me, and put a candle into Robert's hand; having received which,
he began to ascend the staircase. Jacques was employed in laying the cloth, and
his back was turned toward me. Marguerite seized the moment when we were
unobserved: she caught my hand, and pressed it strongly.

"Look at the sheets!" said she as she passed me, and immediately resumed her
former occupation.

Startled by the abruptness of her action, I remained as if petrified. Robert's
voice desiring me to follow him recalled me to myself. I ascended the
staircaise. My conductor ushered me into a chamber where an excellent wood fire
was blazing upon the hearth. He placed the light upon the table, inquired
whether I had any further commands, and, on my replying in the negative, left
me to myself. You may be certain, that the moment when I found myself alone was
that on which I complied with Marguerite's injunction. I took the candle
hastily, approached the bed, and turned down the coverture. What was my
astonishment, my horror, at finding the sheets crimsoned with blood!

At that moment a thousand confused ideas passed before my imagination. The
robbers who infested the wood, Marguerite's exclamation respecting her
children, the arms and appearance of the two young men, and the various
anecdotes which I had heard related respecting the secret correspondence which
frequently exists between banditti and postillions; all these circumstances
flashed upon my mind, and inspired me with doubt and apprehension. I ruminated
on the most probable means of ascertaining the truth of my conjectures.
Suddenly I was aware of some one below, pacing hastily backwards and forwards.
Every thing now appeared to me an object of suspicion. With precaution I drew
near the window, which, as the room had been long shut up, was left open in
spite of the cold. I ventured to look out. The beams of the moon permitted me
to distinguish a man, whom I had no difficulty to recognize for my host. I
watched his movements. He walked swiftly, then stopped and seemed to listen: he
stamped upon the ground, and beat his stomach with his arms, as if to guard
himself from the inclemency of the season: at the least noise, if a voice was
heard in the lower part of the house, if a bat flitted past him, or the wind
rattled amidst the leafless boughs, he started, and looked round with anxiety.

"Plague take him!" said he at length with extreme impatience; "what can he be
about?"

He spoke in a low voice; but as he was just below my window, I had no
difficulty to distinguish his words.

I now heard the steps of one approaching. Baptiste went toward the sound; he
joined a man, whom his low stature and the horn suspended from his neck
declared to be no other than my faithful Claude, whom I had supposed to be
already on his way to Strasbourg. Expecting their discourse to throw some light
upon my situation, I hastened to put myself in a condition to hear it with
safety. For this purpose I extinguished the candle, which stood upon a table
near the bed: the flame of the fire was not strong enough to betray me, and I
immediately resumed my place at the window.

The objects of my curiosity had stationed themselves directly under it. I
suppose that, during my momentary absence, the woodman had been blaming Claude
for tardiness, since when I returned to the window the latter was endeavoring
to excuse his fault.

"However," added he, "my diligence at present shall make up for my past delay."

"On that condition," answered Baptiste, "I shall readily forgive you: but in
truth, as you share equally with us in our prizes, your own interest will make
you use all possible diligence. 'Twould be a shame to let such a noble booty
escape us. You say that this Spaniard is rich?"

"His servant boasted at the inn, that the effects in his chaise were worth
above two thousand pistoles."

Oh! how I cursed Stephano's imprudent vanity!

"And I have been told," continued the postillion, "that this baroness carries
about her a casket of jewels of immense value."

"May be so, but I had rather she had stayed away. The Spaniard was a secure
prey; the boys and myself could easily have mastered him and his servant, and
then the two thousand pistoles would have been shared between us four. Now we
must let in the band for a share, and perhaps the whole covey may escape us.
Should our friends have betaken themselves to their different posts before you
reach the cavern, all will be lost. The lady's attendants are too numerous for
us to overpower them. Unless our associates arrive in time, we must needs let
these travelers set out tomorrow without damage or hurt.

"'It Is plaguey unlucky that my comrades who drove the coach should be those
unacquainted with our confederacy! But never fear, friend Baptiste: an hour
will bring me to the cavern; it is now but ten o'clock, and by twelve you may
expect the arrival of the band. By the bye, take care of your wife; you know
how strong is her repugnance to our mode of life, and she may find means to
give information to the lady's servants of our design."

"Oh! I am secure of her silence; she is too much afraid of me, and fond of her
children, to dare to betray my secret. Besides, Jacques and Robert keep a
strict eye over her, and she is not permitted to set a foot out of the cottage.
The servants are safely lodged in the barn. I shall endeavor to keep all quiet
till the arrival of our friends. Were I assured of your finding them, the
strangers should be dispatched this instant; but as it is possible for you to
miss the banditti, I am fearful of being summoned by their domestics to produce
them in the morning."

"And suppose either of the travelers should discover your design?"

"Then we must poignard those in our power, and take our chance about mastering
the rest. However, to avoid running such a risk, hasten to the cavern; the
banditti never leave it before eleven, and if you use diligence you may reach
it in time to stop them."

"Tell Robert that I have taken his horse; my own has broken his bridle, and
escaped into the wood. What is the watch word?"

"The reward of courage."

"'It Is sufficient. I hasten to the cavern."

"And I to rejoin my guests, lest my absence should create suspicion. Farewell,
and be diligent."

These worthy associates now separated; the one bent his course toward the
stable, while the other returned to the house.

You may judge what must have been my feelings during this conversation, of
which I lost not a single syllable. I dared not trust myself to my reflections,
nor did any means present itself to escape the dangers which threatened me.
Resistance I knew to be vain; I was unarmed, and a single man against three.
However, I resolved at least to sell my life as dearly as I could. Dreading
lest Baptiste should perceive my absence, and suspect me to have overheard the
message with which Claude was dispatched, I hastily relighted my candle and
quitted the chamber. On descending, I found the table spread for six persons.
The baroness sat by the fire sid^; Marguerite was employed in dressing a
sallad, and her step sons were whispering together at the further end of the
room. Baptiste, having the round of the garden to make ere he could reach the
cottage door, was not yet arrived. I seated myself quietly opposite to the
baroness.

A glance upon Marguerite told her that her hint had not been thrown away upon
me. How different did she now appear to me! What before seemed gloom and
sullenness, I now found to be disgust at her associates and compassion for my
danger. I looked up to her as to my only resource; yet knowing her to be
watched by her husband with a suspicious eye, I could place but little reliance
on the exertions of her good will.

In spite of all my endeavors to conceal it, my agitation was but too visibly
expressed upon my countenance. I was pale, and both my words and actions were
disordered and embarrassed. The young men observed this, and inquired the
cause. I attributed it to excess of fatigue, and the violent effect produced on
me by the severity of the season. Whether they believed me or not, I will not
pretend to say; they at least ceased to embarrass me with their questions. I
strove to divert my attention from the perils which surrounded me, by
conversing on different subjects with the baroness. I talked of Germany,
declaring my intention of visiting it immediately: God knows that I little
thought at that moment of ever seeing it! She replied to me with great ease and
politeness, professed that the pleasure of making my acquaintance amply
compensated for the delay in her journey, and gave me a pressing invitation to
make some stay at the castle of Lindenberg. As she spoke thus, the youths
exchanged a malicious smile, which declared that she would be fortunate if she
ever reached that castle herself. This action did not escape me; but I
concealed the emotion which it excited in my breast. I continued to converse
with the lady; but my discourse was so frequently incoherent that, as she has
since informed me, she began to doubt whether I was in my right senses. The
fact was, that while my conversation turned upon one subject, my thoughts were
entirely occupied by another. I meditated upon the means of quitting the
cottage, finding my way to the barn, and giving the domestics information of
our host's designs. I was soon convinced how impracticable was the attempt.
Jacques and Robert watched my every movement with an attentive eye, and I was
obliged to abandon the idea. All my hopes now rested upon Claude's not finding
the banditti. In that case, according to what I had overheard, we should be
permitted to depart unhurt.

I shuddered involuntarily as Baptiste entered the room. He made many apologies
for his long absence, "but he had been detained by affairs impossible to be
delayed." He then entreated permission for his family to sup at the same table
with us, without which, respect would not authorize his taking such a liberty.
Oh! how in my heart I cursed the hypocrite! how I loathed his presence, who was
on the point of depriving me of an existence, at that time infinitely dear! I
had every reason to be satisfied with life; I had youth, wealth, rank, and
education, and the fairest prospects presented themselves before me. I saw
those prospects on the point of closing in the most horrible manner: yet was I
obliged to dissimulate, and to receive with a (...) blance of gratitude the
false civilities of him who held the dagger to my bosom.

The permission which our host demanded was easily obtained. We seated
ourselves at table. The baroness and myself occupied one side; the sons were
opposite to us, with their backs to the door. Baptiste took his seat by the
baroness, at the upper end; and the place next to him was left for his wife.
She soon entered the room, and placed before us a plain but comfortable
peasant's repast. Our host thought it necessary to apologize for the poorness
of the supper: "he had not been apprized of our coming; he could only offer us
such fare as had been intended for his own family."

"But," added he, "should any accident detain my noble guests longer than they
at present intend, I hope to give them better treatment."

The villain! I well knew the accident to which he alluded. I shuddered at the
treatment which he taught us to expect.

My companion in danger seemed entirely to have got rid of her chagrin at being
delayed. She laughed, and conversed with the family with infinite gaiety. I
strove, but in vain, to follow her example. My spirits were evidently forced,
and the constraint which I put upon myself escaped not Baptiste's observation.

"Come, come, monsieur, cheer up!" said he, "you seem not quite recovered from
your fatigue. To raise your spirits, what say you to a glass of excellent old
wine which was left me by my father? God rest his soul, he is in a better
world! I seldom produce this wine; but as I am not honored with such guests
every day, this is an occasion which deserves a bottle."

He then gave his wife a key, and instructed her where to find the wine of
which he spoke. She seemed by no means pleased with the commission; she took
the key with an embarrassed air, and hesitated to quit the table.

"Did you hear me?" said Baptiste, in an angry tone.

Marguerite darted upon him a look of mingled anger and fear, and left the
chamber. His eyes followed her suspiciously till she had closed the door.

She soon returned with a bottle sealed with yellow wax. She placed it upon the
table, and gave the key back to her husband. I suspected that this liquor was
not presented to us without design, and I watched Marguerite's movements with
inquietude. She was employed in rinsing some small horn goblets. As she placed
them before Baptiste, she saw that my eye was fixed upon her; and at the moment
when she thought herself unobserved by the banditti, she motioned to me with
her head not to taste the liquor. She then resumed her place.

In he mean while our host had drawn the cork, and filling two of the goblets
offered them to the lady and myself. She at first made some objections; but the
instances of Baptiste were so urgent, that she was obliged to comply. Fearing
to excite suspicion, I hesitated not to take the goblet presented to me. By its
smell and color, I guessed it to be champaign; but some grains of powder
floating upon the top convinced me that it was not unadulterated. However, I
dared not express my repugnance to drinking it; I lifted it to my lips, and
seemed to be swallowing it: suddenly starting from my chair, I made the best of
my way toward a vase of water at some distance, in which Marguerite had been
rinsing the goblets. I pretended to spit out the wine with disgust, and took an
opportunity, unperceived, of emptying the liquor into the vase.

The banditti seemed alarmed at my action. Jacques half rose from his chair,
put his hand into his bosom, and I discovered the haft of a dagger. I returned
to my seat with tranquillity, and affected not to have observed their confusion.

"You have not suited my taste, honest friend," said I, addressing myself to
Baptiste: "I never can drink champaign without its producing a violent illness.
I swallowed a few mouthfuls ere I was aware of its quality, and fear that I
shall suffer for my imprudence."

Baptiste and Jacques exchanged looks of distrust.

"Perhaps," said Robert, "the smell may be disagreeable to you?"

He quitted his chair and removed the goblet. I observed that he examined
whether it was nearly empty.

"He must have drank sufficient," said he to his brother in a low voice, while
he reseated himself.

Marguerite looked apprehensive that I had tasted the liquor. A glance from my
eye reassured her.

I waited with anxiety for the effects which the beverage would produce upon
the lady. I doubted not but the grains which I had observed were poisonous, and
lamented that it had been impossible for me to warn her of the danger. But a
few minutes had elapsed, before I perceived her eyes grow heavy: her head sunk
upon her shoulder, and she fell into a deep sleep. I affected not to attend to
this circumstance, and continued my conversation with Baptiste, with all the
outward gaiety in my power to assume. But he no longer answered me without
constraint. He eyed me with distrust and astonishment, and I saw that the
banditti were frequently whispering among themselves. My situation became every
moment more painful: I sustained the character of confidence with a worse grace
than ever. Equally afraid of the arrival of their accomplices, and of their
suspecting my knowledge of their designs, I knew not how to dissipate the
distrust which the banditti evidently entertained for me. In this new dilemma
the friendly Marguerite again assisted me. She passed behind the chairs of her
step sons, stopped for a moment opposite to me, closed her eyes, and reclined
her head upon her shoulder. This hint immediately dispelled my incertitude. It
told me, that I ought to imitate the baroness, and pretend that the liquor had
taken its full effect upon me. I did so, and in a few minutes seemed perfectly
overcome with slumber.

"So!" cried Baptiste, as I fell back in my chair, "at last he sleeps! I began
to think that he had scented our design, and that we should have been forced to
dispatch him at all events."

"And why not dispatch him at all events?" inquired the ferocious Jacques, "why
leave him the possibility of betraying our secret? Marguerite give me one of my
pistols: a single touch of the trigger will finish him at once."

"And supposing," rejoined the father, "supposing that our friends should not
arrive tonight, a pretty figure we should make when the servants inquire for
him in the morning! No, no, Jacques; we must wait for our associates. If they
join us, we are strong enough to dispatch the domestic as well as their
masters, and the booty is our own. If Claude does not find the troop, we must
take patience, and suffer the prey to slip through our fingers. Ah! boys, boys,
had you arrived but five minutes sooner, the Spaniard would have been done for,
and two thousand pistoles our own. But you are always out of the way when you
are most wanted. You are the most unlucky rogues -- "

"Well, well, father!" answered Jacques; "had you been of my mind, all would
have been over by this time. You, Robert, Claude, and myself -- why the
strangers were but double the number, and I warrant you we might have mastered
them. However, Claude is gone; it is too late to think of it now. We must wait
patiently for the arrival of the gang; and, if the travelers escape us
tonight, we must take care to waylay them tomorrow."

"True! true!" said Baptiste, "Marguerite, have you given the sleeping draught
to the waiting women?"

She replied in the affirmative.

"All then is safe. Come, come, boys; whatever falls out, we have no reason to
complain of this adventure. We run no danger, may gain much, and can lose
nothing."

At this moment I heard a trampling of horses. Oh! how dreadful was the sound
to my ears! A cold sweat flowed down my forehead, and I felt all the terrors of
impending death. I was by no means reassured by hearing the compassionate
Marguerite exclaim, in the accents of despair, "Almighty God! they are lost."

Luckily the woodman and his sons were too much occupied by the arrival of
their associates to attend to me, or the violence of my agitation would have
convinced them my sleep was feigned.

"Open! open!" exclaimed several voices on the outside of the cottage.

"Yes! yes!" cried Baptiste joyfully; "they are our friends, sure enough. Now
then our booty is certain. Away! lads, away! Lead them to the barn; you know
what is to be done there."

Robert hastened to open the door of the cottage.

"But first," said Jacques, taking up his arms, first let me dispatch these
sleepers."

"No, no, no!" replied his father: "Go you to the barn, where your presence is
wanted. Leave me to take care of these and the women above."

Jacques obeyed, and followed his brother. They seemed to converse with the new
comers for a few minutes; after which I heard the robbers dismount, and, as I
conjectured, bend their course toward the barn.

"So! that is wisely done!" muttered Baptiste; "they have quitted their horses,
that they may fall upon the strangers by surprise. Good! good! and now to
business."

I heard him approach a small cupboard which was fixed up in a distant part of
the room, and unlock it. At this moment I felt myself shaken gently.

"Now! now!" whispered Marguerite. I opened my eyes. Baptiste stood with his
back toward me. No one else was in the room save Marguerite and the sleeping
lady. The villain had taken a dagger from the cupboard, and seemed examining
whether it was sufficiently sharp. I had neglected to furnish myself with arms;
but I perceived this to be my only chance of escaping, and resolved not to lose
the opportunity. I sprang from my seat, darted suddenly upon Baptiste, and,
clasping my hands round his throat, pressed it so forcibly as to prevent his
uttering a single cry. You may remember that I was remarkable at Salamanca for
the power of my arm. It now rendered me an essential service. Surprised,
terrified, and breathless, the villain was by no means an equal antagonist. I
threw him upon the ground; I grasped him still tighter; I fixed him without
motion upon the floor, Marguerite, wresting the dagger from his hand, plunged
it repeatedly in his heart till he expired.

No sooner was this horrible but necessary act perpetrated, than Marguerite
called on me to follow her.

"Flight is our only refuge," said she; "quick! quick! away!"

I hesitated not to obey her; but unwilling to leave the baroness a victim to
the vengeance of the robbers, I raised her in my arms still sleeping, and
hastened after Marguerite. The horses of the banditti were fastened near the
door. My conductress sprang upon one of them. I followed her example, placed
the baroness before me, and spurred on my horse. Our only hope was to reach
Strasbourg, which was much nearer than the perfidious Claude had assured me.
Marguerite was well acquainted with the road, and gallopped on before me. We
were obliged to pass by the barn, where the robbers were slaughtering our
domestics. The door was open: we distinguished the shrieks of the dying, and
imprecations of the murderers. What I felt at that moment language is unable to
describe.

Jacques heard the trampling of our horses, as we rushed by the barn. He flew
to the door with a burning torch in his hand, and easily recognized the
fugitives.

"Betrayed! betrayed!" he shouted to his companions.

Instantly they left their bloody work, and hastened to regain their horses. We
heard no more. I buried my spurs in the sides of my courser, and Marguerite
goaded on hers with the poignard which had already rendered us such good
service. We flew like lightning, and gained the open plains. Already was
Strasbourg's steeple in sight, when we heard the robbers pursuing us.
Marguerite looked back, and distinguished our followers descending a small hill
at no great distance. It was in vain that we urged on our horses, the noise
approached nearer with every moment.

"We are lost!" she exclaimed; "the villains gain upon us!"

"On, on!" replied I; "I hear the trampling of horses coming from the town."

We redoubled our exertions, and were soon aware of a numerous band of
cavaliers, who came toward us at full speed. They were on the point of passing
us.

"Stay! stay! shrieked Marguerite; "save us! for God's sake, save us!"

The foremost, who seemed to act as guide, immediately reined in his steed.

"'It Is she! it is she!" exclaimed he, springing upon the ground: "stop, my lord,
stop! they are safe! it is my mother!"

At the same moment Marguerite threw herself from her horse, clasped him in her
arms, and covered him with kisses. The other cavaliers stopped at the
exclamation.

"The baroness Lindenberg?" cried another of the strangers eagerly: "Where is
she? Is she not with you?"

He stopped on beholding her lying senseless in my arms. Hastily he caught her
from me. The profound sleep in which she was plunged, made him at first tremble
for her life; but the beating of her heart soon reassured him.

"God be thanked!" said he, "she has escaped unhurt."

I interrupted his joy by pointing out the brigands, who continued to approach.
No sooner had I mentioned them, than the greatest part of the company, which
appeared to be chiefly composed of soldiers, hastened forward to meet them. The
villains staid not to receive their attack. Perceiving their danger, they
turned the heads of their horses, and fled into the wood, whither they were
followed by our preservers. In the mean while the stranger, whom I guessed to
be the baron Lindenberg^ after thanking me for my care of his lady, proposed
our returnin^ with all speed to the town. The baroness, on who^ he effects of
the opiate had not ceased to operate, was placed before him; Marguerite and her
son remounted their horses; the baron's domestics followed, and we soon arrived
at the inn where he had taken his apartments.

This was at the Austrian Eagle, where my banker, whom before my quitting Paris
I had apprized of my intention to visit Strasbourg, had prepared lodgings for
me. I rejoiced at this circumstance. It gave me an opportunity of cultivating
the baron's acquaintance, which I foresaw would be of use to me in Germany.
Immediately upon our arrival, the lady was conveyed to bed. A physician was
sent for, who prescribed a medicine likely to counteract the effects of the
sleepy potion; and after it had been poured down her throat, she was committed
to the care of the hostess. The baron then addressed himself to me, and
entreated me to recount the particulars of this adventure. I complied with his
request instantaneously; for, in pain respecting Stephano's fate, whom I had
been compelled to abandon to the cruelty of the banditti, I found it impossible
for me to repose till I had some news of him. I received but too soon the
intelligence that my trusty servant had perished. The soldiers who had pursued
the brigands, returned while I was employed in relating my adventure to the
baron. By their account, I found that the robbers had been overtaken. Guilt and
true courage are incompatible: they had thrown themselves at the fe^t of their
pursuers, had surrendered themselves without striking a blow, had discovered
their secret retreat, made known their signals by which the rest of the gang
might be seized, and, in short, had betrayed every mark of cowardice and
baseness. By this means the whole of the band, consisting of near sixty
persons, had been made prisoners, bound, and conducted to Strasbourg. Some of
the soldiers hastened to the cottage, one of the banditti serving them as
guide. Their first visit was to the fatal barn, where they were fortunate
enough to find two of the baron's servants still alive, though desperately
wounded. The rest had expired beneath the swords of the robbers, and of these
my unhappy Stephano was one.

Alarmed at our escape, the robbers, in their haste to overtake us, had
neglected to visit the cottage; in consequence, the soldiers found (...) ^wo
waiting women unhurt, and buried in the (...) death like slumber which had
overpowered their mistress. There was nobody else found in the cottage, except
a child not above four years old, which the soldiers brought away with them. We
were busying ourselves with conjectures respecting the birth of this little
unfortunate, when Marguerite rushed into the room with the baby in her arms.
She fell at the feet of the officer who was making us this report, and blessed
him a thousand times for the preservation of her child.

When the first burst of maternal tenderness was over, I besought her to
declare by what means she had been united to a man whose principles seemed so
totally discordant with her own. She bent her eyes downwards, and wiped a ^ew
tears from her cheek.

"Gentlemen 'said she, after a silence of some minutes, "I would request a
favor of you. You have a right to know on whom you confer an obligation; I
will not, therefore, stifle a confession which covers me with shame; but permit
me to comprise it in as few words as possible.

"I was born in Strasbourg, of respectable parents; their names I must at
present conceal. My father still lives, and deserves not to be involved in my
infamy. If you grant my request, you shall be informed of my family name. A
villain made himself master of my affections, and to follow him I quitted my
father's house. Yet, though my passions overpowered my virtue, I sunk not into
that degeneracy of vice but too commonly the lot of women who make the first
false step. I loved my seducer, dearly loved him! I was true to his bed: this
baby, and the youth who warned you, my lord baron, of your lady's danger, are
the pledges of our affection. Even at this moment I lament his loss, though
it is to him that I owe all the miseries of my existence.

"He was of noble birth, but he had squandered away his paternal inheritance.
His relations considered him as a disgrace to their name, and utterly discarded
him. His excesses drew upon him the indignation of the police. He was obliged
to fly from Strasbourg; and saw no other resource from beggary than an union
with the banditti who infested the neighboring forest, and whose troop was
chiefly composed of young men of family in the same predicament with himself. I
was determined not to forsake him. I followed him to the cavern of the
brigands, and shared with him the misery inseparable from a life of pillage.
But though I was aware that our existence was supported by plunder, I knew not
all the horrible circumstances attached to my lover's profession: these he
concealed from me with the utmost care. He was conscious that my sentiments
were not sufficiently depraved to look without horror upon assassination. He
supposed, and with justice, that I should fly with detestation from the
embraces of a murderer. Eight years of possession had not abated his love for
me: and he cautiously removed from my knowledge every circumstance which might
lead me to suspect the crimes in which he but too often participated. He
succeeded perfectly. It was not till after my seducer's death that I discovered
his hands to have been stained with the blood of innocence.

"One fatal night he was brought back to the cavern, covered with wounds: he
received them in attacking an English traveller, whom his companions
immediately sacrificed to their resentment. He had only time to entreat my
pardon for all the sorrows which he had caused me: he pressed my hand to his
lips, and expired. My grief was inexpressible. As soon as its violence abated,
I resolved to return to Strasbourg, to throw myself, with my two children, at
my father's feet, and implore his forgiveness, though I little hoped to obtain
it. What was my consternation when informed, that no one entrusted with the
secret of their retreat was ever permitted to quit the troop of the banditti;
that I must give up all hopes of ever rejoining society, and consent instantly
to accept one of their band for my husband! My prayers and remonstrances were
vain. They cast lots to decide to whose possession I should fall. I became the
property of the infamous Baptiste. A robber, who had once been a monk,
pronounced over us a burlesque rather than a religious ceremony: I and my
children were delivered into the hands of my new husband, and he conveyed us
immediately to his home.

"He assured me that he had long entertained for me the most ardent regard; but
that friendship for my deceased lover had obliged him to stifle his desires. He
endeavored to reconcile me to my fate, and for some time treated me with
respect and gentleness. At length, finding that my aversion rather increased
than diminished, he obtained those favors by violence which I persisted to
refuse him. No resource remained for me but to bear my sorrows with patience: I
was conscious that I deserved them but too well. Flight was forbidden. My
children were in the power of Baptiste; and he had sworn, that if I attempted
to escape, their lives should pay for it. I had had too many opportunities of
witnessing the barbarity of his nature, to doubt his fulfilling his oath to the
very letter. Sad experience had convinced me of the horrors of my situation. My
first lover had carefully concealed them from me; Baptiste rather rejoiced in
opening my eyes to the cruelties of his profession, and strove to familiarize
me with blood and slaughter.

"My nature was licentious and warm, but not cruel: my conduct had been
imprudent, but my heart was not unprincipled. Judge, then, what I must have
(...) at being a continual witness of crimes the most horrible and revolting!
Judge how I must have grieved at being united to a man, who received the
unsuspecting guest with an air of openness and hospitality, at the very moment
that he meditated his destruction! Chagrin and discontent preyed upon my
constitution; the few charms bestowed on me by nature withered away, and the
dejection of my countenance denoted the sufferings of my heart. I was tempted a
thousand times to put an end to my existence; but the remembrance of my
children held my hand. I trembled to leave my dear boys in my tyrant's power,
and trembled yet more for their virtue than their lives. The second was still
too young to benefit by my instructions; but in the heart of my eldest I
labored unceasingly to plant those principles which might enable him to avoid
the crimes of his parents. He listened to me with docility, or rather with
eagerness. Even at is early age, he showed that he was not calculated for the
society of villains; and the only comfort which I enjoyed among my sorrows, was
to witness the dawning virtues of my Theodore.

"Such was my situation when the perfidy of Don Alphonso's postillion conducted
him to the cottage. His youth, air, and manners interested me most forcibly in
his behalf. The absence of my husband's sons gave me an opportunity which I had
long wished to find, and I resolved to risk every thing to preserve the
stranger. The vigilance of Baptiste prevented me from warning Don Alphonso of
his danger. I knew that my betraying the secret would be immediately punished
with death; and however embittered was my life by calamities, I wanted courage
to sacrifice it for the sake of preserving that of another person. My only hope
rested upon procuring succor from Strasbourg. At this I resolved to try; and
should an opportunity offer of warning Don Alphonso of his danger unobserved, I
was determined to seize it with avidity. By Baptiste's orders I went up stairs
to make the stranger's bed: I spread upon it sheets in which a traveller had
been murdered but a few nights before, and which still were stained with blood.
I hoped that these marks would not escape the vigilance of our guest, and that
he would collect from them the designs of my perfidious husband. Neither was
this the only step which I took to preserve the stranger. Theodore was confined
to his bed by illness. I stole into his room unobserved by my tyrant,
communicated to him my project, and he entered into it with eagerness. He rose
in spite of his malady, and dressed himself with all speed. I fastened one of
the sheets round his arms, and lowered him from the window. He flew to the
stable, took Claude's horse, and hastened to Strasbourg. Had he been accosted
by the banditti, he was to have declared himself sent upon a message by
Baptiste; but fortunately he reached the town without meeting any obstacle.
Immediately upon his arrival at Strasbourg, he entreated assistance from the
magistrate: his story passed from mouth to mouth, and at length came to the
knowledge of my lord the baron. Anxious for the safety of his lady, who he knew
would be upon the road that evening, it struck him that she might have fallen
into the power of the robbers. He accompanied Theodore, who guided the soldiers
toward the cottage, and arrived just in time to save us from falling once more
into the hands of our enemies."

Here I interrupted Marguerite to inquire why the sleepy potion had been
presented to me. She said that Baptiste supposed me to have arms about me, and
wished to incapacitate me from making resistance: it was a precaution which he
always took, since, as the travelers had no hopes of escaping, despair would
have incited them to sell their lives dearly.

The Baron then desired Marguerite to inform him what were her present plans. I
joined him in declaring my readiness to show my gratitude to her for the
preservation of my life.

"Disgusted with the world," she replied, "in which I have met nothing but
misfortunes, my only wish is to retire into a convent. But first I must provide
for my children. I find that my mother is no more -- probably driven to an
untimely grave by my desertion. My father is still living. He is not an hard
man. Perhaps, gentlemen, in spite of my ingratitude and imprudence, your
intercessions may induce him to forgive me, and to take charge of his
unfortunate grand-sons. If you obtain this boon for me, you will repay my
services a thousand fold."

Both the baron and myself assured Marguerite, that we would spare no pains to
obtain her pardon; and that, even should her father be inflexible, she need be
under no apprehensions respecting the fate of her children. I engaged myself to
provide for Theodore, and the baron promised to take the youngest under his
protection. The grateful mother thanked us with tears for what she called
generosity, but which in fact was no more than a proper sense of our
obligations to her. She then left the room to put her little boy to bed, whom
fatigue and sleep had completely overpowered.

The baroness, on recovering, and being informed from what dangers I had
rescued her, set no bounds to the expressions of her gratitude. She was joined
so warmly by her husband in pressing me to accompany them to their castle in
Bavaria, that I found it impossible to resist their entreaties. During a week
which we passed at Strasbourg, the interests of Marguerite were not forgotten.
In our application to her father we succeeded as amply as we could wish. The
good old man had lost his wife. He had no children but this unfortunate
daughter, of whom he had received no news for almost fourteen years. He was
surrounded by distant relations, who waited with impatience for his decease, in
order to get possession of his money. When therefore Marguerite appeared again
so unexpectedly, he considered her as a gift from Heaven. He received her and
her children with open arms, and insisted upon their establishing themselves in
his house without delay. The disappointed cousins were obliged to give place.
The old man would not hear of his daughter's retiring into a convent. He said,
that she was too necessary to his happiness, and she was easily persuaded to
relinquish her designs. But no persuasions could induce Theodore to give up the
plan which I had at first marked out for him. He had attached himself to me
most sincerely during my stay at Strasbourg; and when I was on the point of
leaving it, he besought me with tears to take him into my service. He set forth
all his little talents in the most favorable colors, and tried to convince me
that I should find him of infinite use to me upon the road. I was unwilling to
charge myself with a lad scarcely turned of thirteen, who I knew could only be
a burden to me: however, I could not resist the entreaties of this
affectionate youth, who in fact possessed a thousand estimable qualities. With
some difficulty he persuaded his relations to let him follow me; and that
permission once obtained, he was dubbed with the title of my page. Having
passed a week at Strasbourg, Theodore and myself set out for Bavaria, in
company with the baron and his lady. These latter, as well as myself, had
forced Marguerite to accept several presents of value, both for herself and her
youngest son. On leaving her, I promised his mother faithfully, that I would
restore Theodore to her within the year.

I have related this adventure at length, Lorenzo, that you might understand
the means by which "the adventurer Alphonso d'Alvarada got introduced into the
castle of Lindenberg." Judge from this specimen, how much faith should be given
to your aunt's assertions.

CHAP. IV.
Avaunt! and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee!
Thy bones are marrowless; thy blood is cold;
Thou have no speculation in those eyes
Which thou do glare with! Hence, horrible shadow!
Unreal mockery, hence!
MACBETH.
CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF DON RAYMOND.
MY journey was uncommonly agreeable. I found the baron a man of some sense,
but little knowledge of the world. He had passed a great part of his life
without stirring beyond the precincts of his own domains, and consequently his
manners were far from being the most polished; but he was hearty, good
humoured, and friendly. His attention to me was all that I could wish, and I
had every reason to be satisfied with his behavior. His ruling passion was
hunting, which he had brought himself to consider as a serious occupation; and,
when talking over some remarkable chase, he treated the subject with as much
gravity as if it had been a battle on which the fate of two kingdoms was
depending. I happened to be a tolerable sportsman: soon after my arrival at
Lindenberg, I gave some proofs of my dexterity. The baron immediately marked me
down for a man of genius, and vowed to me an eternal friendship.

That friendship was become to me by no means indifferent. At the castle of
Lindenberg, I beheld for the first time your sister, the lovely Agnes. For me,
whose heart was unoccupied, and who grieved at the void, to see her and to love
her were the same. I found in Agnes all that was requisite to secure my
affection. She was then scarcely sixteen; her person, light and elegant, was
already formed; she possessed several talents in perfection, particularly those
of music and drawing: her character was gay, open, and good humoured; and the
graceful simplicity of her dress and manners formed an advantageous contrast to
the art and studied coquetry of the Parisian dames, whom I had just quitted.
From the moment that I beheld her, I felt the most lively interest in her fate.
I made many inquiries respecting her of the baroness.

"She is my niece," replied that lady. "You are still ignorant, Don Alphonso,
that I am your countrywoman. I am sister to the duke of Medina Celi. Agnes is
the daughter of my second brother, Don Gaston: she has been destined to the
convent from her cradle, and will soon make her profession at Madrid."

[Here Lorenzo interrupted the marquis by an exclamation of surprise --

"Intended for the convent from her cradle!" said he: "(...), this is the first
word that I ever heard of such a design."

"I believe it, my dear Lorenzo," answered Don Raymond; "but you must listen to
me with patience. You will not be less surprised, when I relate some
particulars of your family still unknown to you, and which I have learned from
the mouth of Agnes herself."

He then resumed his narrative as follows:]

You cannot but be aware, that your parents were unfortunately slaves to the
grossest superstition: when this foible was called into play, their every other
sentiment, their every other passion, yielded to its irresistible strength.
While she was big with Agnes, your mother was seized by a dangerous illness,
and given over by her physicians. In this situation Donna Inesilla vowed, that
if she recovered from her malady, the child then living in her bosom, if a
girl, should be dedicated to St. Clare; if a boy, to St. Benedict. Her prayers
were heard: she got rid of her complaint; Agnes entered the world alive, and
was immediately destined to the service of St. Clare.

Don Gaston readily chimed in with his lady's wishes; but knowing the
sentiments of the duke, his brother, respecting a monastic life, it was
determined that your sister's destination should be carefully concealed from
him. The better to guard the secret, it was resolved that Agnes should
accompany her aunt, Donna Rodolpha, into Germany, whither that lady was on the
point of following her new married husband, baron Lindenberg. On her arrival at
that estate, the young Agnes was put into a convent, situated but a few miles
from the castle. The nuns, to whom her education was confided, performed their
charge with exactitude: they made her a perfect mistress of many
accomplishments, and strove to infuse into her mind a taste for the retirement
and tranquil pleasures of a convent. But a secret instinct made the young
recluse sensible that she was not born for solitude: in all the freedom of
youth and gaiety, she scrupled not to treat as ridiculous many ceremonies which
the nuns regarded with awe: and she was never more happy than when her lively
imagination inspired her with some scheme to plague the stiff lady abbess, or
the ugly ill tempered old porteress. She looked with disgust upon the prospect
before her: however, no alternative was offered to her, and she submitted to
the decree of her parents, though not without secret repining.

That repugnance she had not art enough to conceal long: Don Gaston was
informed of it. Alarmed, Lorenzo, lest your affection for her should oppose
itself to his projects, and lest you should positively object to your sister's
misery, he resolved to keep the whole affair from your knowledge as well as the
duke's, till the sacrifice should be consummated. The season for her taking the
veil was fixed for the time when you should be upon your travels: in the mean
while, no hint was dropped of Donna Inesilla's fatal vow. Your sister was never
permitted to know your direction. All your letters were read before she
received them, and those parts effaced which were likely to nourish her
inclination for the world: her answers were dictated either by her aunt, or by
dame Cunegonda, her governess. These particulars I learnt partly from Agnes,
partly from the baroness herself.

I immediately determined upon rescuing this lovely girl from a fate so
contrary to her inclinations, and ill suited to her merit. I endeavored to
ingratiate myself into her favor: I boasted of my friendship and intimacy with
you. She listened to me with avidity; she seemed to devour my words while I
spoke in your praise, and her eyes thanked me for my affection to her brother.
My constant and unremitted attention at length gained me her heart, and with
difficulty I obliged her to confess that she loved me. When, however, I
proposed her quitting the castle of Lindenberg, she rejected the idea in
positive terms.

"Be generous, Alphonso," she said; "you possess my heart, but use not the gift
ignobly. Employ not your ascendancy over me in persuading me to take a step at
which I should hereafter have to blush. I am young and deserted: my brother, my
only friend, is separated from me, and my other relations act with me as my
enemies. Take pity on my unprotected situation. Instead of seducing me to an
action which would cover me with shame, strive rather to gain the affections of
those who govern me. The baron esteems you. My aunt, to others ever harsh,
proud, and contemptuous, remembers that you rescued her from the hands of
murderers, and wears with you alone the appearance of kindness and benignity.
Try then your influence over my guardians. If they consent to our union, my
hand is yours. From your account of my brother, I cannot doubt your obtaining
his approbation; and when they find the impossibility of executing their
design, I trust that my parents will excuse my disobedience, and expiate by
some other sacrifice my mother's fatal vow."

From the first moment that I beheld Agnes, I had endeavored to conciliate the
favor of her relations. Authorized by the confession of her regard, I
redoubled my exertions. My principal battery was directed against the baroness.
It was easy to discover that her word was law in the castle: her husband paid
her the most absolute submission, and considered her as a superior being. She
was about forty. In her youth she had been a beauty; but her charms had been
upon that large scale which can but ill sustain the shock of years: however,
she still possessed (...) of them. Her understanding was (...) excellent when
not obscured by prejudice, which unluckily was but seldom the case. Her
passions were violent: she spared no pains to gratify them, and pursued with
unremitting vengeance those who opposed themselves to her wishes. The warmest
of friends, the most inveterate of enemies, such was the baroness Lindenberg.

I labored incessantly to please her: unluckily I succeeded but too well. She
seemed gratified by my attention, and treated me with a distinction accorded by
her to no one else. One of my daily occupations was reading to her for several
hours: those hours I should much rather have passed with Agnes; but as I was
conscious that complaisance for her aunt would advance our union, I submitted
with a good grace to the penance imposed upon me. Donna Rodolpha's library was
principally composed of old Spanish romances: these were her favorite studies,
and once a day one of these unmerciful volumes was put regularly into my hands.
I read the wearisome adventures of " Perceforest," "Tirante the White,"
"Palmerin of England," and " The Knight of the Sun," till the book was on the
point of falling from my hands through ennui. However, the increasing pleasure
which the baroness seemed to take in my society encouraged me to persevere; and
latterly she showed for me a partiality so marked, that Agnes advised me to
seize the first opportunity of declaring our mutual passion to her aunt.

One evening I was alone with Donna Rodolpha, in her own apartment. As our
readings generally treated of love, Agnes was never permitted to assist at
them. I was just congratulating myself on having finished The Loves of Tristan
and the Queen Iseult -- "

"Ah! the unfortunates!" cried the baroness: "How say you, Segnor? Do you think
it possible for man to feel an attachment so disinterested and sincere?"

"I cannot doubt it," replied I; "my own heart furnishes me with the certainty.
Ah! Donna Rodolpha, might I but hope for your approbation of my love! might I
but confess the name of my mistress, without incurring your resentment!"

She interrupted me --

"Suppose I were to spare you that confession? Suppose I were to acknowledge
that the object of your desires is not unknown to me? Suppose I were to say,
that she returns your affection, and laments not less sincerely than yourself
the unhappy vows which separate her from you?"

"Ah! Donna Rodolpha!" I exclaimed, throwing myself upon my knees before her,
and pressing her hand to my lips, "you have discovered my secret! What is your
decision? Must I despair, or may I reckon upon your favor?"

She withdrew not the hand which I held; but she turned from me, and covered
her face with the other.

"How can I refuse it you?" she replied: "Ah! Don Alphonso, I have long
perceived to whom your attentions were directed, but till now I perceived not
the impression which they had made upon my heart. At length I can no longer
hide my weakness either from myself or from you. I yield to the violence of my
passion, and own that I adore you! For three long months I stifled my desires;
but growing stronger by resistance, I submit to their impetuosity. Pride, fear,
and honor, respect for myself, and my engagements to the baron, all are
vanquished. I sacrifice them to my love for you, and it still seems to me that
I pay too mean a price for your possession."

"She paused for an answer. -- Judge, my Lorenzo, what must have been my
confusion at this discovery. I at once saw all the magnitude of this obstacle,
which I had myself raised to my happiness. The baroness had placed those
attentions to her own account, which I had merely paid her for the sake of
Agnes: and the strength of her expressions, the looks which accompanied them,
and my knowledge of her revengeful disposition, made me tremble for myself and
my beloved. I was silent for some minutes. I knew not how to reply to her
declaration: I could only resolve to clear up the mistake without delay, and
for the present to conceal from her knowledge the name of my mistress. No
sooner had she avowed her passion, than the transports which before were
evident in my features gave place to consternation and constraint. I dropped
her hand, and rose from my knees. The change in my countenance did not escape
her observation.

"What means this silence?" said she in a trembling voice: Where is that joy
which you led me to expect?"

"Forgive me, Segnora," I answered, "if what necessity forces from me should
seem harsh and ungrateful. grateful. To encourage you in an error, which,
however, it may flatter myself, must prove to you the source of disappointment,
would make me appear criminal in every eye. Honor obliges me to inform you,
that you have mistaken for the solicitude of love what was only the attention
of friendship. The latter sentiment is that which I wished to excite in your
bosom: to entertain a warmer, respect for you forbids me, and gratitude for the
baron's generous treatment. Perhaps these reasons would not be sufficient to
shield me from your attractions, were it not that my affections are already
bestowed upon another. You have charms, Segnora, which might captivate the most
insensible; no heart unoccupied could resist them. Happy is it for me, that
mine is no longer in my possession, or I should have to reproach myself for
ever, with having violated the laws of hospitality, Recollect yourself, noble
lady! recollect what is owed by you to honor, by me to the baron, and replace
by esteem and friendship those sentiments which I never can return."

The baroness turned pale at this unexpected and positive declaration; she
doubted whether she slept or woke. At length recovering from her surprise,
consternation gave place to rage, and the blood rushed back in her cheeks with
violence.

"Villain!" she cried; "Monster of deceit! Thus is the avowal of my love
received? Is it thus that -- but, no, no! it cannot, it shall not be! Alphonso,
behold me at your feet? Be witness of my despair! Look with pity (...) woman
who loves you with sincere affection! She who possesses your heart, how has she
merited suc^ a treasure? What sacrifice has she made (...) you? What raises her
above Rodolpha?"

I endeavored to lift her from her knees.

"For God's sake, Segnora, restrain these transports; they disgrace yourself
and me. Your exclamations may be heard, and your secret divulged to your
attendants. I see that my presence only irritates you; permit me to retire."

I prepared to quit the apartment: the baroness caught me suddenly by the arm.

"And who is this happy rival?" said she in a menacing tone; "I will know her
name, and when I know it! -- She is some one in my power; you entreated my
favor, my protection! Let me but find her, let me but know who dares to rob me
of your heart, and she shall suffer every torment which jealousy and
disappointment can inflict. Who is she? Answer me this moment. Hope not to
conceal her from my vengeance! Spies shall be set over you; every step, every
look shall be watched; your eyes will discover my rival; I shall know her; and
when she is found, tremble, Alphonso, for her and for yourself."

As she uttered these last words, her fury mounted to such a pitch as to stop
her powers of respiration. She panted, groaned, and at length fainted away. As
she was falling I caught her in my arms, and placed her upon a sofa. Then
hastening to the door, I summoned her women to her assistance; I committed her
to their care, and seized the opportunity of escaping.

Agitated and confused beyond expression, I bent my steps toward the garden.
The benignity with which the baroness had listened to me at first, had raised
my hopes to the highest pitch: I imagined her to have perceived my attachment
for her niece, and to approve of it. Extreme was my disappointment at
understanding the true purport of her discourse. I knew not what course to
take: the superstition of the parents of Agnes, aided by her aunt's unfortunate
passion, seemed to oppose such obstacles to our union as were almost
insurmountable.

As I passed by a low parlour, whose windows looked into the garden, through
the door which stood half open I observed Agnes seated at a table. She was
occupied in drawing, and several unfinished sketches were scattered round her.
I entered, still undetermined whether I should acquaint her with the
declaration of the baroness.

"Oh! is it only you?" said she, raising her head: "You are no stranger, and I
shall continue my occupation without ceremony. Take a chair, and seat yourself
by me."

I obeyed, and placed myself near the table. Unconscious what I was doing, and
totally occupied by the scene which had just passed, I took up some of the
drawings, and cast my eyes over them. One of the subjects struck me from its
singularity. It represented the great hall of the castle of Lindenberg. A door
conducting to a narrow staircase stood half open. In the foreground appeared a
group of figures, placed in the most grotesque attitudes; terror was expressed
upon every countenance. Here was one upon his knees, with his eyes cast up to
heaven, and praying most devoutly; there, another was creeping away upon all
fours. Some hid their faces in their cloaks, or the laps of their companions.
Some had concealed themselves beneath a table, on which the remnants of a feast
were visible; while others, with gaping mouths and eyes wide stretched, pointed
to a figure supposed to have created this disturbance. It represented a female
of more than human stature, clothed in the habit of some religious order. Her
face was veiled; on her arm hung a chaplet of beads; her dress was in several
places stained with the blood which trickled from a wound upon her bosom. In
one hand she held a lamp, in the other a large knife, and she seemed advancing
toward the iron gates of the hall.

"What does this mean, Agnes?" said I: "Is this some invention of your own?"

She cast her eyes upon the drawing.

"Oh! no," she replied: "'it is the invention of much wiser heads than mine. But
can you possibly have lived at Lindenberg for three whole months without
hearing of the bleeding nun?"

"You are the first who ever mentioned the name to me. Pray, who may the lady
be?"

"That is more than I can pretend to tell you. All my knowledge of her history
comes from an old tradition in this family, which has been handed down from
father to son, and is firmly credited throughout the baron's domain's. Nay, the
baron believes it himself; and as for my aunt, who has a natural turn for the
mavelous, she would sooner doubt the veracity of the bible than of the
bleeding nun. Shall I ^ell you this history?"

I answered, that she would oblige me much by relating it: she resumed her
drawing, and then proceeded as follows in a tone of burlesqued gravity:

"It is surprising that in all the chronicles of past times this remarkable
personage is never once mentioned. Fain would I recount to you her life; but
unluckily till after her death she was never known to have existed. Then first
did she think it necessary to make some noise in the world, and with that
intention she made bold to seize upon the castle of Lindenberg. Having a good
taste, she took up her abode in the best room of the house; and once
established there, she began to amuse herself by knocking about the tables and
chairs in the middle of the night. Perhaps she was a bad sleeper, but this I
have never been able to ascertain. According to the tradition, this
entertainment commenced about a century ago. It was accompanied with shrieking,
howling, groaning, swearing, and many other agreeable noises of the same kind.
But though one particular room was more especially honored with her visits,
she did not entirely confine herself to it. She occasionally ventured into the
old galleries, paced up and down the spacious halls; or, sometimes stopping at
the doors of the chambers, she wept and wailed there to the universal terror of
the inhabitants. In these nocturnal excursions she was seen by different
people, who all describe her appearance as you behold it here traced by the
hand of her unworthy historian."

The singularity of this account insensibly engaged my attention.

"Did she never speak to those who met her?" said I.

"Not she. The specimens indeed which she gave nightly of her talents for
conversation were by no means inviting. Sometimes the castle rung with oaths
and execrations: a moment after she repeated her Paternoster: now she howled
out the most horrible blasphemies, and then chanted De profundis as orderly as
if still in the choir. In short, she seemed a mighty capricious being: but
whether she prayed or cursed, whether she was impious or devout, she always
contrived to terrify her auditors out of their senses. The castle became
scarcely habitable; and its lord was so frightened by these midnight revels,
that one fine morning he was sound dead in his bed. This success seemed to
please the nun mightily, for now she made more noise than ever. But the next
baron proved too cunning for her. He made his appearance with a celebrated
exorciser in his hand, who feared not to shut himself up for a night in the
haunted chamber. There it seems that he had a hard battle with the ghost before
she would promise to be quiet. She was obstinate, but he was more so; and at
length she consented to let the inhabitants of the castle take a good night's
rest. For some time after no news was heard of her. But at the end of five
years the exorciser died, and then the nun ventured to peep abroad again.
However, she was now grown much more tractable and well behaved. She walked
about in silence, and never made her appearance above once in five years. This
custom, if you will believe the baron, she still continues. He is fully
persuaded, that on the fifth of May of every fifth year, as soon as the clock
strikes one, the door of the haunted chamber opens. [Observe, that this room
has been shut up for near a century.] Then out walks the ghostly nun with her
lamp and dagger: she descends the staircase of the eastern tower, and crosses
the great hall. On that night the porter always leaves the gates of the castle
open, out of respect to the apparition: not that this is thought by any means
necessary, since she could easily whip through the keyhole if she chose it: but
merely out of politeness, and to prevent her from making her exit in a way so
derogatory to the dignity of her ghostship."

"And whither does she go on quitting the castle?"

"To heaven, I hope; but if she does, the place certainly is not to her taste,
for she always returns after an hour's absence. The lady then retires to her
chamber, and is quiet for another five years."

"And you, believe this, Agnes?"

"How can you ask such a question? No, no, Alphonso! I have too much reason to
lament superstition's influence to be its victim myself. However, I must not
avow my incredulity to the baroness: she entertains not a doubt of the truth of
this history. As to dame Cunegonda, my governess, she protests that fifteen
years ago she saw the spectre with her own eyes. She related to me one evening,
how she and several other domestics had been terrified while at supper by the
appearance of the bleeding nun, as the ghost is called in the castle: it is from
her account that I drew this sketch, and you may be certain that Cunegonda was
not omitted. There she is! I shall never forget what a passion she was in, and
how ugly she looked while she scolded me for having made her picture so like
herself!"

Here she pointed to a burlesque figure of an old woman in an attitude of
terror.

In spite of the melancholy which oppressed me, I could not help smiling at the
playful imagination of Agnes: she had perfectly preserved dame Cunegonda's
resemblance, but had so much exaggerated every fault, and rendered every
feature so irresistably laughable, that I could easily conceive the duenna's
anger.

"The figure is admirable, my dear Agnes! I knew not that you possessed such
talents for the ridiculous."

"Stay a moment," she replied: "I will show you a figure still more ridiculous
than dame Cunegonda's. If it pleases you, you may dispose of it as seems best
to yourself."

She rose, and went to a cabinet at some little distance: unlocking a drawer,
she took out a small case, which she opened, and presented to me.

"Do you know the resemblance?" said she, smiling.

It was her own.

Transported at the gift, I pressed the portrait to my lips with passion: I
threw myself at her feet, and declared my gratitude in the warmest and most
affectionate terms. She listened to me with complaisance, and assured me that
she shared my sentiments; when suddenly she uttered a loud shriek, disengaged
the hand which I held, and flew from the room by a door which opened to the
garden. Amazed at this abrupt departure, I rose hastily from my knees. I beheld
with confusion the baroness standing near me, glowing with jealousy, and almost
choked with rage. On recovering from her swoon, she had tortured her
imagination to discover her concealed rival. No one appeared to deserve her
suspicions more than Agnes. She immediately hastened to find her niece, tax her
with encouraging my addresses, and assure herself whether her conjectures were
well grounded. Unfortunately she had already seen enough to need no other
confirmation. She arrived at the door of the room, at the precise moment when
Agnes gave me her portrait. She heard me profess an everlasting attachment to
her rival, and saw me kneeling at her feet. She advanced to separate us; we
were too much occupied by each other to perceive her approach, and were not
aware of it till Agnes beheld her standing by my side.

Rage on the part of Donna Rodolpha, embarrassment on mine, for some time kept
us both silent. The lady recovered herself first.

"My suspicions then were just," said she; "the coquetry of my niece has
triumphed, and it is to her that I am sacrificed. In one respect, however, I am
fortunate; I shall not be the only one who laments a disappointed passion. You,
too, shall know what it is to love without hope! I daily expect orders for
restoring Agnes to her parents. Immediately upon her arrival in Spain, she will
take the veil, and place an insuperable barrier to your union. You may spare
your supplications," she continued, perceiving me on the point of speaking --
"my resolution is fixed and immovable. Your mistress shall remain a close
prisoner in her chamber, till she exchanges this castle for the cloister.
Solitude will perhaps recall her to a sense of her duty: but to prevent your
opposing that wished event, I must inform you, Don Alphonso, that your presence
here is no longer agreeable either to the baron or myself. It was not to make
(...) to my niece, that your relations sent you to Germany; your business was
to travel, and I should be sorry to impede any longer so excellent a design.
Farewell, Segnor; remember, that tomorrow morning we meet for the last time."

Having said this, she darted upon me a look of pride, ^^ntempt, and malice,
and quitted the apartment. I also retired to mine, and consumed the night in
planning the means of rescuing Agnes from the power of her tyrannical aunt.

After the positive declaration of its mistress, it was impossible for me to
make a longer stay at the castle of Lindenberg. Accordingly, I the next day
announced my immediate departure. The baron declared that it gave him sincere
pain; and he expressed himself in my favor so warmly, that I endeavored to
win him over to my interest. Scarcely had I mentioned the name of Agnes when he
stopped me short, and said, that it was totally out of his power to interfere
in the business. I saw that it was in vain to argue; the baroness governed her
husband with despotic sway, and I easily perceived that she had prejudiced him
against the match. Agnes (...) not appear. I (...) permission to take leave
^^^ner, but my prayer was rejected. I was obliged to depart without seeing her.

At quitting him, the baron shook my hand affectionately, and assured me, that,
as soon as his niece was gone, I might consider his house as my own.

"Farewell, Don Alphonso!" said the baroness, and stretched out her hand to me.

I took it, and offered to carry it to my lips. She prevented me. Her husband
was at the other end of the room, and out of hearing.

"Take care of yourself," she continued; "my love is become hatred, and my
wounded pride shall not be unatoned. Go where you will, my vengeance shall
follow you!"

She accompanied these words with a look sufficient to make me tremble. I
answered not, but hastened to quit the castle.

As my chaise drove out of the court, I looked up to the windows of your
sister's chamber: nobody was to be seeen there. I threw myself back despondent
in my carriage. I was attended by no other servants than a Frenchman, whom I
had hired at Strasbourg in Stephano's room, and my little page, whom I before
mentioned to you. The fidelity, intelligence, and good temper of Theodore had
already made him dear to me; but he now prepared to lay an obligation on me,
which made me look upon him as a guardian genius. Scarcely had we proceeded
half a mile from the castle, when he rode up to the chaise door.

"Take courage, Segnor!" said he in Spanish, which he had already learnt to
speak with fluency and correctness: "While you were with the baron I watched
the moment when dame Cunegonda was below stairs, and mounted into the chamber
over that of Donna Agnes. I sang, as loud as I could, a little German air, well
known to her, hoping that she would recollect my voice. I was not disappointed,
for I soon heard her window open. I hastened to let down a string with which I
had provided myself. Upon hearing the casement closed again, I drew up the
string, and fastened to it, I found this scrap of paper."

He then presented me with a small no^e, addressed to me. I opened it with
impatience. It contained the following words, written in pencil:

Conceal yourself for the next fortnight in some neighboring village. My aunt
will believe you to have quitted Lindenberg, and I shall be restored to
liberty." I will be in the west pavilion at twelve on the night of the
thirtieth. Fail not to be there, and we shall have an opportunity of concerting
our future plans.

Adieu. AGNES.


At perusing these lines my transports exceeded all bounds; neither did I set
any to the expressions of gratitude which I heaped upon Theodore. In fact, his
address and attention merited my warmest praise. You will readily believe that
I had not entrusted him with my passion for Agnes; but the arch youth had too
much discernment not to discover my secret, and too much discretion not to
conceal his knowledge of it. He observed in silence what was going on, nor
strove to make himself an agent in the business till my interests required his
interference. I equally admired his judgment, his penetration, his address, and
his fidelity. This was not the first occasion in which I had found him of
infinite use, and I was every day more convinced of his quickness and capacity.
During my short stay at Strasbourg, he ^ad applied himself diligently to learn
the rudiments of Spanish. He continued to study it, and with so much success,
that he spoke it with the same facility as his native language. He passed the
greatest part of his time in reading. He had acquired much information for his
age; and united the advantages of a lively countenance and prepossessing figure
to an excellent understanding and the very best of hearts. He is now fifteen.
He is still in my service; and, when you see him, I am sure that he will please
you. But excuse this digression; I return to the subject which I quitted.

I obeyed the instructions of Agnes. I proceeded to Munich: there I left my
chaise under the care of Lucas, my French servant, and then returned on
horseback to a small village about four miles distant from the castle of
Lindenberg. Upon arriving there, a story was related to the host at whose inn I
alighted, which prevented his wondering at my making so long a stay in his
house. The old man fortunately, was credulous and incurious: he believed all I
said, and sought to know no more than what I thought proper to tell him. Nobody
was with me but Theodore: both were disguised; and as we kept ourselves close,
we were not suspected to be other than what we s^emed. In this manner the
fortnight passed away. During that time I had the pleasing conviction that
Agnes was once more at liberty. She passed through the village with dame
Cunegonda: she seemed in good health and spirits, and talked to her companion
without any appearance of constraint.

"Who are those ladies?" said I to my host as the carriage passed.

"Baron Lindenberg's niece, with her governess," he replied: "she goes
regularly every Friday to the convent of St. Catherine, in which she was
brought up, and which is situated about a mile from hence."

You may be certain that I waited with impatience for the ensuing Friday. I
again beheld my lovely mistress. She cast her eyes upon me as she passed the
inn door. A blush which overspread her cheek told me, that in spite of my
disguise I had been recognized. I bowed profoundly. She returned the compliment
by a slight inclination of the head, as if made to one inferior, and looked
another way till the carriage was out of sight.

The long expected, long wished for night arrived. It was calm, and the moon
was at the full. As soon as the clock struck eleven I hastened to my
appointment, determined not to be too late. Theodore had provided a ladder; I
ascended the garden wall without difficulty. The page followed me and drew the
ladder after us. I posted myself in the west pavilion, and waited impatiently
for the approach of Agnes. Every breeze that whispered, every leaf that fell, I
believed to be her footstep, and hastened to meet her. Thus was I obliged to
pass a full hour, every minute of which appeared to me an age. The castle bell
at length tolled twelve, and scarcely could I believe the night to be no
further advanced. Another quarter of an hour elapsed, and I heard the light
foot of my mistress approaching the pavilion with precaution. I flew to receive
her, and conducted her to a feat. I threw myself at her feet, and was
expressing my joy at seeing her, when she thus interrupted me:

"We have no time to lose, Alphonso; the moments are precious; for, though no
more a prisoner, Cunegonda watches my every step. An express is arrived from my
father; I must depart immediately for Madrid, and it is with difficulty that I
have obtained a week's delay. The superstition of my parents, supported by the
representations of my cruel aunt, leaves me no hope of softening them to
compassion. In this dilemma, I have resolved to commit myself to your honor.
God grant that you may never give me cause to repent my resolution! Flight is
my only resource from the horrors of a convent; and my imprudence must be
excused by the urgency of the danger. Now listen to the plan by which I hope to
effect my escape.

"We are now at the thirtieth of April. On the fifth day from this the
visionary nun is expected to appear. In my last visit to the convent I provided
myself with a dress proper for the character. A friend whom I have left there,
and to whom I made no scruple to confide my secret, readily consented to supply
me with a religious habit. Provide a carriage, and be with it at a little
distance from the great gate of the castle. As soon as the clock strikes 'one,'
I shall quit my chamber, dressed in the same apparel as the ghost is supposed
to wear. Whoever meets me will be too much terrified to oppose my escape: I
shall easily reach the door, and throw myself under your protection. Thus far
success is certain: but, oh! Alphonso, should you deceive me; should you
despise my imprudence, and reward it with ingratitude, the world will not hold
a being more wretched than myself! I feel all the dangers to which I shall be
exposed. I feel that I am giving you a right to treat me with levity; but I
rely upon your love, upon your honor! The step which I am on the point of
taking will incense my relations against me; should you desert me; should you
betray the trust reposed in you, I shall have no friend to punish your insult,
or support my cause. On yourself alone rests all my hope; and if your own heart
does not plead in my behalf, I am undone for ever!"

The tone in which she pronounced these words was so touching that, in spite of
my joy at receiving her promise to follow me, I could not help being affected.
I also repined in secret at not having taken the precaution to provide a
carriage at the village; in which case, I might have carried off Agnes that
very night. Such an attempt was now impracticable; neither carriage nor horses
were to be procured nearer than Munich, which was distant from Lindenberg two
good day's journey. I was therefore obliged to chime in with her plan, which,
in truth, seemed well arranged. Her disguise would secure her from being
stopped in quitting the castle, and would enable her to step into the carriage
at the very gate, without difficulty or losing time.

Agnes reclined her head mournfully upon my shoulder, and, by the light of the
moon, I saw tears flowing down her cheek. I strove to dissipate her melancholy,
and encouraged her to look forward to the prospect of happiness. I protested in
the most solemn terms that her virtue and innocence would be safe in my
keeping; and that, till the church had made her my lawful wife, her honor
should be held by me as sacred as a sister's. I told her that my first care
should be to find you out, Lorenzo, and reconcile you to our union; and I was
continuing to speak in the same strain, when a noise without alarmed me.
Suddenly the door of the pavilion was thrown open, and Cunegonda stood before
us. She had heard Agnes steal out of her chamber, followed her into the garden,
and perceived her entering the pavilion. Favored by the trees which shaded it,
and unperceived by Theodore, who waited at a little distance, she had
approached in silence, and overheard our whole conversation.

"Admirable!" cried Cunegonda, in a voice shrill with passion, while Agnes
uttered a loud shriek. "By St. Barbara, young lady, you have an excellent
invention! You must personate the bleeding nun, truly! What impiety! What
incredulity! Marry, I have a good mind to let you pursue your plan. When the
real ghost met you, I warrant you would be in a pretty condition! Don Alphonso,
you ought to be ashamed of yourself for seducing a young, ignorant creature to
leave her family and friends. However, for this time, at least, I shall mar
your wicked designs. The noble lady shall be informed of the whole affair, and
Agnes must defer playing the spectre till a better opportunity. Farewell,
Segnor. -- Donna Agnes, let me have the honor of conducting your ghostship back
to your apartment."

She approached the sofa on which her trembling pupil was seated, took her by
the hand, and prepared to lead her from the pavilion.

I detained her, and strove by entreaties, soothing promises, and flattery, to
win her to my party; but, finding all that I could say of no avail, I abandoned
the vain attempt.

"Your obstinacy must be its own punishment," said I; "but one resource remains
to save Agnes and myself, and I shall not hesitate to employ it."

Terrified at this menace, she again endeavored to quit the pavilion; but I
seized her by the wrist, and detained her forcibly. At the same moment
Theodore, who had followed her into the room, closed the door, and prevented
her escape. I took the veil of Agnes; I threw it round the duenna's head, who
uttered such piercing shrieks, that, in spite of our distance from the castle,
I dreaded their being heard. At length I succeeded in gagging her so completely
that she could not produce a single sound. Theodore and myself, with some
difficulty, next contrived to bind her hands and feet with our handkerchiefs;
and I advised Agnes to regain her chamber with all diligence. I promised that
no harm should happen to Cunegonda; bade her remember that, on the fifth of
May, I should be in waiting at the great gate of the castle, and took of her an
affectionate farewell. Trembling and uneasy, she had scarce power enough to
signify her consent to my plans, and fled back to her apartment in disorder and
confusion.

In the mean while Theodore assisted me in carrying off my antiquated prize.
She was hoisted over the wall, placed before me upon my horse, like a
portmanteau, and I galloped away with her from the castle of Lindenberg. The
unlucky duenna never had made a more disagreeable journey in her life. She was
jolted and shaken till she was become little more than an animated mummy; not
to mention her fright, when we waded through a small river, through which it
was necessary to pass in order to regain the village. Before we reached the
inn, I had already determined how to dispose of the troublesome Cunegonda. We
entered the street in which the inn stood; and while the page knocked, I waited
at a little distance. The landlord opened the door with a lamp in his hand.

"Give me the light," said Theodore, "my master is coming."

He snatched the lamp hastily, and purposely let it fall upon the ground. The
landlord returned to the kitchen to relight the lamp, leaving the door open. I
profited by the obscurity, sprang from my horse with Cunegonda in my arms,
darted up stairs, reached my chamber unperceived, and, unlocking the door of a
spacious closet, stowed her within it, and then turned the key. The landlord
and Theodore soon after appeared with lights: the former expressed himself
surprised at my returning so late, but asked no impertinent questions. He soon
quitted the room, and left me to exult in the success of my undertaking.

I immediately paid a visit to my prisoner. I strove to persuade her to submit
with patience to her temporary confinement. My attempt was unsuccessful. Unable
to speak or move, she express her fury by her looks; and, except at meals, I
n^^er dared to unbind her, or release her from the gag. At such times I stood
over her with a drawn sword, and protested that, if she uttered a single cry, I
would plunge it in her bosom. As soon as she had done eating, the gag was
replaced. I was conscious that this proceeding was cruel, and could only be
justified by the urgency of circumstances.

As to Theodore, he had no scruples upon the subject. Cunegonda's captivity
entertained him beyond measure. During his abode in the castle, a continual
warfare had been carried on between him and the duenna; and, now that he found
his enemy so absolutely in his power, he triumphed without mercy: he seemed to
think of nothing but how to find out new means of plaguing her. Sometimes he
affected to pity her misfortune, then laughed at, abused, and mimicked her: he
played her a thousand tricks, each more provoking than the other; and amused
himself by telling her, that her elopement must have occasioned much surprise
at the baron's. This was in fact the case. No one, except Agnes, could imagine
what was become of dame Cunegonda. Every hole and corner was searched for her,
the ponds were dragged, and the woods underwent a thorough examination. Still
no dame Cunegonda made her appearance. Agnes kept the secret, and I kept the
duenna: the baroness, therefore, remained in total ignorance respecting the old
woman's fate, but suspected her to have perished by suicide. Thus passed away
five days, during which I had prepared every thing necessary for my enterprise.
On quitting Agnes, I had made it my first business to dispatch a peasant with a
letter to Lucas, at Munich, ordering him to take care that a coach and four
should arrive about ten o'clock on the fifth of May at the village of
Rosenwald. He obeyed my instructions punctually; the equipage arrived at the
time appointed. As the period of her lady's elopement drew nearer, Cunegonda's
rage increased. I verily believe, that spite (...) passion would have killed
her, had I not luckily discovered her prepossession in favor of cherrybrandy.
With this favorite liquor she was plentifully supplied, and, Theodore always
remaining to guard her, the gag was occasionally removed. The liquor seemed to
have a wonderful effect in softening the acrimony of her nature; and her
confinement not admitting of any other amusement, she got drunk regularly once
a day, just by way of passing the time.

The fifth of May arrived, a period by me never to be forgotten! Before the
clock struck twelve, I betook myself to the scene of action. Theodore followed
me on horseback. I concealed the carriage in a spacious cavern of the hill on
whose brow the castle was situated. This cavern was of considerable depth, and,
among the peasants, was known by the name of Lindenberg Hole. The night was
calm and beautiful: the moon beams fell upon the ancient towers of the castle,
and shed upon their summits a silver light. All was still around me; nothing
was to be heard except the night breeze sighing among the leaves, the distant
barking of village dogs, or the owl who had established herself in a nook of
the deserted eastern turret. I heard her melancholy shriek, and looked upwards;
she sat upon the ridge of a window, which I recognized to be that of the
haunted room. This brought to my remembrance the story of the bleeding nun, and
I sighed while I reflected on the influence of superstition, and weakness of
human reason. Suddenly I heard a faint chorus steal upon the silence of the
night.

"What can occasion that noise, Theodore?"

"A stranger of distinction," replied he, "passed through the village today in
his way to the castle: he is reported to be the father of Donna Agnes.
Doubtless the baron has given an entertainment to celebrate his arrival."

The castle bell announced the hour of midnight. This was the usual signal for
the family to retire to bed. Soon after I perceived lights in the castle,
moving backwards and forwards in different directions. I conjectured the
company to be separating. I could hear the heavy doors grate as they opened
with difficulty; and as they closed again, the rotten casements rattled in
their frames. The chamber of Agnes was on the other side of the castle. I
trembled lest she should have failed in obtaining the key of the haunted room.
Through this it was necessary for her to pass, in order to reach the narrow
staircase by which the ghost was supposed to descend into the great hall.
Agitated by this apprehension, I kept my eyes constantly fixed upon the window,
where I hoped to perceive the friendly glare of a lamp borne by Agnes. I now
heard the massy gates unbarred. By the candle in his hand, I distinguished old
Conrad, the porter. He set the portal doors wide open, and retired. The lights
in the castle gradually disappeared, and at length the whole building was
wrapped in darkness.

While I sat upon a broken ridge of the hill, the stillness of the scene
inspired me with melancholy ideas not altogether unpleasing. The castle, which
stood full in my sight, formed an object equally awful and picturesque. Its
ponderous walls, tinged by the moon with solemn brightness; its old and partly
ruined towers, lifting themselves into the clouds, and seeming to frown on the
plains around them; its lofty battlements, overgrown with ivy, and folding
gates, expanding in honor of the visionary inhabitant, made me sensible of a
sad and reverential horror. Yet did not these sensations occupy me so fully as
to prevent me from witnessing with impatience the slow progress of time. I
approached the castle, and ventured to walk round it. A few rays of light still
glimmered in the chamber of Agnes. I observed them with joy. I was still gazing
upon them, when I perceived a figure draw near the window, and the curtain was
carefully closed to conceal the lamp which burned there. Convinced by this
observation that Agnes had not abandoned our plan, I returned with a light
heart to my former station.

The half hour struck! The three quarters struck! My bosom beat high with hope
and expectation. At length, the wished for sound was heard. The bell tolled
'one,' and the mansion echoed with the noise loud and solemn. I looked up to
the casement of the haunted chamber. Scarcely had five minutes elapsed when the
expected light appeared. I was now close to the tower. The window was not so
far from the ground, but that I fancied I perceived a female figure with a lamp
in her hand moving slowly along the apartment. The light soon faded away, and
all was again dark and gloomy.

Occasional gleams of brightness darted from the staircase windows as the
lovely ghost passed by them. I traced the light through the hall: it reached
the portal, and at length I beheld Agnes pass through the folding gates. She
was habited exactly as she had described the spectre. A chaplet of beads hung
upon her arm; her head was enveloped in a long white veil; her nun's dress was
stained with blood; and she had taken care to provide herself with a lamp and
dagger. She advanced toward the spot where I stood. I flew to meet her; and
clasping her in my arms, I exclaimed,

"Agnes! Agnes! thou art mine!
"Agnes! Agnes! I am thine!
"Fairest! Dearest! Thou art mine!
"Fairest! Dearest! I am thine!
"Leave thee will I never!
"Thou art mine!
"I am thine!
"Body and soul for ever!"
Terrified and breathless, she was unable to speak. She dropped her lamp and
dagger, and sunk upon my bosom in silence. I raised her in my arms, and
conveyed her to the carriage. Theodore remained behind in order to release dame
Cunegonda. I also charged him with a letter to the baroness, explaining the
whole affair, and entreating her good offices in reconciling Don Gaston to my
union with his daughter. I discovered to her my real name. I proved to her that
my birth and expectations justified my pretending to her niece; and assured
her, though it was out of my power to return her love, that I would strive
unceasingly to obtain her esteem and friendship.

I stepped into the carriage, where Agnes was already seated. Theodore closed
the door, and the postillions drove away. At first I was delighted with the
rapidity of our progress; but as soon as we were in no danger of pursuit, I
called to the drivers, and bade them to moderate their pace. They strove in
vain to obey me; the horses refused to answer the rein, and continued to rush
on with astonishing swiftness. The postillions redoubled their efforts to stop
them; but, by kicking and plunging, the beasts soon released themselves from
this restraint. Uttering a loud shriek, the drivers were hurled upon the
ground. Immediately thick clouds obscured the sky: the winds howled around us,
the lightning flashed, and the thunder roared tremendously. Never did I behold
so frightful a tempest! Terrified by the jar of contending elements, the horses
seemed every moment to increase their speed. Nothing could interrupt their
career; they dragged the carriage through hedges and ditches, dashed down the
most dangerous precipices, and seemed to vie in swiftness with the rapidity of
the winds.

All this while my companion lay motionless in my arms. Truly alarmed by the
magnitude of the danger, I was in vain attempting to recall her to her senses,
when a loud crash announced that a stop was put to our progress in the most
disagreeable manner. The carriage was shattered to pieces. In falling, I struck
my temple against a flint. The pain of the wound, the violence of the shock,
and apprehension for the safety of Agnes, combined to overpower me so
completely, that my senses forsook me, and I lay without animation on the
ground.

I probably remained for some time in this situation, since, when I opened my
eyes, it was broad daylight. Several peasants were standing round me, and
seemed disputing whether my recovery was possible. I spoke German tolerably
well. As soon as I could utter an articulate sound, I inquired after Agnes.
What was my surprise and distress, when assured by the peasants that nobody had
been seen answering the description which I gave of her! They told me, that in
going to their daily labor they had been alarmed by observing the fragments of
my carriage, and by hearing the groans of an horse, the only one of the four
which remained alive: the other three lay dead by my side. Nobody was near me
when they came up, and much time had been lost before they succeeded in
recovering me. Uneasy beyond expression respecting the fate of my companion, I
besought the peasants to disperse themselves in search of her. I described her
dress, and promised immense rewards to whoever brought me any intelligence. As
for myself, it was impossible for me to join in the pursuit: I had broken two
of my ribs in the fall; my arm being dislocated hung useless by my side; and my
left leg was shattered so terribly, that I never expected to recover its use.

The peasants complied with my request; all left me except four, who made a
litter of boughs, and prepared to convey me to the neighboring town. I
inquired its name; it proved to be Ratisbon, and I could scarcely persuade
myself that I had traveled to such a distance in a single night. I told the
countrymen, that at one o'clock that morning I had passed through the village
of Rosenwald. They shook their heads wistfully, and made signs to each other
that I must certainly be delirious. I was conveyed to a decent inn, and
immediately put to bed. A physician was sent for, who set my arm with success:
he then examined my other hurts, and told me that I need be under no
apprehension of the consequences of any of them, but ordered me to keep myself
quiet, and be prepared for a tedious and painful cure. I answered him, that if
he hoped to keep me quiet, he must first endeavor to procure me some news of a
lady who had quitted Rosenwald in my company the night before, and had been
with me at the moment when the coach broke down. He smiled, and only replied by
advising me to make myself easy, for that all proper care should be taken of
me. As he quitted me, the hostess met him at the door of the room.

"The gentleman is not quite in his right senses," I heard him say to her in a
low voice; "'it is the natural consequence of his fall, but that will soon be
over."

One after another the peasants returned to the inn, and informed me that no
traces had been discovered of my unfortunate mistress. Uneasiness now became
despair. I entreated them to renew their search in the most urgent terms,
doubling the promises which I had already made them. My wild and frantic manner
confirmed the bystanders in the idea of my being delirious. No signs of the
lady having appeared, they believed her to be a creature fabricated by my over
heated brain, and paid no attention to my entreaties. However, the hostess
assured me, that a fresh inquiry should be made; but I found afterward that
her promise was only given to quiet me. No further steps were taken in the
business.

Though my baggage was left at Munich under the care of my French servant,
having prepared myself for a long journey, my purse was amply furnished:
besides, my equipage proved me to be of distinction, and in consequence all
possible attention was paid me at the inn. The day passed away: still no news
arrived of Agnes. The anxiety of fear now gave place to despondency. I ceased
to rave about her, and was plunged in the depth of melancholy reflections.
Perceiving me to be silent and tranquil, my attendants believed my delirium to
have abated, and that my malady had taken a favorable turn. According to the
physician's order, I swallowed a composing medicine; and as soon as the night
shut in, my attendants withdrew, and left me to repose.

That repose I wooed in vain. The agitation of my bosom chased away sleep.
Restless in my mind, inspite of the fatigue of my body, I continued to toss
about from side to side, till the clock in a neighboring steeple struck 'one.'
As I listened to the mournful hollow sound, and heard it die away in the wind,
I felt a sudden chiilness spread itself over my body. I shuddered without
knowing wherefore; cold dews poured down my forehead, and my hair stood
bristling with alarm. Suddenly I heard slow and heavy steps ascending the
staircase. By an involuntary movement I started up in my bed, and drew back the
curtain. A single rushlight, which glimmered upon the hearth, shed a faint
gleam through the apartment, which was hung with tapestry. The door was thrown
open with violence. A figure entered, and drew near my bed with solemn measured
steps. With trembling apprehension I examined this midnight visitor. God
Almighty! it was the bleeding nun! It was my lost companion! Her face was still
veiled, but she no longer held her lamp and dagger. She lifted up her veil
slowly. What a sight presented itself to my startled eyes! I beheld before me
an animated corse. Her countenance was long and haggard; her cheeks and lips
were bloodless; the paleness of death was spread over her features; and her
eyeballs, fixed steadfastly upon me, were lustreless and hollow.

I gazed upon the spectre with horror too great to be described. My blood was
frozen in my veins. I would have called for aid, but the sound expired ere it
could pass my lips. My nerves were bound up in impotence, and I remained in the
same attitude inanimate as a statue.

The visionary nun looked upon me for some minutes in silence: there was
something petrifying in her regard. At length, in a low sepulchral voice, she
pronounced the following words:

"Raymond! Raymond! Thou art mine!
"Raymond! Raymond! I am thine!
"Leave thee will I never!
"I am thine!
"Thou art mine,
"Body and soul for ever!"
Breathless with fear, I listened while she repeated my own expressions. The
apparition seated herself opposite to me at the foot of the bed, and was
silent. Her eyes were fixed earnestly upon mine; they seemed endowed with the
property of the rattlesnake's, for I strove in vain to look off her. My eyes
were fascinated, and I had not the power of withdrawing them from the spectre's.

In this attitude she remained for a whole long hour without speaking or
moving; nor was I able to do either. At length the clock struck 'two.' The
apparition rose from her seat, and approached the (...) of the bed. She grasped
with her icy fingers my (...) which hung lifeless upon the coverture, and,
prssing her cold lips to mine, again repeated,

"Raymond! Raymond! Thou art mine*
"Raymond! Raymond! I am thine!" (...) --
She then dropped my hand, quitted the chamber with slow steps, and the door
closed after her. Till that moment the faculties of my body had been all
suspended; those of my mind had alone been waking. The charm now ceased to
operate; the blood which had been frozen in my veins rushed back to my heart
with violence; I uttered a deep groan, and sunk lifeless upon my pillow.

The adjoining room was only separated from mine by a thin partition; it was
occupied by the host and his wife; the former was roused by my groan, and
immediately hastened to my chamber; the hostess soon followed him. With some
difficulty they succeeded in restoring me to my senses, and immediately sent
for the physician, who arrived in all diligence. He declared my fever to be
very much increased, and that, if I continued to suffer such violent agitation,
he would not take upon him to insure my life. Some medicines which he gave me,
in some degree tranquillized my spirits. I fell into a sort of slumber toward
daybreak, but fearful dreams prevented me from deriving any benefit from my
repose. Agnes and the bleeding nun presented themselves by turns to my fancy,
and combined to harrass and torment me. I awoke fatigued and unrefreshed. My
fever seemed rather augmented than diminished; the agitation of my mind impeded
my fractured bones from knitting: I had frequent fainting fits, and during the
whole day the physician judged it expedient not to quit me for two hours
together.

The singularity of my adventure made me determine to conceal it from every
one, since I could not expect that a circumstance so strange should gain
credit. I was very uneasy about Agnes. I knew not what she would think at not
finding me at the rendezvous, and dreaded her entertaining suspicions of my
fidelity. However, I depended upon Theodore's discretion, and trusted that my
letter to the baroness would convince her of the rectitude of my intentions.
These considerations somewhat lightened my inquietude upon her account; but the
impression left upon my mind by my nocturnal visitor grew stronger with every
succeeding moment. The night drew near; I dreaded its arrival; yet I strove to
persuade myself that the ghost would appear no more, and at all events I
desired that a servant might sit up in my chamber.

The fatigue of my body, from not having slept on the former night,
cooperating with the strong opiates administered to me in profusion, at length
procured me that repose of which I was so much in need. I sunk into a profound
and tranquil slumber, and had already slept for some hours, when the
neighboring clock roused me by striking "one" its sound brought with it to my
memory all the horrors of the night before. The same cold shivering seized me.
I started up in my bed, and perceived the servant fast asleep in an armchair
near me. I called him by his name; he made no answer. I shook him forcibly by
the arm, and strove in vain to wake him: he was perfectly insensible to my
efforts. I now heard the heavy steps ascending the staircase; the door was
thrown open, and again the bleeding nun stood before me. Once more my limbs
were chained in second infancy: once more I heard those fatal words repeated:

" Raymond! Raymond! Thou art mine!
" Raymond! Raymond! I am thine!" etc. --
The scene which had shocked me so sensibly on the former night, was again
presented. The spectre again pressed her lips to mine, again touched me with
her rotting fingers, and, as on her first appearance, quitted the chamber as
soon as the clock told "two."

Every night was this repeated. Far from growing accustomed to the ghost, every
succeeding visit inspired me with greater horror. Her idea pursued me
continually, and I became the prey of habitual melancholy. The constant
agitation of my mind naturally retarded the re-establishment of my health.
Several months elapsed before I was able to quit my bed; and when, at length, I
was moved to a sofa, I was so faint, spiritless, and emaciated, that I could
not cross the room without assistance. The looks of my attendants sufficiently
denoted the little hope which they entertained of my recovery. The profound
sadness which oppressed me without remission, made the physician consider me to
be an hypochondriac. The cause of my distress I carefully concealed in my own
bosom, for I knew that no one could give me relief. The ghost was not even
visible to any eye but mine. I had frequently caused attendants to sit up in my
room; but the moment that the clock struck "one," irresistible slumber seized
them, nor left them till the departure of the ghost.

You may be surprised that during this time I made no inquiries after your
sister. Theodore, who with difficulty had discovered my abode, had quieted my
apprehensions for her safety; at the same time he convinced me, that all
attempts to release her from captivity must be fruitless, till I should be in a
condition to return to Spain. The particulars of her adventure, which I shall
now relate to you, were partly communicated to me by Theodore, and partly by
Agnes herself.

On the fatal night when her elopement was to have taken place, accident had
not permitted her to quit her chamber at the appointed time. At length she
ventured into the haunted room, descended the staircase leading into the hall,
found the gates open as she expected, and lest the castle unobserved. What was
her surprise at not finding me ready to receive her! She examined the cavern,
ranged ^^^ough every alley of the neighboring wood, and passed two full hours
in this fruitless inquiry. She could discover no traces either of me or of the
carriage. Alarmed and disappointed, her only resource was to return to the
castle before the baroness missed her; but here she found herself in a fresh
embarrassment. The bell had already tolled "two," the ghostly hour was past,
and the careful porter had locked the folding gates. After much irresolution,
she ventured to knock softly. Luckily for her, Conrad was still awake: he heard
the noise and rose, murmuring at being called up a second time. No sooner had
he opened one of the doors, and beheld the supposed apparition waiting there
for admittance, than he uttered a loud cry, and dropped upon his knees. Agnes
profited by his terror: she glided by him, flew to her own apartment, and,
having thrown off her spectre's trappings, retired to bed, endeavoring in vain
to account for my disappearing.

In the mean while, Theodore, having seen my carriage drive off with the false
Agnes, returned joyfully to the village. The next morning he released Cunegonda
from her confinement, and accompanied her to the castle. There he found the
baron, his lady, and Don Gaston, disputing together upon the porter's relation.
All of them agreed in believing the existence of specter; but the latter
contended, that for a ghost to knock for admittance was a proceeding till then
unwitnessed, and totally incompatible with the immaterial nature of a spirit.
They were still discussing the subject, when the page appeared with Cunegonda,
and cleared up the mystery. On hearing his deposition, it was agreed
unanimously, that the Agnes whom Theodore had seen step into my carriage must
have been the bleeding nun, and that the ghost who had terrified Conrad was no
other than Don Gaston's daughter.

The first surprise which this discovery occasioned being over, the baroness
resolved to make it of use in persuading her niece to take the veil. Fearing
lest so advantageous an establishment for his daughter should induce Don Gaston
to renounce his resolution, she suppressed my letter, and continued to
represent me as a needy unknown adventurer. A childish vanity had led me to
conceal my real name even from my mistress; I wished to be loved for myself,
not for being the son and heir of the marquis de las Cisternas. The consequence
was, that my rank was known to no one in the castle except the baroness, and
she took good care to confine the knowledge to her own breast. Don Gaston
having approved his sister's design, Agnes was summoned to appear before them.
She was taxed with having meditated an elopement, obliged to make a full
confession, and was amazed at the gentleness with which it was received: (...)
what was her affliction, when informed that the failure of her project must be
attributed to me! Cunegonda, tutored by the baroness, told her, that when I
released her I had desired her to inform her lady that our connection was at an
end, that the whole affair was occasioned by a false report, and that it by no
means suited my circumstances to marry a woman without fortune or expectations.

To this account, my sudden disappearing gave but too great an air of
probability. Theodore, who could have contradicted the story, by Donna
Rodolpha's order was kept out of her sight. What proved a still greater
confirmation of my being an impostor, was the arrival of a letter from
yourself, declaring that you had no sort of acquaintance with Alphonso
d'Alvarada. -- These seeming proofs of my perfidy, aided by the artful
insinuations of her aunt, by Cunegonda's flattery, and her father's threats and
anger, entirely conquered your sister's repugnance to a convent. Incensed at my
behavior, and disgusted with the world in general, she consented to receive
the veil. She passed another month at the castle of Lindenberg, during which,
my nonappearance confirmed her in her resolution, and then accompanied Don
Gaston into Spain. Theodore was now set at liberty. He hastened to Munich,
where I had promised to let him hear from me; but finding from Lucas that I
never arrived there, he pursued his search with indefatigable perseverance, and
at length succeeded in rejoining me at Ratisbon.

So much was I altered, that scarcely could he recollect my features: the
distress visible upon his, sufficiently testified how lively was the interest
which he felt for me. The society of this amiable boy, whom I had always
considered rather as a companion that a servant, was now my only comfort. His
conversation was gay, yet sensible, and his observations shrewd and
entertaining. He had picked up much more knowledge than is usual at his age;
but what rendered him most agreeable to me, was his having a delightful voice,
and no mean skill in music. He had also acquired some taste in poetry, and even
ventured occasionally to write verses himself. He frequently composed little
ballads in Spanish. His compositions were but indifferent, I must confess, yet
they were pleasing to me from their novelty; and hearing him sing them to his
guitar was the only amusement which I was capable of receiving. Theodore
perceived well enough that something preyed upon my mind; but as I concealed
the cause of my grief even from him, respect would not permit him to pry into
my secrets.

One evening I was lying upon my sofa, plunged in reflections very far from
agreeable: Theodore amused himself by observing from the window a battle
between two postillions, who were quarrelling in the inn yard.

"Ha! ha!" cried he suddenly, "yonder is the Great Mogul."

"Who?" said I.

"Only a man who made me a strange speech at Munich."

"What was the purport of it?"

"Now you put me in mind of it, Segnor, it was a kind of message to you, but
truly it was not worth delivering. I believe the fellow to be mad, for my part.
When I came to Munich in search of you, I found him living at 'the King of the
Romans,' and the host gave me an odd account of him. By his accent he is
supposed to be a foreigner, but of what country nobody ^^n tell. He seemed to
have no acquaintance in the town, spoke very seldom, and never was seen to
smile. He had neither servants nor baggage; but his purse seemed well
furnished, and he did much good in the town. Some supposed him to be an Arabian
astrologer, others to be a traveling mountebank, and many declared that he was
Doctor Faustus, whom the devil had sent back to Germany. The landlord, however,
told me, that he had the best reasons to believe him to be the Great Mogul
incognito."

"But the strange speech Theodore -- "

"True, I had almost forgotten the speech: indeed, for that matter, it would
not have been a great loss if I had forgotten it altogether. You are to know,
Segnor, that while I was inquiring about you of the landlord, this stranger
passed by. He stopped, and looked at me earnestly -- "Youth," said he, in a
solemn voice, "he whom you seek, has found that which he would fain lose. My
hand alone can dry up the blood. Bid your master wish for me when the clock
strikes "one."

"How?" cried I, starting from my sofa. [The words which Theodore had repeated,
seemed to imply the stranger's knowledge of my secret] "Fly to him, my boy!
entreat him to grant me one moment's conversation."

Theodore was surprised at the vivacity of my manner: however, he asked no
questions, but hastened to obey me. I waited his return impatiently. But a
short space of time had elapsed when he again appeared, and ushered the
expected guest into my chamber. He was a man of majestic presence; his
countenance was strongly marked, and his eyes were large, black, and sparkling:
yet there was a something in his look, which, the moment that I saw him,
inspired me with a secret awe, not to say horror. He was dressed plainly, his
hair hung wildly upon his brow, and a band of black velvet, which encircled his
forehead, spread over his features an additional gloom. His countenance wore
the marks of profound melancholy, his step was slow, and his manner grave,
stately, and solemn.

He saluted me with politeness; and having replied to the usual compliments of
introduction, he motioned to Theodore to quit the chamber. The page instantly
withdrew.

"I know your business," said he, without giving me time to speak. "I have the
power of releasing you from your nightly visitor; but this cannot be done
before Sunday. On the hour when the Sabbath morning breaks, spirits of darkness
have least influence over mortals. After Saturday the nun shall visit you no
more."

"May I not inquire," said I, "by what means you are in possession of a secret
which I have carefully concealed from the knowledge of every one."

"How can I be ignorant of your distresses when their cause at this moment
stands beside you?"

I started. The stranger continued.

"Though to you only visible for one hour in the twenty-four, neither day nor
night does she ever quit you; nor will she ever quit you till you have granted
her request."

"And what is that request?"

"That she must herself explain: it lies not in my knowledge. Wait with
patience for the night of Saturday: all shall be then cleared up."

I dared not press him further. He soon after changed the conversation, and
talked of various matters. He named people who had ceased to exist for many
centuries, and yet with whom he appeared to have been personally acquainted. I
could not mention a country, however distant, which he had not visited, nor
could I sufficiently admire the extent and variety of his information. I
remarked to him, that having traveled, seen and known so much, must have given
him infinite pleasure. He shook his head mournfully.

"No one," he replied, "is adequate to comprehending the misery of my lot! Fate
obliges me to be constantly in movement; I am not permitted to pass more than a
fortnight in the same place. I have no friend in the world, and, from the
restlessness of my destiny, I can never acquire one. Fain would I lay down my
miserable life, for I envy those who enjoy the quiet of the grave; but death
eludes me, and flies from my embrace. In vain do I throw myself in the way of
danger. I plunge into the ocean, the waves throw me back with abhorrence upon
the shore: I rush into fire; the flames recoil at my approach: I oppose myself
to the fury of banditts; their swords become blunted, and break against my
breast. The hungry tiger shudders at my approach, and the alligator flies from
a monster more horrible than itself. God has set his seal upon me, and all his
creatures respect this fatal mark."

He put his hand to the velvet which was bound round his forehead. There was in
his eyes an expression of fury, despair, and malevolence, that struck horror to
my very soul. An involuntary convulsion made me shudder. The stranger perceived
it.

"Such is the curse imposed on me," he continued: "I am doomed to inspire all
who look on me with terror and detestation. You already feel the influence of
the charm, and with every succeeding moment will feel it more. I will not add
to your sufferings by my presence. Farewell till Saturday. As soon as the clock
strikes twelve, expect me at your chamber door."

Having said this he departed, leaving me in astonishment at the mysterious
turn of his manner and conversation. His assurances that I should soon be
relieved from the apparition's visits, produced a good effect upon my
constitution. Theodore, whom I rather treated as an adopted child than a
domestic, was surprised at his return to observe the amendment in my looks. He
congratulated me on this symptom of returning health, and declared himself
delighted at my having received so much benefit from my conference with the
Great Mogul. Upon inquiry I found that the stranger had already passed eight
days in Ratisbon. According to his own account, therefore, he was only to
remain there six days longer. Saturday was still at the distance of three. Oh!
with what impatience did I expect its arrival! In the interim the bleeding nun
continued her nocturnal visits; but hoping soon to be released from them
altogether, the effects which they produced on me became less violent than
before.

The wished for night arrived. To avoid creating suspicion, I retired to bed at
my usual hour. But as soon as my attendants had left me, I dressed myself
again, and prepared for the stranger's reception. He entered my room upon the
turn of midnight. A small chest was in his hand, which he placed near the
stove. He saluted me without speaking; I returned the compliment, observing an
equal silence. He then opened his chest. The first thing which he produced was
a small wooden crucifix: he knelt down and gazed upon it mournfully, and cast
his eyes toward heaven. He seemed to be praying devoutly. At length he bowed
his head respectfully kissed the crucifix thrice, and quitted his kneeling
posture. He next drew from the chest a covered goblet; with the liquor which it
contained, and which appeared to be blood, he sprinkled the floor; and then
dipping in it one end of the crucifix, he described a circle in the middle of
the room. Round about this he placed various relics, sculls, thigh bones,
etc. I observed that he disposed them all in the forms of crosses. Lastly, he
took out a large Bible, and beckoned me to follow him into the circle. I obeyed
him.

"Be cautious not to utter a syllable!" whispered the stranger; "step not out
of the circle, and, as you love yourself, dare not to look upon my face!"

Holding the crucifix in one hand, the Bible in the other, he seemed to read
with profound attention. The clock struck one! As usual I heard the spectre's
steps upon the staircase; but I was not seized with the accustomed shivering. I
waited her approach with confidence. She entered the room, drew near the
circle, and stopped. The stranger muttered some words, to me, unintelligible.
Then raising his head from the book, and extending the crucifix toward the
ghost, he pronounced in a voice distinct and solemn,

"Beatrice! Beatrice! Beatrice!"

"What would thou?" replied the apparition in a hollow faltering tone.

"What disturbs thy sleep? Why do thou afflict and torture this youth? How
can rest be restored to thy unquiet spirit?"

"I dare not tell! I must not tell! Fain would I repose in my grave, but stern
commands force me to prolong my punishment!"

"Know thou this blood? Know thou in whose veins it flowed? Beatrice!
Beatrice! In his name, I charge thee to answer me."

"I dare not disobey my taskers."

"Dare thou disobey me?"

He spoke in a commanding tone, and drew the sable band from his forehead. In
spite of his injunctions to the contrary, curiosity would not suffer me to keep
my eyes off his face; I raised them, and beheld a burning cross impressed upon
his brow. For the horror with which this object inspired me I cannot account,
but I never felt its equal. My senses left me for some moments: a mysterious
dread overcame my courage; and had not the exorciser caught my hand, I should
have fallen out of the circle.

When I recovered myself, I perceived that the burning cross had produced an
effect no less violent upon the spectre. Her countenance expressed reverence
and horror, and her visionary limbs were shaken by fear.

"Yes!" she said at length, "I tremble at that mark! I respect it! I obey you!
Know then, that my bones lie still unburied: they rot in the obscurity of
Lindenberg Hole. None but this youth has the right of consigning them to the
grave. His own lips have made over to me his body and his soul: never will I
give back his promise, never shall he know a night devoid of terror, unless he
engages to collect my mouldering bones, and deposit them in the family vault of
his Andalusian castle. Then let thirty masses be said for the repose of my
spirit, and I trouble this world no more. Now let me depart. Those flames are
scorching!"

He let the hand drop slowly which held the crucifix, and which till then he
had pointed toward her. The apparition bowed her head, and her form melted
into air. The exorciser led me out of the circle. He replaced the Bible, etc.
in the chest, and then addressed himself to me, who stood near him speechless
from astonishment.

"Don Raymond, you have heard the conditions on which repose is promised you.
Be it your business to fulfill them to the letter. For me, nothing more remains
than to clear up the darkness still spread over the spectre's history, and
inform you, that, when living, Beatrice bore the name of las Cisternas. She was
the great aunt of your grandfather. In quality of your relation, her ashes
demand respect from you, though the enormity of her crimes must excite your
abhorrence. The nature of those crimes no one is more capable of explaining to
you than myself. I was personally acquainted with the holy man who proscribed
her nocturnal riots in the castle of Lindenberg, and I hold this narrative from
his own lips.

"Beatrice de las Cisternas took the veil at an early age, not by her own
choice, but at the express command of her parents. She was then too young to
regret the pleasure^ of which her profession deprived her: but no sooner did
her warm and voluptuous character begin to be developed, than she abandoned
herself freely to the impulse of her passions, and seized the first opportunity
to procure their gratification. This opportunity was at length presented, after
many obstacles which only added new force to her desires. She contrived to
elope from the convent, and fled to Germany with the baron Lindenberg. She
lived at his castle several months as his acknowledged mistress. All Bavaria
was scandalized by her impudent and abandoned conduct. Her feasts vied in
luxury with Cleopatra's, and Lindenberg became the theater of the most
unbridled debauchery. Not satisfied with displaying the incontinence of a
prostitute, she professed herself an atheist; she took every opportunity to
scoff at her monastic vows, and loaded with ridicule the most sacred ceremonies
of religion.

"Possessed of a character so depraved, she did not long confine her affections
to one object. Soon after her arrival at the castle, the baron's younger
brother attracted her notice by his strong marked features, gigantic stature,
and herculean limbs. She was not of an humor to keep her inclination long
unknown: but she found in Otto von Lindenberg her equal in depravity. He
returned her passion just sufficiently to increase it; and when he had worked
it up to the desired pitch, he fixed the price of his love at his brother's
murder. The wretch consented to this horrible agreement. A night was pitched
upon for perpetrating the deed. Otto, who resided on a small (...) a few miles
distant from the castle, promised that, at one in the morning, he would be
waiting for her at Lindenberg Hole; that ^e would bring with him a party of
chosen friends, by whose aid he doubted not being able to make himself master
of the castle; and that his next step should be the uniting her hand to his. It
was this last promise which overruled every scruple of Beatrice; since, in
spite of his affection for her, the baron had declared positively, that he
never would make her his wife.

"The fatal night arrived. The baron slept in the arms of his perfidious
mistress when the castle bell struck 'one.' Immediately Beatrice drew a dagger
from underneath her pillow, and plunged it in her paramour's heart. The baron
uttered a single dreadful groan, and expired. The murderess quitted her bed
hastily, took a lamp in one hand, in the other the bloody dagger, and bent her
course toward the cavern. The porter dared not to refuse opening the gates to
one more dreaded in the castle than its master. Beatrice reached Lindenberg
Hole unopposed, where, according to promise, she found Otto waiting for her. He
received, and listened to her narrative with transport: but ere she had time to
ask why he came unaccompanied, he convinced her that he wished for no witnesses
to their interview. Anxious to conceal his share in the murder, and to free
himself from a woman whose violent and atrocious character made him tremble
with reason for his own safety, he had resolved on the destruction of his
wretched agent. Rushing upon her suddenly, he wrested the dagger from her hand.
He plunged it, still reeking with his brother's blood, in her bosom, and put an
end to her existence by repeated blows.

"Otto now succeeded to the barony of Lindenberg. The murder was attributed
solely to the fugitive nun, and no one suspected him to have persuaded her to
the action. But though his crime was unpunished by man, God's justice permitted
him not to enjoy in peace his blood stained honors. Her bones lying still
unburied in the cave, the restless soul of Beatrice continued to inhabit the
castle. Dressed in her religious habit, in memory of her vows broken to Heaven,
furnished with the dagger which had drank the blood of her paramour, and
holding the lamp which had guided her flying steps, every night did she stand
before the bed of Otto. The most dreadful confusion reigned through the castle.
The vaulted chambers resounded with shrieks and groans; and the spectre, as she
ranged along the antique galleries, uttered an incoherent mixture of prayers
and blasphemies. Otto was unable to withstand the shock which he felt at this
fearful vision: its horrors increased with every succeeding appearance. His
(...) length became so insupportable, that (...), and one morning he was found
in his bed totally deprived of warmth and animation. His death did not put an
end to the nocturnal riots. The bones of Beatrice continued to lie unburied,
and her ghost continued to haunt the (...).

"The domains of Lindenberg now fe^^ to a distant relation. But terrified by
the accounts given him of the bleeding nun (so was the spectre called by the
multitude) the new baron called to his assistance a celebrated exorciser. This
holy man succeeded in obliging her to temporary repose: but though she
discovered to him her history, he was not permitted to reveal it to others, or
cause her skeleton to be removed to hallowed ground. That office was reserved
for you; and till your coming her ghost was doomed to wander about the castle,
and lament the crime which she had there committed. However, the exorciser
obliged her to silence during his lifetime. So long as he existed, the haunted
chamber was shut up, and the spectre was invisible. At his death, which
happened in five years after, she again appeared, but only once on every fifth
year, on the same day and at the same hour when she plunged her knife in the
heart of her sleeping lover: she then visited the cavern which held her
mouldering skeleton, returned to the castle as soon as the clock struck 'two,'
and was seen no more till the next five years had elapsed.

"She was doomed to suffer during the space of a century. That period is past.
Nothing now remains but to consign to the grave the ashes of Beatrice. I have
been the means of releasing you from your visionary tormentor; and amidst all
the sorrows which oppress me, to think that I have been of use to you, is some
consolation. Youth, farewell! may the ghost of your relation enjoy that rest in
the tomb which the Almighty's vengeance has denied to me for ever!"

Here the stranger prepared to quit the apartment.

"Stay yet one moment!" said I; "you have satisfied my curiosity with regard to
the spectre, but you leave me a prey to yet greater respecting yourself. Deign
to inform me to whom I am under such real obligations. You mention
circumstances long past, and people long dead: you were personally acquainted
with the exorciser, who, by your own account, has been deceased near a century.
How am I to account for this? What means that burning cross upon your forehead,
and why did the sight of it strike such horror to my soul?"

On these points he for some time refused to satisfy me. At length, overcome by
my entreaties, he consented to clear up the whole, on condition that I would
defer his explanation till the next day. With this request I was obliged to
comply, and he left me. In the morning my first care was to inquire after the
mysterious stranger. Conceive my disappointment, when informed that he had
quitted Ratisbon. I dispatched messengers in pursuit of him, but in vain. No
traces of the fugitive were discovered. Since that moment I have never heard
any more of him, and it is most probable that I never shall."

[Lorenzo here interrupted his friend's narrative:

"How!" said he, "you have never discovered who he was, or even formed a guess?"

"Pardon me," replied the marquis: "when I related this adventure to my uncle,
the cardinal duke, he told me, that he had no doubt of this singular man's
being the celebrated character known universally by the name of The Wandering
Jew. His not being permitted to pass more than fourteen days on the same spot,
the burning cross impressed upon his forehead, the effect which it produced
upon the beholders and many other circumstances, gave this supposition the
color of truth. The cardinal is fully persuaded of it; and for my own part I
am inclined to adopt the only solution which offers itself to this riddle I
imagined the tradition of the W^ndering Jew to be known universally. But, as
many people have expressed to me their ignorance on the subject, it may be as
well to state, that the Wandering Jew is said to have insulted our Savior,
while leading to the Cross, saying "Go, go, Thou King of the Jews!" on which
Christ, looking at him, answered "Yea, I will go; but thou shall tarry till I
come again!"
" I return to the narrative from which I have digressed.]

From this period I recovered my health so rapidly as to astonish my
physicians. The bleeding nun appeared no more, and I was soon able to set out
for Lindenberg. The baron received me with open arms. I confided to him the
sequel of my adventure; and he was not a little pleased to find that his
mansion would be no longer troubled with the phantom's quinquennial visits. I
was ^orry to perceive, that absence had not weakened Donna Rodolpha's imprudent
passion. In a private conversation which I had with her during my short stay at
the castle, she renewed her attempts to persuade me to return her affection.
Regarding her as the primary cause of all my sufferings, I entertained for her
no other sentiment than disgust. The skeleton of Beatrice was found in the
place which she had mentioned. This being all that I sought at Lindenberg, I
hastened to quit the baron's domains, equally anxious to perform the obsequies
of the murdered nun, and escape the importunity of a woman whom I detested. I
departed, followed by Donna Rodolpha's menaces that my contempt should not be
long unpunished.

I now bent my course toward Spain with all diligence. Lucas with my baggage
had joined me during my abode at Lindenberg. I arrived in my native country
without any accident, and immediately proceeded to my father's castle in
Andalusia. The remains of Beatrice were deposited in the family vault, all due
ceremonies performed, and the number of masses said which she had required.
Nothing now hindered me from employing all my endeavors to discover the
retreat of Agnes. The baroness had assured me that her niece had already taken
the veil; this intelligence I suspected to have been forged by jealousy, and
hoped to find my mistress still at liberty to accept my hand. I inquired after
her family; I found that before her daughter could reach Madrid, Donna Inesilla
was no more: you, my dear Lorenzo, were said to be abroad, but where I could
not discover: your father was in a distant province, on a visit to the duke de
Medina; and as to Agnes, no one could or would inform me what was become of
her. Theodore, according to promise, had returned to Strasbourg, where he found
his grandfather dead, and Marguerite in possession of his fortune. All her
persuasions to remain with her were fruitless: he quitted her a second time,
and followed me to Madrid. He exerted himself to the utmost in forwarding my
search: but our united endeavors were unattended by success. The retreat which
concealed Agnes remained an impenetrable mystery; and I began to abandon all
hopes of recovering her.

About eight months ago, I was returning to my hotel in a melancholy humor,
having passed the evening at the playhouse. The night was dark, and I was
unaccompanied. Plunged in reflections which were far from being agreeable, I
perceived not that three men had followed me from the theater, till on turning
into an unfrequented street, they all attacked me at the same time with the
utmost fury. I sprang back a few paces, drew my sword, and threw my cloak over
my left arm. The obscurity of the night was in my favor. For the most part the
blows of the assassins, being aimed at random, failed to touch me. I at length
was fortunate enough to lay one of my adversaries at my feet; but before this I
had already received so many wounds, and was (...) warmly pressed, that my
destruction would have been inevitable, had not the clashing of swords called a
cavalier to my assistance. He ran toward me with his sword drawn: several
domestics followed him with torches. His arrival made the combat equal: yet
would not the bravos abandon their design, till the servants were on the point
of joining us. They then fled away, and we lost them in the obscurity.

The stranger now addressed himself to me with politeness, and inquired whether
I was wounded. Faint with the loss of blood, I could scarcely thank him for his
seasonable aid, and entreat him to let some of his servants convey me to the
hotel de las Cisternas. I no sooner mentioned the name than he professed
himself an acquaintance of my father's, and declared that he would not permit
my being transported to such a distance before my wounds had been examined. He
added, that his house was hard by, and begged me to accompany him thither. His
manner was so earnest, that I could not reject his offer; and, leaning upon his
arm, a few minutes brought me to the porch of a magnificent hotel.

On entering the house, an old greyheaded domestic came to welcome my
conductor: he inquired when the duke, his master, meant to quit the country,
and was answered, that he would remain there yet some months. My deliverer then
desired the family surgeon to be summoned without delay: his orders were
obeyed. I was seated upon a sofa in a noble apartment; and my wounds being
examined, they were declared to be very slight. The surgeon, however, advised
me not to expose myself to the night air; and the stranger pressed me so
earnestly to take a bed in his house, that I consented to remain where I was
for the present.

Being now left alone with my deliverer, I took the opportunity of thanking him
in more express terms than I had done hitherto; but he begged me to be silent
on that subject.

"I esteem myself happy," said he, "in having had it in my power to render you
this little service; and I shall think myself eternally obliged to my daughter
for detaining me so (...) at the convent of St. Clare. The high esteem in which
I have ever held the marquis de las Cisternas, though accident has not
permitted our being so intimate as I could wish, makes me rejoice in the
opportunity of making his son's acquaintance. I am certain that my brother, in
whose house you now are, will lament his not being at Madrid to receive you
himself: but, in the duke's absence, I am master of the family, and may assure
you, in his name, that every thing in the hotel de Medina is perfectly at your
disposal."

Conceive my surprise, Lorenzo, at discovering, in the person of my preserver,
Don Gaston de Medina. It was only to be equalled by my secret satisfaction at
the assurance, that Agnes inhabited the convent of St. Clare. This latter
sensation was not a little weakened, when, in answer to my seemingly
indifferent questions, he told me that his daughter had really taken the veil.
I suffered not my grief at this circumstance to take root in my mind: I
flattered myself with the idea, that my uncle's credit at the court of Rome
would remove this obstacle, and that, without difficulty, I should obtain for
my mistress a dispensation from her vows. Buoyed up with this hope, I calmed
the uneasiness of my bosom; and I redoubled my endeavors to appear grateful
for the attention, and pleased with the society, of Don Gaston.

A domestic now entered the room, and informed me that the bravo whom I had
wounded discovered some signs of life. I desired that he might be carried to my
father's hotel, and said that, as soon as he recovered his voice, I would
examine him respecting his reasons for attempting my life. I was answered, that
he was already able to speak, though with difficulty. Don Gaston's curiosity
made him press me to interrogate the assassin in his presence; but this
curiosity I was by no means inclined to gratify. One reason was, that,
suspecting from whence the blow came, I was unwilling to place before Don
Gaston's eyes the guilt of a sister. Another was, that I feared to be
recognized for Alphonso d'Alvarada, and precautions taken in consequence, to
keep me from the sight of Agnes. To avow my passion for his daughter, and
endeavor to make him enter into my schemes, what I knew of Don Gaston's
character convinced me would be an imprudent step; and considering it to be
essential that he should know me for no other than the Conde de las Cisternas,
I was determined not to let him hear the bravo's confession. I insinuated to
him, that as I suspected a lady to be concerned in the business, whose name
might accidentally escape from the assassin, it was necessary for me to examine
the man in private. Don Gaston's delicacy would not permit his urging the point
any longer, and, in consequence, the bravo was conveyed to my hotel.

The next morning I took leave of my host, who was to return to the duke on the
same day. My wounds had been so trifling, that, except being obliged to wear my
arm in a sling for a short time, I felt no inconvenience from the night's
adventure. The surgeon who examined the bravo's wound declared it to be mortal:
he had just time to confess that he had been instigated to murder me by the
revengeful Donna Rodolpha, and expired in a few minutes after.

All my thoughts were now bent upon getting to the speech of my lovely nun.
Theodore set himself to work, and, for this time, with better success. He
attacked the gardener of St. Clare so forcibly with bribes and promises, that
the old man was entirely gained over to my interests; and it was settled that I
should be introduced into the convent in the character of his assistant. The
plan was put into execution without delay. Disguised in a common habit, and a
black patch covering one of my eyes, I was presented to the lady prioress, who
condescended to approve of the gardener's choice. I immediately entered upon my
employment. Botany having been a favorite study with me, I was by no means at
a loss in my new station. For some days I continued to work in the convent
garden without meeting the object of my disguise. On the fourth morning I was
more successful. I heard the voice of Agnes, and was speeding toward the
sound, when the sight of the domina stopped me. I drew back with caution, and
concealed myself behind a thick clump of trees.

The prioress advanced, and seated herself with Agnes on a bench at no great
distance. I heard her, in an angry tone, blame her companion's continual
melancholy. She told her, that to weep the loss of any lover, in her situation,
was a crime; but that to weep the loss of a faithless one was folly and
absurdity in the extreme. Agnes replied in so low a voice that I could not
distinguish her words, but I perceived that she used terms of gentleness and
submission. The conversation was interrupted by the arrival of a young
pensioner, who informed the domina that she was waited for in the parlour. The
old lady rose, kissed the cheek of Agnes, and retired. The new comer remained.
Agnes spoke much to her in praise of somebody whom I could not make out; but
her auditor seemed highly delighted and interested by the conversation. The nun
showed her several letters: the other perused them with evident pleasure,
obtained permission to copy them, and withdrew for that purpose to my great
satisfaction.

No sooner was she out of sight, than I quitted my concealment. Fearing to
alarm my lovely mistress, I drew near her gently, intending to discover myself
by degrees. But who for a moment can deceive the eyes of love? She raised her
head at my approach, and recognized me, at a single glance. She rose hastily
from her seat with an exclamation of surprise, and attempted to retire: but I
followed her, detained her, and entreated to be heard. Persuaded of my
falsehood, she refused to listen to me, and ordered me positively to quit the
garden. It was now my turn to refuse. I protested that, however dangerous might
be the consequences, I would not leave her till she had heard my justification.
I assured her, that she had been deceived by the artifices of her relations;
that I could convince her, beyond the power of doubt, that my passion had been
pure and disinterested; and I asked her what should induce me to seek her in
the convent, were I influenced by the selfish motives which my enemies had
ascribed to me.

My prayers, my arguments, and vows not to quit her till she had promised to
listen to me, united to her fears lest the nuns should see me with her, to her
natural curiosity, and to the affection which she still felt for me, in spite
of my supposed desertion, at length prevailed. She told me that to grant my
request at that moment was impossible; but she engaged to be in the same spot
at eleven that night, and to converse with me for the last time. Having
obtained this promise, I released her hand, and she fled back with rapidity
toward the convent.

I communicated my success to my ally, the old gardener: he pointed out an
hiding place, where I might shelter myself till night without fear of a
discovery. Thither I betook myself at the hour when I ought to have retired
with my supposed master, and waited impatiently for the appointed time. The
chillness of the night was in my favor, since it kept the other nuns confined
to their cells. Agnes alone was insensible of the inclemency of the air, and,
before eleven, joined me at the spot which had witnessed our former interview.
Secure from interruption, I related to her the true cause of my disappearing on
the fatal fifth of May. She was evidently much affected by my narrative. When
it was concluded, she confessed the injustice of her suspicio^s, and blamed
herself for having taken the veil through despair at my ingratitude.

"But now it is too late to repine!" she added; "the die is thrown: I have
pronounced my vows, and dedicated myself to the service of Heaven. I am
sensible how ill I am calculated for a convent. My disgust at a monastic life
increases daily: ennui and discontent are my constant companions; and I will
not conceal from you, that the passion which I formerly felt for one so near
being my husband, is not yet extinguished in my bosom: but we must part!
Insuperable barriers divide us from each other, and on this side the grave we
must never meet again!"

I now exerted myself to prove, that our union was not so impossible as she
seemed to think it. I vaunted to her the cardinal duke of Lerma's influence at
the court of Rome. I assured her, that I should easily obtain a dispensation
from her vows; and I doubted not but Don Gaston would coincide with my views,
when informed of my real name and long attachment. Agnes replied, that since I
encouraged such an hope, I could know but little of her father. Liberal and
kind in every other respect, superstition formed the only stain upon his
character. Upon this head he was inflexible: he sacrificed his dearest
interests to his scruples, and would consider it an insult to suppose him
capable of authorizing his daughter to break her vows to Heaven.

"But suppose," said I, interrupting her, "suppose that he should disapprove of
our union: let him remain ignorant of my proceedings till I have rescued you
from the prison in which you are now confined. Once my wife, you are free from
his authority. I need from him no pecuniary assistance; and when he sees his
resentment to be unavailing, he will doubtless restore you to his favor. But,
let the worst happen; should Don Gaston be irreconcilable, my relations will
vie with each other in making you forget his loss; and you will find in my
father a substitute for the parent of whom I shall deprive you."

"Don Raymond," replied Agnes, in a firm and resolute voice, "I love my father:
he has treated me harshly in this one instance; but I have received from him,
in every other, so many proofs of love, that his affection is become necessary
to my existence. Were I to quit the convent, he never would forgive me; nor can
I think that, on his death bed, he would leave me his curse, without shuddering
at the very idea. Besides, I am conscious myself, that my vows are (...).
Wilfully did I contract my engagement with Heaven: I cannot break it without a
crime. Then banish from your mind the idea of our being ever united. I am
devoted to religion; and however I may grieve at our separation, I would oppose
obstacles myself to what I feel would render me guilty."

I strove to overrule these ill grounded scruples. We were still disputing upon
the subject, when the convent bell summoned the nuns to matins. Agnes was
obliged to attend the^ (...) but she left me not till I had compelled her to
promise, that on the following night she would be at the same place at the same
hour. These meetings continued for several weeks uninterrupted: and it is now,
Lorenzo, that I must implore your indulgence. Reflect upon our situation, our
youth, our long attachment. Weigh all the circumstances which attended our
assignations, and you will confess the temptation to have been irresistible;
you will even pardon me when I acknowledge that, in an unguarded moment, the
honor of Agnes was sacrificed to my passion."

[Lorenzo's eyes sparkled with fury; a deep crimson spread itself over his
face: he started from his seat, and attempted to draw his sword. The marquis
was aware of his movement, and caught his hand: he pressed it affectionately:

"My friend! my brother! hear me to the conclusion! Till then restrain your
passion; and be at least convinced, that if what I have related is criminal,
the blame must fall upon me, and not upon your sister."

Lorenzo suffered himself to be prevailed upon by Don Raymond's entreaties: he
resumed his place, and listened to the rest of the narrative with a gloomy and
impatient countenance. The marquis thus continued:]

Scarcely was the first burst of passion past, when Agnes, recovering herself,
started from my arms with horror. She called me infamous seducer, loaded me
with the bitterest reproaches, and ^eat her bosom in all the wildness of
delirium. Ashamed of my imprudence, I with difficulty found words to excuse
myself. I endeavored to console her: I threw myself at her feet, and entreated
her forgiveness. She forced her hand from me, which I had taken and would have
pressed to my lips.

"To^ch me not!" she cried, with a violence which terrified me. "Monster of
perfidy and ingratitude, how have I been deceived in you! I looked upon you as
my friend, my protector; I trusted myself in your hands with confidence, and,
relying upon your honor, thought that mine ran no risk: and it is by you, whom I
adored, that I am covered with infamy! It Is by you that I have been seduced
into breaking my vows to God, that I am reduced to a level with the basest of
my sex! Shame upon you, villain, you shall never see me more!"

She started from the bank on which she was seated. I endeavored to detain
her; but she disengaged herself from me with violence, and took refuge in the
convent.

I retired, filled with confusion and inquietude. The next morning I failed
not, as usual, to appear in the garden; but Agnes was no where to be seen. At
night I waited for her at the place where we generally met. I found no better
success. Several days and nights passed away in the same manner. At length I
saw my offended mistress cross the walk, on whose borders I was working: she
was accompanied by the same young pensioner, on whose arm she seemed, from
weakness, obliged to support herself. She looked upon me for a moment, but
instantly turned her head away. I waited her return; but she passed on to the
convent without paying any attention to me, or the penitent looks with which I
implored her forgiveness.

As soon as the nuns were retired, the old gardener joined me with a sorrowful
air.

"Segnor," said he, "it grieves me to say, that I can be no longer of use to
you; the lady whom you used to meet has just assured me, that if I admitted you
again into the garden, she would discover the whole business to the lady
prioress. She bade me tell you also, that your presence was an insult, and
that, if you still possess the least respect for her, you will never attempt to
see her more. Excuse me then for informing you, that I can favor your disguise
no longer. Should the prioress be acquainted with my conduct, she might not be
contented with dismissing me her service: out of revenge, she might accuse me
of having profaned the convent, and cause me to be thrown into the prisons of
the Inquisition."

Fruitless were my attempts to conquer his resolution. He denied me all future
entrance into the garden; and Agnes persevered in neither letting me see or
hear from her. In about a fortnight after, a violent illness which had seized
my father obliged me to set out for Andalusia. I hastened thither, and, as I
imagined, found the marquis at the point of death. Though, on its first
appearance, his complaint was declared mortal, he lingered out several months;
during which, my attendance upon him in his malady, and the occupation of
settling his affairs after his decease, permitted not my quitting Andalusia.
Within these four days I returned to Madrid, and, on arriving at my hot^^, I
there found this letter waiting for me.

[Here the marquis unlocked a drawer of a cabinet; he took out a folded paper,
which he presented to his auditor. Lorenzo opened it, and recognized his
sister's hand. The contents were as follows:

INTO what an abyss of misery have you plunged me! Raymond, you force me to
become as criminal as yourself. I had resolved never to see you more; if
possible, to forget you; if not, only to remember you with hate. A being, for
whom I already feel a mother's tenderness, solicits me to pardon my seducer,
and apply to his love for the means of preservation. Raymond, your child lives
in my bosom. I tremble at the vengeance of the prioress. I tremble much for
myself, yet more for the innocent creature whose existence depends upon mine.
Both of us are lost, should my situation be discovered. Advise me, then, what
steps to take, but seek not to see me. The gardener, who undertakes to deliver
this, is dismissed, and we have nothing to hope from that quarter. The man
engaged in his place is of incorruptible fidelity. The best means of conveying
to me your answer, is by concealing it under the great statue of St. Francis,
which stands in the Capuchin cathedral; thither I go every Thursday to
confession, and shall easily have an opportunity of securing your letter. I
hear that you are now absent from Madrid. Need I entreat you to write the very
moment of your return? I will not think it. Ah! Raymond! mine is a cruel
situation! Deceived by my nearest relations, compelled to embrace a profession
the duties of which I am ill calculated to perform, conscious of the sanctity
of those duties, and seduced into violating them by one whom I least suspected
of perfidy, I am now obliged, by circumstances, to choose between death and
perjury. Woman's timidity, and maternal affection, permit me not to balance in
the choice. I feel all the guilt into which I plunge myself when I yield to the
plan which you before proposed to me. My poor father's death, which has taken
place since we met, has removed one obstacle. He sleeps in his grave, and I no
longer dread his anger. But from the anger of God, oh! Raymond! who shall
shield me? Who can protect me against my conscience, against myself? I dare not
dwell upon these thoughts; they will drive me mad. I have taken my resolution.
Procure a dispensation from my vows. I am ready to fly with you. Write to me,
my husband! Tell me that absence has not abated your love! Tell me that you
will rescue from death your unborn child, and its unhappy mother. I live in all
the agonies of terror. Every eye which is fixed upon me, seems to read my
secret and my shame. And you are the cause of those agonies! Oh! when my heart
first loved you, how little did it suspect you of making it feel such pangs!

AGNES


Having perused the letter, Lorenzo restored it in silence. The marquis
replaced it in the cabinet, and then proceeded:]

Excessive was my joy at reading this intelligence, so earnestly desired, so
little expected. My plan was ^oon arranged. When Don Gaston discovered to me
his daughter's retreat, I entertained no doubt of her readiness to quit the
convent: I had, therefore, entrusted the cardinal duke of Lerma with the whole
affair, who immediately busied himself in obtaining the necessary bull.
Fortunately, I had afterward neglected to stop his proceedings. Not long since
I received a letter from him, stating that he expected daily to receive the
order from the court of Rome. Upon this I would willingly have relied; but the
cardinal wrote me word, that I must find some means of conveying Agnes out of
the convent, unknown to the prioress. He doubted not but this latter would be
much incensed by loosing a person of such high rank from her society, and
consider the renunciation of Agnes as an insult to her house. He represented
her as a woman of a violent and revengeful character, capable of proceeding to
the greatest extremities. It was therefore to be feared lest, by confining
Agnes in the convent, she should frustrate my hopes, and render the pope's
mandate unavailing. Influenced by this consideration, I resolved to carry off
my mistress, and conceal her in the cardinal duke's estate till the arrival of
the expected bull. He approved of my design, and professed himself ready to
give a shelter to the fugitive. I next caused the new gardener of St. Clare to
be seized privately, and confined in my hotel. By this means I became master of
the key to the garden door, and I had now nothing more to do than prepare Agnes
for the elopement. This was done by the letter which you saw me deliver this
evening. I told her in it, that I should be ready to receive her at twelve
tomorrow night; that I had secured the key of the garden, and that she might
depend upon a speedy release.

You have now, Lorenzo, heard the whole of my long narrative. I have nothing to
say in my excuse, save that my intentions toward your sister have been ever
the most honorable; that it has always been, and still is, my design to make
her my wife; and that I trust, when you consider these circumstances, our
youth, and our attachment, you will not only forgive our momentary lapse from
virtue, but will aid me in repairing my faults to Agnes, and securing a lawful
title to her person and her heart. There is certainly a very strong resemblance
between some parts of the story of "the Bleeding Nun," and that of the
Apparition in "Les Chevaliers du Cygne." I can only account for it by supposing
that Madame de Genlis had heard, while in ^ermany, the same tradition which I
have made use of. It is at least certain, that "The Monk" was already in the
press, when I read, for the first time "Les Chevaliers du Cygne." -- The story
which was related to me, was merely, that the castle of Lauenstein was haunted
by a spectre habited as a nun (but not as a bleeding one;) that a young officer
by mistake ran away with her, instead of the heiress of Lauenstein; that she
used to appear to him every night; that, going to a foreign country, neither he
nor the phantom was ever after heard of; and that the words which she used to
repeat to him were in the original,

"Frizchen! Frizchen! Du bist mein!
Frizchen! Frizchen! Ich bin dein!
Ich dein!
Du mein,
Mit leib' und seel."



CHAP. V.
O you! whom Vanity's light bark conveys
On Fame's mad voyage by the wind of Praise,
With what a shifting gale your course you ply,
For ever sunk too low or borne too high!
Who pants for glory finds but short repose:
A breath revives him, and a breath o'erthrows.
POPE.
HERE the marquis concluded his adventures. Lorenzo, before he could determine
on his reply, passed some moments in reflection. At length he broke silence.

"Raymond," said he, taking his hand, "strict honor would oblige me to wash off
in your blood the stain thrown upon my family, but the circumstances of your
case forbid me to consider you as an enemy. The temptation was too great to be
resisted. It Is the superstition of my relations which has occasioned these
misfortunes, and they are more the offenders than yourself and Agnes. What has
passed between you cannot be recalled, but may yet be repaired by uniting you
to my sister. You have ever been, you still continue to be, my dearest, and
indeed, my only friend. I feel for Agnes the truest affection, and there is no
one on whom I would bestow her more willingly than on yourself. Pursue, then,
your design. I will accompany you tomorrow night, and conduct her myself to
the house of the cardinal. My presence will be a sanction for her conduct, and
prevent her incurring blame by her flight from the convent."

The marquis thanked him in terms by no means deficient in gratitude. Lorenzo
then informed him that he had nothing more to apprehend from Donna Rodolpha's
enmity. Five months had already elapsed since, in an excess of passion, she
broke a blood vessel, and expired in the course of a ^ew hours. He then
proceeded to mention the interests of Antonia. The marquis was much surprised
at hearing of this new relation. His father had carried his hatred of Elvira to
the grave, and had never given the least hint that he knew what was become of
his eldest son's widow. Don Raymond assured his friend, that he was not
mistaken in supposing him ready to acknowledge his sister-in-law, and her
amiable daughter. The preparations for the elopement would not permit his
visiting them the next day; but in the mean while, he desired Lorenzo to assure
them of his friendship, and to supply Elvira, upon his account, with any sums
which she might want. This the youth promised to do, as soon as her abode
should be known to him. He then took leave of his future brother, and returned
to the palace de Medina.

The day was already on the point of breaking when the marquis retired to his
chamber. Conscious that his narrative would take up some hours, and wishing to
secure himself from interruption, on returning to the hotel he ordered his
attendants not to fit up for him; consequently, he was somewhat surprised, on
entering his anti-room, to find Theodore established there. The page sat near a
table, with a pen in his hand, and was so totally occupied by his employment,
that he perceived not his lord's approach. The marquis stopped to observe him.
Theodore wrote a few lines, then paused and scratched out a part of the
writing; then wrote again, smiled, and seemed highly pleased with what he had
been about. At last he threw down his pen, sprang from his chair, and clapped
his hands together joyfully.

"There it is!" cried he aloud: "now they are charming!"

His transports were interrupted by a laugh from the marquis, who suspected the
nature of his employment.

"What is so charming, Theodore?"

The youth started, and looked round: he blushed, ran to the table, seized the
paper on which he had been writing, and concealed it in confusion.

"Oh! my lord, I knew not that you were so near me. Can I be of use to you?
Lucas is already gone to bed."

"I shall follow his example when I have given my opinion of your verses."

"My verses, my lord!"

"Nay I am sure that you have been writing some, for nothing else could have
kept you awake till this time in the morning. Where are they, Theodore? I shall
like to see your composition."

Theodore's cheeks glowed with still deeper crimson: he longed to show his
poetry, but first chose to be pressed for it.

"Indeed, my lord, they are not worthy your attention."

"Not these verses, which you just now declared to be so charming? Come, come,
let me see whether our opinions are the same. I promise that you shall find in
me ^n indulgent critic."

The (...) produced his paper with seeming reluctance; but the satisfaction
which sparkled in his dark expressive eyes betrayed the vanity of his youthful
bosom. The marquis smiled while he observed the emotions of an heart as yet but
little skilled in veiling its sentiments. He seated himself upon a sofa.
Theodore, while hope and fear contended on his anxious countenance, waited with
inquietude for his master's decision, while the marquis read the following
lines:

LOVE AND AGE.
THE night was dark; the wind blew cold,
Anacreon, grown morose and old,
Sat by his fire, and fed the kindly flame:
Sudden the cottage door expands,
And, lo! before him Cupid stands,
Casts round a friendly glance, and greets him by his name.
"What! is it thou?" the startled sire
In sullen tone exclaimed, while ire
With crimson flushed his pale and wrinkled cheek:
"Would thou again with amorous rage
Inflame my bosom? Steeled by age,
Vain boy, to pierce my breast thine arrows are too weak.
"What seek you in this desert drear?
No smiles or sports inhabit here;
Never did these valleys witness dalliance sweet:
Eternal winter binds the plains;
Age in my house despotic reigns;
My garden boasts no flower, my bosom boasts no heat.
"Begone, and seek the blooming bower,
Where some ripe virgin courts thy power,
Or bid provoking dreams flit round her bed;
On Damon's amorous breast repose;
Wanton on Chloe's lip of rose,
Or make her blushing cheek a pillow for thy head.
"Be such thy haunts! These regions cold
Avoid! Nor think grown wise and old
This hoary head again thy yoke shall bear:
Remembering that my fairest years
By thee were marked with sighs and tears,
I think thy friendship false, and shun the guileful snare.
"I have not yet forgot the pains
I felt while bound in Julia's chains:
The ardent flames with which my bosom burned;
The nights I passed deprived of rest;
The jealous pangs which racked my breast;
My disappointed hopes, and passion unreturned.
"Then fly, and curse mine eyes no more!
Fly from my peaceful cottage door!
No day, no hour, no moment shall thou stay.
I know thy falsehood, scorn thy arts,
Distrust thy smiles, and fear thy darts:
Traitor, begone, and seek some other to betray!" --
"Does age, old man, your wits confound?"
Replied the offended god, and frowned:
(His frown was sweet as is the virgin's smile!)
"Do you to me these words address?
To me, who do not love you less,
Though you my friendship scorn, and pleasures past revile,
"If one proud fair you chanced to find,
An hundred other nymphs were kind,
Whose smiles might well for Julia's frowns atone:
But such is man! his partial hand
Unnumbered favors writes on sand,
But stamps one little fault on solid lasting stone.
"Ingrate! Who led you to the wave,
At noon where Lesbia loved to lave?
Who named the bower alone where Daphne lay?
And who, when Celia shrieked for aid,
Bade you with kisses hush the maid?
What other was it than love, oh! false Anacreon, say?
"Then you could call me -- 'Gentle boy!
'My only bliss! my source of joy!'
Then you could prize me dearer than your soul!
Could kiss, and dance me on your knees;
And swear, not wine itself would please,
Had not the lip of Love first touched the flowing bowl.
"Must those sweet days return no more?
Must I for aye your loss deplore,
Banished your heart, and from your favor driven?
Ah! no! my fears that smile denies;
That heaving breast, those sparkling eyes
Declare me ever dear, and all my faults forgiven.
"Again beloved, esteemed, caressed,
Cupid shall in thine arms be pressed,
Sport on thy knees, or on thy bosom sleep:
My torch thine age struck heart shall warm;
My hand pale winter's rage disarm,
And Youth and Spring shall here once more their revels keep." --
A feather now of golden hue
He smiling from his pinion drew:
This to the poet's hand the boy commits;
And straight before Anacreon's eyes
The fairest dreams of fancy rise,
And round his favored head wild inspiration slits.
His bosom glows with amorous fire;
Eager he grasps the magic lyre;
Swift over the tuneful chords his fingers move:
The feather plucked from Cupid's wing
Sweeps the too long neglected string,
While soft Anacreon sings the power and praise of Love.
Soon as that name was heard, the woods
Shook off their snows; the melting floods
Broke their ^old chains, and winter fled away.
Once more the earth was decked with flowers,
Mild zephyrs breathed through blooming bowers;
High towered the glorious sun, and poured the blaze of day.
Attracted by the harmonious sound,
Sylvans and fauns the cot surround,
And curious crowd the minstrel to behold:
The wood-nymphs haste the spell to prove:
Eager they run: they list, they love,
And, while they hear the strain, forget the man is old.
Cupid, to nothing constant long,
Perched on the harp attends the song,
Or stifles with a kiss the dulcet notes:
Now on the poet's breast reposes,
Now twines his hoary locks with roses,
Or borne on wings of gold in wanton circle floats.
Then thus Anecreon -- "I no more
At other shrines my vows will pour,
Since Cupid deigns my numbers to inspire:
From Phoebus or the blue-eye'd Maid
Now shall my verse request no aid,
For Love alone shall be the patron of my lyre.
"In lofty strain, of earlier days,
I spread the king's or hero's praise,
And struck the martial chords with epic fire:
But farewell, hero! farewell, king!
Your deeds my lips no more shall sing,
For love alone shall be the subject of my lyre The last stanza is taken from
the first Ode of Anacreon.
."
The marquis returned the paper with a smile of encouragement.

"Your little poem pleases me much," said he: "however, you must not count my
opinion for any thing. I am no judge of verses, and for my own part never
composed more than six lines in my life: those six produced so unlucky an
effect, that I am fully resolved never to compose another. But I wander from my
subject. I was going to say that you cannot employ your time worse than in
making verses. An author, whether good or bad, or between both, is an animal
whom every body is privileged to attack: for though all are not able to write
books, all conceive themselves able to judge them. A bad composition carries
with it its own punishment -- contempt and ridicule. A good one excites envy,
and entails upon its author a thousand mortifications: he finds himself
assailed by partial and ill humoured criticism: one man finds fault with the
plan, another with the style, a third with the precept which it strives to
inculcate; and they who cannot succeed in finding fault with the book, employ
themselves in stigmatizing its author. They maliciously rake out from obscurity
every little circumstance which may throw ridicule upon his private character
or conduct, and aim at wounding the man since they cannot hurt the writer. In
short, to enter the lists of literature is wilfully to expose yourself to the
arrows of neglect, ridicule, envy, and disappointment. Whether you write well
or ill, be assured that you will not escape from blame. Indeed this
circumstance contains a young author's chief consolation: he remembers that
Lope de Vega and Calderona had unjust and envious critics, and he modestly
conceives himself to be exactly in their predicament. But I am conscious that
all these sage observations are thrown away upon you. Authorship is a mania, to
conquer which, no reasons are sufficiently strong; and you might as easily
persuade me not to love, as I persuade you not to write. However, if you cannot
help being occasionally seized with a poetical paroxysm, take at least the
precaution of communicating your verses to none but those whose partiality for
you secures their approbation."

"Then, my lord, you do not think these lines tolerable?" said Theodore, with
an humble and dejected air.

"You mistake my meaning. As I said before, they have pleased me much: but my
regard for you makes me partial, and others might judge them less favorably. I
must still remark, that even my prejudice in your favor does not blind me so
much as to prevent my observing several faults. For instance, you make a
terrible confusion of metaphors; you are too apt to make the strength of your
lines consist more in the words than sense; some of the verses seem introduced
only in order to rhyme with others; and most of the best ideas are borrowed
from other poets, though possibly you are unconscious of the theft yourself.
These faults may occasionally be excused in a work of length; but a short poem
must be correct and perfect."

"All this is true, Segnor; but you should consider that I only write for
pleasure."

"Your defects are the less excuseable. Their incorrectness may be forgiven,
who work for money, who are obliged to complete a given task in a given time,
and are paid according to the bulk, not value, of their productions. But in
those whom no necessity forces to turn author, who merely write for fame, and
have full leisure to polish their compositions, faults are unpardonable, and
merit the sharpest arrows of criticism."

The marquis rose from the sofa; the page looked discouraged and melancholy;
and this did not escape his master's observation.

"However," added he smiling, "I think that these lines do you no discredit.
Your ver^ification is tolerably easy, and your ear seems to be just. The
perusal of your little poem upon the whole gave me much pleasure; and if it is
not asking too great a favor, I shall be highly obliged to you for a copy."

The youth's countenance immediately cleared up. He perceived not the smile,
half approving, half ironical, which accompanied the request, and he promised
the copy with great readiness. The marquis withdrew to his chamber, much amused
by the instantaneous effect produced upon Theodore's vanity by the conclusion
of his criticism. He threw himself upon his couch, sleep soon stole over him,
and his dreams presented him with the most flattering pictures of happiness
with Agnes.

On reaching the hotel de Medina, Lorenzo's first care was to inquire for
letters. He found several waiting for him; but that which he sought was not
amongst them. Leonella had found it impossible to write that evening. However,
her impatience to secure Don Christoval's heart, on which she flattered herself
with having made no slight impression, permitted her not to pass another day
without informing him where she was to be found. On her return from the
Capuchin church, she had related to her sister, with exultation, how attentive
an handsome cavalier had been to her; as also how his companion had undertaken
to plead Antonia's cause with the marquis de las Cisternas. Elvira received
this intelligence with sensations very different from those with which it was
communicated. She blamed her sister's imprudence in confiding her history to an
absolute stranger, and expressed her fears lest this inconsiderate step should
prejudice the marquis against her. The greatest of her apprehensions she
concealed in her own breast. She had observed with inquietude, that at the
mention of Lorenzo a deep blush spread itself over her daughter's cheek. The
timid Antonia dared not to pronounce his name. Without knowing wherefore, she
felt embarrassed when he was made the subject of discourse, and endeavored to
change the conversation to Ambrosio. Elvira perceived the emotions of this
young bosom: in consequence, she insisted upon Leonella's breaking her promise
to the cavaliers. A sigh, which on hearing this order escaped from Antonia,
confirmed the wary mother in her resolution.

Through this resolution Leonella was determined to break: she conceived it to
be inspired by envy, and that her sister dreaded her being elevated above her.
Without imparting her design to any one, she took an opportunity of dispatching
the following note to Lorenzo: it was delivered to him as soon as he awoke:

Doubtless, Segnor Don (...), you have frequently accused me of (...) and
forgetfulness: but on the word of a virgin it was out of my power to perform my
promise yesterday. I know not in what words to inform you, how strange a
reception my sister gave your kind wish to visit her. She is an odd woman, with
many good points about her; but her jealousy of me frequently makes her
conceive notions quite unaccountable. On hearing that your friend had paid some
little attention to me, she immediately took the alarm: she blamed my conduct,
and has absolutely forbidden me to let you know our abode. My strong sense of
gratitude for your kind offers of service, and -- shall I confess it? my desire
to behold once more the too amiable Don Christoval, will not permit my obeying
her injunctions. I have therefore stolen a moment to inform you, that we lodge
in the strada di San Jago, four doors from the palace d'Albornos, and nearly
opposite to the barber's Miguel Coello. Inquire for Donna Elvira Dalfa, since,
in compliance with her father-in-law's order, my sister continues to be called
by her maiden name. At eight this evening you will be sure of finding us: but
let not a word drop, which may raise a suspicion of my having written this
letter. Should you see the Conde d'Ossorio, tell him -- I blush while I declare
it -- tell him that his presence will be but too acceptable to the sympathetic

LEONELLA.


The latter sentences were written in red ink, to express the blushes of her
cheek while she committed an outrage upon her virgin modesty.

Lorenzo had no sooner perused this note, than he set out in search of Don
Christoval. Not being able to find him in the course of the day, he proceeded
to Donna Elvira's alone, to Leonella's infinite disappointment. The domestic by
whom he sent up his name having already declared his lady to be at home, she
had no excuse for refusing his visit: yet she consented to receive it with much
reluctance. That reluctance was increased by the changes which his approach
produced in Antonia's countenance; nor was it by any means abated, when the
youth himself appeared. The symmetry of his person, animation of his features,
and natural elegance of his manners and address, convinced Elvira that such a
guest must be dangerous for her daughter. She resolved to treat him with
distant politeness, to decline his services with gratitude for the tender of
them, and to make him feel, without offense, that his future visits would be
far from acceptable.

On his entrance he found Elvira, who was indisposed, reclining upon a sofa;
Antonia sat by her embroidery frame; and Leonella in a pastoral dress, held
"Montemayor's Diana." In spite of her being the mother of Antonia, Lorenzo
could not help expecting to find in Elvira, Leonella's true sister and the
daughter of "as honest a pains-taking (...) as any in Cordova." A single glance
was sufficient to undeceive him. He beheld a woman whose features, though
impaired by time and sorrow, still bore the marks of distinguished beauty: a
serious dignity reigned upon her countenance, but was tempered by a grace and
sweetness which rendered her truly enchanting. Lorenzo fancied that she must
have resembled her daughter in her youth, and readily excused the imprudence of
the late Conde de las Cisternas. She desired him to be seated, and immediately
resumed her place upon the sofa.

Antonia received him with a simple reverence, and continued her work: her
cheeks were suffused with crimson, and she strove to conceal her emotion by
leaning over her embroidery frame. Her aunt also chose to play off her airs of
modesty: she affected to blush and tremble, and waited with her eyes cast down
to receive, as she expected, the compliments of Don Christoval. Finding, after
some time, that no sign of his approach was given, she ventured to look round
the room, and perceived with vexation that Medina was unaccompanied. Impatience
would not permit her waiting for an explanation: interrupting Lorenzo, who was
delivering Raymond's message, she desired to know what was become of his friend.

He, who thought it necessary to maintain himself in her good graces, strove to
console her under her disappointment by committing a little violence upon truth.

"Ah! Segnora," he replied in a melancholy voice, how grieved will he be at
losing this opportunity of paying you his respects! A relation's illness has
obliged him to quit Madrid in haste: but on his return he will doubtless seize
the first moment with transport to throw himself at your feet!

As he said this, his eyes met those of Elvira: she punished his falsehood
sufficiently by darting at him a look expressive of displeasure and reproach.
Neither did the deceit answer his intention. Vexed and disappointed, Leonella
rose from her seat, and retired in dudgeon to her own apartment.

Lorenzo hastened to repair the fault which had injured him in Elvira's
opinion. He related his conversation with the marquis respecting her: he
assured her that Raymond was prepared to acknowledge her for his brother's
widow; and that, till it was in his power to pay his compliments to her in
person, Lorenzo was commissioned to supply his place. This intelligence
relieved Elvira from an heavy weight of uneasiness: she had now found a
protector for the fatherless Antonia, for whose future fortunes she had
suffered the greatest apprehensions. She was not sparing of her thanks to him
who had interfered so generously in her behalf: but still she gave him no
invitation to repeat his visit. However, when upon rising to depart he
requested permission to inquire after her health occasionally, the polite
earnestness of his manner, gratitude for his services, and respect for his
friend the marquis, would not admit of a refusal. She consented reluctantly to
receive him: he promised not to abuse her goodness, and quitted the house.

Antonia was now left alone with her mother: a temporary silence ensued. Both
wished to speak upon the same subject, but neither new how to introduce it. The
one felt a bashfulness which sealed up her lips, and for which she could not
account; the other feared to find her apprehensions true, or to inspire her
daughter with notions to which she might still be a stranger. At length Elvira
began the conversation.

"That is a charming young man, Antonia; I am much pleased with him. Was he
long near you yesterday in the cathedral?"

"He quitted me not for a moment while I staid in the church: he gave me his
seat, and was very obliging and attentive."

"Indeed? Why then have you never mentioned his name to me? Your aunt launched
out in praise of his friend, and you vaunted Ambrosio's eloquence: but neither
said a word of Don Lorenzo's person and accomplishments. Had not Leonella
spoken of his readiness to undertake our cause, I should not have known him to
be in existence."

She paused. Antonia colored, but was silent.

"Perhaps you judge him less favorably than I do. In my opinion his figure is
pleasing, his conversation sensible, and manners engaging. Still he may have
struck you differently: you may think him disagreeable, and -- "

"Disagreeable? Oh! dear mother, how should I possibly think him so? I should
be very ungrateful were I not sensible of his kindness yesterday, and very
blind if his merits had escaped me. His figure is so graceful, so noble! His
manners so gentle, yet so manly! I never yet saw so many accomplishments united
in one person, and I doubt whether Madrid can produce his equal."

"Why then were you so silent in praise of this phoenix of Madrid? Why was it
concealed from me, that his society had afforded you pleasure?"

"In truth, I know not; you ask me a question which I cannot resolve myself. I
was on the point of mentioning him a thousand times; his name was constantly on
my lips; but when I would have pronounced it, I wanted courage to execute my
design. However, if I did not speak of him, it was not that I thought of him
the less."

"That I believe. But shall I tell you why you wanted courage? It was because,
accustomed to confide to me your most secret thoughts, you knew not how to
conceal, yet feared to acknowledge, that your heart nourished a sentiment which
you were conscious I should disapprove. Come hither to me, my child."

Antonia quitted her embroidery frame, threw herself upon her knees by the
sofa, and hid her face in her mother's lap.

"Fear not, my sweet girl! Consider me equally as your friend and parent, and
apprehend no reproof from me. I have read the emotions of your bosom; you are
yet ill skilled in concealing them, and they could not escape my attentive eye.
This Lorenzo is dangerous to your repose; he has already made an impression
upon your heart. It Is true that I perceive easily that your affection is
returned: but what can be the consequences of this attachment? You are poor and
friendless, my Antonia; Lorenzo is the heir of the duke of Medina Celi. Even
should himself mean honorably, his uncle never will consent to your union;
nor, without that uncle's consent, will I. By sad experience I know what sorrow
she must endure, who marries into a family unwilling to receive her. Then
struggle with your affection: whatever pains it may cost you, strive to conquer
it. Your heart is tender and susceptible: it has already received a strong
impression; but when once convinced that you should not encourage such
sentiments, I trust that you have sufficient fortitude to drive them from your
bosom."

Antonia kissed her hand, and promised implicit obedience. Elvira then
continued --

"To prevent your passion from growing stronger, it will be needful to prohibit
Lorenzo's visits. The service which he has rendered me permits not my
forbidding them positively; but unless I judge too favorably of his character,
he will discontinue them without taking offense, if I confess to him my
reasons, and throw myself ^ntirely on his generosity. The next time that I see
him, I will honestly avow to him the embarrassment which his presence
occasions. How say you, my child? Is not this measure necessary?"

Antonia subscribed to every thing without hesitation, though not without
regret. Her mother kissed her affectionately, and retired to bed. Antonia
followed her example, and vowed so frequently never more to think of Lorenzo,
that till sleep closed her eyes she thought of nothing el^e. Pour chasse^ de sa
souvenance
^^objet qui plait,
(...) done bien de souffrance
Pour peu d'effet.
Le souvenir durant la vie
Toujours revient;
En pensant qu'^l faut qu'on l'oublie
On s'en souvient.



While this was passing at Elvira's, Lorenzo hastened to rejoin the marquis.
Every thing was ready for the second elopement of Agnes; and at twelve the two
friends with a coach and four were at the garden wall of the convent. Don
Raymond drew out his key, and unlocked the door. They entered, and waited for
some time in expectation of being joined by Agnes. At length the marquis grew
impatient: beginning to fear that his second attempt would succeed no better
than the first, he proposed to reconnoitre the convent. The friends advanced
toward it. Every thing was still and dark. The prioress was anxious to keep
the story a secret, fearing lest the crime of one of its members should bring
disgrace upon the whole community, or that the interposition of powerful
relations should deprive her vengeance of its intended victim. She took care
therefore to give the lover of Agnes no cause to suppose that his design was
discovered, and his mistress on the point of suffering the punishment of (...)
fault. The same reason made her reject the idea of arresting the unknown
seducer in the garden: such a proceeding would have created much disturbance,
and the disgrace of her convent would have been noised about Madrid. She
contented herself with confining Agnes closely: as to the lover, she left him
at liberty to pursue his designs. What she expected was the result. The marquis
and Lorenzo waited in vain till the break of day; they then retired without
noise, alarmed at the failure of their plan, and ignorant of the cause of its
ill success.

The next morning Lorenzo went to the convent, and requested to see his sister.
The prioress appeared at the grate with a melancholy countenance. She informed
him that for several days Agnes had appeared much agitated; that she had been
pressed by the nuns in vain to reveal the cause, and apply to their tenderness
for advice and consolation; that she had obstinately persisted in concealing
the cause of her distress; but that on Thursday evening it had produced so
violent an effect upon her constitution, that she had fallen ill, and was
actually confined to her bed. Lorenzo did not credit a syllable of this
account: he insisted upon seeing his sister; if she was unable to come to the
grate, he desired to be admitted to her cell. The prioress crossed herself! she
was shocked at the very idea of a man's profane eye pervading the interior of
her holy mansion, and professed herself astonished that Lorenzo could think of
such a thing. She told him that his request could not be granted; but that, if
he returned the next day, she hoped that her beloved daughter would then be
sufficiently recovered to join him at the parlour grate. With this answer
Lorenzo was obliged to retire, unsatisfied, and trembling for his sister's
safety.

He returned the next morning at an early hour. "Agnes was worse; the physician
had pronounce^ her to be in imminent danger; she was ordered to remain quiet,
and it was utterly impossible for her to receive her brother's visit." Lorenzo
stormed at this answer, but there was no resource. He raved, he entreated, he
threatened; no means were left untried to obtain a sight of Agnes. His
endeavors were as fruitless as those of the day before, and he returned in
despair to the marquis. On his side, the latter had spared no pains to discover
what had occasioned his plot to fail. Don Christoval, to whom the affair was
now entrusted, endeavored to worm out the secret from the old porteress of St.
Clare, with whom he had formed an acquaintance; but she was too much upon her
guard, and he gained from her no intelligence. The marquis was almost
distracted, and Lorenzo (...) scarcely less inquietude. Both were convince^
(...) the purposed elopement must have been discovered: they doubted not but
the malady of Agnes was a pretense, but they knew not by what means to rescue
her from the hands of the prioress.

Regularly every day did Lorenzo visit the convent: as regularly was he
informed that his sister rather grew worse than better. Certain that her
indisposition was feigned, these accounts did not alarm him: but his ignorance
of her fate, and of the motives which induced the prioress to keep her from
him, excited the most serious uneasiness. He was still uncertain what steps he
ought to take, when the marquis received a letter from the cardinal duke of
Lerma. It enclosed the pope's expected bull, ordering that Agnes should be
released from her vows, and restored to her relations. This essential paper
decided at once the proceedings of her friends; they resolved that Lorenzo
should carry it to the domina without delay, and demand that his sister should
be instantly given up to him. Against this mandate illness could not be
pleaded: it gave her brother the power of removing her instantly to the palace
de Medina, and he determined to use that power on the following day.

His mind relieved from inquietude respecting his sister, and his spirits
raised by the hope of soon restoring her to freedom, he now had time to give a
few moments to love and to Antonia. At the same hour as on his former visit, he
repaired to Donna Elvira's. She had given orders for his admission. As soon as
he was announced, her daughter retired with Leonella; and when he entered the
chamber, he found (...) ^ady of the house alone. She received him with less
distance than before, and desired him to pl^^^ ^^^self near her upon the sofa.
She then, without losing time, opened her business, as had been agreed between
herself and Antonia.

"You must not think me ungrateful, Don Lorenzo, or forgetful how essential are
the services which you have rendered me with the marquis. I feel the weight of
my obligations: nothing under the sun should induce my taking the step to which
I am now compelled, but the interest of my child, of my beloved Antonia. My
health is declining; God only knows how soon I may be summoned before his
throne. My daughter will be left without parents, and, should she lose the
protection of the Cisternas family, without friends. She is young and artless,
uninstructed in the world's perfidy, and with charms sufficient to render her
an object of seduction. Judge then how I must tremble at the prospect before
her! Judge, how anxious I must be to keep her from their society who may excite
the yet dormant passions of her bosom. You are amiable, Don Lorenzo; Antonia
has a susceptible, a loving heart, and is grateful for the favors conferred
upon us by your interference with the marquis. Your presence makes me tremble:
I fear lest it should inspire her with sentiments which may embitter the
remainder of her life, or encourage her to cherish hopes in her situation
unjustifiable and futile. Pardon me, when I avow my terrors, and let my
frankness plead in my excuse. I cannot forbid you my house, for gratitude
restrains me; I can only throw myself upon your generosity, and entreat you to
spare the feelings of an anxious, of a doting mother. Believe me when I assure
you, that I lament the necessity of rejecting your acquaintance; but there is
no remedy, and Antonia's interest obliges me to beg you to forbear your visits.
By complying with my request, you will increase the esteem which I already feel
for you, and of which every thing convinces me that you are truly deserving."

"Your frankness charms me," replied Lorenzo: "You shall find, that in your
favorable opinion of me you were not deceived; yet I hope that the reasons now
in my power to allege, will persuade you to withdraw a request which I cannot
obey without infinite reluctance. I love your daughter, love her most
sincerely; I wish for no greater happiness than to inspire her with the same
sentiments, and receive her hand at the altar as her husband. It Is true I am
not rich myself, my father's death has left me but little in my own possession;
but my expectations justify my pretending to the Conde de las Cisternas'
daughter."

He was proceeding, but Elvira interrupted him --

Ah! Don Lorenzo, you forget in that pompous title the meanness of my origin.
You forget that I have ^ow passed fourteen years in Spain, disavowed by my
husband's family, and existing upon a stipend barely sufficient for the support
and education of my daughter. Nay, I have even been neglected by most of my own
relations, who out of envy affect to doubt the reality of my marriage. My
allowance being discontinued at my father-in-law's death, I was reduced to the
very brink of want. In this situation I was found by my sister, who, amongst
all her foibles, possesses a warm, generous, and affectionate heart. She aided
me with the little fortune which my father left her, persuaded me to visit
Madrid, and has supported my child and myself since our quitting Murcia. Then,
consider not Antonia as descended from the Conde de las Cisternas; consider her
as a poor and unprotected orphan, as the grandchild of the tradesman Torribio
Dalfa, as the needy pensioner of that tradesman's daughter. Reflect upon the
difference between such a situation and that of the nephew and heir of the
potent duke of Medina. I believe your intentions to be honorable; but as there
are no hopes that your uncle will approve the union, I foresee that the
consequences of your attachment must be fatal to my child's repose."

"Pardon me, Segnora; you are misinformed if you suppose the duke of Medina to
resemble the generality of men. His sentiments are liberal and disinterested;
he loves me well, and I have no reason to dread his forbidding the marriage,
when he perceives that my happiness depends upon Antonia. But supposing him to
refuse his sanction, what have I still to fear? My parents are no more; my
little fortune is in my own possession; it will be sufficient to support
Antonia, and I shall exchange for her hand Medina's dukedom without one sigh of
regret."

"You are young and eager; it is natural for you to entertain such ideas. But
experience has taught me to my cost, that curses accompany an unequal alliance.
I married the Conde de las Cisternas in opposition to the will of his
relations; many an heart pang has punished me for the imprudent step. Wherever
we bent our course, a father's execration pursued Gonzalvo. Poverty overtook
us, and no friend was near to relieve our wants. Still our mutual affection
existed, but, alas! not without interruption. Accustomed to wealth and ^ase,
ill could my husband support the transition to distress and indigence. He
looked back with repining to the comforts which he once enjoyed. He regretted
the situation which for my sake he had quitted; and in moments when despair
possessed his mind, has reproached me with having made him the companion of
want and wretchedness. He has called me his bane! the source of his sorrows,
the cause of his destruction! Ah! God! he little knew how much keener were my
own heart's reproaches! He was ignorant that I suffered trebly, for myself, for
my children, and for him! It Is true that his anger seldom lasted long: his
sincere affection for me soon revived in his heart, and then his repentance for
the tears which he had made me shed, tortured me even more than his reproaches.
He would throw himself on the ground, implore my forgiveness in the most
frantic terms, and load himself with curses for being the murderer of my
repose. Taught by experience, that an union contracted against the inclinations
of families on either side must be unfortunate, I will save my daughter from
those miseries which I have suffered. Without your uncle's consent, while I
live, she never shall be yours. Undoubtedly he will disapprove of the union;
his power is immense, and Antonia shall not be exposed to his anger and
persecution.

"His persecution? How easy may that be avoided! Let the worst happen, it is
but quitting Spain. My wealth may easily be realised. The Indian islands will
offer us a secure retreat. I have an estate, though not of value, in
Hispaniola; thither will we fly, and I shall consider it to be my native
country, if it gives me Antonia's undisturbed possession."

"Ah! youth, this is a fond, romantic vision. Gonzalvo thought the same. He
fancied that he could leave Spain without regret; but the moment of parting
undeceived him. You know not yet what it is to quit your native land: to quit
it, never to behold it more! You know not what it is to exchange the scenes
where you have passed your infancy, for unknown realms and barbarous climates!
-- to be forgotten, utterly, eternally forgotten by the companions of your
youth! -- to see your dearest friends, the fondest objects of your affection
perishing with diseases incidental to Indian atmospheres, and find yourself
unable to procure for them necessary assistance! I have felt all this! My
husband and two sweet babes found their graves in Cuba; nothing would have
saved my young Antonia, but my sudden return to Spain. Ah! Don Lorenzo, could
you conceive what I suffered during my absence! Could you know how sorely I
regretted all that I left behind, and how dear to me was the very name of
Spain! I envied the winds which blew toward it: and when the Spanish sailor
chanted some well known air as he passed my window, tears filled my eyes, while
I thought upon my native land. Gonzalvo too -- my husband -- "

Elvira paused. Her voice faltered, and she concealed her face with her
handkerchief. After a short silence she rose from the sofa, and proceeded --

"Excuse my quitting you for a few moments; the remembrance of what I have
suffered has much agitated me, and I need to be alone. Till I return, peruse
these lines. After my husband's death I found them among his papers. Had I
know^ sooner that he entertained such sentiments, grief would have killed me.
He wrote these verses on his voyage to Cuba, when his mind was clouded by
sorrow, and he forgot that he had a wife and children. What we are losing ever
seems to us the most precious. Gonzalvo was quitting Spain for ever, and
therefore was Spain dearer to his eyes than all else which the world contained.
Read them, Don Lorenzo, they will give you some idea of the feelings of a
banished man."

Elvira put a paper into Lorenzo's hand, and retired from the chamber. The
youth examined the contents, and found them to be as follows:

THE EXILE.
FAREWELL, oh native Spain! farewell for ever!
These banished eyes shall view thy coast no more:
A mournful presage tells my heart, that never
Gonzalvo's steps again shall press thy shore.
Hushed are the winds; while soft the vessel sailing
With gentle motion ploughs the unruffled main:
I feel my bosom's boasted courage failing,
And curse the waves which bear me far from Spain.
I see it! Beneath yo^ blue clear heaven
Still do the spires, so well beloved, appear:
From yonder craggy point the gale of eve^
Still wafts my native accents to mine ^ar.
Propped on some moss crowned rock, and gaily singing,
There in the sun his nets the fisher dries;
Often have I heard the plaintive ballad, bringing
Scenes of past joys before my sorrowing eyes.
Ah! happy swain! he waits the accustomed hour,
When twilight gloom obscures the closing sky;
Then gladly seeks his loved paternal bower,
And shares the feast his native fields supply.
Friendship and Love, his cottage guests, receive him
With honest welcome and with smiles sincere:
No threatening woes of present joys bereave him;
No sigh his bosom owns, his cheek no tear.
Ah! happy swain! such bliss to me denying,
Fortune thy lot with envy bids me view;
Me, who, from home and Spain an exile flying,
Bid all I value, all I love, adieu.
No more mine ear shall (...) the well known ditty
Sung by some mountain-girl who tends her goats,
Some village-swain imploring amorous pity,
Or shepherd chanting wild his rustic notes.
No more my arms a parent's fond embraces,
No more my heart domestic calm must know;
Far from these joys, with sighs which memory traces,
To sultry skies and distant cli^es I go;
Where Indian suns engender new diseases,
Where snakes and tigers breed, I bend my way
To brave the feverish thirst no art appeases,
The yellow plague, and madding blaze of day.
But not, to feel slow pangs consume my liver,
To die by piecemeal in the bloom of age,
My boiling blood drank by insatiate fever,
And brain delirious with the day-star's rage,
Can make me know such grief, as thus to sever,
With many a bitter sigh, dear land! from thee;
To feel this heart must dote on thee for ever,
And feel that all thy joys are torn from me!
Ah me! how often will fancy's spells in slumber,
Recall my native country to my mind!
How often regret will bid me sadly number
Each lost delight, and dear friend left behind!
Wild Murcia's vales and loved romantic bowers,
The river on whose banks a child I played,
My castle's ancient halls, its frowning towers,
Each much-regretted wood, and well-known glade;
Dreams of the land where all my wishes center,
Thy scenes, which I am doomed no more to know,
Full often shall memory trace, my soul's tormentor,
And turn each pleasure past to present woe.
But, lo! the sun beneath the waves retires;
Night speeds apace her empire to restore;
Clouds from my sight obscure the village-spires,
Now seen but faintly, and now seen no more.
Oh! breathe not, winds! Still be the water's motion!
Sleep, sleep, my bark, (...) silence on the main!
So, when tomorrow's light shall gild the ocean,
Once more mine eyes shall see the coast of Spain.
Vain is the wish! My last petition scorning,
Fresh blows the ga^e, and high the billows swell:
Far shall we be before ^he break of morning:
Oh! then, for ever, native Spain, farewell!
Lorenzo had scarcely time to read these lines, when Elvira returned to him:
the giving a free course to her tears had relieved her, and her spirits had
regained their usual composure.

"I have nothing more to say, my lord," said she; "you have heard my
apprehensions, and my reasons for begging you not to repeat your visits. I have
thrown myself in full confidence upon your honor. I am certain that you will
not prove my opinion of you to be too favorable."

"But on^ question more, Segnora, and I leave you. Should the duke of Medina
approve my love, would my addresses be unacceptable to yourself and the fair
Antonia?"

"I will be open with you, Don Lorenzo: there being little probability of such
an union taking place, I fear that it is desired but too ardently by my
daughter. You have made an impression upon (...) young heart which gives me the
most serious alarm: to prevent that impression from growing stronger, I am
obliged to decline your acquaintance. For me, you may be sure that I should
rejoice at establishing my child so advantageously. Conscious that my
constitution, impaired by grief and illness, forbids me to expect a long
continuance in this world, I (...) a^ the thought of leaving her under the
protection of a perfect stranger. The marquis de las Cisternas is totally
unknown to me. He will marry: his lady may look upon Antonia with an eye of
displeasure, and deprive her of her only friend. Should the duke, your uncle,
give his consent, you need not doubt obtaining mine and my daughter's; but,
without his, hope not for ours. At all events, whatever steps you may take,
whatever may be the duke's decision, till you know it, let me beg your
forbearing to strengthen, by your presence, Antonia's prepossession. If the
sanction o^ your relations authorizes your addressing her as your wife, my
doors fly open to you. If that sanction is refused, be satisfied to possess my
esteem and gratitude, but remember that we must meet no more."

Lorenzo promised reluctantly to conform to this decree: but he added, that he
hoped soon to obtain that consent which would give him a claim to the renewal
of their acquaintance. He then explained to her why the marquis had not called
in person; and made no scruple of confiding to her his sister's history. He
concluded by saying, "that he hoped to set Agnes at liberty the next day; and
that, as soon as Don Raymond's fears were quieted upon this subject, he would
lose no time in assuring Donna Elvira of his friendship and protection.

The lady shook her head.

"I tremble for your sister," said she; "I have heard many traits of the domina
of St. Clare's character from a friend who was educated in the same convent
with her: she reported her to be haughty, inflexible, superstitious, and
revengeful. I have since heard, that she is infatuated with the idea of
rendering her convent the most regular in Madrid, and never forgave those whose
imprudence threw upon it the slightest stain. Though naturally violent and
severe, when her interests require it, she well knows how to assume an
appearance of benignity. She leaves no means untried to persuade young women of
rank to become members of her community: she is implacable when once incensed,
and has too much intrepidity to shrink at taking the most rigorous measures for
punishing the offender. Doubtless, she will consider your sister's quitting the
convent as a disgrace thrown upon it: she will use every artifice to avoid
obeying the mandate of his holiness; and I shudder to think that Donna Agnes is
in the hands of this dangerous woman."

Lorenzo now rose to take leave. Elvira gave him her hand at parting, which he
kissed respectfully; and, telling her that he soon hoped for the permission to
salute that of Antonia, he returned to his hotel. The lady was perfectly
satisfied with the conversation which had passed between them: she looked
forward with satisfaction to the prospect of his becoming her son-in-law; but
prudence bade her conceal from her daughter's knowledge the flattering hopes
which herself now ventured to entertain.

Scarcely was it day, and already Lorenzo was at the convent of St. Clare,
furnished with the necessary mandate. The nuns were at matins. He waited
impatiently for the conclusion of the service; and at length the prioress
appeared at the parlour grate. Agnes was demanded. The old lady replied with a
melancholy air, that the dear child's situation grew hourly more dangerous:
that the physicians despaired of her life; but that they had declared the only
chance for her recovery to consist in keeping her quiet, and not to permit
those to approach her whose presence was likely to agitate her. Not a word of
all this was believed by Lorenzo, any more than he credited the expressions of
grief and affection for Agnes with which this account was interlarded. To end
the business, he put the pope's bull into the hands of the domina, and insisted
that, ill or in health, his sister should be delivered to him without delay.

The prioress received the paper with an air of humility; but no sooner had her
eye glanced over the contents than her resentment baffled all the efforts of
hypocrisy. A deep crimson spread itself over her face, and she darted upon
Lorenzo looks of rage and menace.

"This order is positive," said she, in a voice of anger, which she in vain
strove to disguise* "willingly would I obey it, but unfortunately, it is out of
my power."

Lorenzo interrupted her by an exclamation of surprise.

"I repeat it, Segnor, to obey this order is totally out of my power. From
tenderness to a brother's feelings, I would have communicated the sad event to
you by degrees, and have prepared you to hear it with fortitude. My measures
are broken through; this order commands me to deliver up to you the sister
Agnes without delay; I am, therefore, obliged to inform you, without
circumlocution, that on Friday last she expired."

Lorenzo started back with horror, and turned pale. A moment's recollection
convinced him that this assertion must be false, and it restored him to himself.

"You deceive me!" said he, passionately: "but five minutes past you assured me
that, though ill, she was still alive. Produce her this instant! See her I must
and will; and every attempt to keep her from me will be unavailing."

"You forget yourself, Segnor: you owe respect to my age as well as my
profession. Your sister is no more. If I at first concealed her death, it was
from dreading lest an event so unexpected should produce on you too violent an
effect. In truth, I am but ill repaid for my attention. And what interest, I
pray you, should I have in detaining her? To know her wish of quitting our
society is a sufficient reason for me to wi^h (...), and think her a disgrace
to the sisterhood of St. Clare: but she has forfeited my affection in a manner
yet more culpable. Her crimes were great; and when you know the cause of her
death, you will doubtless rejoice, Don Lorenzo, that such a wretch is no longer
in existence. She was taken ill on Thursday last on returning from confession
in the capuchin chapel: her malady seemed attended with strange circumstances;
but she persisted in concealing its cause. Thanks to the Virgin, we were too
ignorant to suspect it! Judge then what must have been our consternation, our
horror, when she was delivered the next day of a still born child, whom she
immediately followed to the grave. How, Segnor? Is it possible that your
countenance expresses no surprise, no indignation? Is it possible that your
sister's infamy was known to you, and that still she possessed your affection?
In that case, you have no need of my compassion. I can say nothing more; except
repeat my inability of obeying the orders of his holiness. Agnes is no more;
and, to convince you that what I say is true, I swear by our blessed Savior,
that three days have passed since she was buried."

Here she kissed a small crucifix which hung at her girdle: she then rose from
her chair, and quitted the parlour. As she withdrew, she cast upon Lorenzo a
scornful smile.

"Farewell, Segnor," said she; "I know no remedy for this accident. I fear that
even a second bull from the pope will not procure your sister's resurrection."

Lorenzo also retired, penetrated with affliction* but Don Raymond's, at the
news of this event, amounted to madness: he would not be convinced that Agnes
was really dead; and continued to insist that the walls of St. Clare still
confined her. No arguments could make him abandon his hopes of regaining her.
Every day some fresh scheme was invented for procuring intelligence of her, and
all of them were attended with the same success.

On his part, Medina gave up the idea of ever seeing his sister more; yet he
believed that she had been taken off by unfair means. Under this persuasion, he
encouraged Don Raymond's researches, determined, should he discover the least
warrant for his suspicions, to take a severe vengeance upon the unfeeling
prioress. The loss of his sister affected him sincerely: nor was it the least
cause of his distress, that propriety obliged him for some time to defer
mentioning Antonia to the duke. In the mean while his emissaries constantly
surrounded Elvira's door. He had intelligence of all the movements of his
mistress. As she never failed every Thursday to attend the sermon in the
Capuchin cathedral, he was secure of seeing her once a week; though, in
compliance with his promise, he carefully shunned her observation. Thus two
long months passed away. Still no information was procured of Agnes. All but
the marquis credited her death: and now Lorenzo determined to disclose his
sentiments to his uncle: he had already dropped some hints of his intention to
marry: they had been as favorably received as he could expect; and he
harbored no doubt of the success of his application.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
AMBROSIO; OR, THE MONK. A ROMANCE.

BY M. G. LEWIS, ESQUIRE. M. P. AUTHOR OF "CASTLE SPECTRE," etc. etc.

THREE VOLUMES IN TWO. VOL. II. THE SECOND AMERICAN, FROM THE FOURTH BRITISH
EDITION. With considerable Additions and Alterations.

Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagos,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque.
HOR. Dreams, magic terrors, spells of mighty power,
Witches, and ghosts, who rove at midnight hour.
PRINTED at BOSTON, by SAMUEL ETHERIDGE, For THOMAS and ANDREWS. Sold by them,
the other Booksellers, and S. ETHERIDGE, in Boston: by I. THOMAS, Worcester; by
THOMAS, ANDREWS and PENNIMAN. Albany; by THOMAS, ANDREWS and BUTLER, Baltimore;
and by E. S. THOMAS, Charleston, (S. C.) JAN. 1799.

THE MONK.
CHAP. VI.
"What (...) ye do!
-- A deed without a name!"
MACBETH.
WE now must revisit the monastery of the Capuchins. There we shall find bosoms
agitated by very different emotions from those which were felt by the innocent
inhabitants of Elvira's dwelling.

With every step that Ambrosio made in the path of vice, he at first looked
back with regret to the station which he had quitted: but, alas! with every
step that regret became weaker. Matilda's eloquence and beauty, the power of
habit, and the frailty of human nature, gradually diminished the sensation, and
at length it scarce could be said to be felt by the (...) bosom at all. He no
longer reflected with shame upon his conduct, or dreaded the vengeance of
Heaven. One fear alone possessed him. He trembled to lose Matilda, who still
labored under the influence of poison. He therefore pressed her with
earnestness to use the means of preservation which she had before declared to
be in her possession.

"Yes!" replied Matilda; "since you have made me feel that life is valuable, I
will rescue mine at any rate. No dangers shall appal me: I will look upon the
consequences of my action boldly, nor shudder at the horrors which they
present: I will think my sacrifice scarcely worthy to purchase your possession;
and remember, that a moment passed in your arms in this world o'erpays an age
of punishment in the next. But before I take this step, Ambrosio, give me your
solemn oath never to enquire by what means I shall preserve myself."

He did so, in a manner the most binding.

"I thank you, my beloved. This precaution is necessary; for, though you know
it not, you are under the command of vulgar prejudices. The business on which I
must be employed this night might startle you, from its singularity, and lower
me in your opinion. Tell me, do you possess the key of the lower door on the
western side of the garden?"

"The door which opens into the burying-ground common to us and the sisterhood
of St. Clare? I have not the key, but can easily procure it."

"You have only this to do. Admit me into the burying ground at night. Watch
while I descend into the vaults of St. Clare, lest some prying eye should
observe my actions. Leave me there alone for an hour, and that life is safe
which I dedicate to your pleasures. To prevent creating suspicion, do not visit
me during the day. Remember the key, and that I expect you before twelve. Hark!
I hear steps approaching! Leave me; I will pretend to sleep."

The friar obeyed, and left the cell. As he opened the door, father Pablos made
his appearance.

"I come," said the latter, "to enquire after the health of my young patient."

"Hush!" replied Ambrosio, laying his finger upon his lip; "speak softly; I am
just come from him: he has fallen into a profound slumber, which doubtless will
be of service to him. Do not disturb him at present, for he wishes to repose."

Father Pablos obeyed, and hearing the bell ring, accompanied the abbot to
matins. Ambrosio felt embarrassed as he entered the chapel. Guilt was new to
him, and he fancied that every eye could read the transactions of the night
upon his countenance. He strove to pray: his bosom no longer glowed with
devotion: his thoughts insensibly wandered to Matilda's charms. But what he
wanted in purity of heart, he supplied by exterior sanctity. The better to
cloak his transgression, he redoubled his pretensions to the semblance of
virtue, and never appeared more devoted to Heaven than since he had broken
through his engagements. Thus did he unconsciously add hypocrisy to perjury and
weakness; he had fallen into the latter errors from yielding to seduction
almost, irresistible; but he was now guilty of a voluntary fault, by
endeavoring to conceal those into which another had betrayed him.

The matins concluded, Ambrosio retired to his cell* His brain was still
bewildered, and presented a confused ^^aos of remorse, inquietude and fear: he
looked back with regret to that peace of soul, that security of virtue, which
till then had been his portion: he had committed an error, from whose very idea
but a few hours before he would have recoiled with horror: he shuddered at
reflecting that a trifling indiscretion on his part, or on Matilda's, would
overturn that fabric of reputation which it had cost him thirty years to erect,
and render him the abhorrence of that people of whom he was then the idol.
Conscience painted to him in glaring colors his perjury and weakness;
apprehension magnified to him the horrors of punishment, and he already fancied
himself in the prisons of the Inquisition. To these tormenting ideas succeeded
Matilda's charms and tenderness. A single glance thrown upon these, reconciled
him with himself; and he considered her possession to have been purchased at an
easy price, by the sacrifice of innocence and honor. Their very remembrance
filled his soul with ecstacy: he cursed his foolish vanity, which had induced
him to waste in obscurity the bloom of life, ignorant of the blessings of love
and woman: he determined, at all events, to continue his commerce with Matilda,
and called every argument to his aid which might confirm his resolution: he
asked himself, provided his irregularity was unknown, in what would his fault
consist, and what consequences he had to apprehend? By adhering strictly to
every rule of his order save chastity, he doubted not to retain the esteem of
men, and even the protection of Heaven: he trusted easily to be forgiven so
slight and natural a deviation from his vows; but he forgot that, having
pronounced those vows, that which is in laymen the most venial of errors,
became in his person the most heinous of crimes.

Once decided upon his future conduct, his mind became more easy. Obedient to
Matilda's order, he visited not her cell during the day. Father Pablos
mentioned in the refectory, that Rosario had at length been prevailed upon to
follow his prescription; but that the medicine had not produced the slightest
effect, and that he believed no mortal skill could rescue him from the grave.
With this opinion the abbot agreed, and affected to lament the untimely fate of
a youth whose talents had appeared so promising.

The night arrived. Ambrosio had taken care to procure from the porter the key
of the low door opening into the cemetery. Furnished with this, when all was
silent (...) the monastery, he quitted his cell, and hastened to Matilda's. She
had left her bed, and was dressed before his arrival.

"I have been expecting you with impatience," said she; "my life depends upon
these moments. Have you the key?"

"I have."

"Away then to the garden! We have no time to lose. Follow me!"

She took a small covered basket from the table. Bearing this in one hand, and
the lamp, which was flaming upon the hearth, in the other, she hastened from
the cell. Ambrosio followed her. Both maintained a profound silence. She moved
on with quick but cautious steps, passed through the cloisters, and reached the
western side of the garden: her eyes flashed with a fire and wildness which
impressed the monk at once with awe and horror. A determined desperate courage
reigned upon her brow: she gave the lamp to Ambrosio; then taking from him the
key, she unlocked the low door, and entered the cemetery. It was a vast and
spacious square, planted with yew-trees; half of it belonged to (...) abbey,
the other half was the property of the sisterhood of St. Clare, and was
protected by a roof of stone; the division was marked by an iron railing, the
wicket of which was generally left unlocked.

Thither Matilda bent her course; she opened the wicket, and sought for the
door leading to the subterraneous vaults, where reposed the mouldering bodies
of the votaries of St. Clare. The night was perfectly dark, neither moon nor
stars were visible. Luckily there was not a breath of wind, and the friar bore
his lamp in full security; by the assistance of its beams the door of the
sepulcher was soon discovered. It was sunk within the hollow of a wall, and
almost concealed by thick festoons of ivy hanging over it. Three steps of rough
hewn stone conducted to it, and Matilda was on the point of descending them,
when she suddenly started back.

"There are people in the vaults!" she whispered to the monk; "conceal yourself
till they are passed."

She took refuge behind a lofty and magnificent tomb, erected in honor of the
convent's foundress. Ambrosio followed her example, carefully hiding his lamp,
lest its beams should betray them. But a few moments had elapsed, when the door
was pushed open leading to the subterraneous caverns. Rays of light proceeded
up the staircase: they enabled the concealed spectators to observe two females
dressed in religious habits, who seemed engaged in earnest conversation. The
abbot had no difficulty to recognize the prioress of St. Clare in the first,
and one of the elder nuns in her companion.

"Every thing is prepared," said the prioress, "her fate shall be decided
tomorrow; all her tears and sighs will be unavailing. No! in five and twenty
years that I have been superior of this convent, never did I witness a
transaction more infamous!"

"You must expect much opposition to your will;" the other replied in a milder
voice; "Agnes has many friends in the convent, and in particular the mother St.
Ursula will espouse her cause most warmly. In truth, she merits to have
friends; and I wish I could prevail upon you to consider her youth and her
peculiar situation. She seems sensible of her fault; the excess of her grief
proves her penitence, and I am convinced that her tears flow more from
contrition, than fear of punishment. Reverend mother, would you be persuaded to
mitigate the severity of your sentence; would you but deign to overlook this
first transgression, I offer myself as the pledge of her future conduct."

"Overlook it, say you? Mother Camilla you amaze me! What, after disgracing me
in the presence of Madrid's idol, of the very man on whom I most wished to
impress an idea of the strictness of my discipline! How despicable must I have
appeared to the reverend abbot! No, mother -- no, I never can forgive the
insult. I cannot better convince Ambrosio that I abhor such crimes, than by
punishing that of Agnes with all the rigor of which our severe laws admit.
Cease then your supplications, they will all be unavailing. My resolution is
taken. Tomorrow Agnes shall be made a terrible example of my justice and
resentment."

The mother Camilla seemed not to give up the point, but by this time the nuns
were out of hearing. The prioress unlocked the door which communicated with St.
Clare's chapel, and, having entered with her companion, closed it again after
them.

Matilda now asked, who was this Agnes with whom (...) prioress was thus
incensed, and what connection (...) could have with Ambrosio. He related her
adventure: and he added that, since that time his ideas having undergone a
thorough revolution, he n^w felt much compassion for the unfortunate nun.

"I design," said he, "to request an audience of the domina tomorrow, and use
every means to obtain a mitigation of her sentence."

"Beware of what you do," interrupted Matilda; "your sudden change of sentiment
may naturally create surprise, and may give birth to suspicions which it is
most our interest to avoid. Rather redouble your outward austerity, and thunder
out menaces against the errors of others, the better to conceal your own.
Abandon the nun to her fate. Your interfering might be dangerous, and her
imprudence merits to be punished: she is unworthy to enjoy love's pleasures,
who has not wit enough to conceal them. But in discussing this trifling
subject, I waste moments which are precious. The night flies apace, and much
must be done before morning. The nuns are retired; all is safe. Give me the
lamp, Ambrosio, I must descend alone into these caverns: wait here, and if any
one approaches, warn me by your voice; but as you value your existence, presume
not to follow me: your life would fall a victim to your imprudent curiosity."

Thus saying, she advanced toward the sepulcher, still holding her lamp in one
hand, and her little basket in the other. She touched the door: it turned
slowly upon its grating hinges, and a narrow winding staircase of black marble
presented itself to her eyes. She descended it; Ambrosio remained above,
watching the faint beams of the lamp, as they still receded down the stairs.
They disappeared, and he found himself in total darkness.

Left to himself, he could not reflect without surprise on the sudden change in
Matilda's character and sentiments. But a few days had passed, since she
appeared the mildest and softest of her sex, devoted to his will, and looking
up to him as to a superior being. Now she assumed a sort of courage and
manliness in her manners and discourse, but ill calculated to please him. She
spoke no longer to insinuate, but command: he found himself unable to cope with
her in argument, and was unwillingly obliged to confess the superiority of her
judgment. Every moment convinced him of the astonishing powers of her mind: but
what she gained in the opinion of the man, she lost with interest in the
affection of the lover. He regretted Rosario, the fond, the gentle, and
submissive; he grieved that Matilda preferred the virtues of his sex to those
of her own; and when he thought of her expressions respecting the devoted nun,
he could not help blaming them as cruel and unfeminine. Pity is a sentiment so
natural, so appropriate to the female character, that it is scarcely a merit
for a woman to possess it; but to be without it is a grievous crime. Ambrosio
could not easily forgive his mistress for being deficient in this amiable
quality. However, though he blamed her insensibility, he felt the truth of her
observations; and though he pitied sincerely the unfortunate Agnes, he resolved
to drop the idea of interposing in her behalf.

Near an hour had elapsed since Matilda descended into the caverns; still she
returned not. Ambrosio's curiosity was excited. He drew near the staircase --
he listened -- all was silent, except that at intervals he caught the sound of
Matilda's voice, as it wound along the subterraneous passages, and was
re-echoed by the sepulchre's vaulted roofs. She was at too great a distance for
him to distinguish her words, and ^re they reached him, they were deadened in a
low murmur. He longed to penetrate into this mystery. He resolved to disobey
her injunctions, and follow her into the cavern. He advanced to the staircase;
he had already descended some steps, when his courage failed him. He remembered
Matilda's menaces if he infringed her orders, and his bosom was filled with a
secret unaccountable awe. He returned up the stairs, resumed his former
station, and waited impatiently for the conclusion of this adventure.

Suddenly he was sensible of a violent shock. An earthquake rocked the ground,
the columns which supported the roof under which he stood, were so strongly
shaken, that every moment menaced him with its fall, and at the same moment he
heard a loud and tremendous burst of thunder: it ceased; and his eyes being
fixed upon the staircase, he saw a bright column of light flash along the
caverns beneath. It was seen but for an instant. No sooner did it disappear,
than all was once more quiet and obscure. Profound darkness again surrounded
him, and the silence of night was only broken by the whirring bat as she
flitted slowly by him.

With every instant Ambrosio's amazement increased. Another hour elapsed, after
which the same light again appeared, and was lost again as suddenly. It was
accompanied by a strain of sweet but solemn music, which, as it stole through
the vaults below, inspired the monk with mingled delight and terror. It had not
long been hushed, when he heard Matilda's steps upon the staircase. She
ascended from the cavern; the most lively joy animated her beautiful features.

"Did you see any thing?" she asked.

"Twice I saw a column of light flash up the staircase."

"Nothing else?"

"Nothing."

"The morning is on the point of breaking: let us retire to the abbey, lest
daylight should betray us."

With a light step she hastened from the buryingground. She regained her cell,
and the curious abbot still accompanied her. She closed the door, and
disembacrassed herself of her lamp and basket.

"I have succeeded!" she cried, throwing herself upon his bosom; "succeeded
beyond my fondest hopes! I shall live, Ambrosio; shall live for you! The step,
which I shuddered at taking, proves to me a source of joys inexpressible! Oh!
that I dared communicate those joys to you! Oh! that I were permitted to share
with you my power, and raise you as high above the level of your sex, as one
bold deed has exalted me above mine!"

"And what prevents you, Matilda?" interrupted the friar. "Why is your business
in the cavern made a secret? Do you think me undeserving of your confidence?
Matilda, I must doubt the truth of your affection, while you have joys in which
I am forbidden to share."

"You reproach me with injustice; I grieve sincerely that I am obliged to
conceal from you my happiness: but I am not to blame; the fault lies not in me,
but in yourself, my Ambrosio. You are still too much the monk; your mind is
enslaved by the prejudices of education: and superstition might make you
shudder at the idea of that which experience has taught me to prize and value.
At present you are unfit to be trusted with a secret of such importance; but
the strength of your judgment, and the curiosity which I rejoice to see
sparkling in your eyes, make me hope that you will one day deserve my
confidence. Till that period arrives, restrain your impatience. Remember that
you have given me your solemn oath never to enquire into this night's
adventures. I insist upon your keeping this oath; for, though," she added,
smiling, while she sealed his lips with a kiss, "though I forgive your breaking
your vows to Heaven, I expect you to keep your vows to me."

This the friar hesitated not to promise, or Matilda to believe. The monks
rejoiced in the feigned Rosario's unexpected recovery, and none of them
suspected his real sex. The abbot possessed his mistress in tranquillity, and,
perceiving his frailty unsuspected, abandoned himself to his passions in full
security. Shame and remorse no longer tormented him. Frequent repetitions made
him familiar with sin, and his bosom became proof against the stings of
conscience. In these sentiments he was encouraged by Matilda; but she soon was
aware that she had satiated her lover by the unbounded freedom of her caresses.
Her charms becoming accustomed to him, they ceased to excite the same emotions
which at first they had inspired. The delirium of passion being past, he had
leisure to observe every trifling defect; where none were to be found, satiety
made him fancy them. A week had scarcely elapsed before he was wearied of his
conquest; and his humor, naturally inconstant, made him sigh impatiently for
variety.

Possession, which cloys man, only increases the affection of women. Matilda
with every succeeding day grew more attached to the friar. Since she was become
his, he was dearer to her than ever; but unfortunately, as her passion grew
ardent, Ambrosio's grew cold; the very marks of her fondness excited his
disgust, and its excess served to extinguish the flame which already burned but
feebly in his bosom. Matilda could not but remark that her society seemed to
him daily less agreeable; he was inattentive while she spoke; her musical
talents, which she possessed in perfection, had lost the power of amusing him;
or, if he deigned to praise them, his compliments were evidently forced and
cold. He no longer gazed upon her with affection, or applauded her sentiments
with a lover's partiality. This Matilda well perceived, and redoubled her
efforts to revive those sentiments which he once had felt. She could not but
fail, since he considered as importunities the pains which she took to please
him, and was disgusted by the very means which she used to recall the wanderer.
In spite of her beauty, he gazed upon every other female with more desire; but
fearing that his hypocrisy should be made public, he confined his inclinations
to his own breast.

It was by no means his nature to be timid: but his education had impressed his
mind with fear so strongly, that apprehension was now become part of his
character. Had his youth been passed in the world, he would have shown himself
possessed of many brilliant and manly qualities. He was naturally enterprising,
firm, and fearless: he had a warrior's heart, and he might have shone with
splendor at the head of an army. There was no want of generosity in his
nature: the wretched never failed to find in him a compassionate auditor. His
abilities were quick and shining, and his judgment vast, solid and decisive.
With such qualifications, he would have been an ornament to his country: that
he possessed them he had given proofs in his earliest infancy, and his parents
had beheld his dawning virtues with the fondest delight and admiration.
Unfortunately, while yet a child, he was deprived of those parents. He fell
into the power of a relation, whose only wish about him was never to hear of
him more: for that purpose he gave him in charge to his friend, the former
superior of the Capuchins. The abbot, a very monk, used all his endeavors to
persuade the boy that happiness existed not without the walls of a convent. He
succeeded fully. To deserve admittance into the order of St. Francis was
Ambrosio's highest ambition. His instructors carefully repressed those virtues,
whose grandeur and disinterestedness were ill suited to the cloister. Instead
of universal benevolence, he adopted a selfish partiality for his own
particular establishment: he was taught to con^^^er compassion for the errors
of others as a crime (...) the blackest dye: the noble frankness of his temper
was exchanged for servile humility; and in order to break his natural spirit,
the monks terrified his young mind, by placing before him all the horrors with
which superstition could furnish them: they painted to him the torments of the
damned in colors the most dark, terrible and fantastic, and threatened him at
the slightest fault with eternal perdition. No wonder that his imagination
constantly dwelling upon these fearful objects should have rendered his
character timid and apprehensive. Add to this, that his long absence from the
great world, and total unacquaintance with the common dangers of life, made him
form of them an idea far more dismal than the reality. While the monks were
busied in rooting out his virtues, and narrowing his sentiments, they allowed
every vice which had fallen to his share to arrive at full perfection. He was
suffered to be proud, vain, ambitious and disdainful: he was jealous of his
equals, and despised all merit but his own: he was implacable when offended,
and cruel in his revenge. Still, in spite of the pains taken to pervert them,
his natural good qualities would occasionally break through the gloom cast over
them so carefully. At such times, the contest for superiority between his real
and acquired character was striking and unaccountable to those unacquainted
with his original disposition. He pronounced the most severe sentences upon
offenders, which the moment after compassion induced him to mitigate: he
undertook the most daring enterprises, which the fear of their consequences
soon obliged him to abandon: his inborn genius darted a brilliant light upon
subjects the most obscure, and almost instantaneously his superstition
replunged them in darkness more profound than that from which they had just
been rescued. His brother monks regarding him as a superior being, remarked not
this contradiction in their idol's conduct. They were persuaded that what he
did must be right, and supposed him to have good reasons for changing his
resolutions. The fact was, that the different sentiments, with which education
and nature had inspired him, were combating in his bosom: it remained for his
passions, which as yet no opportunity had called into play, to decide the
victory. Unfortunately his passions were the very worst judges to whom he could
possibly have applied. His monastic seclusion had till now been in his favor,
since it gave him no room for discovering his bad qualities. The superiority of
his talents raised him too far above his companions to permit his being jealous
of them: his exemplary piety, persuasive eloquence, and pleasing manners had
secured him universal esteem, and consequently he had no injuries to revenge:
his ambition was justified by his acknowledged merit, and his pride considered
as no more than proper confidence. He never saw, much less conversed with, the
other sex; and if he read in the course of his studies "That men were fond, he
smiled, and wondered how."

For a time, spare diet, frequent watching, and severe penance cooled and
repressed the natural warmth of his constitution: but no sooner did opportunity
present itself, no sooner did he catch a glimpse of joys to which he was still
a stranger, than religion's barriers were too feeble to resist the overwhelming
torrent of his desires. All impediments yielded before the force of his
temperament, warm, sanguine and voluptuous in the excess. As yet his other
passions lay dormant; but they only needed to be once awakened, to display
themselves with violence as great and irresistible.

He continued to be the admiration of Madrid. The enthusiasm created by his
eloquence seemed rather to increase than diminish. Every Thursday, which was
the only day when he appeared in public, the Capuchin cathedral was crowded
with auditors, and his discourse was always received with the same approbation.
He was named confessor to all the chief families in Madrid; and no one was
counted fashionable who was enjoined penance by any other than Ambrosio. In his
resolution of never stirring out of his convent he still persisted. This
circumstance created a still greater opinion of his sanctity and self-denial.
Above all, the women sang forth his praises loudly, less influenced by devotion
than by his noble countenance, majestic air, and well-turned graceful figure.
The abbey door was thronged with carriages from morning to night; and the
noblest and fairest dames of Madrid confessed to the abbot their secret
peccadilloes. The friar's eyes devoured their charms. Had his penitents
consulted these interpreters, he would have needed no other means of expressing
his desires. The climate's heat, it is well known, operates with no small
influence upon the constitutions of the Spanish ladies: but the most abandoned
would have thought it an easier task to inspire with passion the marble statue
of St. Francis than the cold and rigid heart of the immaculate Ambrosio.

On his part, the friar was little acquainted with the depravity of the world:
he suspected not that but few of his penitents would have rejected his
addresses. Yet, had he been better instructed on this head, the danger
attending such an attempt would have sealed up his lips in silence. He knew
that it would be difficult for a woman to keep a secret so strange and so
important as his frailty; and he even trembled, lest Matilda should betray him.
Anxious to preserve a reputation which was infinitely dear to him, he saw all
the risk of committing it to the power of some vain giddy female; and as the
beauties of Madrid affected only his senses without touching his heart, he
forgot them as soon as they were out of his sight. The danger of discovery, the
fear of being repulsed, the loss of reputation; all these considerations
counseled him to stifle his desires; and though he now felt for her the most
perfect indifference, he was necessitated to confine his addresses to Matilda.

One morning, the confluence of penitents was greater than usual. He was
detained in the confessional chair till a late hour. At length the crowd was
dispatched, and he prepared to quit the chapel, when two females entered, and
drew near him with humility. They threw up their veils, and the youngest
entreated him to listen to her for a few moments. The melody of her voice, of
that voice to which no man ever listened without interest, immediately caught
Ambrosio's attention. He stopped. The petitioner seemed bowed down with
affliction: her cheeks were pale, her eyes dimmed with tears, and her hair fell
in disorder over her face and bosom. Still her countenance was so sweet, so
innocent, so heavenly, as might have charmed an heart less susceptible than
that which panted in the abbot's breast. With more than usual softness of
manner he desired her to proceed, and heard her speak as follows, with an
emotion which increased every moment:

"Reverend father, you see an unfortunate threatened with the loss of her
dearest, of almost her only friend! My mother, my excellent mother lies upon
the bed of sickness. A sudden and dreadful malady seized her last night, and so
rapid has been its progress that the physicians despair of her life. Human aid
fails me; nothing remains for me but to implore the mercy of Heaven. Father,
all Madrid rings with the report of your piety and virtue. Deign to remember my
mother in your prayers: perhaps they may prevail on the Almighty to spare her;
and should that be the case, I engage myself every Thursday in the next three
months to illuminate the shrine of St. Francis in his honor."

"So!" thought the monk; "here we have a second Vincentio della Ronda.
Rosario's adventure began thus; and he wished secretly that this might have the
same conclusion.

He acceded to the request. The petitioner returned him thanks with every mark
of gratitude, and then continued:

"I have yet another favor to ask. We are strangers in Madrid: my mother needs
a confessor, and knows not to whom she should apply. We understand that you
never quit the abbey; and, alas! my poor mother is unable to come hither! If
you would have the goodness, reverend father, to name a proper person, whose
wise and pious consolations may soften the agonies of my parent's deathbed,
you will confer an everlasting favor upon hearts not ungrateful."

With this petition also the monk complied. Indeed, what petition would he have
refused, if urged in such enchanting accents? The suppliant was so interesting!
Her voice was so sweet, so harmonious! Her very tears became her, and her
affliction seemed to add new luster to her charms. He promised to send to her a
confessor that same evening, and begged her to leave her address. The companion
presented him with a card on which it was written, and then withdrew with the
fair petitioner, who pronounced before her departure a thousand benedictions on
the abbot's goodness. His eyes followed her out of the chapel. It was not till
she was out of sight that he examined the card, on which he read the following
words:

"Donna Elvira Dalfa, strada di San Iago, four doors from the palace
d'Albornos."

The suppliant was no other than Antonia, and Leonella was her companion. The
latter had not consented without difficulty to accompany her niece to the
abbey. Ambrosio had inspired her with such awe, that she trembled at the very
sight of him. Her fears had conquered even her natural loquacity; and while in
his presence she uttered not a single syllable.

The monk retired to his cell, whither he was pursued by Antonia's image. He
felt a thousand new emotions springing in his bosom, and he trembled to examine
into the cause which gave them birth. They were totally different from those
inspired by Matilda, when she first declared her sex and her affection. No
voluptuous desires rioted in his bosom. On the contrary, what he now felt was a
mingled sentiment of tenderness, admiration, and respect. A soft and delicious
melancholy infused itself into his soul, and he would not have exchanged it for
the most lively transports of joy. Society now disgusted him: he delighted in
solitude, which permitted his indulging the visions of fancy: his thoughts were
all gentle, sad and soothing; and the whole wide world presented him with no
other object than Antonia.

"Happy man!" he exclaimed in his romantic enthusiasm -- "happy man, who is
destined to possess the heart of that lovely girl! What delicacy in her
features! What elegance in her form! How enchanting was the timid innocence of
her eyes! and how different from the wanton expression, the wild luxurious
fire, which sparkles in Matilda's! Oh, sweeter must one kiss be, snatched from
the rosy lips of the one, than all the full and glutting favors bestowed so
freely by the other. Matilda forces me to her arms, apes the harlot, and
glories in what should be her shame! Did she know the inexpres^ible charm of
modesty, how irresistibly it enthrals the heart of man, how firmly it chains
him to the throne of beauty, she never would have thrown it off. What would be
too dear a price for this lovely girl's affections? What would I not sacrifice,
could I be released from my vows, and permitted to declare my love in the sight
of earth and heaven? While I strove inspire her with tenderness, with
friendship and esteem, how tranquil and undisturbed would the hours roll away!
Gracious God! to see her blue downcast eyes beam upon mine with timid fondness!
to sit for days, for years, listening to that gentle voice! to acquire the
right of obliging her, and hear the artless expressions of her gratitude! to
watch the emotions of her spotless heart! to encourage each dawning virtue! to
share in her joy when happy, to kiss away her tears when distressed, and to see
her fly to my arms for comfort and support! Yes; if there is perfect bliss on
earth, it is his lot alone who becomes that angel's husband."

While his fancy coined these ideas, he paced his cell with a disordered air.
His eyes were fixed upon vacancy; his head reclined upon his shoulder: a tear
rolled down his cheek, while he reflected that the vision of happiness for him
could never be realized.

"She is lost to me!" he continued; "by marriage she cannot be mine: and to
seduce such innocence, to use the confidence reposed in me to work her ruin --
Oh! it would be a crime, blacker than yet the world ever witnessed! Fear not,
lovely girl! your virtue runs no risk from me. Not for Indies would I make that
gentle bosom know the tortures of remorse."

Again he paced his chamber hastily. Then stopping, his eye fell upon the
picture of his once-admired Madona. He tore it with indignation from the wall:
he threw it on the ground, and spurned it from him with his foot.

"The prostitute!"

Unfortunate Matilda! her paramour forgot, that for his sake alone she had
forfeited her claim to virtue; and his only reason for despising her was, that
she loved him much too well.

He threw himself into a chair, which stood near the table. He saw the card
with Elvira's address. He took it up, and it brought to his recollection his
promise respecting a confessor. He passed a few minutes in doubt: but Antonia's
empire over him was already too much decided to permit his making a long
resistance to the idea which struck him. He resolved to be the confessor
himself. He could leave the abbey unobserved without difficulty: by wrapping up
his head in his cowl, he hoped to pass through the streets without being
recognized: by taking these precautions, and by recommending secrecy to
Elvira's family, he doubted not to keep Madrid in ignorance that he had broken
his vow never to see the outside of the abbey walls. Matilda was the only
person whose vigilance he dreaded: but, by informing her at the refectory, that
during the whole of that day business would confine him to his cell, he thought
himself secure from her wakeful jealousy. Accordingly, at the hours when the
Spaniards are generally taking their siesta, he ventured to quit the abbey by a
private door, the key of which was in his possession. The cowl of his habit was
thrown over his face; from the heat of the weather the streets were almost
totally deserted: the monk met with few people, found the strada di San Iago,
and arrived without accident at Donna Elvira's door. He rang, was admitted, and
immediately ushered into an upper apartment.

It was here that he ran the greatest risque of a discovery. Had Leonella been
at home, she would have recognized him directly. Her communicative disposition
would never have permitted her to rest, till all Madrid was informed that
Ambrosio had ventured out of the abbey, and visited her sister. Fortune here
stood the monk's friend. On Leonella's return home, she found a letter
instructing her that a cousin was just dead, who had left what little he
possessed between herself and Elvira. To secure this bequest, she was obliged
to set out for Cordova without losing a moment. Amidst all her foibles, her
heart was truly warm and affectionate, and she was unwilling to quit her sister
in so dangerous a state. But Elvira insisted upon her taking the journey,
conscious that, in her daughter's forlorn situation, no increase of fortune,
however trifling, ought to be neglected. Accordingly, Leonella left Madrid,
sincerely grieved at her sister's illness, and giving some few sighs to the
memory of the amiable but inconstant Don Christoval. She was fully persuaded,
that at first she had made a terrible breach in his heart; but hearing nothing
more of him, she supposed that he had quitted the pursuit, disgusted by the
lowness of her origin, and knowing upon other terms than marriage he had
nothing to hope from such a dragon of virtue as she professed herself; or else,
that being naturally capricious and changeable, the remembrance of her charms
had been effaced from the conde's heart by those of some newer beauty. Whatever
was the cause of her losing him, she lamented it sorely. She strove in vain (as
she assured every body who was kind enough to listen to her) to tear his image
from her too susceptible heart. She affected the airs of a lovesick virgin, and
carried them all to the most ridiculous excess. She heaved lamentable sighs,
walked with her arms folded, uttered long soliloquies, and her discourse
generally turned upon some forsaken maid who expired of a broken heart! Her
fiery locks were always ornamented with a garland of willow. Every evening she
was seen straying upon the banks of a rivulet by moonlight; and she declared
herself a violent admirer of murmuring streams and nightingales --

"Of lonely haunts, and twilight groves,
"Places which pale passion loves!"
Such was the state of Leonella's mind when obliged to quit Madrid. Elvira was
out of patience at all these follies, and endeavored at persuading her to act
like a reasonable woman. Her advice was thrown away: Leonella assured her, at
parting, that nothing could make her forget the perfidious Don Christoval. In
this point she was fortunately mistaken. An honest youth of Cordova, journeyman
to an apothecary, found that her fortune would be sufficient to set him up in a
genteel shop of his own. In consequence of this reflection, he avowed himself
her admirer. Leonella was not inflexible; the ardour of his sighs melted her
heart, and she soon consented to make him the happiest of mankind. She wrote to
inform her sister of her marriage; but, for reasons which will be explained
hereafter, Elvira never answered her letter.

Ambrosio was conducted into the antichamber to that where Elvira was
reposing. The female domestic who had admitted him, left him alone, while she
announced his arrival to her mistress. Antonia, who had been by her mother's
bedside, immediately came to him.

"Pardon me, father," said she, advancing toward him: when recognizing his
features, she stopped suddenly, and uttered a cry of joy. "Is it possible?" she
continued, "do not my eyes deceive me? Has the worthy Ambrosio broken through
his resolution, that he may soften the agonies of the best of women? What
pleasure will this visit give my mother! Let me not delay for a moment the
comfort which your piety and wisdom will afford her."

Thus saying, she opened the chamber door, presented to her mother her
distinguished visitor, and, having placed an arm-chair by the side of the bed,
withdrew into another apartment.

Elvira was highly gratified by this visit; her expectations had been raised
high by general report, but she found them far exceeded. Ambrosio, endowed by
nature with powers of pleasing, exerted them to the utmost, while conversing
with Antonia's mother. With persuasive eloquence he calmed every fear, and
dissipated every scruple. He bade her reflect on the infinite mercy of her
Judge, despoiled death of his darts and terrors, and taught her to view without
shrinking, the abyss of eternity, on whose brink she then stood. Elvira was
absorbed in attention and delight: while she listened to his exhortations,
confidence and comfort stole insensibly into her mind. She unbosomed to him
without hesitation, her cares and apprehensions. The latter respecting a future
life he had already quieted, and he now removed the former, which she felt for
the concerns of this. She trembled for Antonia; she had none to whose care she
could recommend her, save to the marquis de las Cisternas and her sister
Leonella. The protection of the one was very uncertain; and as to the other,
though fond of her niece, Leonella was so thoughtless and vain, as to make her
an improper person to have the sole direction of a girl so young and ignorant
of the world. The friar no sooner learned the cause of her alarms, than he
begged her to make herself easy upon that head. He doubted not being able to
secure for Antonia a safe refuge in the house of one of his penitents, the
marchioness of Villa-Franca: this was a lady of acknowledged virtue, remarkable
for strict principles and extensive charity. Should accident deprive her of
this resource, he engaged to procure Antonia a reception in some respectable
convent, that is to say, in quality of boarder; for Elvira had declared herself
no friend to a monastic life, and the monk was either candid or complaisant
enough to allow that her disapprobation was not unfounded.

These proofs of the interest which he felt for her, completely won Elvira's
heart. In thanking him, she exhausted every expression which gratitude could
furnish, and protested, that now she should resign herself with tranquillity to
the grave. Ambrosio rose to take leave; he promised to return the next day at
the same hour, but requested that his visits might be kept secret.

"I am unwilling," said he, "that my breaking through a rule imposed by
necessity should be generally known. Had I not resolved never to quit my
convent, except upon circumstances as urgent as that which has conducted me to
your door, I should be frequently summoned upon insignificant occasions; that
time would be engrossed by the curious, the unoccupied, and the fanciful, which
I now pass at the bedside of the sick, in comforting the expiring penitent,
and clearing the passage to eternity from thorns."

Elvira commended equally his prudence and compassion, promising to conceal
carefully the honor of his visits. The monk then gave her his benediction, and
retired from the chamber.

In the anti-room he found Antonia; he could not refuse himself the pleasure of
passing a few moments in her society. He bade her take comfort, for that her
mother seemed composed and tranquil, and he hoped that she yet might do well.
He enquired who attended her, and engaged to send the physician of his convent
to see her, one of the most skilful in Madrid. He then launched out in Elvira's
commendation, praised her purity and fortitude of mind, and declared that she
had inspired him with the highest esteem and reverence. Antonia's innocent
heart swelled with gratitude; joy danced in her eyes, where a tear still
sparkled. The hopes which he gave her of her mother's recovery, the lively
interest which he seemed to feel for her, and the flattering way in which she
was mentioned by him, added to the report of his judgment and virtue, and to
the impression made upon her by his eloquence, confirmed the favorable opinion
with which his first appearance had inspired Antonia. She replied with
diffidence, but without restraint; she feared not to relate to him all her
little sorrows, all her little fears and anxieties; and she thanked him for his
goodness with all the genuine warmth which favors kindle in a young and
innocent heart. Such a one alone knows how to estimate benefits at their full
value. They who are conscious of mankind's perfidy and selfishness, ever
receive an obligation with apprehension; they suspect that some secret motive
must lurk behind it; they express their thanks with restraint and caution, and
fear to praise a kind action to its full extent, aware that on some future day
a return may be required. Not so Antonia -- she thought the world was composed
of those only who resembled her: and that vice existed, was to her still a
secret. The monk had been of service to her; he said that he wished her well;
she was grateful for his kindness, and thought that no terms were strong enough
to be the vehicle of her thanks. With what delight did Ambrosio listen to the
declaration of her artless gratitude! The natural grace of her manners, the
unequalled sweetness of her voice, her modest vivacity, her unstudied elegance,
her expressive countenance and intelligent eyes united to inspire him with
pleasure and admiration; while the solidity and correctness of her remarks
received additional beauty from the unaffected simplicity of the language in
which they were conveyed.

Ambrosio was at length obliged to tear himself from this conversation, which
possessed for him but too many charms. He repeated to Antonia his wishes, that
his visits should not be made known; which desire she promised to observe. He
then quitted the house, while his enchantress hastened to her mother, ignorant
of the mischief which her beauty had caused. She was eager to know Elvira's
opinion of the man whom she had praised in such enthusiastic terms, and was
delighted to find it equally favorable, if not even more so than her own.

"Even before he spoke," said Elvira, "I was prejudiced in his favor: the
^^^vour of his (...), dignity of his manner, and closeness of his reasoning,
were very far from inducing me to (...) my opinion. His fine and full-toned
voice struct^^^ (...) ^^^icularly; but surely, Antonia, I have heard it before.
It seemed perfectly familiar to my ear; either I must have known the abbot in
former times, or his voice bears a wonderful resemblance to that of some other,
to whom I have often listened. There were certain tones which touched my very
heart, and made me feel sensations so singular, that I strive in vain to
account for them."

"My dearest mother, it produced the same effect upon me; yet certainly neither
of us ever heard his voice till we came to Madrid. I suspect that what we
attribute to his voice, really proceeds from his pleasant manners, which forbid
our considering him as a stranger. I know not why, but I feel more at my ease
while conversing with him, than I usually do with people who are unknown to me.
I feared not to repeat to him all my childish thoughts; and somehow I felt
confident that he would hear my folly with indulgence. Oh! I was not deceived
in him: he listened to me with such an air of kindness and attention; he
answered me with such gentleness, such condescension; he did not call me an
infant, and treat me with contempt, as our cross old confessor at the Castle
used to do. I verily believe, that if I had lived in Murcia a thousand years, I
never should have liked that fat old father Dominic!"

"I confess, that father Dominic had not the most pleasing manners in the
world; but he was honest, friendly, and well-meaning."

"Ah! my dear mother, those qualities are so common -- "

"God grant, my child, that experience may not teach you to think them rare and
precious! I have found them but too much so. But tell me, Antonia, why is it
impossible for me to have seen the abbot before?"

"Because, since the moment when he entered the abbey he has never been on the
outside of its walls. He told me just now, that from his ignorance of the
streets he had some difficulty to find the strada di San Iago, though so near
the abbey."

"All this is possible, and still I may have seen him before he entered the
abbey: in order to come out, it was rather necessary that he should first go
in."

"Holy Virgin! as you say, that is very true. Oh! but might he not have been
born in the abbey?"

Elvira smiled.

"Why, not very easily."

"Stay, stay! Now I recollect how it was. He was put into the abbey quite a
child; the common people say, that he fell from heaven, and was sent as a
present to the Capuchins by the Virgin."

"That was very kind of her. And so he fell from heaven, Antonia? He must have
had a terrible tumble."

"Many do not credit this; and I fancy, my dear mother, that I must number you
among the unbelievers. Indeed, as our landlady told my aunt, the general idea
is, that his parents being poor and unable to maintain him, left him just born
at the abbey door; the late superior, from pure charity, had him educated in
the convent; and he proved to be a model of virtue, and piety, and learning,
and I know not what else besides. In consequence, he was first received as a
brother of the order, and not long ago was hosen abbot. However, whether this
account or the other is the true one -- at least all agree, that when the monks
took him under their care he could not speak; therefore you could not have
heard his voice before he entered the monastery, because at that time he had no
voice at all."

"Upon my word, Antonia, you argue very closely; your conclusions are
infallible. I did not suspect you of being so able a logician."

"Ah! you are mocking me; but so much the better. It delights me to see you in
spirits; besides, you seem tranquil and easy, and I hope that you will have no
more convulsions. Oh! I was sure the abbot's visit would do you good."

"It has indeed done me good, my child. He has quieted my mind upon some points
which agitated me, and I already feel the effects of his attention. My eyes
grow heavy, and I think I can sleep a little. Draw the curtains, my Antonia;
but if I should not wake before midnight, do not sit up with me, I charge you."

Antonia promised to obey her; and, having received her blessing, drew the
curtains of the bed. She then seated herself in silence at her
embroidery-frame, and beguiled the hours with building castles in the air. Her
spirits were enlivened by the evident change for the better in Elvira, and her
fancy presented her with visions bright and pleasing. In these dreams Ambrosio
made no despicable figure. She thought of him with joy and gratitude; but for
every idea which fell to the friar's share, at least two were unconsciously
bestowed upon Lorenzo. Thus passed the time till the bell in the neighboring
steeple of the Capuchin cathedral announced the hour of midnight. Antonia
remembered her mother's injuctions, and obeyed them, though with reluctance.
She undrew the curtains with caution. Elvira was enjoying a profound and quiet
slumber; her cheek glowed with health's returning colors; a smile declared
that her dreams were pleasant, and as Antonia bent over her she fancied that
she heard her name pronounced, She kissed her mother's forehead softly, and
retired to her chamber; there she knelt before a statue of St. Rosolia, her
patroness; she recommended herself to the protection of Heaven, and, as had
been her custom from infancy, concluded her devotions by chaunting the
following stanzas:

MIDNIGHT HYMN. Probably these stanzas were suggested by Imogen's prayer in
Cymbeline --

"From fairies and from tempters of the night
Guard me, good angels!"


NOW all is hushed; the solemn chime
No longer swells the nightly gale;
Thy awful presence, hour sublime,
With spotless heart once more I hail.
It Is now the moment still and dread,
When sorcerers use their baleful power;
When graves give up their buried dead
To profit by the sanctioned hour.
From guilt and guilty thoughts secure,
To duty and devotion true,
With bosom light and conscience pure,
Repose, thy gentle aid I woo.
Good angels! take my thanks, that still
The snares of vice I view with scorn;
Thanks, that tonight as free from ill
I sleep, as when I woke at morn.
Yet may not my unconscious breast
Harbor some guilt to me unknown?
Some wish impure, which unreprest
You blush to see, and I to own?
If such there be, in gentle dream
Instruct my feet to shun the snare;
Bid truth upon my errors beam,
And deign to make me still your care.
Chase from my peaceful bed away
The witching spell, a foe to rest,
The nightly goblin, wanton say,
The ghost in pain, and fiend unblest.
Let not the tempter in mine ear
Pour lessons of unhallowed joy;
Let not the nightmare, wandering near
My couch, the calm of sleep destroy.
Let not some horrid dream affright
With strange fantastic forms mine eyes:
But rather bid some vision bright
Display the bliss of yonder skies.
Show me the crystal domes of heaven,
The worlds of light where angels lie;
Show me the lot to mortals given,
Who guiltless live, who guiltless die.
Then show me how a seat to (...)
Amidst those blissful realms of air;
Teach me to shun each guilty stain,
And guide me to the good and fair.
So every morn and night my voice
To Heaven the grateful strain shall ^use;
In you as guardian powers rejoice,
Good angels! and (...) your praise.
So will I strive, with zealous fire,
Each vice to shun, each fault correct;
Will love the lessons you inspire,
And prize the virtues you protect.
Then when at length, by high command,
My body seeks the grave's repose;
When death draws nigh, with friendly hand,
My failing pilgrim-eyes to close:
Pleased that my soul escapes the wreck,
Sighless will I my life resign,
And yield to God my spirit back,
As pure as when it first was mine.
Having finished her usual devotions, Antonia retired to bed. Sleep soon stole
over her senses; and for several hours she enjoyed that calm repose which
innocence alone can know, and for which many a monarch with pleasure would
exchange his crown.

CHAP. VII.
-- Ah! how dark
These long-extended realms and rueful wastes;
Where naught but silence reigns, and night, dark night,
Dark as was chaos ere the infant sun
Was rolled together, or had tried its beams
Athwart the gloom profound! The fickly taper,
By glimmering through thy low-browed misty vaults
Furred round with moldy damps and ropy slime,
Lets fall a supernumerary horror,
And only serves to make thy night more irksome!
BLAIR.
RETURNED undiscovered to the abbey, Ambrosio's mind was filled with the most
pleasing images. He was wilfully blind to the danger of exposing himself to
Antonia's charms: he only remembered the pleasure which her society had
afforded him, and rejoiced in the prospect of that pleasure being repeated. He
failed not to profit by Elvira's indisposition to obtain a sight of her
daughter every day. At first he bounded his wishes to inspire Antonia with
friendship: but no sooner was he convinced that she felt that sentiment in its
fullest extent, than his aim became more decided, and his attentions assumed a
warmer color. The innocent familiarity with which she treated him, gave him
encouragement. Grown used to her modesty, it no longer commanded the same
respect and awe: he still admired it, but it only made him more anxious to
deprive her of that which formed her principal charm. His natural penetration,
of which, unfortunately both for himself and Antonia, he possessed an ample
share, supplied a knowledge of the arts of seduction. He easily distinguished
the emotions which were favorable to his designs, and seized every means with
avidity of infusing corruption into Antonia's bosom. This he found no easy
matter. Extreme simplicity prevented her from perceiving the aim to which the
monk's insinuations tended; but the excellent morals which she owed to Elvira's
care, the solidity and correctness of her understanding, and a strong sense of
what was right, implanted in her heart by nature, made her feel that his
precepts must be faulty. By a few simple words she frequently overthrew the
whole bulk of his sophistical arguments, and made him conscious how weak they
were when opposed to virtue and truth. On such occasions he took refuge in his
eloquence; he overpowered her with a torrent of philosophical paradoxes, to
which, not understanding them, it was impossible for her to reply; and thus,
though he did not convince her that his reasoning was just, he at least
prevented her from discovering it to be false. He perceived that her respect
for his judgment augmented daily, and doubted not with time to bring her to the
point desired.

He was not unconscious that his attempts were highly criminal. He saw clearly
the baseness of seducing the innocent girl; but his passion was too violent to
permit his abandoning his design. He resolved to pursue it, let the
consequences be what they might. He depended upon finding Antonia in some
unguarded moment; and seeing no other man admitted into her society, nor
hearing any mentioned either by her or Elvira, he imagined that her young heart
was still unoccupied. In the mean while every day increased his coldness for
Matilda. Not a little was this occasioned by the consciousness of his faults to
her. To hide them from her, he was not sufficiently master of himself; yet he
dreaded lest, in a transport of jealous rage, she should betray the secret on
which his character and even his life depended. Matilda could not but remark
his indifference: he was conscious that she remarked it, and, fearing her
reproaches, shunned her studiously. Yet, when he could not avoid her, her
mildness might have convinced him that he had nothing to dread from her
resentment. She had resumed the character of the gentle interesting Rosario:
she taxed him not with ingratitude; but her eyes filled with involuntary tears,
and the soft melancholy of her countenance and voice uttered complaints far
more touching than words could have conveyed. Ambrosio was not unmoved by her
sorrow; but, unable to remove its cause, he forbore to show that it affected
him. As her conduct convinced him that he needed not fear her vengeance, he
continued to neglect her, and avoided her company with care. Matilda saw that
she in vain attempted to regain his affections; yet she stifled the impulse of
resentment, and continued to treat her inconstant lover with her former
fondness and affection.

By degrees Elvira's constitution recovered itself. She was no longer troubled
with convulsions, and Antonia ceased to tremble for her mother. Ambrosio beheld
this re-establishment with displeasure. He saw that Elvira's knowledge of the
world would not be the dupe of his sanctified demeanor, and that she would
easily perceive his views upon her daughter. He resolved therefore, before she
quitted her chamber, to try the extent of his influence over the innocent
Antonia.

One evening, when he had found Elvira almost perfectly restored to health, he
quitted her earlier than was his usual custom. Not finding Antonia in the
antichamber, he ventured to follow her to her own. It was only separated from
her mother's by a closet, in which Flora, the waiting woman, generally slept.
Antonia sat upon a sofa with her back toward the door, and read attentively.
She heard not his approach, till he had seated himself by her. She started, and
welcomed him with a look of pleasure: then rising, she would have conducted him
to the sitting room; but Ambrosio, taking her hand, obliged her by gentle
violence to resume her place. She complied without difficulty; she knew not
that there was more impropriety in conversing with him in one room than
another. She thought herself equally secure; and having replaced herself upon
the sofa, she began to discourse with him with her usual ease and vivacity.

Antonia spoke of her mother's health with all the enthusiastic joy of a
youthful heart.

"I admire your filial affection," said the abbot; "it proves the excellence
and sensibility of your character; it promises a treasure to him whom Heaven
has destined to possess your affections. The breast so capable of fondness for
a parent, what will it feel for a lover! Nay, perhaps, what feels it for one
even now! Tell me, my lovely daughter, have you known what it is to love?
Answer me with sincerity: forget my habit, and consider me only as a friend."

"What it is to love?" said she, repeating his question. "Oh! yes, undoubtedly;
I have loved many, many people."

"That is not what I mean. The love of which I speak can be felt only for one.
Have you never seen the man whom you wished to be your husband?"

"Oh! no, indeed!"

This was an untruth, but she was unconscious of its falsehood: she knew not
the nature of her sentiments for Lorenzo; and never having seen him since his
first visit to Elvira* ^ith every day his image grew less forcibly impressed
upon her bosom: besides, she thought of an husband with all a virgin's terror,
and negatived the friar's demand without a moment's hesitation.

"And do you not long to see that man, Antonia? Do you feel no void in your
heart, which you fain would have filled up? Do you heave no sighs for the
absence of some one dear to you, but who that some one is you know not?
Perceive you not that what formerly could please, has charms for you no longer?
that a thousand new wishes, new ideas, new sensations, have sprung in your
bosom, only to be felt, never to be described? Or, while you fill every other
heart with love, is it pos^ible that your own remains insensible and cold? It
cannot be! That melting eye, that blushing cheek, that enchanting voluptuous
melancholy which at times overspreads your features -- all these marks belie
your words: you love, Antonia, and in vain would hide it from me."

"Father, you amaze me! What is this love of which you speak? I neither know
its nature, nor, if I felt it, why I should conceal the sentiment."

"Have you seen no man, Antonia, whom, though never seen before, you seemed
long to have sought? whose form, though a stranger's, was familiar to your
eyes? the sound of whose voice soothed you, pleased you, penetrated to your
very soul? in whose presence you rejoiced, for whose absence you lamented? with
whom your heart seemed to expand, and in whose bosom, with confidence
unbounded, you reposed the cares of your own? Have you not felt all this,
Antonia?"

"Certainly I have: the first time that I saw you, I felt it."

Ambrosio started. Scarcely dared he credit his hearing.

"Me, Antonia?" he cried, his eyes sparkling with delight and impatience, while
he seized her hand, and pressed it rapturously to his lips* "Me, Antonia? You
felt those sentiments for me?"

"Even with more strength than you have described. The very moment that I
beheld you, I felt so pleased, so interested! I waited so eagerly to catch the
sound of your voice; and, when I heard it, it seemed so sweet! it spoke to me a
language till then so unknown! Methought it told me a thousand things which I
wished to hear! It seemed as if I had long known you; as if I had a right to
your friendship, your advice, and your protection. I wept when you departed,
and longed for the time which should restore you to my sight."

"Antonia! my charming Antonia!" exclaimed the monk, and caught her to his
bosom: "Can I believe my senses? repeat it to me, my sweet girl! Tell me again
that you love me, that you love me truly and tenderly!"

"Indeed, I do: let my mother be excepted, and the world holds no one more dear
to me."

At this frank avowal Ambrosio no longer possessed himself: he clasped the
blushing trembler in his arms. He fastened his lips greedily upon hers, and
sucked in her pure delicious breath. Startled, alarmed, and confused at his
action, surprise at first deprived her of the power of resistance. At length
recovering herself, she strove to escape from his embrace.

"Father! -- Ambrosio!" she cried, "release me; for God's sake!"

But the monk heeded not her prayers. Antonia prayed, wept, and struggled:
terrified to the extreme, though at what she knew not, she exerted all her
strength to repulse the friar, and was on the point of shrieking for
assistance, when the chamber door was suddenly thrown open. Ambrosio had just
sufficient presence of mind to be sensible of his danger. Reluctantly he
released Antonia, who uttered an exclamation of joy, flew toward the door, and
found herself clasped in the arms of her mother.

Alarmed at some of the (...), which Antonia had innocently repeated, Elvira
resolved to ascertain the truth of her suspicions. She had known enough of
mankind, not to be imposed upon by the monk's reputed virtue. She reflected on
several circumstances, which* (...) trifling, on being put together seemed to
authorize her fears. His frequent visits, which, as far as she could see, were
confined to her family; his evident emotion, whenever she spoke of Antonia; his
youth; and above all, his pernicious philosophy communicated to her by Antonia,
and which accorded but ill with his conversation in her presence; all these
circumstances inspired her with doubts respecting the purity of Ambrosio's
friendship. In consequence she resolved, when he should next be alone with
Antonia, to endeavor at surprising him. Her plan had succeeded. It Is true, that
when she entered the room, he had already abandoned his prey; but her
daughter's alarm, and the shame and confusion stamped upon the friar's
countenance, sufficed to prove that her suspicions were well founded. However,
she was too prudent to make those suspicions known. She judged, that to unmask
the impostor would be no easy matter, the public being so much prejudiced in
his favor: and having but few friends, she thought it dangerous to make
herself so powerful an enemy. She affected therefore not to remark his
agitation, seated herself tranquilly upon the sofa, assigned some trifling
reason for having quitted her room unexpectedly, and conversed on various
subjects with seeming confidence and ease.

Reassured by her behavior, the monk began to recover himself. He strove to
answer Elvira without appearing embarrassed: but he was still too great a
novice in dissimulation, and he felt that he must look confused and awkward. He
soon broke off the conversation, and rose to depart. What was his vexation
when, on taking leave, Elvira told him, in polite terms, that being now
perfectly reestablished, she thought it an injustice to deprive others of his
company who might be more in need of it! She assured him of her eternal
gratitude, for the benefit which during her illness she had derived from his
society and exhortations: and she lamented that her domestic affairs, as well
as the multitude of business which his situation must of necessity impose upon
him, would in future deprive her of the pleasure of his visits. Though
delivered in the mildest language, this hint was too plain to be mistaken.
Still he was preparing to put in a remonstrance, when an expressive look from
Elvira stopped him short. He dared not press her to receive him, for her manner
convinced him that he was discovered: he submitted without reply, took an hasty
leave, and retired to the abbey, his heart filled with rage and shame, with
bitterness and disappointment.

Antonia's mind felt relieved by his departure; yet she could not help
lamenting that she was never to see him more. Elvira also felt a secret sorrow;
she had received too much pleasure from thinking him her friend, not to regret
the necessity of changing her opinion: but her mind was too much accustomed to
the fallacy of worldly friendships to permit her present disappointment to
weigh upon it long. She now endeavored to make her daughter aware of the risk
which she had run; but she was obliged to treat the subject with caution, lest,
in removing the bandage of ignorance, the veil of innocence should be rent
away. She therefore contented herself with warning Antonia to be upon her
guard, and ordering her, should the abbot persist in his visits, never to
receive them but in company. With this injunction Antonia promised to comply.

Ambrosio hastened to his cell. He closed the door after him, and threw himself
upon the bed in despair. The impulse of desire, the stings of disappointment,
the shame of detection, and the fear of being publicly unmasked, rendered his
bosom a scene of the most horrible confusion. He knew not what course to
pursue. Debarred the presence of Antonia, he had no hopes of satisfying that
passion which was now become a part of his existence. He reflected that h^s
secret was in a woman's power: he trembled w^^h apprehension, when he beheld
the precipice before him, and with rage when he thought that, had it not been
for Elvira, he should now have possessed the object of his desires. With the
direst imprecations he vowed vengeance against her; he swore that, cost what it
would, he still would possess Antonia. Starting from the bed, he paced the
chamber with disordered steps, howled with impotent fury, dashed himself
violently against the walls, and indulged all the transports of rage and
madness.

He was still under the influence of this storm of passions, when he heard a
gentle knock at the door of his cell. Conscious that his voice must have been
heard, he dared not refuse admittance to the importuner. He strove to compose
himself, and to hide his agitation. Having in some degree succeeded, he drew
back the bolt: the door opened, and Matilda appeared.

At this precise moment there was no one with whose presence he could better
have dispensed. He had not sufficient command over himself to conceal his
vexation. He started back, and frowned.

"I am busy!" said he in a stern and hasty tone; "leave me!"

Matilda heeded him not: she again fastened the door, and then advanced toward
him with an air gentle and supplicating.

"Forgive me, Ambrosio," said she; "for your own sake I must not obey you. Fear
no complaints from me; I come not to reproach you with your ingratitude. I
pardon you from my heart; and since your love can no longer be mine, I request
the next best gift, your confidence and friendship. We cannot force our
inclinations: the little beauty which you once saw in me has perished with its
novelty; and if it can no longer excite desire, mine is the fault, not yours.
But why persist in shunning me? why such anxiety to fly my presence? You have
sorrows, but will not permit me to share them; you have disappointments, but
will not accept my comfort; you have wishes, but forbid my aiding your
pursuits. It Is of this that I complain; for though I have given up the claims
of the mistress, nothing shall prevail on me to give up those of the friend."

"Generous Matilda!" he replied, taking her hand, "how far do you rise superior
to the foibles of your sex! Yes, I accept your offer. I have need of an
adviser, of a confidant, and in you I find every quality united. But to aid my
pursuits -- Ah! Matilda, it lies not in your power."

"It lies in no one's power but mine. Ambrosio, your secret is none to me* your
every step, your every action has been observed by my attentive eye. You love
-- "

"Matilda!"

"Why conceal it from me? fear not the little jealousy which taints the
generality of women: my soul disdains so despicable a passion. You love,
Ambrosio; Antonia Dalfa is the object of your flame. I know every circumstance
respecting your passion. Every conversation has been repeated to me. I have
been informed of your disappointment, and dismission from Elvira's house. You
now despair of possessing your mistress; but I come to revive your hopes, and
point out the road to success."

"To success? Oh! Impossible!"

"To those who dare, nothing is impossible. Rely upon me, and you may yet be
happy. The time is come, Ambrosio, when regard for your comfort and
tranquillity compels me to reveal a part of my history, with which you are
still unacquainted. Listen, and do not interrupt me. Should my confession
disgust you, remember that in making it, my sole aim is to satisfy your wishes,
and restore that peace to your heart which at present has abandoned it. I
formerly mentioned, that my guardian was a man of uncommon knowledge. He took
pains to instill that knowledge into my infant mind. Among the various sciences
which curiosity had induced him to explore, he neglected not that which by most
is esteemed impious, and by many chimerical: I speak of those arts which relate
to the world of spirits. His deep researches into causes and effects, his
unwearied application to the study of natural philosophy, his profound and
unlimited knowledge of the properties and virtues of every gem which enriches
the deep, of every herb which the earth produces, at length procured him the
distinction which he had sought so long, so earnestly. His curiosity was fully
slaked, his ambition amply gratified. He gave laws to the elements: he could
reverse the order of nature: his eye read the mandates of futurity, and the
infernal spirits were submissive to his commands. Why shrink you from me? I
understand that inquiring look. Your suspicions are right, though your terrors
are unfounded. My guardian concealed not from me his most precious acquisition.
Yet, had I never seen you, I should never have exerted my power. Like you, I
shuddered at the thoughts of magic. Like you, I had formed a terrible idea of
the consequences of raising a demon. To preserve that life which your love had
taught me to prize, I had recourse to means which I trembled at employing. You
remember that night which I passed in St. Clare's sepulcher? Then was it that,
surrounded by mouldering bodies, I dared to perform those mystic rites, which
summoned to my aid a fallen angel. Judge what must have been my joy at
discovering that my terrors were imaginary. I saw the demon obedient to my
orders: I saw him trembling at my frown: and found that, instead of selling my
soul to a master, my courage had purchased for myself a slave."

"Rash Matilda! What have you done? You have doomed yourself to endless
perdition; you have bartered for momentary power, eternal happiness! If on
witchcraft depends the fruition of my desires, I renounce your aid most
absolutely. The consequences are too horrible. I dote upon Antonia, but am not
so blinded by desire, as to sacrifice for her possession my existence both in
this world and in the next."

"Ridiculous prejudices! Oh! blush, Ambrosio, blush at being subjected to their
dominion. Where is the risk of accepting my offers? What should induce my
persuading you to this step, except the wish of restoring you to happiness and
quiet? If there is danger, it must fall upon me. It is I who invoke the
ministry of the spirits: mine therefore will be the crime, and yours the
profit; but danger there is none. The enemy of mankind is my slave, not my
sovereign. Is there no difference between giving and receiving laws, between
serving and commanding? Awake from your idle dreams, Ambrosio! throw from you
these terrors so ill suited to a soul like yours; leave them for common men,
and dare to be happy! Accompany me this night to St. Clare's sepulcher; there
witness my incantations, and Antonia is your own."

"To obtain her by such means, I neither can nor will. Cease then to persuade
me, for I dare not employ hell's agency."

"You dare not? How have you deceived me! That mind which I esteemed so great
and valiant, proves to be feeble, puerile and grovelling, a slave to vulgar
errors, and weaker than a woman's."

"What? Though conscious of the danger, wilfully shall I expose myself to the
seducer's arts? Shall I renounce for ever my title to salvation? Shall my eyes
seek a sight which I know will blast them? No, no, Matilda, I will not ally
myself with God's enemy."

"Are you then God's friend at present? Have you not broken your engagements
with him, renounced his service, and abandoned yourself to the impulse of your
passions? Are you not planning the destruction of innocence, the ruin of a
creature whom he formed in the mould of angels? If not of demons, whose aid
would you invoke to forward this laudable design? Will the seraphims protect
it, conduct Antonia to your arms, and sanction with their ministry your illicit
pleasures? Absurd! But am I not deceived, Ambrosio! It is not virtue which
makes you reject my offer; you would accept it but you dare not. It Is not the
crime which holds your hand, but the punishment; it is not respect for God which
restrains you, but the terror of his vengeance! Fain would you offend him in
secret, but you tremble to profess yourself his foe. Now shame on the coward
soul, which wants the courage either to be a firm friend, or an open enemy!"

"To look upon guilt with horror, Matilda, is in itself a merit: In this
respect I glory to confess myself a coward. Though my passions have made me
deviate from her laws, I still feel in my heart an innate love of virtue. But
it ill becomes you to tax me with my perjury: you who first seduced me to
violate my vows; you who first roused my sleeping vices, made me feel the
weight of religion's chains, and bade me be convinced that guilt had pleasures.
Yet though my principles have yielded to the force of temperament, I still have
sufficient grace to shudder at sorcery, and avoid a crime so monstrous, so
unpardonable!"

"Unpardonable, say you? Where then is your consta^^ boast of the Almighty's
infinite mercy? Has he of late set bounds to it? Receives he no longer a sinner
with joy? You injure him, Ambrosio; you will always have time to repent, and he
have goodness to forgive. Afford him a glorious opportunity to exert that
goodness: the greater your crime, the greater his merit in pardoning. Away then
with these childish scruples! be persuaded to your good, and follow me to the
sepulcher."

"Oh! cease, Matilda! That scoffing tone, that bold and impious language is
horrible in every mouth, but most so in a woman's. Let us drop a conversation
which excites no other sentiments than horror and disgust. I will not follow
you to the sepulcher, or accept the services of your infernal agents. Antonia
shall be mine, but mine by human means."

"Then yours she will never be! You are banished her presence; her mother has
opened her eyes to your designs, and she is now upon her guard against them.
Nay, more, she loves another; a youth of distinguished merit possesses her
heart; and unless you interfere, a few days will make her his bride. This
intelligence was brought me by my invisible servants, to whom I had recourse on
first perceiving your indifference. They watched your every action, related to
me all that passed at Elvira's, and inspired me with the idea of favoring your
designs. Their reports have been my only comfort. Though you shunned my
presence, all your proceedings were known to me; nay, I was constantly with you
in some degree, thanks to this most precious gift!"

With these words she drew from beneath her habit a mirror of polished steel,
the borders of which were marked with various strange and unknown characters.

"Amidst all my sorrows, amidst all my regrets for your coldness, I was
sustained from despair by the virtues of this talisman. On pronouncing certain
words, the person appears in it on whom the observer's thoughts are bent: thus,
though I was exiled from your sight, you, Ambrosio, were ever present to mine."

The friar's curiosity was strongly excited.

"What you relate is incredible! Matilda, are you not amusing yourself with my
credulity?"

"Be your own eyes the judge."

She put the mirror into his hand. Curiosity induced him to take it, and love,
to wish that Antonia might appear. Matilda pronounced the magic words.
Immediately a thick smoke rose from the characters traced upon the borders, and
spread itself over the surface. It dispersed again gradually; a confused
mixture of colors and images presented themselves to the friar's eyes, which
at length arranging themselves in their proper places, he beheld in miniature
Antonia's lovely form.

Ambrosio gazed upon it for a few minutes; those few were sufficient to fix his
irresolution.

"I yield!" he cried, dashing the mirror upon the ground: "Matilda, I follow
you! Do with me what you will!"

She waited not to hear his consent repeated. It was already midnight. She flew
to her cell, and soon returned with her little basket and the key of the
cemetery, which had remained in her possession since her first visit to the
vaults. She gave the monk no time for reflection.

"Come!" she said, and took his hand; "follow me, and witness the effects of
your resolve."

This said, she drew him hastily along. They passed into the burying ground
unobserved, opened the door of the sepulcher, and found themselves at the head
of the subterraneous staircase. As yet the beams of the full moon had guided
their steps, but that resource now failed them. Matilda had neglected to
provide herself with a lamp. Still holding Ambrosio's hand she descended the
marble steps; but the profound obscurity with which they were overspread,
obliged them to walk slow and cautiously.

"You tremble!" said Matilda to her companion; "fear not, the destined spot is
near."

They reached the foot of the staircase; and continued to proceed, feeling
their way along the walls. On turning a corner, suddenly they descried faint
gleams of light, which seemed burning at a distance. Thither they bent their
steps. The rays proceeded from a small sepulchral lamp which flamed unceasingly
before the statue of St. Clare. It tinged with dim and cheerless beams the
massy columns which supported the roof, but was too feeble to dissipate the
thick gloom in which the vaults above were buried.

Matilda took the lamp.

"Wait for me!" said she to the friar; "in a few moments I am here again."

With these words she hastened into one of the passages, which branched in
various directions from this spot and formed a sort of labyrinth. Ambrosio was
now left alone. Darkness the most profound surrounded him, and encouraged the
doubts which began to revive in his bosom. He had been hurried away by the
delirium of the moment. The shame of betraying his terrors, while in Matilda's
presence, had induced him to repress them; but, now that he was abandoned to
himself, they resumed their former ascendancy. He trembled at the scene which
he was soon to witness. He knew not how far the delusions of magic might
operate upon his mind; they possibly might force him to some deed, whose
commission would make the breach between himself and heaven irreparable. In
this fearful dilemma, he would have implored God's assistance, but was
conscious that he had forfeited all claim to such protection. Gladly would he
have returned to the abbey; but as he had passed through innumerable caverns
and winding passages, the attempt of regaining the stairs was hopeless. His
fate was determined; no possibility of escape presented itself. He therefore
combated his apprehensions, and called every argument to his succor, which
might enable him to support the trying scene with fortitude. He reflected, that
Antonia would be the reward of his daring. He inflamed his imagination by
enumerating her charms. He persuaded himself, that (as Matilda had observed) he
always should have time sufficient for repentance; and that, as he employed her
assistance, not that of demons, the crime of sorcery could not be laid to his
charge. He had read much respecting witchcraft; he understood that, unless a
formal act was signed renouncing his claim to salvation, Satan would have no
power over him. He was fully determined not to execute any such act, whatever
threats might ^e used, or advantages held out to him.

Such were his meditations while waiting for Matilda. They were interrupted by
a low murmur, which seemed at no great distance from him. He was startled -- he
listened. Some minutes passed in silence, after which the murmur was repeated.
It appeared to be the groaning of one in pain. In any other situation, this
circumstance would only have excited his attention and curiosity. In the
present, his predominant sensation was that of terror. His imagination totally
engrossed by the ideas of sorcery and spirits, he fancied that some unquiet
ghost was wandering near him; or else that Matilda had fallen a victim to her
presumption, and was perishing under the cruel fangs of the demons. The noise
seemed not to approach, but continued to be heard at intervals. Sometimes it
became more audible -- doubtless, as the sufferings of the person who uttered
the groans became more acute and insupportable. Ambrosio now and then thought
that he could distinguish accents, and once in particular he was almost
convinced that he heard a faint voice exclaim,

"God! Oh! God! No hope! No succor!"

Yet deeper groans followed these words: they died away gradually, and
universal silence again prevailed.

"What can this mean?" thought the bewildered monk.

At that moment an idea which flashed into his mind, almost petrified him with
horror. He started and shuddered at himself.

"Should it be possible!" he groaned involuntarily; "should it but be possible;
Oh! what a monster am I!"

He wished to resolve his doubts, and to repair his fault, if it were not too
late already. But these generous and compassionate sentiments were soon put to
flight by the return of Matilda. He forgot the groaning sufferer, and
remembered nothing but the danger and embarrassment of his own situation. The
light of the returning lamp gilded the walls, and in a few moments after
Matilda stood beside him. She had quitted her religious habit: she was now
clothed in a long sable robe, on which was traced in gold embroidery a variety
of unknown characters: it was fastened by a girdle of precious stones, in which
was fixed a poniard. Her neck and arms were uncovered; in her hand she bore a
golden wand; her hair was loose, and flowed wildly upon her shoulders; her eyes
sparkled with terrific expression; and her whole demeanor was calculated to
inspire the beholder with awe and admiration.

"Follow me!" she said to the monk in a low and solemn voice; "all is ready."

His limbs trembled while he obeyed her. She led him through various narrow
passages; and on every side, as they passed along, the beams of the lamp
displayed none but the most revolting objects; sculls, bones, graves, and
images whose eyes seemed to glare on them with horror and surprise. At length
they reached a spacious cavern, whose lofty roof the eye sought in vain to
discover. A profound obscurity hovered through the void; damp vapors struck
cold to the friar's heart, and he listened sadly to the blast while it howled
along the lonely vaults. Here Matilda stopped. She turned to Ambrosio. His
cheeks and lips were pale with apprehension. By a glance of mingled scorn and
anger she reproved his pusillanimity, but she spoke not. She placed the lamp
upon the ground near the basket. She motioned that Ambrosio should be silent,
and began the mysterious rites. She drew a circle round him, another round
herself; and then, taking a small phial from the basket, poured a few drops
upon the ground before her. She bent over the place, muttered some indistinct
sentences, and immediately a pale sulphurous flame arose from the ground. It
increased by degrees, and at length spread its waves over the whole surface,
the circles alone excepted in which stood Matilda and the monk. It then
ascended the huge columns of unhewn stone, glided along the roof, and formed
the cavern into an immense chamber totally covered with blue trembling fire. It
emitted no heat: on the contrary, the extreme chillness of the place seemed to
augment with every moment. Matilda continued her incantations; at intervals she
took various articles from the basket, the nature and name of most of which
were unknown to the friar; but among the few which he distinguished, he
particularly observed three human fingers, and an agnus dei which she broke in
pieces. She threw them all into the flames which burned before her, and they
were instantly consumed.

The monk beheld her with anxious curiosity. Suddenly she uttered a loud and
piercing shriek. She appeared to be seized with an excess of delirium; she tore
her hair, beat her bosom, used the most frantic gestures, and, drawing the
poniard from her girdle, plunged it into her left arm. The blood gushed out
plentifully; and, as she stood on the brink of the circle, she took care that
it should fall on the outside. The flames retired from the spot on which the
blood was pouring. A volume of dark clouds rose slowly from the ensanguined
earth, and ascended gradually till it (...) the vault of the cavern. At the
same time a clap of thunder was heard, the echo pealed fearfully along the
subterraneous passages, and the ground shook beneath the feet of the
enchantress.

It was now that Ambrosio repented of his rashness. The solemn singularity of
the charm had prepared him for something strange and horrible. He waited with
fear for the spirit's appearance, whose coming was announced by thunder and
earthquakes. He looked wildly around him, expecting that some dreadful
apparition would meet his eyes, the sight of which would drive him mad. A cold
shivering seized his body, and he sunk upon one knee, unable to support himself.

"He comes!" exclaimed Matilda in a joyful accent.

Ambrosio started, and expected the demon with terror. What was his surprise
when, the thunder ceasing to roll, a full strain of melodious music sounded in
the air! At the same time the cloud disappeared, and he beheld a figure more
beautiful than fancy's pencil ever drew. It was a youth seemingly scarce
eighteen, the perfection of whose form and face was unrivalled. He was
perfectly naked: a bright star sparkled upon his forehead, two crimson wings
extended themselves from his shoulders, and his silken locks were confined by a
band of many colored fires, which played round his head, formed themselves
into a variety of figures, and shone with a brilliancy far surpassing that of
precious stones. Circlets of diamonds were fastened round his arms and ankles,
and in his right hand he bore a silver branch imitating myrtle. His form shone
with dazzling glory: he was surrounded by clouds of rose colored light, and at
the moment he appeared, a refreshing air breathed perfumes through the cavern.
Enchanted at a vision so contrary to his expectations, Ambrosio gazed upon the
spirit with delight and wonder: yet, however beautiful the figure, he could not
but remark a wildness in the daemon's eyes, and a mysterious melancholy
imprested upon his features, betraying the fallen angel, and inspiring the
spectators with secret awe.

The music ceased. Matilda addressed herself to the spirit: she spoke in a
language unintelligible to the monk, and was answered in the same. She seemed
to insist upon something which the demon was unwilling to grant. He frequently
darted upon Ambrosio angry glances, and at such times the friar's heart sunk
within him. Matilda appeared to grow incensed; she spoke in a loud and
commanding tone, and her gestures declared that she was threatening him with
her vengeance. Her menaces had the desired effect. The spirit sunk upon his
knee, and with a submissive air presented to her the branch of myrtle. No
sooner had she received it, than the music was again heard; a thick cloud
spread itself over the apparition; the blue flames disappeared, and total
obscurity reigned through the cave. The abbot moved not from his place: his
faculties were all bound up in pleasure, anxiety, and surprise. At length the
darkness dispersing, he perceived Matilda standing near him in her religious
habit, with the myrtle in her hand. No traces remained of the incantation, and
the vaults were only illuminated by the faint rays of the sepulchral lamp.

"I have succeeded," said Matilda, "though with more difficulty than I
expected. Lucifer, whom I summoned to my assistance, was at first unwilling to
obey my commands: to enforce his compliance, I was constrained to have recourse
to my strongest charms. They have produced the desired effect, but I have
engaged never more to invoke his agency in your favor. Beware, then, how you
employ an opportunity which never will return. My magic arts will now be of no
use to you: in future you can only hope for supernatural aid, by invoking the
demons yourself, and accepting the conditions of their service. This you will
never do. You want strength of mind to force them to obedience; and unless you
pay their established price, they will not be your voluntary servants. In this
one instance they consent to obey you; I, offer you the means of possessing
your mistress, and be careful not to lose the opportunity. Receive this
constellated myrtle: while you bear this in your hand, every door will fly open
to you. It will procure you access tomorrow night to Antonia's chamber: then
breathe upon it thrice, pronounce her name, and place it upon her pillow. A
death like slumber will immediately seize upon her, and hold her till break of
morning. In this state you may satisfy your desires without danger of being
discovered; since, when daylight shall dispel the effects of the enchantment,
Antonia will perceive her dishonor, but be ignorant of the ravisher. Be happy
then, my Ambrosio, and let this service convince you that my friendship is
disinterested and pure. The night must be near expiring: let us return to the
abbey, lest our absence should create surprise."

The abbot received the talisman with silent gratitude. His ideas were too much
bewildered by the adventures of the night, to permit his expressing his thanks
audibly, or indeed as yet to feel the whole value of her present. Matilda took
up her lamp and basket, and guided her companion from the mysterious cavern.
She restored the lamp to its former place, and continued her route in darkness
till she reached the foot of the staircase. The first beams of the rising sun
darting down it facilitated the ascent. Matilda and the abbot hastened out of
the sepulcher, closed the door after them, and soon regained the abbey's
western cloister. No one met them, and they retired unobserved to their
respective cells.

The confusion of Ambrosio's mind now began to appease. He rejoiced in the
fortunate issue of his adventure: reflecting upon the virtues of the myrtle, he
looked upon Antonia as already in his power, and waited with impatience for the
approach of midnight.

CHAP. VIII.
The crickets sing, and man's o'erlaboured sense
Repairs itself by rest; our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the rushes, ere he wakened
The chastity he wounded -- Cytheria,
How bravely thou becom'^t thy bed! Fresh lily!
And whiter than the sheets!
CYMBELINE.
ALL the researches of the marquis de las Cisternas proved in vain. Agnes was
lost to him forever. Despair produced so violent an effect upon his
constitution, that the consequence was a long and severe illness. This
prevented him from visiting Elvira, as he had intended; and she being ignorant
of the cause of his neglect, it gave her no trifling uneasiness. His sister's
death had prevented Lorenzo from communicating to his uncle his designs
respecting Antonia. The injunctions of her mother forbade his presenting
himself to her without the duke's consent; and as she heard no more of him or
his proposals, Elvira conjectured that he had either met with a better match,
or had been commanded to give up all thoughts of her daughter. Every day made
her more uneasy respecting Antonia's fate; yet while she retained the abbot's
protection, she bore with fortitude the disappointment of her hopes with regard
to Lorenzo and the marquis. That resource now failed her. She was convinced
that Ambrosio had meditated her daughter's ruin; and when she reflected that
her death would leave Antonia friendless and unprotected in a world so base, so
perfidious and depraved, her heart swelled with the bitterness of apprehension.
At such times she would sit for hours gazing upon the lovely girl, and seeming
to listen to her innocent prattle, while in reality her thoughts dwelt upon the
sorrows into which a moment would suffice to plunge her. Then she would clasp
her in her arms suddenly, lean her head upon her daughter's bosom, and bedew it
with her tears.

An event was in preparation, which, had she known it, would have relieved her
from her inquietude. Lorenzo now waited only for a favorable opportunity to
inform the duke of his intended marriage: however, a circumstance which
occurred at this period obliged him to delay his explanation for a few days
longer.

Don Raymond's malady seemed to gain ground. Lorenzo was constantly at his
bedside, and treated him with a tenderness truly fraternal. Both the cause and
effects of the disorder were highly afflicting to the brother of Agnes: yet
Theodore's grief was scarcely less sincere. That amiable boy quitted not his
master for a moment, and put every means in practice to console and alleviate
his sufferings. The marquis had conceived so rooted an affection for his
deceased mistress, that it was evident to all that he never could survive her
loss. Nothing could have prevented him from sinking under his grief, but the
persuasion of her being still alive, and in need of his assistance. Though
convinced of its falsehood, his attendants encouraged him in a belief which
formed his only comfort. He was assured daily, that fresh perquisitions were
making respecting Agnes: stories were invented recounting the various attempts
made to get admittance into the convent; and circumstances were related, which,
though they did not promise her absolute recovery, at least were sufficient to
keep his hopes alive. The marquis constantly fell into the most terrible excess
of passion, when informed of the failure of these supposed attempts. Still he
would not credit that the succeeding ones would have the same fate, but
flattered himself that the next would prove more fortunate.

Theodore was the only one who exerted himself to realize his master's
chimeras. He was eternally busied in planning schemes for entering the convent,
or at least of obtaining from the nuns some intelligence of Agnes. To execute
these schemes was the only inducement which could prevail on him to quit Don
Raymond. He became a very Proteus, changing his shape every day; but all his
metamorphoses were to very little purpose. He regularly, returned to the palace
de las Cisternas without any intelligence to confirm his master's hopes. One
day he took it into his head to disguise himself as a beggar; he put a patch
over his left eye, took his guitar in hand, and posted himself at the gate of
the convent.

"If Agnes is really confined in the convent," thought he, "and hears my voice,
she will recollect it, and possibly may find means to let me know that she is
here."

With this idea he mingled with a crowd of beggars who assembled daily at the
gate of St. Clare to receive soup, which the nuns were accustomed to distribute
at twelve o'clock. All were provided with jugs or bowls to carry it away; but
as Theodore had no utensil of this kind, he begged leave to eat his portion at
the convent door. This was granted without difficulty. His sweet voice, and, in
spite of his patched eye, his engaging countenance won the heart of the good
old porteress, who, aided by a lay sister, was busied in serving to each his
mess. Theodore was bid to stay till the others should depart, and promised that
his request should then be granted. The youth desired no better, since it was
not to eat soup that he presented himself at the convent. He thanked the
porteress for her permission, retired from the door, and, seating himself upon
a large stone, amused himself in tuning his guitar while the beggars were
served.

As soon as the crowd was gone, Theodore was beckoned to the gate, and desired
to come in. He obeyed with infinite readiness, but affected great respect at
passing the hallowed threshold, and to be much daunted by the presence of the
reverend ladies. His feigned timidity flattered the vanity of the nuns, who
endeavored to reassure him. The porteress took him into her own little
parlour: in the mean while the lay sister went to the kitchen, and soon
returned with a double portion of soup of better quality than what was given to
the beggars. His hostess added some fruits and confections from her own private
store, and both encouraged the youth to dine heartily. To all these attentions
he replied with much seeming gratitude, and abundance of blessings upon his
benefactresses. While he ate, the nuns admired the delicacy of his features,
the beauty of his hair, and the sweetness and grace which accompanied all his
actions. They lamented to each other in whispers, that so charming a youth
should be exposed to the seductions of the world, and agreed that he would be a
worthy pillar of the catholic church. They concluded their conference by
resolving, that heaven would be rendered a real service, if they entreated the
prioress to intercede with Ambrosio for the beggar's admission into the order
of Capuchins.

This being determined, the porteress, who was a person of great influence in
the convent, posted away in all haste to the domina's cell. Here she made so
flaming a narrative of Theodore's merits, that the old lady grew curious to see
him. Accordingly the porteress was commissioned to convey him to the parlour
grate. In the interim, the supposed beggar was sifting the lay sister with
respect to the fate of Agnes: her evidence only corroborated the domina's
assertions. She said, that Agnes had been taken ill on returning from
confession, had never quitted her bed from that moment, and that she had
herself been present at the funeral. She even attested having seen her dead
body, and assisted with her own hands in adjusting it upon the bier. This
account discouraged Theodore: yet, as he had pushed the adventure so far, he
resolved to witness its conclusion.

The porteress now returned, and ordered him to follow her. He obeyed, and was
conducted into the parlour, where the lady prioress was already posted at the
grate. The nuns surrounded her, who all flocked with eagerness to a scene which
promised some diversion. Theodore saluted them with profound respect, and his
presence had the power to smooth for a moment even the stern brow of the
superior. She asked several questions respecting his parents, his religion, and
what had reduced him to a state of beggary. To these demands his answers were
perfectly satisfactory and perfectly false. He was then asked his opinion of a
monastic life. He replied in terms of high estimation and respect for it. Upon
this the prioress told him, that his obtaining an entrance into a religious
order was not impossible; that her recommendation would not permit his poverty
to be an obstacle: and that, if she found him deserving it, he might depend in
future upon her protection. Theodore assured her, that to merit her favor
would be his highest ambition: and having ordered him to return next day, when
she would talk with him further, the domina quitted the parlour.

The nuns, whom respect for the superior had till then kept silent, now crowded
all together to the grate, and assailed the youth with a multitude of
questions. He had already examined each with attention. Alas! Agnes was not
amongst them. The nuns heaped question upon question so thickly, that it was
scarcely possible for him to reply. One asked where he was born, since his
accent declared him to be a foreigner; another wanted to know why he wore a
patch upon his left eye: sister Helena inquired whether he had not a sister
like him, because she should like such a companion: and sister Rachael was
fully persuaded that the brother would be the pleasanter companion of the two.
Theodore amused himself with relating to the credulous nuns, for truths, all
the strange stories which his imagination could invent. He related to them his
supposed adventures, and penetrated every auditor with astonishment, while he
talked of giants, savages, shipwrecks, and islands inhabited

" By anthropophagi, and men whose heads
" Do grow beneath their shoulders,"
with many other circumstances to the full as remarkable. He said that he was
born in Terra Incognita, was educated at an Hottentot university, and had
passed two years among the Americans of Silesia.

"For what regards the loss of my eye," said he, "it was a just punishment upon
me for disrespect to the Virgin, when I made my second pilgrimage to Loretto. I
stood near the altar in the miraculous chapel: the monks were proceeding to
array the statue in her best apparel. The pilgrims were ordered to close their
eyes during this ceremony; but though by nature extremely religious, curiosity
was too powerful. At the moment..... I shall penetrate you with horror,
reverend ladies, when I reveal my crime!... At the moment that the monks were
changing her shift, I ventured to open my left eye, and gave a little peep
toward the statue. That look was my last! The glory which surrounded the
Virgin was too great to be supported. I hastily shut my sacrilegious eye, and
never have been able to unclose it since!"

At the relation of this miracle the nuns all crossed themselves, and promised
to intercede with the blessed Virgin for the recovery of his sight. They
expressed their wonder at the extent of his travels, and at the strange
adventures which he had met with at so early an age. They now remarked his
guitar, and inquired whether he was an adept in music. He replied with modesty,
that it was not for him to decide upon his talents, but requested permission to
appeal to them as judges. This was granted without difficulty.

"But at least," said the old porteress, "take care not to sing any thing
profane."

"You may depend upon my discretion," replied Theodore; "you shall hear how
dangerous it is for young women to abandon themselves to their passions,
illustrated by the adventure of a damsel, who fell suddenly in love with an
unknown knight."

"But is the adventure true?" inquired the porteress.

"Every word of it. It happened in Denmark; and the heroine was thought so
beautiful, that she was known by no other name than that of 'the lovely maid."

"In Denmark, say you?" mumbled an old nun: "are not the people all blacks in
Denmark?"

"By no means, reverend lady; they are of a delicate pea green, with flame
colored hair and whiskers."

"Mother of God! Pea-green?" exclaimed sister Helena: "Oh! it is impossible!"

"Impossible!" said the porteress, with a look of contempt and exultation: "Not
at all: when I was a young woman, I remember seeing several of them myself."

Theodore now put his instrument in proper order. He had read the story of a
king of England, whose prison was discovered by a minstrel; and he hoped that
the same scheme would enable him to discover Agnes, should she be in the
convent. He chose a ballad, which she had taught him herself in the castle of
Lindenberg: she might possibly catch the sound, and he hoped to hear her
replying to some of the stanzas. His guitar was now in tune, and he prepared to
strike it.

"But, before I begin," said he, "it is necessary to inform you, ladies, that
this same Denmark is terribly infested by sorcerers, witches, and evil spirits.
Every element possesses its appropriate demons. The woods are haunted by a
malignant power, called 'The Erl, or Oak King:' he it is who blights the trees,
spoils the harvest, and commands the imps and goblins. He appears in the form
of an old man of majestic figure, with a golden crown, and long white beard.
His principal amusement is to entice young children from their parents; and as
soon as he gets them into his cave, tears them into a thousand pieces. The
rivers are governed by another fiend, called 'The Water King.' His province is
to agitate the deep, occasion shipwrecks, and drag the drowning sailors beneath
the waves. He wears the appearance of a warrior, and employs himself in luring
young virgins into his snare: what he does with them when he catches them in
the water, reverend ladies, I leave for you to imagine. 'The Fire King' seems
to be a man all formed of flames: he raises the meteors and wandering lights
which beguile travelers into ponds and marshes, and he directs the lightning
where it may do most mischief. The last of these elementary demons is called
'The Cloud King:' his figure is that of a beautiful youth, and he is
distinguished by two large sable wings: though his outside is so enchanting, he
is not a bit better disposed than the others. He is continually employed in
raising storms, tearing up forests by the roots, and blowing castles and
convents about the ears of their inhabitants. The first has a daughter, who is
queen of the elves and fairies: the second has a mother, who is a powerful
enchantress. Neither of these ladies is worth more than the gentlemen. I do not
remember to have heard any family assigned to the other two demons, but at
present I have no business with any of them except the fiend of the waters. He
is the hero of my ballad; but I thought it necessary, before I began, to give
you some account of his proceedings."

Theodore then played a short symphony; after which, stretching his voice to
its utmost extent, to facilitate its reaching the ear of Agnes, he sang the
following stanzas:

THE WATER-KING. Since writing these Stanzas, I have met with two old Scotch
ballads which have some resemblance with "The Water-King:" one is called "May
Colvin," and relates the story of a king's daughter, who was beguiled from her
father's house by a false Sir John: the other, entitled "Clerk Colvil," treats
of a young man, who fell into the snares of a false Mermaid: the latter,
indeed, bears a still stronger resemblance to the Danish tradition of "The
Erl-King's Daughter." -- The fragment of "The Water-King" may be found in
"Herder's Volk-lieder."

A DANISH BALLAD.
WITH gentle murmur flowed the tide,
While by the fragrant flowery side
The lovely maid, with carols gay,
To Mary's church pursued her way.
The Water-Fiend's malignant eye
Along the banks beheld her hie;
Straight to his mother-witch he sped,
And thus in suppliant accents said:
"Oh! mother! mother! now advise,
How I may yonder maid surprise:
Oh! mother! mother! now explain,
How I may yonder maid obtain."
The witch, she gave him armor white;
She formed him like a gallant knight;
Of water clear next made her hand
A steed, whose housings were of sand.
The Water-King then swift he went:
To Mary's church his steps he bent:
He bound his courser to the door,
And paced the churchyard three times four.
His courser to the door bound he,
And paced the churchyard four times three;
Then hastened up the aisle, where all
The people flocked, both great and small.
The priest said, as the knight drew near,
"And wherefore comes the white chief here?"
The lovely maid she smiled aside;
"Oh! would I were the white chief's bride!"
He stepped over benches one and two;
"Oh! lovely maid, I die for you!"
He stepped over benches two and three;
"Oh! lovely maiden, go with me!"
Then sweet she smiled, the lovely maid;
And while she gave her hand, she said,
"Betide me joy, betide me woe,
Over hill, over dale, with thee I go."
The priest their hands together joins:
They dance while clear the moon-beam shines:
And little thinks the maiden bright
Her partner is the Water-Spright.
Oh! had some spirit deigned to sing,
"Your bridegroom is the Water-King;"
The maid had fear and hate confessed,
And cursed the hand which then she pressed.
But nothing giving cause to think
How near she strayed to danger's brink,
Still on she went, and hand in hand
The lover's reached the yellow sand.
"Ascend this steed with me, my dear!
We needs must cross the streamlet here:
Ride boldly in; it is not deep;
The winds are hushed, the billows sleep."
Thus spoke the Water-King. The maid
Her traitor bridegroom's wish obeyed:
And soon she saw the courser lave
Delighted in his parent wave.
"Stop! stop! my love! The waters blue
Even now my shrinking foot bedew."
"Oh! lay aside your fears, sweet heart!
We now have reached the deepest part."
"Stop! stop! my love! For now I see
The water's rise above my knee."
"Oh! lay aside your fears, sweet heart!
We now have reached the deepest part."
"Stop! stop! for God's sake stop! For oh!
The waters over my bosom flow!" --
Scarce was the word pronounced, when knight
And courser vanished from her sight.
She shrieks, but shrieks in vain: for high
The wild winds rising dull the cry?
The fiend exults; the billows dash,
And over their hapless victim wash.
Three times, while struggling with the stream,
The lovely maid was heard to scream;
But when the tempest's rage was over,
The lovely maid was seen no more.
Warned by this tale, ye damsels fair,
To whom you give your love beware!
Believe not every handsome knight,
And dance not with the Water-Spright. Many inquiries having been made
respecting the elementary monarchs mentioned a few pages back, I must inform my
readers, that all I know respecting the Water-King (called in the German
translation "Der Wasser-Mann,") and the Erl-King (called in German
"Erl-Konig,") is gathered from the foregoing ballad, and two others which I
shall here insert. With respect to the Fire-King and the Cloud-King, they are
entirely of my own creation; but if my readers choose to ascribe their birth to
the "Comte de Gabalis," they are very welcome.

THE ERL-KING.
[The Original is by Goethe, Author of Werter.]
WHO is it that rides through the forest so fast,
While night frowns around him, while chill roars the blast?
The father, who holds his young son in his arm,
And close in his mantle has wrapped him up warm.
-- "Why trembles my darling? why shrinks he with fear?"
"Oh! father! my father! the Erl-King is near!
The Erl-King with his crown and his beard long and white!"
-- "Oh! thine eyes are deceived by the vapors of night."
-- "If you will, dear baby, with me go away,
I will give you fine clothes; we will play a fine play;
Fine flowers are growing, white, scarlet, and blue,
On the banks of yon river, and all are for you." --
-- "Oh! father! my father! and do thou not hear
What words the Erl-King whispers low in mine ear?" --
-- "Now hush thee, my darling, thy terrors appease:
Thou hear'st 'midst the branches when murmurs the breeze."
-- "If you will, dear baby, with me go away,
My daughter shall tend you so fair and so gay;
My daughter, in purple and gold who is dressed,
Shall nurse you, and kiss you, and sing you to rest."
-- "Oh! father! my father! and do thou not see?
The Erl-King and his daughter are waiting for me?" --
-- "Now shame thee, my dearest! it is fear makes the blind:
Thou see the dark willows, which wave in the wind." --
-- "I love you! I dote on that face so divine!
I must and will have you, and force makes you mine!" --
-- "My father! my father! Oh! hold me now fast!
He pulls me! he hurts, and will have me at last!"
The father, he trembled; he doubled his speed;
Over hills and through forests he spurred his black steed:
But when he arrived at his own castle-door,
Life throbbed in the sweet baby's bosom no more."
THE ERL-KING's DAUGHTER.
[The Original is Danish; but I read it in a German Translation.]
OVER hills and through forests Sir Oluf he wends
To bid to his wedding relations and friends:
It Is late, and arriving where sports the elf band,
The Erl-King's proud daughter presents him her hand.
-- "Now welcome, Sir Oluf! Oh! welcome to me!
Come, enter our circle my partner to be." --
"Fair lady, nor can I dance with you, nor may:
Tomorrow, I marry, to night must away." --
-- "Now listen, Sir Oluf! Oh! listen to me!
Two spurs of fine steel will I give unto thee;
A shirt too of satin receive as thy boon,
Which my Queen Mother bleached in the beams of the moon.
Then yield thee, Sir Oluf! O! yield thee to me,
And enter our circle my partner to be," --
-- "Fair lady, nor can I dance with you, nor may:
Tomorrow I marry, tonight must away." --
-- "Now listen, Sir Oluf! Oh! listen to me!
An helmet of Gold will I give unto thee." --
-- "An helmet of gold would I willingly take,
But I will not dance with you for Urgela's sake." --
"And deigns not Sir Oluf my partner to be?
Then curses and sickness I give unto thee;
Then curses and sickness thy steps shall pursue:
Now hence to thy lady, thou lover so true!" --
Thus said she, and laid her charmed hand on his heart
Oh! never Sir Oluf had felt such a smart!
Swift spurred he his steed till he reached his own door,
And there stood his mother the castle before.
-- "Now riddle me, Oluf, and riddle me right;
Why look thou, my dearest, so wan and so white?"
-- "How should I not, mother, look wan and look white?
I have seen the Erl-King's cruel daughter tonight!
She cursed me; her hand to my bosom she pressed:
Death followed the touch, and now tortures my breast,
She cursed me, and said -- 'To thy lady now ride!' --
But never shall my lips kiss the lips of my bride!" --
-- "Now riddle me, Oluf, and what shall I say
When here comes the lady so fair and so gay?" --
"Oh! say, I am gone for a while to the wood,
To prove if my hounds and my courser be good." --
Scarce dead was Sir Oluf, and scarce shone the day,
When in came the lady so fair and so gay,
And in came her father, and in came each guest
Whom the hapless Sir Oluf had bade to the feast.
They drank the red wine, and they ate the good cheer,
"Oh! where is Sir Oluf? Oh! where is my dear?" --
-- "Sir Oluf is gone for awhile to the wood,
To prove if his hounds and his courser be good." --
Then trembled the lady so fair and so gay;
She eyed the black curtain; she drew it away;
But soon from her bosom for ever life fled,
For there lay Sir Oluf, pale, breathless, and dead.


The youth ceased to sing. The nuns were delighted with the sweetness of his
voice, and masterly manner of touching the instrument: but however acceptable
this applause would have been at any other time, at present it was insipid to
Theodore. His artifice had not succeeded. He paused in vain-between the
stanzas; on voice replied to his, and he abandoned the hope of equalling
Blondel.

The convent bell now warned the nuns that it was time to assemble in the
refectory. They were obliged to quit the grate: they thanked the youth for the
entertainment which his music had afforded them, and charged him to return the
next day. This he promised. The nuns, to give him the greater inclination to
keep his word, told him that he might always depend upon the convent for his
meals, and each of them made him some little present. One gave him a box of
sweetmeats; another, an agnus dei; some brought relics of saints, waxen
images, and consecrated crosses; and others presented him with pieces of those
works in which the religious excel, such as embroidery, artificial flowers,
lace, and needle work. All these he was advised to sell, in order to put
himself into better case; and he was assured that it would be easy to dispose
of them, since the Spaniards hold the performances of the nuns in high
estimation. Having received these gifts with seeming respect and gratitude, he
remarked, that, having no basket, he knew not how to convey them away. Several
of the nuns were hastening in search of one, when they were stopped by the
return of an elderly woman, whom Theodore had not till then observed. Her mild
countenance, and respectable air prejudiced him immediately in her favor.

"Hah!" said the porteress, "here comes the mother St. Ursula with a basket."

The nun approached the grate, and presented the basket to Theodore: it was of
willow, lined with blue satin, and upon the four sides were painted scenes from
the legend of St. Genevieve.

"Here is my gift," said she, as she gave it into his hand: "Good youth despise
it not. Though its value seems insignificant, it has many hidden virtues."

She accompanied these words with an expressive look. It was not lost upon
Theodore. In receiving the present he drew as near the grate as possible.

"Agnes!" she whispered in a voice scarcely intelligible.

Theodore, however, caught the sound. He concluded that some mystery was
concealed in the basket, and his heart beat with impatience and joy. At this
moment the domina returned. Her air was gloomy and frowning, and she looked if
possible more stern than ever.

"Mother St. Ursula, I would speak with you in private."

The nun changed color, and was evidently disconcerted.

"With me?" she replied, in a faltering voice.

The domina motioned that she must follow her, and retired. The mother St.
Ursula obeyed her. Soon after, the refectory bell ringing a second time, the
nuns quitted the grate, and Theodore was left at liberty to carry off his
prize. Delighted that at length he had obtained some intelligence for the
marquis, he flew rather than ran till he reached the hotel de las Cisternas. In
a few minutes he stood by his master's bed with the basket in his hand. Lorenzo
was in the chamber, endeavoring to reconcile his friend to a misfortune which
he felt himself but too severely. Theodore related his adventure, and the hopes
which had been created by the mother St. Ursula's gift. The marquis started
from his pillow. That fire which since the death of Agnes had been
extinguished, now revived in his bosom, and his eyes sparkled with eagerness of
expectation. The emotions which Lorenzo's countenance betrayed were scarcely
weaker, and he waited with inexpressible impatience for the solution of this
mystery. Raymond caught the basket from the hands of his page: he emptied the
contents upon the bed, and examined (...) with minute attention. He hoped that
a letter (...) be ^ound at the bottom. Nothing of the kind appeared. The search
was resumed, and still with no better success. At length Don Raymond observed
that one corner of the blue satin lining was unripped he tore it open hastily,
and drew forth a small scrap of paper, neither folded or sealed. It was
addressed to the marquis de las Cisternas, and the contents were as follow:

Having recognized your page, I ventured to send these few lines. Procure an
order from the cardinal duke for seizing my person, and that of the domina; but
let it not be executed till Friday at midnight. It is the festival of St.
Clare: there will be a procession of nuns by torch light, and I shall be among
them. Beware, not to let your intention be known. Should a syllable be dropped
to excite the domina's suspicions, you will never hear of me more. Be cautious,
if you prize the memory of Agnes, and wish to punish her assassins. I have that
to tell, will freeze your blood with horror.

ST. URSULA.


No sooner had the marquis read the note, than he fell back upon his pillow,
deprived of sense or motion. The hope failed him which till now had supported
his existence; and these lines convinced him but too positively that Agnes was
indeed no more. Lorenzo felt this circumstance less forcibly, since it had
always been his idea that his sister had perished by unfair means. When he
found by the mother St. Ursula's letter how true were his suspicions, the
confirmation excited no other sentiment in his bosom than a wish to punish the
murderers as they deserved. It was no easy task to recall the marquis to
himself. As soon as he recovered his speech, he broke out into execrations
against the assassins of his beloved, and vowed to take upon them a signal
vengeance. He continued to rave and torment himself with impotent passion, till
his constitution, enfeebled by grief and illness, could support itself no
longer, and relapsed into insensibility. His melancholy situation sincerely
affected Lorenzo, who would willingly have remained in the apartment of his
friend: but other cares now demanded his presence. It was necessary to procure
the order for seizing the prioress of St. Clare. For this purpose, having
committed Raymond to the care of the best physicians in Madrid, he quitted the
hotel de las Cisternas, and bent his course toward the palace of the cardinal
duke.

His disappointment was excessive, when he found that affairs of state had
obliged the cardinal to set out for a distant province. It wanted but five days
to Friday: yet, by traveling day and night, he hoped to return in time for the
pilgrimage of St. Clare. In this he succeeded. He found the cardinal duke, and
represented to him the supposed culpability of the prioress, as also the
violent effects which it had produced upon Don Raymond. He could have used no
argument so forcible as this last. Of all his nephews the marquis was the only
one to whom the cardinal duke was sincerely attached: he perfectly doted upon
him, and the prioress could have committed no greater crime in his eyes, than
to have endangered the life of the marquis. Consequently, he granted the order
of arrest without difficulty. He also gave Lorenzo a letter to a principal
officer of the Inquisition, desiring him to see his mandate executed. Furnished
with these papers, Medina hastened back to Madrid, which he reached on the
Friday a few hours before dark. He found the marquis somewhat easier, but so
weak and exhausted, that without great exertion he could neither speak nor
move. Having passed an hour by his bed side, Lorenzo left him to communicate
his design to his uncle, as also to give Don Ramirez de Mello the cardinal's
letter. The first was petrified with horror, when he learned the fate of his
unhappy niece. He encouraged Lorenzo to punish her assassins, and engaged to
accompany him at night to St. Clare's convent. Don Ramirez promised his firmest
support, and selected a band of trusty archers to prevent opposition on the
part of the populace.

But while Lorenzo was anxious to unmask one religious hypocrite, he was
unconscious of the sorrows prepared for him by another. Aided by Matilda's
infernal agents, Ambrosio had resolved upon the innocent Antonia's ruin. The
moment destined to be so fatal to her arrived. She had taken leave of her
mother for the night. As she kissed her, she felt an unusual despondency infuse
itself into her bosom. She left her, and returned to her instantly, threw
herself into her maternal arms, and bathed her cheek with tears. She felt
uneasy at quitting her, and a secret presentiment assured her that never must
they meet again. Elvira observed, and tried to laugh her out of this childish
prejudice. She chid her mildly for encouraging such ungrounded sadness, and
warned her how dangerous it was to give way to such ideas.

To all her remonstrances she received no other answer than --

"Mother! Dear mother! oh! would to God it were morning!"

Elvira, whose inquietude respecting her daughter was a great obstacle to her
perfect reestablishment, was still laboring under the effects of her late
severe illness. She was this evening more than usually indisposed, and retired
to bed before her accustomed hour. Antonia withdrew from her mother's chamber
with regret, and, till the door closed, kept her eyes fixed upon her with
melancholy expression. She retired to her own apartment: her heart was filled
with bitterness. It seemed to her that all her prospects were blasted, and the
world contained nothing for which it was worth existing. She sunk into a chair,
reclined her head upon her arm, and gazed upon the floor with a vacant stare,
while the most gloomy images floated before her fancy. She was still in this
state of insensibility, when she was disturbed by hearing a strain of soft
music breathed beneath her window. She rose, drew near the casement, and opened
it to hear it more distinctly. Having thrown her veil over her face, she
ventured to look out. By the light of the moon she perceived several men below
with guitars and lutes in their hands; and at a little distance from them stood
another wrapped in his cloak, whose stature and appearance bore a strong
resemblance to Lorenzo's. She was not deceived in this conjecture. It was
indeed Lorenzo himself, who, bound by his word not to present himself to
Antonia without his uncle's consent, endeavored, by occasional serenades, to
convince his mistress that his attachment still existed. His stratagem had not
the desired effect. Antonia was far from supposing that this nightly music was
intended as a compliment to her. She was too modest to think herself worthy
such attentions; and concluding them to be addressed to some neighboring lady,
she grieved to find that they were offered by Lorenzo.

The air which was played was plaintive and melodious. It accorded with the
state of Antonia's mind, and she listened with pleasure. After a symphony of
some length, it was succeeded by the sound of voices, and Antonia distinguished
the following words:

SERENADE.
CHORUS.
OH! breathe in gentle strain, my lyre!
It Is here that beauty loves to rest:
Describe the pangs of fond desire,
Which rend a faithful lover's breast.
SONG.
In every heart to find a slave,
In every soul to fix his reign,
In bonds to lead the wise and brave,
And make the captive kiss his chain:
Such is the power of Love, and oh!
I grieve so well Love's power to know.
In sighs to pass the live-long day,
To taste a short and broken sleep,
For one dear object far away,
All others scorned, to watch and weep;
Such are the pains of Love, and oh!
I grieve so well Love's pains to know.
To read consent in virgin eyes,
To press the lip never pressed till then,
To hear the sigh of transport rise,
And kiss, and kiss, and kiss again!
Such are thy pleasures, Love, but oh!
When shall my heart thy pleasures know?
CHORUS.
Now hush, my lyre! My voice, be still!
Sleep, gentle maid! May fond desire
With amorous thoughts thy visions fill
Though still my voice, and hushed my lyre!
The music ceased: the performers dispersed, and silence prevailed through the
street. Antonia quitted the window with regret. She, as usual, recommended
herself to the protection of St. Rosolia, said her accustomed prayers, and
retired to bed. Sleep was not long absent, and his presence relieved her from
her terrors and inquietude.

It was almost two o'clock before the monk ventured to bend his steps toward
Antonia's dwelling. It has been already mentioned, that the abbey was at no
great distance from the strada di San Iago. He reached the house unobserved.
Here he stopped and hesitated for a moment. He reflected on the enormity of the
crime, the consequences of a discovery, and the probability after what had
passed, of Elvira's suspecting him to be the culprit. On the others hand it was
suggested, that she could do no more than suspect; that no proofs of his guilt
could be produced; and finally, he believed tha^ his fame was too firmly
established to be shaken by the unsupported accusations of two unknown women.
This latter argument was perfectly false. He knew not how uncertain is the air
of popular applause, and that a moment suffices to make him today, the
detestation of the world, who yesterday was its idol. The result of the monk's
deliberations was, that he should proceed in his enterprise. He ascended the
steps leading to the house. No sooner did he touch the door with the silver
myrtle, than it flew open, and presented him with a free passage. He entered,
and the door closed after him of its own accord.

Guided by the moon beams, he proceeded up the staircase with slow and cautious
steps. He looked round him every moment with apprehension and anxiety. He saw a
spy in every shadow, and heard a voice in every murmur of the night breeze.
Consciousness of the guilty business on which he was employed appalled his
heart, and rendered it more timid than a woman's. Yet still he proceeded. He
reached the door of Antonia's chamber. He stopped and listened. All was hushed
within. The total silence persuaded him that his intended victim was retired to
rest, and he ventured to lift up the latch. The door was fastened, and resisted
his efforts. But no sooner was it touched by the talisman than the bolt flew
back. The intruder stepped on, and found himself in the chamber, where slept
the innocent girl, unconscious how dangerous a visitor was drawing near her
couch. The door closed after him, and the bolt shot again into its fastening.

Ambrosio advanced with precaution. He took care that not a board should creak
under his foot, and held in his breath as he approached the bed. His first
attention was to perform the magic ceremony as Matilda had charged him: he
breathed thrice upon the silver myrtle, pronounced over it Antonia's name, and
laid it upon her pillow. The effects which it had already produced, permitted
not his doubting its success in prolonging the slumbers of his devoted
mistress; and no sooner was the enchantment performed, than he considered nor
to be absolutely in his power. He now ventured to cast a glance upon the
sleeping beauty. A single lamp burning before the statue of St. Rosolia, shed a
faint light through the room, and permitted him to examine all the charms of
the lovely object before him. She lay with her cheek reclining upon one ivory
arm; the other rested on the side of the bed with graceful indolence. A few
tresses of her hair had escaped from beneath the muslin which confined the
rest, and fell carelessly over her bosom, as it heaved with slow and regular
suspiration. The warm air had spread her cheek with higher color than usual. A
smile inexpressibly sweet played round her ripe and coral lips, from which
every now and then escaped a gentle sigh, or an half pronounced sentence. An
air of enchanting innocence and candor was spread over every feature. But the
modesty visible in her whole appearance, instead of persuading him to renounce
them, served only to confirm the monk in his designs.

He remained for some moments lost in motionless admiration! Her mouth half
open seemed to solicit a kiss: he bent over her: he joined his lips to hers,
and drew in the fragrance of her breath with rapture.

"Gracious God!" at that moment exclaimed a voice behind him: "Am I not
deceived? Is not this an illusion?"

Terror, confusion, and disappointment accompanied these words, as they struck
Ambrosio's hearing. He started, and turned toward the voice. Elvira stood at
the door of the chamber, and regarded the monk with looks of surprise and
detestation.

A frightful dream had represented to her Antonia on the verge of a precipice.
She saw her trembling on the brink: every moment seemed to threaten her fall,
and she heard her exclaim with shrieks, "Save me, mother! save me! -- Yet a
moment, and it will be too late." Elvira woke in terror. The vision had made
too strong an impression upon her mind, to permit her resting till assured of
her daughter's safety. She hastily started from her bed, threw on a loose night
gown, and, passing through the closet in which slept the waiting woman, reached
Antonia's chamber in time to rescue her from the betrayer's grasp.

His shame and her amazement seemed to have petrified into statues both Elvira
and the monk. They remained gazing upon each other in silence. The lady was the
first to recover herself.

"It is no dream," she cried: "it is really Ambrosio who stands before me. It
is the man whom Madrid esteems a saint, that I find at this late hour near the
couch of my unhappy child. Monster of hypocrisy! I already suspected your
designs, but forebore your accusation in pity to human frailty. Silence would
now be criminal. The whole city shall be informed of your infamy. I will unmask
you, villain, and convince the church what a viper she cherishes in her bosom."

Pale and confused, the baffled culprit stood trembling before her. He would
fain have extenuated his offense, but could find no apology for his conduct. He
could produce nothing but broken sentences, and excuses which contradicted each
other. Elvira was too justly incensed to grant the pardon which he requested.
She protested that she would raise the neighborhood, and make him an example
to all future hypocrites. Then hastening to the bed, she called to Antonia to
wake; and finding that her voice had no effect, she took her arm, and raised
her forcibly from the pillow. The charm operated too powerfully. Antonia
remained insensible; and, on being released by her mother, sunk back upon the
pillow.

"This slumber cannot be natural," cried the amazed Elvira, whose indignation
increased with every moment: "some mystery is concealed in it. But tremble,
hypocrite! All your villainy shall soon be unravelled. Help! help!" she
exclaimed aloud: "Within there! Flora! Flora!"

"Hear me for one moment, lady!" cried the monk, restored to himself by the
urgency of the danger: by all that is sacred and holy, I swear that your
daughter's honor is still unviolated. Forgive my transgression! Spare me the
shame of a discovery, and permit me to regain the abbey undisturbed. Grant me
this request in mercy! I promise not only that Antonia shall be secure from me
in future, but that the rest of my life shall prove -- "

Elvira interrupted him abruptly.

"Antonia secure from you? I will secure her. You shall betray no longer the
confidence of parents. Your iniquity shall be unveiled to the public eye. All
Madrid shall shudder at your perfidy and hypocrisy. What ho! there! Flora!
Flora! I say."

While she spoke thus, the remembrance of Agnes struck upon his mind. Thus had
she sued to him for mercy, and thus had he refused her prayer! It was now his
turn to suffer, and he could not but acknowledge that his punishment was just.
In the mean while Elvira continued to call Flora to her assistance; but her
voice was so choked with passion, that the servant, who was buried in profound
slumber, was insensible to all her cries: Elvira dared not go toward the
closet in which Flora slept, lest the monk should take that opportunity to
escape. Such indeed was his intention: he trusted that, could he reach the
abbey unobserved by any other than Elvira, her single testimony would not
suffice to ruin a reputation so well established as his was in Madrid. With
this idea he hastened toward the door. Elvira was aware of his design: she
followed him, and, ere he could draw back the bo^t, seized him by the arm, and
detained him.

"Attempt not to fly!" said she: "you quit not this room without witnesses of
your guilt."

Ambrosio struggled in vain to disengage himself. Elvira quitted not her hold,
but redoubled her cries for succor. The friar's danger grew more urgent. He
expected every moment to hear people assembling at her voice; and, worked up to
madness by the approach of ruin, he adopted a resolution equally desperate and
savage. Turning round suddenly, with one hand he grasped Elvira's throat so as
to prevent her continuing her clamor, and with the other dashing her violently
upon the ground, he dragged her toward the bed. Confused by this unexpected
attack, she scarcely had power to strive at forcing herself from his grasp:
while the monk, snatching the pillow from beneath her daughter's head, covering
with it Elvira's face, and pressing his knee upon her stomach with all his
strength, endeavored to put an end to her existence. He succeeded but too
well. Her natural strength increased by the excess of anguish, long did the
sufferer struggle to disengage herself but in vai^. The monk continued to kneel
upon her breast, witnessed without mercy the convulsive trembling of her limbs
beneath him, and sustained with inhuman firmness the spectacle of her agonies,
when soul and body were on the point of separating. Those agonies at length
were over. She ceased to struggle for life. The monk took off the pillow, and
gazed upon her. Her face was covered with a frightful blackness: her limbs
moved no more: the blood was chilled in her veins: her heart had forgotten to
beat; and her hands were stiff and frozen. Ambrosio beheld before him that once
noble and majestic form, now become a corse, cold, senseless, and disgusting.

This horrible act was no sooner perpetrated, than the friar beheld the
enormity of his crime. A cold dew flowed over his limbs: his eyes closed: he
staggered to a chair, and sunk into it almost as lifeless as the unfortunate
who lay extended at his feet. From this state he was roused by the necessity of
flight, and the danger of being found in Antonia's apartment. He had no desire
to profit by the execution of his crime. Antonia now appeared to him an object
of disgust. A deadly cold had usurped the place of that warmth which glowed in
his bosom. No ideas offered themselves to his mind but those of death and
guilt, of present shame and future punishment. Agitated by remorse and fear, he
prepared for flight: yet his terrors did not so completely master his
recollection, as to prevent his taking the precautions necessary for his
safety. He replaced the pillow upon the bed, and, with the fatal talisman in
his hand, bent his unsteady steps toward the door. Bewildered by fear, he
fancied that his flight was opposed by legions of phantoms. Wherever he turned,
the disfigured corse seemed to lie in his passage, and it was long before he
succeeded in reaching the door. The enchanted myrtle produced its former
effect. The door opened, and he hastened down the staircase. He entered the
abbey unobserved; and having shut himself into his cell, he abandoned his soul
to the tortures of unavailing remorse, and terrors of impending detection.

CHAP. IX.
Tell us, ye dead, will none of you in pit^
To those you left behind disclose the secret?
Oh! that some courteous ghost would blab it out,
What it is you are, and we must shortly be!
I Have heard, that souls departed have sometimes
Forewarned men of their deaths, 'twas kindly done,
To knock, and give the alarm.
BLAIR
AMBROSIO shuddered at himself when he reflected on his rapid advances in
iniquity. The enormous crime which he had just committed, filled him with real
horror. The murdered Elvira was continually before his eyes, and his guilt was
already punished by the agonies of his conscience. Time, however, considerably
weakened these impressions: one day passed away; another followed it, and still
not the least suspicion was thrown upon him. Impunity reconciled him to his
guilt. He began to resume his spirits; and as his fears of detection died away,
he paid less attention to the reproaches of remorse. Matilda exerted herself to
quiet his alarms. At the first intelligence of Elvira's death she seemed
greatly affected, and joined the monk in deploring the unhappy catastrophe of
his adventure; but when she found his agitation to be somewhat calmed, and
himself better disposed to listen to her arguments, she proceeded to mention
his offense in milder terms, and convince him that he was not so highly
culpable as he appeared to consider himself. She represented, that he had only
availed himself of the rights which nature allows to every one, those of self
preservation: that either Elvira or himself must have perished; and that her
inflexibility and resolution to ruin him had deservedly marked her out for the
victim. She next stated, that as he had before rendered himself ^^spected to
Elvira, it was a fortunate event for him that her lips were closed by death;
since, without this last adventure, her suspicions, if made public, might have
produced very disagreeable consequences. He had therefore freed himself from an
enemy, to whom the errors of his conduct were sufficiently known to make her
dangerous, and who was the greatest obstacle to his designs upon Antonia. Those
designs she encouraged him not to abandon. She assured him that, no longer
protected by her mother's watchful eye, the daughter would fall an easy
conquest; and by praising and enumerating Antonia's charms she strove to
rekindle the desires of the monk. In this endeavor she succeeded but too well.

As if the crimes into which his passion had seduced him had only increased its
violence, he was now bent more earnestly than ever on procuring its
gratification. The same success in concealing his present guilt, he trusted,
would attend his future. He was deaf to the murmurs of conscience, and resolved
to satisfy his desires at any price. He waited only for an opportunity of
repeating his former enterprise; but to procure that opportunity by the same
means was now impracticable. In the first transports of despair he had dashed
the enchanted myrtle into a thousand pieces. Matilda told him plainly, that he
must expect no further assistance from the infernal powers, unless he was
willing to subscribe to their established conditions. This Ambrosio was
determined not to do. He persuaded himself that, however great might be his
iniquity, so (...) as he preserve^ his claim to salvation, he need not despair
of pardon. He therefore resolutely refused to enter into any bond or compact
with the fiends; and Matilda, finding him obstinate upon this point, forebore
to press him further. She exerted her invention to discover some means of
putting Antonia into the abbot's power: nor was it long before that means
presented itself.

While her ruin was thus meditating, the unhappy girl herself suffered severely
from the loss of her mother. Every morning on waking, it was her first care to
hasten to Elvira's chamber. On that which followed Ambrosio's fatal visit, she
woke later than was her usual custom: of this she was convinced by the abbey
chimes. She started from her bed, threw on a few loose garments hastily, and
was speeding to inquire how her mother had passed the night, when her foot
struck against something which lay in her passage. She looked down. What was
her horror at recognizing Elvira's livid corse! She uttered a loud shriek, and
threw herself upon the floor. She clasped the inanimate form to her bosom, felt
that it was dead cold, and, with a movement of disgust, of which she was not
mistress, let it fall again from her arms. The cry had alarmed Flora, who
hastened to her assistance. The sight which she beheld penetrated her with
horror; but her alarm was more audible than Antonia's. She made the house ring
with her lamentations, while her mistress, almost suffocated with grief, could
only mark her distress by sobs and groans. Flora's shrieks soon reached the
ears of the hostess. whose terror and surprise were excessive on learning the
cause of this disturbance. A physician was immediately sent for; but, on the
first moment of beholding the corse, he declared that Elvira's recovery was
beyond the power of art. He proceeded therefore to give his assistance to
Antonia, who by this time was truly in need of it. She was conveyed to bed,
while the landlady busied herself in giving orders for Elvira's burial. Dame
Jacintha was a plain good kind of woman, charitable, generous, and devout; but
her intellects were weak, and she was a miserable slave to fear and
superstition. She shuddered at the idea of passing the night in the same house
with a dead body. She was persuaded that Elvira's ghost would appear to her,
and no less certain that such a visit would kill her with fright. From this
persuasion, she resolved to pass the night at a neighbor's, and insisted that
the funeral should take place the next day. St. Clare's cemetery being the
nearest, it was determined that Elvira should be buried there. Dame Jacintha
engaged to defray every expense attending the burial. She knew not in what
circumstances Antonia was left; but, from the sparing manner in which the
family had lived, she concluded them to be indifferent: consequently, she
entertained very little hope of ever being recompensed. But this consideration
prevented her not from taking care that the interment was performed with
decency, and from showing the unfortunate Antonia all possible respect.

Nobody dies of mere grief; of this Antonia was an instance. Aided by her youth
and healthy constitution, she shook off the malady which her mother's death had
occasioned; but it was not so easy to remove the disease of her mind. Her eyes
were constantly filled with tears; every trifle affected her, and she evidently
nourished in her bosom a profound and rooted melancholy. The slightest mention
of Elvira, the most trivial circumstance (...) that beloved parent to her
memory, was sufficient to throw her into serious agitation. How much would her
grief have been increased, had she known the agonies which terminated her
mother's existence! But of this no one entertained the least suspicion. Elvira
was subject to strong convulsions: it was supposed that, aware of their
approach, she had dragged herself to her daughter's chamber, in hopes of
assistance: that a sudden access of her fits had seized her, too violent to be
resisted by her already enfeebled state of health; and that she had expired ere
she had time to reach the medicine which generally relieved her, and which
stood upon a shelf in Antonia's room. This idea was firmly credited by the few
people who interested themselves about Elvira. Her death was esteemed a natural
event, and soon forgotten by all, save by her who had too much reason to
deplore her loss.

In truth, Antonia's situation was sufficiently embarrassing and unpleasant.
She was alone, in the midst of a dissipated and expensive city; she was ill
provided with money and worse with friends. Her aunt Leonella was still at
Cordova, and she knew not her direction. Of the marquis de las Cisternas she
heard no news. As to Lorenzo, she had long given up the idea of possessing any
interest in his bosom. She knew not to whom she could address herself in her
present dilemma. She wished to consult Ambrosio, but she remembered her
mother's injunctions to shun him as much as possible; and the last conversation
which Elvira had held with her upon the subject, had given her sufficient
lights respecting his designs, to put her upon her guard against him in future.
Still all her mother's warnings could not make her change her good opinion of
the friar. She continued to feel that his friendship and society were requisite
to her happiness: she looked upon his failings with a partial eye, and could
not persuade herself that he really had intended her ruin. However, Elvira had
positively commanded her to drop his acquaintance, and she had too much respect
for her orders to disobey them.

At length she resolved to address herself for advice and protection to the
marquis de las Cisternas, as being her nearest relation. She wrote to him,
briefly stating her desolate situation: she besought him to compassionate his
brother's child, to continue to her Elvira's pension, and to authorize her
retiring to his old castle in Murcia, which till now had been her retreat.
Having sealed her letter, she gave it to the trusty Flora, who immediately set
out to execute her commission. But Antonia was born under an unlucky star. Had
she made her application to the marquis but one day sooner, received as his
neice, and placed at the head of his family, she would have escaped all the
misfortunes with which she was now threatened. Raymond had always intended to
execute this plan: but first, his hopes of making the proposal to Elvira
through the lips of Agnes, and afterward his disappointment at losing his
intended bride, as well as the severe illness which for some time had confined
him to his bed, made him defer from day to day the giving an asylum in his
house to his brother's widow. He had commissioned Lorenzo to supply her
liberally with money. But Elvira, unwilling to receive obligations from that
nobleman, had assured him that she needed no immediate pecuniary assistance.
Consequently the marquis did not imagine that a trifling delay on his part
would create any embarrassment; and the distress and agitation of his mind
might well excuse his negligence.

Had he been informed that Elvira's death had left her daughter friendless and
unprotected, he would doubtless have taken such measures as would have ensured
her from every danger. But Antonia was not destined to be so fortunate. The day
on which she sent her letter to the palace de las Cisternas, was that following
Lorenzo's departure from Madrid. The marquis was in the first paroxysms of
despair at the conviction that Agnes was indeed no more: he was delirious; and
his life being in danger; no one was suffered to approach him. Flora was
informed that he was incapable of attending to letters, and that probably a few
hours would decide his fate. With this unsatisfactory answer she was obliged to
return to her mistress, who now found herself plunged into greater difficulties
than ever.

Flora and Dame Jacintha exerted themselves to console her. The latter begged
her to make herself easy, for that as long as she chose to stay with her she
would treat her like her own child. Antonia, finding that the good woman had
taken a real affection for her, was somewhat comforted by thinking that she had
at least one friend in the world. A letter was brought to her, directed to
Elvira. She recognized Leonella's writing, and, ^pening it with joy, found a
detailed account of her aunt's adventures at Cordova. She informed her sister
that she had recovered her legacy, had lost her heart, and had received in
exchange that of the most amiable of apothecaries, past, present, and to come.
She added, that she should be at Madrid on the Tuesday night, and meant to have
the pleasure of presenting her caro sposo in form. Though her nuptials were far
from pleasing Antonia, Leonella's speedy return gave her niece much delight.
She rejoiced in thinking that she should once more be under a relation's care.
She could not but judge it to be highly improper for a young woman to be living
among absolute strangers, with no one to regulate her conduct, or protect her
from the insults to which in her defenseless situation she was exposed. She
therefore looked forward with impatience to the Tuesday night.

It arrived. Antonia listened anxiously to the carriages as they rolled along
the street. None of them stopped, and it grew late without Leonella's
appearing. Still Antonia resolved to sit up till her aunt's arrival: and, in
spite of all her remonstrances, dame Jacintha and Flora insisted on doing the
same. The hours passed on slow and tediously. Lorenzo's departure from Madrid
had put a stop to the nightly serenades: she hoped in vain to hear the usual
sound of guitars beneath her window. She took up her own and struck a few
chords; but music that evening had lost its charms for her, and she soon
replaced the instrument in its case. She seated herself at her embroidery
frame, but nothing went right: the silks were missing, the thread snapped every
moment, and the needles were so expert at falling that they seemed to be
animated. At length a flake of wax fell from the taper which stood near her
upon a favorite wreath of violets: this completely discomposed her; she threw
down her needle and quitted the frame. It was decreed that for that night
nothing should have the power of amusing her, she was the prey of ennui, and
employed herself in making fruitless wishes for the arrival of her aunt.

As she walked with a listless air up and down the chamber, the door conducting
to that which had been her mother's caught her eye. She remembered that
Elvira's little library was arranged there, and thought that she might possibly
find in it some book to amuse her till Leonella should arrive. Accordingly she
took her taper from the table, passed through the little closet, and entered
the adjoining apartment. As she looked around her, the sight of this room
brought to her recollection a thousand painful ideas. It was the first time of
her entering it since her mother's death. The total silence prevailing through
the chamber, the bed despoiled of its furniture, the cheerless hearth where
stood an extinguished lamp, and a few dying plants in the window, which since
Elvira's loss had been neglected, inspired Antonia with a melancholy awe. The
gloom of night gave strength to this sensation. She placed her light upon the
table, and sunk into a large chair, in which she had seen her mother seated a
thousand and a thousand times. She was never to see her seated there again!
Tears unbidden streamed down her cheek, and she abandoned herself to the
sadness which grew deeper with every moment.

Ashamed of her weakness, she at length rose from her seat; she proceeded to
seek for what had brought her to this melancholy scene. The small collection of
books was arranged upon several shelves in order. Antonia examined them without
finding any thing likely to interest her, till she put her hand upon a volume
of old Spanish ballads. She read a few stanzas of one of them. They excited her
curiosity. She took down the book, and seated herself to peruse it with ease.
She trimmed the taper which now drew toward its end, and then read the
following ballad:

ALONZO THE BRAVE AND FAIR IMOGINE.
A WARRIOR so bold and a virgin so bright
Conversed, as they sat on the green;
They gazed on each other with tender delight:
Alonzo the Brave was the name of the knight,
The maid's was the fair Imogine.
"And, oh!" said the youth, "since tomorrow I go
To ^ight in a far distant land,
Your tears for my absence soon leaving to flow,
Some other will court you, and you will bestow
On a wealthier suitor your hand."
"Oh! hush these suspicions," Fair Imogine said,
"Offensive to love, and to me!
For, if you be living, or if you be dead,
I swear by the virgin, that none in your stead
Shall husband of Imogine be.
"And if ever for another my heart should decide,
Forgetting Alonzo the Brave,
God grant, that, to punish my falsehood and pride,
Your ghost at the marriage may sit by my side,
May tax me with perjury, claim me as bride,
And bear me away to the grave!"
To Palestine hastened the hero so bold;
His love, she lamented him sore:
But scarce had a twelvemonth elapsed, when behold,
A Baron all covered with jewels and gold
Arrived at Fair Imogine's door.
His treasure, his presents, his spacious domain
Soon made her untrue to her vows:
He dazzled her eyes; he bewildered her brain;
He caught her affections so light and so vain,
And carried her home as his spouse.
And now had the marriage been blessed by the priest;
The revelry now was begun:
The tables they groaned with the weight of the feast;
Nor yet had the laughter and merriment ceased,
When the bell of the castle tolled -- "one!"
Then first with amazement Fair Imogine found
That a stranger was placed by her side:
His air was terrific; he uttered no sound*
He spoke not, he moved not, he looked not around,
But earnestly gazed on the bride.
His visor was closed, and gigantic his height;
His armor was fable to view:
All pleasure and laughter were hushed at his sight;
The dogs, as they eyed him drew back in a fright;
The lights in the chamber burned blue!
His presence all bosoms appeared to dismay;
The guests sat in silence and fear.
At length spoke the bride, while she trembled: "I pray,
Sir Knight, that your helmet aside you would lay,
And deign to partake of our cheer."
The lady is silent: the stranger complies,
His visor he slowly unclosed:
Oh! then what a sight met Fair Imogine's eyes!
What words can express her dismay and surprise
When a skeleton's head was exposed!
All present then uttered a terrified shout;
All turned with disgust from the scene.
The worms they crept in, and the worms they crept out,
And sported his eyes and his temples about,
While the spectre addressed Imogine:
"Behold me thou false one! behold (...)!" he cried;
"Remember Alonzo the Brave!
God grants, that, to punish thy falsehood and pride,
My ghost at thy marriage should sit by thy side,
Should tax thee with perjury, claim thee as bride,
And bear thee away to the grave!"
Thus saying, his arms round the lady he wound,
While loudly she shrieked in dismay;
Then sunk with his prey through the wide yawning ground;
Nor ever again was Fair Imogine sound,
Or the spectre who bore her away.
Not long lived the Baron: and none since that time
To inhabit the castle presume;
For chronicles tell that by order sublime,
There Imogine suffers the pain of her crime,
And mourns her deplorable doom.
At midnight four times in each year does her spright,
When mortals in slumber are bound,
Arrayed in her bridal apparel of white,
Appear in the hall with the Skeleton Knight,
And shriek as he whirls her around.
While they drink out of skulls newly torn from the grave,
Dancing round them the specter are seen:
Their liquor is blood, and this horrible stave
They howl: -- "To the health of Alonzo the Brave,
And his consort the False Imogine!" After this raw-head and bloody-bones
history, perhaps it may be agreeable to some readers to peruse the following
parody. I must observe, that the lines in Italics, and the original idea of
making a Brewer of the Baron, and a Physician of the Knight, are borrowed from
another parody which appeared in the newspapers under the title of "Pil-Garlic
the Brave and Brown Celestine."

GILES JOLLUP THE GRAVE AND BROWN SALLY GREEN: A PARODY.
A DOCTOR so prim and a sempstress so tight
Hob-a-nobbed in some right marasquin;
They sucked up the cordial with truest delight:
Giles Jollup the Grave was just five feet in height,
And four feet the Brown Sally Green.
"And as," said Giles Jollup, "tomorrow I go
" To physic a feverish land,
" At some sixpenny hop, or perhaps the Mayor's show,
" You Will tumble in love with some smart city-beau,
" And with him share your shop in the strand."
"Lord! how can you think so?" brown Sally Green said;
" You must know mighty little of me;
" For if you be living, or if you be dead,
" I swear, 'pon my honor, that none in your stead
" Shall husband of Sally Green be.
" And if ever for another my heart should decide,
" False to you and the faith which I gave,
" God grant, that, at dinner too amply supplied,
" Over-eating may give me a pain in my side;
" May your ghost then bring rhubarb to physic the bride,
" And send her well-dosed to the grave!"
Away went poor Giles, to what place is not told.
Sally wept, till she blew her nose sore!
But scarce had a twelvemonth elapsed, when behold!
A Brewer, quite stylish, his gig that way rolled,
And stopped it at Sally Green's door.
His wealth, his pot-belly, and whisky of cane,
Soon made her untrue to her vows:
The steam of strong beer now bewildering her brain,
He caught her while tipsy! Denials were vain,
So he carried her home as his spouse.
And now the roast beef had been blessed by the priest,
To cram now the guests had begun:
Tooth and nail like a wolf fell the bride on the feast;
Nor yet had the clash of her knife and fork ceased,
When a bell -- ('it was a dustman's) -- tolled -- "one!"
Then first with amazement brown Sally Green found
That a stranger was stuck by her side:
His cravat and his rufles with snuff were embrowned;
He ate not, he drank not, but, turning him round,
Sent some pudding away to be fried!!!
His wig was turned forwards, and short was his height;
His apron was dirty to view;
The women (oh! wondrous!) were hushed at his sight;
The cats, as they eyed him, drew back (well they might.)
For his body was pea-green and blue!
Now as all wished to speak, but none knew what to say,
They looked mighty foolish and queer.
At length spoke the bride, while she trembled -- "I pray,
" Dear sir, your peruke that aside you would lay,
" And partake of some strong or small beer!"
The sempstress is silent; the stranger complies,
And his wig from his phiz deigns to pull.
Adzooks! what a squall Sally gave through surprise!
Like a pig that is stuck how she opened her eyes,
When she recognized Jollup's bare skull!
Each miss then exclaimed, while she turned up her snout,
"Sir, your head is not fit to be seen!" --
The pot-boys ran in, and the pot-boys ran out,
And couldn't conceive what the noise was about,
While the Doctor addressed Sally Green;
"Behold me, thou jill-flirt! behold me!" he cried;
" You Have broken the faith which you gave!
" God grants, that, to punish your falsehood and pride,
" Over-eating should give you a pain in your side;
" Come, swallow this rhubarb! I Will physic the bride,
" And send her well-dosed to the grave!"
Thus saying, the physic her throat he forced down,
In spite of whatever she could say;
Then ^ore to his chariot the damsel so brown,
Nor ever again was she seen in that town,
O^ the Doctor who whisked her away.
Not long lived the Brewer; and none since that time
To make use of the brew house presume;
For it is firmly believed, that, by order sublime,
There Sally Green suffers the pain of her crime,
And bawls to get out of the room.
At midnight four times in each year does her spright
With shrieks make the chamber resound;
-- "I will not take the rhubarb!" she squalls in affright,
While, a cup in his left hand, a draught in his right,
Giles Jollup pursues her around!
With wigs so well-powdered, their fees while they crave,
Dancing round them twelve Doctors are seen:
They drink chicken-broth; while this horrible stave
Is twang'd through each nose -- "To Giles Jollup the Grave,
"And his patient, the sick Sally Green!"


The perusal of this story was ill calculated to dispel Antonia's melancholy.
She had naturally a strong inclination to the mavelous; and her nurse, who
believed firmly in apparitions, had related to her, when an infant, so many
horrible adventures of this kind, that all Elvira's attempts had failed to
eradicate their impressions from her daughter's (...). Antonia still nourished
superstitious (...) bosom: she was often susceptible of terrors, which, when
she discovered their natural and insignificant cause, made her blush at her own
weakness. With such a turn of mind, the adventure which she had just been
reading sufficed to give her apprehensions the alarm. The hour and the scene
combined to authorize them. It was the dead of night; she was alone, and in the
chamber once occupied by her deceased mother. The weather was comfortless and
stormy; the wind howled around the house, the doors rattled in their frames,
and the heavy rain pattered against the windows. No other sound was heard. The
taper, now burnt down to the socket, sometimes flaring upwards, shot a gleam of
light through the room, then sinking again seemed upon the point of expiring.
Antonia's heart throbbed with agitation; her eyes wandered fearfully over the
objects around her, as the trembling flame illuminated them at intervals. She
attempted to rise from her seat, but her limbs trembled so violently that she
was unable to proceed. She then called Flora, who was in a room at no great
distance; but agitation choked her voice, and her cries died away in hollow
murmurs.

She passed some minutes in this situation, after which her terrors began to
diminish. She strove to recover herself, and acquire strength enough to quit
the room. Suddenly she fancied that she heard a low sigh drawn (...) her. This
idea brought back her former weakness. She had already raised herself from her
seat, and was on the point of taking the lamp from the table. The imaginary
noise stopped her; she drew back her hand, and supported herself upon the back
of a chair. She listened anxiously, but nothing more was heard.

"Gracious God!" she said to herself, "what could be that sound? Was I
deceived, or did I really hear it?"

Her reflections were interrupted by a voice at the door scarcely audible: it
seemed as if somebody was whispering. Antonia's alarm increased; yet the bolt
she knew to be fastened, and this idea in some degree reassured her. Presently
the latch was lifted up softly, and the door moved with caution backwards and
forwards. Excess of terror now supplied Antonia with that strength of which she
had till then (...) ^eprived. She started from her place, and made toward the
closet door, whence she might soon have reached the chamber where she expected
to find Flora and Dame Jacintha. Scarcely had she reached the middle of the
room, when the latch was lifted up a second time. An involuntary movement
obliged her to turn her head. Slowly and gradually the door turned upon its
hinges, and standing upon the threshold, she beheld a tall thin figure, wrapped
in a white shroud which covered it from head to foot.

This vision arrested her feet; she remained as if petrified in the middle of
the apartment. The stranger with measured and solemn steps drew near the table.
The dying taper darted a blue and melancholy flame as the figure advanced
toward it. Over the table was fixed a small clock; the hand of it was upon the
stroke of three. The figure stopped opposite to the clock; it raised its right
arm, and pointed to the hour, at the same time looking earnestly upon Antonia,
who waited for the conclusion of this scene, motionless and silent.

The figure remained in this posture for some moments. The clock struck. When
the sound had ceased, the stranger advanced yet a few steps nearer Antonia.

"Yet three days," said a voice faint, hollow, and sepulchral; "yet three days,
and we meet again!"

Antonia shuddered at the words.

"We meet again?" she pronounced at length with difficulty: "Where shall we
meet? Whom shall I meet?"

The figure pointed to the ground with one hand, and with the other raised the
linen which covered its face.

"Almighty God! My mother?"

Antonia shrieked, and fell lifeless upon the floor.

Dame Jacintha, who was at work in a neighboring chamber, was alarmed by the
cry: Flora was just gone down stairs to fetch fresh oil for the lamp by which
they had been sitting. Jacintha therefore hastened alone to Antonia's
assistance, and great was her amazement to find her extended upon the floor.
She raised her in her arms, conveyed her to her apartment, and placed her upon
the bed, still senseless. She then proceeded to bathe her temples, chafe her
hands, and use all possible means of bringing her to herself. With some
difficulty she succeeded. Antonia opened her eyes, and looked round her wildly.

"Where is she?" she cried in a trembling voice: "Is she gone? Am I safe? Speak
to me! Comfort me! Oh! speak to me, for God's sake!"

"Safe from whom, my child?" replied the astonished Jacintha: "What alarms you?
Of whom are you afraid?"

"In three days! She told me that we should meet in three days! I heard her say
it! I saw her, Jacintha, I saw her but this moment!"

She threw herself upon Jacintha's bosom.

"You saw her? -- Saw whom?"

"My mother's ghost!"

"Christ Jesus!" cried Jacintha; and, starting from the bed, let fall Antonia
upon the pillow, and fled in consternation out of the room.

As she hastened down stairs she met Flora ascending them.

"Go to your mistress, Flora," said she; "here are rare doings! Oh! I am the
most unfortunate woman alive! My house is filled with ghosts and dead bodies,
and the Lord knows what besides; yet I am sure nobody likes such company less
than I do. But go your way ^o Donna Antonia, Flora, and let me go mine."

Thus saying, she continued her course to the street door, which she opened;
and, without allowing herself time to throw on her veil, she made the best of
her way to the Capuchin abbey. In the mean while, Flora hastened to her lady's
chamber, equally surprised and alarmed at Jacintha's consternation. She found
Antonia lying upon the bed, insensible. She used the same means for her
recovery that Jacintha had already employed; but finding that her mistress only
recovered from one fit to fall into another, she sent in all haste for a
physician. While expecting his arrival, she undressed Antonia, and conveyed her
to bed.

Heedless of the storm, terrified almost out of her senses, Jacintha ran
through the streets, and stopped not till she reached the gate of the abbey.
She rang loudly at the bell, and as soon as the porter appeared, she desired
permission to speak to the superior. Ambrosio was then conferring with Matilda
upon the means of procuring access to Antonia. The cause of Elvira's death
remaining unknown, he was convinced that crimes were not so swiftly followed by
punishment as his instructors the monks had taught him, and as till then he had
himself believed. This persuasion made him resolve to pursue his designs upon
Antonia, for whom dangers and difficulties only seemed to have increased his
passion. The monk had already made one attempt to gain admission to her
presence; but Flora had refused him in such a manner as to convince him that
all future endeavors must be vain. Elvira had confided her suspicions to that
trusty servant: she had desired her never to leave Ambrosio alone with her
daughter, and, if possible, to prevent their meeting altogether. Flora promised
to obey her, and had executed her orders to the very letter. Ambrosio's visit
had been rejected that morning, though Antonia was ignorant of it. He saw that
to obtain a sight of his mistress by open means was out of the question; and
both himself and Matilda had consumed the night in endeavoring to invent some
plan, whose event might be more successful. Such was their employment when a
lay brother entered the abbot's cell, and informed him that a woman calling
herself Jacintha Zuniga requested audience for a few minutes.

Ambrosio was by no means disposed to grant the petition of his visitor. He
refused it positively, and bade the lay brother tell the stranger to return the
next day. Matilda interrupted him --

"See this woman," said she in a low voice; "I have my reasons."

The abbot obeyed her, and signified that he would go to the parlour
immediately. With this answer the lay brother withdrew. As soon as they were
alone, Ambrosio inquired why Matilda wished him to see this Jacintha.

"She is Antonia's hostess, replied Matilda; "she may possibly be of use to
you; but let us examine her, and learn what brings her hither."

They proceeded together to the parlour, where Jacintha was already waiting for
the abbot. She had conceived a great opinion of his piety and virtue; and,
supposing him to have much influence over the devil, thought that it must be an
easy matter for him to lay Elvira's ghost in the Red Sea. Filled with this
persuasion, she had hastened to the abbey, As soon as she saw the monk enter
the parlour, she dropped upon her knees, and began her story as follows:

"Oh! reverend father! such an accident! such an adventure! I know not what
course to take; and unless you can help me, I shall certainly go distracted.
Well, to be sure, never was woman so unfortunate as myself! All in my power to
keep clear of such abomination have I done, and yet that all is too little.
What signifies my telling my beads four times a day, and observing every fast
prescribed by the calendar? What signifies my having made three pilgrimages to
St James of Compostella, and purchased as many pardons from the pope as would
buy off Cain's punishment? Nothing prospers with me! All goes wrong, and God
only knows whether any thing will ever go right again! Why now, be your
holiness the judge -- My lodger dies in convulsions; out of pure kindness I
bury her at my own expense; [not that she is any relation of mine, or that I
shall be benefited a single pistole by her death: I got nothing by it, and
therefore you know, reverend father, that her living or dying was just the same
to me. But that is nothing to the purpose; to return to what I was saying] -- I
took care of her funeral, had every thing performed decently and properly, and
put myself to expense enough God knows! And how do you think the lady repays me
for my kindness? Why truly by refusing to sleep quietly in her comfortable deal
coffin, as a peaceable well disposed spirit ought to do, and coming to plague
me, who never wish to set eyes on her again. Forsooth it well becomes her to go
racketing about my house at midnight, popping into her daughter's room through
the keyhole, and frightening the poor child out of her wits! Though she be a
ghost, she might be more civil than to bolt into a person's house who likes her
company so little. But as for me, reverend father, the plain state of the case
is this: if she walks into my house, I must walk out of it, for I cannot abide
such visitors -- not I. Thus you see, your sanctity, that without your
assistance I am ruined and undone for ever. I shall be obliged to quit my
house: nobody will take it when it is known that she haunts it, and then I shall
find myself in a fine situation. Miserable woman that I am! what shall I do?
what will become of me?"

Here she wept bitterly, wrung her hands, and begged to know the abbot's
opinion of her case.

"In truth, good woman," replied he, "it will be difficult for me to relieve
you, without knowing what is the matter with you. You have forgotten to tell me
what has happened, and what it is you want."

"Let me die," cried Jacintha, "but your sanctity is in the right! This then is
the fact stated briefly -- A lodger of mine is lately dead; a very good sort of
woman, that I must needs say for her; as far as my knowledge of her went,
though that was not a great way. She kept me too much at a distance; for indeed
she was given to be upon the high ropes; and whenever I ventured to speak to
her; she had a look with her which always made me feel a little queerish: God
forgive me for saying so! However, though she was more stately than needful,
and affected to look down upon me (though, if I am well informed, I come of as
good parents as she could do for her ears, for her father was a shoemaker at
Cordova, and mine was an hatter at Madrid -- aye, and a very creditable hatter
too, let me tell you,) yet for all her pride she was a quiet well behaved body,
and I never wish to have a better lodger. This makes me wonder the more at her
not sleeping quietly in her grave; but there is no trusting to people in this
world. For my part, I never saw her do amiss, except on the Friday before her
death. To be sure, I was then much scandalized by seeing her eat the wing of a
chicken. 'How, Madona Flora!' quoth I (Flora, may it please your reverence, is
the name of the waiting maid) -- 'how, Madona Flora!' quoth I, 'does your
mistress eat flesh upon Fridays? Well! well! see the event, and then remember
that Dame Jacintha warned you of it!' These were my very words; but, alas! I
might as well have held my tongue. Nobody minded me: and Flora, who is somewhat
pert and snappish (more is the pity, say I,) told me, that there was no more
harm in eating a chicken than the egg from which it came: nay, she even
declared, that if her lady added a slice of bacon, she would not be an inch
nearer damnation. God protect us! a poor ignorant sinful soul! I protest to
your holiness, I trembled to hear her utter such blasphemies, and expected
every moment to see the ground open and swallow her up, chicken and all; for
you must know, worshipful father, that while she talked thus, she held the
plate in her hand on which lay the identical roast fowl: and a fine bird it
was, that I must say for i^ -- done to a turn, for I superintended the cooking
of it myself. It was a little gallician of my own raising, may it please your
holiness, and the flesh was as white as an eggshell, as indeed Donna Elvira
told me herself. 'Dame Jacintha,' said she very good humouredly, though, to say
the truth, she was always very polite to me -- "

Here Ambrosio's patience failed him. Eager to know Jacintha's business in
which Antonia seemed to be concerned, he was almost distracted while listening
to the rambling of this prosing old woman. He interrupted her, and protested
that if she did not immediately tell her story and have done with it, he should
quit the parlour, and leave her to get out of her difficulties by herself. This
threat had the desired effect. Jacintha related her business in as few words as
she could ma^^age: but her account was still so prolix, that Ambrosio had need
of his patience to bear him to the conclusion.

"And so, your reverence," said she, after relating Elvira's death and burial,
with all their circumstances -- "and so your reverence, upon hearing the
shriek, I put away my work, and away posted I to Donna Antonia's chamber.
Finding nobody there, I passed on to the next: but I must own I was a little
timorous at going in; for this was the very room where Donna Elvira used to
sleep. However, in I went, and sure enough there lay the young lady at full
length upon the floor, as cold as a stone, and as white as a sheet. I was
surprised at this, as your holiness may well suppose: but, oh me! how I shook
when I saw a great ^all figure at my elbow, whose head touched the ceiling! The
face was Donna Elvira's I must confess; but out of its mouth came clouds of
fire; its arms were loaded with heavy chains, which it rattled piteously; and
every hair on its head was a serpent as big as my arm. At this I was frightened
enough, and began to say my Ave Maria: but the ghost interrupting me uttered
three loud groans, and roared out in a terrible voice, 'Oh! that chicken's
wing! my poor soul suffers for it.' As soon as she said this, the ground
opened, the spectre sunk down, I heard a clap of thunder, and the room was
filled with a smell of brimstone. When I recovered from my fright, and had
brought Donna Antonia to herself, who told me that she cried out upon seeing
her mother's ghost (and well might she cry, poor soul! had I been in her place,
I should have cried ten times louder,) it directly came into my head, that if
any one had power to quiet this spectre, it must be your reverence. So hither I
came in all diligence, to beg that you will sprinkle my house with holy water,
and lay the apparition in the Red Sea."

Ambrosio stared at this strange story, which he could not credit.

"Did Donna Antonia also see the ghost?" said he.

"As plain as I see you, reverend father."

Ambrosio paused for a moment. Here was an opportunity offered him of gaining
access to Antonia, but he hesitated to employ it. The reputation which he
enjoyed in Madrid was still dear to him; and since he had lost the reality of
virtue, it appeared as if its semblance was become more valuable. He was
conscious that publicly to break through the rule never to quit the abbey
precincts would derogate much from his supposed austerity. In visiting Elvira,
he had always taken care to keep his features concealed from the domestics.
Except by the lady, her daughter, and the faithful Flora, he was known in the
family by no other name than that of father Jerome. Should he comply with
Jacintha's request, and accompany her to her house, he knew that the violation
of his rule could not be kept a secret. However, his eagerness to see Antonia
obtained the victory. He even hoped that the singularity of this adventure
would justify him in the eyes of Madrid. But whatever might be the
consequences, he resolved to profit by the opportunity which chance had
presented to him. An expressive look from Matilda confirmed him in his
resolution.

"Good woman," said he to Jacintha, "what you tell me is so extraordinary that
I can scarcely credit your assertions. However, I will comply with your
request. Tomorrow, after matins, you man expect me at your house: I will then
examine into what I can do for you; and, if it is in my power, will free you
from this unwelcome visitor. Now then go home, and peace be with you!"

"Home!" exclaimed Jacintha; "I go home? Not I, by my troth! -- except under
your protection, I set no foot of mine within the threshold. God help me! the
ghost may meet me upon the stairs, and whisk me away with her to the devil! Oh!
that I had accepted young Melchior Basco's offer! then I should have had some
body to protect me: but now I am a lone woman, and meet with nothing but
crosses and misfortunes. Thank Heaven, it is not yet too late to repent. There
is Simon Gonzalez will have me any day of the week; and if I live till
daybreak, I will marry him out of hand: an husband I will have, that is
determined; for, now this ghost is once in my house. I shall be frightened out
of my wits to sleep alone. But, for God's sake reverend father! come with me
now. I shall have no rest till the house is purified, or the poor young lady
either. The dear girl! she is in a piteous taking: I left her in strong
convulsions, and I doubt she will not easily recover her fright."

The friar started, and interrupted her hastily.

"In convulsions, say you? Antonia in convulsions? Lead on, good woman, I
follow you this moment."

Jacintha insisted upon his stopping to furnish himself with a vessel of holy
water. With this request he complied. Thinking herself safe under his
protection should a legion of ghosts attack her, the old woman returned the
monk a profusion of thanks, and they departed together for the strada di San
Iago.

So strong an impression had the spectre made upon Antonia, that for the first
two or three hours, the physician declared her life to be in danger. The fits
at length becoming less frequent, induced him to alter his opinion. He said
that to keep her quiet was all that was necessary; and he ordered a medicine to
be prepared, which would tranquillize her nerves, and procure her that repose
which at present she much wanted. The sight of Ambrosio, who now appeared with
Jacintha at her bed side, contributed essentially to compose her ruffled
spirits. Elvira had not sufficiently explained herself upon the nature of his
designs, to make a girl so ignorant of the world as her daughter aware how
dangerous was his acquaintance. At this moment, when, penetrated with horror at
the scene which had just passed, and dreading to contemplate the ghost's
prediction, her mind had need of all the succors of friendship and religion,
Antonia regarded the abbot with an eye doubly partial. That strong
prepossession in his favor stil^ existed, which she had felt for him at first
sight: (...) fancied, yet knew not wherefore, that his presence was a safeguard
to her from every danger, insult, or misfortune. She thanked him gratefully for
his visit, and related to him the adventure which had alarmed her so seriously.

The abbot strove to reassure her, and convince her that the whole had been a
deception of her overheated fancy. The solitude in which she had passed the
evening, the gloom of night, the book which she had been reading, and the room
in which she sat, were all calculated to place before her such a vision. He
treated the idea of ghosts with ridicule, and produced strong arguments to
prove the fallacy of such a system. His conversation tranquillized and
comforted her, but did not convince her. She could not believe that the spectre
had been a mere creature of her imagination: every circumstance was impressed
upon her mind too forcibly to permit her flattering herself with such an idea.
She persisted in asserting that she had really seen her mother's ghost, had
heard the period of her dissolution announced, and declared that she never,
should quit her bed alive. Ambrosio advised her against encouraging these
sentiments, and then quitted her chamber, having promised to repeat his visit
on the morrow. Antonia received this assurance with every mark of joy; but the
monk easily perceived that he was not equally acceptable to her attendant.
Flora obeyed Elvira's injunctions with the most scrupulous observance. She
examined with an anxious eye every circumstance likely in the least to
prejudice her young mistress, to whom she had been attached for many years. She
was a native of Cuba, had followed Elvira to Spain, and loved the young Antonia
with a mother's affection. Flora quitted not the room for a moment while the
abbot remained there: she watched his every word, his every look, his every
action. He saw that her suspicious eye was always fixed upon him; and,
conscious that his designs would not bear inspection so minute, he felt
frequently confused and disconcerted. He was aware that she doubted the purity
of his intentions; that she would never leave him alone with Antonia: and, his
mistress defended by the presence of this vigilant observer, he despaired of
finding the means to gratify his passion.

As he quitted the house, Jacintha met him, and begged that some masses might
be sung for the repose of Elvira's soul, which she doubted not was suffering in
purgatory.

He promised not to forget her request; but he perfectly gained the old woman's
heart, by engaging to watch during the whole of the approaching night in the
haunted chamber. Jacintha could find no terms sufficiently strong to express
her gratitude, and the monk departed loaded with her benedictions.

It was broad day when he returned to the abbey. His first care was to
communicate what had passed to his confidant. He felt too sincere a passion for
Antonia, to have heard unmoved the prediction of her speedy death, and he
shuddered at the idea of losing an object so dear to him. Upon this head
Matilda reassured him. She confirmed the arguments which himself had already
used: she declared Antonia to have been deceived by the wandering of her brain,
by the spleen which oppressed her at the moment, and by the natural turn of her
mind to superstition and the mavelous. As to Jacintha's account, the
absurdity refuted itself. The abbot hesitated not to* believe that she had
fabricated the whole story, either confused by terror, or hoping to make him
comply more readily with her request. Having overruled the monk's
apprehensions, Matilda continued thus:

"The prediction and the ghost are equally false: but it must be your care,
Ambrosio, to verify the first. Antonia within three days must indeed be dead to
the world: but she must live for you. Her present illness, and this fancy which
she has taken into her head, will color a plan which I have long meditated,
but which was impracticable without your procuring access to Antonia. She shall
be yours, and yours for ever. All the vigilance of her duenna shall not avail
her; but this very day must the scheme be put in execution, for you have no
time to lose. The nephew of the duke of Medina Celi prepares to demand Antonia
for his bride: in a few days she will be removed to the palace of her relation,
the marquis de las Cisternas, and there she will be secure from your attempts.
Thus during your absence have I been informed by my spies, who are ever
employed in bringing me intelligence for your service. Now then listen to me.
There is a juice extracted from certain herbs known but to few, which brings on
the person who drinks it the exact image of death. Let this be administered to
Antonia: you may easily find means to pour a few drops into her medicine. The
effect will be throwing her into strong convulsions for an hour: after which
her blood will gradually cease to flow, and heart to beat: a mortal paleness
will spread itself over her features, and she will appear a corse to every eye.
She has no friends about her: you may charge yourself unsuspected with the
superintendance of her funeral, and cause her to be buried in the vaults of St.
Clare. Their solitude and easy access render these caverns favorable to your
designs. Give Antonia the soporific draught this evening: eight and forty hours
after she has drank it, life will revive in her bosom. She will then be
absolutely in your power: she will find all resistance unavailing, and
necessity will compel her to receive you in her arms."

"Antonia will be in my power!" exclaimed the monk; "Matilda, you transport me!
At length then happiness will be mine, and that happiness will be your gift,
will be the gift of friendship! Oh! Matilda, how can I express to you my
gratitude?"

"By profiting by my counsels. Ambrosio I live but to serve you; your interest
and happiness are equally mine. Be your person Antonia's, but to your
friendship and your heart I still assert my claim. Contributing to yours forms
now my only pleasure. Should my exertions procure the gratification of your
wishes, I shall consider my trouble to be amply repaid. But let us lose no
time. The liquor of which I spoke is only to be found in St. Clare's
laboratory. Hasten then to the prioress, request of her admission to the
laboratory, and it will not be denied. There is a closet at the lower end of
the great room, filled with liquids of different colors and qualities; the
bottle in question stands by itself, upon the third shelf on the left. It
contains a greenish liquor: fill a small phial with it when you are unobserved,
and Antonia is your own."

The monk scrupled not to adopt this infamous plan. His passion, but too
violent before, had acquired fresh vigor from the sight of Antonia; and,
inflamed by the remembrance of her beauties, he entered into Matilda's scheme
without hesitation.

No sooner were matins over, than he bent his course toward the convent of St.
Clare. His arrival threw the whole sisterhood into the utmost amazement. The
prioress was sensible of the honor done her convent by his paying it his first
visit, and strove to express her gratitude by every possible attention. He was
paraded through the garden, shown all the relics of saints and martyrs, and
treated with as much respect and distinction as had he been the Pope himself.
On his part, Ambrosio received the domina's civilities very graciously, and
strove to remove her surprise at his having broken through his resolution. He
stated that among his penitents, illness prevented many from quitting their
houses. These were exactly the people who most needed his advice and the
comforts of religion. Many representations had been made to him upon this
account, and, though highly repugnant to his own wishes, he had found it
absolutely necessary, for the service of Heaven, to change his determination,
and quit his beloved retirement. The prioress applauded his zeal (...), and his
charity toward mankind. (...) ^^clared that Madrid was happy in possessing a
man so perfect and irreproachable. In such discourse the friar at length
reached the laboratory: he found the closet; the bottle stood in the place
which Matilda had described, and the monk seized an opportunity to fill his
phial unobserved with the soporific liquor. Then, having partaken of a
collation in the refectory, he retired from the convent, pleased with the
success of his visit, and leaving the nuns delighted by the honor conferred
upon them.

He waited till evening before he took the road to Antonia's dwelling. Jacintha
welcomed him with transport, and besought him not to forget his promise to pass
the night in the haunted chamber. That promise he now repeated. He found
Antonia tolerably well, but still harping upon the ghost's prediction. Flora
moved not from her lady's bed, and, by symptoms yet stronger than on the former
night, testified her dislike to the abbot's presence. Still Ambrosio affected
not to observe them. The physician arrived while he was conversing with
Antonia. It was dark already: lights were called for, and Flora was compelled
to descend for them herself. However, as she left a third person in the room,
and expected to be absent but a few minutes, she believed that she risked
nothing in quitting her post. No sooner had she left the room than Ambrosio
moved toward the table, on which stood Antonia's medicine. It was placed in a
recess of the window. The physician, seated in an arm chair, and employed in
questioning his patient, paid no attention to the proceedings of the monk.
Ambrosio (...) opportunity; he drew out the fatal phial, (...) a few drops fall
into the medicine: he then hastily left the table, and returned to the seat
which he had quitted. When Flora made her appearance with lights, every thing
seemed to be exactly as she had left it.

The physician declared that Antonia might quit her chamber the next day with
perfect safety. He recommended her following the same prescription which on the
night before had procured her a refreshing sleep. Flora replied, that the
draught stood ready upon the table: he advised the patient to take it without
delay, and then retired. Flora poured the medicine into a cup, and presented it
to her mistress. At that moment Ambrosio's courage failed him. Might not
Matilda have deceived him? Might not jealousy have persuaded her to destroy her
rival, and substitute poison in the room of an opiate? This idea appeared so
reasonable, that he was on the point of preventing her from swallowing the
medicine. His resolution was adopted too late. The cup was already emptied, and
Antonia restored it into Flora's hands. No remedy was now to be found: Ambrosio
could only expect the moment impatiently destined to decide upon Antonia's life
or death, upon his own happiness or despair.

Dreading to create suspicion by his stay, or betray himself by his mind's
agitation, he took leave of his victim, and withdrew from the room. Antonia
parted from him with less cordiality than on the former night. Flora had
represented to her mistress, that to admit his visits was to disobey her
mother's orders. She described to her his emotion on entering the room, and the
fire which sparkled in his eyes while he gazed upon her. This had escaped
Antonia's observation, but not her attendant's, who, explaining the monk's
designs, and their probable consequences, in terms much clearer than Elvira's,
though not quite so delicate, had succeeded in alarming her young lady, and
persuading her to treat him more distantly than she had done hitherto. The idea
of obeying her mother's will at once determined Antonia. Though she grieved at
losing his society, she conquered herself sufficiently to receive the monk with
some degree of reserve and coldness. She thanked him with respect and gratitude
for his former visits, but did not invite his repeating them in future. It now
was not the friar's interest to solicit admission to her presence and he took
leave of her as if not designing to return. Fully persuaded that the
acquaintance which she dreaded was now at an end, Flora was so much worked upon
by his easy compliance, that she began to doubt the justice of her suspicions.
As she lighted him down stairs, she thanked him for having endeavored to root
out from Antonia's mind her superstitious terrors of the spectre's prediction:
she added, that, as he seemed interested in Donna Antonia's welfare, should any
change take place in her situation, she would be careful to let him know it.
The monk, in replying, ^ook pains to raise his voice, hoping that Jacintha
would hear it. In this he succeeded. As he reached the foot of the stairs with
his conductress, the landlady failed not to make her appearance.

"Why, surely you are not going away, reveren^ father?" cried she: "Did you not
promise to pass the night in the haunted chamber? Christ Jesus! I shall be left
alone with the ghost, and a fine pickle I shall be in by morning! Do all I
could, say all I could, that obstinate old brute, Simon Gonzalez, refused to
marry me today: and before tomorrow comes, I suppose I shall be torn to
pieces by the ghosts and goblins and devils, and what not! For God's sake, your
holiness, do not leave me in such a woeful condition! On my bended knees I
beseech you to keep your promise: watch this night in the haunted chamber; lay
the apparition in the Red Sea, and Jacintha remembers you in her prayers to the
last day of her existence!"

This request Ambrosio expected and desired; yet he affected to raise
objections, and to seem unwilling to keep his word. He told Jacintha that the
ghost existed no where but in her own brain, and that her insisting upon his
staying all night in the house was ridiculous and useless. Jacintha was
obstinate: she was not to be convinced, and pressed him so urgently not to
leave her a prey to the devil, that at length he granted her request. All this
show of resistance imposed not upon Flora, who was naturally of a suspicious
temper. She suspected the monk to be acting a part very contrary to his own
inclinations, and that he wished for no better than to remain where he was. She
even went so far as to believe that Jacintha was in his interest; and the poor
old woman was immediately set down as being no better than she should be. While
she applauded herself for having penetrated into this plot against her lady's
honor, she resolved in secret to render it fruitless.

"So then," said she to the abbot with a look half satirical and half indignant
-- "so then you mean to stay here tonight? Do so, in God's name! Nobody will
prevent you. Sit up to watch for the ghost's arrival; I shall sit up too, and
the Lord grant that I may see nothing worse than a ghost? I quit not Donna
Antonia's bed side during this blessed night. Let me see any one dare to enter
the room, and be he mortal or immortal, be he ghost, devil, or man, I warrant
his repenting that ever he crossed the threshold!"

This hint was sufficiently strong, and Ambrosio understood its meaning. But
instead of showing that he perceived her suspicions, he replied mildly, that he
approved the duenna's precautions, and advised her to persevere in her
intention. This she assured him faithfully that he might depend upon her doing.
Jacintha then conducted him into the chamber where the ghost had appeared, and
Flora returned to her lady's

Jacintha opened the door of the haunted room with a trembling hand: she
ventured to peep in, but the wealth of India would not have tempted her to
cross the threshold. She gave the taper to the monk, wished him well through
the adventure, and hastened to be gone. Ambrosio entered. He bolted the door,
placed the light upon the table, and seated himself in the chair which on the
former night had sustained Antonia. In spite of Matilda's assurances that the
spectre was a mere creation of fancy, his mind was impressed with a certain
mysterious (...). He in vain endeavored to shake it off. The silence of the
night, the story of the apparition, the chamber wainscotted with dark oak
pannels, the recollection which it brought with it of the murdered Elvira, and
his incertitude respecting the nature (...) drops given by him to Antonia, made
him feel uneasy at his present situation. But he thought much less of the
spectre than of the poison. Should he have destroyed the only object which
rendered life dear to him; should the ghost's prediction prove true; should
Antonia in three days be (...) more, and he the wretched cause of her death....
The supposition was too horrible to dwell upon. He drove away these dreadful
images, and as often they presented themselves again before him. Matilda had
assured him that the effects of the opiate would be speedy. He listened with
fear, yet with eagerness, expecting to hear some disturbance in the adjoining
chamber. All was still silent. He concluded that the drops had not begun to
operate. Great was the stake for which he now played: a moment would suffice to
decide upon his misery or happiness. Matilda had taught him the means of
ascertaining that life was not extinct forever; upon this assay depended all
his hopes. With every instant his impatience redoubled; his terrors grew more
lively, his anxiety more awake. Unable to bear this state of incertitude, he
endeavored to divert it by substituting the thoughts of others for his own.
The books, as was before mentioned, were ranged upon shelves near the table:
this stood exactly opposite to the bed, which was placed in an alcove near the
closet door. Ambrosio took down a volume, and seated himself by the table: but
his attention wandered from the pages before him. Antonia's image, and that of
the murdered Elvira, persisted to force themselves before his imagination.
Still he continued to read, though his eyes ran over the characters without his
mind being conscious of their import.

Such was his occupation when he fancied that he heard a footstep. He turned
his head; but nobody was to be seen. He resumed his book; but in a few minutes
after, the same sound was repeated, and followed by a rustling noise close
behind him. He now started from his seat, and, looking round him, perceived the
closet door standing half unclosed. On his first entering the room, he had
tried to open it, but found it bolted on the inside.

"How is this?" said he to himself: "how comes this door unfastened?"

He advanced toward it, he pushed it open, and looked into the closet: no one
was there. While he stood irresolute, he thought that he distinguished a
groaning in the adjacent chamber: it was Antonia's, and he supposed that the
drops began to take effect. But upon listening more attentively, he found the
noise to be caused by Jacintha, who had fallen asleep by the lady's bed side,
and was snoring most lustily. Ambrosio drew back, and returned to the other
room, musing upon the sudden opening of the closet door, for which he strove in
vain to account.

He paced the chamber up and down in silence. At length he stopped, and the bed
attracted his attention. The curtain of the recess was but half drawn. He
sighed involuntarily.

"That bed," said he in a low voice, "that bed was Elvira's! There has she
passed many a quiet night, for she was good and innocent. How sound must have
been her sleep! and yet now she sleeps sounder! Does she indeed sleep? Oh! God
grant that she may! What if she rose from her grave at this sad and silent
(...)? What if she broke the bonds of the tomb, and glided angrily before my
blasted eyes? Oh! I never could support the sight! Again to see her form
distorted by dying agonies, her blood swollen veins, her livid countenance, her
eyes bursting from their sockets with pain! -- to hear her speak of future
punishment, menace me with Heaven's vengeance, tax me with the crimes I have
committed, with those I am going to commit..... Great God! what is that?"

As he uttered these words, his eyes, which were fixed upon the bed, saw the
curtain shaken gently backwards and forwards. The apparition was recalled to
his mind, and he almost fancied that he beheld Elvira's visionary form
reclining upon the bed. A few moments consideration sufficed to reassure him.

"It was only the wind," said he, recovering himself.

Again he paced the chamber; but an involuntary movement of awe and inquietude
constantly led his eye toward the alcove. He drew near it with irresolution.
He paused before he ascended the few steps which led to it. He put out his hand
thrice to remove the curtain, and as often drew it back.

"Absurd terrors!" he cried at length, ashamed of his own weakness.

Hastily he mounted the steps, when a figure dressed in white started from the
alcove, and, gliding by him, made with precipitation toward the closet.
Madness and despair now supplied the monk with that courage, of which he had
till then been destitute. He slew down the steps, pursued the apparition, and
attempted to grasp it.

"Ghost, or devil, I hold you!" he exclaimed, and seized the spectre by the arm.

"Oh! Christ Jesus!" cried a shrill voice; "holy father, how you gripe me! I
protest that I meant no harm!"

This address, as well as the arm which he held, convinced the abbot that the
supposed ghost was substantial flesh and blood. He drew the intruder toward
the table, and, holding up the light, discovered the features of..... Madona
Flora!

Incensed at having been betrayed by this trifling cause into fears so
ridiculous, he asked her sternly, what business had brought her to that
chamber. Flora, ashamed at being found out, and terrified at the severity of
Ambrosio's looks, fell upon her knees, and promised to make a full confession.

I protest reverend father," said she, "that I am quite grieved at having
disturbed you; nothing was further from my intention. I meant to get out of the
room as quietly as I got in; and had you been ignorant that I watched you, you
know it would have been the same thing as if I had not watched you at all. To
be sure I did very wrong in being a spy upon you -- that I cannot deny. But,
Lord! your reverence, how can a poor weak woman resist curiosity? Mine was so
strong to know what you were doing, that I could not but try to get a little
peep without any body knowing any thing about it. So with that I left old Dame
Jacintha sitting by my lady's bed, and I ventured to steal into the closet.
Being unwilling to interrupt you, I contented myself at first with putting my
eye to the keyhole; but as I could see nothing by this means, I undrew the
bolt, and, while your back was turned to the alcove, I whipped me in softly and
silently. Here I lay snug behind the curtain, till your reverence found me out,
and seized me ere I had time to regain the closet door. This is the whole
truth, I assure you, holy father, and I beg your pardon a thousand times for my
impertinence."

During this speech the abbot had time to recollect himself: he was satisfied
with reading the penitent spy a lecture upon the dangers of curiosity, and the
meanness of the action in which she had been just discovered. Flora declared
herself fully persuaded that she had done wrong; she promised never to be
guilty of the same fault again, and was retiring very humble and contrite to
Antonia's chamber, when the closet door was suddenly thrown open, and in rushed
Jacintha, pale and out of breath.

"Oh! Father! Father!" she cried in a voice almost ^hoaked with terror, "What
shall I do? What shall I do? Here is a fine piece of work! Nothing but
misfortunes! Nothing but dead people, and dying people! Oh! I shall go
distracted! I shall go distracted!"

"Speak! Speak!" cried Flora and the monk at the same time: "What has happened?
what is the matter?"

"Oh! I shall have another co^se in my house! Some witch has certainly cast a
spell upon it, upon me, and upon all about me! Poor Donna Antonia! there she
lies in just such convulsions as killed her mother! The ghost told her true! I
am sure the ghost told her true!"

Flora ran, or rather flew, to her lady's chamber: Ambrosio followed her, his
bosom trembling with hope and apprehension. They found Antonia as Jacintha had
described, torn by racking convulsions, from which they in vain endeavored to
relieve her. The monk dispatched Jacintha to the abbey in all haste, and
commissioned her to bring father Pablos back with her without losing a moment.

"I will go for him," replied Jacintha, "and tell him to come hither; but as to
bringing him myself, I shall do no such thing. I am sure that the house is
bewitched, and burn me if ever I set foot in it again!"

With this resolution she set out for the monastery, and delivered to Father
Pablos the abbot's orders. She then betook herself to the house of old Simon
Gonzalez, whom she resolved never to quit till she had made him her husband,
and his dwelling her own.

Father Pablos had no sooner beheld Antonia, than he pronounced her incurable.
The convulsions continued for an hour; during that time her agonies were much
milder than those which her groans created in the abbot's heart. Her every pang
seemed a dagger in his bosom, and he cursed himself a thousand times for having
adopted so barbarous a project. The hour being expired, by degrees the fits
became less frequent, and Antonia less agitated. She felt that her dissolution
was approaching, and that nothing could save her.

"Worthy Ambrosio," she said in a feeble voice, while she pressed his hand to
her lips; "I am now at liberty to express how grateful is my heart for your
attention and kindness. I am upon the bed of death; yet an hour, and I shall be
no more. I may therefore acknowledge without restraint, that to relinquish your
society was very painful to me: but such was the will of a parent, and I dared
not disobey. I die without repugnance: there are few who will lament my leaving
them -- there are few whom I lament to leave. Among those few, I lament for
none more than for yourself; but we shall meet again Ambrosio! we shall one day
meet in heaven: there shall our friendship be renewed, and my mother shall view
it with pleasure!

She paused. The abbot shuddered when she mentioned Elvira. Antonia imputed his
emotion to pity and concern for her.

"You are grieved for me, Father," she continued: "Ah! sigh not for my loss. I
have no crimes to repent, at least none of which I am conscious; and I restore
my soul without fear to him from whom I received it. I have but few requests to
make; yet let me hope that what few I have shall be granted. Let a solemn mass
be said for my soul's repose, and another for that of my beloved mother; not
that I doubt her resting in her grave. I am now convinced that my reason
wandered, and the falsehood of the ghost's prediction is sufficient to prove my
error. But every one has some ^ailing: my mother may have had hers though I
knew them not: I therefore wish a mass to be celebrated for her repose, and the
expense may be defrayed by the little wealth of which I am possessed. Whatever
may then remain, I bequeath to my aunt Leonella. When I am dead, let the
marquis de las Cisternas know that his brother's unhappy family can no longer
importune him. But disappointment makes me unjust: they tell me that he is ill,
and perhaps, had it been in (...), he wished to have protected me. Tell him,
then, Father, only that I am dead, and that if he had any faults to me, I
forgave him from my heart. This done, I have nothing more to ask for than your
prayers. Promise to remember my requests, and I shall resign my life without a
pang or sorrow."

Ambrosio engaged to comply with her desires, and proceeded to give her
absolution. Every moment announced the approach of Antonia's fate. Her sight
failed, her heart beat sluggishly, her fingers stiffened and grew cold, and at
two in the morning she expired without a groan. As soon as the breath had
forsaken her body, father Pablos retired, sincerely affected at the melancholy
scene. On her part, Flora gave way to the most unbridled sorrow. Far different
concerns employed Ambrosio: he sought for the pulse whose throbbing, so Matilda
had assured him, would prove Antonia's death but temporal. He ^ound it -- he
pressed it -- it palpitated beneath his hand, and his heart was filled with
ecstacy. However, he carefully concealed his satisfaction at the success of his
plan. He assumed a melancholy air, and addressing himself to Flora, warned her
against abandoning herself to fruitless sorrow. Her tears were too sincere to
permit her listening to his counsels, and she continued to weep unceasingly.
The friar withdrew, first promising to give orders himself about the funeral,
which, out of consideration for Jacintha, as he pretended, should take place
with all expedition. Plunged in grief for the loss of her beloved mistress,
Flora scarcely attended to what he said. Ambrosio hastened to command the
burial. He obtained permission from the prioress, that the corse should be
deposited in St. Clare's sepulcher: and on the Friday morning, every proper and
needful ceremony being performed, Antonia's body was committed to the tomb.

On the same day Leonella arrived at Madrid, intending to present her young
husband to Elvira. Various circumstances had obliged her to defer her journey
from Tuesday to Friday; and she had no opportunity of making this alteration in
her plans known to her sister. As her heart was truly affectionate, and as she
had ever entertained a sincere regard for Elvira and her daughter, her surprise
at hearing of their sudden and melancholy fate was fully equalled by her sorrow
and disappointment. Ambrosio sent to inform her of Antonia's bequest^ at her
solicitation, he promised, as soon as Elvira's trifling debts were discharged,
to transmit to her the remainder. This being settled, no other business
detained Leonella in Madrid, and she returned to Cordova with all diligence.

CHAP. X.
Oh! could I worship aught beneath the skies,
That earth has seen, or fancy could devise,
Thine altar, sacred Liberty should stand,
Built by no mercenary vulgar hand,
With fragrant turf, and flowers as wild and fair,
As ever dressed a bank, or scented summer air.
COWPER.
HIS whole attention bent upon bringing to justice the assassins of his sister,
Lorenzo little thought how severely his interest was suffering in another
quarter. As was before mentioned, he returned not to Madrid till the evening of
that day on which Antonia was buried. Signifying to the Grand Inquisitor the
order of the cardinal duke (a ceremony not to be neglected when a member of the
church was to be arrested publicly), communicating his design to his uncle and
Don Ramirez, and assembling a troop of attendants sufficient to prevent
opposition, furnished him with full occupation during the few hours preceding
midnight. Consequently he had no opportunity to inquire about his mistress, and
was perfectly ignorant both of her death and her mother's.

The marquis was by no means out of danger: his delirium was gone, but had left
him so much exhausted, that the physicians declined pronouncing upon the
consequences likely to ensue. As for Raymond himself, he wished for nothing
more earnestly than to join Agnes in the grave. Existence was hateful to him:
he saw nothing in the world deserving his attention; and he hoped to hear that
Agnes was revenged and himself given over in the same moment.

Followed by Raymond's ardent prayers for success, Lorenzo was at the gates of
St. Clare a full hour before the time appointed by the mother St. Ursula. He
was accompanied by his uncle, by Don Ramirez de Mello, and a party of chosen
archers. Though in considerable numbers, their appearance created no surprise:
a great crowd was already assembled before the convent doors, in order to
witness the procession. It was naturally supposed, that Lorenzo and his
attendants were conducted thither by the same design. The duke of Medina being
recognized, the people drew back, and made way for his party to advance.
Lorenzo placed himself opposite to the great gate, through which the pilgrims
were to pass. Convinced that the prioress could not escape him, he waited
patiently for her appearance, which she was expected to make exactly at
midnight.

The nuns were employed in religious duties established in honor of St. Clare,
and to which no profane was ever admitted. The chapel windows were illuminated.
As they stood on the outside, the auditors heard the full swell of the organ,
accompanied by a chorus of female voices, rise upon the stillness of the night.
This died away, and was succeeded by a single strain of harmony: it was the
voice of her who was destined to sustain in the procession the character of St.
Clare. For this office the most beautiful virgin of Madrid was always selected,
and she upon whom the choice fell, esteemed it as the highest of honors. While
listening to the music, whose melody distance only seemed to render sweeter,
"In notes by distance made more sweet."
COLLINS.
the audience was wrapped up in profound attention. Universal silence prevailed
through the crowd, and every heart was filled with reverence for religion --
every heart but Lorenzo's. Conscious that among those who chanted the praises
of their God so sweetly there were some who cloaked with devotion the foulest
sins, their hymns inspired him with detestation of their hypocrisy. He had long
observed with disapprobation and contempt the superstition which governed
Madrid's inhabitants. His good sense had pointed out to him the artifices of
the monks, and the gross absurdity of their miracles, wonders, and
supposititious relics. He blushed to see his countrymen the dupes of
deceptions so ridiculous, and only wished for an opportunity to free them from
their monkish fetters. That opportunity, so long desired in vain, was at length
presented to him. He resolved not to let it slip, but to set before the people,
in glaring colors, how enormous were the abuses but too frequently practiced
in monasteries, and how unjustly public esteem was bestowed indiscriminately
upon all who wore a religious habit. He longed for the moment destined to
unmask the hypocrites, and convince his countrymen, that a sanctified exterior
does not always hide a virtuous heart.

The service lasted till midnight was announced by the convent bell. That sound
being heard, the music ceased: the voices died away softly, and soon after the
lights disappeared (...) the chapel windows. Lorenzo's (...), when he found the
execution of his plan to be nea^ at hand. From the natural superstition of the
people he had prepared himself for some resistance; but he trusted that the
mother St. Ursula would bring good reasons to justify his proceeding. He had
force with him to repel the first impulse of the populace, till his arguments
should be heard: his only fear was, lest the domia^, suspecting his design,
should have spirited away the (...) on whose deposition every thing depended.
Unless the mother St. Ursula should be present, he could only accuse the
prioress upon suspicion; and this reflection gave him some little apprehension
for the success of his enterprise. The tranquillity which seemed to reign
through the convent, in some degree reassured him: still he expected the moment
eagerly, when the presence of his ally should deprive him of the power of
doubting.

The abbey of Capuchins was only separated from the convent by the garden and
cemetery. The monks had been invited to assist at the pilgrimage. They now
arrived, marching two by two with lighted torches in their hands, and chanting
hymns in honor of St. Clare. Father Pablos was at their head, the abbot having
excused himself from attending. The people made way for the holy train, and the
friars placed themselves in ranks on either side of the great gates. A few
minutes sufficed to arrange the order of the procession. This being settled,
the convent doors were thrown open, and again the female chorus sounded in full
melody. First appeared a band of choristers. As soon as they had passed, the
monks fell in two by two, and followed with steps slow and measured: next came
the novices: they bore no tapers as did the professed, but moved on with eyes
bent downwards, and seemed to be occupied by telling their beads. To them
succeeded a young and lovely girl, who represented St. Lucia: she held a golden
basin, in which were two eyes: her own were covered by a velvet bandage, and
she was conducted by another nun habited as an angel. She was followed by St.
Catherine, a palm branch in one hand, a flaming sword in the other; she was
robed in white, and her brow was ornamented with a sparkling diadem. After her
appeared St. Genevieve, surrounded by a number of imps, who, putting themselves
into grotesque attitudes, drawing her by the robe, and sporting round her with
antic gestures, endeavored to distract her attention from the book on which
her eyes were constantly fixed. These merry devils greatly entertained the
spectators, who testified their pleasure by repeated bursts of laughter. The
prioress had been careful to select a nun whose disposition was naturally
solemn and saturnine. She had every reason to be satisfied with her choice: the
drolleries of the imps were entirely thrown away, and St. Genevieve moved on
without discomposing a muscle.

Each of these saints was separated from the other by a band of choristers,
exalting her praise in their hymns, but declaring her to be very much inferior
to St. Clare, the convent's avowed patroness. These having passed, a long train
of nuns appeared, bearing like the choristers, each a burning taper. Next came
the relics of St. Clare, enclosed in vases equally precious for their
materials and workmanship: but they attracted not Lorenzo's attention. The nun
who bore the heart occupied him entirely. According to Theodore's description,
he doubted not her being the mother St. Ursula. She seemed to look round with
anxiety. As he stood foremost in the rank by which the procession passed, her
eye caught Lorenzo's. A flush of joy overspread her till then pallid cheek. She
turned to her companion eagerly.

"We are safe," he heard her whisper, "'it is her brother."

His heart being now at ease, Lorenzo gazed with tranquillity upon the
remainder of the show. Now appeared its most brilliant ornament: it was a
machine fashioned like a throne, rich with jewels, and dazzling with light. It
rolled onwards upon concealed wheels, and was guided by several lovely children
dressed as seraphs. The summit was covered with silver clouds, upon which
reclined the most beautiful form that eyes ever witnessed. It was a damsel
representing St. Clare: her dress was of inestimable price, and round her head
a wreath of diamonds formed an artificial glory: but all these ornaments
yielded to the luster of her charms. As she advanced, a murmur of delight ran
through the crowd. Even Lorenzo confessed secretly, that he never beheld more
perfect beauty; and had not his heart been Antonia's, it must have fallen a
sacrifice to this enchanting girl. As it was, he considered her only as a fine
statue: she obtained from him no tribute save cold admiration: and when ^he had
passed him, he thought of her no more.

"Who is she?" asked a bystander in Lorenzo's hearing.

"One whose beauty you must often have heard celebrated. Her name is Virginia
de Villa Franca: she is a pensioner of St. Clare's convent, a relation of the
prioress, and has been selected with justice as the ornament of the procession."

The throne moved onwards. It was followed by the prioress herself: she marched
at the head of the remaining nuns with a devout and sanctified air, and closed
the procession. She moved on slowly: her eyes were raised to Heaven: her
countenance calm and tranquil, seemed abstracted from all sublunary things, and
no feature betrayed her secret pride at displaying the pomp and opulence of her
convent. She passed along, accompanied by the prayers and benedictions of the
populace: but how great was the general confusion and surprise when Don
Ramirez, starting forward, challenged her as his prisoner!

For a moment amazement held the domina silent and immovable: but no sooner
did she recover herself, than she exclaimed against sacrilege and impiety, and
called upon the people to rescue a daughter of the church. They were eagerly
preparing to obey her, when Don Ramirez, protected by the archers from their
rage, commanded them to forbear, and threatened them with the severest
vengeance of the Inquisition. At that dreaded word every arm fell, every sword
shrunk back into its scabbard. The prioress herself turned pale, and trembled.
The general silence convinced her that she had nothing to hope but from
innocence, and she besought Don Ramirez in a faltering voice to inform her of
what crime she was accused.

"That you shall know in time," replied he; "but first I must secure the mother
St. Ursula."

"The mother St. Ursula?" repeated the domina faintly.

At this moment casting her eyes round, she saw Lorenzo and the duke, who had
followed Don Ramirez.

"Ah! great God!" she cried, clasping her hands together with a frantic air, "I
am betrayed."

"Betrayed?" replied St. Ursula, who now arrived conducted by some of the
archers, and followed by the nun her companion in the procession: "not
betrayed, but discovered. In me recognize your accuser: you know not how well I
am instructed in your guilt: -- Segnor," she continued, turning to Don Ramirez,
"I commit myself to your custody. I charge the prioress of St. Clare with
murder, and stake my life for the justice of my accusation."

A general cry of surprise was uttered by the whole audience, and an
explanation was (...) demanded. The trembling nuns, terrified at the noise and
universal confusion, had dispersed, and fled different ways. Some regained the
convent: others sought refuge in the dwellings of their relations; and many,
only sensible of their present danger, and anxious to escape from the tumult,
ran through the streets, and wandered they knew not whither. The lovely
Virginia was one of the first to fly. And in order that she might be better
seen and heard, the people desired that St. Ursula should harrangue them from
the vacant (...). The nun complied: she ascended the (...) machine, and then
addressed the surrounding multitude as follows:

"However strange and unseemly may appear my conduct, when considered to be
adopted by a female and a nun, necessity will justify it most fully. A secret,
an horrible secret weighs heavy upon my soul: no rest can be mine till I have
revealed it to the world, and satisfied that innocent blood which calls from
the grave for vengeance. Much have I dared, to gain this opportunity of
lightening my conscience. Had I failed in my attempt to reveal the crime, had
the domina but suspected that the mystery was known to me, my ruin was
inevitable. Angels who watch unceasingly over those who deserve their favor,
have enabled me to escape detection. I am now at liberty to relate a tale,
whose circumstances will freeze every honest soul with horror. Mine is the task
to rend the veil from hypocrisy, and show misguided parents to what dangers the
woman is exposed, who falls under the sway of a monastic tyrant.

"Among the votaries of St. Clare, none was more lovely, none more gentle, than
Agnes de Medina. I knew her well: she entrusted to me every secret of her
heart: I was her friend and confidant, and I loved her with sincere affection.
Nor was I singular in my attachment. Her piety unfeigned, her willingness to
oblige, and her angelic disposition, rendered her the darling of all that was
estimable in the convent. The prioress herself, proud, scrupulous and
forbidding, could not refuse Agnes that tribute of approbation which she
bestowed upon no one else. Every one has some fault. Alas! Agnes had her
weakness: she violated the laws of our order, and incurred the inveterate hate
of the unforgiving domina. St. Clare's rules are severe: but grown antiquated
and neglected, many of late years have either been forgotten, or changed by
universal consent into milder punishments. The penance adjudged to the crime of
Agnes was most cruel, most inhuman. The law had been long exploded. Alas! it
still existed, and the revengeful prioress now determined to revive it. This
law decreed, that the offender should be plunged into a private dungeon,
expressly constituted to hide from the world for ever the victim of cruelty and
tyrannic superstition. In this dreadful abode she was to lead a perpetual
solitude, deprived of all society, and believed to be dead by those whom
affection might have prompted to attempt her rescue. Thus was she to languish
out the remainder of her days, with no other food than bread and water, and no
other comfort than the free indulgence of her tears."

The indignation created by this account was so violent, as for some moments to
interrupt St. Ursula's narrative. When the disturbance ceased, and silence
again prevailed through the assembly, she continued her discourse, while at
every word the domina's countenance betrayed her increasing terrors.

"A council of the twelve elder nuns was called: I was of the number. The
prioress in exaggerated colors described the offense of Agnes, and scrupled
not to propose the revival of this almost forgotten law. To the shame of our
sex be it spoken, that, either so absolute was the domina's will in the
convent, or so much had disappointment, solitude, and self denial hardened
their hearts and soured their tempers, this barbarous proposal was assented to
by nine voices out of the twelve. I was not one of the nine. Frequent
opportunities had convinced me of the virtues of Agnes, and I loved and pitied
her most sincerely. The mothers Bertha and Cornelia joined my party: we made
the strongest opposition possible, and the superior found herself compelled to
change her intention. In spite of the majority in her favor, she feared to
break with us openly. She knew that, supported by the Medina family, our forces
would be too strong for her to cope with: and she also knew that, after being
once imprisoned, and supposed dead, should Agnes be discovered, her ruin would
be inevitable; she therefore gave up her design, though with much reluctance.
She demanded some days to reflect upon a mode of punishment, which might be
agreeable to the whole community; and she promised, that as soon as her
resolution was fixed, the same council should be again summoned. Two days
passed away: on the evening of the third it was announced, that on the next
morning Agnes should be examined: and that according to her behavior on that
occasion her punishment should be either strengthened or mitigated.

"On the night preceding this examination, I stole to the cell of Agnes at an
hour when I supposed the other nuns to be buried in sleep. I comforted her to
the best of my power: I bade her take courage, told her to rely upon the
support of her friends, and taught her certain signs, by which I might instruct
her to answer the domina's questions by an assent or negative. Conscious that
her enemy would strive to confuse, embarrass, and daunt her, I feared her being
ensnared into some confession prejudicial to her interests. Being anxious to
keep my visit secret, I stayed with Agnes but a short time. I bade her not to
let her spirits be cast down. I mingled my tears with those which streamed down
her cheek, embraced her fondly, and was on the point of retiring, when I heard
the sound of steps approaching the cell. I started back. A curtain which veiled
a large crucifix offered me a retreat, and I hastened to place myself behind
it. The door opened. The prioress entered, followed by four other nuns. They
advanced toward the bed of Agnes. The superior reproached her with her errors
in the bitterest terms. She told her, that she was a disgrace to the convent,
that she was resolved to deliver the world and herself from such a monster, and
commanded her to drink the contents of a goblet now presented to her by one of
the nuns. Aware of the fatal properties of the liquor, and trembling to find
herself upon the brink of eternity, the unhappy girl strove to excite the
domina's pity by the most affecting prayers. She sued for life in terms which
might have melted the heart of a fiend. She promised to submit patiently to any
punishment, to shame, imprisonment, and torture, might she but be permitted to
live! Oh! might she but live another month, or week, or day! Her merciless
enemy listened to her complaints unmoved: she told her, that at first she meant
to have spared her life, and that if she had altered her intention she had to
thank the opposition of her friends. She continued to insist upon her
swallowing the poison: she bade her recommend herself to the Almighty's mercy,
not to here is and assured her that in an hour she would be numbered with the
dead. Perceiving that it was vain to implore this unfeeling woman, she
attempted to spring from her bed, and call for assistance: she hoped, if she
could not escape the fate announced to her, at least to have witnesses of the
violence committed. The prioress guessed her design: she seized her forcibly by
the arm, and pushed her back upon her pillow; at the same time drawing a
dagger, and placing it at the breast of the unfortunate Agnes, she protested
that if she uttered a single cry, or hesitated a single moment to drink the
poison, she would pierce her heart that instant. Already half dead with fear,
she could make no further resistance. The nun approached with the fatal goblet;
the domina obliged her to take it, and swallow the contents. She drank, and the
horrid deed was accomplished. The nuns then seated themselves round the bed;
they answered her groans with reproaches; they interrupted with sarcasms the
prayers in which she recommended her parting soul to mercy* they threatened her
with Heaven's vengeance and eternal perdition; they bade her despair of pardon,
and strowed with yet sharper thorns, death's painful pillow. Such were the
sufferings of this young unfortunate till released by fate from the malice of
her tormentors. She expired in horror of the past, in fears for the future; and
her agonies were such as must have amply gratified the hate and vengeance of
her enemies. As soon as her victim ceased to breathe, the domina retired, and
was followed by her accomplices.

"It was now that I ventured from my concealment. I dared not to assist my
unhappy friend, aware that, without preserving her, I should only have brought
on myself the same destruction. Shocked and terrified beyond expression at this
horrid scene, scarcely had I sufficient strength to regain my cell. As I
reached the door of that of Agnes, I ventured to look toward the bed on which
lay her lifeless body, once so lovely and so sweet! I breathed a prayer for her
departed spirit, and vowed to revenge her death by the shame and punishment of
her assassins. With danger and difficulty I have kept my oath. I unwarily
dropped some words at the funeral of Agnes, while thrown off my guard by
excessive grief, which alarmed the guilty conscience of the prioress. My every
action was observed; my every step was traced. I was constantly surrounded by
the superior's spies. It was long before I could find the means of conveying to
the unhappy girl's relations an intimation of my secret. It was given out, that
Agnes had expired suddenly: this account was credited not only by her friends
in Madrid, but even by those within the convent. The poison had left no marks
upon her body: no one suspected the true cause of her death, and it remained
unknown to all, save the assassins and myself.

"I have no more to say; for what I have already said, I will answer with my
life. I repeat that the prioress is a murderess; that she has driven from the
world, perhaps from Heaven, an unfortunate, whose offense was light and venial;
that she has abused the power entrusted to her hands, and has been a tyrant, a
barbarian, and an hypocrite. I also accuse the four nuns. Violante, Camilla,
Alix, and Mariana, as being her accomplices, and equally criminal."

Here St. Ursula ended her narrative. It created horror and surprise
throughout; but when she related the inhuman murder of Agnes, the indignation
of the mob was so audibly testified, that it was scarcely possible to hear the
conclusion. This confusion increased with every moment. At length a multitude
of voices exclaimed, that the prioress should be given up to their fury. To
this Don Ramirez positively refused to consent. Even Lorenzo bade the people
remember that she had undergone no trial, and advised them to leave her
punishment to the Inquisition. All representations were fruitless; the
disturbance grew still more violent, and the populace more exasperated. In vain
did Ramirez attempt to convey his prisoner out of the throng. Wherever he
turned, a band of rioters barred his passage, and demanded her being delivered
over to them more loudly than before. Ramirez ordered his attendants to cut
their way through the multitude. Oppressed by numbers, it was impossible for
them to draw their swords. He threatened the mob with the vengeance of the
Inquisition: but, in this moment of popular phrensy, even this dreadful name
had lost its effect. Though regret for his sister made him look upon the
prioress with abhorrence, Lorenzo could not help pitying a woman in a situation
so terrible: but in spite of all his exertions and those of the duke, of Don
Ramirez, and the archers, the people continued to press onwards. They forced a
passage through the guards who protected their destined victim, dragged her
from her shelter, and proceeded to take upon her a most summary and cruel
vengeance. Wild with terror, and scarcely knowing what she said, the wretched
woman shrieked for a moment's mercy: she protested that she was innocent of the
death of Agnes, and could clear herself from the suspicion beyond the power of
doubt. The rioters heeded nothing but the gratification of their barbarous
vengeance. They refused to listen to her: they showed her every sort of insult,
loaded her with mud and filth, and called her by the most opprobrious
appellations. They tore her one from another, and each new tormentor was more
savage than the former. They stifled with howls and execrations her shrill
cries for mercy, and dragged her through the streets, spurning her, trampling
her, and treating her with every species of cruelty which hate or vindictive
fury could invent. At length a flint, aimed by some well directing hand, struck
her full upon the temple. She sunk upon the ground, bathed in blood, and in a
few minutes terminated her miserable existence. Yet though she no longer felt
their insults, the rioters still exercised their impotent rage upon her
lifeless body. They beat it, trod upon it, and ill used it, till it became no
more than a mass of flesh, unsightly, shapeless, and disgusting.

Unable to prevent this shocking event. Lorenzo and his friends had beheld it
with the utmost horror: but they were roused from their compelled inactivity,
on hearing that the mob were attacking the convent of St. Clare. The incensed
populace confounding the innocent with the guilty, had resolved to sacrifice
all the nuns of that order to their rage, and not to leave one stone of the
building upon another. Alarmed at this intelligence, they hastened to the
convent, resolved to defend it if possible, or at least to rescue the
inhabitants from the fury of the rioters. Most of the nuns had fled, but a few
still remained in their habitation. Their situation was truly dangerous.
However, as they had taken the precaution of fastening the inner gates, with
this assistance Lorenzo hoped to repel the mob, till Don Ramirez should return
to him with a more sufficient force.

Having been conducted by the former disturbance to the distance of some
streets from the convent, he did not immediately reach it. When he arrived, the
throng surrounding it was so excessive, as to prevent his approaching the
gates. In the interim, the populace besieged the building with persevering
rage: they battered the walls, threw lighted torches in at the windows, and
swore that by break of day not a nun of St. Clare's order should be left alive.
Lorenzo had just succeeded in piercing his way through the crowd, when one of
the gates was forced open. The rioters poured into the interior part of the
building, where they exercised their vengeance upon every thing which found
itself in their passage. They broke the furniture into pieces, tore down the
pictures, destroyed the relics, and in their hatred of her servant forgot all
respect to the saint. Some employed themselves in searching out the nuns,
others in pulling down parts of the convent, and others again in setting fire
to the pictures and other valuable furniture which it contained. These latter
produced the most decisive desolation. Indeed the consequences of their action
were more sudden than themselves had expected or wished. The flames rising from
the burning piles caught part of the building, which, being old and dry, the
conflagration spread with rapidity from room to room. The walls were soon
shaken by the devouring element. The columns gave way, the roofs came tumbling
down upon the rioters, and crushed many of them beneath their weight. Nothing
was to be heard but shrieks and groans. The convent was wrapped in flames, and
the whole presented a scene of devastation and horror.

Lorenzo was shocked at having been the cause, however innocent of this
frightful disturbance: he endeavored to repair his fault by protecting the
helpless inhabitants of the convent. He entered it with the mob, and exerted
himself to repress the prevailing fury, till the sudden and alarming progress
of the flames compelled him to provide for his own safety. The people now
hurried out as eagerly as they had before thronged in; but their numbers
clogging up the door way, and the fire gaining upon them rapidly, many of them
perished ere they had time to effect their escape. Lorenzo's good fortune
directed him to a small door in a farther aisle of the chapel. The bolt was
already undrawn: he opened the door, and found himself at the foot of St.
Clare's sepulcher.

Here he stopped to breathe. The duke and some of his attendants had followed
him, and thus were in security for the present. They now consulted what steps
they should take to escape from this scene of disturbance; but their
deliberations were considerably interrupted by the sight of volumes of fire
rising from amidst the convent's massy walls, by the noise of some heavy arch
tumbling down in ruins, or by the mingled shrieks of the nuns and rioters,
either suffocating in the press, perishing in the flames, or crushed beneath
the weight of the falling mansion.

Lorenzo inquired, whither the wicket led? He was answered, To the garden of
the Capuchins: and it was resolved to explore an outlet upon that side.
Accordingly the duke raised the latch, and passed into the adjoining cemetery.
The attendants followed without ceremony. Lorenzo, being the last, was also on
the point of quitting the colonnade, when he saw the door of the sepulcher
opened softly. Some one looked out, but on perceiving strangers uttered a loud
shriek, started back again, and flew down the marble stairs.

"What can this mean?" cried Lorenzo: "Here is (...) mystery concealed. Follow
me without delay!"

Thus saying, he hastened into the sepulcher, and pursued the person who
continued to fly before him. The duke knew not the cause of this exclamation,
but, supposing that he had good reasons for it, followed him without
hesitation. The others did the same, and the whole party soon arrived at the
foot of the stairs. The upper door having been left open, the neighboring
flames darted from above a sufficient light to enable Lorenzo's catching a
glance of the fugitive running through the long passages and distant vaults;
but when a sudden turn deprived him of this assistance, total darkness
succeeded, and he could only trace the object of his inquiry by the faint echo
of retiring feet. The pursuers were now compelled to proceed with caution: as
well as they could judge, the fugitive also seemed to slacken pace, for they
heard the steps follow each other at longer intervals. They at length were
bewildered by the labyrinth of passages, and dispersed in various directions.
Carried away by his eagerness to clear up this mystery, and to penetrate into
which he was impelled by a movement secret and unaccountable, Lorenzo heeded
not this circumstance till he found himself in total solitude. The noise of
footsteps had ceased, all was silent around, and no clue offered itself to
guide him to the flying person. He stopped to reflect on the means most likely
to aid his pursuit. He was persuaded that no common cause would have induced
the fugitive to seek that dreary place at an hour so unusual: the cry which he
had heard, seemed uttered in a voice of terror; and he was convinced that some
mystery was attached to this event. After some minutes passed in hesitation, he
continued to proceed, feeling his way along the walls of the passage. He had
already passed some time in this slow progress, when he descried a spark of
light glimmering at a distance. Guided by this observation, and having drawn
his sword, he bent his steps toward the place whence the beam seemed to be
emitted.

It proceeded from the lamp which flamed before St. Clare's statue. Before it
stood several females, their white garments streaming in the blast as it howled
along the vaulted dungeons. Curious to know what had brought them together in
this melancholy spot, Lorenzo drew near with precaution. The strangers seemed
earnestly engaged in conversation. They heard not Lorenzo's steps, and he
approached unobserved, till he could hear their voices distinctly.

"I protest," continued she who was speaking when he arrived, and to whom the
rest were listening with great attention; "I protest that I saw them with my
own eyes. I flew down the steps, they pursued me, and I escaped falling into
their hands with difficulty. Had it not been for the lamp I should never have
found you."

"And what could bring them hither?" said another in a trembling voice; "do you
think that they were looking for us?"

"God grant that my fears may be false," rejoined the first; "but I doubt they
are murderers! If they discover us, we are lost! As for me, my fate is certain.
My affinity to the prioress will be a sufficient crime to condemn me; and
though till now these vaults have afforded me a retreat...."

Here looking up, her eye fell upon Lorenzo, who had continued to approach
slowly.

"The murderers!" she cried.

She started away from the statue's pedestal on which she had been seated, and
attempted to escape by flight. Her companions at the same moment uttered a
terrified scream, while Lorenzo arrested the fugitive by the arm. Frightened
and desperate, she sunk upon her knees before him.

"Spare me!" she exclaimed; "for Christ's sake, spare me! I am innocent, indeed
I am!"

While she spoke, her voice was almost choked with fear. The beams of the lamp
darting full upon her face, which was unveiled, Lorenzo recognized the
beautiful Virginia de Villa Franca. He hastened to raise her from the ground,
and besought her to take courage. He promised to protect her from the rioters,
assured her that her retreat was still a secret, and that she might depend upon
his readiness to defend her to the last drop of his blood. During this
conversation the nuns had thrown themselves into various attitudes: one knelt,
and addressed herself to Heaven; another hid her face in the lap of her
neighbor; some listened motionless with fear to the discourse of the supposed
assassin; while others embraced the statue of St. Clare, and implored her
protection with frantic cries. On perceiving their mistake, they crowded round
Lorenzo, and heaped benedictions on him by dozens. He found that on hearing the
threats of the mob, and terrified by the cruelties which from the convent
towers they had seen inflicted on the superior, many of the pensioners and nuns
had taken refuge in the sepulcher. Among the former was to be reckoned the
lovely Virginia; nearly related to the prioress, she had more reason than the
rest to dread the rioters, and now besought Lorenzo earnestly not to abandon
her to their rage. Her companions, most of whom were women of noble family,
made the same request, which he readily granted: he promised not to quit them
till he had seen each of them safe in the arms of her relations. But he advised
their deferring to quit the sepulcher for some time longer, when the popular
fury should be somewhat calmed, and the arrival of military force have
dispersed the multitude.

"Would to God," cried Virginia, "that I were already safe in my mother's
embraces! How say you, Segnor? will it be long ere we may leave this place?
Every moment that I pass here, I pass in torture!"

"I hope, not long," said he; "but till you can proceed with security, this
sepulcher will prove an impenetrable asylum. Here you run no risk of a
discovery, and I would advise your remaining quiet for the next two or three
hours."

"Two or three hours?" exclaimed sister Helena: "If I stay another hour in
these vaults, I shall expire with fear! Not the wealth of worlds should bribe
me to undergo again what I have suffered since my coming hither. Blessed
Virgin! To be in this melancholy place in the middle of night, surrounded by
the mouldering bodies of my deceased companions, and expecting every moment to
be torn in pieces by their ghosts who wander about me, and complain, and groan,
and wail accents that make my blood run cold..... Christ Jesus! It is enough to
drive me to madness!"

"Excuse me," replied Lorenzo, "if I am surprised, that while menaced by real
woes you are capable of yielding to imaginary dangers. These dangers are
puerile and groundless: combat them, holy sister; I have promised to guard you
from the rioters; but against the attacks of superstition you must depend for
protection upon yourself. The idea of ghosts is ridiculous in the extreme; and
if you continue to be swayed by ideal terrors...."

"Ideal?" exclaimed the nuns with one voice: "Why, we heard it ourselves,
Segnor! Every one of us heard it! It was frequently repeated, and it sounded
every time more melancholy and deep. You will never persuade me that we could
all have been deceived. No, no; had the noise been merely created by fancy...."

"Hark! hark!" interrupted Virginia, in a voice of terror; "God preserve us!
There it is again!"

The nuns clasped their hands together, and sunk upon their knees. Lorenzo
looked round him eagerly, and was on the point of yielding to the fears which
already had possessed the women. Universal silence prevailed. He examined the
vault, but nothing was to be seen. He now prepared to address the nuns, and
ridicule their childish apprehensions, when his attention was arrested by a
deep and long drawn groan.

"What was that?" he cried and started. --

"There, Segnor!" said Hel^na: "Now you must be convinced! You have heard the
noise yourself! Now judge whether our terrors are imaginary. Since we have been
here, that groaning has been repeated almost every five minutes. Doubtless it
proceeds from some soul in pain who wishes to be prayed out of purgatory: but
none of us dare to ask it the question. As for me, were I to see an apparition,
the fright, I am very certain, would kill me out of hand."

As she said this, a second groan was heard yet more distinctly. The nuns
crossed themselves, and hastened to repeat their prayers against evil spirits.
Lorenzo listened attentively. He even thought that he could distinguish sounds
as of one speaking in complaint, but distance rendered them inarticulate. The
noise seemed to come from the midst of the small vault in which he and the nuns
then were, and which a multitude of passages branching out in various
directions formed into a sort of star. Lorenzo's curiosity, which was ever
awake, made him anxious to solve this mystery. He desired that silence might be
kept. The nuns obeyed him. All was hushed till the general stillness was again
disturbed by the groaning, which was repeated several times successively. He
perceived it to be most audible, when upon following the sound he was conducted
close to the shrine of St. Clare.

"The noise comes from hence," said he, "Whose is this statue?"

Helena, to whom he addressed the question, paused for a moment. Suddenly she
clapped her hands together.

"Aye!" cried she, "it must be so. I have discovered the meaning of these
groans."

The nuns crowded round her, and besought her eagerly to explain herself. She
gravely replied, that for time immemorial the statue had been famous for
performing miracles. From this she inferred, that the saint was concerned at
the conflagration of a convent which she protected, and expressed her grief by
audible lamentations. Not having equal faith in the miraculous saint, Lorenzo
did not think this solution of the mystery quite so satisfactory, as the nuns,
who subscribed to it without hesitation. In one point it is true that he agreed
with Helena. He suspected that the groans proceeded from the statue: the more
he listened the more was he confirmed in this idea. He drew nearer to the
image, designing to inspect it more closely: but perceiving his intention, the
nuns besought him for God's sake to desist, since, if he touched the statue,
his death was inevitable.

"And in what consists the danger?" said he.

"Mother of God! In what?" replied Helena, ever eager to relate a miraculous
adventure: "If you had only heard the hundredth part of those mavelous
stories about this statue, which the domina used to recount! She assured us
often and often, that if we only dared to lay a finger upon it, we might expect
the most fatal consequences. Among other things she told us, that a rob^er
having entered these vaults by night, he observed yonder ruby, whose value is
inestimable. Do you see it Segnor? It sparkles upon the third finger of the
hand in which she holds a crown of thorns. This jewel naturally excited the
villain's cupidity. He resolved to make himself master of it. For this purpose
he ascended the pedestal; he supported himself by grasping the saint's right
arm, and extended his own toward the ring. What was his surprise, when he saw
the statue's hand raised in a posture of menace, and heard her lips pronounce
his eternal perdition! Penetrated with awe and consternation, he desisted from
his attempt, and prepared to quit the sepulcher. In this he also failed. Flight
was denied him. He found it impossible to disengage the hand which rested upon
the right arm of the statue. In vain did he struggle: he remained fixed to the
image, till the insupportable and fiery anguish which darted itself through his
veins, compelled his shrieking for assistance. The sepulcher was now filled
with spectators. The villain confessed his sacrilege, and was only released by
the separation of his hand from his body. It has remained ever since fastened
to the image. The robber turned hermit, and led ever after an exemplary life.
But yet the saint's decree was performed; and tradition says, that he continues
to haunt the sepulcher, and implore St. Clare's pardon with groans and
lamentations. Now I think of it, those which we have just heard, may very
possibly have been uttered by the ghost of this sinner; but of this I will not
be positive. All that I can say is, that since that time no one has ever dared
to touch the statue. Then do not be fool hardy, good Segnor! For the love of
Heaven, give up your design, nor expose yourself unnecessarily to certain
destruction."

Not being convinced that his destruction would be so certain as Helena seemed
to think it, Lorenzo persisted in his resolution. The nuns besought him to
desist, in piteous terms, and even pointed out the robber's hand, which was in
effect still visible upon the arm of the statue. This proof, as they imagined,
must convince him. It was very far from doing so; and they were greatly
scandalized when he declared his suspicion that the dried and shrivelled
fingers had been placed there by order of the prioress. In spite of their
prayers and threats he approached the statue. He sprang over the iron rails
which defended it, and the saint underwent a thorough examination. The image at
first appeared to be of stone, but proved on further inspection to be formed of
no more solid materials than colored wood. He shook it, and attempted to move
it: but it appeared to be of a piece with the base which it stood upon. He
examined it over and over: still no clue guided him to the solution of this
mystery, for which the nuns were become equally solicitous, when they saw that
he touched the statue with impunity. He paused, and listened: the groans were
repeated at intervals, and he was convinced of being in the spot nearest to
them. He mused upon this singular event, and ran over the statue with inquiring
eyes. Suddenly they rested upon the shrivelled hand. It struck him that so
particular an injunction was not given without cause, not to touch the arm of
the image. He again ascended the pedestal: he examined the object of his
attention, and discovered a small knob of iron concealed between the saint's
shoulder and what was supposed to have been the hand of the robber. This
observation delighted him. He applied his fingers to the knob, and pressed it
down forcibly. Immediately a rumbling noise was heard within the statue, as if
a chain tightly stretched was flying back. Startled at the sound, the timid
nuns started away, prepared to hasten from the vault at the first appearance of
danger. All remaining quiet and still, they again gathered round Lorenzo, and
beheld his proceedings with anxious curiosity.

Finding that nothing followed this discovery, he descended. As he took his
hand from the saint, she trembled beneath his touch. This created new terrors
in the spectators, who believed the statue to be animated. Lorenzo's ideas upon
the subject were widely different. ^e easily comprehended, that the noise which
he had heard was occasioned by his having loosened a chain which attached the
image to its pedestal. He once more attempted to move it, and succeeded without
much exertion. He placed it upon the ground, and then perceived the pedestal to
be hollow, and covered at the opening with an heavy iron grate.

This excited such general curiosity, that the sisters forgot both their real
and imaginary dangers. Lorenzo proceeded to raise the grate, in which the nuns
assisted him to the utmost of their strength. The attempt was accomplished with
little difficulty. A deep abyss now presented itself before them, whose thick
obscurity the eye strove in vain to pierce. The rays of the lamp were too
feeble to be of much assistance. Nothing was discernible, save a flight of
rough unshapen steps, which sunk into the yawning gulf, and were soon lost in
darkness. The groans were heard no more: but all believed them to have ascended
from this cavern. As he bent over it, Lorenzo fancied that he distinguished
something bright twinkling through the gloom. He gazed attentively upon the
spot where it showed itself, and was convinced that he saw a small spark of
light, now visible, now disappearing. He communicated this circumstance to the
nuns: they also perceived the spark: but when he declared his intention to
descend into the cave, they united to oppose his resolution. All their
remonstrances could not prevail on him to alter it. None of them had courage
enough to accompany him; neither could he think of depriving them of the lamp.
Alone, therefore, and in darkness, he prepared to pursue his design, while the
nuns were contented to offer up prayers for his success and safety.

The steps were so narrow and uneven, that to descend them was like walking
down the side of a precipice. The obscurity by which he was surrounded,
rendered his footing insecure. He was obliged to proceed with great caution,
lest he should miss the steps and fall into the gulf below him. This he was
several times on the point of doing. However, he arrived sooner upon solid
ground than he had expected. He now found that the thick darkness and
impenetrable mists which reigned through the cavern, had deceived him into the
belief of its being much more profound than it proved upon inspection. He
reached the foot of the stairs unhurt: he now stopped, and looked round for the
spark, which had before caught his attention. He sought it in vain: all was
dark and gloomy. He listened for the groans; but his ear caught no sound except
the distant murmur of the nuns above, as in low voices they repeated their ave
marias. He stood irresolute to which side be should address his steps. At all
events, he determined to proceed: he did so, but slowly, fearful lest, instead
of approaching, he should be retiring from the object of his search. The groans
seemed to announce one in pain, or at least in sorrow, and he hoped to have the
power of relieving the mourner's (...). A plaintive tone, sounding at no great
distance, at length reached his hearing: he bent his course joyfully toward
it. It became more audible as he advanced; and he soon beheld again the spark
of (...), which a low projecting wall had hitherto concealed from him.

It proceeded from a small lamp which was placed upon ^n heap of stones, and
whose faint and melancholy rays served rather to point out than dispel the
horrors of a narrow gloomy dungeon, formed in one side of the cavern: it also
showed several other recesses of similar construction, but whose depth was
buried in obscurity. Coldly played the light upon the damp walls, whose
dew-stained surface gave back a feeble reflection. A thick and pestilential fog
clouded the height of the vaulted dungeon. As Lorenzo advanced, he felt a
piercing chillness spread itself through his veins. The frequent groans still
engaged him to move forwards. He turned toward them, and by the lamp's
glimmering beams beheld in a corner of this loathsome abode, a creature
stretched upon a bed of straw, so wretched, so emaciated, so pale, that he
doubted to think her woman. She was half naked: her long dishevelled hair fell
in disorder over her face, and almost entirely concealed it. One wasted arm
hung listlessly upon a tattered rug, which covered her convulsed and shivering
limbs: the other was wrapped round a small bundle, and held it closely to her
bosom. A large rosary lay near her: opposite to her was a crucifix, on which
she bent her sunk eyes fixedly, and by her side stood a basket and a small
earthen pitcher.

Lorenzo stopped: he was petrified with horror. He gazed upon the miserable
object with disgust and pity. He trembled at the spectacle: he grew sick at
heart: his strength failed him, and his limbs were unable to support his
weight. He was obliged to lean against the low wall which was near him, unable
to go forward or to address the sufferer. She cast her eyes toward the
staircase: the wall concealed Lorenzo, and she observed him not.

"No one comes!" she at length murmured.

As she spoke, her voice was hollow, and rattled in her throat: she sighed
bitterly.

"No one comes!" she repeated: "no! they have forgotten me! they will come no
more!"

She paused for a moment; then continued mournfully:

"Two days! two long, long days, and yet no food! and yet no hope, no comfort!
Foolish woman! how can I wish to lengthen a life so wretched! -- Yet such a
death! O God! to perish by such a death! to linger out such ages in torture!
Till now, I knew not what it was to hunger! -- Hark! -- No! no one comes* they
will come no more."

She was silent. She shivered, and drew the rug over her naked shoulders:

"I am very cold: I am still unused to the damps of this dungeon: it is strange:
but no matter. Colder shall I soon be, and yet not feel it. I shall be cold,
cold as thou art."

She looked at the bundle, which lay upon her breast. She bent over it, and
kissed it; then drew back hastily, and shuddered with disgust:

"It was once so sweet! It would have been so lovely, so like him! I have lost
it for ever. How a few days have changed it! I should not know it again myself!
Yet it is dear to me. God! how dear! -- I will forget what it is! I will only
remember what it was, and love it as well as when it was so sweet! so lovely!
so like him! -- I thought that I had wept away all my tears, but here is our
still lingering."

She wiped her eyes with a tress of her hair. She put out her hand for the
pitcher, and reached it with difficulty. She cast into it a look of hopeless
inquiry. She sighed, and replaced it upon the ground.

"Quite a void! -- Not a drop! -- Not one drop left to cool my scorched up
burning palate! -- Now would I give treasures for a draught of water! -- And
they are God's servants who make me suffer thus! -- They think themselves holy,
while they torture me like fiends! -- They are cruel and unfeeling; and it is
they who bid me repent; and it is they who threaten me with eternal perdition!
Savior, Savior! you think not so!"

She again fixed her eyes upon the crucifix, took her rosary, and, while she
told her beads, the quick motion of her lips declared her to be praying with
fervency.

While he listened to her melancholy accents, Lorenzo's sensibility became yet
more violently affected. The first sight of such misery had given a sensible
shock to his feelings: but that being past, he now advanced toward the
captive. She heard his steps, and, uttering a cry of joy, dropped the rosary.

"Hark! hark! hark!" she cried, "some one comes!"

She strove to raise herself, but her strength was unequal to the attempt; she
fell back, and, as she sunk again upon the bed of straw, Lorenzo heard the
rattling of heavy chains. He still approached, while the prisoner thus
continued:

"Is it you, Camilla? You are come then at last? Oh! it was time! I thought
that you had forsaken me; that I was doomed to perish of hunger. Give me to
drink, Camilla, for pity's sake; I am faint with long fasting, and grown so
weak that I cannot raise myself from the ground. Good Camilla, give me to
drink, lest I expire before you."

Fearing that surprise in her enfeebled state might be fatal, Lorenzo was at a
loss how to address her.

"It is not Camilla," said he at length, speaking in a low and gentle voice.

"Who is it then?" replied the sufferer; "Alix, perhaps, or Violante. My eyes
are grown so dim and feeble, that I cannot distinguish your features; but
whichever it is, if your breast is sensible of the least compassion, if you are
not more cruel than wolves and tigers, take pity on my sufferings. You know
that I am dying for want of sustenance. This is the third day since these lips
have received nourishment. Do you bring me food? Or come you only to announce
my death, and learn how long I have yet to exist in agony?"

"You mistake my business," replied Lorenzo; "I am no emissary of the cruel
prioress. I pity your sorrows, and come hither to relieve them."

"To relieve them?" repeated the captive; "said you to relieve them?"

At the same time starting from the ground, and supporting herself upon her
hands, she gazed upon the stranger earnestly.

"Great God! -- Is it no illusion? -- A man? Speak! Who are you? What brings
you hither? Come you to save me, to restore me to liberty, to life and light?
Oh! speak, speak quickly, lest I encourage an hope whose disappointment will
destroy me."

"Be calm!" replied Lorenzo, in a voice soothing and compassionate; "the domina
of whose cruelty you complain, has already paid the forfeit of her offenses:
you have nothing more to fear from her. A few minutes will restore you to
liberty and the embraces of your friends, from whom you have been secluded. You
may rely upon my protection. Give me your hand, and be not fearful. Let me
conduct you where you may receive those attentions which your feeble state
requires."

"Oh! yes! yes! yes!" cried the prisoner with an exulting shriek; "there is a
God then, and a just one! Joy! Joy! I shall once more breathe the fresh air,
and view the light of the glorious sunbeams! I will go with you! Stranger, I
will go with you! Oh! Heaven will bless you for pitying an unfortunate! But
this too must go with me," she added, pointing to the small bundle, which she
still clasped to her bosom; "I cannot part with this. I will bear it away: it
shall convince the world how dreadful are the abodes so falsely termed
religious. Good stranger! lend me your hand to rise: I am faint with want, and
sorrow, and sickness, and my strength has quite forsaken me! So, that is well!"

As Lorenzo stooped to raise her, the beams of the lamp struck full upon his
face.

"Almighty God!" she exclaimed: "(...) it possible? -- That look! those
features! -- Oh! yes, it is, it is....."

She extended her arms to throw them round him, but her enfeebled frame was
unable to sustain the emotions which agitated her bosom. She fainted, and again
sunk upon the bed of straw.

Lorenzo was surprised at her last exclamation. He thought that he had before
heard such accents as her hollow voice had just formed, but where, he could not
remember. He saw that in her dangerous situation immediate physical aid was
absolutely necessary, and he hastened to convey her from the dungeon. He was at
first prevented from doing so by a strong chain fastened round the prisoner's
body, and fixing her to the neighboring wall. However, his natural strength
being aided by anxiety to relieve the unfortunate, he soon forced out the
staple, to which one end of the chain was attached: then taking the captive in
his arms, he bent his course toward the staircase. The rays of the lamp above,
as well as the murmur of female voices, guided his steps. He gained the stairs,
and in a few minutes after arrived at the iron grate.

The nuns during his absence had been terribly tormented by curiosity and
apprehension. They were equally surprised and delighted on seeing him suddenly
emerge from the cave. Every heart was filled with compassion for the miserable
creature, whom he bore in his arms. While the nuns, and Virginia in particular,
employed themselves in (...) to recall her to her senses, Lorenzo related in a
few words the manner of his finding her. He then observed to them, that by this
time the tumult must have been quelled, and that he could now conduct them to
their friends without danger. All were eager to quit the sepulcher. Still, to
prevent all possibility of ill usage, they besought Lorenzo to venture out
first alone, and examine whether the coast was clear. With this request he
complied. Helena offered to conduct them to the staircase, and they were on the
point of departing when a strong light flashed from several passages upon the
adjacent walls. At the same time steps were heard of people approaching
hastily, and whose number seemed to be considerable. The nuns were greatly
alarmed at this circumstance; they supposed their retreat to be discovered, and
the rioters to be advancing in pursuit of them. Hastily quitting the prisoner,
who remained insensible, they crowded round Lorenzo, and claimed his promise to
protect them. Virginia alone forgot her own danger by striving to relieve the
sorrows of another. She supported the sufferer's head upon her knees, bathing
her temples with rose water, chasing her cold hands, and sprinkling her face
with tears which were drawn from her by compassion. The strangers approaching
nearer, Lorenzo was enabled to dispel the fears of the suppliants. His name
pronounced by a number of voices, among which he distinguished the duke's,
pealed along the vaults, and convinced him that he was the object of their
search. He communicated this intelligence to the nuns, who received it with
rapture. A few moments after confirmed this idea. Don Ramirez as well as the
duke appeared, followed by attendants with torches. They had been seeking him
through the vaults, in order to let him know that the mob was dispersed, and
the riot entirely over. Lorenzo recounted briefly his adventure in the cavern,
and explained how much the unknown was in want of medical assistance. He
besought the duke to take charge of her, as well as of the nuns and pensioners.

"As for me," said he, "other cares demand my attention. While you with one
half of the archers convey these ladies to their respective homes, I wish the
other half to be left with me. I will examine the cavern below, and pervade the
most secret recesses of the sepulcher. I cannot rest till convinced that yonder
wretched victim was the only one confined by superstition in these vaults."

The duke applauded his intention. Don Ramirez offered to assist him in his
inquiry, and his proposal was accepted with gratitude. The nuns, having made
their acknowledgments to Lorenzo, committed themselves to the care of his
uncle, and were conducted from the sepulcher. Virginia requested that the
unknown might be given to her in charge, and promised to let Lorenzo know,
whenever she was sufficiently recovered to accept his visits. In truth she made
this promise more from consideration for herself, than for either Lorenzo or
the captive. She had witnessed his politeness, gentleness, and intrepidity with
sensible emotion. She wished earnestly to preserve his acquaintance; and in
addition to the sentiments of pity which the prisoner excited, she hoped that
her attention to this unfortunate would raise her a degree in the esteem of
Lorenzo. She had no occasion to trouble herself upon this head. The kindness
already displayed by her, and the tender concern which she had shown for the
sufferer, had gained her an exalted place in his good graces. While occupied in
alleviating the captive's sorrows, the nature of her employment adorned her
with new charms, and rendered her beauty a thousand times more interesting.
Lorenzo viewed her with admiration and delight: he considered her as a
ministering angel descended to the aid of afflicted innocence; nor could his
heart have resisted her attractions, had it not been steeled by the remembrance
of Antonia.

The duke now conveyed the nuns in safety to the dwellings of their respective
friends. The rescued prisoner was still insensible, and gave no signs of life,
except by occasional groans. She was borne upon a sort of litter. Virginia, who
was constantly by the side of it, was apprehensive that, exhausted by long
abstinence, and shaken by the sudden change from bonds and darkness to liberty
and light, her frame would never get the better of the shock. Lorenzo and Don
Ramirez still remained in the sepulcher. After deliberating upon their
proceedings, it was resolved that, to prevent losing time, the archers should
be divided into two bodies: that with one, Don Ramirez should examine (...)
cavern, while Lorenzo, with the other, might penetrate into the further vaults.
This being arranged, and his followers being provided with torches, Don Ramirez
advanced to the cavern. He had already descended some steps, when he heard
people approaching hastily from the interior part of the sepulcher. This
surprised him, and he quitted the cave precipitately.

"Do you hear footsteps?" said Lorenzo. "Let us bend our course toward them.
It Is from this side that they seem to proceed."

At that moment a loud and piercing shriek induced him to quicken his steps.

"Help! help, for God's sake!" cried a voice, whose melodious tone penetrated
Lorenzo's heart with terror.

He flew toward the cry with the rapidity of lightning, (...) was followed by
Ramirez with equal swif^ness.

CHAP. XI.
Great Heaven! How frail thy creature man is made:
How by himself insensibly betrayed!
In our own strength unhapp^ly secure,
Too little cautious of the adverse power,
On pleasure's flowery brink we idly stray,
Masters as yet of our returning way;
Till the strong gusts of raging passion rise,
Till the dire tempest mingles earth and skies,
And, swift into the boundless ocean borne,
Our foolish confidence too late we mourn;
Round our devoted heads the billows beat,
And from our troubled view the ^essening lands retreat.
PRIOR.
ALL this while Ambrosio was unconscious of the dreadful scenes which were
passing so near. The execution of his designs upon Antonia employed his every
thought. Hitherto he was satisfied with the success of his plans. Antonia had
drank the opiate, was buried in the vaults of St. Clare, and absolutely in his
disposal. Matilda, who was well acquainted with the nature and effects of the
soporific medicine, had computed that it would not cease to operate till one in
the morning. For that hour he waited with impatience. The festival of St. Clare
presented him with a favorable opportunity of consummating his crime. He was
certain that the friars and nuns would be engaged in the procession, and that
he had no cause to dread an interruption (...) himself at the head of the
monks, he (...) desired to be excused. He doubted not* that being beyond the
reach of help, cut off from all the world, and totally in his power, Antonia
would fall an easy victim to his villainy. The affection which he had ever
expressed for him, warranted this persuasion: but he resolved, that, should she
prove obstinate, no consideration whatever should be permitted to counteract
his plans. Secure from a discovery, he shuddered not at the idea of employing
force; or, if he felt any repugnance, it arose not from a principle of shame or
compassion, but from his feeling for Antonia the most sincere and ardent
affection.

The monks quitted the abbey at midnight. Matilda was among the choristers, and
led the chant. Ambrosio was left by himself, and at liberty to pursue his own
inclinations. Convinced that no one remained behind to watch his motions, or
disturb his pleasures, he now hastened to the western aisles. His heart beating
with hope, not unmingled with anxiety, he crossed the garden, unlocked the door
which admitted him (...) the cemetery, and in a few minutes he stood before the
vaults. Here he paused: he looked round him with suspicion, conscious that his
business was unfit for any other eye. As he stood in hesitation, he heard the
melancholy shriek of the screech owl: the wind rattled loudly against the
windows of the adjacent convent, and, as the current swept by him, bore with it
the faint notes of the chant of choristers. He opened the door cautiously, as
if fearing to be overheard; he entered, and closed it again after him. Guided
by his lamp, he threaded the long passages, in whose windings Matilda had
instructed him, and reached the private vault which contained his sleeping
mistress.

Its entrance was by no means easy to discover; but this was no obstacle to
Ambrosio, who at the time of Antonia's funeral had observed it too carefully to
be deceived. He found the door, which was unfastened, pushed it open, and
descended into the dungeon. He approached the humble tomb in which Antonia
reposed. He had provided himself with an iron crow and a pickaxe: but this
precaution was unnecessary. The grate was slightly fastened on the outside: he
raised it, and, placing the lamp upon its ridge, bent silently over the tomb.
By the side of three putrid half corrupted bodies lay the sleeping beauty. A
lively red, the forerunner of returning animation, had already spread itself
over her cheeks; and as wrapped in her shroud she reclined upon her funeral
bier, she seemed to smile at the images of death around her. While he gazed
upon the rotting bones and disgusting figures, who perhaps were once as sweet
and lovely, Ambrosio thought upon Elvira, by him reduced to the same state. As
the memory of that horrid act glanced upon his mind, it was clouded with a
gloomy horror; yet it served but to strengthen his resolution to destroy
Antonia's honor.

"For your sake, fatal beauty!" murmured the monk while gazing on his devoted
prey, "for your sake have I committed this murder, and sold myself to eternal
tortures. Now you are in my power: the produce of my guilt will at least be
mine. Hope not that your prayers breathed in tones of unequalled melody, your
bright eyes filled with tears, and your hands lifted in supplication, as when
seeking in penitence the Virgin's pardon: hope not that your moving innocence,
your beauteous grief, or all your suppliant arts, shall ransom you from my
embraces. Before the break of day, mine you must, and mine you shall be!"

"Antonia! wretched Antonia! Too soon were the villain's words verified.
Heaven, for purposes no doubt wise in themselves, but whose aim the sight of
mortals is too weak to discern, interposed not in the unhappy girl's behalf.
Animation was only restored to make her sensible that the monk was a villain,
and herself undone!

Scarcely had he succeeded in his design, when he shuddered at himself, and the
means by which it was effected. The very excess of his former passion for
Antonia now contributed to inspire him with disgust; and a secret impulse made
him feel how base and unmanly was the crime which he had just committed. He
started hastily from her. She, who so lately had been the object of his
adoration, now raised no other sentiment in his heart than aversion and rage.
He turned away from her; or, if his eyes rested upon her figure involuntarily,
it was only to dart upon her looks of hate. The unfortunate remained stretched
upon the earth in silent despair; the tears chased each other slowly down her
cheeks, and her bosom heaved with frequent sobs. Oppressed with grief, she
continued for some time in this state of torpidity. At length she rose with
difficulty, and dragging her feeble steps toward the door, prepared to quit
the dungeon.

The sound of her footsteps roused the monk from his sullen apathy. Starting
from the tomb, against which he reclined, while his eyes wandered over the
images of corruption contained in it, he pursued the victim of his brutality,
and soon overtook her. He seized her by the arm, and violently forced her back
into the dungeon.

"Whither go you?" he cried in a stern voice; "return this instant!"

Antonia trembled at the fury of his countenance.

"What would you more?" she said with timidity: "Is not my ruin completed? Am I
not undone, undone for ever? Is not your cruelty contented, or have I yet more
to suffer? Let me depart, let me return to my home, and weep unrestrained my
shame and my affliction!"

"Return to your home?" repeated the monk, with bitter and contemptuous
mockery; then suddenly his eyes flaming with passion, "What? that you may
denounce me to the world? that you may proclaim me a hypocrite, a betrayer, a
monster of cruelty, lust and ingratitude? No, no, no! I know well the whole
weight of my offenses; well, that your complaints would be too just, and my
crimes too notorious! You shall not from hence to tell Madrid that I am a
villain; that my conscience is loaded with sins, which make me despair of
Heaven's pardon. Wretched girl, you must stay here with me! Here amidst these
lonely tombs, these images of death, these rotting, loathsome, corrupted
bodies! here shall you stay, and witness my sufferings; witness what it is to
feel the horrors of despondency, and breathe the last groan in blasphemy and
curses! -- And whom am I to thank for this! What seduced me into crimes, whose
bare remembrance makes me shudder? Fatal witch! was it not thy beauty? Have you
not plunged my soul in shame? Nay, at this moment, does not that angel look bid
me despair of God's forgiveness? Oh! when I stand before his judgment throne,
that look will suffice to damn me! " When we shall meet at count,
" That look of thine will hurl my soul from Heaven,
" And fiends will snatch at it!
OTHELLO,
You will tell my judge, that you were happy, till I saw you; that you were
innocent till I polluted you! You will come with those tearful eyes, those
cheeks pale and ghastly, those hands lifted in supplication, as when you sought
from me that mercy which I gave not! Then will my perdition be certain! Then
will come your mother's ghost, and hurl me down into the dwellings of fiends,
and flames, and furies, and everlasting torments! And it is you who will accuse
me! it is you who will cause my eternal anguish! -- you, wretched girl! you!
you!"

As he thundered out these words, he violently grasped Antonia's arm, and
spurned the earth with delirious fury.

Supposing his brain to be turned, Antonia sunk in terror upon her knees; she
lifted up her hands, and her voice almost died away ere she could give it
utterance.

"Spare me! spare me!" she murmured with difficulty.

"Silence!" cried the friar madly, and dashed her upon the ground --

He quitted her, and paced the dungeon with a wild and disordered air. His eyes
rolled fearfully; Antonia trembled whenever she met their gaze. He seemed to
meditate on something horrible, and she gave up all hopes of escaping from the
sepulcher with life. Yet in harboring this idea she did him injustice. Amidst
the horror and disgust to which his soul was a prey, pity for his victim still
held a place in it. The storm of passion once over, he would have given worlds
had he possessed them, to have restored to her that innocence of which his
unbridled passions had deprived her. Of the desires which had urged him to the
crime, no trace was left in his bosom: his nature seemed to revolt at their
very idea, and fain would he have wiped from his memory the scene which had
just passed. As his gloomy rage abated, in proportion did his compassion
augment for Antonia. He stopped, and would have spoken to her words of comfort;
but he knew not from whence to draw them, and remained gazing upon her with
mournful wildness. Her situation seemed so hopeless, so woe begone, as to
baffle mortal power to relieve her. What could he do for her? Her peace of mind
was lost, her honor irreparably ruined. She was cut off for ever from society,
nor dared he give her back to it. He was conscious that, were she to appear in
the world again, his guilt would be revealed, and his punishment inevitable. To
one so laden with crimes, death came armed with double terrors. Yet, should he
restore Antonia to light, and stand the chance of her betraying him, how
miserable a prospect would present itself before her! She could never hope to
be creditably established; she would be marked with infamy, and condemned to
sorrow and solitude for the remainder of her existence. What was the
alternative? A resolution far more terrible for Antonia, but which at least
would ensure the abbot's safety. He determined to leave the world persuaded of
her death, and to retain her a captive in this gloomy prison. There he proposed
to visit her every night, to bring her food, to profess his penitence, and
mingle his tears with hers. The monk felt that this resolution was unjust and
cruel; but it was his only means to prevent Antonia from publishing his guilt
and her own infamy. Should he release her, he could not depend upon her
silence. His offense was too flagrant to permit his hoping for her forgiveness.
Besides, her reappearing would excite universal curiosity, and the violence of
her affliction would prevent her from concealing its cause. He determined,
therefore, that Antonia should remain a prisoner in the dungeon.

He approached her with confusion painted on his countenance. He ^^ised her
from the ground -- her hand trembled as he took it, and he dropped it again as
if he had touched a serpent. Nature seemed to recoil at the touch. He felt
himself at once repulsed from and attracted toward her, yet could account for
neither sentiment. There was something in her look which penetrated him with
horror; and though his understanding was still ignorant of it, conscience
pointed out to him the whole extent of his crime. In hurried accents, yet the
gentlest he could find, while his eye was averted, and his voice scarcely
audible, he strove to console her under a misfortune which now could not be
avoided. He declared himself sincerely penitent, and that he would gladly shed
a drop of his blood for every tear which his barbarity had forced from her.
Wretched and hopeless, Antonia listened to him in silent grief; but when he
announced her confinement in the sepulcher, that dreadful doom, to which even
death seemed preferable, roused her from her insensibility at once. To linger
out a life of misery in a narrow loathsome cell, know to exist by no human
being save her betrayer, surrounded by mouldering corses, breathing the
pestilential air of corruption, never more to behold the light, or drink the
pure gale of heaven -- the idea was more terrible than she could support. It
conquered even her abhorrence of the friar. Again she sunk upon her knees; she
besought his compassion in terms the most pathetic and urgent: she promised,
would he but restore her to liberty, to conceal her injuries from the world; to
assign any reasons for her reappearance, which he might judge proper; and, in
order to prevent the least suspicion from falling upon him, she offered to quit
Madrid immediately. Her entreaties were so urgent as to make a considerable
impression upon the monk. He reflected, that in keeping her concealed as he had
at first intended, he was adding a fresh injury to those which she had already
suffered; and that if she adhered to her promises, whether she was confined or
at liberty, his life and reputation were equally secure. On the other hand, he
trembled lest in her affliction Antonia should unintentionally break her
engagement, or that her excessive simplicity and ignorance of deceit should
permit some one more artful to surprise her secret. However well founded were
these apprehensions, compassion, and a sincere wish to repair his fault as much
as possible, solicited his complying with the prayers of his suppliant. The
difficulty of coloring Antonia's unexpected return to life, after her supposed
death and public interment, was the only point which kept him irresolute. He
was still pondering on the means of removing this obstacle, when he heard the
sound of feet approaching with precipitation. The door of the vault was thrown
open, and Matilda rushed in, evidently much confused and terrified.

On seeing a stranger enter, Antonia uttered a cry of joy; but her hopes of
receiving succor from him were soon dissipated. The supposed novice, without
expressing the least surprise at finding a woman alone with the monk, in so
strange a place, and at so late an hour, addressed him thus without losing a
moment:

"What is to be done? We are lost, unless some speedy means is found of
dispelling the rioters. Ambrosio, the convent of St. Clare is on fire; the
prioress has fallen a victim to the fury of the mob. Already is the abbey
menaced with a similar fate. Alarmed at the threats of the people, the monks
seek for you every where. They imagine that your authority alone will suffice
to calm this disturbance. No one knows what is become of you, and your absence
creates universal astonishment and despair. I profited by the confusion, and
fled hither to warn you of the danger."

"This will soon be remedied," answered the abbot; I will hasten back to my
cell: a trivial reason will account for my having been missed."

"Impossible!" rejoined Matilda: "The sepulcher is filled with archers. Lorenzo
de Medina, with several officers of the Inquisition, searches through the
vaults, and pervades every passage. You will be intercepted in your flight;
your reasons for being at this late hour in the sepulcher will be examined;
Antonia will be found, and then you are undone forever."

"Lorenzo de Medina? Officers of the Inquisition? What brings them here? Seek
they for me? Am I then suspected? Oh! speak* Matilda! answer me in pity!"

"As yet they do not think of you; but I fear that they will ere long. Your
only chance of escaping their notice rests upon the difficulty of exploring
this vault. The door is artfully hidden; happily it may not be observed, and we
may remain concealed till the search is over."

"But Antonia...... Should the inquisitors draw near, and her cries be
heard....."

"Thus I remove that danger!" interrupted Matilda.

At the same time drawing a poniard, she rushed upon her devoted prey.

"Hold! hold!" cried Ambrosio, seizing her hand, and wresting from it the
already lifted weapon. "What would you do, cruel woman? The unfortunate has
already suffered but too much, thanks to your pernicious counsels! Would to God
that I had never followed them! Would to God that I had never seen your face!"

Matilda darted upon him a look of scorn.

"Absurd!" she exclaimed with an air of passion and majesty, which impressed
the monk with awe. "After robbing her of all that made it dear, can you fear to
deprive her of a life so miserable? But it is well! Let her live to convince you
of your folly. I abandon you to your evil distiny! I disclaim your alliance!
Who trembles to commit so insignificant a crime, deserves not my protection.
Hark! hark! Ambrosio; hear you not the archers? They come, and your destruction
is inevitable!"

At this moment the abbot heard the sound of distant voices. He flew to close
the door, on whose concealment his safety depended, and which Matilda had
neglected to fasten. Ere he could reach it, he saw Antonia glide suddenly by
him, rush through the door, and fly toward the noise with the swiftness of an
arrow. She had listened attentively to Matilda; she heard Lorenzo's name
mentioned, and resolved to risk every thing to throw herself under his
protection. The door was open. The sounds convinced her that the archers could
be at no great distance. She mustered up her little remaining strength, rushed
by the monk ere he perceived her design, and bent her course rapidly toward
the voices. As soon as he recovered from his first surprise, the abbot failed
not to pursue her. In vain did Antonia redouble her speed, and stretch every
nerve to the utmost. Her enemy gained upon her every moment: she heard his
steps close after her, and felt the heat of his breath glow upon her neck. He
overtook her; he twisted his hand in the ringlets of her streaming hair, and
attempted to drag her back with him to the dungeon. Antonia resisted with all
her strength. She folded her arms round a pillar which supported the roof, and
shrieked loudly for assistance. In vain did the monk strive to threaten her to
silence.

"Help!" she continued to exclaim: "help! help! for God's sake!"

Quickened by her cries, the sound of footsteps was heard approaching. The
abbot expected every moment to see the inquisitors arrive. Antonia still
resisted, and he now enforced her silence by means the most horrible and
inhuman. He still grasped Matilda's dagger: without allowing himself a moment's
reflection, he raised it, and plunged it twice in the bosom of Antonia. She
shrieked, and sunk upon the ground. The monk endeavored to bear her away with
him, but she still embraced the pillar firmly. At that instant the light of
approaching torches flashed upon the walls. Dreading a discovery, Ambrosio was
compelled to abandon his victim, and hastily fled back to the vault, where he
had left Matilda.

He fled not unobserved. Don Ramirez, happening to arrive the first, perceived
a female bleeding upon the ground, and a man flying from the spot, whose
confusion betrayed him for the murderer. He instantly pursued the fugitive,
with some part of the archers, while the others remained with Lorenzo to
protect the wounded stranger. They raised her, and supported her in their arms.
She had fainted from excess of pain, but soon gave signs of returning life. She
opened her eyes: and on lifting up her head, the quantity of fair hair fell
back, which till then had obscured her features.

"God Almighty! it is Antonia!"

Such was Lorenzo's exclamation, while he snatched her from the attendant's
arms, and clasped her in his own.

Though aimed by an uncertain hand, the poniard had answered but too well the
purpose of its employer. The wounds were mortal, and Antonia was conscious that
she never could recover. Yet the few moments which remained for her, were
moments of happiness. The concern expressed upon Lorenzo's countenance, the
frantic fondness of his complaints, and his earnest inquiries respecting her
wounds, convinced her beyond a doubt that his affections were her own. She
would not be removed from the vaults, fearing lest motion should only hasten
her death: and she was unwilling to lose those moments which she passed in
receiving proofs of Lorenzo's love, and assuring him of her own. She told him,
that had she still been undefiled she might have lamented the loss of life; but
that, deprived of honor and branded with shame, death was to her a blessing:
she could not have been his wife; and that hope being denied her, she resigned
herself to the grave without one sigh of regret. She bade him take courage,
conjured him not to abandon himself to fruitless sorrow, and declared that she
mourned to leave nothing in the whole world but him. While every sweet accent
increased rather than lightened Lorenzo's grief, she continued to converse with
him till the moment of dissolution. Her voice grew faint, and scarcely audible;
a thick cloud spread itself over her eyes; her heart beat slow and irregular,
and every instant seemed to announce that her fate was near at hand.

She lay, her head reclining upon Lorenzo's bosom, and her lips still murmuring
to him words of comfort. She was interrupted by the convent bell, as, tolling
at a distance, it struck the hour. Suddenly Antonia's eyes sparkled with
celestial brightness: her frame seemed to have received new strength and
animation. She started from her lover's arms.

"Three o'clock," she cried. "Mother, I come!"

She clasped her hands and sunk lifeless upon the ground. Lorenzo, in agony,
threw himself beside her. He tore his hair, beat his breast, and refused to be
separated from the corse. At length his force being exhausted, he suffered
himself to be led from the vault, and was conveyed to the palace de Medina
scarcely more alive than the unfortunate Antonia.

In the mean while, though closely pursued, Ambrosio succeeded in regaining the
vault. The door was already fastened when Don Ramirez arrived, and much time
elapsed ere the fugitive's retreat was discovered. But nothing can resist
perseverance. Though so artfully concealed, the door could not escape the
vigilance of the archers. They forced it open, and entered the vault to the
infinite dismay of Ambrosio and his companion. The monk's confusion, his
attempt to hide himself, his rapid flight, and the blood sprinkled upon his
clothes, left no room to doubt his being Antonia's murderer. But when he was
recognized for the immaculate Ambrosio, "the man of holiness," the idol of
Madrid; the faculties of the spectators were chained up in surprise, and
scarcely could they persuade themselves that what they saw was no vision. The
abbot strove not to vindicate himself, but preserved a sullen silence. He was
secured and bound. The same precaution was taken with Matilda. Her cowl being
removed, the delicacy of her features and profusion of her golden hair betrayed
her sex; and this incident created fresh amazement. The dagger was also found
in the tomb, where the monk had thrown it; and the dungeon having undergone a
thorough search, the two culprits were conveyed to the prisons of the
Inquisition.

Don Ramirez took care that the populace should remain ignorant both of the
crimes and profession of the captives. He feared a repetition of the riots,
which had followed the apprehending the prioress of St. Clare. He contented
himself with stating to the Capuchins the guilt of their superior. To avoid the
shame of a public accusation, and dreading the popular fury, from which they
had already saved their abbey with much difficulty, the monks readily permitted
the inquisitors to search their mansion without noise. No fresh discoveries
were made. The effects found in the abbot's and Matilda's cells were seized,
and carried to the Inquisition to be produced in evidence. Every thing else
remained in its former position, and order and tranquillity once more prevailed
through Madrid.

St. Clare's convent was completely ruined by the united ravages of the mob and
conflagration. Nothing remained of it but the principal walls, whose thickness
and solidity had preserved them from the flames. The nuns who had belonged to
it were obliged, in consequence, to disperse themselves into other societies:
but the prejudice against them ran high, and the superiors were very unwilling
to admit them. However, most of them being related to families the most
distinguished for their riches, birth, and power, the several convents were
compelled to receive them, though they did it with a very ill grace. This
prejudice was extremely false and unjustifiable. After a close investigation,
it was proved that all in the convent were persuaded that Agnes had died in
childbed, except the four nuns whom St. Ursula had pointed out. These had
fallen victims to the popular fury, as had also several who were perfectly
innocent and unconscious of the whole affair. Blinded by resentment, the mob
had sacrificed every nun who fell into their hands: they who escaped were
entirely indebted to the duke de Medina's prudence and moderation. Of this they
were conscious, and felt for that nobleman a proper sense of gratitude.

Virginia was not the most sparing of her thanks; she wished equally to make a
proper return for his attentions, and to obtain the good graces of Lorenzo's
uncle. In this she easily succeeded. The duke beheld her beauty with wonder and
admiration; and while his eyes were enchanted with her form, the sweetness of
her manners, and her tender concern for the suffering nun, prepossessed his
heart in her favor. This Virginia had discernment enough to perceive, and she
redoubled her attention to the invalid. When he parted from her at the door of
her father's palace, the duke entreated permission to inquire occasionally
after her health. His request was readily granted; Virginia assured him, that
the marquis de Villa Franca would be proud of an opportunity to thank him in
person for the protection afforded to her. They now separated; he enchanted
with her beauty and gentleness, and she much pleased with him, and more with
his nephew.

On entering the palace, Virginia's first care was to summon the family
physician, and take care of her unknown charge. Her mother hastened to share
with her the charitable office. Alarmed by the riots, and trembling for his
daughter's safety, who was his only child, the marquis had flown to St. Clare's
convent, and was still employed in seeking her. Messengers were now dispatched
on all sides to inform him, that he would find her safe at his hotel, and
desire him to hasten thither immediately. His absence gave Virginia liberty to
bestow her whole attention upon her patient; and though much disordered herself
by the adventures of the night, no persuasion could induce her to quit the bed
side of the sufferer. Her constitution being much enfeebled by want and sorrow,
it was some time before the stranger was restored to her senses. She found
great difficulty in swallowing the medicines prescribed to her; but this
obstacle being removed, she easily conquered her disease, which proceeded from
nothing but weakness. The attention which was paid her, the wholesome food to
which she had been long a stranger, and her joy at being restored to liberty,
to society, and, as she dared to hope, to love, all this combined to her speedy
reestablishment. From the first moment of knowing her, her melancholy
situation, her sufferings almost unparalleled, had gained the affections of her
amiable hostess. Virginia felt for her the most lively interest; but how was
she delighted, when, her guest being sufficiently recovered to relate her
history, she recognized in the captive nun the sister of Lorenzo!

This victim of monastic cruelty was indeed no other than the unfortunate
Agnes. During her abode in the convent, she had been well known to Virginia;
but her emaciated form, her features altered by affliction, her death
universally credited, and her overgrown and matted hair which hung over her
face and bosom in disorder, at first had prevented her being recollected. The
prioress had put every artifice in practice to induce Virginia to take the
veil; for the heiress of Villa Franca would have been no despicable
acquisition. Her seeming kindness and unremitted attention so far succeeded,
that he (...) relation began to think seriously upon compliance. Better
instructed in the disgust and ennui of a monastic life, Agnes had penetrated
the designs of the domina. She trembled for the innocent girl, and endeavored
to make her sensible of her error. She painted in their true colors the
numerous inconveniences attached to a convent, the continued restraint, the low
jealousies, the petty intrigues, the servile court and gross flattery expected
by the superior. She then bade Virginia reflect on the brilliant prospect which
presented itself before her. The idol of her parents, the admiration of Madrid,
endowed by nature and education with every perfection of person and mind, she
might look forward to an establishment the most fortunate. Her riches furnished
her with the means of exercising, in their fullest extent, charity and
benevolence, those virtues so dear to her; and her stay in the world would
enable her discovering objects worthy her protection, which could not be done
in the seclusion of a convent.

Her persuasions induced Virginia to lay aside all thoughts of the vei^, but
another argument, not used by Agnes, had more weight with her than all the
others put together. She had seen Lorenzo when he visited his sister at the
grate; his person pleased her, and her conversations with Agnes generally used
to terminate in some question about her brother. She, who doted upon Lorenzo,
wished for no better than an opportunity to trumpet out his praise. She spoke
of him in terms of rapture; and, to convince her auditor how just were his
sentiments, how cultivated his mind, and elegant his expressions, she showed
her at different times the letters which she received from him. She soon
perceived that from these communications the heart of her young friend had
imbibed impressions which she was far from intending to give, but was truly
happy to discover. She could not have wished her brother a more desirable
union: heiress of Villa Franca, virtuous, affectionate, beautiful, and
accomplished, Virginia seemed calculated to make him happy. She sounded her
brother upon the subject, though without mentioning names or circumstances. He
assured her in his answers, that his heart and hand were totally disengaged,
and she thought that upon these grounds she might proceed without danger. She
in consequence endeavored to strengthen the dawning passion of her friend.
Lorenzo was made the constant topic of her discourse; and the avidity with
which her auditor listened, the sighs which frequently escaped from her bosom,
and the eagerness with which upon any digression she brought back the
conversation to the subject whence it had wandered, sufficed to convince Agnes
that her brother's addresses would be far from disagreeable. She at length
ventured to mention her wishes to the duke. Though a stranger to the lady
herself, he knew enough of her situation to think her worthy his nephew's hand.
It was agreed between him and his niece, that she should insinuate the idea to
Lorenzo, and she only waited his return to Madrid to propose her friend to him
as his bride. The unfortunate events which took place in the interim prevented
her from executing her design. Virginia wept her loss sincerely, both as a
companion, and as the only person to whom she could speak of Lorenzo. Her (...)
continued to prey upon her heart in secret, a^ she had almost determined to
confess her sentiments to her mother, when accident once more threw their
object in her way. The sight of him so near her, his politeness, his
compassion, his intrepidity, had combined to give new ardour to her affection.
When she now found her friend and advocate restored to her, she looked upon her
as a gift from Heaven; she ventured to cherish the hope of being united to
Lorenzo, and resolved to use with him his sister's influence.

Supposing that before her death Agnes might possibly have made the proposal,
the duke had placed all his nephew's hints of marriage to Virginia's account;
consequently he gave them the most favorable reception. On returning to his
hotel, the relation given him of Antonia's death, and Lorenzo's behavior on
the occasion, made evident his mistake. He lamented the circumstances; but the
unhappy girl being effectually out of the way, he trusted that his designs
would yet be executed. It Is true that Lorenzo'^ s;ituation just then ill suited
him for a bridegroom. His hopes disappointed at the moment when he expected to
realize them, and the dreadful and sudden death of his mistress had affected
him very severely. The duke found him upon the bed of sickness. His attendants
expressed serious apprehensions for his life; but the uncle entertained not the
same fears. He was of opinion, and not unwisely, that "men have died, and worms
have ate them, but not for love!" He therefore flattered himself, that, however
deep might be the impression made upon his nephew's heart, time and Virginia
would be able to efface it. He now hastened to the afflicted youth, and
endeavored to console him: he sympathised in his distress, but encouraged him
to resist the encroachments of despair. He allowed, that he could not but feel
shocked at an event so terrible, nor could he blame his sensibility; but he
besought him not to torment himself with vain regrets, and rather to struggle
with affliction, and preserve his life, if not for his own sake, at least for
the sake of those who were fondly attached to him. While he labored thus to
make Lorenzo forget Antonia's loss, the duke paid his court assiduously to
Virginia, and seized every opportunity to advance his nephew's interest in her
heart.

It may easily be expected that Agnes was not long without inquiring after Don
Raymond. She was shocked to hear the wretched situation to which grief had
reduced him; yet she could not help exulting secretly when she reflected that
his illness proved the sincerity of his love. The duke undertook the office
himself, of announcing to the invalid the happiness which awaited him. Though
he omitted no precaution to prepare him for such an event, at this sudden
change from despair to happiness, Raymond's transports were so violent, as
nearly to have proved fatal to him. These once passed, the tranquillity of his
mind, the assurance of felicity, and above all, the presence of Agnes (who was
no sooner reestablished by the care of Virginia and the marchioness, than she
hastened to attend her lover,) soon enabled him to overcome the effects of his
late dreadful malady. The calm of his soul communicated itself to his body, and
he recovered with such rapidity as to create universal surprise.

Not so Lorenzo. Antonia's death, accompanied with such terrible circumstances,
weighed upon his mind heavily. He was worn down to a shadow; nothing could give
him pleasure. He was persuaded with difficulty to swallow nourishment
sufficient for the support of life, and a consumption was apprehended. The
society of Agnes formed his only comfort. Though accident had never permitted
their being much together, he entertained for her a sincere friendship and
attachment. Perceiving how necessary she was to him, she seldom quitted his
chamber. She listened to his complaints with unwearied attention, and soothed
him by the gentleness of her manners, and by sympathising with his distress.
She still inhabited the palace de Villa Franca, the possessors of which treated
her with marked affection. The duke had intimated to the marquis his wishes
respecting Virginia. The match was unexceptionable; Lorenzo was heir to his
uncle's immense property, and was distinguished in Madrid for his agreeable
person, extensive knowledge, and propriety of conduct. Add to this, that the
marchioness had discovered how strong was her daughter's prepossession in his
favor.

In consequence, the duke's proposal was accepted without hesitation: every
precaution was taken to induce Lorenzo's seeing the lady with those sentiments
which she so well merited to excite. In her visits to her brother, Agnes was
frequently accompanied by the marchioness; and as soon as he was able to move
into his antichamber, Virginia, under her mother's protection, was sometimes
permitted to express her wishes for his recovery. This she did with such
delicacy, the manner in which she mentioned Antonia was so tender and soothing,
and, when she lamented her rival's melancholy fate, her bright eyes shone so
beautiful through her tears, that Lorenzo could not behold or listen to her
without emotion. His relations, as well as the lady, perceived that with every
day her society seemed to give him fresh pleasure, and that he spoke of her in
terms of stronger admiration. However, they prudently kept their observations
to themselves. No word was dropped which might lead him to suspect their
designs. They continued their former conduct and attention, and left time to
ripen into a warmer sentiment the friendship which he already felt for Virginia.

In the mean while, her visits became more frequent; and latterly there was
scarce a day, of which she did not pass some part by the side of Lorenzo's
couch. He gradually regained his strength, but the progress of his recovery was
slow and doubtful. One evening he seemed to be in better spirits than usual.
Agnes and her lover, the duke, Virginia, and her parents were sitting round
him. He now for the first time entreated his sister to inform him how she had
escaped the effects of the poison which St. Ursula had seen her swallow.
Fearful of recalling those scenes to his mind in which Antonia had perished,
she had hitherto concealed from him the history of her sufferings. As he now
started the subject himself, and thinking that perhaps the narrative of her
sorrows might draw him from the contemplation of those on which he dwelt too
constantly, she immediately complied with his request. The rest of the company
had already heard her story: but the interest which all present felt for its
heroine, made them anxious to hear it repeated. The whole society seconding
Lorenzo's entreaties, Agnes obeyed. She first recounted the discovery which had
taken place in the abbey chapel, the domina's resentment, and the midnight
scene of which St. Ursula had been a concealed witness. Though the nun had
already described this latter event, Agnes now related it more
circumstantially, and at large. After which she proceeded in her narrative as
follows:

CONCLUSION OF THE HISTORY OF AGNES DE MEDINA.
MY supposed death was attended with the greatest agonies. Those moments which
I believed my last were embittered by the domina's assurances that I could not
escape perdition; and as my eyes closed, I heard her rage exhale itself in
curses on my offense. The horror of this situation, of a death bed from which
hope was banished, of a sleep from which I was only to wake to find myself the
prey of flames and furies, was more dreadful than I can describe. When
animation revived in me, my soul was still impressed with these terrible ideas.
I looked round with fear, expecting to behold the ministers of divine
vengeance. For the first hour, my senses were so bewildered, and my brain so
dizzy, that I strove in vain to arrange the strange images which floated in
wild confusion before me. If I endeavored to raise myself from the ground, the
wandering of my head deceived me. Every thing around me seemed to rock, and I
sunk once more upon the earth. My weak and dazzled eyes were unable to bear a
nearer approach to a gleam of light, which I saw trembling above me. I was
compelled to close them again, and remain motionless in the same posture.

A full hour elapsed, before I was sufficiently myself to examine the
surrounding objects. When I did examine them, what terror filled my bosom! I
found myself extended upon a sort of wicker couch. It had six handles to it,
which doubtless had served the nuns to convey me to my grave. I was covered
with a linen cloth: several faded flowers were strown over me. On one side lay
a small wooden crucifix; on the other a rosary of large beads. Four low narrow
walls confined me. The top was also covered, and in it was fitted a small
grated door, through which was admitted the little air that circulated in this
miserable place. A faint glimmering of light, which streamed through the bars,
permitted me to distinguish the surrounding horrors. I was oppressed by a
noisome suffocating smell; and perceiving that the grated door was unfastened,
I thought that I might possibly effect my escape. As I raised myself with this
design, my hand rested upon something soft: I grasped it, and advanced it
toward the light. Almighty God! what was my disgust! my consternation! In
spite of its putridity, and the worms which preyed upon it, I perceived a
corrupted human head, and recognized the features of a nun who had died some
months before. I threw it from me, and sunk almost lifeless upon my bier.

When my strength returned, this circumstance, and the consciousness of being
surrounded by the loathsome and mouldering bodies of my companions, increased
my desire to escape from my fearful prison. I again moved toward the light.
The grated door was within my reach. I lifted it without difficulty: probably
it had been left unclosed, to facilitate my quitting the dungeon. Aiding myself
by the irregularity of the walls, some of whose stones projected beyond the
rest, I contrived to ascend them, and drag myself out of my prison. I now found
myself in a vault tolerably spacious. Several tombs, similar in appearance to
that whence I had just escaped, were ranged along the sides in order, and
seemed to be considerably sunk within the earth. A sepulchral lamp was
suspended from the roof by an iron chain, and shed a gloomy light through the
dungeon. Emblems of death were seen on every side: skulls, shoulder blades,
thigh bones, and other relics of mortality, were scattered upon the dewy
ground. Each tomb was ornamented with a large crucifix, and in one corner stood
a wooden statue of St. Clare. To these objects I at first paid no attention: a
door, the only outlet from the vault, had attracted my eyes. I hastened toward
it, having wrapped my winding sheet closely round me. I pushed against the
door, and to my inexpressible terror found that it was fastened on the outside.

I guessed immediately, that the prioress, mistaking the nature of the liquor
which she had compelled me to drink, instead of poison had administered a
strong opiate. From this I concluded that, being to all appearance dead, I had
received the rites of burial; and that, deprived of the power of making my
existence known, it would be my fate to expire of hunger. This idea penetrated
me with horror, not merely for my own sake, but that of the innocent creature
who still lived within my bosom. I again endeavored to open the door, but it
resisted all my efforts. I stretched my voice to the extent of its compass, and
shrieked for aid. I was (...) the hearing of every one. (...) friendly voice
(...) mine. A profound and melancholy silence prevailed through the vault, and
I despaired of liberty. My long abstinence from food now began to torment me.
The tortures which hunger inflicted on me, were the most painful and
insupportable: yet they seemed to increase with every hour which passed over my
head. Sometimes I threw myself upon the ground, and rolled upon it wild and
desperate: sometimes starting up, I returned to the door, again strove to force
it open, and repeated my fruitless cries for succor. Often was I on the point
of striking my temple against the sharp corner of some monument, dashing out my
brains, and thus terminating my woes at once. But still the remembrance of my
baby vanquished my resolution. I trembled at a deed, which equally endangered
my child's existence and my own. Then would I vent my anguish in loud
exclamations and passionate complaints; and then again my strength failing me,
silent and hopeless I would sit me down upon the base of St. Clare's statue,
sold my arms, and abandon myself to sullen despair. Thus passed several
wretched hours. Death advanced toward me with rapid strides, and I expected
that every succeeding moment would be that of my dissolution. Suddenly a
neighboring tomb caught my eye: a basket stood upon it, which till then I had
not observed. I started from my seat; I made toward it as swiftly as my
exhausted frame would permit. How eagerly did I seize the basket, on finding it
to contain a loaf of coarse bread and a small bottle of water!

I threw myself with avidity upon these humble aliments. They had to all
appearance been placed in the vault for several days. The bread was hard, and
the water tainted: yet never did I taste food to me so delicious. When the
cravings of appetite were satisfied, I busied myself with conjectures upon this
new circumstance. I debated whether the basket had been placed there with a
view to my necessity. Hope answered my doubts in the affirmative. Yet who could
guess me to be in need of such assistance? If my existence was known, why was I
detained in this gloomy vault? If I was kept a prisoner, what meant the
ceremony of committing me to the tomb? Or, if I was doomed to perish with
hunger, to whose pity was I indebted for provisions placed within my reach? A
friend would not have kept my dreadful punishment a secret: neither did it seem
probable that an enemy would have taken pains to supply me with the means of
existence. Upon the whole I was inclined to think, that the Domina's designs
upon my life had been discovered by some one of my partisans in the convent,
who had found means to substitute an opiate for poison; that she had furnished
me with food to support me, till she could effect my delivery; and that she was
then employed in giving intelligence to my relations of my danger, and pointing
out a way to release me from captivity. Yet why then was the quality of my
provisions so coarse? how could my friend have entered the vault without the
domina's knowledge? and if she had entered, why was the door fastened so
carefully? These reflections staggered me: yet still this idea was the most
favorable to my hopes, and I dwelt upon it in preference.

My meditations were interrupted by the sound of distant footsteps. They
approached, but slowly. Rays of light now darted through the crevices of the
door. Uncertain whether the persons who advanced came to relieve me, or were
conducted by some other motive to the vault, I failed not to attract their
notice by loud cries for help. Still the sounds drew near. The light grew
stronger. At length with inexpressible pleas^^^ I heard the key turning in the
lock. Persuaded that my deliverance was at hand, I flew toward the door with a
shriek of joy. It opened: but all my hopes of escape died away, when the
prioress appeared, followed by the same four nuns who had been witnesses of my
supposed death. They bore torches in their hands, and gazed upon me in fearful
silence.

I started back in terror. The domina descended into the vault, as did also her
companions. She bent upon me a stern resentful eye, but expressed no surprise
at finding me still living. She took the seat which I had just quitted. The
door was again closed, and the nuns ranged themselves behind their superior,
while the glare of their torches, dimmed by the vapors and dampness of the
vault, gilded with cold beams the surrounding monuments. For some moments all
preserved a dead and solemn silence. I stood at some distance from the
prioress. At length she beckoned to me to advance. Trembling at the severity of
her aspect, my strength scarce sufficed me to obey her. I drew near, but my
limbs were unable to support their burden. I sunk upon my knees, I clasped my
hands and lifted them up to her for mercy but had no power to articulate a
syllable.

She gazed upon me with angry eyes.

"Do I see a penitent or a criminal?" she said at length: "Are those hands
raised in contrition for your crimes, or in fear of meeting their punishment?
Do those tears acknowledge the justice of your doom, or only solicit mitigation
of your sufferings? I fear me, it is the latter!"

She paused, but kept her eyes still fixed upon mine.

"Take courage," she continued; "I wish not for your death, but your
repentance. The draught which I administered was no poison, but an opiate. My
intention in deceiving you, was to make you feel the agonies of a guilty
conscience, had death overtaken you suddenly, while your crimes were still
unrepented. You have suffered those agonies; I have brought you to be familiar
with the sharpness of death, and I trust that your momentary anguish will prove
to you an eternal benefit. It is not my design to destroy your immortal soul,
or bid you seek the grave, burdened with the weight of sins unexpiated. No,
daughter, far from it; I will purify you with wholesome chastisement, and
furnish you with full leisure for contrition and remorse. -- Hear then my
sentence: The ill judged zeal of your friends delayed its execution, but cannot
now prevent it. All Madrid believes you to be no more; your relations are
thoroughly persuaded of your death, and the nuns your partisans have assisted
at your funeral. Your existence can never be suspected. I have taken such
precautions as must render it an impenetrable mystery. Then abandon all
thoughts of a world from which you are eternally separated, and employ the few
hours which are allowed you in preparing for the next."

This exordium led me to expect something terrible, I trembled, and would have
spoken to deprecate her wrath: but a motion of the domina commanded me to be
silent. She proceeded:

"Though of late years unjustly neglected, and now opposed by many of our
misguided sisters (whom Heaven convert!) it is my intention to revive the laws
of our order in their full force. That against incontinence is severe, but no
more than so monstrous an offense demands. Submit to it, daughter, without
resistance; you will find the benefit of patience and resignation in a better
life than this. Listen then to the sentence of St. Clare. Beneath these vaults
there exist prisons, intended to receive such criminals as yourself: artfully
is their entrance concealed, and she who enters them must resign all hopes of
liberty. Thither must you now be conveyed. Food shall be supplied you, but not
sufficient for the indulgence of appetite: you shall have just enough to keep
together body and soul, and its quality shall be the simplest and coarsest.
Weep, daughter, weep, and moisten your bread with your tears: God knows, that
you have ample cause for sorrow! Chained down in one of these secret dungeons,
shut out from she world and light for ever, with no comfort but religion, no
society, but repentance; thus must you groan away the remainder of your days.
Such are St. Clare's orders; submit to them without repining. Follow me!"

Thunder struck at this barbarous decree, my little remaining strength
abandoned me. I answered only by falling at her feet, and bathing them with
tears. The domina, unmoved by my affliction, rose from her seat with a stately
air; she repeated her commands in an absolute tone; but excessive faintness
made me unable to obey her. Mariana and Alix raised me from the ground, and
carried me forwards in their arms. The prioress moved on, leaning on Violante,
and Camilla preceded her with a torch. Thus passed our sad procession along the
passages, in silence only broken by my sighs and groans. We stopped before the
principal shrine of St. Clare. The statue was removed from its pedestal, though
how I knew not. The nuns afterward raised an iron grate, till then concealed
by the image, and let it fall on the other side with a loud crash. The awful
sound, repeated by the vaults above and caverns below me, roused me from the
despondent apathy in which I had been plunged. I looked before me; an abyss
presented itself to my affrighted eyes, and a steep and narrow staircase,
whither my conductors were leading me. I shrieked, and started back. I implored
compassion, rent the air with my cries, and summoned both heaven and earth to
my assistance. In vain! I was hurried down the staircase, and forced into one
of the cells which lined the cavern's sides.

My blood ran cold, as I gazed upon this melancholy abode. The cold vapors
hovering in the air, the walls green with damp, the bed of straw so forlorn and
comfortless, the chain destined to bind me for ever to my prison, and the
reptiles of every description, which, as the torches advanced toward them, I
descried hurrying to their retreats, struck my heart with terrors almost too
exquisite for nature to bear. Driven by despair to madness, I burst suddenly
from the nuns who held me; I threw myself upon my knees before the prioress,
and besought her mercy in the most passionate and frantic terms.

"If not on me," said I, "look at least with pity on that innocent being, whose
life is attached to mine! Great is my crime, but let not my child suffer for
it! My baby has committed no fault. Oh! spare me for the sake of my unborn
offspring, whom ere it tastes life, your severity dooms to destruction!"

The prioress drew back hastily; she forced her habit from my grasp, as if my
touch had been contagious.

"What!" she exclaimed with an exasperated air: "What! Dare you plead for the
produce of your shame? Shall a creature be permitted to live, conceived in
guilt so monstrous? Abandoned woman, speak for him no more! Better that the
wretch should perish than live: begotten in perjury, incontinence, and
pollution, it cannot fail to prove a prodigy of vice. Hear me, thou guilty!
Expect no mercy from me, either for yourself or brat. Rather pray that death
may seize you before you produce it; or, if it must see the light, that its
eyes may immediately be closed again for ever! No aid shall be given you in
your labor; bring your offspring into the world yourself, feed it yourself,
nurse it yourself, bury it yourself: God grant that the latter may happen soon,
lest you receive comfort from the fruit of your iniquity!"

This inhuman speech, the threats which it contained, the dreadful sufferings
foretold to me by the domina, and her prayers for my infant's death, on whom,
though unborn, I already doted, were more than my exhausted frame could
support. Uttering a deep groan, I fell senseless at the feet of my unrelenting
enemy. I know not how long I remained in this situation; but I imagine that
some time must have elapsed before my recovery, since it sufficed the prioress
and her nuns to quit the cavern. When my senses returned, I found myself in
silence and solitude. I heard not even the retiring footsteps of my
persecutors. All was hushed, and all was dreadful! I had been thrown upon the
bed of straw: the heavy chain which I had already eyed with terror, was wound
around my waist, and fastened me to the wall. A lamp glimmering with dull
melancholy rays through my dungeon, permitted my distinguishing all its
horrors. It was separated from the cavern by a low and irregular wall of stone.
A large chasm was left open in it, which formed the entrance, for door there
was none. A leaden crucifix was in front of my straw couch. A tattered rug lay
near me, as did also a chaplet of beads; and not far from me stood a pitcher of
water, and a wicker basket containing a small loaf, and a bottle of oil to
supply my lamp.

With a despondent eye did I examine this scene of suffering: when I reflected
that I was doomed to pass in it the remainder of my days, my heart was rent
with bitter anguish. I had once been taught to look forward to a lot so
different! At one time my prospects had appeared so bright, so flattering! Now
all was lost to me. Friends, comfort, society, happiness, in one moment I was
deprived of all! Dead to the world, dead to pleasure, I lived to nothing but
the sense of misery. How fair did that world seem to me, from which I was for
ever excluded! How many loved objects did it contain, whom I never should
behold again! As I threw a look of terror round my prison, as I shrunk from the
cutting wind which howled through my subterraneous dwelling, the change seemed
so striking, so abrupt, that I doubted its reality. That the duke de Medina's
niece, that the destined bride of the marquis de las Cisternas, one bred up in
affluence, related to the noblest families in Spain, and rich in a multitude of
affectionate friends -- that she should in one moment become a captive,
separated from the world for ever, weighed down with chains, and reduced to
support life with the coarsest aliments -- appeared a change so sudden and
incredible, that I believed myself the sport of some frightful vision. Its
continuance convinced me of my mistake with but too much certainty. Every
morning I looked for some relief from my sufferings: every morning my hopes
were disappointed. At length I abandoned all idea of escaping, I resigned
myself to my fate, and only expected liberty when she came the companion of
death.

My mental anguish, and the dreadful scenes in which I had been an actress,
advanced the period of my labor. In solitude and misery, abandoned by all,
unassisted by art, uncomforted by friendship, with pangs which if witnessed
would have touched the hardest heart, was I delivered of my wretched burden. It
came alive into the world; but I knew not how to treat it, or by what means to
preserve its existence. I could only bathe it with tears, warm it in my bosom,
and offer up prayers for its safety. I was soon deprived of this mournful
employment: the want of proper attendance, my ignorance how to nurse it, the
bitter cold of the dungeon, and the unwholesome air which inflated its lungs,
terminated my sweet babe's short and painful existence. It expired in a few
hours after its birth, and I witnessed its death with agonies which beggar all
description.

But my grief was unavailing. My infant was no more: nor could all my sighs
impart to its little tender frame the breath of a moment. I rent my winding
sheet, and wrapped in it my lovely child. I placed it on my bosom, its soft arm
folded round my neck, and its pale cold cheek resting upon mine. Thus did its
lifeless limbs repose, while I covered it with kisses, talked to it, wept, and
moaned over it without remission day or night. Camilla entered my prison
regularly once every twenty-four hours to bring me food. In spite of her flinty
nature, she could not behold this spectacle unmoved. She feared that grief so
excessive would at length turn my brain; and in truth I was not always in my
proper senses. From a principle of compassion she urged me to permit the corse
to be buried; but to this I never would consent. I vowed not to part with it
while I had life: its presence was my only comfort, and no persuasion could
induce me to give it up. It soon became a mass of putridity, and to every eye
was a loathsome and disgusting object, to every eye but a mother's. In vain did
human feelings bid me recoil from this emblem of mortality with repugnance. I
withstood, and vanquished that repugnance. I persisted in holding my infant to
my bosom, in lamenting it, loving it, adoring it! Hour after hour have I passed
upon my sorry couch, contemplating what had once been my child. I endeavored
to retrace its features through the livid corruption with which they were
overspread. During my confinement, this sad occupation was my only delight; and
at that time worlds should not have bribed me to give it up. Even when released
from my prison, I brought away my child in my arms. The representations of my
too kind friends, [Here she took the hands of the marchioness and Virginia, and
pressed them alternately to her lips] at length persuaded me to resign my
unhappy infant to the grave. Yet I parted from it with reluctance. However,
reason at length prevailed; I suffered it to be taken from me, and it now
reposes in consecrated earth.

I before mentioned, that regularly once a day Camilla brought me food. She
sought not to embitter my sorrows with reproach. She bade me, it is true, resign
all hopes of liberty and worldly happiness; but she encouraged me to bear with
patience my temporary distress, and advised me to draw comfort from religion.
My situation evidently affected her more than she ventured to express; but she
believed that to extenuate my fault would make me less anxious to repent it.
Often, while her lips painted the enormity of my guilt in glaring colors, her
eyes betrayed how sensible she was to my sufferings. In fact, I am certain that
none of my tormentors (for the three other nuns entered my prison occasionally)
were so much actuated by the spirit of oppressive cruelty, as by the idea that
to afflict my body was the only way to preserve my soul. Nay, even this
persuasion might not have had such weight with them, and they might have
thought my punishment too severe, had not their good dispositions been
repressed by blind obedience to their superior. Her resentment existed in full
force. My project of elopement having been discovered by the abbot of the
Capuchins, she supposed herself lowered in his opinion by my disgrace, and in
consequence her hate was inveterate. She told the nuns to whose custody I was
committed, that my fault was of the most heinous nature, that no sufferings
could equal the offense, and that nothing could save me from eternal perdition
but punishing my guilt with the utmost severity. The superior's word is an
oracle to but too many of a convent's inhabitants. The nuns believed whatever
the prioress chose to assert: though contradicted by reason and charity, they
hesitated not to admit the truth of her arguments. They followed her
injunctions to the very letter, and were fully persuaded, that to treat me with
lenity, or to show the least pity for my woes, would be a direct means to
destroy my chance for salvation.

Camilla being thus employed about me, was particularly charged by the prioress
to treat me with harshness. In compliance with these orders, she frequently
strove to convince me how just was my punishment, and how enormous ^^s my
crime. She bade me think myself too happy in saving my soul by mortifying my
body, and even threatened me sometimes with eternal perdition. Yet, as I before
observed, she always concluded by words of encouragement and comfort; and
though uttered by Camilla's lips, I easily recognized the domina's expressions.
Once, and once only, the prioress visited me in my dungeon. She then treated me
with the most unrelenting cruelty. She loaded me with reproaches, taunted me
with my frailty; and, when I implored her mercy, told me to ask it of Heaven,
since I deserved none on earth. She even gazed upon my lifeless infant without
emotion; and when she left me, I heard her charge Camilla to increase the
hardships of my captivity. Unfeeling woman! But let me check my resentment. She
has expiated her errors by her sad and unexpected death. Peace be with her! and
may her crimes be forgiven in Heaven, as I forgive her my sufferings on earth!

Thus did I drag on a miserable existence. Far from growing familiar with my
prison, I beheld it every moment with new horror. The cold seemed more piercing
and bitter, the air more thick and pestilential. My frame became weak,
feverish, and emaciated. I was unable to rise from my bed of straw, and
exercise my limbs in the narrow limits to which the length of my chain
permitted me to move. Though exhausted, faint, and weary, I trembled to profit
by the approach of sleep. My slumbers were constantly interrupted by some
obnoxious insect crawling over me. Sometimes I felt the bloated toad, hideous
and pampered with the poisonous vapors of the dungeon, dragging his loathsome
length along my bosom. Sometimes the quick cold lizard roused me, leaving his
slimy track upon my face, and entangling itself in the tresses of my wild and
matted hair. Often have I at waking found my fingers ringed with the long worms
which bred in the corrupted flesh of my infant. At such times I shrieked with
terror and disgust; and, while I shook off the reptile, trembled with all a
woman's weakness.

Such was my situation when Camilla was suddenly taken ill. A dangerous fever,
supposed to be infectious, confined her to her bed. Every one, except the lay
sister appointed to nurse her, avoided her with caution, and feared to catch
the disease. She was perfectly delirious, and by no means capable of attending
to me. The domina, and the nuns admitted to the mystery, had latterly entirely
given me over to Camilla's care. In consequence, they busied themselves no more
about me; and, occupied by preparing for the approaching festival, it is more
than probable that I never once entered into their thoughts. Of the reason of
Camilla's negligence I have been informed since my release by the mother St.
Ursula. At that time I was very far from suspecting its cause. On the contrary,
I waited for my gaoler's appearance at first with impatience, and afterward
with despair. One day passed away: another followed it: the third arrived.
Still no Camilla! still no food! I knew the lapse of time by the wasting of my
lamp, to feed which, fortunately a week's supply of oil had been left me. I
supposed, either that the nuns had forgotten me, or that the domina had ordered
them to let me perish. The latter idea seemed the most probable: yet so natural
is the love of life, that I trembled to find it true. Though embittered by
every species of misery, my existence was still dear to me, and I dreaded to
lose it. Every succeeding minute proved to me that I must abandon all hopes of
relief. I was become an absolute skeleton: my eyes already failed me, and my
limbs were beginning to stiffen. I could only express my anguish, and the pangs
of that hunger which gnawed my heart strings, by frequent groans, whose
melancholy sound the vaulted roof of the dungeon reechoed. I resigned myself to
my fate: I already expected the moment of dissolution, when my guardian angel
-- when my beloved brother arrived in time to save me. My sight, grown dim and
feeble, at first refused to recognize him: and when I did distinguish his
features, the sudden burst of rapture was too much for me to bear. I was
overpowered by the swell of joy at once more beholding a friend, and that a
friend so dear to me. Nature could not support my emotions, and took her refuge
in insensibility.

You already know what are my obligations to the family of Villa Franca. But
what you cannot know, is the extent or my gratitude, boundless as the
excellence of my benefactors. Lorenzo! Raymond! names so dear to me! teach me
to bear with fortitude this sudden transition from misery to bliss. So lately a
captive, oppressed with chains, perishing with hunger, suffering every
inconvenience of cold and want, hidden from the light, excluded from society,
hopeless, neglected, and, as I feared, forgotten: now restored to life and
liberty, enjoying all the comforts of affluence and ease, surrounded by those
who are most loved by me, and on the point of becoming his bride who has long
been wedded to my heart, my happiness is so exquisite, so perfect, that
scarcely can my brain sustain the weight. One only wish remains ungratified. It
is to see my brother in his former health, and to know that Antonia's memory is
buried in her grave. Granted this prayer, I have nothing more to desire. I
trust that my past sufferings have purchased from Heaven the pardon of my
momentary weakness. That I have offended, offended greatly and grievously, I am
fully conscious. But let not my husband, because he once conquered my virtue,
doubt the propriety of my future conduct. I have been frail and full of error:
but I yielded not to the warmth of constitution. Raymond, affection for you
betrayed me. I was too confident of my strength: but I depended no less on your
honor than on my own. I had vowed never to see you more. Had it not been for
the consequences of that unguarded moment my resolution had been kept. Fate
willed it otherwise, and I cannot but rejoice at its decree. Still my conduct
has been highly blameable; and while I attempt to justify myself, I blush at
recollecting my imprudence. Let me then dismiss the ungrateful subject; first
assuring you Raymond, that you shall have no cause to repent our union, and
that, the more culpable have been the errors of your mistress, the more
exemplary shall be the conduct of your wife.

Here Agnes ceased; and the marquis replied to her address in terms equally
sincere and affectionate. Lorenzo expressed his satisfaction at the prospect of
being so closely connected with a man for whom he had ever entertained the
highest esteem. The Pope's bull had fully and effectually released Agnes from
her religious engagements. The marriage was therefore celebrated as soon as the
needful preparations had been made: for the marquis wished to have the ceremony
performed with all possible splendor and publicity. This being over, and the
bride having received the compliments of Madrid, she departed with Don Raymond
for his castle in Andalusia. Lorenzo accompanied them, as did also the
marchioness de Villa Franca and her lovely daughter. It is needless to say that
Theodore was of the party, and would be impossible to describe his joy at his
master's marriage. Previous to his departure, the marquis, to atone in some
measure for his past neglect, made some inquiries relative to Elvira. Finding
that she, as well as her daughter, had received many services from Leonella and
Jacintha, he showed his respect to the memory of his sister in law by making
the two women handsome presents. Lorenzo followed his example. Leonella was
highly flattered by the attentions of noblemen so distinguished, and Jacintha
blessed the hour on which her house was bewitched.

On her side, Agnes failed not to reward her convent friends. The worthy mother
St. Ursula, to whom she owed her liberty, was named, at her request,
superintendant of "the ladies of Charity." This was one of the best and most
opulent societies throughout Spain. Bertha and Cornelia, not choosing to quit
their friend, were appointed to principal charges in the same establishment. As
to the nuns who had aided the domina in persecuting Agnes; Camilla, being
confined by illness to her bed, had perished in the flames which consumed St.
Clare's convent. Mariana, Alix, and Violante, as well as two more, had fallen
victims to the popular rage. The three others, who had in council supported the
domina's sentence, were severely reprimanded, and banished to religious houses
in obscure and distant provinces. Here they languished away a few years,
ashamed of their former weakness, and shunned by their companions with aversion
and contempt.

Nor was the fidelity of Flora permitted to go unrewarded. Her wishes being
consulted, she declared herself impatient to revisit her native land. In
consequence, a passage was procured for her to Cuba, where she arrived in
safety, loaded with the presents of Raymond and Lorenzo.

The debts of gratitude discharged, Agnes was at liberty to pursue her
favorite plan. Lodged in the same house, Lorenzo and Virginia were eternally
together. The more he saw of her, the more was he convinced of her merit. On
her part, she laid herself out to please; and not to succeed was for her
impossible. Lorenzo witnessed with admiration her beautiful person, elegant
manners, innumerable talents, and sweet disposition. He was also much flattered
by her prejudice in his favor, which she had not sufficient art to conceal.
However, his sentiments partook not of that ardent character which had marked
his affection for Antonia. The image of that lovely and unfortunate girl still
lived in his heart, and baffled all Virginia's efforts to displace it. Still,
when the duke proposed to him the match, which he wished so earnestly to take
place, his nephew did not reject the offer. The urgent supplications of his
friends and the lady's merit, conquered his repugnance to entering into new
engagements. He proposed himself to the marquis de Villa Franca, and was
accepted with joy and gratitude. Virginia became his wife, nor did she ever
give him cause to repent his choice. His esteem increased for her daily. Her
unremitted endeavors to please him could not but succeed. His affection
assumed stronger and warmer colors. Antonia's image was gradually effaced from
his bosom, and, Virginia became sole mistress of that heart, which she well
deserved to possess without a partner.

The remaining years of Raymond and Agnes, of Lorenzo and Virginia, were happy
as can be those allotted to mortals, born to be the prey of grief, and sport of
disappointment. The exquisite sorrows with which they had been afflicted, made
them think lightly of every succeeding woe. They had felt the sharpest darts in
misfortune's quiver. Those which remained, appeared blunt in comparison. Having
weathered fate's heaviest storms, they looked calmly upon its terrors: or, if
ever they felt affliction's casual gales, they seemed to them gentle as zephyrs
which breathe over summer seas.

CHAP. XII.
-- He was a fell despightful fiend:
Hell holds none worse in baleful bower below;
By pride, and wit, and rage, and rancour keened;
Of man, alike if good or bad, the foe.
THOMSON.
ON the day following Antonia's death, all Madrid was a scene of consternation
and amazement. An archer, who had witnessed the adventure in the sepulcher, had
indiscreetly related the circumstances of the murder: he had also named the
perpetrator. The confusion was without example, which this intelligence raised
among the devotees. Most of them disbelieved it, and went themselves to the
abbey to ascertain the fact. Anxious to avoid the shame to which their
superior's ill conduct exposed the whole brotherhood, the monks assured the
visitors, that Ambrosio was prevented from receiving them as usual by nothing
but illness. This attempt was unsuccessful. The same excuse being repeated day
after day, the archer's story gradually obtained confidence. The abbot's
partisans abandoned him: no one entertained a doubt of his guilt: and they who
before had been the warmest in his praise, were now the most vociferous in his
condemnation.

While his innocence or guilt was debated in Madrid with the utmost acrimony,
Ambrosio was a prey to the pangs of conscious villainy, and the terrors of
punishment impending over him. When he looked back to the eminence on which he
had lately stood, universally honored and respected, at peace with the world
and with himself, scarcely could he believe that he was indeed the culprit,
whose crimes and whose probable fate he trembled to consider. But a few weeks
had elapsed, since he was pure and virtuous, courted by the wisest and noblest
in Madrid, and regarded by the people with a reverence that approached
idolatry. He now saw himself stained with the most loathed and monstrous sins,
the object of universal execration, a prisoner of the Holy Office, and probably
doomed to perish in tortures the most severe. He could not hope to deceive his
judges: the proofs of his guilt were too stong. His presence in the sepulcher
at so late an hour, his confusion at the discovery, the dagger which in his
first alarm he owned had been concealed by him, and the blood which had spirted
upon his habit from Antonia's wound, sufficiently marked him out for the
assassin. He waited with agony for the day of examination. He had no resource
to comfort him in his distress. Religion could not inspire him with fortitude.
If he read the books of morality which were put into his hands, he saw in them
nothing but the enormity of his offenses. If he attempted to pray, he
recollected that he deserved not Heaven's protection, and believed his crimes
so monstrous as to exceed even God's infinite goodness. For every other sinner
he thought there might be hope, but for him there could be none. Shuddering at
the past, anguished by the present, and dreading the future, thus passed he the
few days preceding that which was marked for his trial.

That day arrived. At nine in the morning his prison door was unlocked, and his
jailer entering commanded him to follow him. He obeyed with trembling. He was
conducted into a spacious hall hung with black cloth. At the table sat three
grave stern looking men, also habited in black: one was the Grand Inquisitor,
whom the importance of this cause had induced to examine into it himself. At a
smaller table at a little distance sat the secretary, provided with all
necessary implements for writing. Ambrosio was beckoned to advance, and take
his station at the lower end of the table. As his eye glanced downwards, he
perceived various iron instruments lying scattered upon the floor. Their forms
were unknown to him, but apprehension immediately guessed them to be engines of
torture. He turned pale, and with difficulty prevented himself from sinking
upon the ground.

Profound silence prevailed, except when the inquisitors whispered a few words
among themselves mysteriously. Near an hour passed away, and with every second
of it Ambrosio's fears grew more poignant. At length a small door, opposite to
that by which he had entered the hall, grated heavily upon its hinges. An
officer appeared, and was immediately followed by the beautiful Matilda. Her
hair hung about her face wildly: her cheeks were pale, and her eyes sunk and
hollow. She threw a melancholy look upon Ambrosio: he replied by one of
aversion and reproach. She was placed opposite to him. A bell then sounded
thrice. It was the signal for opening the court; and the inquisitors entered
upon their office.

In these trials, neither the accusation is mentioned, nor the name of the
accuser. The prisoners are only asked, whether they will confess. If they
reply, that, having no crime, they can make no confession, they are put to the
torture without delay. This is repeated at intervals, either till the suspected
avow themselves culpable, or the perseverance of the examinants is worn out and
exhausted: but without a direct acknowledgment of their guilt, the Inquisition
never pronounces the final doom of its prisoners. In general, much time is
suffered to elapse without their being questioned; but Ambrosio's trial had
been hastened on account of a solemn Auto da Fe which would take place in a few
days, and in which the inquisitors meant this distinguished culprit to perform
a part, and give a striking testimony of their vigilance.

The abbot was not merely accused of rape and murder; the crime of sorcery was
laid to his charge, as well as to Matilda's. She had been seized as an
accomplice in Antonia's assassination. On searching her cell, various
suspicious books and instruments were found, which justified the accusation
brought against her. To criminate the monk, the constellated mirror was
produced, which Matilda had accidentally left in his chamber. The strange
figures engraved upon it caught the attention of Don Ramirez, while searching
the abbot's cell; in consequence, he carried it away with him. It was shown to
the Grand Inquisitor, who, having considered it for some time, took off a small
golden cross which hung at his girdle, and laid it upon the mirror. Instantly a
loud noise was heard resembling a clap of thunder, and the steel shivered into
a thousand pieces. This circumstance confirmed the suspicion of the monk's
having dealt in magic. It was even supposed, that his former influence over the
m^^ds of the people was entirely to be ascribed to witchcraft.

Determined to make him confess not only the crimes which he had committed, but
those also of which he was innocent, the inquisitors began their examination.
Though dreading the tortures, as he yet more dreaded death, which would consign
him to eternal torments, the abbot asserted his purity in a voice bold and
resolute. Matilda followed his example, but spoke with fear and trembling.
Having in vain exhorted him to confess, the inquisitors ordered the monk to be
put to the question. The decree was immediately executed. Ambrosio suffered the
most excruciating pangs that ever were invented by human cruelty. Yet so
dreadful is death, when guilt accompanies it, that he had sufficient fortitude
to persist in his disavowal. His agonies were redoubled in consequence; nor was
he released till fainting from excess of pain, insensibility rescued him from
the hands of his tormentors.

Matilda was next ordered to the torture; but, terrified by the sight of the
friar's sufferings, her courage totally deserted her. She sunk upon her knees,
acknowledged her corresponding with infernal spirits, and that she had
witnessed the monk's assassination of Antonia; but as to the crime of sorcery,
she declared herself the sole criminal, and Ambrosio perfectly innocent. The
latter assertion met with no credit. The abbot had recovered his senses in time
to hear the confession of his accomplice; but he was too much enfeebled by what
he had already undergone, to be capable at that time of sustaining new
torments. He was commanded back to his cell, but first informed, that as soon
as he had gained strength sufficient he must prepare himself for a second
examination. The inquisitors hoped that he would then be less hardened and
obstinate. To Matilda it was announced, that she must expiate her crimes in
fire on the approaching Auto da Fe. All her tears and entreaties could procure
no mitigation of her doom, and she was dragged by force from the hall of trial.

Returned to his dungeon, the sufferings of Ambrosio's body were far more
supportable than those of his mind. His dislocated limbs, the nails torn from
his hands and feet, and his fingers mashed and broken by the pressure of
screws, were far surpassed in anguish by the agitation of his soul and
vehemence of his terrors. He saw that, guilty or innocent, his judges were bent
upon condemning him. The remembrance of what his denial had already cost him,
terrified him at the idea of being again applied to the question, and almost
engaged him to confess his crimes. Then again the consequences of his
confession flashed before him, and rendered him once more irresolute. His death
would be inevitable, and that a death the most dreadful. He had listened to
Matilda's doom, and doubted not that a similar was reserved for him. He
shuddered at the approaching Auto da Fe, at the idea of perishing in flames,
and only escaping from endurable torments to pass into others more subtle and
everlasting! With affright did he bend his mind's eye on the space beyond the
grave; nor could hide from himself how justly he ought to dread Heaven's
vengeance. In this labyri^^^ of terrors, fain would he have taken his refuge in
the gloom of atheism; fain would he have denied the soul's immortality; have
persuaded himself that, his eyes once closed, they would never more open, and
that the same moment would annihilate his soul and body. Even this resource was
refused to him. To permit his being blind to the fallacy of this belief, his
knowledge was too extensive, his understanding too solid and just. He could not
help feeling the existence of a God. Those truths, once his comfort, now
presented themselves before him in the clearest light; but they only served to
drive him to distraction. They destroyed his ill grounded hopes of escaping
punishment; and, dispelled by the irresistible brightness of truth and
conviction, philosophy's deceitful vapors faded away like a dream.

In anguish almost too great for mortal frame to bear, he expected the time
when he was again to be examined. He busied himself in planning ineffectual
schemes for escaping both present and future punishment. Of the first there was
no possibility; of the second despair made him neglect the only means. While
Reason forced him to acknowledge a God's existence, Conscience made him doubt
the infinity of his goodness. He disbelieved that a sinner like himself could
find mercy. He had not been deceived into error; ignorance could furnish him
with no excuse. He had seen vice in her true colors. Before he committed his
crimes, he had computed every scruple of their weight, and yet he had committed
them.

"Pardon?" he would cry in an access of phrenfy: "Oh! there can be none for me!"

Persuaded of this, instead of humbling himself in penitence, of deploring his
guilt, and employing his few remaining hours in deprecating Heaven's wrath, he
abandoned himself to the transports of desperate rage; he sorrowed for the
punishment of his crimes, not their commission; and exhaled his bosom's anguish
in idle sighs, in vain lamentations, in blasphemy and despair. As the few beams
of day which pierced through the bars of his prison window gradually
disappeared, and their place was supplied by the pale and glimmering lamp, he
felt his terrors redouble, and his ideas become more gloomy, (...) solemn, more
despondent. He dreaded the approach of sleep. No sooner did his eyes close,
wearied with tears and watching, than the dreadful visions seemed to be
realised on which his mind had dwelt during the day. He found himself in
sulphurous realms and burning caverns, surrounded by fiends appointed his
tormentors, and who drove him through a variety of tortures, each of which was
more dreadful than the former. Amidst these dismal scenes wandered the ghosts
of Elvira and her daughter. They reproached him with their deaths, recounted
his crimes to the demons, and urged them to inflict torments of cruelty yet
more refined. Such were the pictures which floated before his eyes in sleep:
they vanished not till his repose was disturbed by excess of agony. Then would
he start from the ground on which he had stretched himself, his brows running
down with cold sweat, his eyes wild and phrensied; and he only exchanged the
terrible certainty for surmises scarcely more supportable. He paced his dungeon
with disordered steps; he gazed with terror upon the surrounding darkness, and
often did he cry,

"Oh! fearful is night to the guilty."

The day of his second examination was at hand. He had been compelled to
swallow cordials, whose virtues were calculated to restore his bodily strength,
and enable him to support the question longer. On the night preceding this
dreaded day, his fears for the morrow permitted him not to sleep. His terrors
were so violent as nearly to annihilate his ment^ powers. He sat like one
stupefied near the table on which his lamp was burning dimly. Despair chained
up his faculties in idiotism, and he remained for some hours unable to speak or
move, or indeed to think.

"Look up, Ambrosio!" said a voice in accents well known to him.

The monk started, and raised his melancholy eyes. Matilda stood before him.
She had quitted her religious habit. She now wore a female dress, at once
elegant and splendid; a profusion of diamonds blazed upon her robes, and her
hair was confined by a coronet of roses. In her right hand she held a small
book: a lively expression of pleasure beamed upon her countenance -- but still
it was mingled with a wild imperious majesty, which inspired the monk with awe,
and repressed in some measure his transports at seeing her.

"You here, Matilda!" he at length exclaimed: "How have you gained entrance?
Where are your chains? What means this magnificence, and the joy which sparkles
in your eyes? Have our judges relented? Is there a chance of my escaping?
Answer me for pity, and tell me what I have to hope or fear."

"Ambrosio!" she replied with an air of commanding dignity: "I have baffled the
Inquisition's fury. I am free: a few moments will place kingdoms between these
dungeons and me; yet I purchase my liberty at a dear, at a dreadful price! Dare
you pay the same, Ambrosio? Dare you spring without fear over the bounds which
separate men from angels? -- You are silent -- You look upon me with eyes of
suspicion and alarm -- I read your thoughts, and confess their justice. Yes,
Ambrosio, I have sacrificed all for life and liberty I am no longer a candidate
for Heaven! I have renounced God's service, and am enlisted beneath the banners
of his foes. The deed is past recall; yet, were it in my power to go back, I
would not. Oh! my friend, to expire in such torments! to die amidst curses and
execrations! to bear the insults of an exasperated mob! to be exposed to all
the mortifications of shame and infamy! who can reflect without horror on such
a doom? Let me then exult in my exchange. I have sold distant and uncertain
happiness for present and secure. I have preserved a life, which otherwise I
had lost in torture; and I have obtained the power of procuring every bliss
which can make that life delicious! The infernal spirits obey me as their
sovereign; by their aid shall my days be passed in every refinement of luxury
and voluptuousness. I will enjoy unrestrained the gratification of my senses;
every passion shall be indulged even to satiety; then will I bid my servants
invent new pleasures, to revive and stimulate my glutted appetites! I go
impatient to exercise my newly gained dominion. I pant to be at liberty.
Nothing should hold me one moment l^^ger in this abhorred abode, but the hope
of persuading you to follow my example Ambrosio, I still love you: our mutual
guilt and danger have rendered you dearer to me than ever, and I would fain
save you from impending destruction. Summon then your resolution to your aid,
and renounce for immediate and certain benefits the hopes of a salvation
difficult to obtain, and perhaps altogether erroneous. Shake off the prejudice
of vulgar souls; abandon a God who has abondoned you, and raise yourself to the
level of superior beings!"

She paused for the monk's reply: he shuddered while he gave it.

"Matilda!" he said, after a long silence, in a low and unsteady voice: "What
price gave you for liberty?"

She answered him firm and dauntless.

"Ambrosio, it was my soul!"

"Wretched woman, what have you done! Pass but a few years, and how dreadful
will be your sufferings!"

"Weak man, pass but this night, and how dreadful will be your own! Do you
remember what you have already endured? Tomorrow you must bear torments doubly
exquisite. Do you remember the horrors of a fiery punishment? In two days you
must be led a victim to the stake! What then will become of you? Still dare you
hope for pardon? Still (...) Think upon your crimes! Think upon your perjury,
inhumanity, and hypocrisy! Think upon the innocent blood which cries to the
throne of God for vengeance! and then hope for mercy! Then dream of Heaven, and
sigh for worlds of light, and realms of peace and pleasure! Absurd! Open your
eyes, Ambrosio, and be prudent. Hell is your lot; you are doomed to eternal
perdition: naught lies beyond your grave, but a gulf of devouring flames. And
will you then speed toward that hell? Will you clasp that perdition in your
arms ere it is needful? Will you plunge into those flames while you still have
the power to shun them? It Is a madman's action. No, no, Ambrosio, let us for a
while fly from divine vengeance. Be advised by me, purchase by one moment's
courage the bliss of years; enjoy the present, and forget that a future lags
behind."

"Matilda, your counsels are dangerous; I dare not, I will not follow them. I
must not give up my claim to salvation. Monstrous are my crimes; but God is
merciful, and I will not despair of pardon."

"Is such your resolution? I have no more to say. I speed to joy and liberty,
and abandon you to death and eternal torments!"

"Yet stay one moment, Matilda! You command the infernal demons; you can force
open these prison doors; you can release me from these chains which weigh me
down. Save me, I conjure you, and bear me from these fearful abodes!"

"You ask the only boon beyond my power to bestow. I am forbidden to assist a
churchman and a partisan of Heaven. Renounce those titles, and command me."

"I will not sell my soul to perdition."

"Persist in your obstinacy till you find yourself at the stake: then will you
repent your error, and sigh for escape when the moment is gone by. I quit you.
Yet ere the hour of death arrives, should wisdom enlighten you, listen to the
means of repairing your present fault. I leave with you this book. Read the
four first lines of the seventh page backwards. The spirit whom you have
already once beheld, will immediately appear to you. If you are wise, we shall
meet again; if not, farewell for ever!"

She let the book fall upon the ground. A cloud of blue fire wrapped itself
round her. She waved her hand to Ambrosio, and disappeared. The momentary glare
which the flames poured through the dungeon, on dissipating suddenly, seemed to
have increased its natural gloom. The solitary lamp scarcely gave light
sufficient to guide the monk to a chair. He threw himself into his seat, folded
his arms, and, leaning his head upon the table, sunk into reflections
perplexing and unconnected.

He was still in this attitude, when the opening of the prison door roused him
from his stupor. He was summoned to appear before the Grand Inquisitor. He rose
and followed his jailer with painful steps. He was led into the same hall,
placed before the same examiners, and was again interrogated whether he would
confess. He replied as before, that, having no crimes, he could acknowledge
none. But when the executioners prepared to put him to the question, when he
saw the engines of torture, and remembered the pangs which they had already
inflicted, his resolution failed him entirely. Forgetting the consequences, and
only anxious to escape the terrors of the present moment, he made an ample
confession. He disclosed every circumstance of his guilt, and owned not merely
the crimes with which he was charged, but those of which he had never been
suspected. Being interrogated as to Matilda's flight, which had created much
confusion; he confessed that she had sold herself to Satan, and that she was
indebted to sorcery for her escape. He still assured his judges, that for his
own part he (...) never entered into any compact with the infernal spirits; but
the threat of being tortured made him declare himself to be a sorcerer and
heretic, and whatever other titles the inquisitors chose to fix upon him. In
consequence of this avowal, his sentence was immediately pronounced. He was
ordered to prepare himself to perish in the Auto da Fe, which was to be
solemnized at twelve o'clock that night. This hour was chosen, from the idea,
that, the horror of the flames being heightened by the gloom of midnight, the
execution would have a greater effect upon the mind of the people.

Ambrosio, rather dead than alive, was left alone in his dungeon. The moment in
which this terrible decree was pronounced, had nearly proved that of his
dissolution. He looked forward to the morrow with despair, and his terrors
increased with the approach of midnight. Sometimes he was buried in gloomy
silence; at others, he raved with delirious passion, wrung his hands, and
cursed the hour when he first beheld the light. In one of these moments his eye
rested upon Matilda's mysterious gift. His transports of rage were instantly
suspended. He looked earnestly at the book, he took it up, but immediately
threw it from him with horror. He walked rapidly up and down his dungeon --
then stopped, and again fixed his eyes on the spot where the book had fallen.
He reflected, that here at least was a resource from the ^ate which he dreaded.
He stooped, and took it up a second time. He remained for some time trembling
and irresolute; he longed to try the charm, yet feared its consequences. The
recollection of his sentence at length fixed his indecision. He opened the
volume; but his agitation was so great, that he at first sought in vain for the
page mentioned by Matilda. Ashamed of himself, he called all his courage to his
aid. He turned to the seventh leaf: he began to read it aloud; but his eyes
frequently wondered from the book, while he anxiously cast them round in search
of the spirit, whom he wished, yet dreaded, to behold. Still he persisted in
his design; and with a voice unassured, and frequent interruptions, he
contrived to finish the four first lines of the page.

They were in a language whose import was totally unknown to him. Scarce had he
pronounced the last word, when the effects of the charm were evident. A loud
burst of thunder was heard, the prison shook to its very foundations, a blaze
of lightning flashed through the cell, and in the next moment, borne upon
sulphurous whirlwinds, Lucifer stood before him a second time. But he came not
as when at Matilda's summons he borrowed the seraph's form to deceive Ambrosio.
He appeared in all that ugliness which since his fall from heaven had been his
portion. His blasted limbs still bore marks of the Almighty's thunder. A
swarthy darkness spread itself over his gigantic form: his hands and feet were
armed with long talons. Fury glared in his eyes, which might have struck the
bravest heart with terror. Over his huge shoulders waved two enormous sable
wings; and his hair was supplied by living snakes, which twined themselves
round his brows with frightful hissings. In one hand he held a roll of
parchment, and in the other an iron pen. Still the lightning flashed around
him, and the thunder with repeated bursts seemed to announce the dissolution of
Nature.

Terrified at an apparition so different from what he had expected, Ambrosio
remained gazing upon the fiend, deprived of the power of utterance. The thunder
had ceased to roll: universal silence reigned through the dungeon.

"For what am I summoned hither?" said the demon, in a voice which sulphurous
fogs had damped to hoarseness.

At the sound Nature seemed to tremble. A violent earthquake rocked the ground,
accompanied by a fresh burst of thunder, louder and more appalling than the
first.

Ambrosio was long unable to answer the daemon's demand.

"I am condemned to die," he said with a faint voice, his blood running cold
while he gazed upon his dreadful visitor. "Save me! bear me from hence!"

"Shall the reward of my services be paid me? Dare you embrace my cause? Will
you be mine, body and soul? Are you prepared to renounce him who made you, and
him who died for you? Answer but 'Yes!' and Lucifer is your slave."

"Will no less price content you? Can nothing satisfy you but my eternal ruin?
Spirit, you ask too much. Yet convey me from this dungeon. Be my servant for
one hour, and I will be yours for a thousand years. Will not this offer
suffice?"

" It will not. I must have your soul: must have it mine, and mine for eve."

"Insatiate demon! I will not doom myself to endless torments. I will not give
up my hopes of being one day pardoned."

"You will not? On what chimaera rest then your hopes? Short sighted mortal!
Miserable wretch! Are you not guilty? Are you not infamous in the eyes of men
and angels? Can such enormous sins be forgiven? Hope you to escape my power?
Your fate is already pronounced. The Eternal has abandoned you. Mine you are
marked in the book of destiny, and mine you must and shall be."

"Fiend! it is false. Infinite is the Almighty's mercy, and the penitent shall
meet his forgiveness. My crimes are monstrous, but I will not despair of
pardon. Happily, when they have received due chastisement -- "

"Chastisement? Was purgatory meant for guilt like yours? Hope you, that your
offenses shall be bought off by prayers of superstitious dotards and droning
monks? Ambrosio! be wise. Mine you must be. You are doomed to flames, but may
shun them for the present. Sign this parchment: I will bear you from hence, and
you may pass your remaining years in bliss and liberty. Enjoy your existence.
Indulge in every pleasure to which appetite may lead you. But from the moment
that it quits your body, remember that your soul belongs to me, and that I will
not be defrauded of my right."

The monk was silent: (...) looks declared that the tempter's words were not
thrown away. He reflected on the conditions proposed with horror. On the other
hand he believed himself doomed to perdition, and that, by refusing the
daemon's succor, he only hastened tortures which he never could escape. The
fiend saw that his resolution was shaken. He renewed his instances, and
endeavored to fix the abbot's indecision. He described the agonies of death in
the most terrific colors; and he worked so powerfully upon Ambrosio's despair
and fears, that he prevailed upon him to receive the parchment. He then struck
the iron pen which he held into a vein of the monk's left hand. It pierced
deep, and was instantly filled with blood: yet Ambrosio felt no pain from the
wound. The pen was put into his hand: it trembled. The wretch placed the
parchment on the table before him, and prepared to sign it. Suddenly he held
his hand: he started away hastily, and threw the pen upon the table.

"What am I doing?" he cried. Then turning to the fiend with a desperate air,
"Leave me! begone! I will not sign the parchment"

"Fool!" exclaimed the (...) demon, darting looks so furious as penetrated the
friar's soul with horror. "Thus am I trifled with? Go then? Rave in agony,
expire in tortures, and then learn the extent of the Eternal's mercy! But
beware how you make (...) again (...) mock! Call me no more, till resolve to
accept my offers. Summon me a second time to dismiss me thus idly, and these
talons shall rend you into a thousand pieces. Speak yet again: Will you sign
the parchment?"

"I will not. Leave me. Away!"

Instantly the thunder was heard to roll horribly: once more the earth trembled
with violence: the dungeon resounded with loud shrieks, and the demon fled
with blasphemy and curses.

At first the monk rejoiced at having resisted the seducer's arts, and obtained
a triumph over mankind's enemy: but as the hour of punishment drew near, his
former terrors revived in his heart. Their momentary repose seemed to have
given them fresh vigor. The nearer that the time approached, the more did he
dread appearing before the throne of God. He shuddered to think how soon he
must be plunged into eternity -- how soon meet the eyes of his Creator, whom he
had so grievously offended. The bell announced midnight. It was the signal for
being led to the stake. As he listened to the first stroke, the blood ceased to
circulate in the abbot's veins. He heard death and torture murmured in each
succeeding sound. He expected to see the archers entering his prison; and as
the bell forbore to toll, he seized the magic volume in a fit of despair. He
opened it, turned hastily to the seventh page, and, as if fearing to allow
himself a moment's thought, ran over the fatal lines with rapidity. Accompanied
by his former terrors, Lucifer again stood before the trembler.

"You have summoned me," said the fiend. "Are you determined to be wise? Will
you accept my conditions? You know them already. Renounce your claim to
salvation, make over to me your soul, and I bear you from this dungeon
instantly. Yet is it time. Resolve, or it will be too late. Will you sign the
parchment?"

"I must -- Fate urges me -- I accept your conditions."

"Sign the parchment," replied the demon in an exulting tone.

The contract and the bloody pen still lay upon the table. Ambrosio drew near
it. He prepared to sign his name. A moment's reflection made him hesitate.

"Hark!" cried the tempter: "they come. Be quick. Sign the parchment, and I
bear you from hence this moment."

In effect, the archers were heard approaching, appointed to lead Ambrosio to
the stake. The sound encouraged the monk in his resolution.

"What is the import of this writing?" said he.

"It makes your soul over to me for ever, and without reserve."

"What am I to receive in exchange?"

"My protection, and release from this dungeon. Sign it, and this instant I
bear you away."

Ambrosio took up the pen. He set it to the parchment. Again his courage failed
him. He felt a pang of terror at his heart, and once more threw the pen upon
the table.

"Weak and puerile!" cried the exasperated fiend. "Away with this folly! Sign
the wr^^ing this instant, or I sacrifice you to my rage."

At this moment the bolt of the outward door was drawn back. The prisoner heard
the rattling of chains: the heavy bar fell: the archers were on the point of
entering. Worked up to phrensy by the urgent danger, shrinking from the
approach of death, terrified by the daemon's threats, and seeing no other means
to escape destruction, the wretched monk complied. He signed the fatal
contract, and gave it hastily into the evil spirit's hands, whose eyes, as he
received the gift, glared with malicious rapture.

"Take it!" said the God abandoned. "Now then save me! Snatch me from hence!"

"Hold! Do you freely and absolutely renounce your Creator and his Son?"

"I do! I do!"

"Do you make over your soul to me for ever?"

"For ever!"

"Without reserve or subterfuge? without future appeal to the divine mercy!"

The last chain fell from the door of the prison. The key was heard turning in
the lock. Already the iron door grated heavily upon its rusty hinges --

"I am yours for ever, and irrevocably!" cried the monk wild with terror: "I
abandon all claim to salvation. I own no power but yours. Hark! hark! they
come! Oh save me! bear me away!"

"I have triumphed! You are mine past reprieve, and I fufil my promise."

While he spoke, the door unclosed. Instantly the demon grasped one of
Ambrosio's arms, spread his broad pinions, and sprang with him into the air.
The roof opened as they soared upwards, and closed again when they had quitted
the dungeon.

In the mean while, the jailer was thrown into the utmost surprise by the
disappearance of his prisoner. Though neither he nor the archers were in time
to witness the monk's escape, a sulphurous smell prevailing through the prison
sufficiently informed them by whose aid he had been liberated. They hastened to
make their report to the Grand Inquisitor. The story how a sorcerer had been
carried away by the devil, was soon noised about Madrid; and for some days the
whole city was employed in discussing the subject. Gradually it ceased to be
the topic of conversation. Other adventures arose whose novelty engaged
universal attention; and Ambrosio was soon forgotten as totally as if he never
had existed. While this was passing, the monk, supported by his infernal guide,
traversed the air with the rapidity of an arrow; and a few moments placed him
upon a precipice's brink, the steepest in Sierra Morena.

Though rescued from the Inquisition, Ambrosio as yet was insensible of the
blessings of liberty. The damning contract weighed heavy upon his mind; and the
scenes in which he had been a principal actor had left behind them such
impressions as rendered his heart the seat of anarchy and confusion. The
objects now before his eyes, and which the full moon sailing through clouds
permitted him to examine, were ill calculated to inspire that calm, of which he
stood so much in need. The disorder of his imagination was increased by the
wildness of the surrounding scenery; by the gloomy caverns and steep rocks,
rising above each other, and dividing the passing clouds; solitary clusters of
trees scattered here and there, among whose thick twined branches the wind of
night sighed hoarsely and mournfully; the shrill cry of mountain eagles, who
had built their nests among these lonely deserts; the stunning roar of
torrents, as swelled by late rains they rushed violently down tremendous
precipices: and the dark waters of a silent sluggish stream which faintly
reflected the moon's beams, and bathed the rock's base on which Ambrosio stood.
The abbot cast round him a look of terror. His infernal conductor was still by
his side, and eyed him with a look of mingled malice, exultation and contempt.

"Whither have you brought me?" said the monk at length in an hollow trembling
voice: "Why am I placed in this melancholy scene? Bear me from it quickly!
Carry me to Matilda!"

The fiend replied not, but continued to gaze upon him in silence. Ambrosio
could not sustain his glance; he turned away his eyes, while thus spoke the
demon:

"I have him then in my power! This model of piety! this being without
reproach! this mortal who placed his puny virtues on a level with those of
angels. He is mine! irrevocably, eternally mine! Companions of my sufferings!
denizens of hell! How grateful will be my present!"

He paused, then addressed himself to the monk --

"Bear you to Matilda?" he continued, repeating Ambrosio's words: "Wretch! you
shall soon be with her! You well deserve a place near her, for hell boasts no
miscreant more guilty than yourself. Hark, Ambrosio, while I unveil your
crimes! You have shed the blood of two innocents; Antonia and Elvira perished
by your hand. That Antonia whom you violated, was your sister! that Elvira whom
you murdered, gave you birth! Tremble, abandoned hypocrite! inhuman parricide!
incestuous ravisher! tremble at the extent of your offenses! And you it was who
thought yourself proof against temptation, absolved from human frailties, and
free from error and vice! Is pride then a virtue? Is inhumanity no fault? Know,
vain man! that I long have marked you for my prey; I watched the movements of
your heart; I saw that you were virtuous from vanity, not principle, and I
seized the fit moment of seduction. I observed your blind idolatry of the
Madona's picture. I bade a subordinate but crafty spirit assume a similar form,
and you eagerly yielded to the blandishments of Matilda, Your pride was
gratified by her flattery; your passions only needed an opportunity to break
forth; you ran into the snare blindly, and scrupled not to commit a crime,
which you blamed in another with unfeeling severity. It was I who threw Matilda
in your way; it was I who gave you entrance to Antonia's chamber; and it was I
who caused the dagger to be given you which pierced your sister's bosom! Hear,
hear, Ambrosio! Had you resisted me one minute longer, you had saved your body
and soul. The guards whom you heard at your prison door, came to signify your
pardon. But I had already triumphed: my plots had already succeeded. Scarcely
could I propose crimes so quick as you performed them. You are mine, and Heaven
itself cannot rescue you from my power. Hope not that your penitence will make
void our contract. Here is your bond signed with your blood; you have given up
your claim to mercy, and nothing can restore you to the rights which you have
foolishly resigned. Believe you that your secret thoughts escaped me? No, no, I
read them all! You trusted that you should still have time for repentance. I
saw your artifice, knew its falsity, and rejoiced in deceiving the deceiver!
You are mine beyond reprieve: I burn to possess my right, and alive you quit
not these mountains."

During the daemon's speech, Ambrosio had been stupefied by terror and
surprise. This last declaration roused him.

"Not quit these mountains alive?" he exclaimed: "Perfidious, what mean you?
Have you forgotten our contract?"

The fiend answered by a malicious laugh:

"Our contract? Have I not performed my part? What more did I promise than to
save you from your prison? Have I not done so? Are you not safe from the
Inquisition -- safe from all but from me? Fool that you were to confide
yourself to a devil! Why did you not stipulate for life, and power, and
pleasure? Then all ^ould have been granted: now your reflections come too late.
Miscreant, prepare for death; you have not many hours to live!"

On hearing this sentence, dreadful were the feelings of the devoted wretch! He
sunk upon his knees, and raised his hands toward heaven. The fiend read his
intention and prevented it --

"What?" he cried, darting at him a look of fury: "Dare you still implore the
Eternal's mercy? Would you feign penitence, and again act an hypocrite's part?
Villain, resign your hopes of pardon. Thus I secure my prey!"

As he said this, darting his talons into the monk's shaven crown, he sprang
with him from the rock. The caves and mountains rang with Ambrosio's shrieks.
The demon continued to soar aloft, till, reaching a dreadful height, he
released the sufferer. Headlong fell the monk through the airy waste; the sharp
point of a rock received him; and he rolled from precipice to precipice, till,
bruised and mangled, he rested on the river's banks Instantly a violent storm
arose: the winds in fury (...) up rocks and forests: the sky was now (...) with
clouds, now sheeted with fire: the rain fell in torrents; it swelled the
stream; the waves overflowed their banks; they reached the spot where Ambrosio
lay, and, when they abated, carried with them into the river the corse of the
despairing monk.

Haughty Lady, why shrunk you back when yon poor frail one drew near? Was the
air infected by her errors? Was your purity soiled by her passing breath? Ah!
Lady, smooth that insulting brow: stifle the reproach just bursting from your
scornful lip: wound not a soul that bleeds already! She has suffered, suffers
still. Her air is gay, but her heart is broken; her dress sparkles, but her
bosom groans.

Lady, to look with mercy on the conduct of others, is a virtue no less than to
look with severity on your own.

FINIS

