AN INTRODUCTION TO THE KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICE OF GARDENING, BY CHARLES
MARSHALL, VICAR OF BRIXWORTH, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.

God Almighty first planted a Garden; and indeed it is the purest of human
pleasures: It is the greatest Refreshment to the Spirits of Man: without which,
Buildings and Palaces are but gross handy Works. BACON'S AMERICAN FROM THE
SECOND LONDON EDITION, Considerably Enlarged and Improved.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, AN ESSAY ON QUICKLIME, AS A CEMENT AND AS A MANURE, BY
JAMES ANDERSON, LL.D. F.R.S. F.A.S. S.

VOL. 1.

Boston: PRINTED BY SAMUEL ETHERIDGE, For JOSEPH NANCREDE, NO. 49,
Marlboro'-Street. 1799.

TO THE REVEREND WILLIAM TALBOT, M. A. CHANCELLOR OF THE CHURCH OF SARUM, THIS
INTRODUCTION TO GARDENING IN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF MANY AND GREAT FAVORS, IS, WITH
THE SINCEREST RESPECT AND GRATITUDE, INSCRIBED,

BY HIS MUCH OBLIGED, AND FAITHFUL SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
THE former edition of this book having been approved by persons whose opinion
i^ its favor is flattering to the author, ^e all not hesitate to put it to
press again; and (...) given it a very careful revisal; ^^^racing the
opportunity of making every improvement in his power, which his zeal for the
CAUSL of Gardening has made him very diligent in.

This edition is printed on a larger letter, and yet, by means of a closer,
longer, and wider page, at least one fourth more of matter is inserted; and the
(long) nineteenth section is a new one, where much is comprehended in a way
never before attempted. In this, and every part of the work, particularly the
Calendar, the great object has been to concentrate information; and it is hoped
the young gardener will find this Introduction to he sufficiently comprehensive
and perspicuous to give him satisfaction, and prove his sure GUIDE to the
Knowledge and Practice of GARDENING.

CONTENTS.
SECTION I.
PRAISE OF GARDENING.
ITS worthy nature, page 1. Testimonies in favor of (...), by Lord Bacon, Mr.
Cowley, 2. Anonymous, Mr. Evelyn, 4. Mr. Addison, Mr. Harvey, 5. Mr. Cow^er, 6.
Sir William Temple, Le Pluche, Virgil and Mr. Cowley, 8.

SECTION II.
CONCERNING VEGETATION.
Of earth, 8. Of water, 9. Of air, 10. Of fire, 11. Of light, 12. Of nature; of
seeds, 14. Of plants, 17. Of roots; of stems; of leaves, 18. Of branches; of
^uds, 20. Of flowers, 21. Flora's festival, 23. Of ^theism, 24.

SECTION III.
OF THE FORMATION OF A GARDEN.
In general, 25. Of size; of situation, 26. Of screens, 27. Of the soil; of
best fruit wall, 28. Of its border; (...) intersecting walls, 29. Of
wall-trees; of distances, 30. Of intermediate spaces; of plums, cherries, and
^ears as wall-fruit, 31. Of apples and mulberries as ditto. Of evergreen
hedges, 32. Of gravel walks, 33. Of edgings, 34. Of grass walks and others; of
standard trees, 35. Of dwarf standards and espalier trees, 36. Of distances,
37. Of standard apricots; of carrots, ^^oseberries, and raspberries, 38. Of
strawberries, 39. Of shrubs and flowers, 40, 41. Asparagus and arti^^okes, 40
Of herb-beds; of water, 41. Of mixed gardening; of a flower garden and
parterres, 42. Of ^n orchard, 43.

SECTION IV.
OF THE CULTIVATION OF A GARDEN.
What it is, 45 Of ^rene ing^^d manuring, 46. Of dung; of cropping, 47,48. Of
weeding, earthing up, and digging; of thinning crops, 49. Of pricking and
planting out; of over cropping; of dibble planting; of watering, 50, etc. Of
shading; of plants requiring water, 51. Of watering wall-trees; of an engine;
of the quality of water, 52, etc. Of management in general, and particulars,
54, etc.

SECTION V.
OF PROPAGATION.
Of seed, new and old, 58. Of saving seed, 50, etc. Of preparing seeds, and
season for sowing, 61, etc. Of succession crops; of sowing on fresh ground, 62.
Of the depth to sow at, and quantity to be sown, 63, etc. Of propagation by
suckers, 65. By slips, offsets, and division, 66. By cuttings and layers, 67,
etc.

SECTION VI.
OF A NURSERY.
Its uses, 69, etc. Of the soil, etc. 71. Of fruit-stocks, 71,73,74. Of tree
seeds and sowing, 72. Of management, 73. Of raising apple trees, 74. Of pear,
plum, cherry, ^ig, quince, and mulberry, 75. Of medlar, grape and chestnut, 76.
Of walnut, filberd, current, gooseberry and berberry, 77. Of raspberry and
strawberry, 78. Of raising forest-trees, 78. Of good seed; of management, 80.

SECTION VII.
OF GRAFFING.
Nature of, 81. Of skill in performing; Tools for the work; of heading stocks,
82. Of scions, 83. etc. Time for the work, 84,86. Of cleft-graffing, 85. Of
whip-graffing, 86. Of slicing, 87. Of bark-graffing, 88. Of side-graffing 89.
Of approach-graffing, or inarching, 90. Of budding, or inoculation, 91, etc.
Fruits usually budded, 92. Method or budding, 94, etc. Of buds that have taken,
96. Observations, 96, etc.

SECTION VIII.
OF PLANTING.
Choice of plants, 98. Act of planting, 99, etc. Of covering, watering and
staking, 102. Of late planting; of the soil in general, 103. etc. Of the soil
which suits each sort of fruit, 105. Of situation, 106. Of climate, 107. Of
season for planting, 108. Do the work in the best manner, 109.

SECTION IX.
OF SHRUBS, SHRUBBERIES, etc.
Value of shrubs; of raising them; times for planting deciduous and ever-green
sorts, 110, etc. Of preparing the ground, III. Of the act of planting shrubs;
their disposition, distance and situation, 112, etc. Of flowers for shrubbery
borders, 113. Management of shrubberies; of hedges, or divisions, 114. Of
covering old walls, 115.

SECTION X.
OF FOREST TREES.
Planting them recommended, 115, etc. Of the method of doing it, and preparing
the ground, 117. Of under wood; of distances for timber trees, 118. Of
plantations, single trees, and avenues, 119. Of season for planting; size of
trees; act of planting and fencing, 120. Or dressing and thinning; of
ornamental trees, 121.

SECTION XI.
OF RURAL GARDENING.
Recommended, 122. Advice about; works of art, 123,130. Hints to be attended
to, 124, etc. Enclosure for exotics; of walks, 125. Of flowery decorations; of
the introduction of water; of anticipation, 126. Shenstone on rural elegance,
127. Ornamental gardening; means of effecting it, 128, etc.

SECTION XII.
OF PRUNING.
Wall trees require skill, the obtaining which recommended, 132. Of their
proper form; of heading young ones down, 133. Method of training, 134, etc. Of
regulating trees in summer, 135, 142. Of nails and shreds, 136. Of the hammer;
of trellises, 137, etc. Constant attention necessary; of their health, 138,
etc. Causes of injury, and means of benefit pointed out, 139, etc. Of their
fruitfulness, how to provide for; of thinning the branches, 142. Mode of
bearing; of shortening shoots: of furnishing wood, 145. Time for winter
pruning, 146. Apricot, particulars of, 147. Re-pruning and frequent training;
to preserve blossoms, 148, etc. Of thinning the fruit, 150. Of gathering it,
and its dropping, 151. Of transporting fruit; of pruning vines, 152, etc. Of
figs, 156. Of pears, 157, etc. Of apples; of mulberries, 161. Of cherries, 162.
Of plums; of filberds, 163. Of currants and gooseberries, 164. -- Thus far as
to wall-fruit. Of pruning espalier trees, 164. Of heading young ones down, 165.
Of standard sorts, 166, etc. Of pruning shrubs; raspberries, 169. Berberry;
strawberry, 170. General directions for pruning flowering shrubs, particulars
for the rose, honeysuckle, sweet-briar, lilac, jasmine, senna, hypericum
frutex, spirea frutex, and gueldre rose. -- Forest trees for pruning, see
section X.

SECTION XIII.
OF HOT-BEDS.
Their use and nature, 174. Errors to be avoided; place proper for them;
working the dung, 175. Dung-hills, care of; size of beds, 176. Of moulding it;
substitutes for horse dung, 177. Method of making a bed^ quality of the dung;
of unsoiled straw-beds; of grass-beds, etc. 178. Of bark-beds: to increase the
heat of a bed; to decrease the heat; articles for which hot-beds may be made
use of, 180.

SECTION XIV.
OF RAISING CUCUMBERS AND MELONS.
Early crop of cucumbers, 181. Time to begin; seed-bed to manage, 182, 186,
188. Of moulding the bed; of sowing, 183. Sowing to be repeated; of
pricking-out, etc. 184. Particulars of management, 185. Of burning, 185, 186,
188, 191. Of watering; of a second bed 186. Of steaming; of covering; of
stopping the plants; of the fruit-bed; of earthing it, 188. Of planting, 189.
Of shifting potted plants; of management in general, 190, etc. Setting the
fruit, 192. Of pruning; of second crop, 103, etc. Of third crop, 195, etc. Of
melons; time to sow, etc. 197. Of the seed, 198. Of sowing, airing, etc. Of
second bed, 199. Of stopping the plants; of third bed for fruiting; of soil
proper; of planting, 200, etc. Of pruning and training, 201. Of moulding up; of
general management, watering, etc. 202. Of ripe fruit, 203. Of second crop,
204. Of paper lights, 205, etc. Of third crop, 206.

SECTION XV.
OF ESCULENTS.
Their usefulness, 207. When to gather them; culture of alexander; artichoke,
208. Asparagus, 209. Bean, 213. Beet; boorcole, 215. Brocoli, 216. sprout;
cabbage, 217. Red cabbage, 218. (...) turnip, 215. Carrot, 218. Cauliflower,
220. (...) 222. Celeriac; chardon, 223. Chou de milan wort; cucumber, 224.
Endive, 225. Garlic; (...) horseradish, 227. Jerusalem artichoke; kidney 228
Leek; lettuce, 231. Melon, 233. Navew Onion, 234 Parsley, parsnep, 235. Pea,
236. toe, 239. Pumpio^, 243. Radish, 244. Salsafy; 245. Scorzonera; sea cale,
247. Shalot; skirret nach; turnip, 250. French turnip; turnip cab 251.

SECTION XVI.
OF HERBS, etc.
Culture of angelica; balm, 252. Basil; bor^^ bugloss; burnet; camomile, 253.
Capsicum; carra^^ carduus benedictus; chervil; cives; clary, 254. C^^ander;
corn-sallad; cress, 255. Dill; fennel; finoc^ 256. Hyssop; lavender; marigold,
257. Marjor^^ mint, 258. Mustard; nasturtium, 259. Parsley; pen royal, 260.
Purslane; rape; rampion; rocambo rosemary, 261. Rue; sage; samphire, 262. Savou
smallage; scurvy grass; sorrel; succory, tansey, 263 Tarragon; thy me; tomatum,
264. Wormwood, 265

SECTION XVII.
OF FRUITS.
Variety of sorts. Difference in those of the sa^^ name, 266. Confusion in
names, 267. Season, effect of; choice directed; care in planting; sorts of
apple etc. 268. Of the apricot, 269. Berberry; corn^cherry; chestnut; current,
270. Fig; filberd; gooseberry; grape, 271 Medlar; mulberry; nectarine, 2^^
Peach; pear, 273. Of gathering pears, and keep them, 274. Plum; quince;
raspberry, 275. Servi^^^ strawberry; walnut, 276.

SECTION XVIII.
OF FLOWERS.
Of the classes, annuals, biennials and perennials, 277. Praise of flowers; of
annuals in general, etc. 278. Culture of tender annuals, 280, etc. Of
scoop-trowels and watering-pots; of potting plants, 283. Of watering them, 284.
Of potting hardy flowers; second sowing of tender annuals; of sowing the less
tender sorts, 285, etc. Of the hardy kinds, 287. Second sowing of hardy
annuals, 288. A caution; culture of biennials, 289. Of perennials. The Dutch
famous for producing new flowers. Directions for raising bulbous and tuberous
roots, 290. Of raising fibrous rooted sorts, 291. General culture of bulbous
and tuberous roots, 292, etc. Soil suitable, and depth at which to plant, 293.
Disposition, distances and management, 294, etc. Of forwarding spring bulbs in
water glasses, etc. Of stalk bulbs, 295. Of saving seed. Bulbs are yearly
renewed. Propagation of flowering shrubs, 296, etc. Of American sorts.
Particular use of the hand-glass, 297. A useful observation, 298.

SECTION XIX.
LISTS OF TREES, SHRUBS, AND FLOWERS.
Concerning them, 298. Time of flowering, colors, names, 299. Sorts. List of
forest-trees, 300. Observations on ditto, 301, etc. List of large deciduous
ornamental trees, 304. Observations on ditto, 305, etc. List of smaller
deciduous ornamental trees, or large shrubs, 307. Observations on ditto, 308.
List of the lowest deciduous trees, or shrubs, 309, etc. Observations on ditto,
312, etc. List of evergreen trees, 316. Observations on ditto, 317. List of
evergreen shrubs, 319. Observations on ditto, 321. List of flowers -- tender
annuals, 323. Observations on ditto, 324. Less tender annuals, 326.
Observations on ditto, 328. Hardy annuals, 332. Observations on ditto, 335.
List of biennial flowers, 336. Observations on ditto, 337. List of fibrous
rooted perennials, 34^. Observations on ditto, 346. List of bulbous, tuberous.
List thy rooted perennials. Observation on ditto, 360. Detached articles --
auricula, 365 Carnation, 366. Geranium, 368. Pinks, 371. Polyanthus, 372.
Tuberose, 373.

SECTION XX.
A CALENDAR.
Of the general work of gardening, 375. January, the particular work of, 376.
February, 378. March, 380. April, 383. May, 386. June, 388. July, 391. August,
394. September, 397. October, 399. November, 402. December, 405. Close, 408.

* In the course of the work, a few articles are referred to, which were
designed to be inserted at the close of the book, but are omitted in order to
introduce others more important.

The necessity of an Index is precluded by the above table of contents, the
work being so much in the alphabetical form.

SECTION I.
THE PRAISE OF GARDENING.
IT is of importance to the welfare of any art, that those whose taste inclines
toward it, should have a good opinion of its utility, and competent notions of
its principles. It is therefore the design of the present section, to show the
degree of estimation that the art of Gardening is worthy of; and it is the
object of the next section, to assist in the acquiring that knowledge of
Nature, upon which the art so much depends.

The employments of horticulture, certainly conduce to health of body, and
peace of mind; and great indeed are the charms and recreations of a garden well
stocked, and well managed by the hand, or under the direction of the owner
himself: It at all times serves him as a source of rational amusement, and
honest satisfaction.

The praise of gardening, it is presumed, can hardly be too highly extolled;
and, as this has been so well done by the best of men, and most respectable of
writers, it may better answer the purpose to produce their sentiments, than to
attempt new ones.

What we admire, we praise; and when we praise,
Advance it into notice, that its worth
Acknowledged, others may admire it too.
COWPER. The great Lord Bacon's opinion of gardening, given in the motto of the
title page, is certainly both just and honorable. The agreeable Cowley speaks
of his darling nature as enjoyed in a garden, thus: When God did man to his own
likeness m^^e,
As much as clay, though of the purest kind,
(By the great potter's art refined)
Could the divine impression take,
He thought it fit to place him, where
A kind of heaven too did appear,
As far as earth could such a likeness bear;
That man no happiness might want,
Which earth to her first master could afford;
He did a garden for him plant,
By the quick hand of his omnipotent word;
As the chief help and joy of human life,
He gave him the first gift, -- even before a wife.
And well he knew, what place would best agree,
With INNOCENCE and with FELICITY.
And we elsewhere still seek for them in vain,
If any part of either yet remain.
If any part of either we expect
This may our judgment in the search direct;
Cod the first garden made, and the first city, -- Cain.
When Epicurus to the world had taught
That pleasure was the chiefest good,
(And was perhaps in th'right, if rightly understood)
His life he to his doctrine brought,
And in a garden's shade, that sovereign pleasure sought.
Whoever a true epicure would be,
May there find cheap and virtuous luxury.
Nor does this happy place only dispense
Such various pleasures to the sense,
Here health itself does live
That salt of life, which does to all a relish give,
Its standing pleasure, and intrinsic worth,
The body's virtue, and the soul's good fortune, health.
Methinks I see great Dioclesian walk
In the Salonian garden's noble shade,
Which by his own imperial hands was made:
I see him smile, methinks, as he does talk
With the ambassador, who came in vain
TO entice him to a throne again:
If I, my friends, said he, should to you show
All the delights which in these gardens grow,
It Is likelier much that you should with me stay,
Than it is that you should carry me away:
And trust me not, my friends, if every day
I walk not here with more delight
Than ever after the most happy fight,
In triumph to the capital I rod,
To thank the Gods, and to be thought myself a God.


Mr. Cowley's passion for retirement was indeed very strong; but might he not
well say, "Is there not a cause?" He had been conversant in high and public
life, and was very glad to leave Those dangerous posts, where customs ill agree
With virtuous rules, or sound philosophy.


As one reason for his going out from Sodom (as he speaks) to his little Zoar,
he asks, Who that has reason and his smell,
Would not among roses and jasmin dwell,
Rather than all his spirits choke
With exhalations of dirt and smoke;
And all the uncleanness which does drown
In pestilential clouds a populous town.


Mr. Cowley says of a country life, -- We are here among the vast and noble
scenes of nature; where we walk in the light and open ways of the divine
bounty, and where our senses are feasted with the clear and genuine taste of
their objects.

Another poet retiring from town to a cottage and a garden, says, I strait
betook myself to trace the laws
Of nature, upwards to its fruitful cause;
And, digging mines of true philosophy,
The mystic stone I found, whose energy
Applied, transmutes some matter, some sublimes,
Drawing within my circle golden times.
Often amused with feats of gardening,
Delightful exercise, I work and sing!
And moving cheerful feel not half my toil,
Like swains that whistle, while they plough the soil.
Should any disbelieve, I here invite
Such infidels to come, and trust their sight.
-- Incorrupt and happy days were those
When Roman Consuls exercised their hoes;
Whose leisure hours in country cares were spent,
And whose diversions all were innocent,
Often their own arbours furnished out their feast,
And thus their fruits and sallads relished best.
ART OF GARDENING.

Mr. Evelyn, who had so great knowledge and experience in the way of gardening,
speaks its praise in these words: Though the gardener's life be a laborious
one, yet is it full of tranquillity and satisfaction. A condition furnished
with the most innocent, laudable and purest of earthly felicities; and such as
does certainly make the nearest approaches to that blessed state, where only
they enjoy all things without pains.

Mr. Addison says, I look upon the pleasure which we take in a garden, as one
of the most innocent delights of human life. A garden was the habitation of our
first parents before the fall. It is naturally apt to fill the mind with
calmness and tranquillity, and to lay all its turbulent passions at rest. It
gives a great insight into the contrivance and wisdom of providence; and
suggests innumerable subjects for meditation.

Mr. Hervey, in his meditations on return from a walk, having entered the
flower garden, and called it a beautiful spot, says, "Here nature always
pleasing, every where lovely, appears with peculiar attractions. Yonder she
seems dressed in her dishabille; grand, but irregular. Here she calls in her
handmaid art; and shines in all the delicate ornaments, that the nicest
cultivation can convey. Those are her common apartments where she lodges her
ordinary guests: This is her cabinet of curiosities, where she entertains her
intimate acquaintance. My eye shall often expatiate over those scenes of
universal fertility: My feet shall sometimes brush through the thicket or
traverse the lawn, or stroll along the forest glade: but to this delightful
retreat shall be my chief resort. -- Thither will I make excursions, but here
will I dwell."

On the Kitchen Garden Mr. H. observes, "Here those celebrated qualities are
eminently united, -- the utmost simplicity with the greatest neatness: none of
the productions affect finery. If it be pleasing to behold their orderly
situations, and their modest beauties; how delightful to consider the
advantages they yield! What a fund of choice accommodations here! What a source
of wholesome dainties, and all for the enjoyment of man! Not one species of all
this is a cumberer of the ground. Not a single plant but is good for food, or
some way salutary. And with so beneficent an economy are the several periods of
their ministration settled, that no portion of the year is left destitute of
such nourishing esculents as are best suited to the temperature of the air, and
the state of our bodies. Oh! why should the possessor of so valuable a spot
envy the condition of kings? Since he may daily walk amidst rows of peaceable
and obsequious subjects; every one of which tenders him some agreeable present,
and pays him a willing tribute. Such as is most excellently adapted, both to
supply his wants, and regale his taste; to furnish him at once with both plenty
and pleasure."

From the amiable Cowper something on this subject may be added. See the garden
in his Poem, entitled the TASK.

O friendly to the best pursuits of man,
Friendly to the thought, to virtue and to peace,
Domestic life in rural leisure passed.
Scenes formed for contemplation, and to nurse
The growing seeds of wisdom; that suggest,
By every pleasing image they present,
Reflections such as meliorate the heart,
Compose the passions, and exalt the mind.
Oh! blessed seclusion from a jarring world,
Which he, thus occupied, enjoys! Retreat
Cannot indeed to guilty man restore
Lost innocence, or cancel follies past,
But it has peace, and much secures the mind
From all assaults of evil, proving still
A faithful barrier, not o'erleap'd with ^ase,
By vicious custom raging uncontrolled
Abroad, and desolating public life.
The morning finds the self-sequester'd man,
Fresh for his task, intend what task he may.
-- If the garden with its many cares,
All well repaid, demands him, he attends
The welcome c^ll.
Had I the choice of sublunary good,
What could I wish, that I possess not here?
Sir William Temple commended the employment and care of a garden as his
settled choice, saying, -- For my own part, as the country life, and this part
of it more particularly, were the inclination of my youth itself, so they are
the pleasures of my age.

Le Pluche justly asserts. -- Of all the employments in life, none is more
simple, natural, and entertaining, than the cultivation of plants.

Virgil of old, describes the happiness of a cultivator of the ground in
gardening and planting, as equalling all the opulence of kings, in the ease,
content, and freedom of his mind. This is one of the most assured truths; and
happy are they who are free from the entanglements of artificial life, and not
over-burthened with honor and greatness.

Gardening leads to planting and farming, of which, collectively, Mr. Cowley
prettily speaks, -- It is one of the best natured delights of all others, for a
man to look about him, and see nothing but the effects and improvements of his
own art and diligence; to be always gathering of some fruits of it, and at the
same time to behold others ripening, and others budding; to see all his fields
and gardens covered with the beauteous creatures of his own industry; and to
see, like GOD, that all his works are good.

SECTION II.
CONCERNING VEGETATION.
AS a good GARDEN affords much pleasure and profit, it deserves every
attention; and certainly the cultivation of it cannot be too rationally
pursued. It is therefore that a sketch of the Nature of Vegetation is here
attempted; for the use of those who are unacquainted with the subject to assist
them in the pursuit of gardening with understanding.

Let the ELEMENTS be first considered.

EARTH, as an element, considered in itself, appears not to serve to the
support of man or beast. Though from it all things spring as from a common
womb; yet independent of the other elements, or extraneous matter, it neither
produces, nor affords, any thing like food. Assisted however by these, there is
a combination of powers, the effects of which are equally beneficial and
wonderful.

It has been the most general opinion, that the earth acts only as a receptacle
for nutriment; and as a resting place, or means of supporting plants erectly;
to imbibe rain, dews, air, etc. needing continually to be replenished by
manures, or from the atmosphere. Indeed, it is not to be conceived, how the
earth, considered as a solid, should pass through the capillary parts of
plants. Experiments have proved, that the earth is very little, if at all
exhausted, by the growth of plants, and consequently affords a presumption that
plants are not fed by it.

There has been much controversy about the food of plants. A respectable writer
says, The saline, unctuous, and subtle slime, which the water separates from
the coarse earth, and keeps in a dissolved state, is the principal nutriment of
plants. And indeed, this is the opinion of others, who have treated the
subject, and is justified by inquiries into the nature of the sap of plants.

Those who contend for an inherent power in earth to nourish plants, lay a
stress upon the circumstance, that various earths have various qualities,
suited to different parts. But to this it may be said, that the earth being
more or less binding, or composed of differently constructed particles,
occasions the parting with the food committed to it, the more or less freely,
or altered according to its various modes of percolation.

WATER appears to have much to do in the subsistence of plants, for they
consume a great deal; and either die, or are at a stand, when they are deprived
of it, or at least of humidity from the air. It is proved, that seeds and
plants, and in short all substances, consist chiefly of water, being reducible
to liquids in a great degree. Thus some ancient philosophers maintained, that
all things have their nourishment and growth from water.

Water (with respect to vegetation) has been defined to be, a mixed fluid, in
which are all sorts of particles proper for the composition of plants. But
though seeds will germinate in water, they will not proceed to grow in it.
Rooted trees however have been set in water at the spring, (as a rose) and put
forth leaves fair, though pale; and it is well known, that many slips and
branches of plants will strike root in water readily: and gathered flowers not
only keep fresh in it, but increase in fize, and buds open their foliage.

The natural state of water uninfluenced by heat is ice, and when very cold, it
is too dense a fluid to pass through some of the capillary vessels of plants;
yet a small degree of heat rarefies it; and as its globules are capable of
being infinitely divided by a proportionate heat; it is thus rendered fit to
pass through the finest canals. It mixes with the nutritive properties that are
lodged in the earth, and is (at least) the vehicle of the food of plants. In
this respect alone, it is most valuable. Without it, nothing could be
elaborated in nature, no fermentations be wrought, and animals and plants would
die of thirst!

AIR is found in a considerable degree in water, in plants, and in fruits. It
may be almost demonstrated (says one) that the vegetable nourishment is
principally in the air: The tree Sedum lives and grows for years without earth
or water.

How necessary this element of air is to man, the commonest observation
evinces. Deprived of air, life is quickly lost, and in a depraved state of it,
runs fast to sickness and death. Thus plants are found to flourish in a free
and open air, and grow pale and languish in the contrary. But air is not only
necessary for the leaves of plants to breathe in, but their roots require it:
Plants will not do well if the soil is too much bound for the air to penetrate
freely about them.

The sickliness of housed plants has been said to be owing greatly to want of
motion, supposing it equally necessary to vegetable as to animal life; and the
bending the several parts of plants by wind, must necessarily impel the juices
forwards. Rest can only be esteemed a joint cause of sickliness, and the want
of fresh air, must still be the chief; for pure air is fraught with animating
principles, and by its attenuating and elastic properties, separates the gross
juices, keeps the sap in motion, and the plants in health.

If it be asked what air is, and of what it consists? It may be answered,
Particles of wet and dry bodies volatilized and rendered elastic by fire. The
air or atmosphere that surrounds our earth, contains a mixture of all the
active volatile parts of the whole habitable world; that is, of all vegetables,
minerals and animals. Whatever perspires, corrupts or exhales, impregnates the
air; which, being acted upon by the solar fire, produces within itself, all
sorts of chemical operations, dispenses again those salts and spirits in new
generations, which it had received from putrefactions.

FIRE, as it operates from the prime body of it the SUN, gives life and energy
to all, completing the process of nature. There is no existing without it. Its
total absence would presently bring all to the coldness of death!

The sun by its warmth (conveyed by the air) sets forward that fermentation in
the earth, and gives that animation to plants, which effects growth, and
concocts their juices to make them fruitful.

It is by the rarefaction of the air and juices contained in the roots, and all
the parts of a plant, that motion and expansion are given to it; and by its
ascending force pushes into buds, leaves flowers and fruits; sending off
superfluous and excrementitious moisture into the atmosphere, thus giving us
the scents peculiar to each. That the sun does this, is evident from what is
experienced in artificial warmth, hurrying on the growth of plants, which is
ever proportionate to the heat applied, provided there is a proper supply of
moisture.

Without the vivifying sun, the other elements would be inactive matter, and no
longer would the fig tree blossom, nor fruit be in the vine: The labor of the
olive would fail, and the fields yield no meat. The operative power of the sun
reaches the deepest recesses, to beds of metals, and to "the place of
sapphires; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof."

What blessings does this bounteous planet pour
On the glad heart of man, when rolling round
His azure road, he scatters as he flies,
To warm his raptured bosom, light and joy!
NEWCOMB. The SUN is the fountain of LIGHT. This glorious object of creation,
as a luminary, gives cheerfulness both in nature and appearance to all things:
If light is not so necessary to existence as heat, life would yet be miserable
without it.

As to vegetation, we may observe, without light plants get always sickly, and
would not exist long if deprived of it. Light (says Mr. Evelyn) philosophically
considered, is half their nourishment. All plants turn to the light as to a
powerful attraction, or, as if conscious how necessary it is to their
existence. That accute philosopher Dr. Berkeley says, light at the same time
that it heats, does wonderfully rarify and raise the sap. He is of opinion,
that light is the same with Ether, and that it so mixes with other bodies, as
to enter into their composition, and increase their weight. The aromatic
flavor of vegetables (says he) seem to depend upon the sun's light as much as
colors do.

The physical properties of that ethereal substance, which is so subtle and
pervading as light, we may well believe to be various and wonderful, though
inconceivable.

Behold the light emitted from the sun,
What more familiar, and what more unknown?
While by its spreading radiance it reveals
All nature's face, it still itself conceals.
How swift the effulgent emanations fly
Through the blue gulf of interposing sky!
Millions of miles, so rapid is their race
To cheer the earth, they in few moments pass.
Amazing progress! at its utmost stretch;
What human mind can this swift motion reach?
BLACKMORE. How impressively are we taught to value the blessing of light, by a
view of daybreak in a fine summer's morn! -- The hour of morn returns,
Unbars the gates of light, and opens wide
A prospect to the eye, which now unfolds
Ten thousand beauteous scenes which lay concealed
Before in darkness: now the radiant heavens
Glitter with azure paved, with roses strewn.
With lively verdure each green plain arrayed,
Each flower puts on a glow of richest hue;
The wide creation now is seen adorned
In all her rich attire and beauties bloom,
Viewed by each wandering eye with raptured joy!
All the rich pomp which theaters display
Their shining ornaments, the lustres hung
In the proud courts and palaces of kings,
Lose their diminished light, and die away,
When'er the sun unfolds his radiant beams!
NEWCOMB.

From this view of the elements, it appears that their offices are mutual, and
that there is a harmony o^ them, necessary to the welfare of plants, in a view
to which art may sometimes assist nature.

Having seen a little into the nature of the ELEMENTS, as they relate to the
existence of plants (the knowledge of which may be useful) let us proceed to
consider the plants themselves. Their structure has been examined by the
greatest geniuses, and though able, (perhaps) to determine little of Nature's
laws, yet has the pleasure and satisfaction they have reaped repaid them their
trouble. Though after all our researches, we are finally led to this
conclusion, that God's works, like his ways "are past finding out;" yet if
there is any satisfaction in knowledge, or any consolation in piety, these
gratifications are to be sought in, and will be reaped from attentive and
modest inquiries into Nature. "The works of the Lord are great, sought out of
all them that have pleasure therein."

Nature is nothing but the art of GOD; a bright display of that wisdom, which
demands an eternal tribute of wonder and worship.

The notions which arise from Nature's light
As well adorn the mind as guide her right,
Enlarge h^^ compass, and improve her sight.
These never the breast with vain ambition fire,
But banish pride, and modest thoughts inspire.
By her informed we blessed religion learn,
Its glorious OBJECT by her aid discern.
The rolling worlds around us we survey,
The alternate sov'reigns of the night and day;
View the wide earth adorned with hills and woods,
Rich in her herds, and fertile in her floods.
Walk through the deep apartments of the main,
Ascend the air to visit clouds and rain:
And while we ravished gaze in Nature's face,
Remark her order, and her motions trace.
The long coherent chain of things we find
Leads to a cause SUPREME a wise creating mind.
BLACKMORE. SEEDS of plants stand first to be considered, and they are truly
wonderful. What large plants from seeds no bigger than a grain of sand! What a
stately oak from a little acorn.

The seeds of fern, which by prolific heat,
Cheered and unfolded, form a plant so great;
Are less a thousand times than what the eye
Can unassisted by the tube descry.
BLACKMORE. Seeds contain, in embryo, the plant they are to produce, in all its
parts; which they have preserved from age to age, seeds producing plants, and
plants seeds, etc.

They are covered with coats that are finely and closely wrought, the better to
keep the moisture of the earth from coming in too suddenly upon the lobes, or
the little plant which might occasion their rotting, and we find that almost
every sort of seed, by means of these coverings, must remain different lengths
of time in the earth, before they begin to germinate. Some will not spring in
the ground till the second year after they are buried, while others will begin
to shoot in three days after sowing. This is owing to their requiring different
degrees of moisture, heat and air, to make them germinate; i. e. bring them
into a state of fermentation.

The substance of seeds appears to be spent first in feeding the radicle, and
then in the nourishment of the two first, or seed leaves, which are commonly of
a different size, shape and substance from the proper leaves of the plant: From
between these comes a shoot bearing the true leaves. The lobes (or substance)
of seed, consist of a farinous nutriment, adapted to the infant state of the
plant, when softened and dissolved by the moisture of the earth, which extends
and unfolds the young plant (or plumule) in the same manner, as the nourishing
juice in the eggs of animals hatches their embryo. The seed leaves therefore
contain a fugary juice, which is evident from insects so greedily biting them,
and their pleasant taste in sallads, as those of turnips, cabbages, etc. They
are thick and succulent, calculated to imbibe air and moisture from the
atmosphere, for the support of the tender plant, that might otherwise suffer by
drought: for it must proceed in growth, or it would quickly die. When the
radicle has struck downwards, the office of the seed is evidently to nourish
these leaves, as is seen by the seed coming above the ground with them,
exhausted of its substance -- a mere shell sticking to the top of the leaves.

But some plants have no seed leaves properly so called, as c^ru; which has
therefore been deemed by some, not strictly a seed, but a bud, or bulb.

It has been do ^bted whether all plants have seed, because some have not been
observed to produce it. To conclude that they have, is however more agreeable
to the uniformity of the divine procedure, and altogether to reason.

Seed may be so small as not to be discerned with the help of unequal glasses,
as we know there are many not discernible without them; and with this
minuteness, it may be extremely fugacious by its slight adhesion to the plant.

The truth is, GOD originally ordained that plants should proceed from seed,
and they do, ( Genesis i. 2.) It was long said that fern bare no seed; but this
has proved a demonstrable mistake. That Mushrooms, produce seed, we need not
doubt. Many of the mosses are so small plants, that the microscope only can
discover their flowers, and some the plants themselves are but barely thus
discernible. A great variety of seeds are wafted about continually in the air,
and produce their kind, whenever they light upon a proper matrix. Whatever has
been objected there appears good ground for believing, that there is no natural
production, either in the vegetable or animal kingdom, but what comes from the
seed, or egg of some parent, plant or animal.

As to certain plants appearing where none were before, we know that some seeds
will keep many years, when deep buried, and being afterward brought to the
surface, have vegetated, as the wild mustard, etc. Besides the wind carrying
some sorts of seeds to a considerable distance, birds also drop a great many,
so that plantations of oaks, etc. have sprung up by means of crows carrying the
acorns, and dropping them in cracked ground.

PLANTS follow seed, and we find them proceeding in a steady unceasing
progression toward maturity, to their destined end, i. e. production of the
like, from which they sprung (seed) to preserve the species. And the economy of
nature is so regular, that a certain portion of time is invariably kept
(barring accidental circumstances) for this business. So certainly does Nature
pursue her end in all respects, that the identical species is always preserved,
as to the distinguishing properties of each, though the soils that seeds are
sown are so various. Altogether under the same circumstances are produced the
sweet smelling flower, the nourishing corn, and the poisonous plant, though
differing much in strength, in figure, and other particulars.

The juices in the vessels of plants undergo (according to their conformation)
different fermentations, and thus become altered, in which chemistry of nature,
its powers and results are wonderfully exact.

Peculiar pores peculiar juice receive,
To this deny, to that admittance give.
Hence various trees their various fruits produce,
Some for delightful taste, and some for use.
Hence sprouting plants enrich the plain and wood,
For physic some, and some designed for food.
Hence fragrant flowers with different colors died,
On smiling meads unfold their gaudy pride.
BLACKMORE. The ROOTS of plants are to keep them fixed in the earth and to draw
food from it; which they do (chiefly at least) by their ends which have been
therefore called mouths: In general they affect an horizontal growth for the
benefit of the sun and air, and never descend above a certain depth from the
surface.

By means of the root, nourishment proceeds through the pipes and capillary
conduits of plants, continually from the earth, and by the action of the sun
and air, circulates, rarifies, and distributes itself. This juicy food, swells
the little bags, or cells (of which the substance of plants is composed) and
following the different modifications thereof, filtrates athwart the parts. For
example. That which is most pure and sine, serves to nourish the flowers and
fruits; that which is not, supplies the branches and leaves, and roots; the
most gross and earthy serves for the bark; and the most oily i^ for gum and
rosin. Just the same as we find it in animals, where the food they receive into
the stomach pa^l^s afterward into the blood, circulates into the vessels, and
pursuing its different degrees of attenuation, serves to nourish the different
parts of the body.

The STEMS or trunks of plants are for the support of the head, and to convey
juices from the roots upwards for the leaves, branches, etc. and are composed
(as the roots) of bladders, and various conduits for air, ^ap, etc.
perpendicular, spiral, and horizontal, from the pith to the bark. These vessels
may be somewhat seen with the naked eye, as in slices of the young snoots of
nut, apple tree, and vine, but very evidently by a microscope. It is
observable, that some plants which are weak and pipy have knots at proper
distances to strengthen them, and others have claspers to ^old them up; while
others are robust enough to brave the fury of a tempest.

The LEAVES of plants are very variously, but beautifully constructed in their
form and substance; and if we consider them as attracting nourishment from the
root and the atmosphere, and as perspiring and respiring, they are most
evidently essential to vegetation; and so we find that if the stems, or
branches of a plant, are considerably deprived of them, they become stunted and
diseased, and if any fruit be on them, it proceeds slowly in growth, and is ill
flavoured. The quantity of nutriment which a plant derives from the earth, is
in proportion to the number and size of its leaves; thus that they may
uninterruptedly perform their offices, they are distributed in as distinct and
separate a mode as possible.

The under and upper part of leaves are different, and have separate offices;
the under is rough and porous, as if adapted to imbibe the rising moisture of
night dews; and the upper, or closer, to exclude the grosser parts of the
atmosphere, and to imbibe some finer food, as to "draw the live either." Thus
leaves will not endure to be reversed, as is seen by the quick return to their
right position, when forced from it, and that till this is effected, they
perform not their proper functions.

That the glossy surface of leaves have an intimate connection with the light
is evident, as they rise and fall (in a degree, some plants more and others
less) as the sun does. If they are turned from the light they twist themselves
toward it, as if they had enjoyment, and were conscious of the benefit. The
curious will meet with gratification relative to this subject, by consulting
Hill's Tract On the Sleep of Plants; or his Eden for October.

One of the offices of leaves, seems to be, to subtilize and give more spirit
to the abundance of nourishing sap, and to convey it to the little buds at
their foot sta^k, to whose welfare and life they are essential.

If the texture of the leaves be scrutinized, they are found curiously
ramified; the ribs and fibers of each seeming much like a (...) reading plant.
The ramifications hold a close communication with each other; so that the
principal rib sends out lateral ones less strong, and they again an infinite
number of fine ones in all directions; and these are vessels of two kinds, viz.
for sap and air. As leaves throw off a great deal of excrementitious, so do
they imbibe a great deal of nutritious moisture, as is evident from the general
refreshments received from dews. Yet we are not to conclude, that the other
parts of plants do not the same in a less degree; and the rough bark of the
trees, and the outer vessels, are well calculated to detain moisture, which
they convey to other parts.

The BRANCHES of plants come next to be considered. How beautifully do they
spread, and how uniformly do they proceed, keeping up precisely the same mode
of growth, one from another throughout the whole; till the head of the plant,
or tree, attains its customary size, and own peculiar form; which, if it has
grown with native liberty, proves always of an agreeable symmetry.

The texture of branches consists of the same kind of vessels as the stem, or
trunk; but here it may be observed, that there is yet a specific difference in
the vessels of the various parts, as is concluded from their affording juices
of a different flavor and effluvia in the bark, wood, leaves, flowers and
seeds; so that from the same plant are extracted medical properties of very
contrary nature.

BUDS are like seeds, as they contain the future growth of branches and fruit
in miniature, so that for instance, in the buds of a currant-tree may be
discovered (by a microscope) even before winter, the woody branch, and the
bunches of fruit. The future fruit also has been viewed in the bud of a vine.
In the short buds of pears, which appear at Midsummer, an indifferent
microscope will show the blossoms designed for the April following. The buds of
a Mazerion being examined at Midsummer, had the blossoms discovered in them,
though the time of their blow is not till February; but these are only
particular instances.

Thus it appears, that the leaves, blossoms, fruit, and branches, on all trees,
are formed the year before; and so their fruitfulness in the year they bear, is
no otherwise the consequence of that season, than that nature has gone without
any destructive check in her progress, and particularly at the time of
flowering, when many blossoms are destroyed by inclement weather, and by wet
only as much as any thing.

The FLOWERS of plants have not yet been particularly noticed, but of them
something must, and much might be said.

Go, mark the matchless workings of the power
That shuts within the seed the future flower;
Bids these in elegance of form excel,
In color these, and those delight the smell;
Sends nature forth, the daughter of the skies,
To dance on earth, and charm all human eyes.
COWPER. Flowers have a general structure in substance, similar to the other
parts of plants, as to vessels for sap, air, etc. only are so much the more
exquisitely formed, as the leaves are of so delicate a texture. They are formed
in the bud while in the pith, and so consequently are the fruit and seed.

The flowers of many proceed from a bud, or knot, the leaves or parts of which
do first cover the flower contained therein, whilst it is yet unable to bear
the inconveniences of the weather, and defend it from the same; and after the
flower is blown, they keep up its leaves, that they may not hang confusedly
together, but regularly represent their beauties to the eyes of the beholders:
This is exemplified in the carnation. Those that have a cup to sustain their
leaves, are weak in their texture, and so need this support; but those that are
strong have it not, as lilies, tulips, etc. Those that have no cup are,
however, covered in the bud by some sheath, or tegument, to preserve them,
while young, and yet too tender to be exposed.

The leaves of flowers protect and conceal the seed of those that bear it,
where nature secretly works to the great end of propagation. The seed is the
natural offspring of the flower, and when this is once well formed, the several
parts of the flower dwindle and disappear. So that while we are admiring the
color, shape, and perfume of these delightful companions of our walks, they
are kindly engaged to provide the means of perpetuating pleasure to us.

The care which the AUTHOR of nature has taken to preserve the seed of plants,
by the flower leaves which contain the embryo, as in a matrix is admirable! The
flowers themselves come not forth till the season suits their particular
temperament, many are hid till then under the coverture of the earth, and those
that dare to continue above ground all the year, have yet their gems carefully
locked up, and thus their succession and their fruits are secured to us.

The flowers of plants have a remarkable property, when they begin to unfold,
and the seed is yet young and tender; they observe the course of the weather,
day and night, opening and shutting their flowers accordingly. There is also a
property of some flower plants, twining round solid bodies, or fixing
themselves to them by claspers, laying fast hold of what may be in their way.
Flowers have many admirable properties and parts, that might be considered
distinctly, if it were designed to speak of them botanically.

From flowers (of which every month in the year has its beauties) we eventually
gratify the palate, by a valuable nectar, and from many we immediately reap
agreeable odours; but it is for their color to delight the eye, that we
chiefly cultivate them; and in this respect we may exclaim with the poet, Who
can paint like nature? Can imagination boast
Amidst its gay creation, hues like here is?
Or can it mix them with that matchless skill,
And lose them in each other, as appears
In every bud that blows? --
THOMPSON.

But not only the colors delight the eye, the form of flowers are objects of
admiration. The leaves of the plants (not to mention the shades of their green
and variegations of other colors) are of various symmetry, some plain, others
indented, some hard, some soft, smooth, hairy, etc. Flowers are composed, some
of only one, others of several and numerous leaves. Here it appears like a
large vessel gracefully opening. There it forms some grotesque figure, in
imitation of a muzzle, head piece, or cowl. Here it is a butterfly, a star, a
crown, a radiant s^n. Some are scattered on the plant without any art; others
compose nosegays, globes, tufts of feathers, garlands, pyramids, etc. -- The
seeds of plants are as variously formed as their leaves and flowers.

The following description of Flora's festival and the month of May, may very
well finish the notice here taken of flowers.

The good Posthumous chose the first of May,
To Flora sacred, and observed the day
With holy rural rites, that won by prayer
She might diffuse her blessings over the year;
His homely neighborhood in green privet dressed
With strict devotion kept the cheerful feast,
And crowned with chaplets, to fair Flora bring
The first and freshest beauties of the spring.
Gardens are now with choice perfumes supplied,
By these and thousand nameless sweets beside:
It Is the gay month of all the youthful year,
When nature smiles serene, and calm the air;
In the tall grass the soft Favonius plays,
And nightingales repeat their tuneful lays^;
The flocks too frisking over the flowery vale,
With eager joy the cheerful season hail.
RAPIN. In considering the works of nature, it is hardly possible but to feel
both concern and indignation at the folly of Atheism, and the absurdity of the
Atomic philosophy. Both have been well exposed by many writers, and completely
so by Sir Richard Blackmore, in his Poem on the Creation; from which, though
some extracts have been already made, let the following be added, -- How dark
is human reason found,
How vain the man with wit and learning crowned;
How feeble all his strength when he essays
To trace dark nature, and detect her ways,
Unless he calls its AUTHOR to his aid
Who every secret spring of motion laid;
Who over all his wondrous works presides,
And to their useful ends their causes guides?
These paths in vain are by inquiries trod,
There Is no philosophy without a GOD.
The ETERNAL MIND'S existence we sustain
By proofs so full, by evidence so plain,
That none of all the sciences have shown
Such demonstration of the truths they own.
Good heaven! that men who vaunt discerning sight,
And arrogant from wisdom's distant height,
Look down on vulgar mortals who revere
A CAUSE SUPREME, should their proud building rear,
Without one prop the ponderous pile to bear,
Ye friends of Epicurus look around,
All nature view with marks of prudence crowned.
Mind the wise ends which proper means promote,
See how the different parts for different use are wrought;
Contemplate all this conduct and design,
Then own, and praise, the ARTIFICER DIVINE!


For several observations, and some passages on vegetation, Mr. M. thinks it
proper to acknowledge, that he is indebted to the excellent Mr. Derham, and
others.

SECTION III.
OF THE FORMATION OF A GARDEN.
THE garden here meant, is one where vegetables, fruits and flowers are
cultivated under the same enclosure. Considering the profit and pleasure to be
reaped from a good garden, it is certainly an object of some consequence to the
comfort of human life. It will not, therefore, be prudent in any one who has a
garden to form, to be niggardly, either in allotting ground for it, or in
expense and trouble to prepare and lay it out in the best manner.

The agreeable work of making a new garden can happen to ^ew; and when it does,
soil, situation, and space, all favorable, are happy circumstances not always
at command: It often indeed happens, however, that pieces of ground are taken
into use as additions, and some judgment should be exercised in the choice,
that the business may be well done.

To help toward resolving on the quantity of ground it may be prudent to
cultivate as a garden, a general idea may be given in observing, that an acre
with wall-trees, hot beds, pots, etc. will furnish employment for a man, who at
some buisy times will need assistance. The size of the garden should, however,
be proportioned to the house, as to the number of inhabitants it does, or may
contain. This is naturally dictated; but yet, it is better to have too much
ground allotted than too little, and there is nothing monstrous in a large
garden annexed to a small house.

Some families use few, others many vegetables, and it makes a great difference
whether the owner is curious to have a long season of the same production, or
is content to have a supply only at the more common times. But to give some
rule for the quantity of ground to be laid out, a family of four persons
(exclusive of servents) may have a rood of good working ground, and for every
head after rood extra.

But if it can, let the garden be rather extensive in proportion to the family;
for then, a useful sprinkling of fruit trees can be planted in it, which may be
expected to do well, under the common culture of the ground about them; and
then, a good portion may be allotted for that agreeable fruit the strawberry in
all its varieties; and the very disagreeable circumstance of being at any time
short of vegetables, may be avoided. It should be considered also, that
artichokes, asparagus, and a long succession of peace and beans, require a good
deal of ground. Hot-beds will also take up much room, if any thing considerable
be done in the way of raising cucumbers, melons, flowers, etc.

The situation of a garden should be dry, but rather low than high, and as
sheltered as can be from the North and East winds. These points of the compass,
should be guarded against by high and good fences; by a wall of at least ten
feet high: Indeed lower walls do not answer well for fruit trees, though eight
may do. A garden should be so situated, to be as much warmer as possible, than
the general temper of the air is without, or ought to be made warmer by the
ring, and subdivision fences: This advantage is essential to the expectation we
have from a garden locally considered.

As to trees planted without the wall, to break the wind, it is not to be
expected to reap much good this way, except from something more than a single
row; i. e. a plantation. Yet the fall of the leaves by the autumnal winds is
troublesome, and a high wall is therefore advisable. Spruce firs have been used
in close shorn hedges; which therefore, as evergreens, are proper to plant for
a screen in a single row, though not very near to the wall; but the best
evergreens for this purpose are the evergreen oak, and the cork tree. Rows of
Lombardy poplars, or the witch elm, planted close, grow quick, and have a
pretty summer appearance behind a wall: but are of little use then, as a
screen, except to the West; where still, they may shade too much (if planted
near) as they mount high. In a dry hungry soil, the beech is proper. The great
maple, commonly called the sycamore, is handsome, of quick growth, and being
fit to stand the ^udest blasts, will protect a garden well in a very exposed
situation: the wind to be chiefly guarded against as to strength, being the
westerly.

The form of a garden, may be a square, but an oblong is to be preferred; and
the area rather a level; or if there be any slope, it should be southward, a
point either to the East, or West not much signifying, but not to the North, if
it can be avoided, because crops come in late, and plants do not stand the
winter so well in such a situation. A garden with a northern aspect, has,
however, its advantages, being cooler for some summer productions, as
strawberries, cauliflowers, etc. and therefore to have a little under
cultivation, so situated, is desirable; especially as succession ground. If the
soil of a garden is strong, it would be worth while, where sand (not a binding
sort) is to be had, to make one warm spot of it light for the purpose of a few
forward things; as in a good sandy soil, plants will germinate at spring, from
a fortnight to a month sooner than on clay.

The soil that suits general cultivation best, is a loam; rather the red than
the black; but there are good soils of various colors, and this must be as it
happens: The worst soil is a heavy clay, and the next a light sand I^ the soil
is not good; i. e. too poor, too strong, or too light, it is to be carefully
improved without delay. Let it first, at least, be thoroughly broke, and
cleaned of all rubbish, to a regular level depth at bottom as well as top, so
as to give full eighteen inches of working mould, if the good soil will admit
of it, for none that is bad should be thrown up for use. This rule of bottom
levelling, is particularly necessary when there is clay below, as it will hold
up wet, which should not stand in any part of the garden. When a piece of
ground is cleared of roots, weeds, stones, etc. it would be of advantage, to
have the whole thrown into two feet wide trenches, and lay thus as long as
conveniently may be. The ground cannot be too well prepared; for when this
business is not performed to the bottom at first, it is often neglected, and is
not conveniently done afterward; and so it happens, that barely a spade's
depth (or less) is too often thought sufficient to go on with. There is this
great advantage of a deep staple, that in the cultivation of it, the bottom may
be brought to the top every other year, by double trenching and being thus
renewed, less dung will do: Tap-rooted things as carrots and parsnips require a
good depth of soil. See Improvement of Soils, in the miscellaneous section.

The aspect of the wall designed for the best fruits, may be full South, or
rather inclining to the East, by which it will catch the sun's rays at its
rise, the cold night (...) be earlier and more gently dissipated, and the
sco^^^ing rays of the afternoon summer's sun are sooner (...). By thus having
the walls of a garden not directly to the four points, the North wall is
greatly advantaged, by having more sun.

The border next this wall should be of very good earth, about two feet deep,
rising a little toward the wall. A free moderate loam, or some fresh maiden
soil, not too light, is necessary; and if it is not naturally there, let no
trouble be spared to procure it, if it can be had, so as to make all the
borders promising good; and in order to this, if manure is necessary, let it
rather be that of rotted vegetables, or a small quantity of turf, or wood
ashes, or a less of soot, or salt, for the roots of fruit trees should not meet
with much dung, at least of horses; that of cows is the best, or that of sheep
or hogs, will do, well-rotted, and well mixed, etc. being worked in the
borders, as long as possible before the trees are to be planted. Let the holes
be some time opened beforehand, that they may be sweetened and improved by the
exposure. Thus due care will be taken, and all things ready to go about the
work of planting properly.

The borders for peaches, etc. cannot be too wide, for in a few years the roots
will spread a considerable way; and that they may do it without impediment of
rubbish in the walks, and without meeting with a bad soil, is of much
consequence to the health and fruitfulness of the trees.

If a garden is large and square, a second South wall, running down the middle
of it would be very useful; and so, if large and long, a cross wall or two
might be so, as giving opportunity for the cultivation of more trained fruit
trees; and if there is any idea of forcing fruits, these intersecting walls,
ranging East and West, are proper for it (as situated within the ring fence)
being furnished with flues, etc.

The best fruit border being prepared for peaches, nectarines and apricots, or
vines and figs, the trees should take their residence there (if the leaf is
falling) about the latter end of October, or as soon after as can be. If the
middle of December be past, February is then the time, though some gardeners
plant all winter, if the weather is open enough at the time to work the ground.
March may do, or even [upon a pinch] the beginning of April.

Wall-trees should not be older than two years from grafting, or budding. Much
disappointment has been the consequence of planting old trained trees, through
their being accustomed (perhaps) to a contrary soil, or by damage done the
roots in taking the trees up; and thus, instead of saving time, it has
frequently been lost, being obliged, (after years) to be replaced with young
ones. But if trained trees are to be made use of, let them be planted as early
as possible, with full roots, and in a particularly good soil: The necessity of
removing trees to a better (or at least as good a soil) has been denied, but it
is certainly reasonable.

The distance to plant, should be about eight or nine inches from the wall, and
let apricots, peaches, and nectarines be twenty feet asunder, more or less,
according to the height of the wall; though for the small early sorts of wall
fruits, sixteen feet will do. As the larger apricots, however, grow freely, and
do not well endure the knife, they should have twenty-five feet allowed them:
This is for a wall of nine or ten feet high; if higher, the distance may be
less, and if lower, the contrary. This room may seem (to some) too great, but
experience proves it necessary; for when trees are planted in too confined a
space, after a few years it is troublesome to keep them pruned within bounds;
and the cutting they must have, makes them run to wo^^d, and thus to become
less fruitful. Fig Trees require as much room as the apricot, or rather more,
as they grow freely and must be suffered to extend without shortening. In low,
sheltered, and warm situations, as under a high wall to the N. and E. the
fig tree sometimes does very well as a dwarf standard, particularly in the
gardens of great towns. Though other trees are best planted in October, this
should not be till March.

The intermediate spaces between peaches, nectarines, and apricots, may have a
vine, a dwarf-cherry, or current, or gooseberry-tree, of the early sorts, as
the smooth green and small red, to come in early; and improved in the beauty,
size, and flavor of their fruit, by the advantage of situation. But
wheresoever grapes can be expected to ripen, there let a young plant, or
cutting, be set, though the space be confined; for the vine (freely as it
shoots) bears the knife well to keep it within bounds. If the wall be high, the
cherry, or plum, may be half-standards, which being after a while kept above,
will be more out of the way of the principal trees; though dwarfs may be
trained so as not to interfere. Some have planted half-standards of the some
kind of fruit as the dwarfs: but which ever way is used, let the intermediate
trees be pruned away below in good time, in order to accommodate the principals
as they mount and extend. The better way however is, when the wall is tolerably
covered, ^o extirpate the intermediate trees, as (when large) they impoverish
the border, and too much rob the principals of nutriment: If taken up well, in
season, and pruned properly, they may be planted elsewhere. Something merely
ornamental may occupy the vacancies also, as some double blossomed fruit tree,
passion tree, roses, etc. or in a fine situation, a pomegranate; any of which
may be removed when their room is wanted. See section viii. On planting.

Plums, cherries, and pears, may occupy the other walls, the two former at
about fifteen, or it may be twenty feet asunder. Cherries, however, will not
generally do well in a full North aspect; but any sort of plum (rather a late
one) and summer pears, and also nut trees will, if you choose to train them.
There should always be some currants and gooseberries in an E. and N.
situation, at the distance of eight feet, where they will be easily matted,
(when ripe) to come in late, as October, November, or perhaps December. Pear
trees of free growth are hardly to be kept within tolerable compass on low
walls; but if attempted, should have at least thirty feet allowed them. The
best sort of winter pears deserve a southerly wall to ripen them well, and
improve them in size and flavor: The gable end of a house is peculiarly proper
for a pear tree, as it affords room which they require. Apples may do on a
wall, (and if any on a good wall, let it be the golden pippen) yet the practice
is seldom adopted: The same may be said of mulberries, though they come to
bearing much sooner against a wall; but they need not have a South aspect,
indeed it has been asserted, that they do the best in a North one. For walls,
choose trees of moderate wood, rather than strong; for it can hardly be too
fine, if well rooted, clean, and healthy: This observation particularly applies
to the pear. Quince stock pear trees are chosen in order to a confined growth;
but they do not succeed in a dry soil, or hot situation.

When the planting of a garden is finished, it will be a good way to have a
plan of it taken, with the names of every peculiar tree marked thereon, in
their place, to be assured of the sorts when they come to bear. Some have the
names of the trees painted on boards, and placed behind them, to which, if
added the time of ripening (fixed late enough) it would prevent a premature
plucking by visitors, etc.

Here it may be observed, that if any evergreen hedges are desired, in or about
the garden, yew, box, alaternus, celastrus, phillyrea and pyr^cantha, may be
kept low, and clipped in form, if so desired: In addition to which, if a few
roses were intermixed, it would have a pretty effect.

The walks come next under consideration, and they are to be begun from the
best wall; the border of which being regularly levelled and settled, the walk
is to be governed by it. A wide border next the South (as was said) is best for
the trees, and moreover for the many uses that may be made of it for the
smaller early, or late tender esculents, and a few early cauliflowers. For the
sake of a pleasant sheltered walk, to have the South border narrow may be
desirable; but on no account let it be within six feet. Take care that this
walk is not sunk too much, and that it have a bottom of good earth, as deep as
where the trees are planted. Let the body of gravel be thin, and then the roots
of the trees will be admitted to run properly under the walk, and find
nourishment; where, if they were stopped by rubbish, they would be apt to
canker, and irrecoverably disease the tree.

The number and breadth of the walks must in a measure be determined by the
quantity of allotted ground; exceeding in these particulars where there is
room. But better be few and wide, than many and contracted. If the garden is
small, one good walk all round is sufficient; and if long and narrow, the cross
walks should not be many: six, or eight feet, is not too wide in a moderate
sized garden.

If the grounds be laid out in Autumn, leave the walks alone till Spring, when
the earth will be settled. Gravel laid toward Winter would be greatly
disturbed by the frost, and the necessary work about the ground. But whenever
made, the garden ought to be first carefully brought to an exact level; then
the walks should be nicely stumpt up, keeping the tops of the stumps (as
guides) to the true pitch of the quarters by a light line, made of good hemp,
that will bear pulling tight. Proceed to take the earth out of the alleys about
eight inches deep, which may be thrown toward the middle of the quarters, to
give them an agreeable, but small convexity, which makes them look well.

Rake the bottom of the walk level, and lay the gravel to within two inches of
the top of the stumps. The gravel will settle a little, but the walks should
always be about three inches at their edge, below the quarters, or these will
have a flat and mean appearance.

If Edgings are to be made, in order to separate between the earth and gravel,
especially if of stone, or wood, or box, they should be done first, and they
will be a good rule to lay the walks by. See, of Edgings in the miscellaneous
section.

If plenty of Gravel, lay it moderately fine: if scarce, some small stones, or
rubbish of any kind, may be laid in first, and rammed down with a broad rammer;
but do not spare for a little expense, if gravel can be had, as a thick coat of
fine gravel, will bear relaying, or turning over, to refresh it occasionally.
As the gravel is laid, let the operator neatly rake the larger parts down to
the bottom, leaving a fine surface, in a small degree unequal, i. e. just barely
sufficient to throw off wet: walks that lie high in the middle are unpleasant
to both eye and feet, and cannot be so well rolled.

When deep walks of gravel are designed, for the sake of the mould dug out of
the alleys, it should be forborne, and laid thin, if any trees are designed to
be planted near the edge; for if the roots of trees have not a good soil to
strike into, when they reach the walks they will not (as has been observed)
prosper. In laying gravel very thick, it is a good way to do it at two courses;
the first of which may be rough as it comes from the pit, yet still raking the
larger parts down, and then ramming or treading it; and the last course should
be of all screened materials.

A few yards of gravel only should be laid at a time, before ramming or
treading; after which it may be necessary to go over it with a fine iron rake,
tooth and back; and then a whole walk being finished, it should be repeatedly
pressed with a moderately heavy roller; and again after the next rain that
falls: so will the walks become level and firm. The caution may be repeated,
not to lay the walks too high, on account of the ill appearance it gives the
quarters and borders when on the same level with them.

Grass Walks may do where gravel is scarce; but the latter is so clearly
preferable, that except for a little variety in large gardens where there are
many walks, they will hardly be made choice of. They are troublesome to keep in
order, and if much used are apt to get bare, and out of level, especially when
narrow; they are also frequently damp to the feet, if not wet. See
miscellaneous Section, Of Grass Plats.

Camomile, has been used also to form green walks, planting it in sets about
nine or ten inches asunder; which naturally spreading, and the runners being
fixed by walking on them, it forms a pleasant carpet, and is esteemed
medicinal, from the effluvia arising by the pressure of the feet.

Sand may be adopted for walks, and there is a binding sort of it, that does
very well; but lay not any of it too thick, as it is the less firm for it.
Drift sand is a good substitute for gravel.

Coal Ashes strewed thinly in the alleys are better than nothing, as they at
least serve to keep the feet dry and clean. If the garden be a strong soil,
these ashes (when worn down) may be thrown out of the walks, with a little of
the earth, and will prove a good manure for the quarters.

Sea Shells make very good walks.

All trees designed to be planted, are to be thought of before winter. Those of
the wall have been spoken of; and as to standards they must have a fair depth
of good soil (not very dungy) to grow in, for it should be remembered, that
tree roots in a garden are prevented from running over the surface, as they do
in an undisturbed orchard. It is necessary that some caution should be used not
to dig the ground too near, and too deep about garden trees; lest loosening the
roots, they should not be able to stand the wind; and because the nearer the
surface any root grows, the more, and better fruit, the tree bears.

But the fewer standard trees in a garden the better, as they take up much
room, and by their shade prevent the proper growth of vegetables that are any
thing near them* so that if a garden is small, there should be no trees except
those of the wall. The ^ase is different where there is ample room; and the
blossoms of fruit trees (apples particularly) are so delightful, that if they
produced nothing for the palate, there would be a sufficient inducement to
plant them for ornament; but let them be dwarf standards, in preference to
espaliers.

Dwarf-standards occasion less trouble to keep them in order than espaliers,
and are generally more productive. Espalier trees are seldom managed well, and
commonly appear unsightly; they are stiff and formal, and obstruct the sight in
viewing the quarters of a garden, which (if in order,) are worthy of coming
under the eye; and the violence done to nature, to keep espaliers in form, is
paid by pains and disappointment. A writer of repute; observes, apples on
French paradise stocks, planted at eight or nine feet distance, pruned and kept
in an easy manner, make a fine appearance, and produce better fruit, and in
greater quantities, than when they are in espaliers; Dutch paradise stocks
however last longer, and are altogether superior. For managing Dwarf trees, see
Pruning.

If Espaliers are planted, let them be only fruit of the best sorts, and in
spacious gardens, where they may have a good length and height allowed them to
grow freely; and let it be resolved to do the business neatly. If they may have
nothing better than poles or stakes to be trained to, let them at least be
strait, and of some equality in size, as to height and thickness, smooth, and
not too clumsy for the purpose; fix them well in the ground, upright, and about
nine inches asunder; at first only four feet from the ground, and raised as the
trees advance in height. Apples on paradise stocks best suit for espaliers in
small gardens, and pears on quince stocks, as they maintain a small size; but
they do not so well in espaliers as dwarf standards, being apt to decay by the
cutting they must have: These dwarf stocks in general (at the best) do not
however produce enduring trees.

Espalier trees should rather be trained to sawed materials properly framed
together, smoothed and painted But for a year or two, they may be fastened to
light stakes, when they will have formed a head, to begin to train them for
bearing in the neat manner proposed; i. e. to slips of deal joined to light oak
posts as trellises. Whether the slips be placed perpendicularly, or
longitudinally seem indifferent. If the longitudinal mode of training be the
best approved, strong iron wire, may be recommended to run through the posts,
instead of slips of wood, as it shades less and is stronger and neater. If
upright slips are used, they should be slender, and from six to eight inches
distance, according to the greater or less freedom of growth of the tree. The
height may be also according to the nature of the tree, from five to six feet;
and it will not answer to have them lower. Only a moderate length of trellis
(on each hand) need be fixed at first, and so additions made as the tree
extends The posts may be about four feet asunder, the first on each hand, being
two feet from the stem of the tree.

Apples should be allowed twenty-four feet and pears thirty; except those
gr^ff^d on paradise or quince stocks, (...) which little more than half may do.
Cherries and Pi^^^s should have about eighteen or twenty feet allowed them.
Quinces, ^^diers, mulberries, and filberds may also be espaliered. The trees
should be planted about a yard from the edge, but farther off were better,
especially if the walks lie deep of gravel or poor materials.

The Breda or Brussels apricots have succeeded in espaliers, as also in dwarf
and full standards; but the general climate of the place must be mild, and the
situation they are planted in must be very sunny and well sheltered: The fruit
from standard apricots is very fine, and abundant; but they come not to bearing
under several (sometimes ten or twelve) years.

Currants, gooseberries and raspberries do well espaliered, as to a production
of early and fine fruit.

Trees of a more humble nature, and shrubs, next occupy attention in furnishing
a garden. Currants and gooseberries (as bushes) should be planted three feet
from the edge, and full six feet asunder. Some of these very useful shrubs
should grow in every aspect of the garden, in order to have a succession of
their fruits, as long as may be. Those who choose to plant whole quarters of
currants and gooseberries, ought to do it at six feet asunder in the rows, and
the rows eight feet from one another.

Raspberries may be set in plantations, in rows five feet asunder allowing
three feet between the plants. Though these shrubs are best by themselves, yet
here and there by the walks a detached bunch may be kept, or here and there one
against a warm wall. Between rows of raspberries planted at the above distance,
cole^^orts, early cabbages, cauliflowers, and lettuces may be set or spinach
sowed (rather in drills) the raspberries having their pruning and dressing
early in Autumn. Every year a little rotten manure, dug in close about the
roots, (and deeper as the plantation gets older) will insure fine fruit.
Raspberries are not very nice as to soil and situation; but the twice bearing
sort should have a dry soil and warm birth to forward the crops, that the last
may be in time: See that the plants to be set have good brushy roots, and two
or three eyes to each near the stems, for the next year's bearing.

Strawberries may be planted at the edges of borders and quarters, either in
single or double rows, (rather the latter) for the convenience of gathering,
and for ornament; but the common and best way is, in four feet beds, with
eighteen inch or two feet alleys on which beds may be five rows of the wood and
Alpine, four of the scarlet and pineapple, three of the Carolina, and two of
the Chili; setting the plants at the same distance in the rows, as the rows are
from one another in what is called the quin^unx order. In a good, cool, loamy
soil, which suits them best, a little more distance may be allowed the four
first sorts; and in quite a dry light soil, somewhat less, that they may shade
one another the better.

The best situation for strawberries is an open and sunny one, as thus they
bear more, and finer flavoured fruit, but they are not very difficult. Some of
the scarlets should be planted under warm walls to come early, and in a
situation of little sun to come in late. The woods bear shade as natural to
them, and the alpines do tolerably well in it: As lengthening the season of
fruit is a desirable circumstance; for these three sorts (at least) the
situation should be various.

The most proper time for planting the strawberry is the first moist weather in
September, (or even earlier) that they may be established in the ground before
winter, and they will bear the better the first year: Frost is apt to throw up
late planted ones, and injures, if not destroys them. Those planted in spring
often suffer from drought, and bear very little the first year, except the
alpines* Choose forward runners for planting, and let them be from beds in full
bearing, i. e. of two or three years old; for plants from old beds are not so
fruitful: Take care also they come from beds producing fruit good in its kind,
and true as to sort: Much depends on this, see Nursery. Press them mould to the
roots, give them a watering, and again once or twice, if the weather prove dry.
Some gardeners let them run ^ver the beds, which in a dry, light soil, may be
prope^^^; but in this case, a greater distance should be allowed them at
planting.

If the alpine sort be planted on a warm border, eighteen inches asunder, and
suffered to spread, the young runners will produce fruit the same year, and
sometimes this prolific strawberry bears till November.

Fresh plantations of strawberries should be made every fourth year, though in
a good soil, and with good management they will continue longer; so that where
they are suffered to run, the plants being frequently renewed, and old ones
removed, beds have borne tolerably for ten years. Some gardeners insist that
this spreading mode is the best way of cultivating the strawberry. In a dry
season, such full covered beds have the advantage; but in a wet one, the fruit
is apt to rot, though still in such a season, it is cleaner than from plants
growing in an open way; but this carries the appearance, and rather argues
neglected culture. See the sections, nursery, pruning, and fruits. The method
of keeping them in detached plants produces the largest and best ripened fruit,
and on the whole is preferable; for this practice there cannot be a stronger
argument than that those follow it who cultivate the strawberry for sale.

The watering of strawberries should not be neglected, doing it almost daily,
when in flower and setting their fruit, if the weather proves dry, particularly
to those under a warm wall; but this is not to be continued when the fruit is
toward ripening, which would spoil the flavor, and dispose them to decay.

Flowering Shrubs may be dispersed about, and herbaceous perennial flowers; but
plant them not too near the edge, lest they hang over the walks: The bulbous
sorts may however be within six inches.

Asparagus and artichokes should be thought of, but they take up much room, and
in small gardens may therefore be left out. It will be of little use to have
less than fifty or sixty feet of asparagus beds, as there would be so few heads
to cut at a time; and artichokes must be planted wide, or they will not grow
large and fleshy, in which their merit consists.

Let not pot herbs be forgot, but provide a general herbary in that part of the
garden which is most contiguous to the kitchen.

Having spoken of stationary things, the routine of the seasons must dictate
the rest; and the inclinations of the palate will refresh the memory to take
care of providing the most necessary and agreeable esculents and herbs.

Perennial flowers have been mentioned; but let fancy direct as many annuals,
and biennials to be cultivated, as room can conveniently be found for, that the
garden may be well ornamented.

In furnishing a garden with shrubs and flowers, respect should be had to their
usual height, their bulk, color and season, that the mixture may be properly
varied, appear harmonious to the eye, and come in regular succession,
throughout the year; the latter end of which is seldom provided for so well as
it might be with late flowers, which should be set in warm situations, as their
proper place. In the most dreary months, by judicious planting, evergreens in
their neat and cheerful "winter liveries," may be viewed from our windows, and
serve instead of flowers.

Those who garden upon a large scale, should take care to have every thing
proper and convenient liberally provided for the work. Let there be a well
situated place for hot-beds, with some building as a tool house, and (if dry)
for keeping bulds, seeds, and herbs. A house also on the spot, for the gardener
to reside in, is desirable on many accounts, where there is much to look after:
Those also who garden upon a small scale will do well to have every needful
implement.

If water can be introduced, and kept clean with verdent banks around it, it
would be found very useful where a garden is large; but let it be as near the
center as possible, as the most convenient situation. It should be fed from a
spring, and if* it could, be made to fall, or drip into the reservoir, because
the trickling noise of a rill, is to many an ear agreeable music.

Mixed Gardening, as comprehending the useful with the sweet -- the profitable
with the pleasant, has been the subject hitherto, but if the flower garden and
the kitchen garden are to be distinct things, the case is altered; yet not so
much, but that still the kitchen garden should be adorned with a sprinkling of
the more ordinary decorations, to skirt the quarters, which should be chiefly
those of the most powerful sweet scents, as roses, sweet-briars, and
honey-suckles, wall flowers, pinks, minionette, etc. in order to counteract the
coarser effluvia of vegetables, or (perchance) of dead leaves.

The flower garden (properly so called) should be rather small than large; and
if a portion of ground be separately appropriated for this, only the choicest
gifts of Flora should be introduced, and no trouble spared to cultivate them in
the best manner. The beds of this garden should be narrow, and consequently the
walks numerous; and not more than one half or two thirds the width of the beds,
except one principal walk all round, which may be a little wider. The gravel
(or whatever the walks are made of) should lie about four inches below the
edge. The beds for tulips, hyacinths, an^^^nies, ranunculuses, etc. may be
three and an half, or four feet wide, and those for single flowers the same, or
only two and a half feet wide in the borders; which was the most usual breadth
in the old flower gardens, of which we have hardly an instance now. Let the
mould lie rather rounded in the middle.

Figured parterres in scrolls, flourishes, etc, have got out of fashion, as a
taste for open and extensive gardening has prevailed; but when the beds are
regular in their shapes, and chiefly at right angles, (after the Chinese*
manner) an assemblage of all sorts of flowers, in a fancy spot of about sixty
feet square, is a delightful home source of pleasure, that still deserve to be
countenanced. There should be neat edgings of box to these beds, or rather of
boards, to keep up the mould. See, Of Edgings, in the miscellaneous section.

An ORCHARD may be spoken of here; i. e. a spot to plant standard trees in,
which are forbidden a place in the garden; but it must not be a small spot. The
front row, should be half standards, and before these may be a row of dwarfs;
observing to plant the most towering sorts of the full standards behind. The
ground should be dug thoroughly as low as the proper soil is, and if not
naturally good, let it be improved by dung duly rotted, and worked well in a
full spade. In a strong soil time should make a part of the manure. If the
ground be naturally uneven, it will not be proper to level it, as this would
rob the higher parts, and needlessly enrich the lower. A strong cool soil does
best for an orchard, but it must not be wet. If it holds up water, it should be
well drained by trenches, for the roots of trees will not endure to be sudden,
without sickening the branches, and eventually bringing on death by cankering,
etc.

A piece of ground designed for an orchard, would be greatly improved by first
cultivating it as a kitchen garden for a year or two, manuring well at the
time: Or, give it a good tillage; let it have a winter's frost, by deep
trenching into high ridges, turned over in spring, and summer fallowed. The
trees being planted, at proper distances, the ground may be kept under some
sort of crops, for several years to come, with proper dressing. In a large
orchard, the plough may be used for corn, potatoes, etc. It the soil is poor,
every opportunity should be taken to give it a little manure, that there may be
proper food prepared for the roots, as they extend. No doubt many orchards
would bear much better if the whole ground (as the roots extend far) were
before winter dug or ploughed over every second, or third year, and dressed, by
digging in some rotten dung, or sprinkling over the whole (when rough dug) foot
and pigeons' dung, or that of any other poultry; this will wash in by rains and
snows, and do much good. Or if an orchard were ploughed, or rough dug, every
year, immediately after the fall of the leaf without manuring, it would be very
beneficial; for it is not advisable to give trees much manure.

The thinning of the branches of orchard trees, by an occasional use of the
saw, bill, chizzel, or knife, should not be neglected, that the air may have
free course, and the sun access among the branches: This is more especially
necessary in thick planted orchards, and the benefit of proper pruning is very
great, though much neglected. See Pruning of Standards, Section XII.

To succeed well, apples and pears should be planted from thirty to forty feet
asunder, and cherries and plums from twenty to thirty, according to the
richness of the land. The walnut should be rather planted singly; but if in a
number together, ought to be forty feet asunder for fruit, and thirty for
timber. See Nursery. These distances appear great, but it is necessary, as
after a course of years will be found evident. See planting and pruning, Sect.
9, 12.

If the intermediate ground is not cultivated, as before recommended, some sort
of fruit or forest trees may be planted, to be removed in time; or currants,
gooseberries, etc. it may be kept also in grass, the trees thorned, and small
cattle turned in: which grass, as it will come early, will be found
particularly useful to those who have a stock of cattle. On this subject, it
may not be amiss to give the instructions of one of our best gardeners.

It is an error (says he) to let turf cover the surface of the ground in an
orchard. The trees should be at such distances, that a plough may go between
them, and in that case the trees thrive every way better; the breaking of the
ground serves as a manure without its rankness, and the sun and air have free
passage, which is very essential to the good taste and well ripening of the
fruit. Where the plough cannot be used, dig the ground a full spade deep,
picking out the roots of weeds.

The best manure for an orchard, is a mixture of two parts dung and one part
coal-soot. Let this be blended carefully, and spread all over the ground,
between the trees, not piled up in heaps just about their stems, according to
the old practice.

The cultivation of the ground about the trees in an orchard, is more neglected
than any other part of the gardener's business, yet there is not any thing more
necessary: The industry of man in tillage gives the earth in fields its great
fertility, and why should it be denied in an orchard. Hill.

SECTION IV.
OF THE CULTIVATION OF A GARDEN.
THE cultivation of a garden includes the doing all those things that are
necessary, in order to a seasonable and prolific production of the various
vegetables, fruits and flowers, we are disposed to propagate.

The soil must be first attended to, always to keep the fruit borders in heart,
and the quarters in a proper state for use, when called upon to receive either
seeds or plants. Ground should never lie long without stirring; and if all is
so well as might be, or not, it must be borne with; but the soil of a garden
should have a free, sweet and rich soil, by proper digging, etc. or no great
things can be done, as to forward, handsome, or well-flavoured productions. It
should be free, that the roots of plants may not be impeded in the quest of
food; sweet that the food may be wholesome; and rich that there may be no
defect of nutriment.

Trenching the vacant ground in a garden, does good to all soils in the autumn
and winter seasons, and that in proportion to its strength, being indispensibly
necessary for clays: The light soils may do (perhaps) as well by being only
rough dug, which is a method that stronger soils may be also benefited by. The
soil would be still farther improved, by retrenching, or rough digging, once or
twice in the winter, if the opportunity offers, particularly if strong or
stubborn.

When manure is applied, let not the ground be glutted with dung; for a little
at a time, well-rotted, is sufficient, so that it comes often enough, as
opportunity and the nature of the cropping may dictate. It is indeed a sort of
rule with gardeners, that ground should be dunged every second year; but
circumstances may make more or less of it necessary, and rules should never be
indiseriminately applied. If dung is pretty well reduced, as it were to earth,
much less will do, and let it not be buried too deep; but if it is otherwise,
lay it low, to be dug upwards another time, when it is more consumed.

It is an excellent way of manuring, especially where the superficial ^oil is
much exhausted, to spread over ^^otten dung, (...) in autumn, in the winter, or
early in spring, and (...) it remain, till the ground is wanted, before it is
dug in; which should however be slightly dug before the manure is put on, or
forked in a little afterward. This method is particularly to be recommended
where crops of onions, leeks, and such superficial rooting plants are to be.

Dung is often, but should never be used in great quantities, and lie in lumps,
which bread worms, grubs, and insects, and make plants grow two rampant and
rank flavoured. Carrots it cankers, and it disagrees with many things; it is
apt also to make the ground parch, and burn the crops sown upon it in a hot
summer. On these accounts some persons have been induced to dress their gardens
only with good fresh earth; which, if they do not overcrop, will do very well,
being accompained with good tillage.

Vegetables are always sweeter, the less dung is used, and little need be used,
when the natural soil is good and deep; for the earth may be so dug, that what
is at the top one year may be at the bottom the next; which is a maneuver
evidently advantageous, as a good part of the strength of the top soil, is
constantly washing downwards: The method just recommended, of letting dung lie
on the surface for a time is good also, as it abates the rankness of it.

If the ground is in proper heart, every spot may be contrived to be constantly
and successfully cropped. The common gardeners about London, and other great
towns, who give high rents for their land, contrive (manuring well) a
succession of crops, one under another very dexterously; and this sort of
conduct should be imitated by private persons; and thus a little spot, in
skilful and industrious hands, shall be much more productive than a much
greater under contrary management.

A caution must however be observed, that plants do not grow so crowding thick
as to defeat the end in view; and fruit borders must not be much cropped,
furnishing them chiefly with small plants, of short duration, and superficial
growth.

In the occupation of ground, the change of crops will be proper, as each sort
of plant draws a somewhat different nourishment: so that after a full crop of
one thing, one of another kind may often be immediately sown; but it should be
contrived that a wide crop may follow a close one, and contrariwise.

Close crops, as onions, leeks, carrots, etc. are conveniently and neatly
cultivated in beds of from four to five feet widths, with alleys of a foot to
eighteen inches between them.

The seasons proper for furnishing the ground with every particular vegetable,
should be well attended to, that each may be obtained as early as its nature
will permit; and of the seeds and plants we use, care must be taken to procure
the best of the kind, lest after all the trouble of cultivation, disappointment
as to quality should ensue.

The quantity sown and planted is (in a degree) to be determined by the portion
of ground that can be spared; but it should be always a rule, to sow and plant
more than probably enough, as more may happen to be wanted than expected; and a
cross season or other accident, may occasion disappointment. As exact rules
cannot be laid down, the exercise of a little judgment will be necessary, in
order to proportion crops aright; for to have too much of one thing, and too
little of another, is very disagreeable. Attention should be particularly paid
to cultivate those things that are most generally called for, or approved,
having respect to the natural duration of crops, some going off soon, and
others being lasting, and that too according to the season they are propagated
in. See, Of Propagation, in the next section.

Seeds and plants should be adapted as much as possible to the soil and
situation which best suits them; for in the same garden some difference will be
found, not only as to sun and shelter, but quality of the earth. Some parts of
the garden will be richer, some poorer, some deeper of good mould, some
shallower, and some (perhaps) heavier, some lighter; in due attention to which,
the gardener will reap advantage.

Let the ground be well dug, broke thoroughly with the spade, and properly
levelled, when it is to receive seeds or plants; and let no trouble be ever
spared in doing any thing that is understood as at all necessary, and proper to
be done.

Weeding in time is a material thing in culture, and stirring the ground about
plants, as also earthing up, where necessary, must be attended to. Breaking the
surface will keep the soil in health; for when it lies in a hard or bound
state, enriching showers run off, and the salubrious air cannot enter. Weeds
exhaust the strength of the ground, and if they are suffered to seed and f^w
themselves, may be truly called (as Mr. Evelyn speaks) garden sins: The hand
and hoe are the instruments for the purpose; and where the trouble is not too
much, the former will generally be the best, where it is not thought necessary
to stir the ground; which indeed may be done afterward, when all is clean, to
better purpose. Digging where the spade can go, between the rows of plants is a
good method of destroying weeds, and as it cuts off the straggling fibers of
roots, they strike afresh, in numerous new shoots, and are thus much
strengthened. Deep hoeing is a good practice, as it gives a degree of fertility
to the earth.

The thinning of seedling crops is a very necessary thing to be done in time,
before the young plants have drawn one another up too much, by which they
become weak and out of form, and sometimes never do well afterward. All plants
grow stronger, and ripen their juices better, when the air circulates freely
round them, and the sun is not prevented from an immediate influence; an
attention to which should be paid from the first appearance of plants breaking
ground.

In thinning close crops, as onions, carrots, turnips, etc. be sure that they
are not left too near, for instead of reaping a greater produce, there would
assuredly be a less. When they stand too close, they will make tall and large
tops, but are prevented swelling in their roots: better to err on the wide
side, for though there are fewer plants they will be finer.

In the pricking and planting out of crops, be sure to do it as early as may
be; and always allow room enough for this work; and being thus treated,
vegetables will come forwarder, larger, and of a superior flavor. These
advantages are seen in all things, but in lettuces particularly, which often
have not half the room allowed them they should.

Over cropping is of bad consequence also to the ground, robbing it of strength
to no purpose, except increasing the dunghill; it makes it also inconvenient to
weed, rake and clean the ground round about them, which in a private garden at
least it is proper frequently to do: So that while attention is paid to make
the most of a piece of ground, care must be taken, that the contrary is not in
fact the consequence.

Dibble planting, as being easy and expeditious, is the common way of setting
out plants by; but (except indeed quite small ones) they are best put in by a
spa^e or trowel. In the former method, the roots (...) frequently doubled and
distorted, so as to receive (at least) a great che^k, if not to occasion a
failure, when so put out toward winter; but in the latter way, the roots lie
free and easy, and presently establish themselves in health and strength. There
is more in th^^ than gardeners in general allow of.

Watering is a thing of some importance in cultivation, though not so much as
some make it. It is a most point indeed, whether more harm than good is not
(...), done by it, when it is thought generally necessary in a dry season. In a
large garden, it is an Herculean labor to water every thing, and so the
temptation generally prevails either wholly to neglect it, or to do it
irregularly or defectively. To water nothing is too much on the dry side: but
there is such a thing as watering too much which spoils the flavor, and makes
vegetables less wholesome.

But watering will assuredly benefit some things; as (sparingly) new planted
trees, flowers and vegetables. Watering is of use to settle the earth about the
roots of plants newly set, and it is by a close union, (as it were) of the
earth with them, that they prosper. The watering of new planted things may be
to be repeated, but it should not be done too often, as it is then apt to
sicken, and rot the young fibers of the roots. As soon as they are believed to
have got hold of the ground, desist from watering. When any plant is toward
flowering then moisture is more necessary.

Shading of new planted things, particularly flowers, is of much benefit, and
that in proportion as the ^^^son is sunny. As a little water in a cloudy time,
does much good, the imitating a cloud by a shade, is evidently proper, and
frequently necessary to the life of the plant, as neglecting this business has
frequently proved.

Strawberries and cauliflowers are generally watered in a dry season; that is
the strawberries when in bloom to set the fruit, and the cauliflowers when they
show fruit, in order to swell the head. In a light soil this ought particularly
to be done. In very dry weather, early turnips, carrots, radishes, and
small-sallads, will need watering. Slips, cuttings, and layers of any kind will
need water. Pots of flowers must have it frequently.

When watering is undertook, let it be a complete business; i. e. to the bottom
and extent of the roots, as much as may be. The wetting only of the surface of
the ground is of little use, and of some certain harm, as it binds and cracks
the ground, and so excludes the benefit of showers, dews, air and sun, from
entering the soil, and benefitting the roots as they otherwise would do.
Wetting the surface of the ground, (however) in a summer's evening, as it makes
a cool atmosphere, a dew is formed, which pervades the leaves, and helps to
fill their exhausted vessels again.

Watering the roots of wall-trees (if dry weather) when the fruit is setting,
is by some thought necessary. The way to do this effectually, is to make a few
holes at some distance from the tree with a smooth sharp pointed stake, the
better to let the water down; but this may wound the roots, and should only be
practiced in a light soil, and very dry season. To young trees only it can be
of use for the roots of the old ones run far and wide; and it is the small
fibers of these distant roots, on which the tree chiefly depends for food.
Vines should have no water till they are off blossom. ( July) and the fruit as
big as pin's heads; and then if the season be very hot and dry, watering the
roots (if the soil is warm as it ought to be) twice a week will help the fruit
to swell.

An engine to water the leaves of vines, and all other wall trees in a summer
evening, refreshes them much and helps to rid the trees and wall of insects and
filth. Late in the summer, when the nights begin to get cold it is time to
leave off all watering, except things in pots and frames which should have it
then only in the morning. As watering is apt to make ground hide bound and
unsightly, let the surface be occasionally stirred and raked, which will make
future waterings enter the ground the better: when the ground is hard on the
top, the water runs away from its proper place, and half the labor is lost.
Many things are impatient of being kept wet about the shanks, and therefore
watering should be generally at a little distance.

The quality of water used for refreshing plants, is a material thing, and it
is very various in its nature, according to the peculiar earths and mineral
substances, that it passes through. Rain water is by far the best, as appears
by the verdure and vivacity it gives: It is nourishing as being full of
vegetable food, and free from metallic impregnations.

River water is next in fitness, and pond water follows if it is sweet. Well
water is of least account, though circumstances occasion its use the most. So
that in forming a judgment concerning watering, it is not simply to be
considered, whether plants should be watered; but whether with well water and
that too from a pump. Pump water if used directly (to say nothing of its
hardness) it is so cold in summer, that the roots feel an extreme sensation;
for as they are then warm, through a lively fermentation in the earth, extreme
cold so contracts their vessels, that they perform their proper offices with
difficulty, and become consequently diseased.

Hard water is softened by throwing in a little earth, and rather that of a
loamy nature, which will greatly fit it for use. Some persons keep cha^k in
wells, cisterns, etc. to soften the water; and others have kept hard water on
^yster-shells a few days in a tub, with a view to watering flowers, etc. At any
rate, however, let hard water stand exposed to the sun and air, as long as may
be; a few hours will improve it, but a few days will better qualify it for
vegetation.

Water is sometimes enriched with dungs and salts. Some experiments of putting
a small quantity of nitre into water to keep flowers flourishing in phials, and
rooted plants in pots, have been reported to prove beneficial. That courser way
of impregnating water with dungs may be useful to pots of plants that are too
full of roots, or to any thing growing in a poor soil; but the water should not
be made too rank, or suffered to touch the leaves. Sheep's-dung is that which
has been used for the purpose, and is to be preferred, though others may do.
Let the rule be, to impregnate the water about an equivalent to an ounce of sea
salt to a gallon: A stronger mixture might do mischief.

The MANAGEMENT of a garden as somewhat distinct from the cultivation of it, is
an object of consequence; i. e. to keep it in such ORDER, that it may not
offend the eye, or fail in those general impressions of pleasure it is capable
of affording, when things are shown in their best manner. A garden may be
cultivated so as to be profitable; and yet not conducted so as to be agreeable
to walk in, which is a circumstance surely to be lamented: The proper
appearance of a well managed garden is expressed by the word neat.

It is too sordid a way of persuing gardening to have nothing farther in view
than the gratification of the palate. To do every thing (especially in a large
garden) that ought, or might be done, with a view to have it in the greatest
state of perfection, will indeed occasion no little trouble; but the true taste
for gardening, does not admit of complaint on this head, and will do (at least)
what it can to make all agreeable and inviting; for surely a green meadow, or a
ploughed field, are pleasanter objects than a garden that is not in tolerable
order.

In order to be neat, weeding must be industriously followed up, and all litter
that is made in working, quickly carried off. The ground also should be
frequently stirred and raked between crops, and over the borders, to give all a
fresh appearance. There is a pleasantness to the eye in new broken earth: and
when there are no flowers left in the borders, this gives an air of culture,
and is always agreeable. This observation is particularly meant to apply in
autumn, that the garden may not become dreary too soon, and so bring on winter
before its time. An Asparagus fork is expeditious and useful in this case.
Vegetables and flowers should be supported in time; and in form, by earthing
up, or by proper ties to sticks.

Trees and shrubs should be constantly freed from suckers and dangling shoots,
and wall trees ought to be regularly kept in order agreeable to the directions
in the section, On pruning.

Let gravel walks be kept free from weeds and moss and often swept and rolled
as they may require. If there is quantity of gravel enough in the walks to
relay, or turn them up every spring, or once in two years, it will thoroughly
clean, and make them appear lively. Moss may be either scraped off with a
trowel, or some such instrument, or rather rubbed off by repeated strokes of a
broom not quite new.

Grass plats and walks should be mowed, as often as there is the l^ast hold for
the scythe, for they lose much of their beauty, when the grass gets any thing
long; leaves should not be suffered to remain on them as it stains the grass.

Edgings of all sorts should be kept in good order and repair, as having a
singular neat effect in the appearance of a garden. The dead edgings will
sometimes, and the live edgings often want putting to rights; either cutting,
clipping, or making up complete. Where there are no edgings, or but weak ones,
let the bordering on the walks be kept firm, and now and then worked up by a
line in moist weather, beating it smooth with the spade. See Section 20.

Some fruits may need support, by tying their weak branches when they get
heavy, to stakes, etc. Rows of raspberries, and beans are kept neatly up in
their lines, by putting in here and there a stake, and using packthread
lengthwise; and thus will they bear better fruit, and be more conveniently
gathered. Strawberries of fine heavy sorts, will be preserved from getting
dirty and rotten, by tying their stems of fruit to little sticks; by this
practice the fruit also gets better ripened, and of a finer flavor: Some
persons lay tiles, or moss round the plants, but this is not (generally) so
well, only it has the advantage in keeping the ground cooler in a hot season.

Flowers should be particularly seen to, to tie up, and trim off dead and
dangling parts. Some of them cannot do without support, and many sorts are made
more secure and beautiful by proper ties. If this business is neglected,
perhaps a heavy rain, or strong wind comes and lays all prostrate, especially
about the equinoctial seasons: but even their own weight will often bring
flowers down.

The sticks used for flowers, should be of smooth wood, as hazle or sallow, or
of neat painted slips of deel, with or without an ornamental head; white is the
best color, on account of its contrast with the leaves. New bass wetted, soft
packthread, or green yarn are proper for the ties, which should be twisted
first round the stick, and then round the flower: let the ends of the string be
cut off close. The sticks should have smooth and sharp points, otherwise they
may damage the roots, and will not hold so fast in the ground; thurst them in
as far from the stem as conveniently may be, and let attention be paid to
bulbous roots not to go so near as to wound them. Do not think of forcing all
the branches of a large bushy head to a single stick; but let two or more be
used, as may appear necessary, observing that there is something of an equality
of size in the sticks used to the same flower.

Some persons are very incurious about their flower sticks, which may rather be
called stakes, even when applied to the smaller sort of flowers. Sticks may
also be too weak for large ones, and a due proportion is necessary to propriety
and neatness.

It has been said, by a great gardener, that the support given to flowers,
should be a concealed business, and therefore, if this idea is adopted, the
sticks should be no taller, than that the head of the plant may cover them when
full grown: In order to do this work the more completely, they ought to be
painted green

Decaying flowers should be timely trimmed or removed, and perennials should be
regularly freed from the parts running to seed, (except so much as may be
wanted) as the production of seeds weakens the root much; sometimes even
causing death, and thus many curious perennials have been lost, especially the
first year of planting them. To preserve any particular sort therefore, let the
stems be cut down as soon as the flowers appear to be going off, or to secure
the root in strength, let them not flower at all the first year.

Decaying vegetables are offensive, and the kitchen garden ought to be attended
to, that every thing of the kind may be removed out of sight or smell. Thus may
all in this department, being under industrious and judicious management,
strike the eye as agreeably as a flower garden, the idea of usefulness stamping
a value on the neatness.

Vegetables prematurely spindling, and superfluous ones, sprouts, etc. running
for seed, should not be suffered to continue in the ground (as they too often
are) to exhaust its strength, as well as offend the eye.

The management of a garden (summarily speaking) consists in attention and
application; the first should be of that wary and provident kind, as not only
to do well in the present, but for the future; and the latter should be of that
diligent nature as (willingly) "Never to defer that till tomorrow which may be
done today:" -- Procrastination is of serious consequence in gardening; and
neglect of times and seasons will be fruitful of disappointment and complaint.
It will often happen, indeed, that a gardener cannot do what he would; but if
he does not do what he can, he will be most justly blamed, and perhaps censured
by none more than himself.

SECTION V.
OF PROPAGATION.
PLANTS are propagated by seeds, suckers, slips, offsets, divisions, cuttings,
layers, and graffs.

By seed is the most general method of propagation, and plants raised any other
way are seldom so fine. Those plants from seed which have never been removed,
are commonly handsomer, and come forwarder, than those that have been
transplanted, provided they were sown in a proper soil and situation.

As upon seed being right in kind and good in nature, depends the desired
success, care should be taken to procure the best, and no temptation suffered
to prevail for the use of an inferior kind, or of one only suspected of being
so, if it can be helped; for to cultivate a soil, and use a wrong or defective
seed knowingly, is folly indeed!

The largest seed of the kind, plump and sound, is the best, being well ripened
and kept from injuries of weather and insects; for, as the largest animals
produce the most profitable stock, so it is in vegetables; which directs the
gardener always to save seed only from the forwardest and handsomest uninjured
plants. As in animals the young may be stunted by bad management, and defective
food, so in vegetables, the seed being good will not be alone sufficient, if
the soil and culture be not right.

Commonly speaking, new seed is to be preferred to old, as growing the more
luxuriantly, and coming up the surer and quicker. This circumstance induces
some private persons to save their own seed (a practice not altogether to be
recommended) that they may not be deceived in buying old for new seed: But this
trick of trade it is to be hoped is not practiced by every seedsman: Yet a
little mixture of old seed is sometimes proper, because the new is perhaps cut
off, and the old saved, by being a day or two later in coming up.

If old seed is knowingly sown, some allowance in point of time must be made.
Peace and beans of two years old, are by some preferred to new, as not likely to
run to straw. And cucumbers and melons are reckoned best to be of several years
age, in order to their shooting the less vigorously, and so becoming more
fruitful, and take up less room: But this principle is maintained extravagantly
by some gardeners, who say these seeds can hardly be too old, and will allow
ten years to be within bounds; three for cucumbers, and four for melons however
is best. As to the age of seeds, at which they may be sown and germinate, it is
uncertain, and depends much how they are preserved. Seeds kept from the air and
moisture by being buried deep in the ground will continue a great many years
without corruption.

Peace and beans will germinate very well at seven years of age; but the seeds
of lettuces and kidney beans, and some others are not to be depended upon after
a year or two; and though generally speaking the smaller seeds are of the least
duration, yet their maintenance of vegetative power must depend much upon the
texture of the seed, with respect to its coat, and the oil it contains, etc.

The saving seed, for the sake of saving money in the purchase, has not been
found to answer well, in general with private persons, and is hardly to be
recommended. Things running to seed give a garden a rude appearance, often
occupying ground that is wanted, and might be used to better purpose; and the
case often is, that seeding plants (in private gardens) are neglected in some
measure, or destroyed by birds, and come to little at last. Perhaps they are
not saved from proper plants. It is a particular business to raise seeds for
sale, and (generally) they are best had from those whose province it is to deal
in them.

Against sowing our own seed, there is this to be observed, that it is a
received maxim to procure seeds of esculents from a different soil and
situation, or at least to change them, as being apt to alter or degenerate, if
repeatedly sown in the same place. Seed produced on warm land is disposed to
come early, but by this means (in proportion to its dryness) prematurely, so
that the plants produce but few flowers. Seed from cold land comes late, and in
some seasons the plants do not well ripen their seed. Rich land produces seed,
not abundantly, but too luxuriant in nature, and poor land gives weak seed; so
that in these cases, to continue sowing the seed produced on the same ground,
is evidently not proper.

The only case where (on the whole) it is proper for private persons to save
seed, is to secure that of any particular sort, that it is judged may not be
got so true and good. Yet here perhaps the busy be or wind may interfere, and
disappoint expectation; for if there is any thing of the like kind in a
neighboring garden, these may carry the Farina of that to our charge, and
contaminate it, so as to produce a spurious offspring, which is often
experienced in the cabbage tribe. Now this cannot in a great degree happen with
those who raise seed in extensive pieces of ground occupied with the same sort
of vegetable.

Those however who choose to save the seed o^ vegetables, must propagate from
fine forward plants, secure them from rocking about, when they get tall and
heavy guard against birds, gather them as they ripen, and keep them dry.
Flowers, it may be proper to save the seed of, and it is little trouble. The
sorts may thus be better depended on, and the small quantity wanted of each
kind makes it hardly worth while to buy, if we can raise them ourselves, or get
them of a friend. It should be a rule for flower seeds in general to be fresh
from year to year; though if kept dry, and from much air, many sorts will grow
that are older: Flower seeds are kept well in vials.

Seeds may be forwarded for sowing by various ways of procuring a germination
before they are put into the ground. In summer it has not been unusual, to
steep both broad and kidney beans in soft water, or milk and water, about
twenty-four hours, to forward their growth, and to ascertain their vitality. If
the ground is very dry when these seeds are committed to it, either steeped or
not, it is a good way to make drills or trenches to plant them in, watering
them well first, and then pressing the seed in a little way. Any sort of the
broad beans, or even peace, may be forwarded, when ground is not for the present
ready, by laying them in damp mould, in a garden pot, or otherwise, a layer of
earth, and a layer of seeds, etc. and they may be put into trenches (with care)
when the radicle has got some considerable length, the mould being light, and
the work finished by a gentle watering.

The smaller seeds, as carrots, etc. may be prepared for sowing, by simply
mixing them in a little moist sand, or fine earth, taking care that they do not
lie longer than the usual time of their beginning to sprout: but this practice
should only be adopted for seeds that are long in coming up, and then there is
some advantage in having them to sow in a state ready for rooting immediately,
on fresh dug earth.

The season for committing seeds to the ground, is that as early a time as the
nature of the plant to be cultivated will bear; for the forward productions,
which come without forcing, are the best as to size and fruitfulness, if they
meet with no material check from weather. It is the proper ambition of
gardeners also, to have some of the first of each kind of vegetables and fruits.

Let this direction for early sowing be understood, not only of spring, but
autumn crops; that the plants designed for winter use, or to stand for spring,
may be strong, and well established in the ground: Though for those designed
for spring, it is advisable to have two or three different sowings; for
lettuces (as an instance) that are forward, will sometimes rot, when backward
plants shall do well.

To be sure of a crop, and in some things a succession of crops, various
sowings should be made through the year, at all times that are not too
unnatural as to season; for it is an object in gardening, not only to have
early and late productions, but never to be without what may be produced. Every
sowing that is made (the early in particular) should be noticed in time,
whether it is likely to succeed, that the work may be repeated, if there is
like to be a failure. But a little caution is necessary, that this business be
not over done; for though there may seem to be a sufficient distance of time in
sowing for succession crops; yet they tread sometimes upon the heels of one
another so fast as ^o occasion a disagreeable superfluity: This is often the
case in peace and beans, in the height of summer, and especially if a hot one:
and this caution is the more necessary, where there is no ground to spare, or
but few hands to cultivate it.

Sowings should be generally performed on fresh dug, or stirred ground. The
digging should therefore be done as near the time designed to sow as can be.
There is a (...) moisture in fresh turned up soil, that softens the seed to
swell and germinate quickly, and nourishes it with proper aliment to proceed in
its growth with vigor, but which is evaporated soon after from the surface. If
the ground, indeed, turns up raw, or wet (as early in the spring it is apt to
do) a little time must be allowed it to dry, and so also if rain falls first.
In this case, seed should be sown as soon as ^ver the ground may be ventured
on, not to ^ang to the feet, for trampling when the soil is too wet, binds it
and does harm, especially heavy ground; thus in this work, and every other in
the way of gardening, there is a nicety of time to be observed, by those who
would do their business well. It is to be observed, however, that sowing in
dri^s, or on beds that are not to be trampled, the moisture of the ground is
rather an advantage, provided, in the last case, that the ground will admit a
rake, and the soil is not too wet to drop somewhat loosely about the seeds.

The proper depth at which seed should be sown, is to be carefully observed: if
too deep, they will either rot or not vegetate or thrive well; and if too
shallow, they are liable to be injuriously affected by (...), (...) drought, or
birds; but of the two, rather (...) than too deep, is best, and this we are
(...) whose sowings are mostly superficial.

The smaller the seed, the finer should the soil be, and the less also the
covering; so that, while some (as the seed of celery is to be but barely
covered, others, as peace and beans) may have a depth of two, three, or four
inches. But some regard is to be had to the season and soil: -- in a warm
season, and light soil, sow deeper, and in a cool season, and strong soil
sha^lower.

The quantity of seed sown, is a thing to be attended to with some exactness.
Small seeds go a great way, and require a careful hand to distribute them; for
though sowing a little too much ^e a trifle as to the value of seeds, yet to
have them come up cr^^^ding thick is an evil. To sow evenly as to quantity, is
an object of practice worthy of care, as it secures a better crop, and more
easily managed in the ^^^nning. On the whole, however, it is better to sow
rather thick than thin, especially if the seed is suspected; poor land will
require more seed than rich.

It is not generally advisable to sow several sorts of seed on the same spot,
as some persons are accustomed to do; for though the gardeners about London
follow the practice; profit is their great object, and not neatness or
propriety. On the same piece, they sow radishes, lettuces and carrots; the
radishes are drawn young for the table, the lettuces to plant out, and a
sufficient crop of carrots is left, for carrots should not be very near to grow
big: this is as reasonable a combination as any that is made; but still, if not
short of ground, each kind separate will be found best. In defense of this mode
of culture, it is said, if one crop ^ails, the others may do, and there is no
loss of ground or time; and if all succeed they do very well. Radishes and
spinach are commonly sown together by the common gardeners, and many man^^^res
of inter-cropping are made by them as sowing, or planting between rows of
vegetables that are wide asunder, or presently to come off, or in the alleys of
things cultivated on beds. But this crowding mode of gardening will not be
imitated by private families, except there is a want of room to bring in a
proper succession of crops.

Some little things of this sort, however, ought to be done; as, suppose a
piece of ground for horseradish be new planted, it may be top-cropped with
radishes or spinach, etc. or if a piece of potatoes be planted wide, a bean may
be put in between each set in every or every other row: a thin crop of onions
upon new asparagus beds, is a common practice, drawing them young from about
the plants.

The proper covering for seeds at broad cast being determined on, as to depth,
let the ground lay the rougher, the deeper the seed is to be buried; and if it
is to be scarcely covered, rake the ground first very level and fine. All seeds
come up best when moderately pressed with the earth; for if they lie too
lightly in contact with it, cold and drought more easily affect them, and when
once seeds begin to germinate, they are impatient of both: If stopped in their
vegetation, are quickly cut off. Thus, trampling seeds in, not only fixes them
in their places, but tends to preserve them from injury by the weather.
According to the depth it is intended to cover seeds, the feet should be set
wider or nearer, i. e. the closer for the less covering. Begin to trample on
the outside, walking regularly and steadily round the piece, till the middle be
arrived at in the finish. This done, lay all immediately and neatly level with
a wide rake, drawing off stones, etc. but do it lightly, to avoid driving in
the teeth of the rake, which would remove the seed.

Patches, or small pieces, are sometimes sown without trampling, particularly
of flowers, by drawing some of the mould on one side, and then sowing and
covering the proper depth with what earth was drawn off, adding a little more,
if necessary. In this case, if the soil is not heavy and wet, press the surface
a little with the rake head, spade, or otherwise. Seeds sown in drill, or rows,
should be pressed a little, especially if the soil be light; and even beans set
by a dibble, are best to have the earth pressed about them with it, or
afterward with the rake head, and they will support themselves more erectly
for it, for the least wind rocks them about in loose holes. In a light soil,
the best way is to lay them in a trench, and trample them in.

Directions for thinning seedling crops, and pricking them out in time, were
given in the last section. Let this business be done properly, and prick out
enough, that there may be to spare: perhaps a neighbor may be obliged thereby,
and at any rate it is best to have plenty, l^st accidents happen.

Propagation by suckers is a mode of culture rather peculiar to trees and
shrubs. The things to be observed in this business are, to take them up with
some care from the mother plant, so as not to injure its root, nor the sucker's
own root, by pulling it up without properly loosening it first. The earth
should be moved aside by a trowel, and then the sucker cut off by a knife, and
not with a spade, as is common. Of these hardy things that there is plenty of,
this rough way does not signify much, as to the sucker; but it may injure the
root too much that it comes from. Wherever a root appears barked, the part
below should be cut off. If it is desired to succeed well, in propagating by
suckers, consider that all young roots are tender, let them be trimmed to form,
and planted immediately, or at least let them be covered. Suckers that have
poor roots, must have their heads reduced accordingly.

Propagation by slips is of two sorts, either from the root, or stem: and
several sorts of flowers and herbs are increased this way. When from the roots
(if the whole is not taken up) move the earth carefully aside, and slip off by
a pressure of the thumb and finger, and be cautions of hurting the fibers of
the slips, planting with fine and good mould about them. Take off slips from
the stem carefully by a push of the thumb, and not too many from the same
plant, as it is apt to injure the place a little by tearing off some of the
wood. Slips from the stem are to be considered as cuttings, and treated
accordingly. They take more certainly, and make better roots than cuttings; but
are apt to injure the stem from whence they are taken.

Offset is a term sometimes applied to slips from fibrous roots; but more
properly so from bul^o^s roots, which put forth many offsets. These are slipped
away at the time they are taken up for removal or replanting, and commonly take
two or three years before they bear flowers: dispose of them therefore in a
nursery, where they may remain undisturbed while they come to a flowering state.

Division of the roots is a way of propagating many sorts of plants. To this
end (of course) they must be taken up, and then carefully pulled, or cut
asunder with a sharp instrument; as the case may require. It is not safe,
however, to divide such roots into very small pieces, (especially if cut), as
then they are apt to die; but leave them of a size sufficient, not barely to
secure life, but to form immediately a full and handsome head. The general
season for thus splitting fibrous rooted plants, is October, but it may be done
early in the spring.

Cuttings of a variety of woody plants will grow, and many trees and shrubs are
propagated this way; but their sap must be of a watery nature, as those plants
that are gummy will not strike, (or rarely) though ever so much care is
bestowed, or time allowed them. The texture of the wood of cuttings must be
somewhat soft, as hard wooded ones will not grow. Cuttings should be rather
short than long, and kept steady in the ground. If they are planted where there
is any likelihood of their being disturbed, they may be tied to a stick, well
fastened in the ground.

The season for setting slips and cuttings is for some things summer, as
wall-flowers and myrtles; and for most, from October to March, but (in general)
the sooner the better. It has however been said (by Mr. Miller) that spring is
the best time for all, and that the sap should be in motion first. This is at
least true of some things, as cuttings of the vitex, or chaste tree, (though
hardy) are found to do best in spring, and so all cuttings from plants of a
delicate nature do.

Cuttings should be of well ripened wood, and have the earth pressed to them,
the whole length that they are in the ground; i. e. from four to six inches.
Cut them with a sharp knife slopewise, and plant in a good soil, and in a
situation where they only have the morning sun. They must be kept cool (not
wet) by occasional watering; but if set in fresh cow's dung, with about two
inches of mould on the top, they will not need watering, and will strike
freely, if the shoots are not too young and raw, or of too succulent a nature:
Slips and cuttings should always be taken from the outside of plants, and be
robust but not luxurious.

Laying of branches is a mode of propagation, that may be adopted for almost
all forest trees, and several sorts of fruit trees and shrubs; i. e. all that
will grow from cuttings, and many that will not. Layers are less rampant, and
more fruitful than suckers; and those who (...) curious, and find a seminal
variety of any tree, ^^r shrub, that is remarkably different from the original,
the only way to have it preserved genuine is to convert it into a stool, (by
cutting down) and raising plants by layers. They are made of the lower branches
of the plant, and must be young and pliable, to bend down without breaking, to
the depth of four, five or six inches in the ground, (as the soil is light or
heavy) at which they must be held securely by good pegs; and if they cannot be
brought down sufficiently deep, some earth may be raised up to them.

Let the ground about layers be kept cool by occasional waterings, and laying
some moss, turf, litter, or rather small pebbles about them, which will not
harbor insects. The part out of ground, may be supported erectly by a tie to a
stick. It is a good way to slit (with a sharp knife) the part at the peg as in
cornation layers, a little more than an inch; and some prick a few holes about
the part (at a joint) with a blunt awl, to help the layer to strike root. For
the hard woods, some gardeners make several slits, or chips, in the part
layered in the earth, and bind the layer rather tight, just above it, with
pliant wire; and soft wooded layers are sometimes twisted to crack the bark, in
order to help the part to strike quickly.

Where there are no branches low enough to be brought into the ground, (and it
is not thought good to head down for the production of low shoots, or suckers)
plants may be layered by fixing a broken pot, or a box, with a slit in the
side, to the height necessary to lay in a branch. A branch also, if long
enough, may be thrust through the hole of a garden pot upwards, then filled
with earth, and supported by some contrivance, and shaded by some means, and
frequently watered. Take care not to break the buds in drawing it through the
hole of the pot. By this contrivance rooted plants being procured in pots, may
be turned out with the earth about their roots undisturbed. A branch of a vine
thus layered in November, may be next year cut off, when the fruit is ripe, and
brought in the pot to table, before it is planted out.

The season for layers is (generally) the same as for cuttings, and some sorts
will be well rooted in a year, but others will require two, and sometimes three
years before they will be fit to be moved. Those, however, that are slow to
strike should be layered as soon as ever young shoots are forward enough, which
perhaps may be in July or August. Cut off the leaves of the part that goes into
the ground, because such young wood will not bear stripping. For propagation of
fruit tres by graffing, see the two next sections.

SECTION VI.
OF A NURSERY.
THOSE private persons who have the opportunity of ground, and do not mind the
expense and trouble of managing a nursery, may find satisfaction and advantages
attending it. But there are so many nursery-men ready to supply our wants, that
the necessity of a nursery is in a great measure done away; it affords,
however, employment, amusement and an opportunity for exercising ingenuity, and
that particularly in the way of graffing.

By mea^^ of a nursery, trees are ready upon the spot^^^ be transplanted
without damage to the roots (...) out of ground, and the climate and soil being
the same in which they are raised and are to grow, and to fruit, there is a
sort of certainty of success, that could not otherwise be had.

There is also a great advantage in raising trees, in a very material point, in
an assurance of having fruit that we know we like, by getting graffs, or buds,
from trees of which we have tasted and admired the fruit. If trees are,
however, to be bought, it is reasonable to hope for better success, in
procuring them from a nursery-man living northwards than southwards.

In a nursery, stocks may be raised for fruit trees, shrubs propagated by
suckers, slips and cuttings, and flowers of the biennial and perennial sorts
may be sown, bulbous offsets planted, and thus a stock may be readily provided
for furnishing any part of the pleasure ground. For all, or some of these
objects, a spot might be allotted, if it were only the corner of a garden.

Supposing even only a little spot is made use of for a few flowers, shrubs,
etc. let them be duly attended, to weed, thin, water, trim into form, support,
shelter, and in short nurse, but yet not to bring any thing up tenderly, as too
much, or long cover in winter, exposes to risk when it is taken away; the
plants not being able to bear a moderately cold air. A low part of the garden
that has not too much sun, is best for a little nursery; but it must not be
overshaded with trees.

Suckers, slips and cuttings of any kind, should be attended to for forming a
proper head; shortening the shoots, and keeping a clear stem below, and the
roots free from suckers. Two years commonly fit suckers for planting out, and
three years slips and cuttings. It is a good way, to fasten the two latter, if
not the former, to sticks, that the wind, etc. may not loosen them, and prevent
their rooting.

Large plants, as young trees, etc. should be tied to stakes well fixed, at
first putting out for the same reason. These should be seen to from time to
time, that they remain fast; as also, the mats or cloths, that may have been
put over hoops to shelter exotic seedlings, etc. from heavy rains, or severe
frosts, for the wind has great power over such coverings.

The soil of a nursery should be dry, free and in heart; but not much enriched
with dung, left a rankness of food give too great a freedom of growth, and a
habit in the plants, which not being indulged by a like soil afterward,
disappointment ensue. A dungy soil also encourages worms and insects, to the
injury of seedlings, and makes young plants more liable to be cut off in a
sharp winter; too rank a soil also, prevents the juices of plants from being
properly digested, and so they are less fruitful.

On ground designed to be sown, or planted in spring, if it needs refreshing,
lay on a little well consumed dung toward winter, as directed at page 46.

A nursery should be laid out into beds of about four feet wide, with alleys of
about two; and thus all the work of it will be done conveniently, and the
plants will have free air to strengthen them. In the alleys may be buried some
dung, which will be at hand, and useful when consumed by time and turning over,
to dress the beds as they may need it.

Stocks for graffing fruit, are raised from suckers of plums, cherries,
codlins, crabs, pears and quinces; and sometimes from cuttings of codlins and
quinces; but those stocks raised from seeds and stones are much best, if we
consult freedom of growth. If sucker stocks grow ever so well, they are apt to
put forth suckers, which is not only a troublesome circumstance, but exhausts a
tree and prevents fruitfulness. It is to be understood, that the graff will (in
some measure) partake of the nature of the stock; therefore soft, mealy fruit,
ought to be propagated on austere stocks, and the contrary; tender, delicious
fruits designed for forcing, should always be on smart stocks, or they become
insipid.

Though crab stocks for apples are mostly used, yet the ripe black seed; of any
other smart eating apple may be sown, either in autumn or spring Sow in autumn
( October or November,) and if this sowing fails, the spring may be adopted
toward the end of February. At these times, the well ripened seeds of pears,
or stones of plums, or cherries, may be sown. The stones of any sort of plum,
produce stocks for apricots, peaches and nectarines; and though the white sorts
are commonly preferred, the red wheat-plumb is excellent for the apricot; of
black plums the muscle is the best.

Those seeds or stones that are saved early, or are to be kept through the
winter for spring sowing, (which many prefer,) should be preserved from air in
dry sand: Let them be put in a box layer upon layer, three or four courses,
covering the top three inches, and guard against mice. Nuts, acorns and
chestnuts are put in the ground at the same time, as also the seeds of various
sorts of shrubs and forest trees.

The sowing as to depth must be according to the size of the seed. The seeds,
or kernels of apples and pears may be sown in drills a full inch deep, a foot
asunder, and scattered thinly in them, pressing the ground a little to them; or
sow at broad cast. But take care not to use the seeds of fruit that has grown
on a hollow tree, for they will not vegetate. The stones of any fruit should be
sown at near two inches depth; and nuts, etc. at three or four. Stones and nuts
must be set thin, and (it is of some advantage) the small end upwards, as here
the shoot pushes out, or they may be laid flat. If the beds are sown all over,
cover with mould previously drawn aside in the alleys; but drills have the
neatest appearance, and some little use may be made of the spaces between them
the first year.

Prepare the beds by digging the soils well to a full foot in depth, and let
the surface be made fine: thus will the roots strike down freely to preserve
themselves from drought, wet will drain away, and the young plant push strait
upward: four feet beds are best.

The enemies of seed beds must be guarded against, as poultry, birds, dogs,
cats, mice and frost; the latter by covering lightly with pea haulm or wheat
straw, and the former by furze, thorns, or brush wood, and traps. If any hares,
or rabbits, get at a nursery, they make sad havoc in sharp weather, by barking
the young plants; therefore, guard against them, and larger animals by good
close fences, which will also keep out sharp winds.

During the first year, they must be kept moderately cool, by watering in dry
seasons, or laying moss, or some short litter, over the beds. And as to
weeding, though they must not be smothered, yet some small weeds may be
suffered to grow in summer, as they help to shade the plants, and keep the
ground cool. Seedling trees are very apt to suffer by drought. They should be
thinned in the summer, after rain, from two inches to three or four asunder,
according to their nature; and at the end of the year (i. e. when a year old)
thinned to from nine inches to a foot asunder, and those drawn may be planted
out at the same distance, or at least the best of them. The first winter, they
should be protected from severe frosts, by some light, dry litter, which remove
in mild weather.

Stocks designed to grow for full standards, should be set in rows, three or
four feet asunder, and at one foot and a half in the rows; or if set at the
beforementioned distances, they may be transplanted again, another year or two,
wider. Rows for dwarfs need not be so far asunder as those for standards: but
before they are planted, the side shoots must be trimmed off, and the tap roots
shortened, in order to procure a clean strait stem, and a full root.

All new planted trees in a nursery, should be protected from frost, by laying
pease haulm, bean, or strong wheat straw between them, which may be trampled
down, and secured by throwing stones over it, or by pegging down: seedlings, or
stocks, planted out in spring should be protected from drought also in the same
manner, a month or two, (or longer,) and afterward occasionally watered in dry
weather.

The second year, in October, those left at about a foot distance in the rows,
may either be taken up and replanted, cutting the tap to make bushy roots, or,
taking out every other, left to grow of a size fit to graff, or inoculate
there. This year, only the stronger side-shoots from the stem should be cut
off; for the weaker ones will help the stem to thicken, by detaining the rising
sap, and imbibing moisture from the atmosphere to feed it; and the getting a
strong stem is a material thing, especially for standard trees.

Stocks of any kind will be three or four years growing, or two or three from
planting out, before they are fit for graffing; and if strong stocks are
wanted, (as for standards,) more time will be necessary: The rule of substance
may be from a quarter to an inch, or more. As dwarf trees are graffed, or
inoculated within five or six inches of the ground, much less stocks will do
for them, than for standard trees, which are to be graffed at so many feet
high; i. e. if for full-sized trees.

Stocks that are naturally of a slow growth, are covetted for dwarf trees, that
they may not mount the wall, fill the espalier, or increase to a large head too
fast. So for apples, instead of crab stocks, which are commonly of free growth,
those raised from the seeds of the paradise apple are recommended, or stocks
raised from cuttings of the Kentish codlin. These cuttings should be planted
strong, of an inch at least thick, and from two to three feet long. Trim the
shoots of the side off, but leave one at the top. They must be set a foot deep,
in a good soil, and occasionally watered. It is best to fix them in the very
place where they are to bear fruit, as stocks from cuttings make weak roots,
and are therefore not so safely moved, without danger of losing some of the
fibers, none of which can be spared.

In default of these naturally dwarf-growing stocks, those raised from suckers
are sometimes used, as less likely to grow off freely than seedling stocks.
Layers also are proper for dwarf stocks, and they are commonly to be had from
the codlin; all layers must be carefully taken up to preserve the roots.

For pears, dwarf stocks are raised from quince cuttings, layers, or suckers;
but as quince shoots are commonly of a weak and crooked growth, the stocks from
pear seeds are mostly used. But suckers may be obtained from pears, quinces,
etc. by cutting down an old tree within a foot of the ground, and these being
planted out for a year or two, become good stocks. If the suckers, or shoots,
lay high, they may be earthed up to induce them to strike. But suckers will be
often forced, by only cutting off the top of an old tree, which is an
experiment to be recommended, (in pears particularly) as there will be formed a
new head, and an opportunity given to graff for another, or a better sort. And
if there are no suckers, there may be low-placed shoots proper for layers, of
those trees that will thus strike, and most trees will, if not the first,
perhaps the second year.

Stocks from suckers, for dwarf plums and cherries, are in one sense better
than those raised from stones, as being less free in their growth; and the
common red cherry and the black are to be preferred for stocks, whether as to
suckers or seedlings. If suckers of any tree grow at a proper distance from the
parent stock, they may be graffed or inoculated without removal, ^^ll wanted to
plant out for fruiting, i. e. in a year or two. Suckers that are for stocks
should always be planted out in autumn, and stand (at least) to the following
spring or summer, twelve months before they are used.

Figs, quinces, and mulberries (as sometimes codlins) are raised from suckers,
layers and cuttings, without graffing; but from layers is the best method,
being more sure than cuttings, and more fruitful than suckers, and in one year
they will be rooted. The season for both cuttings and layers (a little before
or after) is October, though February is rather better for the fig. The layers
from fig trees must not be taken off till the beginning of March, as when
planted in autumn they may die; other layers should, however, be then removed.

Medlars are graffed on pear or crab, or service-tree stocks; but more commonly
upon medlar and white thorn stocks; though the fruit (on the last at least) is
not reckoned so good.

Vines are raised from cuttings and layers, either in autumn or spring; but for
cuttings rather the latter; and if the vines are pruned in February, lay the
cuttings by in dry mould or sand, till March or April. Place the layers in the
ground, about four or five inches deep, leaving two or three eyes out. The
cuttings should have three or four eyes in the ground, and only one out, or be
about a foot or fifteen inches long, and placed a little aslant. Cuttings
should have a knot of the old wood at bottom, for those cut off above, though
they may strike, will not produce so good, or fruitful plants; they are also
best taken from the lower part of the tree, the wood there being the most
ripened. Vines are best raised where they are to grow, by opening a hole, and
placing two cuttings in, one of which is likely to answer. Keep it to one
shoot, and cut down to two eyes in autumn. Keep to two shoots the next summer,
and prune down to two or three eyes in autumn, and then the vine will proceed
with vigor, and bear well.

Chestnuts are raised by sowing those that are imported, three inches deep, and
four asunder, in rows six inches apart; where growing two years, let them be
planted out half a yard apart, in rows a yard asunder. When five or six feet
high, they may be moved where they are to remain: If the seed is good, it will
sink in water.

Walnuts are raised from well-ripened nuts, sown either in autumn or spring;
and if the latter (which may be rather best) preserve the nuts in their outer
coats, in dry sand. These trees are best but once moved, and their tap root
preserved, if for timber, with the head as entire as possible; but if for
fruit, the tap root should be shortened, to prevent the tree mounting, and the
head may be cut, to accommodate it to the root, as to size. The walnut likes a
dry soil, and if gravelly, it does best; and though walnut trees are many years
before they come to bear, yet if it were only for the wood, posterity would
have reason to commend the planter.

Filberds are raised from nuts, or suckers, and layers, the latter of which is
the best method; or they may be graffed on the common nut tree. The nuts sown
in autumn, or kept dry in sand till February, produce fine trees, but generally
differ a little from the sorts sown, and make a variety generally for the
worse. Nuts like a cool soil.

Currants and gooseberries are raised principally from suckers, slips, and
cuttings, but best from the latter. When from seed, it is with a view of
obtaining varieties, and hence the many sorts of gooseberries in some
catalogues. Use cuttings, or slips, of the last year's wood, from fruitful
trees, about nine or ten inches long, and set them four or five in the ground,
half a yard asunder; train them to one shoot, (or at the most two,) the first
year, and the next head them down to six or seven eyes, when a fine head will
be formed the following year, and in the autumn they may be moved where they
are to fruit.

Barberries are raised from suckers, layers, cuttings, or seed sown in autumn
or spring. The latter mode of propagation produces the finest shrubs, with the
^argest fruit, though it is seldom practiced, suckers being generally plenty.

Raspberries are almost universally propagated from suckers, being always
abundant; and as this saves a year, and seed produces varieties not desirable,
sowing is not to be recommended: This shrub is rarely brought into the nursery
to obtain strength. Se page 38.

Strawberries are raised from seed, offsets, and runners, but almost
universally from the last; plants from seed produce the finest fruit, and
sometimes a variety that is superior to the original.

The young offsets of the present year, slipped in autumn, or those of the last
year (which will be better rooted) slipped in spring, will do for plants,
cutting off the sticky parts; but the first runners are more commonly and
properly used. Offsets early in spring, and forward runners in summer, (as soon
as rooted in June,) may be planted out in cool ground, at six inches distance,
by way of a nursery, in order for making new plantations toward the end of
September, or in October. This is thought a good way by many, but it is seldom
practiced: Let the summer plants be well watered till rooted, and suffer no
runners to proceed from them. The common method is to let the runners remain
till September, and then, as early in the month as may be, to dress the beds,
and select the strong and most bushy-rooted sets for forming new beds: It
would, however, be an advantage both to the old stools, and the young plants,
to suffer only the first or second runners to remain for the purpose: Thus
their own beds will be the nursery for them; and except the soil is worn out,
(perhaps,) the best. See page 39.

The raising of FOREST TREES is rather beside the purpose of this book. They
have been mentioned as to the time of sowing, and their treatment is in a great
measure the same as for raising stocks for fruit trees; so that to those who
would do only a little in this way, much more need not be said.

Forest trees are often left to grow thick on the seed bed, and only thinned a
little in the autumn following, and so from time to time as they get bigger;
but a little thinning in the summer, by drawing, when the ground is moist, were
surely best. If the soil that seedling trees are to be planted in be poor, let
them be raised in earth somewhat sandy, and at any rate not in a rich soil.

Those who would do much in raising forest trees, should consult works written
particularly on the subject; and that is a judicious one by Mr. Kennedy, on
this, and other articles, 2 vols. 8vo. entitled, A Treatise on Planting and
Gardening, and Management of the Hot-House; but it is to be observed his chief
subject on planting, is with respect to poor or waste land, in which business
(as also in the other articles he has treated) he had much experience.

When young men take to gardening and planting, it is an happy circumstance,
and they should lose no time in the business; for it is a thing that persons
advanced in years have often repented of. It produces considerable
satisfaction, and a peculiar pleasure, in the evening of life, when a man can
point at good trees, and say, "These are of my own planting!" -- but it were a
superior thing to add, "And of my own raising too." Let young planters resolve,
therefore, to raise their own trees, especially of the forest kind. "There is
no better, or cheaper way of raising woods and plantations, than by sowing the
masts or nuts of timber trees, where they are always to remain, and this is
best done in spring."

It is to be observed, that the wild service, hawthorn, hol^y, and ash keys
come up the second year; but most other seeds of trees the first. Ash keys,
however, (and probably the others,) if they are buried in a pit with coal ashes
^^^ted fine, or in a sandy earth for a year, will come up the first year they
are sown.

To have good seed of the various kinds, is a thing too little attended; but on
which evidently depends much. It should be well ripened, and the produce of
fine healthy trees; withal, not growing near dottrel, ill-conditioned ones, the
farina from the flowers of which might impregnate those of the good tree, and
give its seed a degree of degeneracy. Let oak acorns be thrown into water, and
those only used which sink quickly; -- they should be kept a while to harden,
but not too long out of ground, as they soon sprout.

In the management of a nursery, the young plants of trees and shrubs should be
dug round once a year, by a downright cut of a sharp spade, a little distance
from the stems, nearer or farther off, according to their age, to shorten
straggling roots, and produce new ones more at home: Let this be done in
October or February; the former time is best for the older plants, and the
latter for young ones. The spade also may be drove under them to cut off the
tap roots, where it is not an object to preserve them. By this practice, a
good, full, brushy root will be obtained, fitting plants for a prosperous
removal; but it should be done a year before transplanting. Evergreens in
particular would be safer to move, being thus treated. Immediately after the
operation, a sound watering will be proper to settle the earth to the roots,
except the ground be quite moist.

SECTION VII.
OF GRAFFING.
GRAFFING, (or graffing is the ^^s^rtion of a cion into a stock, or stem,
raised for the purpose, and is necessary to the ensuring (...) good fruit; i.
e. to have the same (or at least with ^^tle ^^fference) produced on the new
tree, as that of the old one from whence the graff was taken: It is sometimes
performed on the branches of trees, and may be on the roots, a piece being
raised out of the ground for the purpose.

If the seeds of fruit were left to grow up without graffing, they would
produce a different kind from that they came from; by chance a better, but most
commonly a worse. The varieties of fruit we have, were obtained partly from
seedling stocks, without graffing, and partly by an accidental difference, that
the stock, or soil, may have given.

Graffing is like planting upon a plant, for though there is an union of the
parts, there is in fact little other communication than a root has with the
ground. The cion, or bud, draws nourishment from the stock, but no other than
is properly adapted to its own peculiar pores, which by a chemical process
(suppose by fermentation in its little bladders, or cells) it alters, so as to
become exclusively its own. A great variety of fruit is produced by
graff-planting from the same kind of stock, (and that perhaps a mere crab,)
just as a great variety of plants are from the same soil: By this means also,
some forest, and many ornamental trees and shrubs are propagated, and thus
their particular varieties preserved, as in all the variegated sorts, etc.

The art of graffing is a very curious discovery, and though it requires some
ingenuity to perform it, a few trials may make it familiar, and it will prove
an agreeable source of amusement and satisfaction. By being able to graff,
young trees may be always at hand for replacing old, or unsuccessful ones; and
the pleasure of obliging a friend in this way, is peculiarly gratifying.

Skill in this ingenious art is clearly best obtained by seeing the work
performed; for this is an ec^aircisement superior to the plainest directions:
at the first trial, to have an adept at the elbow, would be a great advantage.
There are few gardeners, (even by profession,) however, that practice this
work, owing to the great number of nurserymen ready to supply trees. But though
they raise fine trees, much disappointment has often happened in dealing with
them (particularly in the sort) which might be avoided, by a man's being able
to raise good trees for himself. Directions precisely descriptive of the
business of graffing, are therefore here attempted, and if once understood,
trials should be made without minding the discouragement of a few failures; for
practice will in the end make perfect.

Proper stocks being ready, and cions, or buds procured, there will be wanting
a good sharp narrow bladed penknife, and a sharp smooth-edged pruning-knife,
with some fine-wrought loam, or clay, and some good new base, or strong yarn.

The first thing to be done is, to cut off the head of the stock at the proper
height, and in a fair part of the (...) making a smooth flat top: If the stock
is too strong for the knife, and a saw is used, it must be smoothed with the
knife after. The properest size for stocks, is from (...) an inch to a^ inch
diameter, a little more or less, however, may (...). When a stock is to little,
the cion (...) to overgrow it, and when too big, the cion does not so well, or
so soon, cover the stock, as might be wished: yet stocks of any size can be
used by one mode of graffing or other.

Dwarf trees are to be graffed within six inches of the ground, and standards
as high as the stock will well bear, considering whether they are to be half or
full standards; the former at about three or four feet, the latter at five or
six. But trees designed for standards, may be graffed, or inoculated at a lower
height, the graff being trained to the desired length, by keeping it to a
single stem.

The cions should be healthy and strong* (not of luxuriant growth,) and taken
from the outsides of fruitful trees, where the juices of the wood have been
properly digested by sun and air: they should be taken (if it may be) from
trees just in their prime, or at full bearing, and not before. Let them be cut
two or three weeks sooner than wanted, and if kept longer they may not hurt,
for they had better be cut a little too soon, than too late, at full length,
without any side shoots.

The cions of pears, plums, and cherries, should be cut from the middle to the
end of January, and at farthest not beyond the middle of February; the season
mus^, however, somewhat govern. Let them be kept all over in dry mould, close
under a south wall, or some shelter, covering them with straw in wet or severe
weather. *Some keep them in a cool room, where they will do without mould, but
it would be better to set them up an end in a garden pot, with dry mould, or
sand.

Cions cut early are prevented from getting two forward in bud; and if the buds
begin to start, and look white, they seldom take. By having them as long as
they may be kept before used, the sap of the stock gets in forwardness; for it
must first begin to stir, and so be ready to push itself quickly into the cion,
(now somewhat exhausted,) to form a union with it.

The middle of cions is fittest for the purpose; but do not cut off the tops
till they are brought out to graff, for they keep best in length. If cions are
to be transported to any distance, let their ends be stuck two or three inches
in clay, and so matted round in a bundle; or, if wrapped ^our^^ with a fine hay
rope, and ^^eared over with clay, or a strong earth, they will not soon wither.

Some gardeners ^ay, cions should be only of the last year's growth, and
others, that the wood of the year before is best; (...) is so far a matter of
indifference, that they will take much older, though (perhaps) not so
certainly. As (...) medium way, if a little of the former years wood (...) with
a cion of the last, and this elder wood be used for the part graffed it will be
found (...) answer, in co^^ring the stock sooner; though it must be
acknowledged, that all new wood is the common practice of these who raise trees
for sale; which circumstance is ordinarily a presumptive proof of right.
However, (...) wood of a year's growth is not strong enough, then, at least,
some of the old wood ought to be cut with it (...) and the bigger the stock is,
the more this practice commends itself, as the barks will be somewhat more
equal in thickness.

Proceeding to graff, take off a little of the lower end of the cion first, and
then cut it in length, so as to have three or four eyes to appear above the
claying: two eyes will be sufficient for a standard, but four is better for a
dwarf that is to be trained. In cutting cions into length, let the top eye be
just in front, or just behind, but rather the former. Use not (except upon
necessity) the upper part of a cion, as the wood is too raw for the purpose,
and will be shrivelled; yet strong cions (properly inserted) seldom miss
through drought: indeed they will take sooner than if quite fresh.

The time for graffing is usually from Mid-February to Mid-March; but in a
forward season sooner, and in a backward one sometimes later.

CLEFT-GRAFFING has been the most common method of propagation, and though it
is not the neatest, yet it is a certain and easy way to young practitioners.
The stocks for this mode of graffing should be strong, about three quarters of
an inch diameter, or more if it so happen; but it may be used with the very
youngest stocks, having cions of the same size.

Cut off the head, as before directed, so as to have (on the sunny side) a
smooth part in the stock, where the cion is to be placed, and cutting a part of
the stock off slopewise, opposite to this place, leave the top, or the crown of
the stock, about half an inch wide.

Then cleave the stock with a strong knife, or thin sharp chisel, about two
inches deep, as near the middle as possible, so as not to divide the pith, and
if any roughness appears in the flit, smooth it off with a penknife; but
something of the wedge kind must be put into the flit to keep it open to
receive the cion, leaving proper room to put it in. Cut the cion on each side
to the form of a wedge at bottom, an inch or more long, making that side which
is to be placed inwards in the stock, thinner by about one third. Put the cion
in, so that its bark, and that of the stock be level; and if the bark of the
stock be thick, let the bark of the cion sink in a trifle, as the current of
the sap runs chiefly betwixt the bark and wood. The cion being placed, take the
wedge out that kept the stock open; yet if the stock be so strong as to pinch
the cion too hard, ease it by a little bit of dry wood to be left in the cleft;
so, however, as not to loosen the graff, which must be held firmly; or if the
stock be very strong, the wedge of the cion may be nearly of equal thickness,
inside and out, which eases the barked part.

"Cleft-graffing is used in the cider countries, sometimes to old stocks very
large, with cions of four or five inches in circumference: thus renewing old
trees to bear fine fruit in three years, which before produced nothing eatable."

The graff must be nicely whipped round with wet bass pulled tight, and the
whole clayed over to an inch above and half an inch below, smoothing it off
taper, with a trowel, or knife, dipped in water. And as this is done with a
view to keep out wet, sun and air, if the clay falls off, or cracks, it must be
immediately repaired, till the season comes to take off the bandage, which is
about Midsummer, or rather sooner: yet at this time some clay should still be
kept on the top, to secure the cleft from wet, and so continued till the cleft
is grown up. This clay must be worked up well with horse dung (having no straw
in it) and a little short chopped hay to make it hold together without
cracking. Let it be prepared at least some days before, and be beat as mortar
is, the oftener the better.

If it is desired to put in two cions, to form a tree for the wall, or
espalier, there should be two clefts parallel to one another, one on each side
the pith. Some put in two cions, merely in case one should miss; but it is not
advisable. It need hardly be observed, that in this case the crown must be left
whole.

With respect to the time of performing this work, remember that what has been
sa^^^elates to pears, plants, and cherries: apples cannot be graffed till the
beginning of March, or later as the season is, even into April.

WHIP-GRAFFING has the advantage of cleft-graffing in neatness, and not
requiring the stocks to be so old by a year or two, as very small ones will do
in this way; for the stock is directly covered by the cion and it takes with
certainty if properly performed. The objections to this mode are, that cions
suitable to proper stocks cannot always be had; i. e. near upon half an inch
thick; and, that if the cion is of a more free nature than the stock, it will
overgrow it, which though it does not signify for dwarf-trees, is not so well
for standards. Stock and cion are to be both of a (...) or rather ^early so, is
better, the stock having the advantage in bigness; for thus it is not so likely
to be overgrown. When the stock of a standard is overgrown by the cion, it will
give it some opportunity to thicken, by slitting the bark through downwards, in
two or three places.

Having cut the head of the stock off, and the cion to its length, slope the
lower end of the cion about an inch and a ha^t, and to a point; then cut the
stock to answer it, (the cut of the stock however may be a trifle wider and
longer) bark against bark, and tie them together exactly to their place, and
clay it. But for the greater certainty of keeping a cion to the part, two ways
to assist it are used. The first is, by cutting the cion so as to leave a small
shoulder at the top of the slope, and the stock so as to leave a narrow bit of
the crown to answer it, and to hold it. The other way is, make a slit with the
knife in the bare place of the stock downward, beginning toward the top of the
slope, and so slitting it a little way; and doing the like in the sloped face
of the cion, but beginning at the same distance from the lower end of it, as
was done before from the top of the stock, and so carrying it upwards; and then
join them by thrusting the one slice into the other, till the bare place of the
cion cover the bare place of the stock: -- this junction is called Lipping.

There is a sort of whip-graffing that has been denominated slicing, or
packing, which differs only from the one just described, in that the stock is
of any size* and this is performed by cutting the cion to a face, as before,
and then taking off a slice from the (beheaded) stock, choosing a gibbons part
of it so as exactly to correspond with the cut-surface of the cion, taking care
to fit them so that the cion may stand erect (or nearly) when clapped to.
Shouldering and lipping are here as necessary as in the former method, though
shouldering is more conveniently and commonly practiced.

GRAFFING IN THE BARK, which is sometimes called crown graffing, is perhaps as
good a way as any, both for ease of operation and certainty of success; but it
will hardly suit any other fruit than apples or pears, as other cions will be
past use (most likely) before the bark of the stocks will peel, as the time for
this business is toward the end of March, or beginning of April.

The head being cut off, make a strait slit down and through the bark from the
top, at the place destined for the graff, which should be rather southerly or
westerly. This score down the bark, should be nearly as long as the slope cut
of the cion, which may be one and a half, or two inches. Loosing the bark a
lit^ile at the top of the score, and then with some smooth instrument rather of
dry hard wood, ivory, bone, or silver, than iron or steel, open the bark
sufficiently to receive the cion, by pushing the instrument down a trifle below
the botton of the slit. This instrument should be thin, tapered and rounded
toward the point, to suit the shape of the cion's face; one side of it flat,
and the other a little unequal, the flat side being applied to the wood of the
stock; let it be rather narrower than the cion, that it may not loosen the bark
too wide.

Cut a bit of the bark of the cion smooth off at the bottom, that it may not
turn up in pushing down. It will be proper to cut the cion with a small
shoulder, to rest upon the stock. And because when the cion is in, it will bear
the bark up hollow from the stock, score the bark on each side the cion, so
that it may fall close to the stock, and to the edges of the cion. Bind and
clay neatly. In this way of graffing there is a sort of agreement between the
cion and stock necessary; the cion not being too big, or the stock too small,
to prevent a proper bedding. If more than one cion be not put in, the stock on
the opposite side to the cion should be sloped up, about two inches in length,
to half its thickness.

This way of graffing is used most properly with strong stocks; and sometimes
is applied to large branches, and even trunks of old trees, to change the
sorts, or renew the wood. In proportion to the largeness of which, from two to
five or six cions are put in, and sometimes of different sorts; and if the
stock be large, the more the better, as they insure the life of the stock, by
receiving and carrying off the sap: in this respect the single branch of the
head of an old stock may be left on, for the sap to pass off by when it begins
to stir.

Having inserted the cions, and bound them, clay the top of the stock well so
as to shoot off the wet. In this way of graffing, the cions are liable to be
disturbed, or moved from their places by strong winds, and the best
preventative is to tie small long sticks to the stocks, and then the cions to
them, taking care to place the sticks so as not to force the cions; and as the
shoots proceed to push they may be fastened to the sticks also, and so grow two
years, when nature will need no further assistance.

SIDE-GRAFFING is done in the bark, much like inoculation, a cion being
inserted instead of a bud; but remember, there must be a fluent sap first: i.
e. the bark must part readily from the wood, before this mode of graffing is
attempted. The head of the stock is not to be cut off, only thinned a little if
it be big, and the side shoots taken away. The bark of the stock, where the
insertion of the cion is to be, must be cut through in the form of the letter
T, as wide and as long as is sufficient to receive the cion, cut as before,
with a slope face of at least an inch long, taking advantage, (if it may be) of
a part of the stock, that is a little gibbous. Let the bark of the stock be
neatly raised to receive it, but yet no more than necessary; a little bit of
the bark may be sliced off the part that is over the cross cut, to receive the
cion the better.

Side-graffing may be done also by taking off (...) bark to the size of the
cion's face (exactly,) and sipping may be used to keep it in its place: in this
case the operation should be performed somewhat sooner in the season than in
the former method. When the graff^ appear to have taken, the head of the stock
may be cut off, or a stump may be left above the graff till another season,
before it be clean cut away.

APPROACH GRAFFING, or INARCHING, is performed when the stock we would graff,
and the tree we would propagate, grows so near together, as to be brought
conveniently into contact, and the nearer the graff and the stock are of a size
the better. This mode of propagation is esteemed the surest of all, as it will
conjoin branches of trees which are scarcely congenerous in their nature; and
in truth, some things cannot be so well propagated any other way. It is a
method seldom used for common fruit trees; but if any one wishes to try the
experiment, the stock or stocks must be planted at least a year before, first
making the soil good, as it may need it, being so near another tree, for it of
course must be close.

Plants in pots or tubs being easily brought together, are frequently
propagated this way; so that inarching is used much in green-houses and
hot-houses for various things, as oranges, lemons, pomegranates, jasmines and
vines sometimes: oranges and lemons thus treated in May will be united by
August.

The method of inarching is, bend the best situated young branch of the tree or
shrub to be propagated, to the stock to be graffed, and having determined on
the part at which most conveniently to fix the shoot; cut the bark of that part
of the shoot off, with nearly half the wood, (not to touch the pith) to the
length of about three inches for a strong branch, or less for a weaker. Then
cut exactly so much of the bark and wood of the stock off, as will receive the
cut part of the branch, or shoot, so as to bring bark and bark in contact in
every part; and if the contrivance of lipping be used, it will secure them
better together. Bind and clay, and if in open ground, fix a stake to tie the
work so that the wind may have no power over it; a tie also to a neat stick may
be proper for those inarched in pots, etc.

As soon as the graff has taken, which will be probably in four months, (except
in the harder woods,) let the head of the stock be steadily cut off with a keen
knife, three or four inches above the binding, which then removing, bind and
clay again, to remain about a month. In March following, cut off the branch
from the parent close to the graffing, and also the stub of the stock that was
left. The head of the stock is sometimes cut off before graffing, in which case
a sloping cut half way the thickness of the stock, is to receive the cion; but
here the graff and the stock must be both of a size, or nearly so. There has
been this distinction made, to call it inarching when the head is cut off, and
approach graffing when it is not. Gardeners mostly prefer the former method.

BUDDING or INOCULATION, though here last mentioned, is the most considerable
mode of propagation, and is a pretty summer business. Apricots, peaches, and
nectarines are always propagated this way, and plums and cherries may be. Pears
are sometimes budded, and apples have been, but the success is uncertain. Not
only fruit, but forest, and ornamental trees and shrubs are inoculated. The
branches also of trees as well as stems are sometimes budded, which is best
done on two years wood, though it may be on both younger and older.

Inoculation begins as soon as good shoots of the present year can be had, so
that the season may be reckoned from Mid-June to Mid-August; but about
Old-Midsummer, or rather after, is the usual and best time for the work: it
should be done in a morning or evening, (the latter rather best,) except the
day be cloudy, when any part of it will do.

Apricots being first ready, the budding season begins with them. The stocks to
be used are those of the plum (raised from stones or suckers) when half an inch
thick, a little under or over, and the operation is to take place from four to
eight inches from the ground.

Peaches are best budded on stocks from stones, which may be either of peach or
plum; but rather the latter, as making the more durable trees. The wheat plum,
(a white one, ripe in August,) is reckoned the best by some, and the muscle
plum is preferred by others; but any free growing sort will do, giving the
preference to those mentioned.

Nectarines are propagated on the same sort of stocks; but if the plum stock is
first budded with an apricot (very low,) and, when of proper size, budded with
the nectarine, the advantage is reckoned that it takes best so, and comes to a
better bearing, producing an improved fruit, and particularly the red Roman
nectarine. Peaches are also sometimes thus double-budded; and apricots may be
expected to be less luxuriant by this treatment, in which case the first bud
should be of the Brussels sort.

Plums and cherries may be inoculated on sucker stocks of any kind; yet if a
free growth is required, (as for standards,) stocks raised from stones are
best; i. e. plums on plums, and cherries on cherries, though they will take
upon each other.

Pears, if for standards, should be inoculated on pear stocks, and on those
raised from seed, rather than suckers, but if for dwarfs, quince stocks may be
best used, to keep the trees from growing off too fast, and so getting soon too
big for their allotted space; white thorn stocks are sometimes used with the
same view, but the fruit gets stony.

Stocks for budding dwarfs should be three years old; but for standards four or
more, though small stocks may be budded for standards also, (as mentioned in
the case of graffing,) if the shoot proceeding from the bud be trained to a
single stem, till of sufficient height to be topped in order to form a head.
Standards should be from three to seven feet high, before they are topped,
according to the height they are desired to be of, as half or full; but dwarfs
for trailing can hardly branch off too low, being budded at five or six inches,
or less from the ground, the shoot from the bud should be shortened (at a
year's growth) to five or six eyes, or to four that are well placed; i. e. with
a lateral direction for the wall.

Though the longer inoculation is deferred, the riper the shoots will be for
furnishing buds; yet there is an advantage in beginning as early as may be,
that if the budding appears not to have taken, the work may be done again
before the season is out. Or, to insure success, two buds may be inserted in
the same stock, (but not in a direction under one another) and if both fail
this year, the stocks may do again the next, as the heads in this mode of
graffing are not to be cut off till the spring following the inoculation,
because the inoculated buds do not push till then, when they will grow off
apace.

Sometimes, however, in a very early inoculation, the bud will shoot the same
year; but it is not desirable, as it comes weak, and is likely to be destroyed
in the winter.

Let the cions to procure buds for inoculation, be taken only from the outside
branches of healthy and fruitful trees. If early budding be attempted, it will
be proper to cut off some spare shoot, (not fit for the purpose,) to try first
whether the bark will yet readily part from the wood.

The season being right, and the cions at hand, having a sharp narrow bladed
knife, and neat though wet bass, set about the work adroitly, for the quicker
it is done the better; but "make no more haste than good speed." Keep the bud,
as much as may be from sun and wind: they must not be taken from the upper part
of the cions, as the bark and buds there are are too raw. If cions or buds be
brought from any distance, they should be conveyed in damp (not wet) moss, or
grass, and never kept above a day and night, but the sooner they are used the
better.

Before the buds are prepared, get the stock ready to receive them, by taking
off lateral shoots, leaving an uncut single stem. At the part fixed on for the
inoculation, which should be smooth, and rather on the north side, cut the bark
through to the wood, in form thus T, the cross and the down slit being of the
length necessary to take in the bud, which may be cut with from one to two
inches of bark; putting the point of a knife (or some instrument rather not of
iron or steel) into the top of the down cut of the stock, raise the bark all
the way to the bottom, so that it will just receive the bud easily. There are
knives made on purpose for budding with flat ivory hafts.

To procure proper buds, put your knife in (suppose) about three-fourths of an
inch above the ^ye, and with a slope downwards cut the cion half through, then
do it at the same distance below the eye, and sloping it upwards cut up the
middle of the wood, till the knife meets the upper incision, so the eye will be
directly in the middle.

The next step is, to separate the wood from the bark, which is to be done
thus: with your nail, or the point of a knife, loosen the bark at the top, and
strip it from the wood; or rather with a swan or large goose quill, made in the
form of an apple scoop, (having a regular smooth edge) push it down between the
bark and wood, pressing against the wood.

Examine the inside of the bark, and it there is a cavity just behind the eye,
or bud, it is good for nothing, and another must be procured; for the cavity
shows, that the root of the bud is with the wood, instead of being with the
bark.

The leaf that grows by the eye is to be cut down to near its footstalk, so as
to leave only a little bit of it to hold the bud by, while inserting it in the
stock.

See that the bark of the stock is loosened a proper length and breadth, and if
when the bud is put in, it should prove a little too long, cut the spare part
off; so that the top of the bud (being squared) falls in strait with the cross
cut of the stock. Thus fixed, bind it moderately tight in its place with the
wet bass, beginning at the bottom and passing by the bud, go on to the top, or
rather above it. Care must be taken that the bud is not hurt, and it is to be
left only just starting out between the bass: -- This is the mode of
inoculation commonly used.

Some gardeners insist, that it is best to cut the bark of the stock thus T,
and so insert the bud by pushing it upward instead of downward, because by this
method it shoots off wet effectually.

Others squaring the bud to an oblong, clap it to the place to be inoculated,
and scoring the stock to its size, cut out the bark of the stock from within
the lines, and having put the bud to the place, bind it in: but great exactness
must in this way be observed, that the edges of the bark do regularly touch.

Another way, and perhaps as good as any, is this -- clap the bud to the stock,
(the bud being first squared) and rather before it is separated from the wood,
and score the bark on each side, and across the top; and instead of scoring the
bark at the bottom, do it a quarter of an inch (or rather more) above the
bottom ends of the side lines; then take off the bark between the lines, and
place the bud, by pushing it down this piece of bark, (being first loosened)
which will serve to hold it. Bind close, but not over tight. If in this method
the bud fits exactly, it is a very sure and neat way of inoculating. As the
scoring of the stock is best done before the barking of the bud, a little
allowance must be made, as when the bud is separated from its wood, it will
spread a trifle wider.

Lastly, budding has been performed by making a down slit in the bark of the
stock, and a cross one in the middle of this slit, and so raising the four
corners to receive the bud; making in this case, the bud rather under an inch
in length; but it is difficult thus to insert the bud without injuring it, and
this method i^ therefore not to be recommended.

If the buds have taken, it will be seen in about three weeks, by their
appearing fresh and plump, and not dark, flat and shrivelled. As often as any
shoots appear below the budding, cut them off, and also some of the shoots
above, if there are many of them; for it is not proper that an inoculated stock
should have a large head. In a month loosen the bandage, by taking it off, and
putting it on gently again, for another month.

In March, cut the head of the stock off with a keen knife, close behind the
budding, in a sloping direction; some leave three or four inches of the stock
above the bud till the following spring, and it will serve to tie the new shoot
to, in order to keep it to a proper erect direction. Suffer no shoots from the
stock, but rub the buds off as soon as they appear.

A few observations concludes this long article of propagation by graffing and
budding. Persons designing to graff, are apt to neglect cutting their cions
till they get two forward, therefore remember to be in time. To do the work
well, there must be good tools, etc. and particularly a keen knife. Choose as
good a day as can reasonably be expected, for bad weather occasions hurry and
embarrassment, and the patience necessary to success may not be possessed: but
defer not too long on account of the weather. In handling cions, take care of
their eyes, that nothing bruises them, and be particularly careful of the buds
used for inoculation.

Some motion of the sap is proper, at the time of all graffing, but a free
motion is necessary for the mode of graffing in the bark, and as on the sunny
side of the stock it moves freest, and is the best aspect as to weather,
insertion of graffs, though not buds, if it can be avoided, should be always on
a part of the stock inclining to the West. It may be of use to shade the
inoculated buds a few days, by a leaf, or a bit of paper. Silver, (as a fruit
knife) is best to raise the bark with, or any thing is preferable to iron.

Though inoculation may seem the slowest mode of propagating fruit trees, it
proves eventually the quickest; and is the most certain way to produce free
growing trees, with a well covered stock. The insertion of a bud has also the
advantage of a cion, as a failure does not hurt the stock so much.

It is to be advised, that some mark be affixed, (or notch the stock) to be
assured of the sort; an uncertainty of which is often a great mortification.
Many words have been necessarily employed in directing to the business of
graffing, but let not that circumstance deter ingenuity from setting about the
work; or a few failures prevent that perseverance which will at length be
crowned with success, and be a pleasing reward. Though private persons are apt
to think much of the difficulty of this art, yet the ease, celerity, and
certainty, with which Nurserymen perform it, seem to make it nothing at all:
such is the ability which much practice gives.

SECTION VIII.
OF PLANTING.
AS so much depends upon proper planting, every attention ought to be paid to
it. This business may be arranged under these several heads. 1. The choice of
plants. 2. The act of planting. 3. The soil. 4. The situation. 5. The season.

1. As to the CHOICE of plants. Trees ought to be the best of the kind; and
therefore no care in raising, or caution and expense in purchasing should be
spared, that at least there may be a fair prospect of satisfaction. To plant,
and after waiting a long time, to be disappointed, is rather a serious
misfortune; especially when the work is to be begun again late in a man's life.

Having some confidence that the sort is right and good, the plants must be
seen to, that they are healthy; they should appear sound as to any external
injury. If they are of a squat, weak, bushy growth, there can be little
expectation of their becoming good plants; though it may sometimes happen that
a tree of poor promise will rally.

Trees graffed on old stunted stocks, or that have often been removed, or
frequently cut down, seldom grow off well in any soil, and should be rejected.
Let those that are purchased be seen to, as nurserymen often have suck trees,
having remained long on hand.

Good y^^^g trees have a smooth, bright, and strait appearance, rather of a
robust growth than otherwise: though the most luxuriant are not to be
preferred, for their wood is raw, and wants that firmness which is necessary to
fruitfulness: they may get off this crude state in time, but the moderately
free growers are best.

Young fruit trees are the best to plant, for though old ones may sometimes
succeed with good management, yet they are liable to stunt, and d^indle off;
whereas the former establish their roots quickly, and grow off apace; so that
young trees planted at the same time with old ones, generally overtake them in
a few years.

2. The ACT of planting. Trees taken up for planting should be dug carefully,
with (as much as possible) their full roots. Many a good tree has failed merely
by being taken up badly, and then planted so. The roots of fruit trees are
often not only mangled, and too few, but are also put into the ground without
any dressing or care.

The less roots are exposed to the air the better, and the sooner trees are
planted after being taken up, the more likely they are to succeed well. Trees
properly packed (i. e. the roots well covered) may live out of ground ten days
or a fortnight, in autumn, or early in the spring; but nothing except necessity
will justify the keeping a tree out of ground a day longer than can be helped.

It is be determined for any length of time beforehand, when and where to
plant, the opening the ground, and exposing the holes to the sun and air, (and
if it may be to frost also) will both correct crudities in the soil, and enrich
it from the various stores of the atmosphere; this opening should be as deep
and wide as convenient, that the salutary influences of the air may be extended.

Some people do the work of planting very idly, as if it were sufficient to see
that a tree has a root, and that it was only necessary to bide it in the
ground. Every one who plants trees should stand by himself, or have some trusty
person to see the work done, or the necessary labor may not be bestowed. It is
frequently the way (for instance) just to dig a hole no bigger than will
receive the roots of a tree twisted and forced in; but being thus cramped, and
the vessels of their roots distorted and broke, it cannot be expected that such
unnatural treatment should answer.

But the above violence is not all; the roots are confined as in a prison, (in
a tub or a basin,) which if the soil is strong detains wet, and chills and
cankers, if not rots the fibers. To plant well, the roots of a tree should have
liberty to strike out freely every way, and the ground well broke for their
easy progress. Let the ^^de for a tree be loosened about two feet deep, and as
wide as will be much more than sufficient to receive the roots in their fall
spread as they grow, with little or no direction given contrary to the original
one.

When the tree is to be planted, take out the earth a little lower than
necessary for the roots, at the depth the tree is designed to stand; then dig
the bottom to the full spade's depth. Trim any dead or damaged part of the root
clean off; thin it of the finer fibers where withered, or matted thick, and the
more, according to the time the tree has been out of the ground, for the fine
roots soon die, and if dead, ought not to be on. Trees moved only from one part
of the garden to another, need have but few fibers cut off, but some
amputations are necessary to help the sooner to new roots, which shortening
always forces out. If the root had a tap, (or downright spur,) it should be cut
to the general level of the other roots, and never be left longer than a foot
from the highest part of the root. Those great roots that lay auk ward, or
crossing, should be judiciously rectified with a sharp knife; be cautious,
however, of taking off too much, for the head will produce stronger branches in
proportion to the goodness of the root. Though it be little practiced, it may
be very well to apply some wound mixture to large amputations, especially of
stone fruit.

The head of a tree should be somewhat conformed to the root. Some reduction of
the head may take place at the time of planting; yet not all that may be
thought necessary should be taken off at first; but let alone till the sap
stirs at spring, and then care should be taken to proportion the head to the
root; and not leave on a tree too many buds, for a few stout branches are
preferable to many weak ones. This is the ordinary practice with respect to
wall trees, and why not of all others? See articles, Orchard and Pruning, Sect.
3 and 12.

The hole being made as directed, form a little hillock in the middle of it to
lay the roots on and round; clap the tree upon it, and having thrown on a
little good and well-broke mould, give the tree a gentle, shaking lift, which
will let the earth in close among the roots, and bring the tree up toward its
proper height; by not doing this the roots are sometimes turned up at the ends,
instead of laying rather downwards: Set the tree high enough to allow for a
setting of the earth, in proportion to the depth it was loosened. Young trees,
however, should have their roots nearly upon a level, and so must have their
ends raised with the hand, if they are suspected to be too much depressed. The
mould should be thrown on gently, a little at a time; and if some that is finer
and richer than the rest be put about the roots, just to cover them, it would
be a trouble that would answer, helping the tree to strike fresh roots, and
grow off the faster.

Trample the mould gently about the roots, beginning at the outside of the
hole, and so toward the stem. Finally, leave the ground a little hollow on the
top, to receive rains, or waterings.

As to depth, trees in a light dry soil may have the top of their roots settled
at about five or six inches below the surface, and in a strong soil about three
inches; or it may be a general rule to plant a tree no deeper than it was
before; for trees planted too deep never do well. Always keep the roots of a
tree above a heavy clay, for the making trenches in it will not answer, and an
unhealthy tree may be looked for. See next article Soil. If the good soil is
thin, the roots should be almost planted in sight, raising the earth about
them; and if care is taken to protect the roots of such high set trees from
frost the first winter, and drought the first summer, they will generally do
well. But all new planted trees should be somewhat covered about their roots
from extremes of weather for a time; either with good solid turf, litter with
stones on it, or stones alone, which by their weight help to hold the tree
fast. Where plenty of moss is to be had, it is a neat material to lay about
roots to keep them from drought.

When litter alone is laid about trees (particularly if against an old wall)
mice are apt to harbor in it, and bark them.

Watering is to take place if trees are planted early in autumn; but in winter
it should not. This settles the mould about the roots, but let them not be
sodden with it. Late in spring water will be safely and necessarily applied,
and must be repeated also if dry weather; but yet with caution, for many new
planted trees have been injured (if not killed) by keeping the roots wet. Late
planted trees should be occasionally watered throughout the summer.

In planting wall trees, (the bud outward) try in the hole which way they will
best stand against the wall; and if they have a head designed to remain for
training, place it carefully for the branches to be laid to; but keep the tree
as far from the wall as may be, (suppose eight or nine inches) that the roots
may have the more room to strike behind: cut off, or shorten much all roots
whose direction is toward the wall. Nail the tree to it, that wind may not
disturb the roots.

In planting standards it will be proper to fix a stake near the stem to fasten
the tree, in order to prevent the roots being disturbed by wind, which prevents
their striking out new fibers; rocking about opens the ground also about the
stem, and admits frost, by which a tree is sometimes lost, or succeeds badly.
This staking is best done while the holes are open, and the roots of the tree
seen, as by driving a stake in afterward, it might damage some principal root,
and the hurting a root is to be avoided as much as bruising a branch. Take care
to fix the stake firmly, and to tie the tree so with a hayband, that it may not
easily get galled. Twist the band close round the tree first, and then round
the stake and tree.

In late spring planting it will be found of good use to make a mixture (in a
barrow) of fresh cow dung and fine mould, half and half, to put about the
roots, which will greatly help to keep them cool, and plentifully to nourish
them. In default of cow dung, a puddle of fine sifted mould and water will do.
Or, if the soil is light, mix half mud from a pond or ditch.

Circumstances may occur to make summer planting desirable, if it could be
safely done. It is certain that roots quickly strike in summer, and if the head
of the tree is a little reduced, and some shading contrived for a while, even
wall trees may be then planted with cow dung. But the greatest point in this
business is, that the tree be not out of the ground so long as to dry the
roots; by some means they should be kept cool, and if dried, put into pond
water a few hours before planting. Trees thus planted will not need watering
for a long time, and must not have it, for over moisture might rot the delicate
new fibers.

3. The SOIL for planting fruit trees should be good, or nothing pleasing can
be expected: It should be sweet and nourishing; and therefore if not naturally
so, it is to be improved by art and labor. Tillage or breaking up a soil, to
expose it to the atmosphere, is of much benefit. See article Soil, in the
Formation of a Garden. Sect. 3.

It nothing more can be done at the present, at least make the ground fairly
good where the tree is to be set. Two or three barrows of fresh earth, if of a
good quality, is preferable to dung: but if the soil really needs manure, let
it be well incorporated by the spade; and work some rotten dung in deep, below
the roots, which will be properly consumed before the new roots reach it.

In the case of only making the soil good for the present, the first
opportunity, (or at least before the roots spread far) should be taken to
extend the benefit as far as may be, even to several yards round; and let this
work be done deep enough, or as low as the part made good for first planting,
i. e. two feet, or as near upon it as the case will allow. In a few years this
attention should be extended (^n bad soils) to where it may be thought possible
for the roots to have reached. For want of this, a tree sometimes fails when
just come to its full size and principal time for bearing. When roots reach a
weak, ill conditioned, poisonous soil, the tree must fail; and it should be
remembered that the extreme branches of the root are what chiefly nourish a
plant.

Fruit trees (though they like a rather strong soil) will not prosper, or
hardly grow, in a cold clay; but in a soil that is tolerable above they may be
planted, by improving, or raising this as the case may require, and cautiously
avoiding going into the clay. Some persons have laid flat stones, or tiles,
below the root to a considerable distance, which perhaps may answer; but it
seems advisable only to do it about a foot square, (or a little more,) as this
may give the roots an horizontal direction, which if they keep, all will be
well.

It has been recommended to do this in all kinds of soil, in order to insure a
more superficial spread, than without such contrivance could be expected.

If the soil be good, and at the same time strong, above any bad soil, and the
roots take to run toward the surface, it is surprising how trees will thus
prosper. When planting takes place superficially, let a hillock of earth be
laid round the roots, and the tree secured by a stake for two or three years to
hold it steady; and keep turf or moss about the root, till the tree is well
established.

In a soil that trees are found to canker in, and get otherwise diseased, it is
of no use (generally speaking) to wait their getting better; but if there is
any spot of a more promising quality, trees that are not too old and far gone
may be removed there, and perhaps recover, as it has often happened; but let
the root be examined, as well as the head, to cut out any diseased part. If the
shoots should be weak the first year, prune down close the second, and strong
wood may possibly follow.

With respect to the soil that suits every particular kind of tree, there is
some variety of opinions; and though it were clear what best agrees with each,
yet trees must after all be planted in different soils, as each situation is.
In what may be truly called a good soil, all trees will do very well, and in a
bad one none will. No situation or management avails when the soil is
poisonous, as some sorts are, by their coldness, acidity, sulphurous, or
metallic qualities. Generally speaking, a true loam suits every thing. See
Formation of a Garden, Sect. 3.

Of the soil that best suits each sort of tree, (though this be mentioned
elsewhere in different places,) the following particulars seem to have a pretty
common consent. Vines love a rich dry soil, gravelly or sandy, if it does not
bind. Figs like much the same soil, though they need not so rich a one.
Apri^ots flourish in a light loam; but peaches and nectarines should have a
somewhat strong loam, and the latter needs the warmer or richer soil of the
two. Pears like a strong but dry soil; apples a strong and a cool one, if it is
not wet. Cherries, plums, walnuts, and mulberries prefer a dry, sandy,
gravelly, or light soil, though they will grow in a stronger; notwithstanding
plums do very well in a moist soil, and produce the larger fruit in it, yet the
flavor is far inferior. Quinces flourish most in a rich moist soil, by a brook
or river's side, or where a rich wash from sinks, or dunghills, runs
occasionally about their roots; in a dry soil their fruit is small, though
higher flavoured: It is an universal rule, that fruits are forwarder and more
grateful in warm soils, but of less size.

Though the vine be planted in a right soil, yet it will require to be fed and
enlivened with some spirituous manure, either in autumn or spring. For this
purpose water impregnated with sheep's dung and fresh urin has been used. The
top soil being removed, bullock's or hog's blood is sometimes applied; but a
little sheep's dung, or that of poultry, dug in regularly every autumn, is a
good, neat, standing rule. The dung of sheep and poultry should be used in the
proportion of a tenth part of that of horses.

That soils should be accommodated to each particular sort of tree, the analogy
between plants and animals is reasonably urged; that as the latter require
their peculiar food, so do the former; -- but it is to be observed, that plants
receive a great deal of their nourishment from the air, and do not depend so
much on the soil as is supposed.

4. The SITUATION properest for planting any particular kind of tree is to be
considered; for some like a low, some a high, some a moist, some a dry
situation; but it is spoken here chiefly of fruit trees. The general situation
of a country, will in a measure rule; for though England be but an island, it
has many climates in it, and certain plants will do better in one place than
another, (even within the space of a few miles,) as to effects from weather.
The difference between hill and valley in the same place, is something, so that
in the latter the tender blossoms of trees shall escape, when in the former,
unkind winds shall cut them off: -- not that valleys are always safe, for they
have sometimes destructive n^sts. To give an example:

Peace sown to stand the winter, in a garden on a hill, and in another only a
hundred yards below, the former exposed, and the latter well sheltered, will
demonstrate what situation will do; for the peace below will live when the
others are cut off, and perhaps come in a week earlier, when both survive
uninjured.

In very exposed situations, especially northwards, little fruit can be
expected from the more delicate wall trees; it is prudent therefore to avoid
planting in cold places the tenderest, or the earliest, or the latest sorts.

The difference of latitude between Middlesex and Northamptonshire makes
commonly a fortnight in the coming in of many of the productions of the garden;
so that, generally speaking, what is called an October peach is of little worth
in the latter country, though in the former it may do well; except there is
plenty of walling for experiment, therefore never think of planting late fruit
in a bleak aspect.

The farther north, however, is not a certain rule for the productions of the
garden being proportionally later; for in some parts of yorkshire they produce
vegetables and fruits, nearly as early as about London. This has been ascribed
to subterraneous heat from coal beds or minerals, acting as natural hot-beds;
but it may be attributed simply to a rich, warm, and deep soil, having gravel
below it, especially when in a valley sheltered by winds on the cold side. It
has been observed, "in some grounds in the same climate, fruit will ripen
fifteen days, or more, before some others, not far off from them, in ground of
a different temper." A happy soil is therefore the great desideratum in
gardening.

With regard to situation, we should consider the garden itself, and not plant
choice fruits in a cold or shaded part of it: the aspect must be good for them
as well as the soil. From an error of this sort, Vines have frequently been
planted and pruned for years, producing nothing but wood and leaves.

Figs and vines, nectarines and peaches should have a full sun, or little fruit
can be expected from them; and Apricots ought to have a good share of it,
though they do very well (in some places) against an east wall, and sometimes
against a west. An east aspect is not so safe as a south one, as to the embryo
fruit at the time of blossoming, nor does it bring the apricots so forward; but
the fruit is commonly better: it has the earliest sun all the morning, and the
benefit of a gentle warmth afterward, by the wall, (the sun shining hot on the
other side,) if the tree is nailed properly close. See Formation of a Garden,
articles Situation and Aspect.

From what has been said on situation, the young gardener will be led to make
some discrimination in planting, and not hope to succeed when working against
nature. If his garden is small, let him contract his desires, and proceed upon
sure grounds: but if large, experiments and risks are not of much consequence.
Favorable and unfavourable seasons make a great difference; but hope should
have a foundation, and we cannot expect a fortunate end, without the use, of
probable means.

5. The SEASON for planting is a matter of consequence, though some persons are
apt to neglect it who should, and do, know better. The proper rule is, to plant
as early in the season as can be; so that if the ground is ready, trees had
best be put in when the leaves begin to fall, i. e. in October, yet some good
planters have recommended an earlier time than this; and scruple not to plant
all the latter half of September, though the leaves be full on. Some trees will
form fresh roots in the winter, and those which do not, get so united with the
earth, and prepared for starting in the spring, that they are ready to answer a
supply of juices much more freely than when late planted; and consequently the
new shoots (...) be stronger. Let nothing but necessity put off planting in
autumn, except indeed the soil be naturally wet and then the work done early in
spring is proper.

The season for planting in a dry soil may be all winter for deciduous trees,
i. e. those that leave their leaves; but all evergreens (except the Scotch sir,
which may be planted at any time,) should be moved early in autumn, or late in
spring, and rather the latter, as they are somewhat uncertain in taking kindly
to the ground, especially if the weather is unfavourable at the time of
planting. The oak and larch (though deciduous) are removed safest in the
spring. In spring-planting, always give a sound watering at the time, and it
late in the spring repeat it once a week in dry weather.

Let even the meanest trees and shrubs, as currants, gooseberries and
raspberries have the like attention paid to them as to their superiors; for
their fruit will prove the finer, and the argument is cogent for an October
planting of these, as they are to bear the next season. (...) men be taken up,
and planted with care: for the best way of doing every thing ought to be the
rule of practice in all cases, and a gardener should follow it above all
persons. See lists of trees, section 19.

SECTION IX.
OF SHRUBS, SHRUBBERIES, etc.
WE are indebted to SHRUBS for much of the pleasure we enjoy in our gardens and
plantations, and they justly merit every care, though they produce us no (or
few) edible fruits. They assist in forming an agreeable shade, they afford a
great variety of flowers with leaves differently tinged, and are standard
ornaments that give us no great trouble.

Of shrubs too little care (however) in general is taken to plant them
properly, or even to choose good plants for the purpose; and hence they often
fail to flourish, and are mortifying us with a dwindling growth, and unhealthy
appearance, when they should have become objects of admiration.

Many shrubs, are raised from suckers, others from layers, some from cuttings,
and most may be propagated from seeds, which though the slowest method,
generally produces the finest plants. Before they are planted out for
ornaments, they should be trained two or three years in a nursery, to be formed
into a full and proper head.

Though deciduous shrubs may be planted almost at any time, yet October, is
much the best month, especially if a moist season; the exception being made as
to a cold wet soil, in which all sorts of planting (as observed before) is best
done in spring.

Evergreen shrubs must be cautiously planted, and should not be ventured upon
in winter, and even in autumn and spring ought not to be meddled with in harsh
weather: drying winds are apt presently to injure their roots. It is a good
rule, let the weather be what it will, and the sorts what they may, to expose
the roots to the air no longer than can be helped; evergreens should therefore
be immediately planted after they are taken up, and their roots also very
carefully preserved whole.

As shrubberies, clumps, etc. are often made on poor or indifferent ground, the
soil should be previously cleared, dug, and trenched, and that as long before
planting as may be. For spring planting, this work ought to be done in autumn
or in winter, that the soil may have the benefit of frosts, and other helps
from the atmosphere, which is a circumstance of much consequence in the case.

Tillage not only saves manure, but is superior to it, where time can be
allowed exhausted ground. In planting shrubs and trees, it is desirable to do
without dung, as much as possible; and therefore a little foot, or turf-ashes,
etc. sprinkled over the ridges of trenched ground is proper; and if the
trenches were turned over once a month, the advantage would be fully answerable
to the trouble.

As spring is, on the whole, rather the fittest time for moving evergreen
shrubs, and as the deciduous sorts do then also very well, shrubberies and
clumbs will properly enough be the work of March, a little earlier or later,
according to the soil and season. Light sandy soils should always be planted in
good time, and any fair weather that appears settled, should not be neglected;
the beginning of April, however, is by some reckoned the best season for
planting shrubs. A good medium way is to plant the deciduous sorts the
beginning of March; and, leaving places for the evergreen kinds, plant them the
end of March, or the beginning of April. But it were still a better way (if the
ground is in order) to plant deciduous shrubs in autumn, and the evergreen
sorts in spring.

If autumn be the season fixed for planting, it will be proper before the frost
comes in to cover the roots of shrubs, and especially of evergreens, with
litter, and indeed at spring it is proper to do so; for neither frost nor
drought should be suffered to affect new planted trees, or shrubs. It will be
proper to have the outside plants of a new shrubbery, toward the sun, covered
about the roots all summer.

What has been said of the act (or method) of planting fruit trees, should be
observed of shrubs. In dressing the roots of shrubs, shorten them moderately,
prune the heads so as to form them handsomely. Settle the ground to the roots
by watering, and leave a little hollow about them for future watering, if the
season should require it. Let the taller plants be tied to stakes, as the wind
is apt to disturb them, and hinder their speedy rooting.

The proper disposition of shrubs, where there are many to be planted, should
be considered in several particulars; for the beauty and prosperity of a
plantation, depends greatly upon it.

The distances must be according to the size they usually attain. Some grow off
slow at first, but afterward get large; but still these should be rather
considered in a middling way, otherwise the ground will be a long time naked.
Some sorts will require not more than a three feet distance, others four, five,
or six; but as they are small, when planted, and perhaps much of a size, the
future height and spread, are frequently not considered.

The situation, to accommodate them as well as may be, according to their
tender or hardy nature, should be attended to; not to plant evergreen shrubs,
or the more delicate deciduous sorts, on the outside toward the N. or N. E.
and as there may be a variety and irregularity in the ground, the lower parts
and deeper soil may be more suitable to some, and the higher and shallower may
suit (or at least do very well for) others.

Tender shrubs should not only be sheltered for protection, but be planted in a
dry spot open to the fun: Some things will live abroad in a dry and poor soil,
that would seldom survive a winter in a rich and moist one. The more towering
sorts must be placed behind, and the less so before them, gradually declining
to the low growing ones, in a sort of theatrical order: This is necessary in a
shrubbery, and indeed all plantations, but more so in the disposition of plants
in clumps, keeping the center high, and falling gradually toward the edge.
Thus the stems, and naked parts of the higher plants are hid by those before
them, and the whole appears to the eye a full scene of verdure.

The season of shrubs flowering and leafing is a material point to provide for,
by a proper distribution, that there may be a sprinkling of decoration every
month, in every part. And in this business, an equally dispersed mixture of the
evergreen, and deciduous sorts is necessary to be observed.

As to the proportion of this mixture it will depend upon taste, and the
opportunity of procuring the one sort or the other; but the circumstance may
direct (in a measure) whether the plantation of shrubs be about the house, or
at a distance from it. In the former case, more evergreens should be made use
of, as in sight in winter: generally speaking, perhaps, one evergreen, and two
deciduous shrubs, or one and three, may form an agreeable shrubbery for view at
all times.

A regularity in planting shrubs is not necessary as to lines, but is rather to
be avoided, except just in the front, where there should always be some low
ones, and a border for flowers, chiefly of the spring, as summer ones are apt
to be drawn up weak, if the shrubbery walks are not very wide. The flowers
should be of the lowest growth, and rather bulbous rooted. Toward the edge may
be planted aconites, snow-drops, crocusses, primroses, violets, polyanthuses,
hepaticas, wood anemonies, daffodils, cowslips, etc. In open shrubberies an
edging of strawberries is proper, and the hautboy preferable, on account of its
superior show when in flower; but in these situations the wood strawberry is
more commonly planted, as it will produce fruit with less sun and air.

The management of a plantation of shrubs comes next be considered. It should
be kept clean, or much o^ ^s beauty is lost. Let it be frequently hoed and
raked to give it a fresh appearance, and prevent the grow^^ of moss, which
spreads apace from the ground up the stems of plants, and thus injures them
much. When moss can be seen, it has then got ahead, and will be got rid of with
difficulty. The usual time for pruning and digging about shrubs is spring; but
autumn is better, if the plants are well established in the ground, and
especially if got old and full of roots. The pruning should not be late, (
October best) as some sorts are apt to die down; these, however, might be left
to spring, or only shortened in part: They should constantly be kept free from
suckers and luxuriant wood. See pruning of shrubs. An autumn digging of an old
shrubbery does much good, by the benefit which the soil receives from frost,
and cutting some of the ends of the roots, by which new ones strike. This
autumn dressing is particularly to be recommended as lessening the work of
spring, the hurry of which season sometimes occasions, shrubberies to be
neglected too long, and to be but partially attended to.

The suchers or young plants, found in digging and dressing about shrubs are
often left carelessly on the ground, but if likely to be wanted ought to have
their roots buried as soon as possible: Why should they be suffered to wither
and spoil, because they may recover?

For h^dges about a garden, (i. e. for the divisions of it) the laurel, yew,
and holly are the principal evergreens: the former as a lofty and open fence,
the second as close and moderate in height, and to be cut to any thing the last
as ^^^able by judicious pruning to an impregnable and beautiful fence.
Deciduous divisions are best made with the small leaved elm, or the hop
hornbeam, as they are tonsile, and of a peculiar neat foliage: If a lofty hedge
is wanted, the beech makes a good one.

Old walls are somewhat unsightly, and if covered with plants are rendered
agreeable. The evergreens to be recommended for hiding them, are the laurel,
phillyrea, alaternus, pyracantha, yew, box, and laurustinus; but if the aspect
of the wall be N. let them be planted late in spring. Ivy, box, thorn, and
other climbing shrubs answer the purpose. If a mere summer covering be desired,
and the wall is high, hornbeam, (rather the hop) and witch elm do very well
when planted close; or lilacs, or even black currants will soon come to a
cover: but whatever is planted for the purpose, let it be kept trimmed, and
trained close as may be to the wall. The gable end of a building may be covered
with a pear tree, or a vine, for though the vine should not bear, it will
answer its prime end, and looks well when in full leaf. See lists of shrubs,
section 9.

SECTION X.
OF FOREST TREES.
PLANTING of forest trees, in some extent or other, may be an object with some
young gardeners, and those who have a taste this way, and ground to exercise it
on, will amuse themselves in a very respectable manner by so doing. Let the
work be set about with all speed and resolution; for every year lost is to be
lamented, both in a public and private view.

What if forest trees produce nothing for the table, or no immediate profit,
they afford in their planting and nursing, present entertainment of a very
grateful and kind; they may ever after be viewed as objects of satisfaction,
and friends, neighbors, and posterity will have reason to praise the work.

Plantations of forest trees do very much ornament a country, and there are
some grounds peculiarly situated to become objects of delight in this respect,
which could not be better employed. A place without trees appears disagreeably
naked, and being destitute of one of the most useful materials for buildings,
utensils, etc. is in truth to be lamented as unfurnished and forlorn. The
demand for wood is perpetual, and the consumption is great; and therefore a
provision for generations to come, by planting of forest trees, must afford the
sincerest, (because most disinterested) gratifications of pleasure to the mind.

Though every one has not ground to form plantations of any considerable
extent, yet if it were only a single tree here and there, i. e. to do what
little might be in this way, it would show a worthy spirit, and make a man an
honorable benefactor to society. Corners of fields might have little clumps
conveniently planted, without much expense of fencing. A few trees might be
planted in, or rather just without hedge rows; but these should be chiefly
oaks. It is a practice with some, to plant trees in hedges when first made; but
they are commonly too small, and so the quick choaks them, and they never
thrive.

The planting of forest trees is profitable as well as pleasing and
respectable; and a young planter may live to reap much reward from his labor,
or he may leave a valuable inheritance to his children. "The plantation and
care of timber is like buying the reversion of an estate -- for a little money
expended, we become heirs to great sums. -- In countries scarce of firing, and
where poles and rails are wanted, underwood will pay the proprietor triple more
value than the best fields of corn, and the oaks among it remain a great estate
to succeeding generations." Poor land, that does not answer for corn, would be
profitable cultivated in wood; but such ground should be sown, rather than
planted. Wet ground may be advantageously planted with the amphibious tribe, as
willow, sallow, withy, ozier, etc.

For those who may be disposed to plant forest trees, the following directions
are offered: -- The manual work proper to this business, may be gathered from
what has been already said on planting fruit trees and shrubs; and though
plantations of forest trees, need not be so nicely attended to as fruit trees,
yet the better the work is performed, the fairer is the prospect in growing
good timber; a check by an error at first planting is a loss of time, and a
damage done to trees which is sometimes never recovered. To give an instance:
-- the mould is often thrown on the roots of a forest tree in lumps, when if it
were sifted, so as just to cover them with fine mould, the trouble would be
amply repaid by the quick striking of the roots, and future strength of the
tree.

Ground designed for planting should be prepared as long as it can beforehand,
by the use of the plough or spade; and if some sort of previous cultivation,
either in corn or vegetables, were adopted, the soil would be better fitted to
receive the trees. At any rate, the places where the trees are to be set,
should be previously dug somewhat deep, and cleared of rubbish, perennial
weeds, twitch, etc. If wet let it be properly drained, for none but those of
the aquotics kind can do well in a cold and very moist soil.

In open planting for timber, to make only the holes good where the trees are
set, is sufficient, if the soil is not strong, (which generally speaking
however it should be,) and in such plantations the plough being used for corn,
or some crops to be carried off, the whole soil will be prepared for the roots
to spread. A plantation of this sort may be constantly under the plough, till
the trees shade too much, and then it may be sown down for grass, which laying
warm, and coming early, would be found useful. The opportunity given to improve
a soil by this intermediate cultivation, would insure very fine timber.

But a plantation of trees being made (as suppose of oaks) at due distances,
and the ground ploughed for a year or two, while they got a little ahead, then
it might be sown profitably with nuts, keys and seeds for underwood, observing
to thin the plants the second year, and again the third, till two or three feet
asunder in poor ground, and to three or four feet distance if rich. In fourteen
or fifteen years, (or much sooner for some purposes,) the ash poles, etc. will
be fine, and meet with a ready sale as useful stuff; and afterward the
underwood will be fit to cut, in a strong state, every eleven or twelve years.
In the management of underwood, some have thinned the plants while young, to
three feet asunder, and cut them down at three years, to about six inches, to
form stools, which in about ten years are cut, having produced several stems
from each. Some persons have cut seedling trees down at this age to three
inches for timber, leaving only one strong shoot to grow from each stool; and
thus finer trees are frequently (or rather certainly) produced, then from
seedlings not cut down.

The distances of the timber plants, may be from twenty-five to thirty-five
feet, according to the soil, or opinion of the planter. If no view to
underwood, the above open planting may be made close, by setting first the
principals (which should be fine plants) and then filling up with others that
are worse, to within about eight or nine feet of one another. They will at this
distance come to fair timber, or may be thinned at pleasure; and even among
these a small crop of underwood might be had, which would shelter the timber
plants, and help to draw them up strait and tall.

As to small plantations, of thickets, coppices, clumps, and sows of trees,
they are to be set close according to their nature, and the particular view the
planter has, who will take care to consider the usual size they attain, and
their mode of growth. An advantage at home for shade or shelter, and a more
distant object of sight, will make a difference: for some immediate advantage,
very close planting may take place, but good trees cannot be thus expected; yet
if thinned in time, a strait tall stem is often thus procured, which afterward
is of great advantage.

For little clumps, or groupes of forest trees, (as elms) there may be planted
three or four in a spot, within five or six feet of one another, and thus be
easily fenced: having the air freely all round, and a good soil, such clumps
produce fine timber.

Single trees of every sort, grow off apace, and are more beautiful than when
in the neighborhood of others, and particularly firs, pines, larches, limes,
and chestnuts: the edible fruited chestnut is only good for timber; but the horse
is very ornamental; flourishing however only on high dry ground. As to rows of
trees, whether single or double, when planted for a screen, they may be set
about seven or eight feet asunder, upon an average, according to their nature,
taking care to prune them occasionally, from too galling an interference.

Avenues are now seldom planted, but when they are, two good rows of elms,
limes, chestnuts, etc. should be set at the width of the house, at full thirty
feet distance in the rows; to thicken which, intermediate plants may be set;
and also an inner row, to be removed when the principal trees are full grown.
Avenues to prospects, should be fifty or sixty feet wide.

The best season for planting the deciduous kinds of forest trees, is the
latter end of October, and evergreen sorts, the latter end of March; though the
soil, whether light and dry, or heavy and wet, should somewhat direct;
evergreen trees being to be planted generally with safety, early in autumn, if
the soil is warm; but in all cases trees should be planted in dry weather, that
the mould may be loose to drop in, and lie close between the roots, which is a
material thing.

Forest trees for planting are generally preferred rather large, and being so,
should not be taken up idly, but with as much of an uninjured spread of roots
as possible: yet, free growing plants of about three or four feet high, promise
in the end to make finer trees than those that are planted larger. Some say
they are best at this size from the seed bed; and others, that having grown on
the seed bed two years, and been once planted out, as having had their tap
roots cut, they will do better, and generally speaking this is the case, as
they have a more bushy and horizontal foot.

In the act of planting, let every thing be done as directed for fruit trees;
i. e. the hole dug wide and deep, the ground well broken, or rather sifted, to
lay about the roots, etc. A sound watering may take place, and the trees made
fast by stakes, and litter laid about their roots to keep out frost and
drought. It is of much consequence to take care that the roots (especially of
evergreen trees) do not get withered before planted. Evergreens do best in a
dry, but deciduous forest trees (generally) in a moist soil, if it is not wet.
Oaks in particular, though at first they may appear to do poorly, grow well in
strong and moist ground.

Fencing is the last thing to be considered. If trees are planted where cattle
go, their stems must be protected from barking and rubbing. The common way of
small posts and little rails, is well known; but if large cattle are not fed
where the trees are, good thorns stuck round them, and tied to them, is
sufficient, and indeed this might do in almost all cases. There are various
ways, and whatever mode is used, let it be at first well executed, and
afterward repaired in time, as often as there is need. Something concerning
the raising of forest trees will be found at page 78.

Whoever plants forest trees, should take care to dress them by proper pruning,
and suffering no suckers to remain about their roots. Their tops should be kept
equal, and not permitted to spread too much in heavy branches, but trained in a
light and spiral way; always preserving the leading shoot, to encourage
mounting, which is the perfection of a forest tree. The stems of all trees
designed for timber, should be constantly, and timely attended to, as it is
necessary to rub off buds, or to cut off the side shoots, except here and there
a small one, which may serve to detain the sap to the swelling of the trunk;
but branches being left on of any strength, keep the tree from mounting, and
draw it crooked, and such branches, if cut off when large, occasion, knots, and
sometimes a decay at the part.

Plantations, growing thick, should, be thinned in time, but not too much at
once, especially in hilly situations; for as those trees which remain, come
suddenly to be exposed, (after having been brought up under the shelter of
others) suffer much; getting crooked, stunted, and bushy, instead of having
their desirable erect from, without which they are not adapted for superior
uses, or are agreeable to the eye.

Ornamental trees, as the crab, black cherry, etc. may prove profitable, as
well as agreeable, here and there one amongst forest trees, and should
therefore not be omitted.

See list of forest trees, section 19.

SECTION XI.
OF RURAL AND EXTENSIVE GARDENING.
RURAL and extensive gardening is naturally connected with a taste for planting
forest trees; and an idea of the picturesque should ever accompany the work of
planting. Merely for the sake of objects to gratify the eye, planting is very
often pursued, and wherever trees can be introduced to improve a view from the
house, or accustomed walks, there a man, having it in his power, as proprietor
of the land, ought to plant.

If to planting in clumps, coppices, groves, avenues, and woods, be added
levelling of ground, improving of water courses, and pastures, making lawns,
etc. the expense incurred would be honorable, and answered by pleasures of the
sincerest kind! There are ways of spending money, that could be named, which
are found mischievous in the extreme, and are therefore deservedly branded with
disgrace; but he who distributes wealth into the hands of industry, working to
useful purposes, and that delectable end of making the country about him, as it
were, a garden, does it in wisdom.

Yet here some caution may be necessary. "Do nothing too much," is a wise
maxim. Building, planting, and gardening, upon a large scale, have been
sometimes attended with serious consequences, as when a man's fortune has not
been equal to the undertaking. It were desirable to be able to persuade to
great things in this way; but prudence must guide.

Those who would do much in rural and extensive gardening, should not be
forward to trust to their own taste altogether, though they may be ingenious.
In this business there is no making experiments, but all should be executed, as
much as possible, upon certainty. There are professional man in this way, whose
peculiar practice, and appropriate talents, will enable them to conceive
improvements, and the best manner of executing them, which could scarcely be
projected by any private person. There is a variety of works and decorations in
extensive gardening which injudiciously introduced, might create a wasteful
expense. This is an error that ought to be avoided, and most probably would be,
by those who have been in the habit of studying nature, and the powers of art,
as her submissive handmaid.

Artificial decorations are at this time much less made use of than formerly,
and the grandeur of past times in the way of gardening would now be thought
trifling and mean. Witness the sheard trees, statues, vases, water works,
figured parterres, etc. of that style of gardening, imitated from the Dutch,
which has been long deemed a mere burlesque upon Nature, the grand
characteristics of which are ease and simplicity.

The pleasure we seek in laying out gardens, is now justly founded upon the
principles of concealed art, which appears like Nature; but still, whether
ingenious contrivances and decorations, (altogether artificial,) should be so
entirely laid aside as they are, may deserve to be considered. Gardens, were
formerly loaded with statues, and great improprieties were committed in placing
them, as Neptune in a grove, and Vulcan at a fountain, large figures in small
gardens, and small in large, etc. but, perhaps, works of the statuary might
still be introduced, and the meeting with Flora, Ceres, or Pomona, etc. well
executed, and in proper places, could hardly give offense. A terrace as a
boundary, is now seldom formed, but in some situations, such an eminence might
in several respects be agreeable.

It would certainly be too much to attempt here particular directions; for
extensive gardening. The peculiar capabilities of any place must suggest what
may be done, and much judgment is necessary to plan aright. It is presumed only
to give a few hints to those private persons who would do something in this
way, which they may consider as they please.

If trees are planted injudiciously, the error is a trifle; but if cut down so,
the consequence is serious, and has often been sorely lamented; extirpation
should therefore be well thought of before it is executed; especially trees
about houses, for many dwellings have been thus too hastily exposed, and
deprived of a comfortable shelter and shade. And why should a taste have
prevailed for so sudden a transition, no sooner out of the house than to arrive
in the open country, or why should an extensive garden be thrown as much as
possible into a single view, when meeting with new objects in our walks is so
agreeable?

Hilly spots, that are in view of the house should be planted with firs, as
pleasant noble looking trees, and very hardy. Beech does well on high ground,
especially, if chalky. In low ground, not to mention. alders and that tribe,
the birch, and even the oak, should not be forgot, where the wet does not long
stand.

About the houses some shady walks ought always to be provided, by thick
planting, if not of trees, yet of flowering shrubs, and evergreens, of which
the laurel will be found the most useful. Here should be also a good portion of
grass plat, or lawn, which so delights the eye when neatly kept, also borders
of shewy flowers, which, if backed by any kind of fence, it should be hid with
evergreens, or at least with deciduous shrubs, that the scene may be as much as
possible vivacious. If there is good room, single trees of the fir kind, at due
distances, are admirable ornaments about a house, and clumps of shrubs all of
the same kind have a good effect.

Those who have much space of ground to decorate, do well to plant trees and
shrubs of every kind, as enlarging the sources of amusement, and affording
opportunities for observation; but if the allotment of ground for this purpose
is contracted, then, of course, those only should be planted, which by their
neat foliage, natural symmetry, and gay flowers, may be truly esteemed
ornamented. They should be such as strike the eye of persons in general, though
they have nothing of singularity to engage the attention of the curious in
plants. It too often happens, that good old sorts of trees, shrubs, and
flowers, are excluded for new ones, but if the latter are not more elegant, and
generally pleasing, the practice is surely not a wise one: in ornamental
gardening, on a small scale, great care should be taken, in the choice of what
is really pretty, that nothing dull or rambling be introduced.

In the most sheltered place near the house, there should be an enclosure of a
compact nature, as suppose of yew, or hornbeam (rather the former) open only to
the South, as a necessary apartment to place things in from the greenhouse, or
occasionally the hothouse, tender annuals, or any hardy curious potted plants,
for a summer residence. For this purpose, or for hedges to separate, or divide
any spot of ground, the hop hornbeam is best, as the common sort holds its dead
leaves all the winter, and makes a litter at spring. This business, however,
may be easily effected by planting elder cuttings at a foot asunder, which will
grow up quickly, being kept moist.

The walks should always be wide, some (in general) serpentine, and contrived
as much as possible upon a level, as walking up and down hills can hardly be
called pleasure. That they may be extensive, they should skirt the grounds and
seldom go across them. In small pleasure grounds the edges of the walks should
be regularly planted with flowers, and long ones occasionally so, or with the
most dwarf shrubs; and neat sheltered compartments of flowers, (every now and
then to be met with) have a pretty effect. If the walks are extended to distant
plantations of forest trees, every opportunity should be taken, to introduce
something of the herbaceous flowery kind, which will prove the more pleasing,
as found in unexpected situations: The outer walk of pleasure grounds and
plantations, should every now and then break into open views of the country,
and to parts of the internal space, made pleasing, if not striking, by some
ornaments of art and nature.

Water should only be introduced in full sight, where it will run itself clear,
or may be easily kept so, ought to be kept in full sight; and some fall of it
should be contrived, (if possible,) for the sake of giving it motion and sound,
because a lively scene of this element is always much more pleasant than a dead
one. Every spring of water should be made the most of, and though fountains
jets d'eau; etc. are out of fashion, something of this kind is agreeable
enough. Near some piece of water, as a cool retreat, it is desirable that there
should be something of the summer house kind, and why not the simple rustic
arbor, embowered with the woodblue, the sweetbriar, the jasmine, and the rose?

Before the design of a (rural and extensive) garden be put in execution, it
ought to be considered, what it will be in twenty or thirty years time; for it
often happens, that a design that looks handsome when it is first planted, and
in good proportion, becomes so small and ridiculous in process of time, that
there is a necessary either to alter it, or destroy it entirely, and so plant
it now." This observation of Mr. Millar's, justifies the advice given of
employing the most skilful in planning and directing pleasure grounds. To
proportion the breadth of walks, the size of carpets, casting and levelling of
grounds, parterres, etc. The disposal of fountains, statues, vases, dials, and
other decorations of magnificence to most advantage, requires a particular
address, says Mr. Evelyn, or to speak more emphatically, a prophetic eye; and
though the taste is not now what it was in Mr. Evelyn's time, yet, perhaps, the
only difference is, that more skill is requisite.

What has been said of the difficulty of rural and extensive gardening, is
meant only as advice to proceed with cautious steps. The work is truly of the
most worthy nature, and a taste for it deserves to be cherished. Mr. Shenstone,
in an ode on rural elegance, defends his favorite employment thus: And oh! the
transport, most allied to song,
In some fair villa's peaceful bound,
To catch soft hints from Nature's tongue,
And bid Arcadia bloom around:
Whether we fringe the sloping hill,
Or smooth below the verdant mead;
Whether we break the falling rill,
Or through meandering mazes lead:
Or in the horrid bramble's room,
Bid careless groups of roses bloom:
Or let some sheltered lake serene
Reflect flowers, woods, and spiers, and brighten all the scene,
Of sweet disposal of the rural hour!
O beauties never known to cloy!
While worth and genius haunt the favored bower,
And every gentle breast partakes the joy!
While Charity at eye surveys the swain,
Enabled by these toils to cheer
A train of helpless infants dear,
Speed whistling home across the plain:
S^es vagrant Luxury, her handmaid grown,
For half her graceless deeds atone,
And hails the bounteous work, and ranks it with her own.
Why brand these pleasures with the name
Of soft, unsocial toils, of Indolence and shame?
Search but the garden, or the wood,
Let yon admired carnation own,
Not all was meant for raiment, or for food,
Not all for needful use alone;
There while the seeds of future blossoms dwell,
It Is colored for the sight, perfumed to please the smell.
Why knows the nightingale to sing?
Why flows the pine's nectareous juice?
Why shines with paint the linnet's wing?
For sustenance alone? for use?
For preservation? Every sphere
Shall bid fair Pleasure's rightful claim appear.
And sure there seem of human kind,
Some born to shun the solemn strife;
Some for amusive takes designed,
To soothe the certain ills of life;
Grace its lone vales with many a budding rose,
New founts of bliss disclose,
Call forth refreshing shades, and decorate repose.


Mr. Shenstone succeeded admirably in laying out his grounds, and producing a
delightful scene about the Leasowes. Several gentlemen have done great things
in picturesque gardening, without the assistance of professional artists; but
they have had a peculiar talent this way, improved by study and observation.
Thus Mr. Walpole makes an easy affair of it, and says, "the possessor, it he
has any taste, is the best designer of his own grounds." And indeed, as they
have come so frequently under his own eye and contemplation, he must, in a
great measure, be competent to the work; and at least, ought not to give up his
judgment too implicitly to general undertakers of rural gardening.

Ornamental gardening depends much on the form of the ground, and therefore to
shape that is the first object. Some situations may not need it, and, perhaps,
a little alteration may produce a happy effect in others; therefore great
alterations should not be attempted without manifest advantages, as either
levelling, or raising ground, is a heavier business than is commonly supposed.

Too much plain is to be guarded against, and when it abounds, the eye should
be relieved, by clumps or some other agreeable object. Hollows are not easily
filled, and ominences, in general, are advantageous in the formation of
picturesque scenes, in which the general principle of ornamental gardening
consists. This idea has been pressed so far, that it is contended, a gar^n^r
should be a painter, or at least a studier of paintings. But without an
immediate view to pictures, no doubt, grounds may be laid out in a way
sufficiently picturesque. That view may be very agreeable in Nature, which
would not be so in a picture, and vice versa.

Picturesque gardening is effected by a number of means, which a true rural
genius, and the study of examples, only can produce. These examples may be
pictures, but the better instructions will be scenes in Nature; and the proper
grouping of trees, according to their mode of growth, and their shades of
green, and appearance in autumn will effect a great deal.

To plant picturesquely a knowledge of the characteristic differences of trees
and shrubs, is, evidently, a principal qualification. Some trees spread their
branches wide, others grow spiral, and some conical; some have a close foliage,
others an open one, and some form regular, others irregular heads, the branches
and leaves of which may grow erect, level, or pendent.

The mode of growth in trees, as quick or slow, the time of lea^ing, and
shedding leaf, with the color of the bark, are all circumstances of
consideration in order to produce striking contracts, and happy assemblages in
the way of ornamental gardening.

To range the shrubs and small trees so that they mutually set off the
beauties, and conceal the blemishes of each other; to aim at no effects which
depend on a nicety for their success, and which the soil, the exposure, or the
season of the day, may destroy; to attend more to the groupes than to the
individuals; and to consider the whole as a plantation, not as a collection of
plants; are the best general rules which can be given concerning them.

In considering the subjects of gardening, ground and wood first present
themselves; water is the next; which, though not absolutely necessary to a
beautiful composition, yet occurs so often, and is so capital a feature, that
it is always regretted when wanting; and no large place can be supposed, a
little spot can hardly be imagined, in which it may not be agreeable. It
accommodates itself to every situation; is the most interesting object in a
landscape, and the happiest circumstance in a retired recess; captivates the
eye at a distance, invites approach, and is delightful when near: it refreshes
an open exposure; it animates a shade; cheers the dreariness of a waste, and
enriches the most crowded view. In form, in style, and in extent, it may be
made equal to the greatest compositions, or adapted to the least; it may spread
in a calm expanse to soothe the tranquillity of a spaceful scene; or hurrying
along a devious course, and splendour to a gay, and extravagance to a romantic
situation. So various are the characters which water can assume, that there is
scarcely an idea in which it may not concur, or an impression which it cannot
enforce.

On the works of art in gardening, the following passage is pertinent. "Art was
carried to excess, when ground, wood and water, were reduced to mathematical
figure, and similarity and order were preferred to freedom and variety. These
mischiefs, however, were occasioned, not by the use, but the perversion of art;
it excluded, instead of improving upon nature, and thereby destroyed the very
end it was called in to promote. Architecture requires symmetry, the objects of
nature freedom; and the properties of the one, cannot, with justice, be
transferred to the other. But if, by the term art, no more is meant than merely
design, the dispute is at an end; choice, arrangement, composition,
improvement, and preservation, are so many symptoms of art, which may
occasionally appear in several parts of a garden, but ought to be displayed
without reserve near the house: nothing there should seem neglected; it is a
scene of the most cultivated nature: it ought to be enriched, it ought to be
adorned; and design may be avowed in the plan, and expense in the execution.
Even regularity is not excluded: a capital structure may extend its influence
beyond its walls: but this power should be exercised only over its immediate
appendages. Works of sculpture are not, like buildings, objects familiar in
scenes of cultivated nature; but vases, statues, and termini, are usual
appendages to a considerable edifice: as such, they may attend the mansion, and
trespass a little upon the garden, provided they are not carried so far into it
as to lose their connection with the structure."

SECTION XII.
OF PRUNING.
1. OF WALL TREES.
OF this "master work of gardening," it has been said, "that gentlemen prune
too little, and gardeners too much;" these extremes are to be avoided, as
attended with peculiar evils, equally mischievous: Wall-trees are presently
spoiled by either practice. If they are too full of wood, the shoots and fruits
cannot be properly ripened, and if they are too thin, the consequence of the
cutting that has made them so, is the production of wood, rather than fruit,
forcing out shoots, where otherwise blossom buds would have been formed. The
designation of trees to a wall necessarily occasions cutting, and on the
skilful use of the knife much depends; but let not the ingenious young gardener
be discouraged at the appearance of difficulty; a little study, practice and
perseverance will clear the way, and if he does not become a complete pruner at
once, he will in a reasonable time, and the work will prove one of the
pleasantest of rural amusements not attended with fatigue.

Every one who has wall-trees, cannot keep a professed gardener, nor is every
one who calls himself so, qualified to prune properly. It is a great
mortification to a man, who wishes to see his trees in order, not to be able to
get an operator to attend them; let him resolve to learn the art himself, and
the ability will be very gratifying to him.

Proud of his well-spread walls, he views his trees
That meet (no barren interval between,)
With pleasure more than even their fruits afford,
Which, save himself who trains them, none can feel.
COWPER As many words must be used on this article of pruning, for the sake of
a little order, and the appearing less tedious, the business of managing
wall-trees may be thus divided; 1. Concerning the FORM. 2. The HEALTH. 3. The
FRUITFULNESS of them. A tree may be kept in good form, but be neither healthy
nor fruitful, and may be both in good form and health yet not fruitful; but if
it is fruitful, it must possess both the former qualifications.

1. As to the FORM, or general appearances of the wall trees. If a tree is
newly planted, the first thing is to head it down, by cutting off (if it is a
nectarine, peach, or apricot) all the shoots, and the stem itself, down to a
few eyes, that the lower part of the wall may be furnished with new and strong
wood. Make the cut sloping, and behind the tree, taking care (by placing the
foot on the root, and the hand on the stem) not to disturb the tree by the pull
of the knife. Plaster the part with a bit of cow dung and clay, or stiff earth,
to keep the weather from it, and prevent an oozing of the sap: this is not
generally done, but it is proper.

The heading down is to be made so as to leave two or three eyes, or at the
most, four on each side of the stem, from which shoots will come properly
placed for training. The number of eyes should be determined according to the
strength of the tree, and its roots. If there are not two well placed eyes on
each side of the stem, two shoots thus situated, may be left, cutting them
short to two or three eyes each. Eyes, or shoots behind, or before, as being of
no use, must be early displaced by rubbing, or cutting. This work is to be
performed in spring, when the tree is putting forth shoots; i. e. about the
beginning of April.

If toward the end of May, there should be wanting shoots on either side,
having, perhaps, only one put forth where two were expected, that one shoot
should be cut, or pinched down, to two or three eyes, and before summer is over
there will be found good shoots from them, and thus a proper head be obtained.
This work of shortening shoots of the year may be do any time before Midsummer,
but in this case, all illp^^^ed, or superfluous growths must be rubbed off as
soon as seen, that those to be reserved may be the stronger.

As the lateral shoots grow, let them be timely nailed to the wall, close,
strait, and equidistant; but use no force while they are tender. If they are
quite well placed, they will need to bending: but sometimes shoots must be laid
is which are not perfectly so. Lay in as many good moderate sized shoots as may
be throughout the summer, for choice at winter pruning, yet do not crowd the
tree. As the shoots proceed in length, nail them to the wall, that no material
dangling be seen; but avoid using too many shreds.

In the formation of a tree, keep each side as nearly as can be equal in wood,
and the shoots inclining downwards, which is a mode of training necessary to
fill the lower part of the wall, (none of which should be lost) and to check
the too free motion of the sap, which wall trees are liable to from their warm
situation, and continual cutting. All the branches should have an horizontal
tendency, though the upper cannot have it so much as the lower ones. Those that
are perpendicular, or nearly so, mount the wall too fast, and run away with the
food that should pass to the horizontals, which being impoverished by the
vigorous middle branches, gradually become too weak to extend themselves, and
nourish the fruit. The pruner, therefore, must be content to have some of the
wall over the middle of the tree, unoccupied; or, at least, suffer none but
weak shoots to find a place there.

The idea of a wellformed tree, is somewhat represented by the ribs of a spread
fan, or the fingers of the hand extended. Regularity is allowed to be so
necessary to the beauty of a wall tree, that some have even drawn lines for a
guide to train by; but Nature, (ever free and easy,) will not submit to so much
formality, and such a perfect disposition of the branches are not necessary. A
tree may be regular, without being linear, and the proper useful shoots are not
to be sacrificed to a fanciful precision. Though crossing of branches is
against rule, yet cases may happen (a^ in want of wood or fruit) where even
this awkwardness may be permitted. The object is fruit, and to obtain this end,
from must sometimes give place. "Barrenness being the greatest defect, crossing
must not be scrupled, when barrenness cannot otherwise be avoided." A tree may
be in fair symmetry, and yet badly pruned; and thus some ignorantly, and others
cunningly, put trees in order without a proper selection of branches; so that
the best shall be cut out, and the worse left, merely because the latter suits
the form better, and gives a favorable appearance to the work.

All fore right, and back shoots, and other useless wood, should be displaced
in time, for they exhaust the strength of the tree to no purpose, and occasion
a rude appearance. It is a very expeditious method to displace superfluous
young shoots, by pushing, or breaking them off; but when they get woody, it is
apt to tear the bark, and, in this case, the knife must be used: the better way
is to disbud by rubbing; yet a young laxuriant tree, should be suffered to grow
a little wild to spend the sap. There is one evil, however, attending on
disbudding, and rubbing off young fore rights that some fruit spurs are thus
lost; for apricots are apt to bear on little short shoots, of from half an inch
to an inch (or more) and there are peaches which do the same; so that it is a
rule with some pruners to wait to distinguish spurs from shoots, and then to
use the knife; but the less the knife is used in summer the better.

In regulating a tree, at any time, begin at the bottom and middle, and work
the way orderly upward and outward. Never shorten in Summer, (which would
produce fresh shoots,) except a forward shoot where wood may be wanting; but
where the tree is really too thick, cut clean out what may be spared. None of
the shoots produced after midsummer should be nailed in, except where wood is
wanting to fill a naked place.

The proper use of nails and shreds is necessary to the beauty of the tree, as
well as a regular disposition of the branches; and in this business a neatness
will evidence ingenuity.

Nails that are weak and small can hardly be used, for they must be of
sufficient strength to hold fast; but large nails do not look well, and hurt
the wall more than smaller. There is, however, a sort made on purpose for this
work, with flat heads and robust shanks, called garden nails, and these are
generally to be used; there is yet a smaller sort, with flat heads, that, in
many cases, might do, and they have somewhat the advantage in neatness. In
default of these there are lath nails of too or three sizes, that may be
brought into use. It is proper to have two sizes, the larger for strong, and
the smaller for weak shoots; trees trained to wood can hardly have nails too
small.

Shreds should be adapted to the strength of the branches, and the distance of
the buds from each other; so that with strong shoots, having their buds wide,
such broad shreds may be used, that would make weak shoots unsightly, and spoil
them by covering the buds: many a well cut tree has been made disgusting,
merely by irregular and dangling shreds. An uniformity of color can hardly be
accomplished, but a regularity of size may; scarlet, if all alike, looks best;
and white the worst. The general width of shreds should be from half an inch,
to three quarters, and the length two inches to three, having a few wide,
longer, and stronger for large branches. In the disposition of shreds some must
have their ends turned downwards, and some upwards, as best suits for bringing
the shoots to their proper place and strait direction. Though some pruners
observe a sort of alternate order, yet the ends hanging chiefly down, (if it
may be) will be found to look best. Use no more shreds and nails than necessary
to make good work, as both are unsightly and injurious.

The hammer used in nailing branches should be neat and light, with a perfectly
smooth and level face, about two-thirds of an inch diameter, having a claw for
drawing nails. As nails are apt to break out pieces of the wall in drawing, it
is a good way to give the nail a tap to drive it a little, which loosening it
from its rust, makes it come out easier, and so saves a wall from holes, which
is a material thing, as they harbor insects and filth.

Trellises have been recommended to be placed against walls, as a means of
keeping a wall sound, and giving the fruit more room to swell. In the training
of fruit trees that do not require the greatest degree of sun, and in
situations where the loss of a little heat is not n^aterial, this method of
training trees is a good one. But, perhaps, there are not many situations in
England, (common as it is on the continent) where this mode of culture can be
adopted, as all the sun we meet with here, is generally but barely sufficient
for peaches, nectarines, grapes, and figs. Apri^^ts, however, may do, and when
trained upon a trellis, in a Southern aspect, grow finer, and are less mealy
than against a wall.

Trellises should be made of seasoned deal, and squared to slips of
three-fourths of an inch, or a trifle wider, and fixed close to the wall, so as
to form upright oblongs of twelve inches by six. In this way of training, the
shreds ought to be finer, and the nails much smaller; but the branches may be
tied with bass, etc. if the trellis is set a little from the wall.

It may be observed, that tying saves the expense of nails and shreds, close
set buds are never covered, damage from the hammer is avoided, and that by
trellising, a tree will be less infested with vermin, and insects which breed
in the holes made by nailing. In this mode of training the fruit swells freely,
grows larger, and is of more equal flavor; so that it deserves trial where it
is likely to succeed.

As a close to these instructions concerning the form, or beauty of wall trees,
let the young gardener be advised resolutely to observe the pruning laws, and
keep all things in perpetual order; for anarchy among the branches of wall
trees is attended with serious evils. As in the state it is certain, The
greatest empires ever will decline,
As vice relaxes rules of discipline.
To in the garden all things run presently to confusion and rain, if
inattention and neglect take place.

2. The HEALTH of wall trees is greatly provided for, by observing the
directions already given, concerning their form; for, if observed, each shoot
will have the proper benefit of sun and air, to concoct its juices, and prepare
it for fruiting.

It injures a tender shoot when it presses hard against a nail. If the hammer
strikes a shoot, and bruises the bark, it often spoils, if not kills it, by the
part cankering. The shreds may be too tight, so that the shoot cannot properly
swell, and if shreds are too broad, and too numerous, they are apt to occasion
sickness. A slip of the knife may wound a neighboring branch, and make it gum,
canker, or die. It will require care, and some practice, to avoid this
accident; and in order to it, keep the point of the knife sharp, and mind the
position of it when cutting. Cut close and sloping behind the eye; neither so
near as to injure it, nor so wide as to leave a stub.

Digging deep with a spade about borders, sometimes injures the roots, and
keeps them too low in the ground, when they should be encouraged to run higher;
and as nothing but well consumed dung, or other manure that drops freely,
should be used about fruit trees, it is a good way to dig, or stir the ground
with an asparagus fork. Wounds and bruises hurt roots as much as branches, and
though cutting small roots asunder by a spade, does good rather than harm, yet
large ones are often much injured.

The extremities of a tree will not be in vigor without a strict attention to
the middle, that it have no strong wood, growing erectly: this was before
directed, and must be observed: when the sides of a tree are well extended, and
full of healthy wood, then some shoots of moderate substance may be trained up
the middle.

The bending of a branch much out of the direction it has grown in, is a
violence to the vessels of which it is composed. It distends those in the upper
part, and contracts those in the lower, if it does not break them; so that
every shoot should be kept from the first in the direction it is to grow.

Luxuriant wood must be particularly attended to, to get rid of it in time,
before it has robbed the weaker branches too much. That is luxuriant wood,
which according to the general habit of the tree is much larger than the rest;
for a shoot that is deemed luxuriant in one tree, would not be so in another.
If strong wood that is not very luxuriant, happens to be at the bottom of the
tree, so that it can be trained quite horizontally, it may often be used to
good purpose, as this position checks the sap. A luxuriant shoot may be kept in
summer where it is not designed to retain it, merely to cut it down at winter,
pruning to two or three eyes, for getting wood where wanted to next year; or
this shortening may take place in June, to have new shoots the present year.
Luxuriant shoots may be sometimes retained for a time, merely as waste pipes.
More concerning luxuriant wood will be found in what follows.

All diseased, damaged, very weak, or worn out branches (as they occur) should
be cut out, to make way for better; but if a tree is generally diseased, some
caution must be used not to cut out too much at once, if there is any hope of
restoring it. A very old tree, or a young one that does not thrive, may be cut
a great deal; but prune it so as to have a general sprinkling of the best of
the branches, and keep s^ort lengths of an eye or two, of the weaker ones, in a
sort of alternate order.

A weak tree is helped much by training it more erectly than usual, as less
check is thus given to the sap, and so the shoots are more likely to swell:
such a tree should be kept thin of branches, and always pruned early in autumn,
keeping the top free from such wood as is stronger than that which is in
general below.

Old decaying trees should be lessened a little every year, and constantly
watched, to observe where young and strong shoots are putting out below, in
order to cut down to them; and though the time for doing this is commonly at
autumn or winter pruning, yet it may be best done in summer, as the shoots
would thrive the better, observing to put some mixture, or graffing clay to the
part, to prevent gumming, which summer pruning is apt to occasion. A judicious
pruner may bring the oldest, and most ill-conditioned tree, to a healthy and
bearing state, if all is but right at the root, it having a good soil about it.

Keep all wall trees clean, and particularly weak ones, from moss, cobwebs, or
other filth; and attend to insects, snails, caterpillars, and smother flies.
Any bark that is decayed by cracks, etc. must be cleared away to the quick,
either by rubbing, or the knife, as filth and insects are apt particularly to
gather there: wipe the part clean.

Consider the soil about an unthrifty tree, and if it is thought bad, improve
it by moving away as much of the old, as conveniently can be done. The roots
should be laid quite bare, and examined in order to cut off decayed or cankered
parts, and to apply immediately to them some fine and good fresh earth, with a
little thorough rotten dung in it, and a sprinkling of soot or wood ashes.

Hog dung applied fresh, is said to have a peculiar efficacy in recovering weak
trees; and cow dung may reasonably be expected to do good, if the soil is a
warm, or hungry one, and if not so, the hog dung is not so proper, as it is a
cold dressing. If the soil is a strong one, a compost of fowl's, or sheep's
dung, lime, and any fresh light earth, one part of each of the former, and
three of the latter, mixed with the soil that is taken off, will be a proper
manure. An animal dressing as of entrails, or any carrion, or bullock's blood,
applied to the roo^s, has been frequently found effectual to make fruitful, and
to recover decaying trees and vines. All these applications should be made late
in autumn.

The constitution of a tree is sometimes naturally barren; or the soil that the
roots have got into may be so naught and deleterious, that no pains, or
perseverance will avail any thing; but growing worse and worse, admonishes the
owner to take it up, and try another plant, rectifying the soil thoroughly, if
the evil is thought to arise there. The smother fly does sometimes repeatedly
attack the same tree, which is a sign of inherent weakness, for the juices of a
sickly tree are sweeter than those of a sound one, and so more liable to such
attacks. Sometimes a tree of this kind when removed and pruned greatly down,
does very well. A soil too rich of dung often occasions trees to be blighted,
and the remedy is to impoverish it with a sharp sand.

A tree must not be kept too full during summer, as it prevents the proper
ripening of the wood, and makes the shoots long jointed. If more than one shoot
proceed from the same eye, reserve only the strongest and best situated. A
crowded tree cannot be healthy, and it becomes both lodging and food for
insects. The blossom buds of a tree being formed the year before, will be few
and weak in a thicket of leaves, being debarred of the sun and air. But in
order to avoid an over fullness, do not make any great amputations in summer,
lest the tree should gum.

In clearing a tree of superabundant wood, take care not to cut off the leading
shoot of a branch. All shoots after midsummer should be displaced as they
arise, except where wanted to fill up a vacancy. In a too vigorous tree, the
midsummer shoots, (if not quite foreright) may be left for a while on those
branches that are to be cut out at winter pruning, as cutting such trees in
summer is to be avoided as much as possible: so that a little rudeness in a
luxuriant tree may be permitted as a necessary evil, provided it becomes not
too shady, or unsightly. Watering wall trees with an engine on a summer's
evening is conducive to their health.

3. The FRUITFULNESS of wall trees, (the ultimate object of planting and
training them) comes now to be spoken of. Their proper form and health being
good, the foundation is laid, but several things are yet to be done to obtain
the end proposed, and this chiefly regards the principal, or what is called
winter pruning.

If trees have been planted far enough asunder, it is a happy circumstance, as
the proper horizontal form, and the open middle may be preserved. The longer
the horizontals are, the more necessary it is to be careful to suffer none but
weak branches in the center uprightly. If trees are confined as to length of
wall they must take a more erect form: but still strong wood should not mount
just in the middle.

If the trees have been properly attended to, during summer, there will be now
the less to do; and the leading objects are, to thin and to furnish them, or in
other words, to take out what is to spare, and to cut what is left, so as to
fill the tree properly again by succeeding shoots.

A tree is to be thinned of damaged, unpromising, and illplaced shoots, and of
woody branches that are decaying, or reach far without fruitful shoots on them,
and always some of the old wood should be cut out, where there is young to
follow, or supply its place. Of the fair and well placed shoots also, the
superabundance is to be taken away, so as generally to leave the good ones at
four, five or six inches asunder, according to the size of the wood and fruit.

Luxuriant wood, i. e. those shoots that are gigantic, must be taken out from
the rest, as they would impoverish the good, and destroy the weak branches, and
are never fruitful; but if a tree is generally luxuriant, it must be borne
with, and the less it is cut, comparatively speaking, the better. Such trees,
after a few years, may come to bear well; and when it begins to shoot
moderately, some of the biggest wood may be taken out each year, or shortened
down to two or three eyes, and so manoeuvered into order. The more horizontally
free shooting trees are trained, the better, as the bending of the shoots
checks the sap. A strong shoot or two of a very luxuriant tree may be trained
perpendicular for a time, to keep the horizontals the more moderate.

As the tree is to be begun below, and toward the stem, so the object in
thinning must be, to prefer and to leave these shoots that are placed lowest on
the branches, that so the tree may be furnished toward the center. See that
those left are sound, and not weak, or over strong, for the moderate shoots are
generally best. Weak shoots are always more fruitful than strong ones; and if
they are furnished with fair blossoms, should be kept where a tree is full of
wood, and even preferred to moderate ones, on a very flourishing tree.

In this thinning business the young pruner must be content to go on
deliberately, that he may consider well before the knife is applied. To make a
proper choice is the great point, and perhaps no two adepts would exactly
determine the same; so that after hesitating, to be sometimes at a loss, must
not discourage a learner.

Of those shoots that are barren, retain no more than are absolutely necessary
to throw out wood for the next year, and shorten them as much as may be,
agreeable to the view of the following directions.

The next object is to furnish a tree. In order to this, the thinning of old
wood, young being ready (or easily to be procured) to follow, has already been
mentioned; but the principal step is the shortening of the shoots, which
occasions them to throw out below the cut, for future use. If they were not to
be shortened, the tree would presently extend a great way, bearing chiefly at
the ends, and all over the middle, it would be thin of fruit, and thus a great
part of the wall lost.

The mode of bearing in peaches, nectarines, and apricots, is on the last
year's wood, which makes it necessary to shorten, in order to a certain supply
of bearing wood for the next year; and to contrive to have succession wood in
every part of the tree, is one of the chief arts of the pruner.

The rule for shortening is this. Consider the strength of the tree, and the
more vigorous the shoots are, cut off the less. If a luxuriant tree were to
have its shoots much shortened, it would throw out nothing but wood; and if a
weak tree were not pretty much cut, it would not have strength to bear. From
vigorous shoots onefourth may be cut off: from middling ones, one-third; and
from weak ones, one-half.

In shortening, make the cut at a leading shoot bud, which is known by having a
blossom bud on the side of it, or which is better, one on each side. Blossom
buds are rounder and fuller than leaf buds, and are discernible at the fall of
the leaf, and plainly seen early in the spring: but though it is desirable to
make the cut at ^uin blossoms, yet as this cannot always be done, the due
proportion of length must generally determine. It often happens that the
blossom buds are chiefly, and sometimes all, at the end of the shoot; but still
it should be shortened, if it is at all long. Never cut where there is only a
blossom bud, and prefer those shoots that are shortest jointed, and have the
blossoms most in the middle. The shoots that lie well, and are fruitful or
healthy, and but a few inches long, may be left whole. Always contrive to have
a good leader at the end of every principal branch.

Young trees (as of the first year of branching) should have the lower shoots
left longer in proportion, and the upper shorter, in order to form the tree
better to the filling of the wall: The lower shoots may have three or four eyes
more than the upper.

In furnishing a tree, consider where it wants wood, and cut the nearest
unbearing branch (or if necessary, a bearing one) down to one, two, or more
eyes, according to the number of shoots desired, for in such close shortening,
a shoot will come from each eye. With a view to wood for filling up a naked
place, a shoot formed after midsummer may be thus shortened; though the general
rule is, to displace all such shoots as useless; the dependence for blossoms,
being on the early formed shoots, and therefore the tree must not be crowded
with the late formed ones.

The time for the principal or winter pruning is by some held indifferent, if
the weather is mild at the time; but a moderate winter's day, is often quickly
followed by a severe frost, which may hurt the eye and blossom next the cut.
The best time is at the fall of the leaf, and may take place as soon as the
leaves begin to fall. November is, generally speaking, a good time, and if this
month is past, then February, if it is mild, or as soon after as possible, for
when the blossoms get swelled, they are apt to be knocked off by a little touch.

An autumn pruning will make the tree stronger, and the blossoms come bolder
and forwarder; and if trees are then cut, as it lessens the work of spring
much, this alone is a good argument, if no obstacle is in the way. This
practice gives also a better opportunity to crop the borders with cauliflowers,
lettuces, radishes, etc. to stand the winter. Pruners in general, however, like
a spring cutting, because they then see the blossoms plainly, and thus more
readily make their election of shoots. Yet if the first fine weather and
leisure were embraced in autumn it were certainly better; and surely it must be
satisfaction, to see the trees in order all the winter: It is a most desirable
thing to bring gardeners to this practice.

To clear a tree of leaves in autumn, a birchen broom may be drawn up the
branches, or the hand brushed upwards: this practice is not only desirable to
get at the tree properly, but to free the borders from litter.

It has been so strongly recommended by one of our best gardeners to prune wall
trees in October, that he directs to the trouble of cutting the leaves off with
a sharp knife, an inch from the bud below, which he observes may be done very
expeditiously: but though an autumn pruning is to be recommended, it were best
to leave young trees, for a year or two, after heading down till spring; and
luxuriant trees ought certainly to be so left, not only to check the strength
of the coming shoots, but to see better where their blossoms are, that no fruit
be lost, as when in this state they bear but idly.

If spring be the time for pruning, the rule is to begin with apricots, then
peaches, and then nectarines. Apricots should not be so much shortened as
peaches, nor do they so well endure the knife, and the Anson, or moor-park
sort, particularly.

Shoots of the apricot, if under a foot, may be left uncut, if there is room.
The spurs of apricots should be spared, if not too long, or numerous, for they
bear well and continue for years.

The apricot bearing so much in the manner of the plum, it should be somewhat
considered as such; and those who leave stubs on the wall plums for forming
spurs, may, with equal reason, do so on the apricot, but let it be done
sparingly. Some sorts of peaches are also apt to put out fruit spurs, and must
be managed accordingly.

If much alteration is to be made in a wall tree, it will be necessary to
unnail a great part, if not the whole tree, or a side of it, at least. When a
tree has filled its space something of this sort must be done, and the worst,
oldest, largest, and most unprofitable wood taken out. If good fruitful wood be
cut away to reduce the tree, then that is to be reserved which will lay in
straitest and in the best form, branching out the nearest toward the stem.

Thus having finished the directions for pruning apricots, peaches, and
nectarines, a few short observations may be made, and something said concerning
the management of those wall trees, in order to obtain good fruit.

After trees have been pruned, it will be proper to look them over, to see what
can be amended, as they will hardly be done perfectly at first; this business
may be let alone till blossoming time, and then some judicious alterations may
perhaps be made, as taking out some weak, or other shoots, that prove barren,
and may be spared, or cutting some down to the knit-fruit, both to benefit
that, and make room for the new wood: April will be the time for this.

The pruner's greatest art is shown, not simply in providing a present, or a
next year's crop of fruit, but to manage his trees so as to lay a foundation
for years to come: He is to anticipate consequences, and provide for the future.

Particular as the directions here given for pruning have been, they cannot
have comprehended every possible case, but good sense and experience will
readily supply what may be wanting, if the instructions afforded are understood.

Those who hire a workman to perform their pruning, should have three summer
operations besides the winter; i. e. in May, July, and September, earlier, or
later in these months as the season is, taking care to be satisfied of the
skill of the performer.

To preserve blossoms from inclement weather, is a thing some persons are
curious in, though on the whole, they may be (as they generally are) left to
take their chance. After some expense and trouble, this business is often done
to no purpose, or a bad one. The cover sometimes knock off the blossoms, and if
the work is done irregularly, as perhaps covered too close for a time, and then
left uncovered, they are sooner then cut off.

Many contrivances for shelters have been used. The old way of sticking
cuttings of yew, or other evergreens, or fern (which is best when dry) is as
little trouble as any, but they should be fixed carefully, so as not to slip,
or be moved by wind, and not so thick as to shade overmuch. A slight covering
is of service, and rather to be recommended than a thick one.

Nothing more than an old net has been used successfully by some gardeners for
the purpose.

A coping projecting from six-inches to a foot, according to the height of the
wall is serviceable, as keeping off heavy rains, and also frosts whose action
is perpendicular: This coping when it is of thatch, though not so sightly, is
best.

Perpetual covers, it is observed, if wide, do harm by keeping off dew and
gentle rains, which so greatly cherish and feed the leaves, and the whole tree,
and are essential to its welfare.

An instance, however, deserves to be recorded, of an apricot tree growing on a
wall about eleven feet high, part of which was covered by a coping projecting
near a foot, and this portion of the tree was uniformly forwarder, and more
fruitful than the other, rarely having its blossoms injured by the weather.

The best covering, for the protection of blossoms is, perhaps, that which Mr.
Miller recommends, "made with two leaves of slit deal, joined over each other
and painted, fixed upon the top of the wall with pullies, to draw up and down
at pleasure, forming a sort of penthouse."

Reed or straw hurdles have been used to place before the trees in severe
weather; and if only set at right angles against the wall, toward the east,
when the wind is strong from that quarter, they do good: a long tree might have
one set up against the middle of it, as well as at the East end. Hurdles,
covered with a mat, or cloth over them, do very well, and if too short to reach
the top of the wall, they may be set upon forked stakes fast in the ground.

Poles fixed in the ground to the height of the wall, at small distances, and
six inches from it, might be covered with mats; but as to applying mats
directly to the wall, it is hazardous, being apt to beat off the blossoms, and
if they are kept long on it, sickens the tree, by depriving it of air, etc.

Whatever covering is used, it should be left no longer on than necessary, and
it should be well secured from slipping or rubbing against the tree by wind. It
should not be used till the blossoms get a little forward, nor continued longer
than while the fruit is well set, being regularly put up at night, and taken
off in the day, except in very bad weather.

The thinning of fruit, when too thick upon the tree, is a matter that must be
attended to, for it will eventually prove loss, and not gain, to leave too many
for ripening. It weakens the tree, prevents the knitting of so many, or so
strong blossoms for the next year as are desirable, and hinders the fruit from
coming to its size and flavor.

The rule for thinning should be, to leave no two fruits so close as to swell
one against another; except indeed the tree is generally short of fruit, when
twins may be left on strong branches. Three or four on a long and strong branch
are quite enough, and so in proportion for weaker wood; this is said of the
larger sorts of peaches, and nectarines; apricots may, in genral, be left
somewhat thicker on a flourishing tree, and the lesser kinds of peaches and
apricots may still be somewhat more numerous, as the early masculine apricot,
the nutmeg peach, and nutmeg nectarine: there may be more nectarines left on a
tree than peaches.

As the apricots gathered to thin a tree are used for pies, so are sometimes
the nectarines, but let not too many of either grow for this-use, or stay too
long on the tree before they are gathered. Young wall trees that presently
become very fruitful, should be spared for two or three years, so as not to be
suffered to over bear themselves, which has often occasioned a rapid decline
and death. Trees should be thinned by cutting off the fruit with a sharp
pointed knife, and not by pulling, which may tear the bark, and, if joined (as
in clusters) to another fruit, the pulling off one, often damages the foot
stalk of the other, and occasions its dropping.

As to thinning the leaves of wall trees, too much liberty should not be taken,
though in some measure it may be necessary to give color and ripeness to the
fruit. When leaves are greatly multiplied and shade the fruit much, a few at a
time may be displaced, if the fruit is nearly full grown, but rather by
pinching or cutting the leaves, just above the foot stalk, than by pulling.
Fruit that is too much, and long exposed in a hot summer, is ripened too fast,
the skin hardens, it attains not its proper size, nor is so juicy, or
wellflavoured.

In garthering wall fruit, do not pinch it to try if it is ripe, but give it a
gentle lift, and if fit for eating, it will readily part from the foot stalk.
Those peaches and nectarines that drop by their ripeness are yet good (some say
best) for the table; but apricots have a smarter and more agreeable flavor
before they are thoroughly ripe.

As to the dropping of fruit, when it has attained to some little size, though
some have imputed it to drought, and therefore use watering (which however is
seldom done deep and wide enough,) yet the cause seems more probably to be some
injury from insects, or frosts, that the embryo fruit, has suffered at the foot
stalk, which can only sustain its burden for a while, and then its own weight
breaks it off.

To transport fruit, w^ap it up in vine leaves, or a thin coat of moss, and
pack with fine sifted wood ashes; a layer of these, and a layer of fruits, each
a little separated from one another, and compress all together with a board on
the top. Peaches are better for keeping a day or two, on sweet dry moss, in a
cool airy place, but they will keep well no longer.

Vines require frequent attention, as to pruning and training; but all will
avail little, if they have not a warm soil, and full sun, or some accidental
advantage, as being planted at the back of a warm chimney; and though they will
grow and bear leaves any where, they will not fruit well in England, without a
favorable season, or hot summer.

Young new planted vines should be pruned quite short, for two or three years,
that they may get strong. If the plant has a weak root, not above one shoot
ought to grow the first year, which should be cut down in autumn to two or
three eyes.

The best time for the principal, or winter pruning of vines is best, as soon
as the fruit is off, or the leaves falling. November does very well, and if
this month passes, February should be adopted, rather than quite in the winter,
when the shoots may die down by severe frosts; or late in the spring, when they
are apt to bleed by cutting.

The mode of bearing in vines, is only on shoots of the present year,
proceeding from year old wood. The rule, therefore, at winter pruning is, to
reserve such shoots of the year, that are best situated as to room, for
training of those shoots that are to come from them, which will be almost one
from every eye^ Make choice of those that are placed most toward the middle,
or stem of the vine, that all the wall may be covered with bearing wood; and
every year cut some old wood out that reaches far, to make room for younger to
follow.

The form that a vine takes on the wall is various, and not very material,
whether it be more horizontal, or perpendicular. The form must be governed
according to the space of walling alloted to it; sometimes it has ample room,
as at the gable end of a house, and sometimes it is confined to a low wall, or
between trees, windows, etc. The reserved shoots should be twelve or fifteen
inches asunder, if they are strong, and weak ones may be something ^ess: we can
hardly allow too much room.

The shortening of the shoots should be according to their strength and the
room there is for training those shoots that will be produced, which always
grow very long. If there is room, three, four, or five eyes may be left, but
not more to any shoot, except it is desirable to extend some shoot to a
distance to fill up a particular space, and then eight or nine eyes may be
left, which being repeated again another year, and so on, a vine will soon
reach far.

Sometimes vines are trained on low walls by a long extended horizontal branch,
a ^ew inches from the ground, as a mother bearer. Those shoots that come from
this horizontal are to be trained perpendicularly, and cut down to one or two
eyes every year, that they may not encroach on the space above them. If the
vine is confined to a narrow but lofty space, it is to be trained to an
extended perpendicular mother bearer, having short lateral shoots pruned down
to a single eye, or at most two. The management of vines requires severe
cutting, that they may not be too full in the summer, for they put out a great
deal of wood, and extend their shoots to a great length; and therefore the
young pruner must resolve to cut out enough.

An alternate mode of pruning vines is practiced by some, one shoot short, and
another long; i. e. one with two eyes, and another with four or five. Severe
cutting does not hurt vines, and make them unfruitful, as it does other trees;
and therefore, where short of room, they may be pruned down to a single bud, as
the case requires.

The summer management of vines must be carefully attended to. As soon as the
young shoots can be nailed to the wall, let them not be neglected; but remember
they are very tender, and will not bear much bending: train in only the well
placed shoots, rubbing or breaking off the others. The embryo fruit is soon
seen in the bosom of the shoot, and these are of course to be laid in, as many
as can be found room for, in preference to those shoots that are barren, which
nevertheless should also be trained, if they are strong and well placed, and
there is space for them. Rub off all shoots from old wood, except any tolerable
one that proceeds from a part where wood is wanting to fill up some vacant
space. If two shoots proceed from one eye, displace the weakest, or the
outermost, if they are both alike, and the fruit should not direct otherwise.
Vines grow rapidly, and must be nailed to the wall from time to time as they
proceed, that there may be no rude dangling; which would not only have a
slovenly appearance, but in several respects be injurious.

The stopping of the shoots is to take place, both as to time and measure,
according to the strength and situation of them, or whether fruitful or barren.
Those weak shoots that have fruit, and are rather ill placed, or confined for
room, may be stopped at the second, or even first joint above the fruit, early
in the summer; but those shoots that are strong, and have room to grow, should
not be stopped till they are in flower, (in July,) and at the third or fourth
joint above the fruit. In shortening the shoots of the vine, do it about half
an inch above an eye, sloping behind a plump and sound one. The barren shoots
are to be trained at full length, and not stopped at all, if there is room for
them, or, at least, but a little shortened toward autumn, because they would
put out a number of useless and strong side-shoots, if cut before.

The side shoots, i. e. those little ones put out by the eyes that are formed
for next year, are commonly directed to be immediately displaced by rubbing
off, as soon as they appear; and if the vine is large, and the shoots slender,
it is very proper; but if otherwise, their being left to grow a while (so as
not to get too rude and crowding) is rather an advantage, in detaining the sap
from pushing the shoots out immoderately long; and when these are taken off,
the lower eye may be left with the same view. But the side shoot, that proceeds
from the top of each shortened branch, should be left on, and when it gets
long, shortened down to an eye or two.

In order to fruitfulness, vines will need dressing with some sort of manure,
for though they grow in vineyard countries on rocky hills, and in very shallow
soils, and have done so on some chalky, hot, gravelly hills in England, yet
some warm spirituous food they must have, or they will produce little fruit,
and that of poor flavor.

Some people are very fond of exposing the fruit of the vine to the full sun,
by stripping off leaves; but this should not be practiced till the bunches have
attained their proper size, needing only to be ripened, and even then but
little should be done in this way. The loss of leaves is an injury to every
plant, and all fruit grows larger in shade, though when grown, it will not
ripen well without sun. Much sun, as it contracts the skin, does not forward,
but hinder young fruit from swelling and ripening properly.

Fig trees are best pruned early in October, (cutting the leaves off) but the
more usual time is early in spring, as after an autumn cutting (if late) they
are apt to die down; but if not completely pruned at this time, let, at least,
stragglers be taken out, and the rest laid in close without straining.

The mode of bearing in the fig is, that fruit chiefly comes the present year
on the little shoots from wood of the preceding, and that toward the ends of
the branches; which circumstances dictate the rules for pruning: Two years old
wood will bear some, but older never.

The shoots, during summer, are to be laid in at full length, plentifully as
room will permit. The weak, ill placed, or superabundant ones, cut clean out;
yet rather brake, or rub them off, in an early state of growth, for cutting
branches or shoots in summer, makes them bleed, as it is called; i. e. the sap
run; when cut in autumn (as is recommended the fig will sometimes bleed, for a
day or so) but if late cut in spring, the oozing will continue a week, which is
too much.

At the principal pruning, the strongest, and the closest jointed shoots are to
be preferred, and left about seven or eight inches asunder, without shortening.
Let the spare shoots be cut out close and smooth, and as much of the old wood
as may be; for the tree will increase too fast, and get too naked of bearing
wood in the middle, if this is not freely done; and the greatest point in the
management of fig trees is, to have young wood all over it, and particularly in
the middle and toward the bottom. Wood is seldom wanted in a fig tree, but
where it is, the shortening of a shoot, properly situated (by taking off the
leading bud, or cutting lower as the case requires) is sure to produce it. Do
this in April, as the best time.

When hard frosts are expected let some litter be laid over the roots of fig
trees, and mats nailed over their branches, (first pulling off the figs) as the
succulent nature of their wood makes them tender; and these coverings are to
remain till the frosts are judged to be over, and then let them be covered up
at night, and not by day, for a week or two, to harden them by degrees.

But fig trees will generally survive hard winters, when in standards, without
covering; and though shoots trained to a wall are tenderer, yet peasehaulm hung
close among the branches (at the approach of sharp frosts) will preserve them.
This sort of protection, as affording plenty of air, is by many good gardeners
preferred to the more common practice of matting. But if ma^^ were contrived to
roll up and down, or kept a little distance from the tree, so as to give more
or less air, as the weather is, the health and fruitfulness of the tree would
be better insured, for too close (and as it commonly happens in consequence too
long) covering is injurious to both. Fig trees that have been close covered are
often hurt by an early uncovering, and yet the spring air, as soon as possible,
is desirable.

It is worthy consideration and trial, whether fig trees against a good wall
would not do best on a trellis, as thus they would have sufficient heat,
without being forced into wood, which they are apt to have too much of.

PEARS come next under our consideration as wall fruit:

A young pear tree, being planted against a wall in autumn, should not be cut
down till spring, when the head is to be reduced according to the goodness of
the root, and so as to lay a proper foundation for covering the wall. If it has
a bad root, (as is often the case) all the shoots should come off, and only the
stem be left, with a few eyes to form new shoots, as was directed for peaches,
etc. But generally some of the shoots are to be left, with due shortening, only
taking it as a general rule, that it is not proper to leave much wood on; but
to prune down freely, in order to the putting out strong shoots for parent
branches. See heading-down, under the directions for espalier pruning.

The form of pear trees is to be governed by the nature of the wall. If the
space allowed the tree is low and long, it must of course be trained perfectly
horizontal; but if there is room above, and a deficiency of length, the form
becomes more erect: Yet even in this case the lower, and more horizontal
branches, should be allowed to get the start a year or two, before the middle
is permitted to fill, which ought not to have any over strong wood, lest it run
away with the strength of the tree, and keep the extremities weak. The branches
are to be trained at length, without shortening, and kept at from six to eight
inches distance, according to the size of the fruit; remembering, that it is
essential to a pear, above most other fruit trees, that the branches be clear
of one another, for the sun and air to have free access: Pruners should
consider this circumstance, in all trees, more than they generally do. The
reason for not shortening the branches is, that wood is always thrown out from
two or three eyes below a cut, and so the tree would become a thicket of
useless wood, if such cutting took place.

The mode of bearing in pear trees is on short spurs, which appear first
toward the ends, and then form themselves all along the branches, which do not
produce blossoms for three or four years from planting, and sometimes
(according to the sort) for several years more. When they are come to fruiting,
some pears bear pretty much on year old wood, some on two, others on three. The
same branches continue to bear on spurs from year to year, and most when five
or six years old; but as in course of time the branches may become diseased and
barren, and not produce so fine fruit as younger wood, it is always proper to
procure a succession of young bearers, as the opportunity of good shoots offer.

As to projecting wood, most gardeners allow of it in wall pear trees, but some
not. The wood should not, however, be suffered to project above three or four
inches; and though there may be blossoms at the ends of short year old wood,
yet they should be either cut clean out, or down to an eye or two, for forming
fruit spurs, as they will be apt to do, though they are also as apt to produce
only wood shoots; and these shoots being cut down again, tufts of wood are thus
produced which makes a tree appear ragged; but whether it is best to cut all
spare shoots clean out, (or to cut some o^ them at least) down to little stubs,
or false spurs, is hardly yet determined, though the advocates for both
practices speak very positively. The cutting clean out is much the neater, and
less troublesome way, and is therefore best, if as much fruit is to be obtained
by it: It has been said more may be.

The occasional pruning of pear trees during summer is necessary, lest the
strength of the tree be spent in vain, the fruit robbed, and shaded, and the
extremities impoverished. Whether all the shoots that are clearly known to be
wood shoots (from their length) should be cut out during summer is a question,
but proceed as follows:

Where fruit spurs are wanted, the moderate wood shoots may be left to grow to
some length, till the wood is hardened, and then broke off to about six inches,
which being left to the winter pruning, may be cut down to one eye, with the
hope of getting a spur there: But spurs should not be suffered to grow too
thick; trees bearing small pears, may have theirs four inches asunder, and the
large six.

Several summer shoots will come out about the fruit spurs; yet it is not
advisable to cut all of them off as they appear, but only the strong and most
unsightly; one moderate shoot may be left to each, and shortened when the wood
is hardened, to about six inches, and cut clean out at the general pruning: All
superfluous shoots, except those mentioned as allowed of, should be displaced
while young; but though rubbing, or breaking off, in all cases are preferable
to the knife, do not use this method when shoots are so big as to tear the wood
with them.

The time for general or winter pruning of pear trees ought to be November, as
the blossoms are then very discernable, and at spring pruning they get so
turgid and tender, that almost the least touch knocks them off, or even the
jarring of the tree. What is now to be cut out will be understood from what has
been said; only when the bunches of spurs get too thick and projecting, some
must occasionally be removed, and a thin sharp chissel and mallet will do the
work well, where the wood is too strong or awkwardly placed for the knife. When
a tree gets to the extent of its bounds, it is to be shortened down to a
wellplaced shoot, which may serve for a leader; which leader should be already
provided by a selection in the summer.

Where wood is wanted to fill a vacant place, a shoot may be accordingly
shortened; but otherwise there must be no shortening, except down to a single
eye, with a view (as was said) to forming fruit spurs, where the tree is thin
of them. And when wood is desired in any particular part, where there is no
shoot to cut down for the purpose, a notch (somewhat long) will generally
produce it, and the more certainly, if made just above a joint, or knot, and
such knotching of pear trees does no harm, but rather good, as many choose to
do it to check their too great aptness to luxuriancy.

The thinning of the fruit on pear trees is frequently necessary. They put
forth a great many blossoms, and many of them fall, and even the fruit will do
so when it is set; but as soon as it is promising (by the healthy shining
appearance of the skin) that the fruit will hang, thinning so as to leave only
one pear on a spur, will improve the fruit left, and help the tree: this work
do with a sharp pointed knife.

To check the luxuriant growth of pear trees, many schemes have been tried; but
the best is here and there to strip pieces of bark off, behind the stem, and
some of the principal branches, half round, or rather make so many wide
notches, not going to the pith.

APPLES are sometimes planted against walls, etc.

What has been said of pruning and managing pears is applicable to them; the
branches, however, may be laid in somewhat closer, and they will not require so
much room, but ought to have from twenty-five to thirty feet in length of a low
wall, and on a high one something less: This distance appears great, but a few
years will evince its propriety, and in such wide planting the intermediate
spaces may be occupied by several things.

Mulberries are still more rarely cultivated as wall^ruit:

These trees require good room, as their mode of bearing is mostly at the ends
of the trained shoots, which are therefore not to be shortened. Twenty or
twenty-five feet should be allowed them, and a new planted tree is to be headed
down as directed for pears, etc. Train regularly as many shoots as may be in
summer, and at winter pruning, lay them about six or seven inches distance. A
succession of new wood must be always coming forward, and of course some old
taken out, for the fruit is produced chiefly on year and two year old wood; and
as it comes on spurs, and also small shoots of the same year, the leaving short
stubs (of moderate wood) in pruning, seems justified, though by some much
condemned.

Cherries should be found against walls in every good garden; but plant young
trees, not more than two, but better if one year only from budding.

A new planted cherry tree is best to have but one strong shoot from the bud,
and then cut down, at spring, so as to have two or three eyes on each side, to
lay in well to the wall; but if older and fuller of wood, head it down as
directed in Espalier Pruning.

Cherry trees should be trained at length, four or five inches asunder. The
fruits come from spurs all along the shoots, on one and two years old wood,
which will continue to bear. In pruning have an eye, however, to some fair
shoots for successors to those that are getting diseased, or worn out. Some cut
all superfluous shoots clean away, and others leave a sprinkling of short
stubs, which may be allowed; but let them not advance far fore right.

The morella cherry has a different mode of bearing from others, the fruit
proceeding mostly from eyes along the branches of new, or year old wood: the
pruner, therefore, is to lay in a proper supply of young wood every year,
always removing older wood to make room accordingly. For the better opportunity
of furnishing the tree with young wood, the bearing branches of this tree
should be at six inches distance, and then one young shoot trained between,
makes them three inches distant, closer than which they should not be. The
morella it is clear, ought to have no stubs left in pruning, with a view to
spurs, nor most any fore right shoots be suffered to grow at all, but let them
be rubbed off while very young, or rather while in the bud.

The morella cherry is commonly planted against north walls, where they grow
large and hang long, as they are commonly not wanted till late in the season to
preserve; but if planted upon warmer walls, their fruit is of a finer flavor,
and (when thoroughly ripe) excellent for table use in the desert; i. e. in
September, or October, according to the aspect of their growth.

PLUMS of the finer sorts are often planted against walls, and deserve a good
one.

For the pruning of plum trees, the directions given for cherries apply to
them, only that the branches should be laid somewhat wider; i. e. at five or
six inches.

FILBERDS, or other nuts, are to be trained at full length, the branches about
six inches distance, shortening only the shoots of new planted trees, in order
to the furnishing a proper head and spread of branches, which would be kept as
horizontal as possible, to check their free growth.

They bear upon the sides and ends of the upper young branches; so that young
wood must be continually bringing in, by removing some of the old.

Currants and sometimes Gooseberries are planted against walls:

Train the lower branches somewhat horizontal as far as their allotted room,
and then train upwards, filling the middle as they grow. Keep the branches
about five or six inches asunder. They bear fruit upon young wood, and on
little spurs of the old. Superfluous shoots of the trained branches, are to be
cut down to little stubs or spurs, about half an inch long, which will throw
out fruit shoots and spurs. The mother branches of currants and gooseberries
will last many years; but when good young wood can be brought in for
principals, a renewal every three or four years will produce finer fruit. Take
care to provide shoots to the very bottom of the wall, that no space may be
lost. In the gathering of these fruits for pies, there should be left a
sprinkling all over the trees to come on for eating ripe, which will prove
fine, there being only a small quantity for the tree to nourish.

* One general observation may be here made: That all fruit trees mentioned
since vines, are pruned much in the same way, so that the young gardener will
not find the business of pruning so intricate as he might imagine, from the
number of words, necessarily bestowed on the occasion.

Wall trees are spoken of as to situation, distance, etc. in the section of the
Formation of a Garden, which see, with other particulars.

2. OF PRUNING ESPALIER TREES.
The work of pruning espalier trees is altogether so much the same as for wall
trees, that directions for ^utting and training them, need not be given here.
The only difference is, that instead of being spread upon walls, the branches
are fastened to stakes, or frames, as trellises. The fastenings are commonly
ties of ozier twigs, bass, yarn, or soft packthread, instead of nails, which,
however may be used to frame work, if small and sharp pointed. See formation of
a garden.

As trees planted for espalier training should be young, let great care be
taken to set them off right at first, by regular shoots, full furnished
immediately from the stem; which is effected by proper heading down, as was
directed for wall trees; but directions more particular shall be repeated here,
as to apples, pears, plums, cherries, etc. which in the general need not to be
so much freed of all branches at planting, as peaches, nectarines, and
apricots; yet there are gardeners who prune down to the stem, all sorts of wall
and espalier trees, as peaches are.

The heading down of a young tree (i. e. apple, etc.) for an espalier that has
only one shoot from the graffing, or budding, should be so low, as to leave two
or three, or at the most four eyes on each side of the stem, from which will
proceed shoots properly placed for training: If the tree has two shoots, one on
each side, which branch out right and left, so as to be made principal leaders,
cut each of them down to three or four eyes. If it has three, the upper one, if
not over strong, being shortened down to a few eyes, may be trained strait up
and the two lower ones shortened as above, as laterals, and thus a good
foundation will be made for a proper spread of branches. If it has four shoots
properly placed for training, two on each side, the lower one may be cut down,
to seven or eight ^yes, and that above to three or four: If the tree has more
shoots, they may be either all cut out to two on each side (shortening as
before) or one left perpendicular, being cut down to a few eyes; or if the tree
is somewhat old, and has a good root, more wellplaced shoots may be left on,
keeping the lowermost longer than the upper by two or three eyes, making the
upper ones very short. If these directions are properly observed, an espalier
(or a wall) will be properly and presently filled with branches.

The best time for heading down is the spring, though when trees are planted
early in autumn, it may be then done. All cuts should be close behind an eye.
When a strong stem is to be cut down at spring, remember to place the foot
against it, to keep the root in its place.

Heading down should not only be deferred till spring on account of frosts
possibly injuring the top eye of the shoots; but because the head of a tree
helps to push out roots, either by circulation of the sap, or by a descent of
moisture imbibed by it from the atmosphere: The proper time, therefore, to
prune the heads of new-planted trees, is, when new roots are formed; and then a
head disproportioned to the roots should by no means be suffered, as the new
shoots in such case would be too weak to be healthy, or fruitful. For planting
espaliers, etc. See section 3.

3. OF PRUNING STANDARD TREES.
The principle of pruning standard trees is the same, whether full, half, or
dwarf standards; and the object is, to form a compact, handsome, round, and
open head, rather small than large, equal on all sides, with tolerably erect
wood, capable of supporting the fruit without much bending. Perfect symmetry
indeed is not necessary, but confusion of branches, weak and crossing, crowded
and dangling, is to be prevented by pruning; for a proper (rather free) use of
the knife, is capable of doing much toward the beauty and fruitfulness of
standard trees. A little pruning of standards every year, and a general one
every three or four years, to cut out what is decayed, and some of the older
wood, where a successional supply of young may be obtained to succeed, is the
way to keep them in vigor, and have the best of fruit; for that which grows on
old wood, gets small and austere.

Clear trees from moss, by scraping them with a long narrow bladed blunt knife,
on a bit of hard wood, and cut, or rub off bits of decayed bark, in which
insects are apt to bread, and wipe the part clean. Some use a scouring brush in
this business, the long end hairs of which are well adapted to clean the forky
parts. A bit of hair cloth is also used for the purpose; and a finish is
properly made with a brush and soap and water.

In the first year of new planted standards, they are to be cleared in the
spring, of all weak and improper shoots, reserving only a few of the strongest.
If there are four regularly placed shoots opposite to each other, it is
sufficient to form a good head, shortening them down to a few eyes each, or,
(in general) cutting off about one-third may be a rule. What the head will be,
may be pretty well foreseen, by conceiving two or three shoots to come from
each of the buds below the cut.

If the shoots of the tree are weak, or the root but a poor one, cut the
reserved shoots down ^o two eyes each. If the head is not regularly furnished
with shoots, a judicious pruner will yet be able to maneuver it into form in a
year or two, and this must be effected by close pruning the first year.

The second year (rather in spring) attend to the head, and cut out, or
shorten, so as to provide for the future form and strength of the tree;
reserving only such shoots as recommended themselves for their position and
vigor, as widely placed as may be from each other, and but few in number.
After this, the head will form itself, so as to need only cutting clean out a
few superfluities; but no shortening is allowed, except some of the lowest
branches, or any one where wood is wanted to fill a vacancy; for which purpose,
a weak shoot may do, cut down to one or two eyes.

If trees are too full of wood, the shoots must necessarily be drawn weak and
long jointed, and so be the less fruitful, and unable to support the fruit they
have; and thus it often happens, the branches of an apple tree needs propping;
but on the other hand, too much pruning will occasion a tree to be always
putting forth wood, rather than fruit, and so a medium must be observed. The
branches should be kept about six inches asunder; and as superfluous weak
shoots, will of course be cut out, so let also the over strong wood; for though
it is desirable to have standard trees of able wood, yet those shoots that much
exceed the size of the rest, would, if left on, infallibly weaken the others.

Let no shoots remain on the stems, below the head, nor suckers about the
roots. With respect to cherry trees, rather than cut more than necessary;
drooping branches may be suffered, as the fruit is not heavy, and the heads of
cherry trees may be fuller than other fruit trees. Wherever a cut is made in a
full headed standard to shorten a shoot, it should be (generally) at an eye
situated within side, that so the shoot from it may point more erectly, as the
weight of the fruit is too much for those branches that grow quite horizontal.

Gooseberries and current, may be ranked upon the denomination of dwarf trees,
and the principle of pruning them will be the same, as for other standard
trees, frequently cutting out old wood, to make the room for a succession of
young. The keeping these trees, or bushes, more open than they commonly are,
would improve the fruit in size and flavor, and bring it forwarder; yet some
of them should be suffered to grow rather full of wood, in order to keep the
fruit longer, especially in a northern aspect of the garden, or some shady
place; and if to this situation and fullness, be added matting, or netting, they
may be preserved till November.

The time of pruning these trees, is commonly held to be indifferent, and any
time between leaf and leaf may be adopted to cut them, as opportunity offers.
But when they are getting into leaf is (perhaps) the best time; as when pruned
early, there is frequently a loss of almost the whole fruit, by birds eating
the buds, or, as some say, insects. Leaving the whole head on till spring, is a
security as to a crop of fruit, as the case would be bad indeed, if some good
branches are not left, properly furnished with uninjured buds; but still it is
allowed, that an early pruning strengthens the tree, and tends to increase the
size of the fruit.

Current trees need not be kept so open as gooseberry, the branches of which,
should be (for fine fruit) five or six inches asunder, and as little shortened
as possible. Those sorts of gooseberries whose shoots grow in a curved manner,
may have their long branches, when in fruit, supported with little forked
sticks. Keep these trees clear of suckers, and all shoots from the stem, that
are within nine or ten inches of the ground.

For planting standards in orchards, etc. See section 3.

4. OF PRUNING SHRUBS.
Many shrubs are cultivated for their ornament, and some for their fruit; of
the latter are raspberries and barberries.

RASPBERRIES bear fruit on little side shoots of the present year, proceeding
from stems of the last, and sometimes produce a little on those of the same
year. To prune this shrub, therefore, first cut out all the old bearers, whose
wood dies, then cut out, close to the stool, all the new shoots, except three
or four of the best situated and strongest, which may be carefully twisted, or
tied together at the top, or if upright and strong, left to support themselves
singly. The best situated are those standing closest together, near the center
of the stool, and ranging well in the row: stragglers should not be forced in.
This done, let all shoots between the rows be clean dug out. Shorten
raspberries either just below the bend, or from three to four feet, according
to their strength.

Raspberries must not be shortened in summer; and the time for pruning them is
from October all through winter, till they begin to shoot at spring, though the
former is the best time to dress them; especially if any thing is to be planted
between their rows. See page 38.

BARBERRY, is a beautiful and somewhat large shrub, which should be suffered to
grow with a full head, like a dwarf standard tree. It bears along the sides of
both young and old wood, but chiefly toward the ends, and its branches should,
therefore, not be shortened, except with a view to throw out wood. Keep the
root free from suckers, and the stem from shoots in its lower part, and prune
out weak, luxuriant, straggling, and crossing branches, forming it to a
somewhat round head, which keep moderately open. Let the stem be freed from
lower branches to the height of three, four or five feet, according as the
shrub may be desired to approach to a tree. See page 77.

STRAWBERRIES require pruning from the runners during summer, which strengthens
the plants, keeps the soil from being exhausted, and gives all a neat air of
culture. This work should be particularly followed up in edgings of
strawberries, that they may not run over the walks: If plants, however, are
wanted for new beds, they must be suffered to run. See pages 39,78.

The dressing of strawberries consists, not only of pruning from runners; but
cutting down the great leaves in autumn (early) with a sithe; or which is
better, by taking them up in the hand, and using a knife. At this time they
must be weeded, and the ground stirred between them, deep enough to cut the
ends of the roots. Then there should be spread over the beds a little rott^n
dung, or good fresh earth, and all afterward kept free from weeds. The surface
of the ground be stirred again in spring, and any hollows that may be between
the plants should be filled up with earth, and some dung too amongst it, if
none was applied in autumn. Thus with good management the delicious strawberry
will be had in abundance and perfection.

FLOWERING SHRUBS are of great variety, and the method of pruning them is to be
determined according to their several modes of bearing, of which consider
chiefly these; that is, whether they produce their flowers upon the last year's
shoots, or the present, on the ends or the sides of their branches. If a shrub
bears on the last year's shoots, it is evident that it must be cut away no more
than is necessary to keep it within bounds, open, and handsome as to its form;
in this case, it is the business to cut clean out, or very low, what is to be
spared. If a shrub bears on the present year's shoots, the old wood may, and
must be cut down freely, so however as to leave eyes enough for new shoots to
proceed from, to make a sufficient head and show. If the shrub bears
altogether, or chiefly as its ends, no shortening must take place; but if some
of the branches are too long, they may be either cut out, or quite low, leaving
the shorter ones to bear. If the shrub bears along its sides, the shortening is
of no consequence, and the desired form may be freely provided for at pleasure.

The season for pruning shrubs is generally reckoned the spring, but autumn is
better, if not too near winter; as at this time sharp weather might occasion
some of the sorts to die down, particularly jasmines and honeysuckles. The time
of flowering must, in some measure, direct the time of pruning. Shrubs that
flower in winter (as the laurustinus) should be cut in spring. Those that
flower in spring may be pruned immediately after their blow, or in summer.
Those that flower in summer should be pruned in autumn; and those that flower
in autumn should be ^pruned either soon after flowering, or in spring. The
pyracantha bears on two and three years old wood, and therefore, young wood
should be kept in every part of the tree; for want of this, beautiful plants of
this shrub are frequently seen very large, with fruit only at some of the
extreme branches. The time for pruning it is autumn, but may be done in spring,
as the flowers are then to be seen.

Be sure to take off in time, i. e. as soon as discovered, all suckers and over
strong shoots from shrubs; for by their luxuriancy they greatly impoverish the
proper sized branches, which are the fruitful ones, and such large sappy wood
looks very unsightly.

Flowering shrubs should be better attended to, as to pruning, than they
commonly are; for we sometimes see them either wholly neglected, or cut down at
random, perhaps, only sheared into a little form; and so they make a return
quite suitable to the desert of the owner for his neglect. To be crowding full
of branches, suits the production of flowers no better than it does fruit: They
should not be choked up from sun and air, either in themselves, or by their
neighbors.

The general directions already given for pruning shrubs might suffice, but
that the young gardener may not have to discover (by observation alone) the
proper application of the given rules, he is here particularly directed to the
work of pruning a few of the more common sorts.

Roses bear upon shoots of the present year, and upon those formed after
Midsummer in the past year, but chiefly upon the former. Therefore, they may,
or rather should be cut down low, leaving only three or four eyes to a shoot;
except some of those short shoots formed the last year too late to blow then.
If rose trees are not close pruned, we see them get dangling, and unable to
support their flowers properly. Use a sharp knife, and cut close behind an eye
or bud.

Honeysuckles flower on shoots of the present year; and therefore whether
trained to walls, or kept in bushes, should be also pruned close, but not so
short in the latter as the former; for those against walls should be cut down
to an eye or two, and those in bushes to three or four eyes on a branch.

Sweet briars flower on shoots of the present year, and therefore should be cut
after the manner of honeysuckles. These shrubs (and most others) are seldom
pruned down enough, and so in a few years they get very rambling and unsightly;
but if kept compact, we have beauty as well as sweetness, to recompense our
care; and in all cases, a less number of fine flowers (obtained by short and
open pruning) is certainly preferable to many indifferent ones.

Li^acs bear their flowers at the ends of shoots of the last year, so of course
at spring must not be shortened. If got rambling and crowded, cut either clean
out, or very low, what may be superfluous. If they need much reduction, let
them be cut down as soon (or somewhat before) as they have got off flower, and
then the shoots that come after will form for blow before the summer is out,
for next year.

Jasmines should be pruned down close, even to half an inch, as they bear on
weak shoots of the year.

Sennas bear also on shoots of the present year, yet are best left rather full
of wood.

Hypericum frutex bears all along the sides of old wood, and therefore may be
shortened at pleasure.

Spirea frutex, Guelder rose, and many others, bear on shoots of the year, and
may therefore be pruned short.

For the pruning forest trees, see the end of section the tenth. Berberries,
see page 170.

SECTION XIII.
OF HOT BEDS.
THE dung of animals, but chiefly of horses, is put together for fermentation,
in order to form bodies of heat for two purposes. 1. To raise vegetables,
flowers, etc. not otherwise to be produced, or at least, not in perfection. 2.
To raise such things, as though they come in perfection in open culture, yet
may be forwarded by artificial warmth.

According to the quantity and quality of the materials put together for hot
beds, the heat will be proportioned as to strength and duration; and by a
judicious use in making, and the management afterward, many advantages may be
obtained from them. The great point is, to suit the degree of heat to the
nature of the different plants to be cultivated, that they may have neither
more nor less than in necessary to promote vegetation.

Two errors are common in the use of hot beds, sowing or placing in the same
bed things of a very different nature, as to the climate they grow best in, and
forcing with too much heat even the tenderest. Though it may not answer our
views of haste, the heat of a bed had better be slack than otherwise. A strong
hot bed, that ought (perhaps) to be made a fortnight before it is used, is
sometimes furnished by impatience in a few days, and various ill consequence
follow, which naturally frustrate success.

The place where hot beds are worked, should be open to the full sun, catching
it as early as possible in the morning, and as long as can be in the evening;
and if not naturally sheltered, it should be screened from the north and
north-east winds by a boarded fence, or rather one of reeds, as from a solid
fence the wind reverberates; but straw, or flake hurdles set endwise may do. A
screen of some sort, (and a close clipped hedge is as good as any) not only
protects the enclosure from the harsher winds, and confines the warm air, but
keeps a rather unsightly work from view, and straws from blowing about, the
litter of which is very disagreeable. In large gardens, however, they have
detached grounds for the work of hot beds, where such litter is of no
consequence.

Working of the dung is necessary previous to the making a hot bed; i. e. it
should be thrown together on an heap, in a conical form; and when it has taken
a thorough heat, and has been smoking or sweating for two or three days, it
should be turned over, moving the outside in, or mixing the colder parts with
the hot. When it has taken heat again for two or three days, give it a second
turn as before, and having lain the same time, it will be in proper order for
making a good lasting bed with a steady heat. If in any haste, it may be made
into a bed after the first heating; but it will be better for shifting again.
When dung is ready before wanted, keep turning it over, left it be too much
spent. It will be proper to begin to work fresh dung a week or ten days before
it is to be used; but if the dung is not fresh, it is only necessary to throw
it together for once heating.

Dunghills from which it is designed to collect materials for a hot bed, should
be taken notice of in time, that they are not left to work themselves weak by
long smoking, without opening and turning over. Beds may be made of dung from
the stable from a week to a month old.

If heavy rain, cutting wind, or driving snow should keep the heaps from
heating, and the dung is wanted, lay some straw round it, and it will protect
and fetch up the heat. If at first putting it together there is not a general
moisture in the dung, it must be given it, by casting water evenly over it as
it is laid. This may be done with a hand bowl from a pail, but it would be
better to use a large watering pot. No water must be used to dung when it is
got dark; this is however the color that it should begin to have when put
together in a bed, which the directions given for working it will bring it to.

The size of a hot bed, as to length and breadth, is (of course) to be
according to the frame; and the height of it according to the season, and the
degree of heat requisite to the nature of the plant to be cultivated. In a dry
soil, a bed may be sunk in the ground, from six inches to a foot, to make it
more convenient to get at and manage. But beds made forward in the season,
should rather be on the surface, for the sake of being able to add the stronger
linings, etc.

The bed should not be of greater dimensions than necessary to hold the frame
up firmly; i. e. three or four inches wider every way, though some approve of
making it six, which may be proper if the frame is small, as otherwise the body
of dung might not hold heat enough.

It is the practice of some gardeners, when they mould the bed, to take the
frame off, and lay it two or three inches thick all over, and then put the
frame on again. This is done to guard against steaming, and is proper when the
frames are shallow; in this case the bed must be six inches wider every way
than the frame, in order to hold up the mould for the frame to rest upon. As a
guide to laying the dung, stakes of about four feet long should be drove into
the ground at the four corners.

If there is a likelihood of not being a sufficient quantity of good horse
dung, that of cows, oxen, or pigs, if it is strawy, and not too wet, may be
mixed with it, in the proportion of one-fourth, or upon a pinch more;
especially in an advanced part of the season, or to cultivate things that are
only forcing, and do not naturally require heat. In the case of a deficient
quantity of proper materials also, some dry old worn out horse dung may be laid
at bottom, and a little of it on the top. O^fal hay may be mixed as the bed is
made; or a little or mown grass or weeds, especially for late made beds; but
clear straw, well wetted, may be put at the bottom a foot thick, and reckoned
about equal to five or six inches of dung. Cucumbers and melons have been
raised upon straw beds, mixed with sea coal ashes: and thus the rank steam of
dung avoided, which sometimes injures plants, if it does not give the fruit a
less agreeable taste than they otherwise would have. Sea coal ashes among dung,
has been recommended to continue the heat of the bed, and to moderate it, in
the proportion of one-fifth or sixth part; tanner's bark has been used in the
same way: and these have been sometimes mixed generally, and at others in
layers three or four to a bed.

The making of a hot bed is performed thus: lay some of the most strawy dung at
bottom, and keep that which appears least worked toward the middle. Let all be
well broke, and laid evenly without lumps; keeping the ends and sides upright,
(or rather hanging over) not suffering them to draw in, left the bed be made
too little for the frame, or should thus catch wet. Having laid it about half a
yard high, some gardeners trample it with the feet set close, and again when
raised a foot higher, and lastly when near finished; but beating it down well
with the back of the fork is by many gardeners thought sufficient, except
indeed the dung be fresh and strawy, and then trampling ought to be used. The
cleaner dung is, it must not only be more trampled, but more wetted, and the
greater quantity of it used. To make beds of unsoiled straw, it is recommended
to lay it in a pond for two or three days, and then to throw it in a heap to
drain and heat.

If any dung is to be used directly from the stable, let it be equally mixed
with the rest; but if there is a coldness in the other dung, it will bring the
heat forwarder, by laying a good part of the fresh in the middle, which will
soon kindle, and spread warmth. The litter that is made use of for this purpose
should be foul; and if not, it may be made so, by mixing cow or hog dung with
it, or rather by collecting the draining from a farmer's much hill, and
sprinkling with it; this would help greatly to fermentation.

The best sort of dung is that of bean straw, next wheat, rye, oats, and
barley. When the season is pretty much advanced, hot beds may be made of grass
mowings, (as from an orchard) and weeds, which is a common practice in the
cider countries. These heats, however, (though violent) last not long; yet may
they be lined with the same materials if done in time, otherwise if a green hot
house bed g^^s greatly cool it will not be recovered. A grass bed may be used
as soon as warm, but let it not be overweighted, by putting on heavy frames, or
more mould than necessary. It should rather be worked with hand glasses, or
oiled paper covers. If a large quantity of grass be put together wet, it will
occasion such a burning heat, as has been known to melt tin; therefore, in
these beds some caution must be used.

Hot beds are to be made of the refuse hark of a tanner's yard, and also of oak
leaves; but these must have walled pits for them, of a large size, and are
seldom used but in hot-houses. A bark-bed properly made, and managed by forking
up at two or three months end, etc. will hold a fair, moderate, and steady
heat, four, five, or six months.

The bark is to be got fresh, after it has been thrown out of the vats a few
days, and if not moderately dry, kept a few days longer to drain, and if the
weather is fair, it may be opened to the sun to dry; for it will not ferment if
it is put together wet. When it is made into a bed it must be only beat
together with the fork, and not trampled. In a fortnight it will have come to a
fine heat, and may be immediately used.

The pit should be eleven or twelve feet long, five and a half or six feet
wide, and a foot, or a little more, higher than the bark in front, and two feet
higher behind, to receive the mould on a body of bark, three feet deep: But if
for the cultivation of any thing in pots, as there will need no mould, the pits
need not be so deep, the pots being plunged in the bark: or the pit may be made
level all round, of a depth to hold the bark and mould, on which frames of wood
may be set. Let the pit be sunk one-third, or one-half in the ground, as the
soil about it is either cold or warm. In the section on Flowers, is mentioned a
method of making hot beds of bran.

To increase the heat of a dung bed when it declines, a warm lining of straw,
or hay, put round it, a foot thick, and laid high up the sides of the frame,
will recover it for a few days; but a lining of hot dung, one foot and a half
wide at bottom, and rather narrower at top, should be applied first to the
back, and in about a week after to the front, before the heat is greatly gone
off; and if very bad weather comes, there should be a lining of straw all round
this. In cases of great declension of heat, the ends should have hot dung
applied to them, or, at least, a good thickness of litter, or straw. Lay all
linings a few inches higher than the bed, to allow for sinking; or, not being
laid quite so high at first, add more afterward, when a little settled. Early
made beds will require two or three repeated linings. Should dung of a brisk
heat for a new lining be wanting, the old lining may be worked up with what
there is, and if shook up with quite fresh (but foul) dung from the stable it
may do very well.

To decrease the heat of a bed, several holes may be made in it, by thrusting
an iron bar, or a thick, smooth, sharp pointed stake up to the middle, which
holes are to be close stopped again, with dung or hay, when the heat is
sufficiently abated.

The uses to which hot beds may be applied are various, but chiefly for the
cultivation of cucumbers and melons, for which see the next section. At the
spring of the year, hot beds are commonly made use of for forcing crops of
several vegetables, as radishes, carrots, cauliflowers, lettuces, potatoes,
turnips, peace, kidney beans, purslain, tarragon, small sallading, etc. Fruits
of several sorts, as cherries, strawberries, raspberries, etc. are sometimes
brought forward by dung heat; as also various shrubs and flowers, by means of
forcing frames. Tender annuals, as balsams, and other flowers, that necessarily
require heat to bring them up; and the less tender, and some even of the harder
sorts, are also cultivated on hot beds, or other assistance from dung, to
produce an earlier blow than could otherwise be had. Directions for which, will
be given in their proper places.

As to the forcing of peace, asparagus, and the raising of mushrooms, though
these things are not often practiced, and may hardly be expected in such an
initiatory book as this, some instructions shall be given (if room) at the
close of the book.

SECTION XIV.
OF RAISING CUCUMBERS AND MELONS.
1. OF RAISING CUCUMBERS.
See Cucumber in the next Section.
GARDENERS usually provide three crops of cucumbers in the season, all of which
will be indebted to hot dung to produce them: except sometimes, indeed, the
last sowing be upon cold ground, which, in some situations, and in some
seasons, may do very well for a few picklers. We begin with the early crop.

Make a seed bed of the size of a one-light frame, (or a two-light were better)
from three to four feet thick, and if amoitious of being forward, do it some
time between the first and fifteenth of January, though some gardeners sow
about Christmas: But the sooner this work is begun, the more hazard there is of
failing, and the more skill and trouble will be necessary to manage them.

The young gardener is advised not to attempt this business till the middle of
February; and then, if he has the good fortune to succeed properly, he will cut
fruit about the middle of May. When he has attained some skill in the work, he
may begin sooner; for there is nothing that professed gardeners are so fond of
exhibiting, as early cucumbers, which is a proof, that no little ingenuity and
attention is necessary to produce them. All favorable circumstances
coinciding, as sowing the forwardest in kind, mild and sunny weather, and
plenty of dung, with good frames at the command of skill and industry, early
cucumbers are sometimes raised in about eight weeks, and later in the season
have been raised in six; but near upon three months must commonly be allowed.

A bed being ready, agreeable to the directions given in the last section,
which may be four feet high in January, three and a half in February, and three
in March, or the medium as a general rule; let it be covered with the frame and
lights, raising the glasses a little to let off the steam that will come
strongly from the bed.

When the heat has been up three or four days in a single light, or a day or
two more, if a two-light frame, let it be taken off, and see that the surface
of the bed is perfectly level; but rather rising behind, and if you think the
bed is hardly strong enough, the opportunity is given to add a course or two
more of dung. Having levelled the bed with the fork, beat it smooth with a
shovel or spade, and put the frame and glass on again.

The temper of the bed is now to be attended to, that it be not molded till
the burning heat is over; a judgment of which may be formed, by keeping two
sharp pointed smooth sticks thrust in behind, and occasionally feeling them, by
a quick grasp of the hand. Endeavor to hit the exact time, not putting the
mould on too soon, as it is liable to burn, not delaying too long, and so to
lose time, and too much of that heat, the bed was made for.

The moulding is thus; lay all over the bed about three inches thick of rich
loose (not over light) and dry earth, and add as much in the center of the
light as will raise a hill eight or nine inches deep, which as soon as warm
through, is to be used, except the bed seem too hot, and likely to burn; in
which case, draw the chief of the mould aside round the frame, that the heat
may have vent in the middle, for a day or two. As it is a thing essentially
necessary in the cultivation of early cucumbers, to have rich earth, properly
dry, it should be prepared, and laid by in autumn, in some airy shed or hovel.
Let it be, if possible, some fresh under turf earth, mixed with about
one-fourth part of thorough rotten horse dung, and often stirred together.

The sowing may be made upon the hill of mould, levelled down to about six
inches deep; but if any suspicion of burning (or in short at any rate,) it were
better to sow in a small pot or two, which should be filled with the warm
mould, and plunged a little way in, more or less, according to the heat of the
bed, for if the bed appears to be over hot, the pot may be raised from it;
cover the seeds half an inch, and add a gentle pressure of the earth upon them.
In a bed of proper temper, they will be up in three or four days, and sooner or
later, if there is too strong or too weak a heat; though the age of the seed
will occasion some difference. Very old seed (which some gardeners are fond of,
as running less to vine, and so reckoned the more fruitful,) will sometimes
come up weak, and also rot, when the mould is damp, and the heat not strong; so
that seed of two, three, or, at the most, four years of age is to be preferred:
That of a year old only comes up certainly, but too luxuriantly.

Whether the first seeds come up, or not, on the third day, sow a few more, and
so again and again; for the young plants are incident to failures at this early
season, from various causes. As the seed must not be sown in wet earth, so if
it gets too dry, sprinkle the mould to moisten it a little below the depth of
the seed; but let it be with water previously set in the frame (in a bottle) to
warm. Be sure to give the plants air, according to the weather, raising the
lights from one half, to a whole inch; and now, and ever after, while there is
a strong heat in the bed, tilt one corner of a light for the steam to pass off
on nights, and let a mat hang, or be nailed loosely over the open part.

The pricking out the young plants is to be done when they are three or four
days old, taking them up carefully, and the mould being warm, put three in a
small (...), as the common practice is; ^ut no more than (...), or one, is a
good method. If one plant only is put in a small pot, it certainly may be
expected to grow stronger, and be continued longer in the pot, and three of
these may be planted close together in the f^^iting bed. If only one plant is
put in, set it upright in the middle of the pot nearly up to the seed leaves.
If two or three are pot in, take the mould out of the pot in a bason-like form,
an inch or a little more deep, as the shanks are, laying the roots smooth
toward the center, and the leaves toward the edge of the pot; cover up to the
top; and give the earth a gentle pressure.

If the mould is very dry and the bed hot, a little water may be immediately
given to the roots; but if otherwise, the next day will be best.

Give very little air the first day, but afterward more, as the sun shines or
not, or the day is mild, or sharp, still, or windy. As the plants get older and
hardier, air may be given up to two inches, when there is a good heat, and
extraordinary fine weather, to three or four inches of tilt: For this purpose,
wedges of wood about four inches thick are proper. If suspicious of the air
coming in too suddenly, tack a bit of cloth, or mat before the place. Air is to
be given in different degrees, regularly as the weather alters in the course of
the day; -- a little air in the morning, more as the day advances, and less
again as it declines.

Cucumbers will not do well, if the air in the bed is long confined, or
stagnant: Sun is necessary as well as air, but as that we cannot furnish, every
advantage that is in our power, we should not fail to make use of.

The plants are to be nursed, and preserved moderately warm, by keeping the
pots plunged less or more in the bed, placing them toward the outsides of the
frame when there is a great heat, and more in the middle when it is moderate.

Keep some mould round the inside of the frame, ready to earth up the pots to
the rim, as the heat declines. There should not be less than two, or more than
three inches depth of mould, in the intermediate spaces of the frame; for when
the bed is molded too thick, it keeps down the heat too much, and occasions
burning. Young plants should be guarded from much sun, if the season is
advanced, and especially when the bed is hot.

Attend to the weather, and if rain, snow, or wind, is either of them likely to
chill the bed much, provide against it in time, by laying straw round; and if
the heat naturally declines much, line, etc. as directed page 179, in order to
recover and keep it up, for the plants will soon be spoiled, or lost, if the
bed gets cold. They are to grow in the pots, till their first rough leaves are
two or three inches broad. When there is only one in a pot, a plant (upon a
pinch,) may grow in it till it has runners and blossoms.

Use water, (which should be soft) but moderately at first, till the roots get
spread about the pot, and then wet the shanks of the plants, as little as can
be helped, if the season is early, or there is little sun. When the roots are
got to the bottom of the pot, take care to water to the bottom; but over much
watering of young plants, makes them sickly. Once a week at an early season,
will be sufficient, except the heat is very strong in the bed, and the weather
very sunny: the water must be in a small degree warm, and given in the morning
toward the middle of the day.

If the seed bed is not likely to hold the plants so long as directed, or
nearly, in a free growing state, an intermediate bed should be made in time to
receive them; for it is not proper to plant them out into the fruit bed too
soon, left there should be a failure in keeping up its heat to set the fruit
and bring it on. This intermediate bed should be made of proportionate
strength, for the time it is wanted, and may do at two and a half, or three
feet thick, nor need there be any great objection to an intermediate bed, as it
tends to insure success, and brings the plants on faster, and saves trouble in
keeping up the heat of the seed bed.

Burning is a thing to be suspected when a bed is very hot, and in proportion
as the mould is damp; and should therefore be seen to, by drawing away some
mould from the bottom near the middle; and if it appears discolored, of a
greyish hue, and caked, let what is so, be taken out from all parts of the bed,
as soon as possible; but take care that in doing it, too much cold air do not
damp the bed, or injure the plants. Do this work at the best time of the day,
while the sun shines, if it may be, and rather at twice, allowing an hour or so
between. Fill up with fresh and dry mould, and keep the glasses close, till the
earth is got thorough warm again. Burning, however, is not of so much
consequence now, as when the plants are put out to fruit, for the pots may be
drawn from the evil; but burnt mould contaminates the air, as well as injures
the roots that it reaches to. Burning will be mentioned again presently.

Steaming must be guarded against, and the rank effluvia which rises in the bed
at first, and whilst the dung is quite hot, must have vent night and day, by
raising the lights. A little rise will do on nights, and if a mat hangs before
the aperture, or is nailed down loosly over it, the too sudden entrance of cold
air will be prevented. But when the strong heat of the bed is certainly over,
shut close on nights, and give but little air in unfavourable days. The steam
is sometimes drawn into a frame from the outside of the bed, occasined by the
mats hanging over it; therefore, in covering, it is necessary to keep up the
ends of the mats, so that the glass only be covered. Danger of steaming arises
also from the application of fresh linings, the smoke of which, wind may drive
into the frames; so that the ^^ning should either be covered with two or three
inches of mould, or which is better, a good thickness of fine hay. Sometimes
steam will insinuate itself round the inside of the frame, through the bed
settling unequally, so that the mould draws from it, which is easily remedied
by filling the apertures.

Covering up at night has been just directed to be only over the glasses, for a
reason given. Put the cover on a little before sunset, and take off a little
after sunrise, except very bad weather dictate otherwise; yet remember, that
light is a most necessary article in the welfare of plants, and guard against
permitting cover longer than compelled to it. While the bed is in a good heat,
one mat is sufficient, but yet if the weather is sharp, more should be used;
for if not necessary for the warmth, it will be useful to keep the steam of the
bed from being so suddenly condensed as to drop on the plants, which would
injure them. As the bed declines in heat, and the weather is cold, a thicker
covering must be put on; and a very warm covering is made thus: -- lay on a
mat, and over it a coat of straw, or rather hay, and then a mat on the top,
which tack down round the frame. It will help to warmth, to push into the dung
some little sticks round the frame, and fill up the space with hay. Covering
round the bed with straw, and lining have been spoken of; and let these
applications be made in time.

The Seed bed by good management, may be kept with a good growing heat for six
weeks, when the plants being about five weeks old, will be ready for putting
into a new bed to bear fruit.

Stopping the plants, is to be performed about a week before they leave the
seed bed; i. e. as soon as the second rough leaf is expended, and shows in its
bosom the little bud or eye, that produces a runner. This is to be nicely cut
off with a penknife, or small sharp pointed scissars, or picked out with a
needle, though if it gets forward, it may be pinched off. Soon after this
operation, the plant thickens, and will push for runners again, which the
stopping is designed to dispose them to, as also to an earlier and more
plentiful bearing. The practice of stopping is again to be performed upon the
first runners when they have three joints without showing the germen, or embryo
fruit.

The fruit bed comes now, and it should be made of good materials, duly
prepared, and well put together, toward four feet thick. It ought not to be
for less than a two-light, but better for a three-light frame, as the heat is
more certainly to be kept up a proper length of time, without which all the
previous labor is lost. Preparations must be made for this bed at least a
fortnight before it is wanted, in the way directed in the last section.

Before earthing, take care that the burning heat is over, and that the mould
to be used be properly dry. Lay it all over the bed not more than three inches
thick, (for reasons given, page 185) making hills where the plants are to be
set about twelve or fourteen inches depth. A two-light bed (of proper
materials) will not be ready for moulding in less than a week or ten days for
making; nor a three-light in less than ten days or a fortnight. But if it
should be desired to plant out quick, on account of the seed beds having got
cold, a security from burning the plants is found in forming a hole in the bed,
where the plants are to be, two inches deep, and about a foot or fifteen inches
over, and filling up with fresh cow dung; through this the heat will not burn,
and if it catches the other parts of the bed, the disease may be easily
remedied. Some gardeners place turf under the plants, with the grass downwards,
to prevent excess of heat; and it helps to keep the mould in other parts from
burning, to stir it about in time. A preventative used by some, is to put on a
layer of five or six inches of old dung, when the bed is made. It should seem
that a layer of about three inches of old bark might prevent burning. See
Burning, pages 185, 186, 191.

Planting is to take place as soon as the heaps of mould are warm. Spread the
earth on the top a little, and having the hills a full ten inches depth; make a
hole in the middle six inches deep, to receive the pot of plants, which pots
will be from four and a half to five inches deep, and consequently the plants
will be sunk in this hole a full inch more in mould than they were in the pot:
and they will have four inches depth of mould at the bottom, which there should
be below the roots. Draw the mould up to the plants, and press it gently
between, and to them all round the hillock. It is spoken here of a pot of
plants with three, but if only one in a pot, the whole hill must be thrown down
to four inches depth, and the plants set one close by the side of the other,
and then filled up and round with the mould of the bed.

To shift plants out of the pots with the ball of earth entire about them, put
the fingers between the plants, and turning the pot up, give it a gentle tap on
the knee, or edge of the frame, and the whole will come out; a little pressure
at the same time through the hole at bottom, with a finger of the other hand,
will assist: turn the plants up carefully, and place them in so. To secure
their coming out whole, water the pots to the bottom the day before; and if not
too wet they will slip out. If the plants hold tight to the pots, when turned
up, a long thin narrow bladed knife, will be proper to loosen the sides. If the
mould should fall from the plants, carefully spread the roots in planting, and
they will be sure to grow, only their having no mould to them, will occasion a
little loss of time till they have struck root again. Thus having settled the
plants, shut the lights close till all is thorough warm, and then give a little
air; if the mould pot round the roots be dry, give a little water.

Management as to air, covering, watering and lining, and guarding against
burning, steaming, etc. is now to occupy the constant attention of the
gardener: On these heads, what has been before said, may serve for instruction
now; only as the season advances, and the plants get strong, the more air and
watering may be ventured on, and if the heat of the bed is good, less covering
will do. As the season advances, water earlier in the morning, or later in the
afternoon, so as not to have a full and strong sun come directly upon the leave
while wet: for drops of water act as unequal glasses, to draw the rays of the
sun to a focus, and scorches. As the weather may be cool, and the bed gets cool
water the more sparingly, and in this case especially, avoid wetting the shanks
of the plants much. It will be known when water must be given, by the larger
leaves flagging, without any violent sun to occasion an extraordinary
perspiration. Bottles of water may be kept in the frame, which is preferable to
that warmed at a fire; yet the latter must be used when there is not enough of
the former, to water so deeply as necessary. When the frame gets full of vine,
it gets full of root; and as by this time the days get long, and may be sunny,
a good portion of water for the whole may be wanted twice, or, perhaps, thrice
a week, to swell the fruit.

Air should be given (as before directed) in fine weather to a tilt of three
inches, or more. While there is a brisk heat in the bed, give a little air on
nights. If the bed gets cold, it may be helped by covering up earlier and
warmer, and uncovering later; though the plants should not be deprived of more
light than made necessary by bad weather.

In case of burning being discovered, take the burnt mould from under the
plants carefully, but quickly, but quickly, as far as can be, without throwing
them down: remember to be cautious of steaming, and think of lining (185) in
time, that the plants be not stunted by cold, for when they are materially
checked, they hardly ever recover it. Sometimes the application of linings,
will so increase the heat as to occasion burning; let this be seen to, and (at
least) remove a part, and remake it when the violent heat is sufficiently
abated.

Earth up the shanks with dry mould, (kept in the frame on purpose) as the
plants increase; and let warm mould be added to the sides of the heaps, as soon
as ever the roots begin to appear through, or the runners need support;
proceeding thus from time to time, till the bed is filled up level all over.
For this end keep bringing in a little cold mould frequently, laying it round
the sides of the frame. When the bed is filled with mould, it is a good way to
press it tightish round the frame, about a hand's breadth, to keep the roots
longer from the outside.

Some gardeners mould the bed all over, as soon as they are satisfied there can
be no more burning; but it is best to do it at several times, and not sooner
than is necessary to cover the roots, and support the runners; because, where
the mould lies thin, the heat come up better to warm the air in the frame, for
the leaves will want warmth as well as the roots.

Train the runners close down regularly with neat pegs, as they proceed in
growth, and prune the tendrils off as they appear, but take care not to break
any of the leaves. When the days get long, and prove very sunny, the shade of a
single mat, for two or three hours in the middle of the day will be proper, as
suppose from eleven to two.

Thus very particular directions have been given, but still much will depend
upon circumstances, and discretion must direct. Let it be remembered, no
neglect will be borne with. If any imprudent person should lift the lights
high, to pry into the bed in improper weather, perhaps an early tender crop
might at once receive their death blow, though exposed but a very short time.
Success in raising cucumbers and melons chiefly depends upon keeping the bed in
due temper; the plants being neither burned nor chilled.

Setting the fruit is the practice of most good gardeners, as generally
ensuring the embryos from going off, as they are apt to do at an early season;
when not much wind can be suffered to enter the bed, and no bees or insects are
about, to convey the sarina from the male flowers to the female. The male
flowers have been commonly called false blossoms, and so have been regularly
pulled off (as said) to strengthen the plants, but they are essential to
impregnate the female flowers; i. e. those that show the germen, or fruit at
their base. This impregnation, called, setting the fruit, is artificially done
thus:

As soon as any female flowers are fully open, gather a newly opened male
flower, and stripping the leaf gently off from the middle, take nicely hold of
the bottom, and twirling the top of the male over the center of the female
flower, the fine fertilizing dust from the male part will fall off, and adhere
to the female part and fecundate it, causing the fruit to keep its color,
swell, and proceed rapidly toward perfection, so as to cut cucumbers of three
or four inches long, in about three weeks after. This business of setting may
be practiced through the months of February, March, and April, but afterward
it will not be necessary; for the admission of so much air as may afterward be
given, will disperse the farina effectually; but if the weather still is bad,
or remarkably calm, the practice may be continued a little longer. If short of
male flowers, one of them may serve to impregnate two females. Pull off all the
male flowers as fast as they die upon the vines.

Something of pruning may perhaps be necessary, for plants will not bear well,
either in quantity or quality, if the frames are crowded. The rule (of course)
is, to cut out those runners that can be best spared, as being weak, most in
the way, or having the smallest fruit on them. But the better method is to cut
down to the root a whole plant, in time, if there is a prospect of being too
full of vine: this may seem a great sacrifice, but it will prove a profitable
one. Let the discharged plant lay a day to wither, that it hang not to the
others, and break their leaves, in drawing it out while fresh. About Midsummer
the frame may be raised, to permit the runners to strike out, and in a
fortnight after taken entirely off; though once in a frame and always in, is
better, if it is convenient.

A SECOND CROP of cucumbers may be sown at any time between the middle and end
of March, if they are to be brought up in frames; but if under hand-glasses, or
paper covers, then any time from the beginning of April to the middle, is soon
enough, at least in Northamptonshire. A hot bed for sowing the seed at this
time, need only be from two and a half to three feet thick, and a one-light
frame. On this bed also may be sown, in pots, or otherwise, tender annuals, and
it is a very good time for most of them. Or the seed for plants to ridge out
under hand-glasses, may be sown in pots, and placed in other hot beds, to bring
them forward till they are in rough leaf, and have been stopped.

What has been said about making hot beds, and sowing and managing cucumbers,
is sufficient to direct now; only at this season, mowings of grass may be put
round a bed to increase the heat, and will be found useful to lay on the top of
dung linings that are sunk.

A seed ^ed at this time should have a growing heat for one month, when the
plants will be fit (the latter end of April, or beginning of May) to put either
into another two feet and a half hot bed with a frame, or only under
hand-glasses, etc. which should be rather large, because plants running from
under them much before Midsummer, will hardly endure the weather. They should
be covered up on nights with a single mat; and when they must run from under
the glasses, sticks or hoops may keep the mats off from pressing upon them:
fasten the covering down at the corners with pegged sticks, to keep them from
blowing away. Let the ground about the bed be stirred, and also raised to train
the plants level, and to give the roots full room to strike.

For ridging cucumbers, that are to have only hand-glasses, or some such cover,
observe (as advised) not to sow too forward, for better be rather late, than
have the plants cut off, or much injured, just as they are going to bear. The
hot bed, or ridge made in May for hand-glasses, should be sunk in a dry soil,
two spades deep; and two feet and a half thick of good dung is now enough. The
mould that is thrown out, (if it is good) may be used to cover the bed; and if
but indifferent, may be laid round it, or on it toward the outsides. Lay on it
at first only three inches or mould, except where the plants are to be, at
which place lay a depth of about nine inches, rather more than less. It is not
necessary that the earth should be very dry, as directed for early cucumbers,
but let it be warm to plant in. If it be Mid-May before the plants are put out,
holes of two or three barrows full of dung may be sufficient to bring them on
through May, and then the season (if it is not bad) will be warm enough to keep
them pushing forwards. There should be near four feet distance between each set
of plants. Shade them for a few days at first planting.

Cucumbers not sown till the beginning of April, may be brought to bear on one
good bed, if under a large frame; and such a bed would, at the same time, serve
very well to sow, or to prick out tender annuals on. See section 18, On flowers.

A THIRD CROP of cucumbers may be sown any time, from the middle to the end of
May, (or even a little later) either in a pot or not, upon some hot bed in use,
to grow for a week or ten days; or sow upon a little heat of two or three
barrows full of warm dung, trod close, and previously thrown together for the
purpose; or if fresh and moist from the stable, it will, though at present
cold, heat itself. Cover the dung with four or five inches of mould, and sow
half inch deep, and half an inch asunder, under a hand-glass* and when the
plants are completely up, thin them to an inch asunder, where let them grow,
earthing them up as they get tall, till they show rough leaf. Then prepare more
such little bodies (...) heat to plant them out upon, three or four in a pat^^,
which cover with a hand-glass or otherwise, and shade also for a day or two, if
sunny. If you can take three or four plants up together by a scoop trowel, with
earth to the roots, the better; and if not, plant them pretty near together,
laying them aslant, so that the shanks be covered two or three inches. Keep
these plants earthed up, and as much under their covers, as may be till toward
Midsummer, and let the parts that run out be covered on nights till this time.
The third crop is that generally sown for picklers.

Sometimes, at this season, cucumbers are sown in cold ground, especially about
London, or south or west of it; but soil, situation, and season, make a great
difference in the cultivation of all, and particularly of delicate plants. If
any seed be sown on cold ground, let it be in dry weather; give them a
favorable situation, and sow in patches eight or nine seeds in a hole, formed
like a shallow basin, covering half an inch deep; and if covered with
hand-glasses to bring them up a little while, it were much better. Thin them
when getting into rough leaf, to four or five of the best plants; spread them a
little, and earth up to the seed leaves, giving a little water: and if,
afterward, the number of plants is reduced to three, it might be better than
more. Those who grow cucumbers for picklers, should have a great many holes of
them, or there will not be ^now to gather at a time for the purpose. Give
plenty of air by day, and a little on nights. Raise earth about the shanks as
they grow, and let it lie about them, while the plants are small, in the form
of a shallow basin.

As to saving the seed of cucumbers, as it is of some consequence to be
ascertained of a good kind, when the early nature and approved quality of any
sort is known, it ought to be an object to save it well; which will be best
done from plants of the second crop, that have been ridged out, i. e. brought
up under hand-glasses. From this crop that plant which shows fruit first (under
the same culture) should be reserved for seed, judging that its early
disposition may be continued, and because the first fruit of any kind (if
uninjured) always produces the best seed.

Fix upon handsome fruit, and prefer that which is placed lowest, or grows
nearest the root. Leave no more than one fruit for seed upon a plant, and let
it remain on the vines through August, or as much longer as the weather will
permit, to be very ripe: when cut off, place the seed cucumber against a south
wall, till they appear decaying.

Being got rotten ripe, scoop out the pulp and seed into some vessel, and stir
it well up, which repeat for several days; then let it be washed in two or
three waters, which will separate the pulp, and leave the seed clean: spread it
thin for two or three days, that it may dry thoroughly, and putting it up in
paper for use, keep it in a place free from damp. Let it be every now and then
examined and rubbed in a dry cloth, and it may be kept for several years.

OF RAISING MELONS.
See Melons in the next Section.
MELONS are raised much in the same way as cucumbers. They should not, however,
be thought of so early, and from the middle of February to the middle of March,
will (for most persons) be soon enough to sow them. The place where they are
cultivated should be well sheltered, so that winds may blow over the frames, as
mentioned in the directions about hot beds. They require a stronger soil to
grow in than cucumbers, and more heat, bo^n at bottom and top, and need less
water; they take up more room, so that one plant, or at most two, will be
enough under one light. Cucumbers may be raised on a seed bed till ^it to plant
out on the fruit bed; but melons will require an intermediate bed. During the
whole time of the cultivation of melons, (till high summer) they must have a
lively bottom heat, in order to bring them forward, and succeed well; and, if
melons are late, as soon as September enters, a lining of hot dung may be put
to the bed, to afford some degree of heat to the roots, at least equivalent to
the failure of the season. Melons never do well in a shady summer; and in the
best summers we have, are very inferior to those grown in warmer climates. As
cucumbers are about three months coming in, so melons are about four. They set
their fruit in about two months, and are about the same time in ripening,
though forty days will sometimes effect it.

The seed of melons (procured from well ripened and fine flavoured fruit)
should be about four years old, though some prefer it much older, as judging it
so much the less likely to run to vine: If it is too old, however, it comes up
weak, and is apt to rot, when the mould is not sufficiently dry, and the seed
bed not very warm. If new seed only can be had, it should be carried a week or
two in the breeches pocket, to dry away some of the more watery parts: The
earlier the seed is sown, the older it should be. Melon seed may be sown in a
cucumber bed, that is, in a brisk heat, in pots plunged toward the middle; but
a bed should be ready, to move the young plants into before the cucumber bed
gets too cool. Sow only three or four seeds in each pot, and cover a little
more than half an inch: The earth in which the seed is sown, should not be so
strong as that in which the plants are to grow for fruit. When the seedlings
are three or four days old, take them up carefully, so as not to break any of
the roots, and either plant one in a small pot, or two in a little bigger; but
depend on no plants which do not appear healthy and strong. Sow a few seeds
every four or five days, lest accidents happen to destroy the first plants.

As melons require skill, and occasion trouble to raise them, the greatest
possible care should be taken that the seed is of a good kind. It is reckoned,
that seed saved by the same person, and sown frequently in the same soil and
situation, and under the same culture, will degenerate, so that it should be
had elsewhere, from some person that may be depended on, and this may be by
exchange, as he may be glad of the like opportunity. Melons should never grow
near cucumbers especially if for seed, as the farina of the cucumber may
impregnate the blossom of the melon, and give it a watery flavor, or quite
alter the nature of it.

Melons may be sown in a cucumber frame, that is in a good heat; but rather
make a seed bed, of about three feet thick; and having put on the frame and
light, tilt the glass a little, and when the great heat is abated, put on some
dry, rich, and fine, but not very light earth, to the thickness of four inches
all over, and the next day, if the mould is not too hot, sow the seed, some in
the beds, and some in pots, placed just in the middle, which may be drawn up
out of the way of any burning heat.

When the plants appear, give them air, and beware of rancid steam from the
glasses dropping on them: They may be wiped with a woollen cloth, or turned to
dry in fine weather. Consider what was said about cucumbers, concerning too
much heat, too little, etc. After the melons have been up two or three days,
(as was said before) let them be potted and plunged to the rims, toward the
middle of the bed; and the next day a little water (warmed in the bed) may be
given the roots; or a little may be given at the same time, if the should is
very dry.

As soon as the plants are potted, think of making a second bed, to be ready in
a week, ten days, or a fortnight, (as circumstances dictate) that so the young
plants may receive no check through a decline of heat. This bed should be
stronger than the seed bed, and rather for a two-light frame; and being molded
as soon as it can be, not to burn, set the pots in, about an inch deep, and in
a day or two draw a little mould up round them, and so on again. But if the
first bed is warm enough to hold the plants longer, the heat of this second bed
(if violent) may be suffered to evaporate a little more first. Here they are to
grow till in the second rough leaf, when the plants should be stopped, as was
directed for cucumbers.

The third, or fruiting bed is to be (observe) ready by a few days after the
time of this stopping the plants. It should be a strong bed of four feet thick,
and for a three-light frame, and made the higher, the more strawy the dung is.
As soon as the burning heat is sufficiently abated, let the bed be covered all
over with good dry melon mould (the best is a rich moderately strong loam)
three or four inches, and heaps made under each light of about fourteen inches
depth. Melons do not fruit well in a light mould, but yet it should not be a
heavy one. If the mould is thought too light, let it be pressed a little
together to give it consistence.

To a fresh maiden soil, or good earth from the kitchen garden, that is known
to be in heart, (by the strength of the plants it has produced) add about
one-fourth, or one-third of well consumed dung, and it makes a good compost,
but it must be completely incorporated by frequent turning and exposing to sun
and air, and kept by some means dry, as under a shed, etc. as directed for
cucumbers. Much depends on the melons growing in a good soil.

The planting of melons takes place as soon as the hills of mould are warm
through; only if a violent heat is in the bed, a day or two's delay does not
signify, if the plants are doing well where they are; yet the roots must not be
cramped longer in the pots than necessary. Melons require a greater depth of
mould to grow in than cucumbers, and the bottom of the roots, at planting,
should not be nearer than five or six inches from the dung. Shade them from
much sun, till they have taken root.

If the lights are small, one plant under each is sufficient, and if large, let
there be only two; for melons take up much room, and never do well when they
are crowded: It is a great error in the cultivation of melons not to observe
this. Earth the plants up with dry mould about the shanks as they proceed in
growth, and bend them gently down with pegs, to give them a regular and snug
direction all over the bed. When fruit is set, there must be only one of the
large, and two of the small sorts, (fair and promising) left on each principal
runner, and this runner should be pinched off at the second or third joint
above it, which is called stopping.

Pruning is necessary in order to strengthen the bearers, and keep the frame
from getting too full of vine, i. e. let all very strong, and all weak shoots
be taken out, as also the tendrils; but take care that too many male blossoms
are not thus cut off, for the weak shoots (if not abundant) do no great harm.
As in other plants, so in melons, it is the middling shoots that bear best.

Lay the branches all regular ( in time) with neat pegs, for it hurts melon
plants to lie rude, and to have their leaves disturbed or damaged, to put them
in order. A piece of tile, or a small earthen plate under each fruit is proper,
to keep it from the damp mould, and to assist its ripening by reflected heat.
Three (at the most four) melons are as many as should grow upon one plant, and
those are best that are situated nearest to the stem, as remote ones are not so
well nourished. Do not let a great deal of vine grow below them, lest they be
too much robbed, and let them be stopped as before directed, for when there is
a great length of vine above, nature pushes toward the extremity, and passing
by the fruit below, forms more above, sometimes to the total loss of the first
set.

Keep mould round the sides of the frame, to earth up round the hills (a little
at a time) as the plants increase, and do not earth all over before necessary,
as full earthing at first is apt to occasion burning, and afterward to damp
the heat of the bed too much, and the warmth of the air about the plants. When
the bed is earthed all over, press the mould round the sides of the frame about
six inches wide, to make it firm, that the roots may not get too soon to the
wood, and mat against it, which often occasions sickliness.

Do not think of cultivating early melons, without plenty of dung both for beds
and linings. The particulars of management, concerning covering, shading, air,
^^ning, stopping the young plants, setting the fruit, etc. and to guard against
burning and steaming may be seen in the directions already given for cucumbers;
only less air, and much less watering will do for melons. Keep them close shut
down on nights, when the heat of the bed is become moderate. As melons
therefore are kept rather dry, they should be shaded a little in very sunny
weather by a single mat, for two or three hours in the middle of the day; i. e.
when the season is forward, especially if the bed itself be in a hot state.

Melons may be watered moderately once a week, in fair weather, or twice if
sultry, especially if the mould is light. Early in the season, water a little
before noon, and in high summer a little before evening. When the fruit is
setting, and when getting toward ripening, very little water must be given; be
sure to water the extremities of the roots, but avoid the shanks, particularly
while the plants are young. A little sprinkling all ov^^ (...) ^^aves, when the
plants get big, (but let not a hot sun shine upon them at the time) will
greatly refresh them, when it is not thought proper to water the roots
thoroughly, on account of the bed being cool. Because much wet is certainly
injurious, some gardeners keep their melons exceeding dry; but their leaves
should not show too much sign of drought, lest the fruit shrivel for want of
moisture. Take particular care that the heat is kept up, at the setting of the
fruit, or it will become yellow, and fall off. Keep a bottom heat till about
Mid-June.

Melons should not be turned about, as is the practice of some, in order to
ripen the fruit all over; for it is a violence done to nature in the foot
stalk, distorting the vessels that feed the melons, and so preventing a proper
digestion of the juices.

The flavor of a melon being preferable to the size, is the reason why water
is to be withheld (as much as can be) when they are ripening; and indeed all
esculents are better tasted that grow in a dry, than in a moist soil: In the
latter, they will become bigger, and so appear finer; but what is quantity
without quality?

The young fruit need not be fully exposed to the sun, it had better be a
little covered with leaves. Much hot sun hardens the skin of all fruit, and
prevents its proper growth. When a melon has nearly attained its size, then,
however, a full sun is necessary to ripen it.

As to cutting the fruit, if it is to be some days before a melon is eat, (as
when carried to a distance) it should not be quite ripe. Its ripeness is known
by the high color and strong odor, and the cracking of the foot stalk; and if
they give not a full and pleasant scent, they will not prove good. Always cut
melons in the morning, and if fully ripe they should not be kept more than two
or three days. If a melon is cut before it is ripe (t^s said) it may be
ripened, by wrapping it close up in cloth, and placing it in a heap of warm
horse dung for twenty-four hours. But the better way would probably be, to
treat them as unripe medlars, which article see.

A SECOND CROP of melons is to be had, by sowing (in any other hot-bed, or one
made on purpose) from Mid-March to the beginning of April, according to
situation, as in a favorable one the sowing may be ventured on the later.
These must be brought up as before, till stopped, and then ridg^^d out; i. e.
when about a month or five weeks old. The method of which is, to make a trench
in the ground four feet wide, and deep according to the soil: If the ground is
dry it may be a foot, or near two feet deep, or otherwise but a few inches. Lay
in hot dung full two feet and a half thick, being well shook and beat together
with the fork. This trench must be of length according to the number of plants
designed to be put out. For each hole (which should be full four feet asunder)
put on good melon earth, laid up round to fifteen or eighteen inches high; and
then lay the earth, thrown out of the trench, to the sides and top, about three
or four inches thick, breaking it fine, and cover all over with mats to draw up
the heat: But never expect ridged out melons (particularly to do well in a
light soil. When the earth is warm, put in the plants, two in a hole, (or only
one) giving a little warm water, and cover with large hand, or bell glasses, or
oiled paper lights, and proceed to manage according to that discretion, which
the directions already given about melons and cucumbers have inculcated.

As the bed sinks, and the roots spread, take care to add a good thickness of
mould around, for the plants to strike into, and to keep them up: This may be
put in a week or ten days, and it will keep out cold air and wet from the dung;
but it is best not done at first. When the plants spread to the extent of the
bed, the ground about it should be dug over, and rotten dung buried to raise it
to the level of the bed; but, perhaps, this work has been superseded by the
necessity of a lining.

If the plants are forward enough to ridge out in April, or beginning of May,
it may be proper to make these beds on the level surface, or nearly so, for the
sake of lining; but if later, they may be sunk as directed above, or deeper
still, in a dry soil. Remember, it will be necessary to line, if there appears
any likelihood of a want of heat, before the fruit is thoroughly set.

If two ridges of melon plants, let there be four feet (or more) of alley
between them, and then a lining may be applied of that width to heat both beds;
and this middle heat may be made use of to raise plants for the third crop of
cucumbers, or tender annual flowers, purylain, etc. Give ridged out plants air
on the south side. They will need more water when in the ridges than in frames,
and give it wide, but little about the stem, or hardly there at all; nor let it
be applied cold, though a small degree of warmth from the sun, or otherwise,
will do. This crop need never be shaded but when the leaves hang. When the
plants cannot be contained under the glasses, let them be carefully trained
out, and covered with mats all over on nights, and on days, in bad weather,
till July, particularly if much rain falls.

With large papered frames this work of the second crop of melons may be very
well managed. The plants should be kept under hand-glasses till too big for
them, and then the paper lights may be put on, which containing the runners
till high summer, they will be safe. Yet these covers, being set upon bricks,
may be kept always on; but let the fruit that happens to be without side be
covered with a hand-glass, which will help to ripen it. For summer protection,
oiled paper suits all sorts of plants that grow under them, as it admits light
and heat in a moderate way. Let them be protected in heavy rains, by laying
some cloth, or mat, over, and toward the close of summer guard against much
cold.

Oiled paper lights are either made like the tilt of a wagon, or ridged like
an house. They should be from four to five feet wide at bottom, and of a height
in proportion, only rather steep than flat, and of a length at pleasure,
according to what they are designed to cover. The oil had ^^^tter not be
boiled, (as the common way is) for the paper is then more apt to break. The
best printing demi paper is proper, and when oiled, it should be kept in
shelter till quite dry, lest the rain wash the oil off. It may be either pasted
on the frame, or together, of a breadth and length proper to lay over, (as
suppose of nine sheets, which is about the size of a mat) lapping a little, and
being held down at bottom on each side by a string, or a moveable slip of deal,
the paper may be kept fast on. The general frame should be made rather stiff,
but the bars as light as can be, and assisted with lines of string to keep the
paper up. If the paper is thus moveable, there should be a sort of door to open
at the ends, to give air, etc. as it would be troublesome to move the whole
frame every time any thing is to be done. But if the paper is pasted to the
frame, then the sides, in lengths of double the width of paper, should be on
hinges, to lift up.

A THIRD CROP of melons may be sown (in favorable situations) toward the end
of April, or beginning of May, if the former crop was sown about Mid-March, and
this is to be proceeded with in the same manner as the second; only when
September comes, (as was observed) late melons should be preserved as much as
possible from cold and wet, that they may ripen. To this end frames may be used
over all, or at least hand-glasses put over each fruit, covering warmly up with
mats on nights. Those melons that do not ripen may be used for mangoes.

SECTION XV.
OF ESCULENTS.
THE USEFULENESS of esculent plants, as serving for the food, health, and
pleasure of man, is pretty generally acknowledged; and that they may not fail
to answer these ends in the best way, it may be observed here, that they
deserve every attention; and that, not only in their cultivation, but in their
preparation for the table. Let there be no slight put upon the bounty of
PROVIDENCE in ordaining them to our use, by an unnecessary preference to other
foods. "There was a time, when bread and herbs (with a little fruit) were the
only dainties wherewith the tables of the greatest voluptuaries were spread."

"Vegetables and fruits (observes Quintinye) were our innocent, primitive, and
natural food; but men's depraved appetites have substituted the shambles; yet
after all, the inventions of the most luxurious and voluptuous epicure, the
most Coesarian tables would want of their magnificence, noble gust, and
grateful relish, without fruit and the productions of the garden, which gives
the true condiment, and most agreeable closure to all the rest."

Our Ray, in his History of Plants, says, "Their use is all our life long, of
that universal importance and concern, that we can neither live nor subsist in
any plenty, with decency or convenience, or be said to live at all without
them; whatsoever contributes to delight or refresh us, are supplied and brought
forth out of this plentiful and delightful store of the garden.

Let it be a rule to gather vegetables of all kinds (designed for the table) in
the morning, before much sun has shined on them, and lay them by in a cool
place.

ALEXANDER is a culinary plant, formerly much used, but has given away to
celery, like which it is blanched, about a foot high, for use in soups and
sallads. The seeds are best sown in drills two feet asunder, and thinned to six
or eight inches distance, though they may be sown at broad cast and
transplanted. Spring sown plants come in for autumn, and autumn ones for spring.

ARTICHOKE, there are two kinds of, the globe and the conical; (which is the
hardest) but the former being generally preferred, both for size and flavor,
the latter is seldom seen. Artichokes are propagated from rooted slips, or
offsets in April taken from the mother plant, by drawing the mould aside. As
they require a rich soil, and are stationary plants, dig a good quantity of
dung in below the roots for them to strike into.

The head of the artichoke is valuable according to its size and substance, and
therefore to a good soil, add good room, for though they may be planted nearer,
yet they would do much better in rows six feet asunder, and three feet apart in
the rows. This distance is great, but between these rows may be propagated
several sorts of spring or early summer crops. They should be regularly watered
in dry weather, and suffered to bear only one principal head. Fresh plantations
should be made every third or fourth year, to have them in perfection. Every
year that they stand after planting they should be dug round, and some manure
applied. Cut the heads when the leaves begin to expand, and before the center
opens for flowering; and let them have about a foot of stalk, breaking the
remaining part of the stem down to the bottom, that it may not rob the root. At
the spring dressing, all the suckers are to be taken off, leaving three only of
the strongest shoots to fruit.

Let the plants be protected from hard frosts; before the prospect of which,
cut down the stalks and outside leaves to the inner one, dig between, and earth
the plants to near the tops; and if severe weather follows, they should be
covered thick with straw, which must be removed when the frost goes. The
earthing up need not be levelled down till March, or may be let alone till the
time of their dressing, which is best done at the beginning of April.

To have a long succession of artichokes, some slips should be planted at two
different times every spring, as they bear the same year, only come in later,
and with smaller heads than the old plants. When planted quite late, they
sometimes do not produce in the present season, but then they are forwarder the
next summer than old stools are; but remember, a good soil and open situation
are absolutely necessary for the artichoke. Though dung must be used in an
indifferent soil, the finest artichokes (as indeed of all other vegetables) are
produced from a fresh and natural good soil. It Is of service to lay grass
mowings, or some litter, about the roots to keep them cool; for though
artichokes should not be planted in a moist soil, on account of frost, yet they
thrive best in one. The market gardeners seldom throw away any suckers, but put
them in the ground somewhere, and having borne heads, then pull them up if
overstocked. Artichokes that come late, may be cut with their full stalks, and
being laid up to the head in moist sand, in a cellar, will keep a month, so
that they may sometimes be had at Christmas.

ASTARAGUS, there is but one sort of, as an esculent, but some difference
occurs, as to size, color, and flavor, arising from cultivation. In order to
obtain large heads, and to have the beds continue to produce the longer, much
dung is used; but the less of it, the sweeter will this vegetable be, so that
in a soil naturally prolific, no dung need be used by the curious.

Asparagus beds are commonly made from plants, but the best way is from seed.
The time for both is March, rather early in the month than late, though the
beginning of April may do. The plants should be only a year old, and set in
rows a foot distance, and the roots the same, or a little less from one another
in the rows.

Making the beds four feet and a half wide, there will be four rows of plants,
and nine inches left between the outside rows and the alleys, which should be
two feet wide. The beds ought to be trenched full eighteen inches deep, and
enriched with dung that is well consumed, burying it below with roots; they
will soon strike into the dung, which had best not lay immediately about them.
If some mould of rotted vegetables, wood pile earth, and a little pond mud,
were mixed with the top soil, it would greatly help the plants; or if none
other than this manure were used all through the work, it were better. As
asparagus beds are designed to last many years, suppose twelve or fifteen, no
pains should be spared to do the work well; and if the ground were prepared
sometime beforehand, or in winter, it would be an advantage, the top soil
laying trenched for the benefit of frost. The alleys, as well as the beds,
should be made good, for the roots of the outer rows will strike into them. A
rich sandy loam is the best soil for asparagus, and if the earth is too heavy,
or too light, rectify it. See improvement of soils, miscellaneous section.

To plant asparagus set the line nine inches from the edge of the bed, and cut
the trench upright, close to it, so deep that the crowns of the roots lie full
two inches below the surface. If the mould of the bed lies light, and is likely
to settle much, the crowns of the plants may come to the top, and two inches of
mould put on afterward; this is, indeed, the best method of planting; but if
the ground is not expected to settle, two inches of the top mould must (in this
method) be first drawn aside to cover with. The roots must be neatly spread
against the trench, and cut as little as possible; i. e. only the damaged parts
off. This should be with a sharp knife, and it would be better if done the day
before they are used, that the ends may dry and heal. It is of consequence to
have the plants dug up carefully, with a three pronged fork, that the roots may
not be injured; for bruises, and sometimes even cuts, will occasion that part
of the root to rot.

To sow asparagus beds, make little holes an inch deep, at the distance
directed for plants, and having laid three seeds in each, near an inch asunder,
cover them three-fourths of an inch, which will leave little hollows, to show
their places, and give occasional watering in a dry time, to fetch up the
seeds. If the beds were covered with a little haulm, or straw, till the plants
appeared, it would help them to germinate, as in a sunny season they are apt to
lie long, especially if the work be not done till April. When the plants are
above ground fill up the holes. Refresh the plants occasionally with water
through the summer, and when they are two inches high, thin the holes to one
plant in each, and cover the beds with an inch of mould, and they will then be
two inches deep, as was directed for plants. The drawn plants may be pricked
out at four or five inches distance, to make good any deficiencies next spring,
or otherwise. In October, when the haulm is decayed, cover the bed with about
half an inch of rotten dung, to keep out frost; and, in severe weather, put
some long litter over all. In spring, take the litter off, and gently stir
(with a proper fork) the rotten dung in: do so again the next year. Watering
asparagus beds with the draining of a dunghill (a rich manure too often lost)
in autumn, or spring, will wash down to the roots, and greatly benefit the
lower soil to the increase of the produce: It is worth while to make a rank
water for this purpose, for weak or old beds.

Asparagus is cut from planted beds in three years, and from sown ones in four;
but this loss of a year, will be amply repaid by the superior size and
abundance of the heads. If the buds come very fine, a little may be cut the
year before. A thin crop of onions or lettuces to prick out, is commonly had on
planted beds the first, and on seed beds the two first years, taking care that
none grow just about the plants. The best method of doing this business, is by
an intermediate drill between each row, and again across them.

The management of asparagus beds is, to cut down the haulm, within an inch of
the ground, when it turns yellow in autumn, clearing of weeds, stirring the
ground, and covering the whole over with about an inch of rotten dung before
every winter, which is to be forked in at spring, not to hurt the plants, and
covered with some parings of the mould from the alleys, which should afterward
be dug over, if no crop is in them to prevent it. It may seem, that an addition
every year to the beds might sink the crowns of the plants too low; but it is
their nature to rise as they grow. Besides the rotten dung, as above, there may
be laid some long litter over the beds, before severe weather sets in; but the
covering of asparagus beds is not simply to keep out frost, (which will not
hurt them without much wet) but to keep them warm, that the buds may be forward
at spring. A stump ought to be kept at each corner of the beds, to show their
bounds, and as marks to pare the alleys up by, which should lay three or four
inches lower.

The cutting of asparagus should be carefully performed, not to injure
adjoining buds. Move the mould a little aside to see, and then close by the
head, and with a little slope, cut it off about three inches below the ground.
The knife should have a long narrow blade, and a proper one is indented with
teeth as a saw. It may be cut when from two to four inches high, and let it be
done as soon as ready. If it is lain by in a cool place, as in a dairy or
cellar, it will keep very well three days.

Six rods of well planted ground will produce, in the full season, about a
hundred a day; and this, as a rule, will help to determine how much room to
allot for this vegetable.

BEANS we have several sorts of, differing in size, color, flower, flavor,
hardiness, and time of coming in. Of the forward beans, the mazagan is
generally preferred, as the earliest, hardiest, most productive, and pleasant.
The Portugal ranks next to it. Of the later sorts, the Windsor stands first, as
to general estimation, for eating; but it is in most soils rather an idle
bearer. The long-pod and Sandwich, however, are preferred by some, chiefly as
more fruitful. Trials must determine taste, but it may be observed, that the
white blossom bean is a very good one, if eat young.

Close under a warm wall (^o which they should be kept by packthread) some
mazagans may be put in the ground early in October; but at the latter end, and
the beginning of November, is best, when they commonly succeed at some distance
from the wall, earthing them up regularly as they proceed in growth.

Put the small beans in three inches deep, and four asunder, in single rows, or
six inches asunder every way, in double rows; and let the rows, in the first
case, be two and a half, and in the latter, three feet asunder.

There is a dwarf bean (by some called the fan cluster) that grows but a few
inches high, which is very convenient to put in, close under a south wall, in
October, and they will thus be but a few days (if any) later than the mazagan,
sown in November.

It Is a good way to sow patches of beans under a warm corner to stand the
winter, placing them about an inch from one another, and transplanting them, at
the above distances, the first mild weather in February or March to any
sheltered part of the garden, and if under a south wall, it will forward them.
Beans, sown in patches, may be easily covered in severe weather, by a frame,
etc. Make trenches to lay them in when transplanted; pull off the bean adhering
to the roots, shorten them a little, and put them in rather highly covered over
the shanks. If planted aslant, they will soon get erect; but this is only
permitted in case of a shallow soil and long roots.

In severe weather, a light covering of peace haulm, or any straw, may be lain
over winter beans to protect them, but must be taken off as soon as the weather
alters; for too much covering of any thing is as likely to destroy (eventually)
as being wholly exposed.

Though the mazagan is mostly the bean put in to stand the winter, some
gardeners sow other sorts for the purpose, (even Windsors) which in general may
succeed; but they certainly will not come in so early be near a fortnight, and
must have a dry, sheltered situation. The larger beans must be sown a little
deeper, and two or three inches farther asunder than the mazagan, allowing a
foot more between the roots, especially if double ones.

If early crops of beans fail, through severity of the winter, be sure to take
the first opportunity of open weather in the new year, to sow some of the early
sorts; and if they be covered over with some straw, they will come up the
sooner; but remove the covering as soon as the beans appear, if not a frost at
the time.

Succession crops of beans are to be sown for every three weeks, or a month,
from November to July; preferring the larger sorts in February, and so on to
June, when the smaller (or early) kinds will be the properest.

BEET, there are four sorts of, red, green, yellow, and white, which are used
several ways, as pot and sallad herbs. The leaves of the latter are sometimes
blanched, when full grown, for the sake of their thick ribs, being peeled for
stewing, and eat as asparagus. Sow beets in February or March, thinly, either
in drills or broad cast, and hoe them to a foot asunder: They run to seed the
second year. A little also may be sown, early in autumn, for late spring use;
but they will be small. The red sort is cultivated for its root, and is
preserved in winter, in dry sand, as carrots are; and of this there is a turnip
shaped sort, that suits best in heavy shallow soils, and a long rooted sort
proper for light and deep ones: Beets, but principally the red, require a rich
soil.

BOORCOLE, or cale, is a hardy green, of which we have two principal sorts,
green and brown, and a little variety is in the leaf, as plain, curled,
variegated: The latter is a pretty vegetable when growing, but not so hardy, or
pleasant, at table as the other sorts.

Some sow two crops of this green at the end of March and of April, but one
sowing may suffice; and the first day of April, or at least in the first week,
is the best time. Sow in an open situation, and in cool ground, and thin the
plants in time, that they may be robust, and able to support themselves.

This green should be planted out in rows a yard asunder, and two feet apart in
the rows, having been previously pricked out from the seed bed, at six inches,
for five or six weeks, to obtain strength for final planting in June or July.

Let boorcole, and all summer planted things, have a good watering at the time,
and again in a few days, if the weather proves dry and before winter let them
be well earthed up to support the plants from the wind and snow, that are apt
to break them down, or at least, to set them awry; which, when it happens,
should be attended to, to fix them upright again; observe this of all other
winter greens.

The heads of Boorcole may be cut in winter, and the sprouts come full in
spring: The heads are tender and sweeter for being frost bitten. The sprouts
should only be topped when gathered, and they will shoot out again below.

BROCCOLI is of two distinct kinds, the purple, and the white; for the green,
etc. are only varieties from them; of each, there are large and dwarf sorts,
the latter of which is mostly cultivated. All the sorts, except the white,
generally produce side shoots, as well as a head. The white is called
cauliflower broccoli, because it resembles a cauliflower much, but is not so
white. This is not so hardy as the purple, nor is it thought so good; indeed
the green may be esteemed the best. Of the purple there is an early and a late
sort; the former is sowed to come in at autumn, and the latter in spring.

The first day of April is a good general time to sow for the autumn crop,
(though some do it sooner) and the last day of April for the spring crop. But
it will be very proper to sow again a fortnight after each; and at the end of
May, for late spring use; which though they produce small heads, will be very
acceptable. Sow in open ground, and see that they young plants are thinned,
when quite small, that they may not be drawn up weak; and prick them out when
they have got six leaves, to six inches distance, where having grown to a
proper robust size, (as about July) let them be planted out at two feet, or a
little more asunder. The autumn sort should be planted toward a warm wall,
lest it come not in at the time. Broccoli requires a rich and dry soil; yet
watering, in a dry time, is necessary to help their heads to swell, and forward
them, Stir the ground about the plants occasionally, and keep them well earthed
up. The best broccoli seed comes immediately from Italy, whence we first had it.

BRUSSELS SPROUTS are winter greens, growing much like boorcole, and by some
preferred as more delicate eating; but they are not so hardy or productive.
Their culture is the same as boorcole, only they may be planted out at rather
less distance.

CABBAGE, there is a considerable variety of, as to flavor, size, time of
coming in, and hardiness. Some are for the use of the table, and others for
cattle, though the latter are very sweet, before they get solid. The early
dwarf, early Yorksbire, and early Russian, are the chief sorts for spring use,
and the early and late sugar loaf for summer.

In April, the forwardest cabbages may be tied up, (as lettuces are) to assist
them to head and whiten; a practice seldom seen, but which will certainly be
helpful: Use wetted bass.

Sow for early cabbages about Mid-August; soon after up thin them, and in a
month, draw the strongest, and prick them out four or five inches apart, where
having grown about the same time, they will be fit to plant for spring use; or
they may be put out any time after, even in winter; for should frost come
directly, it will hardly affect them injuriously. Set them, if in a middling
soil, two feet asunder, allowing six inches more for a rich one: There should,
however, always be some dung dug into cabbage ground. If they are planted at
half the above distances in the rows, taking care to draw every other plant in
time for early greens, (or coleworts) it is a very good method, as the ground
is better occupied, and the plants protect one another.

The late cabbages, or those of summer and autumn, should be sown early and
late in the spring. For early summer uses, sow after Mid-February on a little
heat, or under hand-glasses, on a warm border; and the later crops in March, to
the end of it, and for the latest at the end of April.

Sow red cabbage seed, either about the middle of August, or beginning of
March: but as there is much more bad seed than good of this vegetable, be as
careful of the sort as possible.

CARROT, there is a little variety of, in color, size, and time of coming in,
though not much in taste. We have orange, red, yellow, and white, (each of
which have their admirers) but the former is generally preferred, and the last
is rarely cultivated. The sort sown for the first crop, whether in cold ground,
or on a hot bed, is the early born carrot. Both this and the late horn carrot
grow short and thick, and are therefore proper for heavy, or shallow soils, as
the other sorts are for light and deep ones.

Sow carrots always in good times, as the seed lies long in the ground, and
they are, by many persons, covered early. A few should be sown in a favorable
situation, the first tolerable weather in February, digging the ground well and
deep for the purpose; for if it is lumpy, the carrots will grow forked, as they
will also if the ground is fresh dunged.

Carrot seed should be mixed with dry sand, or earth, rubbing them well
together, in order the better to spread it equally in sowing. Use about twice
as much sand as seed, and if earth, it were better to be of a different color
from that on which the seed is distributed, that it may be seen.

If early in the month, the new sown beds may be covered with a little haulm,
or straw, which will help the seed to germinate, and preserve them from being
thrown out of the ground by frost; and this covering should be continued on
nights, and taken off by day, when the plants are up; which practice being
continued for some time, will greatly forward, as well as preserve, the crop.
Some people sow in January, if the weather is mild, but for this, (and other
circumstances in gardening) situation must in a measure, govern, and discretion
determine.

If a hot bed be made for carrots, let it be about two feet and an half thick,
and covered with eight inches of sifted mould, as soon as the violent heat is
gone off. Sow the seed directly, a full quarter of an inch deep, and if covered
with lights, give air sufficient to keep the earth only just warm. A ho^ped bed
to be covered with mats, may do for this purpose, but in this case, two feet of
dung may answer better than more; for if the seed is hurried up, they will be
too tender for the protection of such a covering, and the plants will run to
top, and not bottom.

Thin the plants soon to an inch asunder, and in a little time again to three
inches, in order to grow to a small size for use; and if not so wanted, at any
rate draw some equally, that those which remain may swell properly: Carrots
must have a great share of air, if covered with glass.

The principal crop of carrots should be sown early in the month of March, or
before the end of it, and be soon hoed, or thinned by hand, to a small
distance, and a while after to a greater; so that together with hoeing and
drawing for use, they should at last stand at from eight to ten inches
distance, according to the soil. This may seem too much, but certainly carrots
have, in common, too little room allowed them for attaining their proper size.
Let the first hoe be of the breadth of three inches, and the second of six. No
consideration should prevail to let carrots stand too long before they are
properly thinned.

A few late carrots may be sown in April and May, to draw young in the summer;
and some in the autumn months to stand the winter, for early spring use, but
carrots that stand the winter grow hard, and are of very little worth.

In autumn, let carrots be taken up as soon as their leaves begin to change;
for when they continue too long in the ground, they are apt to get worm-eater,
especially in rich soils. Cut the tops off at an inch, and lay them up dry and
free from mould, in dry sand, a layer of sand, and a layer of carrots. All
those that are broken, or cut, should be thrown aside for present spending, as
they would decay in the heap, and spread infection in the rest. Those who grow
large quantities for cattle, stack them in hovels, etc. with a thick coat of
straw, bottom and sides, and particularly on the top. In a soil that suits
them, carrots turn to good account, and are excellent food for all sorts of
cattle, and particularly pige.

CAULIFLOWER is sometimes distinguished into an early and late sort; though in
fact, there is no difference, only as the seed of that called early is saved
from the forwardest plants.

The time for sowing cauliflowers is rather a nice business, but it is
generally settled for the 20th of August, a day under or over. It will be
prudent, however, to sow again a few days after, but not earlier, as then they
would be apt to form only very little heads, and run up for seed. Let the young
plants, be timely thinned, that they may be strong. Prick them out when the
first leaves are about an inch broad. And as cauliflowers are tender, they will
require to be pricked out in the warmest and driest part of the garden. Some of
them should be protected under hand-glasses, frames, or ho^ps and mats,
covering the glasses and mats with straw in severe weather; not doing this
before the weather makes it necessary, and always allowing what air they will
bear, especially toward spring, otherwise they may be disposed to run, or will
be weak and sickly. As the season advances, let them be wholly uncovered on
fair days, and when they are got forward in March, draw the spare ones to plant
out, leaving only a single plant under a small hand-glass, and two under a
large one; or a few may be drawn out at the end of February, if the glasses are
crowded. Continue the glasses on as long as they will contain the plants,
raising them upon bricks. The number generally put under hand-glasses for the
winter, is from three to five. Those drawn from these, make a good succession
crop: But do not prick out or plant, those that have black shanks, for they
will come to nothing: Cauliflowers are liable to this defect chiefly in wet
seasons.

If the autumn sown plants are cut off, the earliest opportunity must be taken
in the new year to sow some seed on a gentle heat, as in February, covering
with glasses, or only with hoops and mats. From this bed, when it is cold, they
should be pricked out upon another, where let them grow till planted to bear.
And if those weak ones that have stood all the winter were pricked out early in
the spring upon a little heat, covered with good mould, it would strengthen and
forward them much. In default of dung, sow under hand-glasses in a warm border.

To have a succession of cauliflowers till winter, sow on a slight heat, or
under glass, in March, for plants to follow the first crop; and again in open
ground, in April and May. It winter should overtake some of the latest plants,
they may be taken up, when in flower, with a ball of earth, and planted in a
conservatory, or even in a cellar, where they will swell their heads, and be
safe. All the succession crops, except the last, should be planted in a cool
part of the garden.

Cauliflowers require a rich soil, and to be kept moist during summer,
especially when flowering, watering them well twice a week. If the water were
impregnated with sheep or other dung, to the strength of about an ounce of salt
to a gallon of water, if would help them in size, for cauliflowers are greedy
feeders. The ground in which they grow, can hardly be too full of dung; nor
need there be any fear as to making them rank; a little salt thrown in the
water (...) however, cleaner, and does away the idea of rankness. When they are
wanted, the earth may be drawn a little from the stem, and put to again. As
soon as the head appears, break down one or two of the large leaves over them
to protect from the weather: It preserves them white and cool, and increases
the size.

CELERY we have three or four sorts of, as the common Italian upright, both
hollow and solid, with the giant hollow, and turnip rooted, or celeriac.

For early celery, sow in the last week of February, or first in March, on a
gentle bot bed, or in a warm rich border, under a hand-glass, or not. When
cultivated so early, it is apt to run, but if only a few plants stand
tolerably, it is worth while to sow a little, and even when in a pipy state it
does for soups. Sow thin, cover so, and keep the earth moist; for the seed is
slow in coming up.

For principal crops, sow at Mid-March, and again at Mid-April.

For a few late plants, a little seed may be sown at the beginning and latter
end of May; and if the ground is covered with a mat it will help the seed to
germinate, by keeping the earth cool, and from air. But it must be taken off,
and the ground lightly watered as soon as the plants appear. If the weather
should be very sunny, shade they young plants a little for a few days, by
raising the mat, or laying some brush wood over.

Prick the plants out when two or three inches high, at three or four asunder;
and when about six inches high, plant them in trenches a yard distant, and six
inches from one another. In a light soil the trenches may be somewhat deeper;
but generally near a spade's depth is proper, and a spade's width, keeping the
walls firm and upright.

If the soil is not very good, dig in a little well-rotted dung at bottom; but
the celery will be sounder and sweeter without dung, so that a little fresh
earth were better; and though the plants will not come up so large, they will
be hardier to resist frost. The later that celery is planted out, the shallower
the trenches should be.

Water celery at pricking out and planting, and occasionally afterward in very
dry weather.

Earth up the plants frequently (as suppose every week or ten days) a little at
a time, in order to blanch them, by which they become crisp, sweet, and tender:
The celery gets tough when this business is let alone too long. In earthing up,
it is a good way to gather them close (but carefully) with the left hand, using
a trowel, or small spade.

In severe frost lay some long, dry litter over the tops, which remove when the
frost goes.

Celeriac requires a rich soil, and should have frequent watering to have fine
tender roots. Plant in trenches about three inches deep, and earth up, (only
once) when the plants are about three parts grown, to four inches height. This
species is hardier than the others, and holds longer in spring; therefore,
those who like the solid root should cultivate it.

The seed of celery, (in default of plants) if bruised, answers very well to
give soup a flavor of it. Parsley seed, etc. may be used in the same way.

CHARDON is a gigantic vegetable of the artichoke kind, (now seldom cultivated,
used sometimes in sallads, but chiefly in soups, or stewed, etc. It should be
sown about the middle of March, and end of April, in trenches, four feet
asunder, a foot wide, and six inches deep. Drop the seed (which will be near a
month coming up) a few inches asunder, and thin them at last to the distance of
from three to four feet. They must be watered in a dry time. Those plants that
are drawn may be taken up with balls of earth about them, and planted in
trenched rows as celery, at the above distances, and the rows five feet from
one another. The leaves only of this plant are used, after they are blanched;
which is done by earthing two-thirds of their length up, when about three or
four feet high, typing neat hay*bands first close round them, to within a foot
of the top; i. e. blanch when they are full grown, in August and September, and
in about six weeks they will be fit for use. In frost cover the tops with
straw. It will assist the blanching to lay straw, or offal hay, close round
them when untied.

CHOU DE MILAN is of the boorcole kind, and propagated like it, but the plants
should be put out at a yard asunder. This is a very good winter green, and
stays longer than any other at spring before it shows for seed, and is then in
its highest perfection.

COLEWORT is a very hardy small open headed green, sown in July, or early in
August, for winter and spring use. But instead of the true colewort (a coarse
vegetable) it is common to sow the early sort of cabbages as an agreeable
substitute, to be eat in their open state. The sweetest of this kind of green,
however, is the large sugar loaf cabbage, sown about Midsummer, which
frequently stands the winter.

These plants should be put out for use, at from eight to twelve inches
asunder, according to the nature of the sort sown, some of the early cabbages
being very small, as the Russian.

Coleworts are seldom cultivated otherwise than for winter and spring use; but
all the year it were well for the garden to supply them, as they are, what may
be truly esteemed, choice greens. With this view sow some cabbage seed every
month.

CUCUMBER has several shades of difference in it, arising from culture and
accident; but the common and more distinct green sorts of it, are the short and
the long prickly, the cluster, the early African, and the Turkey. There are
also a white short prickly, (or Dutch cucumber) and a white Turkey sort. The
white Dutch (like the white Turkey) is an idle bearer, and seldom met with; but
it has an evident difference in flavor, and admired by most who eat of it.

The early nature of a cucumber is the principal object with gardeners, for as
much skill and care is exercised to produce forward ones, it is a great
draw-back to have sown seed not of the forwardest kind. Of the seed called
early, there is no doubt much difference: How material a thing it is to improve
the breed, and to be ascertained of the quality of seed for early crops is
therefore evident.

The principal crop of cucumbers should be the long prickly, which is
preferable on the whole to any other. The Turkey grows strait, long and large;
but quality is certainly before quantity, and the cucumber that eats crispest
is the best. In this respect the Dutch white (little as it is cultivated) is,
perhaps, even before the justly admired long prickly, and has fewer seeds. The
early African, is a very favorite cucumber with some gardeners: It clusters.

Seed should never be saved except from the greenest and handsomest cucumbers;
but that which is bright frequently is from clumsy, smooth, yellow, seedy
fruit, which is always watery and vapid.

The ambition of gardeners has been pretty much exercised to have cucumbers
every month in the year; but the expense and trouble are surely vain, when
bestowed in the production of what, in the cold months, is unwholesome, and not
much relished. A gardener that can cut a cucumber by the first of April does
sufficiently well, or rather better than he that produces them before. See, Of
raising cucumbers in the last section.

ENDIVE is a sallad and culinary vegetable, of which there are three sorts, the
curled, green, and white, and the plain, or broad leaved. To these may be
added, however, a plant of the same kind, which is seldom propagated in
gardens, the wild succory, used sometimes medicinally. The plain, or Batavian
endive, is but little used in sallads, as the curled is so much preferable
though cooks prefer it for stewing: The green is the hardiest, and therefore
the late sowings should be all of this. Sow succory in March.

Sow endive at three several times, between the middle of May, and the middle
of July, at equal intervals. Some of the first may, perhaps, run for seed; but
yet a little should be then sown; as also at the beginning of August for late
use. Scatter the seeds thin, and do not suffer them to grow in clusters to
become weak. When the plants are about three inches high, plant them out in an
open situation a foot asunder, watering them at the time, and twice or thrice
after till they have taken root. The same sowing will make several crops,
drawing the strongest first, and in a week after more.

Those planted out after Michaelmas should be on warm borders; but if long
after (as toward winter) the method of planting is thus, which blanches at the
same time: Draw earth to an high ridge, under a sunny wall, and taking up
carefully some full grown endive in a dry state, gather the leaves up close,
without breaking, tie them neatly with bass, and put them close together
sideways; i. e. horizontally, in the ridge, almost to the top of the leaves. If
any suspicion of wet in them, hang the plants up by the roots, in some covered,
shady, airy place, for a day or so. In severe weather lay straw over all.

Endive in open ground should be protected from sharp frost by peace haulm, or
dry litter. Some may be planted in frames, or under hand-glasses, giving plenty
of air, or in a shed, or hovel, open toward the sun; and this may be either in
the upright, or ridged way.

The blanching of endive in open ground is thus: Gather up the leaves (being
dry) when nearly of a full grown size, and tie them regularly, and carefully
round, from the middle upwards, moderately close, with bass, and earth them up
to the middle, if the soil is light and dry, but not otherwise. In two or three
weeks, the blanching is effected, after which the endive must soon be used, or
it will rot, especially if much wet comes. The object of blanching, is to take
away the bitter taste of the endive, and to make it crisp and tender. Blanch a
little at a time, once a week, that it may come in proper succession.

GARLIC is used for both culinary and medicinal purposes. The cloves should be
planted in autumn, or early in spring, in rows six or eight inches asunder,
three deep, and six from one another in the rows, preferring a light dry soil.
If the leaves are tied up in knots the beginning of June, it will prevent their
spindling for seed, and help their bulbs to swell. Take them up toward autumn,
when their leaves turn yellow, and keep them in bags, or hang them up in a dry
place, for use.

GOURD, SQUASH, and CALABASH, as of one family; see PUMPION, the culture being
the same.

HORSERADISH is variously used for culinary purposes, and may be reckoned one
of our most wholesome roots; when scraped fine, it is a good addition to
sallads, especially in the colder season. Propagate crowns, or pieces of the
root, from one to two inches long, having an eye or two, set from nine to
twelve inches below the surface of the ground, (according to the nature of the
soil, as heavy or light) by digging a trench, and covering them over, or by
making holes with a dibble; this should be the work of February, or October,
and the soil must not only the be deep, but rich, or the roots will be weak.

This root will grow finer, and be more conveniently dug, to have the rows two
feet, and the sets one foot asunder in them, though a less distance is the more
common practice. Where there is plenty of ground, however, it is not worth
while to be cramped, and the first year of planting the ground may be cropped
with any early things. The roots will not be fit for use the first year; but
the second it comes strong and warm. Take them up carefully and regularly,
moving the earth away, and cut them off close to the stool, from whence fresh
heads will spring.

New plantations of horseradish should be made about every fifth year; old
ones should be cleared from the straggling side shoots, in order to keep the
rows open, but take them up deeply.

JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE is cultivated for the root, (which eats like artichoke
bottoms) and it is an ornamental plant, growing similar to the perennial
sun-flower, with which it classes, but taller. Propagate in March, by planting
cuttings of its root, as potatoes. The root is red, and full of indented eyes,
every one of which is sure to grow; but it is not much admired. Where it has
been once planted, it must be carefully dug up, or it will not easily be got
rid of. Any poor ordinary spot of spare ground will do for it. Preserve the
roots in dry sand, when they can be no longer preserved in the ground,
immediately dug from which they are much best.

KIDNEY BEAN we have two sorts of, dwarfs and runners, each of which has a
rather numerous variety, arising from the color of the seed, time of coming
in, and taste. Both sorts have their admirers, but the dwarf is more generally
esteemed, and more conveniently cultivated.

Of the variety in the dwarf beans, some come earlier than others; but there is
a difference in opinions, which is the best, as to earliness and quality. The
yellow and the black are, perhaps, as forward as any. The early white is not
long behind, and is of superior quality, but is not so hardy as the yellow and
black, and some others; this may, therefore, be the second crop. The dwarf
sorts come in quicker than the runners. For the principal crop, the Battersea
and Canterbury beans are mostly used by the market gardeners, being good and
prolific.

Of the runners, or climbing sort, the common scarlet, and the white Dutch, are
generally preferred, and when mixed together, their blossoms make an agreeable
show, and bear a long time, if the beans are gathered constantly as they get
fit for use.

The dwarf sorts of this vegetable may be had most months in the year, by the
united means of open culture, hot beds, and hot houses. In cold ground they are
sometimes sown, close under a south wall, toward the end of a dry March, but
April is soon enough; for if they get above ground without rotting, (as the
seed is apt to do, when the ground is long wet) a little frost will cut them
off.

The latter end of March, however, if some are sown in a warm border, in
patches, and covered with hand-glasses, they will do very well. Or an early
crop may be produced by raising the beans, at this time, on a gentle hot bed,
and planting them out, when two or three inches high, under glasses, in
patches, tow feet asunder. If the beans are raised in small pots, three or four
in each, they may be ^^^ned out whose, with great advantage, as kidney beans do
not always bear transplanting well; and they may be covered on nights with
hand-glasses, garden pots, etc.

When planted in rows singly, let it be under a warm wall, and not (if it can
be avoided) till the end of April, or beginning of May; and protect them a
while at first on cold nights, with matting or otherwise.

As to the hot bed culture of kidney beans, if any are attempted to be brought
to fruit on heat, let them be raised, toward the end of February, upon one
gentle bed, (or in pots, at the back of a cucumber frame) and planted out in
another, in rows fifteen inches apart, and at four inches in the rows; for
nearer they will not fruit well. The bed may be about two and a half feet
thick, and must have on it seven or eight inches of mould, and the plants
treated with as much air as can safely be given them. Line the bed before the
heat is quite gone, to preserve and forward them. The sort used for forcing in
hot houses is a reddish speckled one; but the early white is fittest for
forcing in hot beds, as of lower growth: The early yellow and black may do, but
they are not so good as the white.

The Common culture of the dwarf bean, in the proper season, and open ground,
is to sow them an inch or an inch and half deep, three asunder, and two feet,
or a little more, to a yard between the rows, according to the size of the
seed, for some sorts require more room than others. Let them be earthed up as
they proceed in growth; and to have a succession, sow every three weeks;
remembering that a crop produces more, and lasts longer, the oftener the beans
are gathered: It is proper, therefore, to gather them constantly whilst young
and good.

The last crop should be under 2 warm wall, and may be sown as late as the
middle, or end of July, and if very dry weather, let the beans for this, and
the June crop, be soaked about twelve hours in milk and water, and the drills
watered, in order to forward their germination, and bring them more certainly
and regularly up. It is a good way to prepare the seed for high summer, by
laying it in a garden pot, in damp mould, till it begins to chit, and then
planting it in watered drills. In a course of dry warm weather, kidney beans
should be watered, especially while young. The culture of runners is to sow
them near two inches deep, four or five asunder, and the rows four or five feet
apart. They will thus require tall brushy sticks to climb upon; but they may be
sown in patches of about fifteen inches diameter, placing the beans five or six
inches asunder, in the circumference, and fixing a pole in the middle for them
to run upon. The end of April, or beginning of May, is soon enough to put the
climbing sorts into the ground; and two more sowings, at about five weeks
between each, will go through the season.

If seed is saved, let it be only from some of the first beans of the principal
crop, for all late formed seeds, and particularly of the kidney bean, are not
near so good as the early ones, often failing or producing weak plants, and
late ill tasted fruit.

LEEK, we have a narrow and a broad leaved sort of, the latter of which is the
one generally cultivated. The leek requires a good soil and open situation in
order to have them fine.

Sow in February, if the weather is tolerable, or at the beginning of March.
Thin in April to three inches asunder, and plant them out the first moist
weather after Midsummrer, in rows, a foot apart, and at six inches in the rows;
though if the ground be very rich, and the leeks forward, a little more may be
allowed to advantage.

Trim the tops, and ends of the roots, and plant with a dibble, two or three
inches in the ground, in order to whiten the heads; but to this end, some have
planted leeks in trenches, and earthed them up high, with a light soil, or sand.

Toward winter, or in prospect of frost, leeks may be taken up, and laid with
their roots in sand, or earth, in some conservatory or cellar. A few sown in
April to stand all winter for spring use is a proper practice.

LETTUCE is a vegetable, of which there is a great variety. The brown Dutch,
and the green cabbage lettuces come earliest, and are mostly to be depended
upon to stand the winter; though the other sorts often do, except the silver,
and white coss. The brown and the green Egyptian goss are excellent, being
hardy and large, forming close heads; but the latter is earliest. The Cabbage
lettuce eats moderately well, but is chiefly used in soups, etc. The Silesia
lettuce is much admired by some, though at present but little cultivated: There
is a brown and green sort.

For winter and spring use, the hardier sorts are sown in July, August, and
September, but chiefly in August, when if three sowings are made, the
beginning, middle and end of the month it will generally be sufficient.

For summer use, the white coss, and any of the others, may be sown on warm
borders, either in open ground, or under hand-glasses, or other cover, in
February, and a little constantly every fortnight, or three weeks after,
choosing cooler ground for them when summer advances. Plant them from ten to
fourteen inches asunder according to the size they attain; it being an error to
put lettuces out so near as many do, for it forces them to run for seed, and
prevents their growing large: The sort called the admirable should be allowed
eighteen inches. Lettuces may be pricked out very young; and when three or four
inches high is the best time for planting them.

It is not a common way, but spring sown lettuces will be forwarder and larger,
if sown thin, and only thinned out to their proper distance: Those that are
drawn may serve for a second crop. The brown Dutch, green capuchin, and the
tennis, and button lettuces do not run up so soon for seed as the other sorts,
and are therefore proper for late summer use. To forward early spring sown
ones, a slight hot bed may be made, and by all means ought to be some time in
February, if those that were to have stood the winter are cut off. When these
plants are an inch high, they should be pricked out, four inches asunder, upon
another gentle hot bed. When they meet, or are four or five inches high, draw
every other to plant out in open ground, and let the rest remain to cabbage.

Hand-glasses, frames, or hoops, covered with mats, or peace straw, may be used
to protect lettuces in winter, especially those that are forward, which are
more likely to be destroyed than the smaller, as the wet hangs in them; let
covered plants have a great deal of air at all opportunities. Winter lettuces
require a dry soil and situation, and a wet one is helped by planting on
hillocks, which is a method that frequently saves them from rotting.

To have fine winter lettuces, some of the forwardest may be taken up with
balls of earth about them in November, and planted at nine or ten inches
distance, on a somewhat strong hot bed, which as soon as the great heat is
certainly over, should be covered with six or seven inches of dry mould for the
purpose, but give a little water just about the roots: Line the bed when it
gets cool. Lettuces must be well attended to, to give them plenty of air, pick
off dead leaves, cover on nights, etc. frequently stir the surface of the
mould, and give water as occasion may dictate. The cabbage lettuce succeeds
best in hot beds.

Tying lettuces with bass, from the middle upwards, when about three parts
grown, will somewhat help them to whiten and cabbage; but let this business be
done carefully. Some gardeners do not think it worth while to practice it; and
indeed, right good sorts (as to seed) will cabbage themselves, and open ones it
is of little use to; yet this assistance may be tried to the first crop.

This vegetable is sometimes sown thick, to draw young for small sallading; for
which purpose, the lap and cabbage lettuces are the properest, as they eat
tendered and sweeter in their infant state, and the lap lettuce seed is very
cheap.

MELON there is a variety of, in size, shape, coat, and color of the flesh:
This is greater on the Continent, and more than sufficiently so here. The sorts
we succeed in, and which are usually sown, are the musk (or common oblong
ribbed melon,) the Roman, the Portugal, and the Cantaleupes in variety, as the
common rock, the black, the orange, and the silver. The Roman and Portugal are
small, but early. The Cantaleupes are justly the most admired fruit, but are
not so good bearers as the others.

The seed that is brought from the continent seldom succeeds here. Whoever sows
it, must not begin too early in the season, must use more heat, and give less
water than is necessary for Denizens. See, Of raising Melons, p. 197.

ONION, we have several sorts, but the Strasburgh (oval shaped) is that mostly
cultivated as it keeps the best. The silver skinned and Spanish (flat shaped)
are milder, and therefore by some preferred. The Welsh sort does not bulb, and
it is rank; but for its being very hardy, is sown thick in August, and suffered
to stand so for winter and spring use, as a green substitute for others. At
this time also, some of the Strasburgh may be sown, and perhaps stand the
winter. The Welsh onion is not only hardy, but perennial, by cutting the green
tops off. These sometimes die down in severe winters, but the roots shoot again.

The small silver-skinned onion is the sort fittest for summer sallading, and
pickling. Sow first at the end of March, and to have them young once a month
after. There is a sort of onion that keeps two years, yet not much admired.

The scallion is a hot distinct kind of perennial onion that does not bulb; and
is got quite out of cultivation, having given way to the Welsh onion, as also
to the other sorts, that are made milder scallions of, by planting early in
spring, those that decay and sprout in the house, which quickly grow. Set them
in drills six inches asunder, and two inches apart in the drills.

For the principal crop of onions, sow the Strasburgh or any other, toward the
end of February, or soon after, though any time in March may do, for it is
desirable to shun frost: Let the soil be rich. The earliest crops (of course)
produce the largest bulbs. As soon as they will bear it, (perhaps in five or
six weeks) let them be thinned either by hoe or hand, to an inch or two apart,
and twice afterward, till each root has full four inches square of ground to
grow in.

Onions will transplant when five or six inches high, taking care to give water
immediately. If any onion seed is sown, that comes directly from Portugal or
Spain, it will be very large the first year, and should have six inches room
allowed them to bulb finely.

Crops of onions should be kept very clean from weeds, and it would be of
advantage to water them once or twice a week in dry weather. In July or August,
when the leaves begin to die at the ends, shrink and turn yellow, let them be
bent down to the ground, and in about ten days after, drawn in dry weather, and
laid to harden by the sun, turning them every two or three days for a
fortnight. House them clean and dry, into neither a warm, nor damp, but close
room; laying them thin, frequently looking them over in the winter to pick
decayed ones out, which would damage the rest: But onions are best kept strung
and hung up.

PARSLEY, as an esculent root, is that called Hamburgh; it is eat as carrots,
and is considered as a remedy in the gravel and stone. Sow it early in March or
April, either at broad cast or in drills, and leave the plants six inches
asunder. The roots may be preserved in sand; but it is the practice of some to
sow at Midsummer, to draw them young in winter, being best when fresh dug. See
parsley, next section.

PARSNEP is a sweet and valuable root, less cultivated than it deserves, being
accounted very nourising. As carrots require a light soil, so the parsnep does
a strong one. Sow about the end of February, or early in March, digging the
ground well and deep. If the soil is light, tread the seed in twice over to
fasten it; it comes up in about three weeks. Thin when about two inches high,
with a small hoe, and afterward with a large one, so as to leave the roots in
a good rich soil, a foot asunder, though eight or ten inches will do in light,
or indifferent land. Any thing that is to go off quick, may be sown with
parsneps, as carrots to draw young, radishes, lettuces, etc. Parsneps are not
good till arrived to maturity. These roots are to be taken up, and preserved as
carrots; but they may remain longer in the ground, and are seldom hurt by
frost, so that some of the roots are commonly left undug till spring, and then
taken up for use just as they begin to shoot, if they are not wanted for seed;
when they will keep good in sand till Mid-April.

PEA, we have a considerable garden variety of, arising from the size, time of
coming in, color of flower and fruit, and somewhat in taste. The principal
distinction is made, as to early and late peace, so that if the earliest pea is
sown at the same time with one of the latest, there will be three weeks
difference in their bearing, and a fortnight is usually reckoned between the
common hotspur and marrowfat.

The early frame pea (which is that forced in hot beds, etc.) may be sown close
under a warm wall at the middle, or rather at the latter end of October, or
beginning of November, and being kept to the wall, by earthing and by strings,
or otherwise, will commonly survive the winter, and produce peace in May: But at
a little distance from the wall in November, they do very well, either in a
line along it, or in short rows from it, a yard asunder, at right angles with
it, or inclining a point to the east, to catch the first sun.

The frame pea is not a good bearer, either in the size, or number of its pods,
and therefore the hotspurs being hardier and more prolific, are sown by many
gardeners for their earliest crop, and the difference of coming in is often but
a few days. The frame pea, however, takes up less room than the hotspurs, and
in this respect best suits a fruit border, which should not be encumbered with
tall crops. Facny will rule in the choice of peace, but the established sorts of
the Reading hotspur, and dwarf marrowfats, are excellent for full summer crops.

The frame pea may be sown a quarter of an inch from one another, and the
hotspur half; it is common indeed to sow thicker, but it is not advisable.

Earthing up peace, and particularly the early crops, should be done frequently,
a little at a time, in dry weather, beginning when only an inch high. Before
frost comes on, the early peace must be earthed up high, and some peace haulm, or
dry straw laid lightly against, or over them, in hard frosts; but let the
covering be immediately removed aside when the weather becomes mild.

S^^king peace is to take place as soon as they begin to vine, (put forth
tendrils) or appear too weak to support themselves against wind. Let the sticks
be set strait, neat, and full; and by all means high enough for the sorts;
allowing sticks of three feet above ground for the frame pea, near five for the
hotspur, near six for the dwarf marrowfat, and seven or eight for the larger
sorts. If short of wood, sticking only the S. or W. side of the rows may do, if
the wind does not set very contrary. Some people sow double rows of peace at ten
inches or a foot asunder, and set sticks only in the middle, earthing the peace
toward them. Peace that are to grow without sticks, may be sown, the smaller
sorts at two, and the larger at three feet asunder.

The latter end of November, or beginning of December, more peace may be sown,
and toward the end of January, and the beginning of February, in order to have
a full supply at the first of the season: The earliest opportunity in the new
year should be taken, if those sown before have been cut off, or greatly
injured. Peace sown at the beginning of February are often only a week behind
those of November.

To have a constant succession of them, peace should be sown about once a month
in winter, every three weeks in spring, and every fortnight in summer, which
may be continued till the middle of July, when if some hotspurs are sown in a
sheltered and sunny situation, they may do very well.

The late and large sorts of peace, as the marrowfat Morattos, American, etc.
should be first sown toward the end of February, and not sooner, left they rot.

The dwarf marrowfats should be laid in the drills half an inch asunder, the
large marrowfats three-quarters, the Moratto an inch, and the American two
inches, and each sort covered near two inches. The Leadman's dwarf pea, for its
small size, is admired at genteel tables, and is sweet and fruitful; but rather
longer in coming in than the usual late sorts: It escapes the mildew better
than other peace, and therefore is proper for the latest crops in open ground:
It requires sticks only from two to three feet high, and may be sown thicker
than any other pea: It may be sown till Midsummer. On the same day that
hotspurs are sown, put in a crop of any of these late peace, and they will come
in proper succession; i. e. ten days or a fortnight after.

To save seed peace, let none be gathered from the rows except late formed ones,
which had better not be among the rest, for the reason given in the article
kidney bean.

A few observations may be added. Peace will transplant, and therefore broken
rows may be made up, only choose (if possible) mild and moist weather for the
work in March, and shade them with a little straw, while they have taken root.
If the autumn sown crops were cut off, peace may be sown under hand-glasses in
January or February, and thus forwarded, planting them out when they have been
two or three weeks above ground.

Watering peace in a dry time answers well, and especially when in flower and
fruiting. To receive the water there should be ridges drawn toward the
earthing up, forming a gutter on each side.

If slugs, or other insects attack young peace, strew some lime fresh slacked,
or soot along the rows, so as not immediately to touch the plants, after which
give them a watering. If the peace are still infested, repeat the application.

Mice must be guarded against as to autumn and winter sown peace, by immediately
setting traps for them, of which a number of the common block ones will be
found to answer best, setting one at every two yards.

Peace do not like dung, and will be more fruitful in a moderate soil than a
rich one, except the rouncivals, of which we have the White, green, gray, and
blue sorts.

Stopping peace (i. e. cropping the leading shoot) is practiced by some
gardeners, to promote fruitfulness and maturity: This is a reasonable practice,
but chiefly relates to the early crop.

POTATOE is found to be the most useful root that is cultivated, though it is
not many years that it has been in so general estimation. Its worth and uses
are now pretty well known, and it seems settled, that as a substitute for
bread, it is most profitably eat without mixture.

As the potatoe degenerates when it is long propagated from roots, they are
occasionally raised from seed, which changes the sorts. Some are denominated
meally, others waxy; i. e. are either of a loose or a firm contexture: The
former is best adapted for food, as most farinaceous. They are distinguished
again as to shape, into round, oval, and clustered.

Potatoes will grow in any soil, but best in one that is light, cool and good,
especially a fresh one. Season, as well as soil, makes a difference in their
goodness, as does the way of boiling them in eating, on which the quality of
the water has some effect, as indeed it has on all vegetables, and that is the
best water in which they are boiled quickest. The white potatoes are generally
preferred, but some of the red kinds are very good; and the old rough red from
Lancashire, was one of the best ever cultivated: About fifty years ago, one but
red ones met with a good sale at market. The kidney shaped sor^^ are most
generally approved, as boiling or roasting more equally through; and among
these, the red nose kidney (a white potatoe) is the present favorite: others,
however, are no doubt as good, and many sorts there are.

The coarse kinds of potatoe are given to hogs; but whether even for them,
(...) ought not to be preferred to quantity, may be considered. The clustered
American potatoe is reckoned most profitable for cattle, yielding great
increase; but the goodness of a potatoe as food, is to be estimated by the
quantity of flour it produces. The early potatoes are small, but by common
culture are produced in June, when soon after their tops change yellow, which
betokens their having arrived to maturity: They will keep better in the ground
(it being summer) than if taken up.

The cultivation of potatoes is various, as experiment and opinions ha^^^^d: It
would be too much here to take particular notice of each method; and to say
every thing that might be advanced on this subject.

For sets or cuttings, prefer middle sized, well shaped potatoes, and let each
piece have one good eye in its middle, or at the most two. They should be set
in rows, eighteen inches asunder, in a poor soil, twenty-one in a middling, and
two feet in a rich one. In the former, the sets may be six or seven inches
apart, and in the latter eight or nine. In a light soil, plant them five or six
inches deep, and in a heavy one only three or four. When planted deep, they
will not need earthing up above once, but when shallow, two or three times. In
a light soil, they may be put in with a blunt dibble, but in a heavy one should
be laid in trenches; and if the trenches were dug deep, and first filled with
long dung, old thatch, or short straw, it would be a great advantage, covering
them up in ridges, and drawing mould to as they settle. Cold, moist ground
should be divided into beds of two or three rows each, with sunk alleys
between; and as in such a soil the sets should not be above three inches deep,
the sinking of the alleys may be made by earthing the rows up from time to
time. In a heavy soil make the rows rather wider than in a light one, that
there be a due quantity of mould to draw for earthing up.

Early potatoes are procured several ways. On a hot bed, some may be planted in
February, or under hand-glasses, in a warm border, or without. There are early
sorts on purpose for this culture, called mules, as they do not bear seed. As
these potatoes are small, they may be planted whole, or rather cut in halves,
paring off the eyes at the crown where they are thick, as it never answers to
have many shoots come from a set; whole ones should be planted a foot asunder,
and halves at eight inches.

Look over the stock of early potatoes, and plant those first carefully in
trenches that have rooted shoots, for they will produce the first fruit,
especially if short and bushy. When up in hot beds, or under hand-glasses, let
them have plenty of air, and in open ground be protected from frost by timely
earthing up, and occasional covering with haulm, or straw, which must not be
kept on, but upon necessity. As these early potatoes are on a warm border, a
little water in a dry time will forward them, and increase their size. In
default of the true early potatoe, sets with good forward shoots of any of the
other sorts may be treated as above.

From Mid-March to Mid-April is the properest time (earlier or later as the
soil is dry or moist) to plant for the principal crop, though May, or even
June, generally produce an increase worth the cultivation. The roots from late
crops should not be used for planting, as they are more liable to the curl:
Those potatoes growing sickly in a wet soil, are also subject to this defect.
Potatoes, being of superficial growth, should be regularly weeded, as long as
they can be walked among without treading on the tops.

Ground, designed for a field crop, should be twice ploughed, and the first
time some weeks before the setting.

In the potatoe counties, they change their sorts every third or fourth year;
procuring fresh kinds from places farther North, as a means to avoid the curl,
which seems to arise chiefly from the tender nature of the potatoe, and advises
us not to be too early in planting.

Seedling potatoes are procured by saving the first thorough ripe pods, (called
apples) and either preserving them in very dry sand till spring, or immediately
separating them from the pulp, put the seed up dry in papers, when it is quite
dry. In March, or April, sow the seed half an inch deep, in a light soil, in
drills fifteen inches asunder, and thin the plants to six inches. Earth them up
as they grow. Dig them as soon as the haulm dies, and carefully preserving them
from frost, they will be fit to plant the ^ext spring for table use.

That potatoes are very susceptable of frost, is well known; but it is often
not sufficiently guarded against in time. If not kept in a warm cellar, they
may be laid in a room, having some straw at bottom, and when in prospect of
frost entering the house, they should be covered with straw, a foot thick: Let
them be brought in clean and dry.

Pying (as it is called in some places) is a good method of preserving potatoes
in winter. They are piled on the surface of the ground, in a ridged form, of a
width and length at pleasure, according to the quantity, but commonly about six
feet wide. This is done by digging a spit of earth, and laying it round the
edge, a foot wide, (if turf the better) filling the space up with straw, and
them laying on a course of potatoes, dig earth from the outside, and lay upon
the first earth. Put straw a few inches along the inside edge, then put in more
potatoes, and (...) on, keeping a good coat of straw all the way up between the
potatoes and the mould, which should abo^^ six inches thick all over; beat it
close together, and the form it lies in, with the trench all round, will
preserve the potatoes dry; and the severest frost will hardly affect them, in a
time of which the whole may be covered thick with straw. In the spring, look
over the stock, and break off the shoots of those designed for the table, and
repeat this business, to preserve the potatoes longer good.

PUMPIONS there are many sorts of; but they are esculents little cultivated,
because little relished. They take up much room, spreading from twenty to forty
feet square of ground. As gigantic curiosities, or to cover an arbor, we now
and then see them; but they must have a good deal of sun to forward their
ripening. There is a great variety in the shape, color, and rind of this
fruit, and the sizes are from four inches diameter to eighten, or more. The
bottle gourd, or common pumpion, has produced fruit, even in this climate, six
feet long. In America, a single plant of the gourd, without any culture, spread
over so large a spot of ground, as to produce 260 fruits, one with another, as
big as a half peck. They grow so large in Egypt, that the camel (so remarkable
for its strength) is not able to carry above five or six of them.

Pumpions being tender, are raised on a moderate hot bed, in April, or May,
according to the time desired to have fruit at. After the seed has been up a
few days, prick the plants out at four or five inches, or rather put them in
small pots, one in each. When a month old, they may be planted out about four
yards asunder, one of the large sorts, or two of the small ones, on a hole of
two or three barrows full of hot dung, and about ten inches thick of mould.
Cover with hand-glasses, or garden pots, or hoops and mats, on nights, till
Mid-June. On such a hole of hot dung they may be sown in May, under a
hand-glass, and there remain to fruit. Pumpions will do very well sometimes (in
favorable seasons and situations) sown in May, on cold ground. The seed should
be covered near an inch, and the plants kept earthing up as they grow. Water
well in dry and warm weather. The orange gourd looks very pretty when trained
up a strong pole, spirally, or to a wall. Drinking vessels have been made of
the shells of wellripened gourds, as is done with the cocoanut.

RADISH is of two kinds, the spindle rooted, and the round, of each of which
there is a variety. Of the former we have the early purple, and the early pink,
short topped, and late large topped ones of both sorts. Of the latter there are
the white, black, and red turnip radishes. The white (of which there is a small
and large sort) is mostly cultivated, but the others are both good; the black
grows large, and the red small. The purple sorts, and the small white and red
eat the coolest. The order of coming in from the time of sowing is, the purple,
and the pink, spindle sorts, and the turnip, red, white, and black: The latter
is very hardy for winter use.

For the first crop, the early purple short top may be sown the latter end of
October, November, and December, in a warm border, and have a chance of
surviving the winter, if a little protected in frosts by short sticks, stuck
sloping in the ground, to support mats; or by laying peace haulm, or wheat
straw, lightly over them, which may be an inch or two thick, as the frost is;
but no longer than it lasts may the covering be on. In open weather in January
and February sow again, and in these months, and the preceding one, cover the
ground over with some straw, and it will help to fetch the seeds up, and
preserve them from being thrown out of the ground by frost, as also from birds.
As soon as they begin to appear, let them be uncovered to harden them to the
air, if the weather is not too severe. Thin these radishes to an inch and a
half, or two inches asunder, though some gardeners let them grow thicker.

A hot bed is frequently used for radishes about Christmas, or in January and
February, which must not be too warm a one, as it would hurry the seed up, and
make them grow all top, and come to nothing. Two feet thick of dung is
sufficient, on which seven or eight inches of light mould should be put on,
(rather sifted) and the seed immediately sown on the surface, (rather thick)
and covered with half an inch of earth, giving the whole a gentle pressure,
that the seed may not lie too lightly in contact with the mould, a circumstance
that in all cases should be avoided; for roots will grow better when the earth
is somewhat firm (...) them. Thin the plants to an inch asunder, before they
begin to draw one another up weak; if wider it were better, but room in a hot
bed is precious. Hot bed radishes, under glass, must have plenty of air, and
though covered, are not to be shut down close on nights, except severity of
frost demand it. In lieu of frames, a hot bed of radishes may, in February, or
after be hooped, and covered with on nights, and in bad weather; and in this
way, indeed, they generally succeed best. Line forward beds, when the heat
declines, that they may proceed in growth, without check or interruption.

Repeat sowing of radishes every three weeks in spring, and fortnight in
summer, sowing in cool ground as the season advances, and they may be had
almost the whole year. In dry weather water. Allow three inches distance to
those sown after February, or rather more for the longed topped sorts. The
turnip kind may now be sown; yet their best season is after Michaelmas. But sow
only the small white and red; the large white and black are considered merely
as autumn and winter sorts, which will often continue good to spring: In
prospect of severe weather, some of these may be taken up, and preserved in
sand, having first cut the tops off short.

Thin the small turnip sorts to four inches distance, and the large to six or
eight: Sow the two last sorts in June, July, or even August. In August, or
September, sow also some of the other sorts of radishes. Turnip radishes are
rarely sown on hot beds; but the small red sort will be found an agreeably
early crop, and may stand as thick as the spindle rooted kinds.

The ground should be well dug for radishes, especially the long rooted sorts,
and the seed carefully covered a full half inch, leaving none on the top (if
possible) to lure birds, which will frequently do much mischief to the crop. It
is a troublesome mode, but radishes when drilled are safer, and being thin^^
(...) the rows by hand they come fine. Make the drills for the tap rooted
sorts, from two to three inches asunder, but for the round wider. It is also a
good method to sow radishes on beds four feet wide, and the mould being made
fine on the top, beat the seeds in with the teeth of a wooden take till none
appear, and then lightly draw the back of the rake over, to fill up the holes;
or, having sown the bed, cover with mould from the alleys.

A sprinkle of radish seed may be frequently sown among other crops, as
spinach; and the ground at spring that is designed for cauliflowers, may very
properly be sown with them, just before the plants are to be set out.

Draw the roots for use in regular thinning way, and those that are left will
become the larger for it.

Radishes are sometimes sown thick for eating, while very young in the seed
leaf, with other small sallading. And large radishes may be boiled, and eat as
asparagus.

SALSAFY, though but little cultivated, is a useful vegetable. Its young shoots
are eat as asparagus in spring, and its long white roots in autumn and winter
as carrots, some of which are taken up, and preserved in sand for winter use.
Those left in the ground may be dug up occasionally, or left to produce shoots
for spring, or may stand for seed. Sow them early in March, in drills ten
inches asunder, and thin the plants to six.

SAVOY is a sort of a cabbage, peculiarly adapted for late autumn and winter
use, as frost improves it, making it tenderer and sweeter than before. Some
gardeners forward them for early autumn use, but they are not then good. There
is a green, and a yellow sort, the former mostly cultivated, as it looks best
at table.

If savoys are desired forward, sow a little savoy seed in a warm border in
February, or under a hand-glass; but a sowing in March, and another in April,
in an open situation, is sufficient for late autumn, winter, and spring use.
Thin the seed bed in time, that the plants may be strait and robust; and when
about three inches high, prick them out to five or six inches distance, where
let them grow to a proper size, (as in June or July) to plant out at two feet
apart, or a little more, in a rich soil. Choose moist weather for this work, if
possible, and give some water. Earth them up as they grow.

Sprouts of savoys are most delicate eating greens, and therefore if the ground
is wanted where the stalks grow, let them be taken up, and laid deep in a
trench to produce a second crop.

SCORZONERA is a carrot-rooted esculent, and therefore requires a deep and cool
soil. Cultivate it as salsafy, only let the drills be two inches wider, and the
plants an inch or two more asunder.

SEA-CALE, or cabbage, is a vegetable not generally known, except in Essex,
Sussex, and the West of England, but is much liked by many, and as an early
spring production is valuable.

Its natural place of growth being the sea-beach, it is evident that a sandy
soil suits it best. Some people cultivate it in almost all sand, which, if the
natural soil of the place, is proper, as such surface sand is endowed with
vegetable principles; but when a soil for this vegetable is made, it should be
one half sharp, or drift sand, and the other half any light rich mould, which
may be a little gravelly, or mixed with sea-coal ashes. Sow, or plant, either
in autumn, or spring.

It is a root that lasts many years, and therefore should be properly planted
and managed; either in beds of it, like those of asparagus, (the which it
precedes) of four feet and a half wide, and two feet alleys between; or in
single rows of long trenches, which is perhaps the better way. They are best
raised from seed, though often from offsets, or pieces of the roots, having two
or three eyes to each.

The beds must be trenched, and of a dry loose earth, (as said) to two, or two
and a half feet deep; and if any suspicion of wet ever hanging at bottom, lay a
course of rough gravel or stones there. The plants should be near a foot
asunder, kept five of six inches below the surface, that they may grow through
a body of earth to blanch the sprouts; and they are to be cut up four or five
inches deep, soon after they appear above ground. In summer, the ribs of the
large leaves may be peeled, and eat as asparagus. They will want earthing up
from the alleys every year, to keep them at the above depth; for which purpose
keep proper earth in them. It is evidently best to sow, or plant, low enough at
first, to be prepared for future earthing up; not to grow too low, however, if
there is a clay bottom. Sets may be planted at first only three inches deep
from their crowns, and earthed up to five or six as they rise: Some do this
with fine sifted coal-ashes, and the effect may also be attained with the
leaves of trees laid close round. Little should be cut the first year, but the
second do it freely.

The seed should be dropped three or four in a hole, half an inch deep, and
thinned to one plant in the summer, earthing up a little as they proceed in
growth. When the leaves decay in autumn, earth the plants over an inch or two,
with mould from the alleys. In the spring, loosen the earth carefully with the
asparagus fork, and at autumn, earth up as before. The following spring, fork
again in time, and about April there will be plenty to cut, which, if suffered
to grow large, will eat tough and strong. For seed, reserve a stool that has
not been cut: The flower is so pretty, (white heads) as to be sown for ornament.

SHALOT is a perennial sort of onion, for which it is often substituted, and in
some cases preferred, as being more agreeable to the palate and stomach, by its
rich and mild nature.

The shalot is propagated by planting its offsets late in autumn, in a dry
soil, or in spring, if a moist one. The latter time is generally adopted as
safest; but autumn sets produce the finest bulbs. Plant two or three inches
deep, and four or five asunder, in rows, six inches distance from one another.
When the leaves wither, dig them up, le^t they decay in the ground, as they are
apt to do when much wet falls.

SKIRRET is a very wholesome root, propagated by seed, as scorzonera, and
sometimes by offsets of the old roots in spring, planted an inch deep over
their crowns.

SPINACH is of two kinds, denominated from the seed, as prickly and smooth; the
former is sown in autumn, i. e. (...) end of July, and about Mid-August, to
gather in winter, and the beginning of spring, being very hardy; and the latter
is sown early in the new year for after use, though the prickly does very well
also for the same purpose. The smooth sort is rather tender, but it grows
larger, with thicker leaves, and is therefore seldom sown, otherwise than at
broad cast; but the prickly is frequently sown in drills, as between rows of
pens, beans, etc. Soinach may be sown on pieces of ground, where it is intended
to plant cauliflowers, or cabbages.

At broad cast hoe thin, and trample the seed in with the feet, rather wide,
that there may be a sufficient quantity of mould to rake down over the seed.
Hoe the prickly sort to four inches apart, and the smooth to six, or more, in a
rich soil. If in drills sow also thin, and cover an inch deep. Some people thin
the plants in drills to three inches distance, and draw every other for use,
when those left will grow large, and this may be proper with the smooth
spinach; but it is more common not to thin the rows, and to gather, by cutting
the leaves down low, when more will spring up again. It is a good way to sow
spinach in beds of four feet, with alleys, that it may be the more conveniently
attended and gathered, without trampling the ground: Gardening in this way of
narrow beds will, in many cases, he found agreeable.

To have a full succession of spinach, sow in January and February, and
afterward again in three weeks, and then every fortnight, or even oftener, for
it presently runs to seed in summer, especially if the plants grow close. Some
people are fond of drilled spinach, as it is quickly gathered, and fancied to
eat better; but broad cast is commonly reckoned the best way, and gathering the
outside leaves, the plant shoots again repeatedly: In spring, however, when the
ground is wanted, and the plants are disposed to run, they should be drawn.

TURNIP we have a variety of sorts of, for table use, differing in color and
shape, earliness and flavor. The most common are the white sorts; but the
yellow and red are by some admired, and are worthy of trial. The small early
Dutch is that mostly cultivated in gardens, at least for the first crops,
though the early stone sort is a good root.

Turnips are sown from March to September, but in June and July for the
principal crops, which may be of the larger sorts. Late crops may be sown till
Mid-August, but they will produce but small roots. Those sown in March will be
apt to run for seed before they have formed much bottom, and must be watched to
draw them in time. Yet the turnip is so favorite a vegetable that hot beds are
sometimes made in February and March to forward it, though thus cultivated, it
can attain but to a very small size. A bed of this sort must be slight, and
have a great deal of air from the very sowing. A moderately light soil, with
little dung, suits turnips best, and they should always have open ground that
is well broke. Sow thin, trample close, and rake lightly: It is a way with
some, to sow one third old seed with the new, for the greater certainly of a
crop; the former sometimes succeeding when the latter misses. Do not neglect to
hoe the crops in time, the early ones to five or six inches, and the late ones
to eight or nine, though some large sorts should have more distance allowed
them.

When the fly is observed to attack young turnips, it will be proper to stir
the ground, and sow again immediately, or to choose another spot for the purpose.

The NAVEW, or French turnip, (which is much admired by some, and said to be
the most nourishing sort of turnip) should be repeatedly sown from March to
August, in a moist ground; but being a small, slender root, need not stand
wider than five or six inches.

The cabbage turnip is of two kinds; one apples above ground, and the other in
it. This vegetable is sometimes used young for the table; but it is chiefly
cultivated for cattle. Sow it in May or June, for autumn use, or in June or
July for the spring: They are very hardy. If sown in a garden, and pricked out,
they may be transplanted in fields, the first moist weather after a crop of
oats, or barley, at half a yard, in a poor, or near two feet in a rich soil;
and if the ground if foul, this culture gives a fine opportunity to clean it,
by hoeing.

SECTION XVI.
OF HERE IS, etc.
ANGELICA is cultivated for the large ribs of its leaves, cut in May or June to
make a candied preserve; and it is also a medicinal plant, in stalk, leaf,
root, and seed. The seed should be sown after it is ripe, as in spring it does
not come well. Put the plants out when a few inches high, at two feet asunder.
It is biennial; but if not cultivated for the seed, cut the stems down in May,
and the plant will put out side shoots; and by this practice, every year, may
be continued long in the same place. A moist situation suits it best, and it
may be planted by ditches, or ponds.

BALM is either plain, or variegated; but the former only is cultivated as a
medicinal herb. It is propagated by parting the root, either in autumn or
spring, but rather the latter. Slip off short pieces with roots, and plant them
a foot, or fifteen inches asunder, giving a little water.

The balm that is gathered to dry, ought to be cut just as it gets into flower;
as for this purpose all herbs should, being then in the highest perfection. Dry
it in an airy, shady place, till fit to tie up in small bundles, which must be
stored in a dry airy room. Balm, and most perennial herbs, should be fresh
planted in beds every third or fourth year; and every year, in autumn or
spring, should have the ground stirred about them, and dressed with a little
fresh earth, the plants being previously cut down.

BASIL is pretty annual, of which we have two sorts, the large and the bush;
(each having a variety) both are used as pot herbs, but chiefly the former.
Sometimes also this herb is used in sallads, and occasionally in medicine. The
large grows about a foot high, and the bush but a few inches. They are both
sweet, but the bush most so; and for this, and its delicate round form, it is
cultivated as a part of the furniture of the flower garden. Both sorts are sown
on a gentle hot bed, in March or April, and may be pricked out in small pots,
but they will hardly endure the open air till June.

BORAGE is a cordial herb, that has its varieties, as blue, red, and white
flowered, and one with variegated leaves; but the former is that commonly
cultivated as a pot herb, for sallads, and cool tankards. To have it young (as
it should be for use) all the year, let it be sown in spring, summer, and
autumn, either in drills or broad cast. Thin the plants to nine inches asunder.
It sows itself in autumn, and likes a dry soil.

BUGLOSS possesses the like cordial virtues with borage, so that the one may be
substituted for the other. Culture is the same.

BURNET is a warm perennial sallad herb, used also in cool tankards, propagated
in spring or autumn, either by seed, or by parting its roots, and planting them
a foot asunder. Keep it frequently cut down, that it may constantly furnish
young shoots for use.

CAMOMILE is a useful medicinal herb, of which we have single and double
flowering kinds; and of the latter, a sort with very full flowers. It is
propagated by parting its roots, or by its runners in March or April, setting
them nine or ten inches asunder. Gather the flowers in their prime, (as those
of all plants should be) before they begin to fade; dry them thinly in the
shade for a few days, and preserve them from damp in paper bags. The single
sort is the strongest, though for quantity, the double is mostly cultivated.

CAPSICUM is sometimes cultivated for its young pods to pickle; being raised on
a gentle hot bed, or two, to bring them forward till June, when (rather about
the middle) they may be planted in open ground, about half a yard asunder. See
list of annuals.

To have capsicums fine, if the ripe pods are wanted, sow them at the end of
February, or beginning of March, and let them be well attended to, to give them
as much air as the season will permit. The seed will be about a fortnight
before it comes up.

CARAWAY seeds are medicinal, and being used in cakes, a few plants may have
place in the garden. Sow in spring in a moist rich soil, and let them have six
inches square to grow in.

CARDUUS BENEDICTUS is simply medicinal, and is of good repute. Sow it in
autumn, either in drills or broad cast, and thin the plants to nine inches
distance. It is annual, and must be cut down to the root for drying, just as it
gets into flower, about July.

CHERVIL is used in sallads, and is also a pot herb that was formerly in much
estimation for its warm nature. Sow it thick in autumn for winter and spring
use. When sown in spring, or summer, it runs quickly to flower. The seed must
be slightly covered, and the leaves gathered for use while young, cutting it
down like parsley, (which it resembles) it springs up again.

CIVES are small bulbs, and a sort of mild perennial onion, the leaves of which
are cut for sallads, and culinary purposes, at the spring, before onions come
in. As the bulbs increase fast, some of them may be slipped from the rooted
clusters, and used as onions. They are propagated in autumn, or early in the
spring, by planting five or six of the little bulbs in a hole, an inch deep,
and eight asunder.

CLARY (the common garden) ranks as a medicinal herb, but it is used also in
soups, and is very odorous. Sow it in spring, and when two or three inches
high, prick the plants out fifteen or eighteen inches asunder, or thin them to
this distance. It is biennial, and therefore must be sown every year as parsley
is. There are sorts of this plant cultivated for their ornamental flowers. See
biennials.

CORIANDER is occasionally used in soups and sallads, for its peculiar high
flavor; but it has been mostly propagated for medicinal purposes, which its
seeds are used in. For culinary uses, sow it in April, and once a month, or
oftener, afterward, in drills six inches asunder, to have a succession of
young plants; and make a principal sowing in August or September, on a warm
border. Cover some of it with a frame, or it will die in hard weather, as it is
a tender plant. If wanted early in the year, sow on a hot bed, in February or
March; or in this last month under hand-glasses.

CORN SALLAD or (lamb's lettuce) is a small, warm, wholesome, hardy herb, and
for winter and spring use should be sown in August and September, and again in
February and March, and once a month all summer, for it is to be eat quite
young. The plants should grow about three inches distance.

CRESS, there are three sorts of, plain, curled, and broad leaved; the former
of which is much used as a sallad herb, with mustard, rape, radish, etc. The
curled and broad leaved sorts should be thinned to half an inch asunder: but
the plain is to be sown thick. The curled makes a pretty gurnish. In the cold
months this sallad herb (as others) is sown on gentle hot beds, giving plenty
of air; and as the spring gets up, on warm borders, or under hand-glasses. The
London market gardeners sow it just within the glasses which cover their
cauliflower plants, etc. In summer it should be sown in shady cool ground, and
daily watered; or it may be sown in the most sunny situation, if hooped over,
and shaded with a mat. Break the mould fine, and draw level shallow drills, and
cover only a quarter of an inch. It may, however (...) at broad cast, the
ground being first raked very smooth, and the seed just covered with fine
sifted mould. Let it be sown (upon an average) once a week, and cut young. It
that which is sown in open ground, at an early season, be covered with a mat,
it will forward the germination. The American cress is much like water cress,
only of a more strong bitter flavor. It answers well as a winter and early
spring sallad, being sown in August, at broad cast, or rather thin in drills.
The plants being cut, or the outside leaves pulled off, shoot again.

DILL is a very stomachic herb, whose leaves and seed vessels are put among
vegetable pickles, particularly cucumbers, to heighten their relish. The stem,
leaves, and seed, are also used in medicine. The leaves are sometimes used in
soups and sauces. Sow it either in autumn, or early in the spring, at broad
cast, or in drills, a foot asunder, thinning the plants to about eight inches.
It sows itself freely, and comes up at spring.

FENNEL (the common sort) is an hardy perennial herb, of the same family as
dill, the uses of which are well known. It may be sown either in spring or
autumn, and the plants ought to be kept near half a yard asunder; or it may be
propagated by slips from the roots of old plants. It should be constantly cut
down to prevent seeding, which would cover the ground in a very troublesome
degree. Sweet fennel is an annual, cultivated for its seeds in medicine.

FINOCHIO is a sort of dwarf fennel, very aromatic; the thick stalks of which,
earthed up, when nearly full grown, five or six inches to blanch, are used in
soups and sallads, or sliced, and eat alone with oil, vinegar, etc. Sow it
thick in March, in drills, about two feet asunder, and repeat the sowing every
month till July, as it presently runs for seed. Thin the plants to seven or
eight inches. It likes a dry soil, and in a warm situation some may be sown in
February; the last crop in June must be in a like situation, and will not be
ready before winter. It takes a fortnight or three weeks to blanch.

HYSSOP is used sometimes in a culinary, but more in a medicinal way. There are
white, blue, and red flowered sorts of it: but the blue spiked is that commonly
cultivated. The parts for culinary purposes are the leaves, and young shoots;
and the flower spikes are cut, dried, and preserved medical uses. As hyssop is
a woody evergreen perennial herb, growing little more than a foot high, it may
be planted for an edging of the kitchen garden. It is propagated by seed, and
rooted slips in March, by cuttings in April, or young slips in June or July. A
poor dry, or sandy soil suits it. The plants may be nine inches, or a foot
asunder as an edging, but should be near two feet from one another in a bed, as
they soon get large.

LAVENDER (that sort commonly cultivated) is, for its pleasant aromatic scent,
found in most gardens, and makes a neat perennial edging in large ones. It is
propagated by cuttings, or young slips, in April and May, set a few inches
asunder, in a shady situation, and good soil; and when rooted, planted out
where they are to grow. The slips should be occasionally watered, and as a mat
would cover a great many, might be shaded when the sun is hot upon them, for a
fortnight or three weeks, to forward their rooting. But though raised in a good
soil, lavender likes a poor and dry one best to abide in. Set the plants at a
foot distance from one another. In a rich moist soil, they are apt to die in
the winter, but in a dry hungry one, they rarely do. This is the case with all
plants, that the more luxuriantly they grow, the more likely they are to be cut
off by severe weather.

MARIGOLD has its varieties, and some sorts bear very fine double flowers, but
the common single kind is best as a pot herb, being most aromatic. All single
flowers are preferable to the double of the same kind for medicinal, or other
uses, as being of a higher flavor, or stronger essence. Sow marigolds in
spring, and let plants of the single sort stand a foot asunder, but the large
double wider. They will grow in any soil, and are in flower most part of the
year. The time of gathering them for drying is toward autumn, when they are
most plentiful. Take care that they are not put up in their paper bags raw, or
damp, and keep them in a very dry place. This flower is a valuable ingredient
in broths and soups, however it may have got into disuse. It sows itself
abundantly, and will bear transplanting about May, so that there will seldom be
occasion to sow.

MARJORAM is distinguished into pot, winter, and knotted sorts; the two former
perennial, and the last annual. They are all occasionally used for culinary
purposes, but the knotted is chiefly cultivated as a sweet companion of our
flowers. The propagation of it is by parting the roots of the perennial sorts
in autumn or spring, and by sowing the annual kind in March or April, on a warm
border, and light or dry soil. The annual sort should stand at six inches
distance, and the perennial at nine or ten. These (and all) herbs are to be cut
for drying just as they get in bloom. The knotted sort, it planted in pots, and
housed, may be preserved in the winter, cutting down the flower stems. This
kind is sometimes used for medicinal purposes, and should be drawn up by the
roots, for drying in the shade; or at least with but little sun.

MINT is a salutary herb, of which we have two sorts, the spear and the pepper;
the former for culinary, and the latter for medicinal purposes. There is a
little variety in the spear, as broader and narrower leaved, and also
variegated sorts, white and yellow, but these are considered only as ornamental.

Mint is propagated by pieces of its roots, or rooted slips, in the spring, set
an inch or two deep, and eight asunder, on beds four feet wide. Cuttings will
quickly strike root in any of the summer months. It delights in a moist soil,
and new plantations of it (particularly cuttings) should be well watered in a
dry time. Mint is to be had young all winter, and early in spring, by means of
a gentle hot bed, on which it should be set pretty close. Or it may be
conveniently planted in pots, and placed in any bed, and so shifted from one to
another, if occasion. Cut mint for drying just as it gets in flower, spread it
in the shade, and do not let this, or other herbs, be badly dried, or
preserved, as is too common a case. For present use, mint should be properly
gathered, using only the young leaves and shoots.

MUSTARD is much used as a sallad herb, gathered quite young, and the white is
the garden sort, the black being cultivated in fields, for its seeds to make
flour of. It is managed as cress, which see.

NASTURTIAM, there is a greater and less sort of, both cultivated for their
unripe berries to pickle, their flowers for sallad, and garnish, and as a
garden ornament; but the large is chiefly cultivated for culinary purposes.
Being climbers they should have something to lay hold of as an arbor, or brush
wood. They are of free growth, and flower abundantly for a long time, even till
the frost comes. Sow an inch deep, in drills, in a light soil, and warm
situation, in April, or sooner, if on a gentle heat, to forward them. It is
best to sow in a few small pots, holding each two plants, from which they may
be turned out whole (before they get too big) in May; though sometimes they
transplant without earth, about the roots, very well. Give them plenty of air
while under cover, or they will be drawn up weak. A fresh, but poor, soil, is
better than a rich one, which would make them too rampant, and less fruitful.

The double nasturtium is considered merely as a fine flower, but they are a
beautiful garnish. It grows from cuttings: Plant these in pots, in June, and
place them on a little heat, and they will soon take root. Or if the pots are
plunged in a warm border, and covered close with a hand-glass, it may be
sufficient. Gently water them, when the mould gets quite dry. This plant is
tender, and will hardly survive the winter in a good green house, but must be
put in a stove. In open ground, however, it flourishes all summer, flowering
most in a poor soil.

PARSLEY we have a plain and a curled kind of; and though the former is mostly
used, yet the latter is equally proper as a pot herb, and is much admired for
its leaves as a garnish. This sort cannot be mistaken for hemlock, as the plain
sometimes has been. There is more essence in an equal quantity of the plain,
than of the curled; but it is only using rather more of the latter, which if
not suffered to seed, will stand three years. To produce the curled sort very
fine, the plants should be thinned to three or four inches asunder; and it may
be sown either at broad cast, or in drills, about nine inches asunder, as the
common sort is. Parsley may be sown early in autumn, to have it young for the
winter and spring; but the usual time is early in spring, and one sowing may be
sufficient for the year, cutting it down often enough to get rid of the old,
and young will spring up. Cutting down parsley should never be omitted in
autumn, that it may be had good through the winter and spring. This herb will
bear transplanting. For Hamburgh parsley, see parsley in the last section.

PENNYROYAL is a pot and medicinal herb of the mint species. There is an
upright and a trailing sort of it; but the latter is that chiefly used: This is
propagated by rooted branches, of which it affords plenty, as it spreads fast;
and it will grow in the summer months from slips, or cuttings. Set them a foot
asunder in spring or autumn, and in a strong moist soil, it will most flourish.
If, however, it is suffered to mat thick, it is apt to rot. As this herb is
often wanted in winter, let it have somewhat sheltered situation: it is aptly
enough called by some pudding-grass. If cut for preserving in winter, the time
of flowering must be observed, and it must be very carefully dried, as it is
apt to mould.

PURSLAIN is a low growing succulent herb, of a cold and tender nature, used
chiefly in summer sallads, but sometimes for culinary purposes. The sorts are
the green and golden, but the former is preferred. It will not succeed in the
open ground till May, and then it must have a warm border. In March, or April,
it is sown on a gentle heat; for which purpose the lining of a hot bed may do.
Cover the seed in drills, four inches apart, cover a quarter of an inch, and
let the soil be light and rich. In dry weather, water it twice or thrice a
week. The end of the young shoots only are used, and when cut down it springs
again. It is usual to sow it three or four times in the summer, in cooler
places, as the weather gets dry and hot.

RAPE, or coleseed, is sown for a sallad herb, to be eat while in the seed
leaf, with mustard the cress; and is to be treated as they are; it is
stomachic, and some persons are fond of it when boiled.

RAMPION is a sallad root, in but little request. Sow it thin in April and May,
and leave the plants at four or five inches distance, for autumn and winter
use: Draw it young.

ROCAMBOLE is a root much like garlic, producing small bulbs at head, as well
as root; is chiefly medicinal. The cloves may be planted in autumn or spring,
two inches deep, and four asunder. In June tie the leaves in knots, to prevent
their spindling for seed, and to swell their bulbs. When the leaf decays, take
them up, and preserve them dry. It is sometimes used as a mild substitute for
garlic.

ROSEMARY we have the varieties, as plain, silver, and gold striped. The plain
is a useful medicinal herb, which should be found in every garden. It is
propagated by suckers, layers, slips or cuttings, in the spring, setting the
two last where they have not much sun; and when rooted, toward autumn, or in
the following spring, allot the young plants a station rather warm, and
sheltered, as rosemary is apt to suffer, or die, in severe winters, especially
the variegated.

RUE is a medicinal plant, propagated in spring, by seed, slips, or cuttings.
It stands many years, but should be prevented seeding, and pruned down
occasionally, to keep it in a neat bushy trim, of moderate height, and strong
growth.

SAGE there are several sorts of, but the common red is that used chiefly for
culinary purposes, and the green both for these, and medicinally for tea, etc.
There is a narrow leaved green sort, called tea sage, or sage of virtue; but
the broad leaved green is reckoned by some to be better, not being so heating,
and unpleasant to the taste. The variegated sorts of sage are only considered
as ornaments in the flower garden or shrubbery. Sage is propagated by slips or
cuttings of the last year's shoots, in April or May, choosing those that are
short and strong; or of the young shoots in the early part of summer, set in to
an inch from the top, and about four inches distance, in some shady place.
These, if they spindle tall in the summer, should be pinched down to about
three inches, in order to form bushy heads. They will be well rooted in August,
when they should be planted a foot asunder, in a sunny and sheltered situation,
from the N. and E. that they may stand severe winters, which they will the
better do, if the soil is rather poor than rich.

SAMPHIRE is by some greatly esteemed for a pickle, using its leaves, which are
sometimes added to sallads, and occasionally used medicinally. It is perennial,
and propagated by parting its roots, or by seed sown in spring. It likes a cool
situation, but yet prefers a sandy, or a gravelly soil: Let it have plenty of
water. Some have found it to do best in pots.

SAVORY, we have a summer and winter kind of; the former is annual, and the
latter perennial; and both are used as medicinal and culinary herbs, but the
summer sort is that mostly cultivated for medicine. The annual is propagated
from seed in March or April, sown thin and shallow, in drills, eight or nine
inches asunder. The perennial is sometimes propagated from seed, but more
usually from rooted slips, or cuttings from the top, in spring, as also from
side slips. The annual sort should grow at six inches distance in the drills,
and the perennial be allowed a foot. Summer savory, gathered for drying, is
best drawn up by the roots.

SMALLAGE is a sort of wild parsley, found in moist places, and was formerly
much cultivated in gardens, and used in soups and sallads, and medicine, as a
warm herb. Sow it in spring as parsley.

SCURVY GRASS (the Dutch, or round leaved) is sometimes cultivated in gardens,
for its excellent medicinal properties. Sow it in autumn, or spring, but best
early in the former. Though it will grow in any soil, it should have a moist
one.

SORREL is an acid, perennial plant, much relished by some as a sallad, often
used as a pot herb, and sometimes as a medicinal one: Though found common
enough in the fields, it is much improved by garden culture. The round leaved
sort, commonly called the Roman, is reckoned the more grateful acid, and
increases in the ground apace. Sorrel is generally propagated by parting is
roots, either in spring or autumn, and if propagated from seed, (which produces
the finest plants) it should be sown in March. The plants of the common sorrel
should be six or eight inches asunder, and the other a foot, or fifteen inches.
Sorrel likes a cool moist soil, but the round a dry one.

SUCCORY, see endive, in the last section.

TANSEY is a culinary and medicinal herb, of which, ^esides the common, there
are curled leaved, and variegated sorts; but the former only is proper to be
used medicinally. It is perennial, and propagated by rooted slips, in spring or
autumn, set at eighteen inches distance, in beds, four feet and a half wide;
and will grow in any soil, or situation.

TARRAGON is a perennial pot and sallad herb, which was formerly much admired
for its peculiar high warm flavor. It is propagated sometimes from seed, but
mostly by rooted, or other slips, set in spring or autumn, at six or eight
inches distance, and may be by cuttings in the summer months. The shoots die
down toward winter, but the roots are hardy, and increase apace. If wanted in
winter, it may be dried as other herbs are, or forced as mint, in order to have
it green. When the stems begin to run, cut them down, in order to produce young
shoots, for the tender tops only are to be used; and that not too freely, as it
is an herb that heats much.

THYME is a pot herb, of which there are commonly cultivated a broad, and a
narrow leaved sort, but the former mostly. There is a sort called lemon, thyme,
that is admired for its flavor, and another called silver thyme, which, with
the striped, are considered rather as an herb merely ornamental. It is best to
raise the common sorts from seed, though root branches, on account of their
trailing nature, may be usually had from old plants. Slips will grow, if set in
a light rich soil, in a shady situation. Loosening the earth under, and drawing
it up about old plants one year, will produce plenty of rooted branches the
next. The plants should grow at six or eight inches distance. If propagated
from seed, let it be sown thin in March, and covered lightly. Slips are best
made in April. This herb makes a neat edging when planted close, but it is a
great impoverisher of the ground.

TOMATUM, or love apples, we have red, white, and yellow fruited; and of the
red and yellow, a cherry-shaped sort. The first, or larger red, is that
commonly cultivated, and it serves for an ornament in the garden, as well as of
use for the table, in a pickle made of the green fruit, and when red in soups,
etc. It is also sometimes pickled when red, (i. e. ripe.) At the end of March,
or beginning of April, it must be sown in a moderate hot bed; and being soon
thinned, let the plants grow two or three inches high, and be pricked in small
pots, to turn into the cold ground toward the end of May; or if not long and
weak, keep them under cover a little longer. Give them a sunny situation
against a wall, for regular and timely training, or support them by slicks.
They take up much room, and it rows should be three yards asunder. If planted
out upon holes of hot dung, it would help their speedy rooting, and forward
them much for ripening their fruit, which in bad seasons they sometimes fail
in. They require much water in dry weather.

WORMWOOD is a useful medicinal herb; and common as it is in many places, in
others it is not to be met with wild. Besides the common, there is Roman
wormwood, both efficacious; some preferring the one, some the other. They are
commonly raised from slips and cuttings, in any of the summer months, or from
seed sowm in spring.

SECTION XVII.
OF FRUITS.
THERE is a variety (and of some a great one) of each kind of fruit, and the
difference of tastes makes it impossible to pronounce upon their particular
merits. A sort that is deemed bad by one, may be thought good by another; and
thus nurseruymen go on to propagate fruit that are generally esteemed bad,
because sometimes called for. With respect to fruit, there are provinical
prejudices in favor of some, and of apples in particular; so that in one
country, a sort shall be generally known and admired, and in another, not be
heard of.

In assisting the young gardener in his choice of the principal fruits, only a
few sorts will therefore be named; such as have obtained almost an universal
credit. It would be well if the number of some kinds were reduced; for their
multiplicity occasions a great uncertainly, and their shades of distinction are
hardly discovered by the best judges: The nursermens' catalogues will furnish
larger lists.

Of the same sort of fruit there is often a perceptable difference, owing
either jointly or separately to the stock, state of the tree, soil, situation,
management and season. Bad planting, by cramping the roots, etc. will often
induce sickliness, and of course a good plant made to produce small, ill
flavoured fruit, and thus it will appear to be not itself. So that when the
best method is taken to procure good fruit, (i. e. such that please us) which
is by graffing, or inoculating from the very tree we have admired the fruit of,
our expectations may, in a measure, be disappointed by a variety of
circumstances.

NURSERYMEN, it is often said, are not to be depended upon, for if they have
not the sort you want, they will send you one they have; and this may sometimes
be the case, as they may think it of little consequence if you have one that is
good. But the case is, there is a great confusion in the names of fruit, by
accident, ignorance, carelessness, etc. New titles have been arbitrarily
imposed on old fruits that have happened to vary a little; and distinctions
made without a difference, of which circumstance Mr. Evelyn complained in his
day, saying, "The discriminating the several kinds of fruit, by their
characteristical notes, from the leaf, taste, color, and other distinguishing
properties, is much wanting." But as Mr. E. observes, the ability for this, is
only attained by long and critical observation. In order to settle this
business, Mr. Miller announced, (1733) that a society of gardeners were
preparing descriptions of each sort of fruit tree, with plates colored from
Nature, which containing all the specific differences of the manner of the
wood, in shooting, and leafing, etc. with the appearance of the flowers and
fruit, as to size, shape and shades of color, would, no doubt, have been a
valuable work. Dr. Hill (in his Eden, folio) professes to have given great
assistance in this matter. "Under the section of fruits (says he) we shall give
their proper names and descriptions, by which every one will know by what names
to call those he fees."

Disappointment frequently originates with the purchaser, who having met with a
fruit to his mind, inquires the name, and is told a wrong one, and that,
perhaps, of a bad sort; the nurserymen then complying with his order, is
blamed. A reduction of the number of sorts, to those in which there is an
evident difference, and more care on the part of those who raise, and those who
buy trees, in all respects; and particularly that of preserving the true name
seems necessary, therefore, in the affair of fruit trees.

On this subject, it may be observed, that the fruit of even the same tree is
not always alike, owing to the season, as that growing in a cold, wet, and
shady summer, will be inferior to the production of a fair and sunny one;
though very hot and dry weather does not suit, and will make a difference in
another way.

The choice of fruit trees should be somewhat governed by soil and situation;
(which has been observed) for that fruit which succeeds in one, will not in
another. Later fruit may be planted in light soils than in strong ones. Some
sorts grow finest in a cool, others in a warm soil, and some situations are too
bleak, either for early or late fruit, though the aspect, and all other
circumstances may be good. In planting fruit trees, particularly those of the
wall, much discretion is necessary, that disappointment may (if possible) be
avoided.

As fruit trees are so readily purchased, few people care to raise them; but
those who may be disposed this way, will find instructions in the sections
nursery and graffing. The purchaser must attend carefully to the planting, for
which work directions have been given in the sections of the formation of a
garden, and that on planting. For the training and pruning of fruit trees,
ample rules are laid down in the section On pruning; so that nothing need be
said of their cultivation here, making proper references.

APPLES, as the most useful fruit, it will be proper to provide as many of as
there may possibly be found due room and occasion for; taking all care to
procure good sorts of the two kinds, for eating raw, and dressed; and to have a
proper assortment of the summer, autumn, and winter fruits.

For the first season, jenneting, common codlin, margaret apple, and summer
pearmain. Second, Golden pippin, Holland pippin, golden rennet, white calville,
and Kentish codlin. Third, Nonpareil, golden russel, Wheeler's russet, winter
pearmain, Kentish pippin, ribstone pippin, margille, Norfolk beefing, and the
John apple. There are, no doubt, other apples very good; but, perhaps, these
have as much merit as any. With respect to raising, planting, pruning, etc. see
pages 31, 36, 37, 71, 74, 86, 105, 161, 165.

The gathering of apples, and other fruit from standards, is often badly
performed, damaging the branches, and breaking the spurs off; let this
business, therefore, be properly attended to, particularly in young trees of
good sorts. Take care not to pinch, or bruise, fruit in gathering.

As to the keeping of apples, those which continue long for use, should be
suffered to hang late, even to November, if the frosts will permit, for they
must be well ripened, or they will shrink. Lay them on heaps till they have
sweated a few days, when they must be wiped dry. Let them then lay singly for
about a fortnight, and be again wiped, and immediately packed in boxes and
hampers, lined with double or treble sheets of paper. Place them gently in, and
cover close, so as to keep air out as much as possible. Preserve them from
frost through the winter.

The fruiterers in London preserve their apples in stiff upright baskets, that
hold about two bushels; laying very dry straw over all, and thickly in severe
weather.

Some of the choicest table sorts of apples may be treated as directed for the
best pears.

The baking apples need not be packed, but either kept singly on the floor, or
shelves, or in heaps covered over, when they have sweated a few days longer
than the others, and have been wined dry; yet these, if packed, will certainly
stand a better chance of keeping the longer.

APRICOT is a fruit something between a plum and a peach, partaking of a middle
nature, both in growth and taste.

The early masculine, Brussels, orange, Turkey, Breda, and Moor-park or Anson,
are the common and best wall sorts; but the Turkey and the Moor-park, though
excellent fruits, are idle uncertain bearers. The Dunmore Breda (a modern
fruit) is said to be excellent; ripe in September.

Gather apricots a little before ripe, or they will lose that smartness which
is so agreeable. With respect to thinning the trees of young fruit, when too
full, see page 150. Particulars as to raising, planting, etc. see pages 30, 38,
72, 105, 108, 132, etc.

BERBERRY is a pretty fruit, useful as a preserve and garnish; a handsome
shrub, which makes a profitable, and also useful hedge, for by reason of its
thorns it is almost impregnable.

Besides the common red, there is a stoneless red, a white and a black fruited
kind. Of raising this shrub, etc. see pages 77, 170.

CORNEL; i. e. Cornelian cherry. The fruit used to be by many preserved to make
tarts, and a medicinal preparation was also made of it, called rob de cornis.
See cherry in list of shrubs.

CHERRY: The sorts may be the early May, May-duke,(ripe in June) white, red,
and black heart, bleeding, heart, Turkey, tradescants, and morella.

In gathering cherries take care not to pull the fruit spur off, which is a
very common thing. If they are properly ripe, they will part so easy from the
tree, as not to do this mischief. See pages 31, 37, 86, 92, 105, 162, 165, 168.

CHESTNUT is not a garden fruit, but the manured, or Spanish sort, in an open
situation, produces good nuts about Michaelmas, and may be kept good all
winter, if covered close from the air. See page 76.

CURRENT, we have in common cultivation, a small red and white, with a larger
of each, called Dutch currants, the champaigne, or pale red sort, and the
black. There are current trees with variegated leaves, and a sort with a
gooseberry leaf. See pages 31, 32, 38, 77, 109, 164, 168.

FIG is a fruit "esteemed by all delicate palates amongst the richest sorts of
fruits; though few vulgar tastes care for it." The sorts that are mostly
planted without doors in England, are the common large blue, early dwarf blue,
early dwarf white, and large white. The first kind is the hardiest, though they
do not always ripen well with us abroad. See pages, 30, 75, 105, 108, 156, etc.

FILBERD, we have a white and red sort of, and the latter judged most agreeable
in flavor. The nuts are the Spanish, cob, and hazel. The first is a large nut
with a thin shell, and the second is a large one with a thick shell, but both
are good. See pages 37, 72, 77, 163.

GOOSEBERRY, there are many sorts of, arising from their propagation by seed,
differing in their time of coming in, size, color, etc. The large sorts of
gooseberries (weighing from ten to fifteen penny-weights) have been much run
upon, yet there are ^mall ones better tasted. The names at least of the sorts
are numerous, (above 200) but those that have been long commonly cultivated
are, the early black, small early red, smooth green, hairy green, common and
large white, hairy and smooth red, ironmonger, Champaigne, yellow, amber, and
tawney. See pages 31, 32, 38, 77, 109, 164, 168.

GRAPE. The vine should never be planted, but in a very warm situation, free of
all shade, from the rising to the setting sun, or at least nearly so.

The only sorts likely to fruit well in open culture, are the black July, white
and black sweet water, black, ^uscadine, and black claster. When grapes are
ripe, they are transparent. See pages 31, 76, 105, to 108, 452, etc.

MEDLAR, there is an apple, and pear shaped sort of, but this fruit is little
cultivated, less liked, and not good till rotten ripe. The sorts are the
German, the Italian, and the English, or Nottingham medlar. Gather at the
beginning of November, lay some on straw, and cover with straw; and others (to
forward their ripening) put in a box, on a two inch layer of fresh bran,
moistened well with soft warm water; then strew bran between them, and cover
two inches thick, which moisten also, but not so wet as before: Proceed thus,
layer upon layer; and a week, ten days, or a fortnight, will do the business.

The chief value of the medlar (as also of the service) is its late coming in
for table use, when there is little other fruit to be had.

MULBERRY, there is a black, a white, and a red sort of; but the former is the
one generally cultivated for fruit, being much the best. The white sort of
mulberry is that cultivated for feeding silk worms. The red sort is the common
mulberry of Virginia, hardy, and succeeds here.

The mulberry tree should have a grass plat underneath it for the fruit to fall
on, for those thus picked up will be superior to what may be gathered. See
pages 32, 37, 75, 161.

NECTARINE is much like the peach in all respects, only that it is smaller, it
has a smooth skin, and firmer flesh. The Newington, red Roman, temple, and
murry, and good sorts, to which the curious, in a good situation, may add the
early nutmeg, and the late green or Peterborough nectarine.

In gathering nectarines and peaches, never pinch them to try whether they are
ripe; for if they are so, the touch will discover it, and when thorough ripe
(as they should be) they will come from the tree with ease. See pages 30, 31,
72, 92, 105, 108, 132, to ^52.

PEACH is a more useful fruit than the nectarine, being larger, more juicy, and
succeeding better in general, as to bearing and ripening. There is a great
variety of peaches under cultivation in England, but on the Continent the
number is much greater. The following may be recommended: The early Ann, early
Newington, early purple, the red and white Magdalens, the great and small
mignens, noblesse, admirable, and old Newington.

Peaches cannot be too ripe,(see nectarine) so that those which drop are by
many reckoned the best; and those whose flesh adheres to the stone (called
pavies) are by some thought the more delicious. See pages 30, 72, 92, 105, 108,
132, to 152.

PEAR, there is a great variety of, and they are classed into summer autumn,
and winter fruits. The summer sorts may be the green chissel, Catharine,
Jargonelle, and summer Bonchretian. The autumn, brown buerre, swan's egg,
bergamot, and dean pear, or St. Michael. The winter St. Germain, cresan, winter
bonchretian, colmar, and chaumontelle. These all come in for eating regularly,
the first in July, and the last continues on to June. Baking pears, Parkinson's
warden, the union, or Uuedales St. German, cadillac and black pear of
Worcester, good to Midsummer.

Gather pears of the summer sorts rather before they are ripe, as when
thoroughly so they eat meally, and will not keep well above a day or two; even
when gathered as they ought to be, in a week, or less, they will begin to go at
the core: They should not, however, be gathered, while they require much force
to pull them off. Autumn pears must also not be full ripe at the time of
gathering, though they will keep longer than those of the summer. Winter pears,
on the contrary, should hand as long on the trees as they may, so as to escape
frost, which would make them flat in flavor, and not keep well. Generally they
may hang to the middle of October on full standards, a week longer on dwarfs,
and to the end of the month on walls; but yet not after they are ripe.

The art of gathering, is to give them a lift, so as to press away the stalk,
and if ripe they readily part from the tree. Those that will not come off easy,
should hang a little longer; for when they come hardly off, they will not be so
sit to store, and the violence done at the foot stalk may injure the bud there
formed for next year's fruit.

Let the pears be quite dry when pulled, and in handling avoid pinching the
fruit, or in any way (in the least) bruising it, as those which are hurt, not
only decay themselves, but presently spread infection to those near them: When
suspected to be bruised, let them be carefully kept from others, and used
first. Gather in shallow baskets, and lay them in gently.

House pears in a dry airy room, at first thinly for a few days, and then put
them in heaps to sweat; in order to which, a blanket thrown over them will
help. The fermentation must be watched, and when it seems to have passed the
height of sweating, wipe the fruit quite dry with fine flannel, or clean soft
linen, and store them.

The storing is thus: Those to be used first, lay be singly on shelves, or on
the floor, in a dry southern room, on clean dry moss, or sweet dry straw, so as
not to touch one another. Some, or all the rest, may be stored as directed for
apples; for they will the keep very well, having first laid a fortnight singly,
and then nicely culled. But the most superior way is, to pack in large earthen,
or China jars, with very dry long moss at the bottom, sides, and also between
them, if it might be. Press a coat of moss on the top, and then stop the mouth
close with cork, or otherwise, which should be rosined over, with about a
twentieth part of bees wax in it. As the object is effectually (...) air, (the
cause of putrefaction) the ja^^ (...) ^arthen, may be set on dry sand, which
put also between, round, and over them, to a foot thick on the top. In all
close storing, observe, there should be no doubt of the soundness of the fruit.
Guard in time from frost those that lie open. Jars of fruit must be soon used
after unsealing, as the air would presently affect it toward decay.

PLUM, of the many sorts the following are good: Green and blue gage,
Fortheringham, white and blue perdrigon, drop d'or, la roche Corbon, la royal,
and St. Catharine. The imperial, or red magnum bonum, and white magnum white,
are chiefly used in tarts, and for sweetmeats, as is the Wentworth. The early
white primordian (not a choice fruit) is valuable for its coming in the
beginning of July; and the imperatrice for not coming in till October. The
bullace plum, black and white, are good for tarts, late in the season, and make
a fine acid preserve. See pages, 31, 37, 75, 86, 92, 105, 163, 165.

QUINCE, we have the common apple, and pear shaped, and Portugal pear shaped.
This fruit cannot be eat raw, but for marmalade, and baked in pies, etc. the
housewife finds it useful. The Portugal sort is mostly reckoned best. Quinces
may hang till November. The ripe ones only are of value, which after sweating a
few days, must be laid singly (at some distance from one another) on a shelf.
See pages 37, 75, 105.

RASPBERRY, the kinds are red and white, and of each a twice bearing sort, i.
e. producing fruit in summer and autumn, Of the red there is a prickly wooded
sort, and a smooth one, sometimes called the Cane, and reed raspberry; and a
large sort, called the Antwerp, of a yellow white.

Gather this fruit carefully, lay no great quantity together, and do it but a
little time before wanted, as raspberries ^^^ntly lose flavor, and tend to
decay. (...) 38, 55, 78, 109, 169.

SERVICE, or sob apple, is rarely cultivated here, as it requires a warmer
climate than England to ripen its fruit; though, in fact, it never ripens on
the tree. It is gathered late in autumn, in a very austere state, and laid by
on straw to decay, when it becomes sweet and very agreeable in a month or six
weeks. The trees are hardy, and the curious often plant them, for the
singularity of their leaves and fruit. There are three sorts of the service,
the wild, the pear, and the medlar, to which fruit they are very like.

STRAWBERRY: Of this fine flavoured fruit, beautiful and fragrant, we have the
following sorts: Red, white, and green wood, and red and white Alpine, scarlet,
Carolina, hautboy, red and green pineapple, and Chili, of sorts, with some
seminal varieties, as several of the hautboy, and one in particular of the
Carolina, called the pink-fleshed strawberry. There is also a strawberry with
one leaf, a variety of the wood and prolific.

Gather strawberries regularly as fast as they ripen, with a bit of their
stalk, and never lay many together to press upon one another. The fresher the
finer ^ating, for this fruit, as the raspberry, is very bad when stale. See
pages 39, 51, 55, 78, 114, 170.

WALNUT, there are several sorts of, as early and late, small and large, thick
and thin shelled, etc. Two only need be named, the early oval thin shelled, and
the Common round, or royal walnut. All the others seem to be only seminal
variations from the last, which is justly reckoned the best fruit. Those
planted for fruit may have the tap root shortened, and be from seven to ten
year's old first, as they seldom bear till about twenty years of age. See pages
77, 105.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICE OF GARDENING, BY CHARLES
MARSHALL, VICAR OF BRIXWORTH, NORTHAMPTONSHIR.

God Almighty first planted a Garden; and indeed it is the purest of human
pleasures: It is the greatest Refreshment to the Spirits of Man: without which,
Buildings and Palaces are but gross handy Works. BACON'S ESSAY. FIRST AMERICAN
FROM THE SECOND LONDON EDITION, Considerably Enlarged and Improved.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, AN ESSAY ON QUICKLIME, AS A CEMENT AND AS A MANURE, BY
JAMES ANDERSON, LL.D. F.R.S. F.A.S. S.

VOL. II.

Boston: PRINTED BY SAMUEL ETHERIDGE, For JOSEPH NANCREDE, NO. 49,
Marlboro'-Street. 1799.

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.
SECTION XVIII.
OF FLOWERS.
OF the classes, annuals, biennials and perennials, 3. Praise of flowers; of
annuals in general, etc. 4. Culture of tender annuals, 6, etc. Of scoop-trowels
and watering-pots; of potting plants, 9. Of watering them, 10. Of potting hardy
flowers; second sowing of tender annuals; of sowing the less tender sorts, 11,
etc. Of the hardy kinds, 13. Second sowing of hardy annuals, 14. A caution;
culture of biennials, 15. Of perennials. The Dutch famous for producing new
flowers. Directions for raising bulbous and tuberous roots, 16. Of raising
fibrous rooted sorts, 17. General culture of bulbous and tuberous roots, 18,
etc. Soil suitable, and depth at which to plant, 19. Disposition, distances and
management, 20, etc. Of forwarding spring bulbs in water glasses, etc. Of stalk
bulbs, 21. Of saving seed. Bulbs are yearly renewed. Propagation of flowering
shrubs, 22, etc. Of American sorts. Particular use of the hand-glass, 23. A
useful observation, 24.

SECTION XIX.
LISTS OF TREES, SHRUBS, AND FLOWERS.
Concerning them, 24. Time of flowering, colors, names, 25. Sorts. Lists of
forest-trees, 26. Observations on ditto, 27, etc. List of large deciduous
ornamental trees, 30. Observations on ditto, 31, etc. List of smaller deciduous
ornamental trees, or large shrubs, 33. Observations on ditto, 34. List of the
lowest deciduous trees, or shrubs, 35, etc. Observations on ditto, 38, etc.
List of evergreen trees, 42. Observations on ditto, 43. List of evergreen
shrubs, 45. Observations on ditto, 47. List of flowers -- tender annuals, 49.
Observations on ditto, 50. Less tender annuals, 52. Observations on ditto, 54.
Hardy annuals, 58. Observations on ditto, 61. List of biennial flowers, 62.
Observations on ditto, 63. List of fibrous rooted perennials, 66. Observations
on ditto, 72. List of bulbous, tuberous and fleshy rooted perennials, 82.
Observations on ditto, 86. Detached articles -- auricula, 91. Carnation, 92.
Geranium, 94. Pinks, 97. Polyanthus, 98. Tuberose, 99.

SECTION XX.
A CALENDAR.
Of the general work of gardening, 101. January, the particular work of, 102.
February, 104. March, 106. April, 109. May, 112. June, 114. July, 117. August,
120. September, 123. October, 125. November, 128. December, 131. Close, 134.

* In the course of the work, a few articles are referred to, which were
designed to be inserted at the close of the book, but are omitted in order to
introduce others more important.

The necessity of an Index is precluded by the above table of contents, the
work being so much in the alphabetical form.

SECTION XVIII.
OF FLOWERS.
FLOWERS, as to their cultivation, are classed into annuals, biennials and
perennials. Annuals are those that are sown, flower and die, within a year.
Biennials are those that are sown one year, and flower and die the next.
Perennials are those ^^at do not flower the year they are sown, but the next,
and continue to live years afterward, some fewer, some more: Of this class
there is a great variety, (perhaps fifty to one of the last) mostly fibrous
rooted, some fleshy, some bulbous, and some tuberous, etc. Most of the
perennials are annual in their stalks, which die down to the ground in winter,
and fresh shoots rise in the spring. But strictly speaking, all of each class
are not annual, biennial, and perennial; for some of the annuals come a second,
or a third year, as Chinese holyhock, and Indian pink, and others would live
through the winter if housed. Of the biennials, the same may be said of the
stock July flower, sweet William, and wall flower; only these plants do not
always live, and will not come so neat and strong as before, and are therefore
to be sown, or propagated, as they are classed, in order to have a certain and
fine blow. Of the perennials, some do not flower well above three or four
years, as the holyhock, etc. for which a sowing should of course take place the
year before they are wanted. See pages 41, 42, 56, 57, 60, 65, 66, 67, 70, 113.

Flowers, the sole luxury which Nature knew,
In Eden's pure and guiltless garden grew;
Gay without toil, and lovely without art,
They sprung to cheer the sense, and glad the heart.
BARBAULD, What sweets are these which gratefully diffuse
Their fragrance round? --
-- It Is the flowers,
The incense of the garden's breath, that sheds
This balmy sweetness. --
-- To the smell
How grateful, nor less pleasing to the eye
The bloom of opening flowers. -- Kind Nature here
In nice proportion all her favors deals;
Those gales around the biissfull garden pours,
Neither too strong the organs to oppress,
Nor yet so saint the senses to elude.
How often is the sated palate cloyed
At the rich sumptuous feast, how soon offend
The loathed dishes which last moment pleased?
But the high relish which each sense partakes
From Nature's gifts the appetite never tire,
Which please it more, the more they are enjoyed.
Even luxury itself, when feasting here,
Is guiltless, and esteemed a crime no more.
See in what various tints the flowery tribes
Their several beauties show, and court the eye
With new delight, distinguished each from each
By different hues -- how wise the bounteous hand
Of that indulgent power! though perfect all
His works, who yet on all the charms bestows
Of novelty to show 'em still more fair.
NEWCOMB. 1. OF ANNUALS.
Annual flowers are divided into three classes, i. e. tender, less tender, and
hardy.

In the list, section 19th. the tender annuals are marked 1, the less tender 2,
and the unmarked are hardy.

To this list of flowers might be added others, and some possibly that are
pretty; but many of the annuals that have been introduced for variety's sake in
large gardens, plantations, etc. are weed-like, dull and rambling, and perhaps
a few among those here mentioned may not be sufficiently ornamental (as, for
instance, the whites, where there are other colors of the same flower) to give
general satisfaction; for a gay appearance is certainly the first object in the
cultivation of flowers. There are rare plants, and others admirable in their
structure and properties, which make no show; but these are rather subjects for
the curious b^t^^ist, and he will think them well worthy of a place in his
garden.

Some flowers are both beautiful and fragrant; but many have only one of these
properties to recommend them. Some are cultivated chiefly for the elegance of
their leaf, as the ice plant, palma christi, and the curled mallow; and some
that bear pretty and sweet flowers, are meanly furnished with leaves, as the
yellow sultan. Others obtain a place in the garden, neither for fragrance, or
flower, or leaf: but merely for the singularity of the fruit, or seed vessel,
as the egg plant, snails, catterpillars, hedge hogs, horns, and others.

In the given list, some of the tender annuals may occasionally be considered
as less tender; as Amaranthus coxcomb, and tricolor, balsams, double, as well
as single, and stramonium; only they will not be so forward and fine. Some of
those also among the less tender may be sown as hardy for a late blow, as China
after, Indian pink, love lies bleeding, marigold, French and African, princes
feather, ten week stocks, sultan, red and white. Some among the hardy annuals
may advantageously be treated as the less tender, to ensure their germination,
or to bring them forward, as belvidere, Indian corn, (the large sort of which
must be forwarded upon heat) mignonette, mulberry blight, nasturtium, and
persicaria.

The CULTURE of each Class follows.
1. OF ANNUALS.
ABOUT Mid-March is a general good time to sow the TENDER (and in short all)
sorts, though the curious and skilful being well furnished with proper frames,
etc. may begin a month sooner; the end of March, or beginning of April is,
however, not too late, and will better suit a young gardener than if he sowed
earlier. In order to succeed in this business, there should be provided, fine
dry and rich earth, good stable dung, frames, or roomy hand-glasses, and mats.

A moderately strong hot bed, for a one light, must be prepared, and the
violent heat being certainly over, the seeds may either be sown thinly in
drills, two or three inches asunder, on five or six inches of mould, or less on
a weak bed. May sow also in pots, plunged to the rims. Cover the seeds from a
quarter to half an inch, or more, according to their size. Some of them will
appear in a few days, and others will lie a fortnight, or more, according to
the circumstances of their nature, age, and the heat, or moisture, they meet
with.

Thin the pla^^^ ^ittle in time, and soon after to an inch, and then again to
two, asunder.

Water, just warm, must be gently given them, (not to beat them down) as they
may appear to need it, and air (particularly in a full sun) as much as they Can
be thought to bear, a little at first, and by degrees more, for this is
essential to their health and strength.

The seeds may also (...) sown in pots, and plunged at the back part of a
cucumber or melon bed. A bed may be got ready to prick them into, or into pots
placed in the like manner; and where only a few are cultivated, this method is
advisable, (to save trouble) not beginning too early.

Provide another bed by one month from the sowing, to prick the plants out in,
having six inches depth of mould, place them five or six inches asunder,
allotting those to the warmest part of the bed, which were longest coming up,
and which are of course the weakest, as globes, etc. Let the mould be warmed
through before planting. There had better be too little, than too much heat;
but if the bed gets cool, line it, or cover round with straw, as directed in
the management of hot beds, page 179.

If not sown till the beginning of April, this second bed may possibly go
through the business, with proper management to keep up its heat, and covering
well on nights; but a third bed is commonly necessary, in order to succeed
well, and bring the plants on forward and fine, which is necessary to the
credit of the gardener. In this bed, it being covered over with four or five
inches of mould, the plants should be in small pots, one in each, and plunged
an inch deep, close to one another. As the bed gets cooler, the pots are to be
earthed higher, till up to the rims in mould; but if planted without pots, the
distance should be about nine inches asunder.

More water and air is necessary as the plants increase in size; and every time
they are shifted, let it be carefully, with some earth about their roots,
though a warm bed will soon make them strike, if without mould. Let the (...)
from sun a few days; i. e. till rooted in their new ^^^itation. As these tender
annuals do not rightly bear the full open air till Midsummer, give them
resolutely as much of it as possible in the frames, (by degrees) even to taking
off the glasses in mild parts of the day. Keep up a heat in the third bed as
long as can be, that the plants may continue in a growing state, and not
stunted by bottom cold. To this end a fourth bed, for some of the sorts, as
globes, coxcombs, etc. would be a great advantage, as to size.

It is hardly necessary to hint that the beds must be larger, and frames
deeper, every time the plants are shifted. As the first frame was a one light,
let the second be a two light, and the third a three light, which may be raised
upon bricks, or boarded round the bottom, as occasion may require. From the
small pots, let them be transplanted into bigger in time, or (as soon as they
can safely be) into warm borders, where if covered with hand-glasses, set on
bricks for a while, it would secure them from unkind weather, till got a little
hardened. In this changeable climate of England, there is hardly and knowing
when tender plants may be exposed safely; yet too much housing and covering is
to be avoided as much as possible. Many flowers will need support. See page 56.
For the method of shifting plants from pots, as into bigger, or to the open
ground. See page 190.

Some tender flowers in pots may be in the ground, to keep their roots cool,
and for the sake of being conveniently covered; in which case, put a bit of
tile below the pot to keep out worms.

Good seed from tender annuals will not be well had, but from February sown
plants. Skilful gardeners, sowing early and having plenty of dung and drawing
frames, produce surprising plants of the tender annual class, so that the globe
amaranthus to three, and the giant coxcomb and tricolor from three to five or
six feet high have been seen. Flowers designed to gather seed from, should
begin to have some protection of glass about Mid-August, at least on nights,
till they are fully ripened in September.

Scoop trowels of two or three sizes will be found very useful in the shifting
of flowers in general, but particularly of the hot bed sort; and as they should
be clean from dirt when used, so also should they by free from rust, by which
they will work much pleasanter, and more successfully: In short, all garden
tools should be kept bright, as well for use as neatness. Before a trowel is
used, in the removal of a plant, it is a proper, and safe way, to cut strait
down round the root, and to the bottom, with a clean, and not very blunt knife;
so will the trowel take all up whole, and the fibers will not be lacerated, or
barked.

A small watering pot (i. e. from two to three quarts) with a finely pierced
rose, is also necessary, to give refreshment without bending down the plants,
or hardening the surface of the earth. The form of many a good flower is
spoiled in its infancy by rough watering, and particularly capsicums; to avoid
which evil, whatever watering pot is used, it should be only half full.

The potting of plants is often carelessly, but ought to be most carefully
performed, that as little check as possible may be felt by the roots. Fill the
pot one half or two thirds full, (as the case may require) and then make a hole
in the middle, adapted in form to receive the plant, with its ball of earth;
and do it right at first, so as not to be too high, or too low, for once put
in, it will not be safe to take it out again, left the mould drop from the
roots. Do not press the ball of earth, (as some do) but only just fasten the
loose mould that is put round it. If the soil is light, press that a little
which is first put in at the bottom. If a plant that is to be potted be without
would about its roots, raise a billock (at a proper height) in the middle of
the pot, to lay the roots on and round. It must always be avoided planting in
the pots too deep, because so much of the pot is lost as is above. In all
transplantations it is proper to shorten some of the roots, and the most
straggling are to be chosen for the purpose; so that when it is done with a
ball of earth, some of the external fibers must be cut off, if it was not done
by taking up, which it generally is when the plants are any thing large.

Annuals in pots will require water every day, in very hot weather, and in
moderately so, every other; but those in the open ground will do twice as long
(or more) without water being given them. Some sorts will need more water than
others, as egg plants and balsams, than coxcombs and tricolors. This matter and
a variety of others, will be learned by observation, without a good share of
which, no one can possibly become a good gardener: The most exact directions
will not take in every case, and rules will be of little avail, where the mind
is not in diligent exercise.

In general, potted plants require water according to the weather, their
situation as to the sun, the size of the pots, the fullness of the roots, the
quantity of leaves, and the particular nature of their substance, as succulent
or not: The smaller pots must have the most. The earth also in which plants
grow makes a great difference, as some sorts of soil retain moisture much
longer than others. It may be a question whether pots of annual flowers
standing in pans, should have water constantly kept in them, or only watered
(in due time) on the top, till it runs through: Both practices are followed by
good gardeners; but the latter seems best, as keeping the young fibers at the
bottom always sodden can hardly be right: With respect to perennials (except of
an aquatic nature) it must be wrong. Let pots of flowers in the summer be
placed pretty much in the Shade and shelter; but not by any means be under
trees, or a roof. A situation where they have only the morning sun till eleven
or twelve o'clock is the best; and some persons are so curious in this respect
as to have awnings for the purpose, and temporary reed fences to keep off the
wind, to which flowers (particularly of the tender kind) should not be wholly
exposed. Annuals, or even a few perennials, may be put in covered places, when
nearly in full blow, for the sake of their ornament; but the latter should not
be continued longer than while the prime show lasts.

It is advisable not to pot more plants than necessary, as they occasion much
trouble, if properly managed; and after all, will not be so fine as those
growing in the open ground. Some thing are too tender for open culture, and by
potting they are conveniently protected by frames, or by housing, and sometimes
simply plunging them in the ground, close against a warm wall, in winter, where
a little protection may be easily given them; others it may be desirable to
pot, for the sake of moving them into particular place when in blow, and to
have some ready to put into the ground, where others are gone off, so as to
keep certain favorite borders and walks always in glow; but do not have too
much to do in this way.

A second sowing of tender annuals should take place two, three, or four weeks
after the first, according as that was made, late or early; for their beauties
are certainly desirable, as long as the season will permit us to behold them,
and they are the ^^rist's chief dependence in the autumn.

The LESS TENDER annuals should have a slight bed (about two feet thick) made
for them at Mid-March, or a little after, being sown and managed as directed
for the tender sorts, when they are one or two inches high, (according to their
nature) they must be taken up with a scoop trowel, so as to keep a ball of
earth about their roots, and either transplanted on another bed, about one and
a half foot thick of dung, or into the cold ground; the small kinds at four or
five, and the larger at six or eight inches asunder, in a good well broke soil.
Let them be immediately watered and kept moist, and shaded from sun till well
settled. Here they may grow till their leaves begin to meet, when they should
be cut between their roots with a knife, and lifted up neatly with a scoop
trowel, to be potted or planted where they are to flower: If this business is
done well, they will receive but little check in their transplantation. Spindle
rooted plants (as flocks) should be moved where they are to blow, as young as
may be; but fibrous rooted ones may be shifted much older.

Plants will flag a little even when removed with a large ball of earth; but as
most likely some of the sibres of the roots are either broke or cut, the effect
is natural, as a plant is chiefly fed by the youngest and most extreme parts of
the root. If possible, let all summer transplanted flowers be shaded from sun,
by garden pots, (raised a little) or otherwise, till they have struck fresh
roots, which they will soon do; but uncover on nights. This will occasion some
trouble; yet the advantage attending it, makes it very advisable, and
especially the plants moved with none, or very little mould about their roots.

A hot bed for these, as it is moderate, may be covered with hoops and mats,
and do very well, or rather better than frames and glass; for it often happens,
that annuals are kept too close, by which they become weak, and get stunted
when planted out in the free air, which is made (by over nursing) unnatural to
them. Toward the end of April, almost any of them will come up under
hand-glasses, on a warm border, in a light and rich soil; but they will blow
late, and be not near so strong. The Chinese holyhock, though it will certainly
come up well at this late sowing, will be hardly able to produce flowers before
winter. Those flowers of this class, however, that have been mentioned as to be
occasionally considered as hardy, may be thus treated for a second blow.

Other modes of cultivation are, that a few of the less tender sorts may be
sown in pots, and placed (not plunged) in any hot bed that is in work for other
things; but they must not be kept close, or hot, which would draw them up weak:
This plan may do for them a little while, and a slight heat may be got ready to
prick them out upon.

Again, both this class of annuals, and the former, if not very early sown, do
exceeding well, (or rather best) when on hot beds under hand-glasses, or paper
lights, particularly balsams.

What was said of tender annuals apply here, as to air, water, and cover, but
more freedom in the present case should be taken. If any are under mats, the
cover must be removed on days, except the weather be bad; or it may be only
turned back, and half off, to let the fun and light in from the south. Never
let the seeds or plants of annuals really want water when the weather is dry.
See page 56.

The HARDY annuals have some little difference in their temperature. Though all
may be sown from the middle to the end of March, as the best average season,
some may generally with safety be sown at Mid-February, as candy tufts,
cornbottles, larkspurs, hawkweed, lavatera, lobel's catchfly, lupines, dwarf
lychnis, nigella, sweet peace, poppies, mulberry blight, oriental mallow,
persicaria, sun-flower, annual snap dragon, Venus' looking-glass, and navel
wort, virginian, or annual stock, and winged peace, with some others.

But nature seems evidently to direct an autumn sowing, for many sorts which
are then shed (some always, and others often) come up at spring, and these make
the finest blow, and produce the best seed for propagation. A number, (all the
above sorts) therefore, might be scattered on the surface of the ground at
random, not immediately as soon as ripe, but kept a little while to harden; but
this is not a common practice, as gardeners like to have their borders spring
dressed before they sow their annuals.

For the spring sowing, the ground being deep dug, and well broke, make hollows
(by drawing the mould aside) of from six to twelve inches diameter, or more,
according to the size of the garden, as large ones should have the biggest
patches. Sow thin, and cover according to the size of the seed, from a quarter
to an inch. Take out mould enough to leave the patches somewhat hallow, which
will serve to show where they are sown, and to receive the rain, or occasional
watering. If the plants come up crowding, thin them soon, and leave a number
suitable to their usual size of growth; as one only of the belvidere,
cornbottle, persicaria, and sun-flower; two of the lavatera, oriental mallow,
mulberry blight, etc. three larkspurs; and ^our of less plants. Annuals are
very often sown too thick, and suffered to stand too close for flowering, and
that altogether not by neglect, but choice; yet a few short strong plants with
fine full flowers, are surely better than tall dangling weak ones.

A second, or even a third, sowing of hardy annuals may be made, at two or
three weeks between, to continue the blow, especially of those that come early,
and are soon off: May is not too late for the sowing of these. (...) ^^kspur,
for instance, will make a long ^now with us, by autumn and early, and late
spring plants; in short of every flower that blows in summer, there may be
three sowings, and two of those that come early in autumn, in order to a full
succession.

Hardy annuals do not in general transplant well, so should be sown where they
are to remain, and they must have a good soil, as well as the tender kinds, in
order to success. Take care to sow the tallest sorts behind, and the lowest in
front, and to form the patches at a sufficient distance from one another, that
the ground may be stirred and raked between them. A garden may be too full of
flowers, which it certainly is, if the earth is not seen about them: for when
that is clean and fresh, all things growing in it appear more lively: It is, as
it were, the back ground of a picture.

2. OF BIENNIALS.
There are but a few of these, and the principal sorts will be found in the
list of them, next section, where observations will be made on particular
plants.

These are to be sown in drills, or in beds, at broad cast, the latter end of
March, or beginning of April, where they have only the morning sun, and the
ground should be cool, or kept so by occasional watering: The beginning of May,
however, is not too late.

Thin the young plants on the seed beds a little, soon after they appear, to
about an inch, and again to three or four inches asunder, and keep them well
weeded. They may either thus remain till autumn, to be planted out where they
are to blow; or if they grow too strong and crowding, let every other be drawn
in summer, (choosing a moist time, if possible) and planted out wider into
nursery beds for use in autumn, or the following spring: The latter season will
do for final planting, though the former is best, as the roots get established
in the ground; when if moved in the spring they meet with a check. It is best
to transplant with earth about their roots; but shorten all straggling fibers,
and cut off dead and rambling leaves. In severe winters, those moved in autumn
are sometimes killed, and therefore a few may be reserved to spring, in case of
such an accident.

3. OF PERENNIALS.
This class (as has been observed) is very numerous, and the plants are
propagated, many of them by their roots, according to their nature, as fibrous,
bulbous, etc. some by layers, suckers, offsets, slips, cuttings, etc. and very
few by seed only; though all sorts (bearing seed) are occasionally propagated
this way, for new varieties, or to produce finer plants, as those from seed
generally prove, with respect to strength, symmetry, and flowers. It happens,
however, when propagated from seed, that sometimes a better, but more
frequently a less beautiful flower is produced of many sorts; and this is the
reason why the other modes of propagation are so much adopted, by offsets, etc.
as thus they come identically the same with the mother plant. Another obstacle
against some sorts being sown is, that they are several years before they come
to bear, as bulbous, and tuberous rooted flowers.

The Dutch have made themselves famous by their patience and perseverance in
raising bulbs and tubers, and sow every year some of each kind, which pays them
well, when they meet with an eminently good flower. A new sort of anemone,
auricula, carnation, ranunculus, and even a polyanthus will frequently fetch a
guinea, and a tulip, or a hyacinth, sometimes ten.

To raise bulbous and tuberous rooted flowers, they should be sown in boxes
(suppose three feet long, two wide, and six inches deep) of light rich earth,
about the middle of August, or September, and setting them in a sunny sheltered
place (not under cover) sow anemonies and ranunculuses a quarter of an inch
deep; irises, colchicums, and cyclamens, half an inch; and tulips,
fritt^llaries, and hyacinths, near an inch deep, giving water in a dry time, so
as to keep the mould somewhat moist, but not wet. A little hay may be kept over
the seeds till the plants appear, which perhaps will be spring with some.
Sowings may take place also in March, or April, removing the boxes in May, to
where they may have only the morning sun. Thin them a little, if they come up
thick, and when stalks die, put on half an inch of fine mould; and after the
decay of the leaf next summer, they must be planted out in nursery beds,
(latter end of August) two, or three inches asunder, (according to their
nature) and some will blow the following year, as the anemone and ranunculus,
etc. though the hyacinth will be four or five, and the tulip seven or eight
first. These must be removed from the first nursery bed to another, (as soon as
their tops are decayed) and planted at six inches distance; and ever after
treated as blowing plants. Keep them very clear of weeds, particularly the seed
boxes, or borders. Protect the seedlings in severe weather from frost, or heavy
rain, by mats and hoops. A reed hurdle, or something else, put up at the N. E.
end, to break off the wind when it is harsh, will be proper.

Fibrous rooted, etc. perennials, if propagated from seed, are to be treated as
biennials; but they are mostly increased (as observed) otherways, with less
trouble, and chiefly by parting the roots in autumn and spring, or by rooted
slips or offsets. Many of them have creeping roots, and increase so fast, that
it is necessary to take them up every three or four years; and a removal of
this sort is proper for most perennials, in order to greater neatness, and a
superior cultivation; for though large tufts look handsome, they may be too
bulky, and some kinds are apt to rot (as bachelor's buttons) when thick, the
stalks and flowers come weak, and the leaves, toward the bottom, turn yellow.

In the next section, is a list of the most common, ornamental, or curious
perennial flowers, (easy of cultivation) having fibrous and fleshy roots, of
which not all the sorts are named, but those only which seemed most worthy.

Many perennial flowers have bulbous and tuberous roots, and their general
culture is, to take them up annually soon after they have flowered, when their
leaves and stalks turn yellow and decay, then the root is at rest, and its
fibers die. When first taken up, lay them covered in the ground for a few days,
and then clean and harden them in the sun, (sparingly, if exceeding hot) when
they must be stored in a dry place, till wanted, for damp is apt to rot them:
Never put many together, for this reason.

It is not absolutely necessary to take bulbs and tubers up every year, as
every second or third may do; but it is the common practice, because it gives
an opportunity to remove the offsets for propagation, and the mother bulbs are
thus strengthened, as also from the renewed soil they meet with by a fresh
plantation. It is not uncommon for bulbous roots to be suffered to stand many
years without taking up; but then they cramp and starve one another, and are
apt to go off from their original beauty.

Bulbs and tubers may be either replanted immediately on being taken up, or
kept out of ground for several months; i.e. during their natural periods of
rest. Autumn flowering bulbs are to be taken up in May, if their leaves are
decayed.

Spring flowering bulbs should be replanted in September, or October; those of
the summer in October, or November; and those of autumn in July, or August. A
little before, or after, is not very material; only when they are put in too
soon, they come so forward as to be liable to be damaged in severe winters, and
springs; and when kept out of the ground too long, the bulbs spend themselves
first in making roots. The scaly bulbs (as lilies) should not be kept out of
the ground above six weeks, or two months. Those that flower in summer, may be
put in the ground at different times, as early and late in autumn, and early in
the new year, (not later than February) to obtain a succession cession of blow.
This is a common practice with the anemone and ranunculus; but when planted in
winter, the soil should be a dry one, or made so, by digging in a good quantity
of fine sea-coal ashes, and coarse, or drift sand; else they are apt to rot, if
much wet falls, especially when followed by sharp frost. They may be protected
from wet by mats, and from frost by peace haulm.

Offsets of bulbs, and weak tubers, must be planted a month before the full
sized roots; and as they are not expected to flower the first year, should be
disposed of in nursery beds, rather close, where they may grow a year, or two,
according to their strength, as some will be this time, or longer, before they
flower. Those taken from scaly bulbs, will not endure to be out of ground, and
must therefore be planted almost immediately. Bulbs taken up out of season, i.
e. when they have remained so long in the ground as to have struck out fresh
roots, should be removed with balls of earth; for though they may live without
this care, they will be exceeding weak; it is therefore necessary exactly to
observe the proper season for removal.

The soil that best suits bulbous and tuberous roots in general, is a sandy
loam; but most of the sorts are not very nice. The ground for them should be
well dug, two spades deep, that their fibers may shoot freely, their offsets
swell easily, and wet be completely drained from them, when much of it fans.
And this work should be done a week before planting, that the ground may
settle. In a light soil, roots of the rununculus have been found to strike a
yard deep, which may admonish, that in a clay bottom, it is proper to lay a
body of stones there, (suppose at eighteen inches) that too much moisture may
not be detained.

The depth at which bu^bs should be planted, must be according to their size,
three or four inches deep, from their top. Tubers also according to their size;
anemonies and ranunculuses at two, or two and a half inches, etc. Some bulbs
will come up even when a foot below the ground, as crown imperials, and
crocuses, at six inches, or more; some persons have, therefore, planted them
deeper than the above rule, in order to be able to stir the surface of the
ground without damaging them.

The proper disposition of bulbous and tuberous roots, is either in beds (a
trifle rounded) of from three to four feet and a half wide, for the curious
sorts; or in patches of the smaller sorts, to form clusters of three, four, or
five, agreeable to the room they require. There should be only one in a place
(generally) of the white, or orange lily, crown imperial, and such like large
bulbs.

In beds, the fancy sorts of bulbs, and tubers, may be set in rows, eight or
nine inches asunder, and from five to seven inches in the rows, according to
their size. The distance of four inches apart is, however, by some florists,
thought sufficient for anemonies and ranunculuses; but certainly more were
better, where a strong blow is a first object. Hyacinths should be planted at
seven, or eight, though they are more commonly at six inches. Tulips should be
at eight, or nine.

When planted, if rain does not come in about four days, beds of bulbs and
tubers should be watered, to set them growing, that they may not rot.

Though bulbs may be planted by a dibble, (taking care that the mould does not
lay hollow about the roots) a better way is, to draw drills, and place them in,
giving them a gentle pressure into the ground, and covering neatly up. A little
free sand should be strewed along the bottom of the drills, under hyacinths,
anemonies and rununculuses, if the soil is not quite a light one.

The best way of planting bulbs is, to draw the mould off the bed to a
sufficient depth; then lay the surface perfectly level; give a watering; and
when the top it a little dry, mark it out into proper sized squares; then place
a bulb in the middle of each, and carefully cover up, so as not to throw them
on their sides.

Those bulbs and tubers in beds, may conveniently be protected, when in flower,
from rain and sun, by an awning, which will continue them in perfection of blow
much longer than if always exposed. When these flowers, in beds, first break
ground, if the weather is severe, they may have an awning of mats, or cloth,
occasionally over them; or a little peace haulm, or wheat straw, laid thinly on,
just to protect their tender state a little; this regards particularly nights,
but on days a cover should not remain on in tolerable weather. But before the
shoots appear above ground, valuable beds of these flowers should be sheltered
from having much wet, (even all through winter) as moisture gives frost so
great power.

Spring flowering bulbs may be brought forward by planting them in pots and
water-glasses, and setting them in warm rooms, or hot beds; and thus, even in
winter, we may have ornaments and sweets that court our admiration. The great
variety of hyacinths and polyanthus nar^iss^s, furnish us amply in this way;
but other early bulbs may also be thus forwarded. Pots, placed in a warm
kitchen window, may be brought forward to blow in the parlour; or placed in any
window, open to the south, will forward them. These should be potted in
October, and have a light dry soil, occasionally giving water. Bulbs may be put
in glasses at this time, and once a month after, to February for a succession.
Let the bulb just touch the water, which should be soft, and replenished so
often as to keep it up to the bottom of the bulbs. Let it be completely changed
about once a week; and if a bit of nitre, the size of a pea, be put in each
time, it will strengthen the blow.

Though bulbous flowers are propagated plentifully by root offsets, yet some
are increased form little bulbs formed on the sides or tops of the stalks, as
the moly tribe, and the bulbiforous lily. These should be taken off in August,
dried in the sun, and then planted in nursery beds as offsets.

Bulbs propagated from offsets, produce a flower exactly like the parent; and
varieties are only to be obtained from seed, which never comes quite like the
original.

Let seed be saved only from choice flowers, be thorough ripe, and being
hardened a little in the sun, they may be sowed soon after, in pots or boxes,
of good light earth. See page 16, vol. 2. Persons of leisure and curiosity,
would do well to amuse themselves in this way, that we may not be so much
indebted to foreigners, for a supply of new flowers of this class.

An observation may be here made, that the same bulb (as is often thought) does
not always continue; for some are renewed every year, as the tulip; and others
the second, third, etc. So that when taken up to remove offsets, the principal
bulb of the tulip, etc. which is commonly esteemed the old one, is, in fact, a
new formed one, though (perhaps) not less in size, and it may be bigger.

As many SHRUBS (i. e. woody plants) are propagated in a view principally to
their flowers, they will properly enough be considered a little here, as to
their propagation. See section On Shrubs and Shrubberies.

The deciduous shrubs that are most usually cultivated for their ornamental
nature, will be found in the lists of the next section; and their modes of
propagation are denoted thus: -- b. budding -- c. cuttings -- g. graff -- l.
layers -- r. roots -- s. seeds -- sl. slips -- su. suckers -- by roots includes
offsets.

Of the various methods of propagating trees and shrubs, that by seed is the
best, where it can be adopted, (as has been observed) and the season is autumn
or spring. If in autumn, it may be earlier, or later, as the seeds ripen; for
soon after they are ripe is the most proper time to commit them to the earth,
covering the smaller seeds from half to a full inch; and kernels, nuts, etc.
from two to three inches, according to their size. Any sort that is doubted to
stand the winter in seed beds, may be sown in pots, or boxes, and housed in
severe frosts. If in spring, (as it is a good rule to sow a little at both
seasons, and some tender sorts require the latter) the seed must be carefully
kept from damp and vermin, and put into the ground toward the end of February,
or early in March. The seeds of some of the more delicate sorts will require to
be sown, at this season, on a slight hot bed; and if a few of most of the sorts
were thus treated, it would be a good method, the better to insure their
germination, and to forward them. Let spring sown seeds be watered
occasionally, according to the weather, to keep them moist. The earth they are
sown in should be moderately light, dry and rich, and formed into beds of four
feet wide, either in drills or at broad cast, first drawing earth off into the
alleys, to cover with. See page 70, 72.

American trees and shrubs do very well in this climate, but the young plants
are generally tender, and should have some protection, one, two, or three
years, till they get woody, and injured to the climate.

For graffing and budding, (as some shrubs are propagated this way) see the
section On Graffing; and for the propagation by suckers, cuttings, layers, etc.
see section 5, page 85, to the end; about suckers, see also page 114. Those
trees, or shrubs, from which cuttings of the same year's growth may be had in
June, or July, may be greatly helped to strike root, by covering them close
with a hand-glass; (as directed concerning pinks) and if a glass were put over
layers, which are difficult to strike, it would help them. See observations on
the arbutus, list 5, next section.

This mode of propagation is particularly adapted to some sorts of evergreen
shrubs, which emit fibers more freely from the youngest wood. If year old wood
is treated thus, the cuttings may be set early in spring; or glasses may be put
over those put out in autumn. But spring cuttings, potted, and set on a slight
hot bed, with hand-glasses, is the surest method to make difficult sorts strike
root.

It may prove an observation of some use, that trees and shrubs raised from
seed grow the largest, from layers generally prove less, and from cuttings the
least. Where budding can be practiced, it is preferable to graffing.

For planting and managing shrubs, etc. see section 9, On Shrubs and
Shrubberies. For pruning, see page 169.

SECTION XIX.
LISTS OF TREES, SHRUBS AND FLOWERS.
* The names of the choicest sorts of fruit trees, will be found in section 17.

THE modes of cultivation are here directed by the letters, as in last section;
adding m. for moist, w. for wet, and d. for dry. Those not marked are to be
understood as (pretty much) indifferent as to soil, and indeed those marked
otherwise may grow in a contrary kind, and often do, though not so
flourishingly.

The time of flowering is annexed to those trees and shrubs that are thus at
all ornamental, and the more ordinary heights they are found to attain are
denoted in the arrangement; a circumstance hitherto much wanted, as useful and
necessary to be known, in order to a right disposal of them. Those of a
naturally low growth have been, sometimes, planted behind in shrubberies, etc.
and the taller forward; but yet this unfortunate circumstance must be
unavoidable to every inexperienced planter, who has no other guide, than that
this is a tree, and that is a shrub, etc.

The colors of the flowers are mentioned when opportunity permitted, as
agreeable to be known, and of use in the disposal of them at planting, to
diversify the scene properly.

Such observations, as may be thought most useful and necessary, will follow
each list; but as neither all the sorts nor the varieties of each sort, could
be enumerated in such a work as this, so also the minutioe of propagation, etc.
is more than could be comprehended, or expected: Folio volumes (so copious is
the subject) have left a variety of plants unnoticed, and much unsaid
respecting cultivation. For ordinary use, a greater enumeration, or more
enlarged particulars, would (indeed) have made the book less valuable. If the
selection and information is good, (and pains have been taken in the business)
those for whom this book is designed, will have no reason to complain.

The names of trees, shrubs and flowers, are in many cases various, as
sometimes the scientific name prevails, and at other times the trivial; and of
neither is there a perfect agreement. The object therefore here has been to
give that name by which each is supposed to be best known. Different plants are
often called by the same name, and a nice discrimination is made by botanists,
according to leaf and flower; but these are no farther noticed than necessary;
and such descriptions are given of each, as cannot (it is hoped) fail to
identify the sort, when applied for to a nurseryman.

In the following lists of trees, the larger are marked with an asterism; and
in the lists of shrubs and flowers, discrimination of size is made by figures,
each being divided into four sorts, as to height; and the lowest marked No. 1.
But it is ever to (...) understood, that the soil, and other circumstances will
make a difference, as to stature; so that the greater may become the less, and
the less the greater.

Where et cetera (i. e. etc.) is affixed to sorts, it means that there are
others; and where it is added to the time of flowering, it signifies of more
than one month's duration. It is the nature of some things to keep in blow all
the summer: to encourage which, dead flowers should always be speedily taken
off, as they occur.

1.
LIST of deciduous trees, usually called forest, or timber trees, serving both
for use and ornament: Abele, is the white poplar; and aspen the tremulous. *
Alder, common hoary leaved American, etc. c. l. s. w. * Ash, common and
American white, red and black, s. * Beech, common and American purple leaved,
s. l. d. Birch, com. white, Virginian and Canadian, etc. s. l. su. * Chestnut,
edible fruited Spanish, and horse, s. May. * Cypress, deciduous, or Virginian
swamp, l. s. w. * Elm, small and broad leaved, wych, or Scotch, etc. s. l. su
Hickery nut, smooth white, and rough barked, s. Hornbeam, common, hop, and
Virginia flowering, s. * Lime, common, red-twigged, black American, etc. l. c.
s. * Larch, common red, white and black American, etc. s. * Maple, great, ash
leaved, opalus or Italian, l. s. su. May -- com. small, Norway, Pennsylvanian,
etc. ditto Medlar, com. German, Nottingham, and Italian, s. l. May Mountain ash
is sometimes a forest tree, see next list * Nettle tree, as next list, grows
large, and is a forest tree Nut tree, common hazel, or any orchard sort, l. su.
s. * Oak, English, American sorts, Spanish, Italian, etc. s. * Plane, Eastern,
Western, middle, or Spanish, s.l.c. May * Poplar, white, black, tremulous and
Carolina, c.l.su. m. * Service tree, the wild maple leaved, s.l. June *
Sycamore, is the great maple, which see. * Walnut, the common, or royal, and
black Virginian, s. * Willow, white, or silver leaved, purple and sweet, etc.


* For Underwood amongst forest trees, the usual sorts are, alders, ash, beech,
birch, hazel, hornbeam, sallow, willow, and sometimes the wych elm, maple,
poplar, and sycamore.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR TREES.
Alders, cuttings of it may be thick truncheons of a yard long, pointed, and
thrust into soft ground half way, or into a hole made with an iron bar, and
will grow readily. This is the way also to propagate poplars, willows, and
sallows; also elders.

Ash, the American sorts do not grow near so large as the common English. For
the ornamental ashes, see next list.

Beech was formerly much used for hedges about, and the divisions of, a garden,
and it serves well for this purpose, as it bears the shears; but it must be
regularly clipped twice a year, the latter end of June and August, or it will
soon get out of order.

Birch is reckoned the worst of timber, yet the wood has its uses in several
particular businesses. The American sorts grow much larger than the English.
The tree is of that accommodating nature, that it will grow in any soil or
situation, wet or dry. It is well known, that a wine is made of its sap, by
boring holes in full grown trees in spring, before the leaves come out; and
from a number of trees a great deal may be collected. Without being unpleasant,
(if properly made, birch wine is relished by many, and is reckoned very
medicinal in scorbutic, and other complaints. For the whole process, see Family
Herbal, octavo, by W. Meyrick, surgeon, a book worthy of notice. There is a
method of catching the liquor, by putting into the holes (deeply bored) faucets
of elder.

Elm, the wych, is the quickest grower, and will flourish in any soil; but the
broad leaved is reckoned the best timber, and the small leaved the most
ornamental, but it must have a good soil to flourish. The wych is easily raised
from seed (sown after it is ripe) but the other sorts are propagated from
suckers, or layers, or graffing on the wych. In order to obtain suckers, and
shoots for layers, stools are to be formed by cutting down some young trees,
almost close to the ground. Trees from layers are better than from suckers.
Observe, that whatever is to be propagated by layers, or suc^ers, making stools
is the way to procure them.

Hornbeam, the common sort will grow very large in some soils, but the
Virginian (flowering yellow) will hardly reach thirty feet, and the hop not
above twenty. All the hornbeams (the hop most) have been used much for clipped
hedges, and partitions in gardens and pleasure grounds, but the oriental sort
suits the purpose best, being naturally dwarfish. The hornbeam feathers down
lower and thicker than any other tree, and the property of holding its decayed
leaves on all winter, adapts it for a screen from winds.

Not tree, as timber, will be best propagated from nuts, either to remain where
sown, or planted out while young, keeping the stems trimmed up, free of shoots,
to about five or six feet, (according to strength) and then to form a head,
topping the leading shoot for the purpose, which will occasion several branches
to proceed from the upper eyes; and this is the way to form all sorts of trees
to good heads.

Oak, the English produces the best wood, but the American sorts are the
fastest growers, though they do not attain to the size of the English. A cool
strong soil produces the handsomest trees, and toughest timber. Oaks should not
be above three or four years old before they are planted, for the older they
are, the more check they receive, and it is a tree that does not transplant
well. Hence all the care should be taken that can be in the business. See
section 10. But oaks succeed best without removal, having a tap, or downright
root, which is frequently broke in taking up: All trees would probably thus
come finer, if it was convenient. The consequence of preserving the tap has
been suspected; but it is certainly Nature's direction, for rather than give up
the point, the tap of the oak will make its way downward, in a direct line,
through the hardest soils. See page 80.

Poplar to propagate by cuttings, see alder; but younger and smaller cuttings
for this tree do better, as those of one or two years old, and half a yard
long: The black poplar does not succeed well by truncheons.

Walnut, when planted for timber, should be young, and the tap root, if
possible, preserved whole. The black Virginian grows more erect, but the other
makes the largest tree, and best wood. The white Virginian is the heckery nut.
All these make the best trees, when growing from seed without transplanting.

Willow and sallow, to propagate by cuttings, see alder.

* Of all the forest trees here mentioned, the ash, the beech, the elm, and the
oak, are the principal; and to plant these, and others, is a work of the most
commendable, and eventually of the most profitable kind. See pages 79,115,122.

II.
LIST of large deciduous trees, considered chiefly as ornamental, for pleasure
grounds, etc.

* Acacia, triple thorned, ^ewer thorned, etc. s.l.c.su. July * Ash, Calabrian
manna, and large flowering. s.gr. May -- weeping and variegated, wh. and yel.
leaved, b.gr. -- dwarf flowering (small white bunches) s.gr. May Annona,
custard apple, or papaw tree, s. May d. * Beech, white and yellow striped
leaved, b.gr.m. Birch, weeping or pendulous twigged, s.l.su. Buckthorn, common
purging berried, s.su.c. May * Catalpa (tree bignonia) or trumpet flower,
c.l.s. Aug. Cherry, the bird, common and Cornish, etc. s.b.gr. May --
Cornelian, male cornus, or cornel, s.c.l.su. May * Chesunt, scarlet flowered
and striped leaved, s.b.gr. May Date plum, or persimon, is the pish^min below.
* Elm, pendulous twigged and variegated leaved, l.gr. Frangula, alpine and
berry bearing alder, s.c.l.su. June Gleditsia is the acacia above, which see *
Hornbeam, oriental, and variegated leaved, l.gr. Laburnham, com. broad and
narrow leaved, s.c.l. May Larch, or the deciduous pine, see last list. * Lime
(or linden tree) with variegated leaves, l.c.gr. Magnolia, umbrella, glaucous
leaved, etc. s.l.c. June d. Mountain ash, or bird's service, pl. and strip.
s.l. May * Nettle tree, black and purple fruited, s.l.su. May * -- bloach
leaved of both sorts, gr. May * Oak, striped, and red leaved Virginian, b.gr.s.
Pishamin, Indian and European, l.s.su. May, d. * Pistachia nut or com.
turpentine tree, etc. s.l. May Poplar, with variegated or striped leaves,
c.l.gr. Robinia, com. or false acacia, wh. flow. s.c.l.su. June -- for other
sorts, see the following list * Service tree, or sorb apple, true and bastard,
s.l. May Tacamahacca, or balsamic poplar tree, c.l.su. * Tulip tree, sometimes
called lily flowered, s.l.su. July Viburnham, or meally way faring tree,
s.l.c.su. May -- American sorts, and striped, b.gr.in. May * Willow, weeping,
shining leaved, and yel. twigged, c.
* These ornamental trees are proper to plant at the back of shrubberies, etc.
and here and there one on the skirts and fronts of woods, or plantations of
timber, and along the boundaries of grounds. Here they will appear to great
advantage; but more so singly in detached situations: Most of them are good
wood for timber.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR TREES.
Annona is of North America, but somewhat tender, and therefore should have a
favorable situation. It must be raised on a hot bed in spring, and the
seedlings potted and housed in winter for a year or two, but not nursed too
much.

Buckthorn, if raised from seed, sow early in autumn, as soon as the berries
can be procured, and perhaps some may come up the following spring, but most of
them will lay another year. This is the case with various seeds.

Catalpa should grow singly, that it may have its natural wide spread, and, if
possible, let it be on a plat of grass, where it will appear to great
advantage. It is very hardy, but as it comes out late, it is advisable to give
it a favorable aspect.

Magnolias are to be considered as rather tender, especially young plants. The
glaucous leaved is of the lowest growth, (about ten feet) but all are elegantly
ornamental with their white flowers: There is also a blue flowered one. Let
them have a dry soil, as all tender plants should, as well as a warm situation.

Mountain ash produces its white flowers in May, but they are little
ornamental. Its foliage, however, is pretty, and its fruit of red berries is
one of the greatest ornaments of autumn, coming very early, and hanging all
winter, if the blackbird, etc. will let them alone. As it deserves the most
conspicuous situation, it will be proper to plant some near the house, and
where birds are likely to be disturbed from too frequent visits.

Pishamin or date plum, is chiefly cultivated here as of ornamental foliage,
for its fruit is rarely relished; and, like the medlar and sorb, must be in a
state of decay before it is eatable. If propagated from layers, it must be done
in spring, and the following March (just as they begin to shoot) they may be
transplanted. If raised from seed, sow it on a hot bed in spring, and house the
young plants in pots the first winter: Allow this tree a dry soil.

Pistachia, this is the hardiest of three sorts. Treat it as a tender plant,
whilst young, for three or four years, and let it have finally a sheltered and
dry situation.

Tulip tree is tender whilst young, but afterward very hardy; is uncertain in
flowering, but handsome in its leaf and growth, and has been used to be planted
singly on lawns, etc. It is a native of Virginia, where it attains to so vast a
size, as to be from twenty to thirty feet in girth, though here it keeps pace
only with an ordinary elm.

Virburnham, though a way faring tree, (found by the road side) is very pretty,
by its hoary leaves, and white flowers, succeeded by fruit in autumn, in
bunches of red berries. The American sorts grow not near so high, but they
rarely ripen their berries here. The variegated sort does not grow so large as
the plain, which is the case with all striped plants.

III.
LIST of smaller deciduous trees, or shrubs of tree growth, ornamental for
pleasure grounds.

* Almond tree, sweet and bit red and wh. flow. s.b. Apr. * -- oriental silver
leaved, s.b. April Andromeda, tree sort, or Carolina sorrel tree, l.su.s. *
Apple, Siberian and Virginian crabs, s.gr. May * -- Tartarian crab, beautiful
large fruit, gr. May * -- double flow. Chinese, (Pyrus spec^abilis) gr. May --
American, very small or berry crab, s.gr. May Aralia, thorny Virginia, or
Angelica tree, s.r. Aug. * Azarole thorn, Virginian cockspur, etc. s.l.b.gr.
May * Azederach, com bead tree, or paternoster nut, s. July Berberry, red,
white, and stoneless red, c.l.s.su. May Benjamin tree, or benzion gum, yel.
flow. s.l.s. April Bignonia, see trumpet flower * Bladder nut, five and three
leaved sorts, s.su.l.c. May -- sena, see colutea Buckthorn, sea, European, and
Canadian, s.c.l. June Caragana, or Siberian robinia, yel. flow. c.l.s.su. May *
Cashiobury bush, or bastard cassine, wh. flow. s.l. Aug. * Cherry, com. double
white and blush flow. b.gr. May -- weeping, or pendulous branched, s.b.gr. May
* -- Mahaleb, or perfumed cherry, s.b.gr. May Chinquapin, dwarf American
chestnut, or oak, s.in May Clematis, (a climber) see virgin's bower Colutea,
com. or tree bladder sena, yel. flow. s.l. July * D^gwood, or bloody twig, com.
and Virginian, c.l.s. June Elder, bl. wh. gr. and red berried and striped,
c.l.s. June * Gueldre rose, often called snow-ball tree, c.l.su. May *
Hawthorn, com. doub. scarl. berried, etc. b.gr.l. May * -- Glastonbury, blows
sometime in winter s.b.gr. -- Virginian thorned and thornless, s.l.b.gr. May *
Judas tree, com. and Canadian, pur. red, wh. s. May Kidney bean tree, Carolina,
blue scar. and red, s. July d. * Lilac, com. purple, blue and white flow.
s.su.l. May Medlar, woolly leaved, pur. fl. red, fruit, s.l.b.gr. May * Nettle
tree eastern yel. flow. and bloached, s.l.c.gr. May * Oleaster, or wild olive
tree, l.c. June d. Peach, doub. bloss. as a standard, no fruit, b. April *
Pear, doub. bloss. harsh baking fruit, b.gr. May Plum, doub. bloss. and striped
leaved, b.gr. May Privet, deciduous, plain and striped s.su.l.c. June Robinia,
or rose acacia, scar. flow. s.c.l.su. May -- shrubby quaternate leaved, yellow
l.s.su. June * Spindle tree, nar. broad, and striped leaved, s.b.c.gr. April
Sumach, tanners, wh. fl. and stag's horn, red, l.su.s. June -- Carolina
scarlet, and Canadia red, etc. ditto Tamarisk, French, with pale red flowers,
c.l.s. July -- Venetian, (cotinus) pur. flow. l.su.s. July * Trumpet flower,
(bignonia) scarlet and yel. c.l.s. July Viburnham, variety as to leaf, white
flow. s.l.c.su. July -- single pur. blue, red striped, b, c. July -- see
clematis, in the next list * White beam, or white leaf tree, wh. flow. s.l.su,
May
* In the above list, there are several plants rather too tender for open
culture, but every thing does so much better abroad, than when their roots are
confined in pots, and housed, that it is very proper to try what may be done in
this way.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR TREES, etc.
Andromeda tree is tender, and must therefore have a situation accordingly. It
is always a part of the green house furniture, but does well sometimes abroad.

Apple, these crabs produce rather slender wood, and therefore to have them
strong and fruitful, (and consequently beautiful) should not be in a crowded,
or shady situation, but rather, as much as possible, in detached single plants.
The fruit of the three first makes superior tarts, and the latter an excellent
preserve; and the fruit of all of them may be introduced in the desert, when
full ripe. Allow the double flowering apple, a good situation, to preserve its
charming blow as long as possible.

Azederach consider as tender; its foliage is beautiful, flowers white, and
fruit yellow.

Cashiobury bush should have a sheltered situation, particularly the young
plants, which should be protected for two or three winters.

Kidney bean tree, (climbers) the two latter sorts are rather green house
plants, but have done abroad.

Spindle tree (sometimes called prickwood) is very beautiful with its leaves in
autumn, for which (as many other plants) it is chiefly considered as
ornamental, its flowers making a poor appearance. The seed lies two years
before it comes up.

Trumpet flower, sometimes called scarlet jasmine, is a trailing plant, and
therefore requires training to a wall for support; or having something to climb
on, it will proceed much in the way of an honeysuckle. It is rather tender, and
must have a good situation; but when properly managed is a great beauty. Prune
it to a few eyes, precisely upon the principle of a vine.

IV.
LIST of the lower deciduous trees and woody plants, called shrubs, cultivated
for ornament: 2 Almond, dwarf, single and double red fl. s.su.b.gr. April 2 --
dwarf, with leaves hoary underneath, ditto 3 Allspice tree, Carolina, or
pompadore, l. May d. 4 Allyson, prickly and hoary leaved, white s. su. c. July
d. 4 Althea frutex, purple, red, white strip. fl. etc. l. su. s. Sept. 3
Amelanchier, dwarf bl. fruited medlar, s. l. su. b. gr. May 2 Andromeda,
shrubby wh. yel. red and pur. fl. s. l. su. July 3 Aralea, herbaceous Canada
and Virginian, r. s. June 4 Azalia, American honeysuckle, white, red, scarlet,
l. r. July 4 Bladder sena, pocock's early deep yellow, s.l. June 4 -- oriental,
or the blood red, s.l. July 3 -- shrubby Ethiopian scarlet, s. August, d. --
see colutea in the last list, and below 4 Bramble, doub. blossomed, and white
berried, l.su.s. May 4 Briar, sw. fing. doub. semi. pink and scar. s.su.l. June
2 Broom, com. English, Dyer's, and dw. Portugal, s.r. May 3 -- large Portugal,
and upright Montpelier, s.r. Ju. 2 -- wh. Flowered, trailing and upright
Montpelier, s.r. June 2 Buckthorn, dwarf, purging berried, s.l.c. May, 3 --
long leaved dwarf ditto, s.l.c. May 4 Button tree (cephelanthus) American,
s.l.c. July Clematis (virgin's bower) upright wh. blue. r.s. June 4 -- oriental
climbing yel. flow. l.c. May, etc. 4 Candleberry myrtle, wh. flow. blue
berried. s.l.su. Ju. m. 3 -- dw. Carolina, br. leav. c.l.s.su. Ju. m. 4 Chaste
tree, nar. and br. leaved, pur. and wh. l.c. Sept. 3 Cherry, com. dwarf, and
dw. Canada bird, s.b.gr. May 4 Clethra, alder leaved, f^ll of wh. flow. s.l.su.
July, etc. 4 Coreopsis, two American sorts, yel. flow. off July, etc. 2
Cinquefoil shrub, (potentilla) com. yel. flow. su.s.c. June 1 -- grandiflorus,
and silvery, yel. fl. r.s. June 1 -- wh. flow. upright and trailing, r.s. June
3 Cytisus, bl. based, and sessile leaved, s.c.l. June d. 3 Elder, dwarf, wh.
flow. and black fruit, s.c. July 3 Gale, the sweet willow, or Dutch m^^^^ r.
June w. 2 Germander tree, wh. yel. and pur. flow. sl.c.s. July, d. 4 Hawthorn,
gooseberry, leaved, yel. fruited, s. May 3 Hamamelis (wytch hazel) Virginian,
s.l. flow. in wint. 4 -- climbing Dutch red, early and late, ditto 4 -- climb.
Italian, wh. red, and yel. c.l.s May 4 -- erect fly, wh. flow. and red berry,
ditto 3 -- erect alpine, red flow. and red berry ditto 3 -- erect acadian
(diervilla) yel. l.c.s.su. May 3 Honeysuckle, there are two climbing striped
leaved sorts. 3 Hydrangia, Virginian white flowering, r.su. Aug. 3 Hypericum
frutex, br. and nar. leaved, l.su.c. June 4 John's wort, stinking, inodorous,
and Canary, su.s. June 1 -- large flow. somewhat tender, su. Aug. 4 Itea
Virginian, full of white flowers, l.s. July, etc. 4 Jasmin, wh. fl. plain, and
wh. and yel. strip. l.c. June, etc. 4 -- trailing yellow flowered, l.c.su.
June, etc. 2 -- erect dwarf yel. flowered, l.c.su. July, etc. 4 Ivy, deciduous
five leaved, or Virginian creeper, c.l.s. 4 Mallow tree, com. shrubby lavatera,
s.c. June, etc. 3 -- three and five lobed shrubby do. s.c. June 3 Medlar, dwarf
alpine, red fruited, s.l.b.gr. May 3 -- Canada, snowy, purple fruit, ditto --
see amelanchier and cotoneaster 2 Mazereon, wh. purp. red, and crimson, s. Feb.
etc. 2 Orobus, or bitter vetch, purp. and blue, s.r. April, etc. 4 Persian
lilac, blue and white flowering, s.su.l. June 2 Poison oak, common white
flowered, r.l.s. July 4 -- ash, of varnish tree, ditto 4 Pomegranate, sing.
doub. and strip. flow. l.b. in July. 4 Raspherry, common sweet flowering,
purple, su. July. 2 Rest harrow, com. shrubby purp. flow. s. May, etc. 2
Rhododendron, alpine, and Mount Baldis red, s.c.r. Sep. 3 -- ferrugineous
leaved, red flow. s.c.r. Aug. 2 Robinia, dw. quaternate leaved, yel. flow.
s.c.l.su. May.


Roses: The lowest sorts are, dwarf Scotch single red -- dwarf common single
white -- dwarf Pennsylvanian single and double red -- dwarf burnet leaved,
single red and striped -- rose de meux -- crimson Burgundy, and dwarf blush
Burgundy.

Middling heights. -- Cinnamon single and double red -- common red and white,
single and double, and semi-double -- monthly red, blush, white and stripe --
maiden's blush double -- virgin pale red thornless -- moss provence double red
-- rose of the world, semi-double striped -- velvet, double and semi-double.

Taller sorts are, -- Provence red, blush and white double -- damask white, red
and blush seme-double -- York and Lancaster semi-double and variegated --
Austrian single, yellow, and another single, red one side, and yellow on the
other -- double yellow.

Tallest sorts are, -- Apple bearing, single and double red -- royal red, a
large double -- Frankfort, purple red -- great burnet leaved, single red --
Carolina and Virginia single red -- musk, single and double white.

4 Scorpion sena, com. large, yel. flow. c.l.s. June, etc. 2 -- common dwarf
ditto 4 Snowdrop tree, or fringe tree, white flow. s.l. June 3 Sperea frutex,
com. willow leaved, pink, su.l.c. June 3 -- downy leaved red, and wh. flow.
ditto 4 -- guelder rose leaved, wh. flow. su.l.c. July 3 -- Siberian and
Spanish, wh. fl. su.l.c. May 3 Sumach, myrtle leaved, white flowered, su.l.
June Sun-flower, tickseeded, see coreopsis 4 Syringa, large plain, and stri.
leaved, wh. c.l.su. May 2 -- dwarf double flowered, white, ditto 4 Tamarisk,
German, very prettry, red fl. c.l.s. July, etc. -- for other sorts, see last
list Toxicodendron, see poison oak and ash Tree trefoil, black base, (secundus
clusii) see cytisus 2 Tutsan, or park leaves, (like St. John's wort) su.s. July
2 Vetch, wood, or sylvan, wh. many flowered, s.r. August 4 Virginian silk, a
variety, pur. flow. a climber, c.l. July 3 Willow herb, or French willow, pur.
etc. r.s. July, m. 3 -- see loosestrife, list XI.
* As it is common to plant herbaceous perennial flowers in the front of
shrubberies, etc. so amongst the shrubs, some of the loftier sorts may properly
be, though annual in stalk, as the tall aconites, or monkshoods, everlasting
sun-flower, etc.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR SHRUBS.
Allspice tree must have a warm and dry part of the shrubbery. The whole plant
is aromatic.

Aralia, thorny, is propagated by pieces of its large roots, and perhaps
several plants might be so: In this way the pyramidal companula succeeds.

Azalea likes cool ground, but must have a sheltered situation; and in this
climate should rather have a dry soil, kept cool by occasional watering, except
in winter: It is a very beautiful upright shrub.

Candleberry myrtle is so called, from the Americans procuring a wax from the
berries of this plant to make candles of. It is rather tender, yet likes (as
many American plants do) a moist soil; let it be sheltered from bleak winds.

Clethra is an elegant shrub, flowering all summer and winter; it prefers a
moist soil.

Colutea is too tender to abide severe winters, but in general will do, with a
little attention: Its flowers are pretty, of a bright yellow. The other sorts
(three) are more tender, and are to be potted for protection from frosts, by
housing.

Cytisus, deciduous and evergreen, there is a variety of, and all very
ornamental, with their yellow flowers. They are rather too tender for the open
ground, and the hardier sorts here mentioned, must have a dry warm situation.
Seedlings should be housed, or well protected abroad for the first winter, but
not kept too close.

Germander tree treat as tender, for though it will live abroad, it is mostly a
green house plant.

Mallow tree manage as the cytisus, though it is not quite so tender. All
seedlings that can be brought up in the open air, make much finer plants; and
every thing of this sort, should be effected as much as possible. Of those
plants considered as rather tender, some may be put out in nursery beds, and
occasionally protected by covering, and some potted to be occasionally housed.

Poison trees, even the touch of the leaves of these plants will affect the
skin, but the sap is very (even dangerously) acrimonious.

Pomegranate must have a good south wall, and rich soil. The double sort should
be occasionally matted in severe frost. In very favorable situations (however)
they have succeeded in espaliers, dwarf, half, and even full standards. The
best season for planting the pomegranate is in spring, when just beginning to
shoot. It is rather rude of growth, and must therefore have timely training.
The principal pruning should always be in autumn, and from time to time all
straggling, superfluous growths taken off, that shoots may be encouraged to put
out strong blossoms, in the fullness of which the great merit consists. These
bearers should be six inches, or rather more, asunder. The mode of flowering is
at the ends of the young shoots; and nothing equals this plant in fineness of
blow. The double sort is more commonly planted; but the single flower is very
beautiful, and its fruit, which will ripen in snug favorable situations and
seasons, makes a fine show also especially when burst. Both flowers and fruit
are of a fine scarlet.

Rose claims precedence of other shrubs. In its varieties it should be planted
in all situations, but the Provence more particularly. This shrub, in most (if
not all its sorts) does best in a cool strong soil.

The order of blowing may be thus: Cinnamon, (sometimes called the May-rose)
monthly, damask, burnet, Scotch, Pennsylvanian, apple, etc. Then the latest
roses we have, are those of the monthly again, and the musk. Occasionally every
sort may bear a few late ones, but chiefly the Provence. To encourage this
shrub to treat us in the latter part of the year, pulling off the first roses,
as soon as they begin to decay, is a means; but to pull off all the buds, at
the usual time of blow, from a few trees, is a more certain method. A more sure
way still is, to top the new shoots toward the end of May, or prune down to
two or three eyes; All these manoeuvies should be particularly exercised on the
monthly sorts. Transplanting roses in spring, i^ a means to effect a middle
blow; and if not a north border, and cool ground, this may be done late in
April, or even in May, (occasionally watering) pruning at the same time short.
Early roses are obtained by being trained against a south wall. The monthly
thus planted, and having glass (as the light of a cucumber frame) put before
it, will sometimes come as early as the end of April, or beginning of May. It
is a good way to put moss round the roots of these wall trees in March to keep
the ground warm, and at the same time moist, which helps us to both forward and
large roses.

To dispose rose trees to bear forward, the not suffering any flowers to blow
the present year, and pruning short in July, or August, is a means from which
much may be expected, especially if there is any artificial warmth used in the
spring to force them. With a view to this, some good brushy rooted, low growing
plants, may be potted in autumn, not suffered to bear the next summer, and
being pruned down (as above) will force well the next spring. Rose trees potted
for an ordinary blow, must not be in too small ones, nor placed in a warm
situation, except early in spring, and must be kept cool by watering. As to the
propagation of rose trees, many will send forth suckers enough, and those that do
not, may be layered, by slitting (as carnations) or budded; but may be two
years before they root. See page 67. Some will come by cuttings, but
uncertainly, as the burgundy, etc. The evergreen, everblowing rose, takes well
by cuttings; but it will not do abroad, except in the summer months, and
therefore is not in the list: It is a semi-double dark crimson, and may be
treated as a geranium; grows low, and rather weak. The burnet, apple, or any
other sort, producing good seed, may be propagated that way; but it is a slow
way, the seed seldom coming up till the second year. The double yellow rose
blows indifferently, but when fair, the flowers are very beautiful. Plant it
against an east wall, and in dry, but strong ground.

Snow-drop tree is considerably ornamental. Layers will be two years in
rooting. If raised from seed, (imported) sow it as soon as it arrives, in pots,
or boxes, and house it before frosts come. If they come not up the first year,
set them on a gentle heat the following spring, and they will soon appear.
Shelter the seedlings the first winter in a frame, or a green house.

Tutsan grows wild in woods, and will therefore do well in the shade, as among
trees. Every shrub, or plant that will flourish in such a situation is
valuable; and a gardener's attention will be well employed to discover them, by
trials, etc. The St. John's wort, and St. Peter's wort, (allied to tutsan) may
be planted in the shade.

Willow herb, as its roots run much, should some of it be potted; and as it
loves moisture, may be set in the shade, and kept well watered.

V.
LIST of evergreen trees, some of which are considered as forest, or timber
trees.

* Arbor vita, common American and Chinese, s.l.c. * Andrachne, or oriental
arbutus, s.l.in fr. in. Nov. d. Andromeda, or Carolina sorrel tree, s.l.su.
July m. Arbutus, com. and scar. fl. sing. and double, s.l.in. Nov. Bay tree,
com. and doub. fl. and striped leaved, l.s.su.d. Box tree, br. and nar. wh. and
yel. strip. leaved, s.l.sl.c. * Cedar of Libanus, Carolina and Virginia, s. --
Phoenician, Lycian and Bermudian, s. Cork tree, see the article oak * Cypress,
large common upright, and male-spreading, s. -- Portugal pendulous or goa
cedar, s. -- the lower upright, or pyramidal shape, s. * Fir, spruce, Norway,
American sorts, etc. s. * -- silver, (i. e. the pitch fir) and balm of gilead,
s. -- hemlock, and variegated balm or gilead, s. Holly, several plain, and many
variegated sorts, s.l.gr.b. -- Dahoon, and Yapon, or S. sea tea tree, ditto
Juniper, Swedish, and two Spanish sorts, s. -- see cedar, Virginian, (i. e. the
red) etc. Laurel, com. or cherry bay, and wh. and yel. str. l.c.s.su. --
Portugal, reddish wood, bright leaves, ditto * Magnolia, or laurel leaved tulip
tree, l.s.c. August * oak (ilex) common evergreen, br. nar. leaved, s. * --
Montpelier, or holly leaved oak, s. * -- cork tree, broad and narrow leaved, s.
* -- Molucca, or the American live oak, s. -- scarlet-bearing, or the kermes
oak, s. * Pine tree, wild Scotch pine, commonly called fir, s. * -- pinaster,
stone, mountain Siberian, s. * -- Weymouth, torch, or Virginia swamp, s. * --
Carolina swamp, or prickly coned, etc. s. Privet, common evergreen, white
flower, s.su.l. June * Pyracantha, or evergreen thorn, red berry, s.l.c. May
Savin, large upright, plain and variegated, s.l.c. Spandle tree, American plain
and striped evergr. s.l.c. Strawberry tree, see andrachne and arbutus. Yew,
short, narrow, broad and striped leaved, s.
* Some of these, though they attain, in a course of years, considerable
height, may be occasionally considered as large shrubs, instead of trees, and
planted accordingly: Skilful pruning may keep large shrubs down, and lead
others to mount.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR TREES.
Andromeda tree should have a dry soil, and sheltered situation.

Arbor vitae, though both sorts are in estimation, yet the Chinese is most
ornamental. Naturally they are of large growth, and hardy, yet sometimes the
Chinese sort is kept in pots, as an agreeable companion (for several years) of
other exotic evergreens.

Arbutus may be propagated from the first young shoots of the summer, planting
them in pots, and putting them in a moderate hot bed, (rather of bark) covering
close with a hand-glass that is air tight; and thus most tender shoots of woody
plants, which are found difficult to strike, may (most probably) he made to
grow, as the bay, ^^lastrus, cypress, etc. They may be tried on a warm border,
keeping the earth cool, and the glasses perfectly close. If the cuttings are
planted just within the glass, watering well round the outside will reach them,
and thus they need not be uncovered: If the glasses are taking off for
watering, it is not (however) material, provided they are carefully fixed close
again. As soon as the cuttings appear to grow, air must be given them, or they
will run up weak.

Bay, the common plain sort is rather tender, and requires a situation
sheltered from bleak winds; but the variegated and double flowered sorts are
tenderer still; and as they rarely succeed well abroad, they are commonly
considered as green house plants.

Cedar, the Bermudian, is tender whilst young, and should have a favorable
situation afterward.

Fir, there is a variety of each species, denominated from the number of the
leaves, and the shape and color of the cones. The balm of gilead, and hemlock
sorts, are the lowest growers. To get the seed from the cones, lay them before
a good fire, so as not to scorch them; and if they come not out well, after
heating this way, bore a hole up the middle, and drive something of iron in to
split them open.

Oak, the evergreen sorts are excellent timber, and very ornamental in pleasure
grounds, page 27. The red excrescences upon the kermes oak, are occasioned b^^
infects making insertions in the bark for depositing their eggs, which causing
an extravasation of the sap, it there condenses, and forms the little granulous
substances, used for scarlet dying.

Pine, there are several other sorts of less estimation. The Waymouth and torch
pines are the loftiest, and the C^^olina swamp the lowest growers. To get out
the seed, observe what is said above, as the pine cones are harder to open than
the firs.

Pyracantha requires some support of stakes, pales, or wall, though it may be
trained as a standard bush, or form an hedge impregnable. It is very beautiful
when in full fruit; but it so often misses being so, (chiefly through bad
pruning, page 172) that it is got too much out of repute. It does best in a dry
poor soil, and an eastern aspect. Young cuttings, in June, will strike, being
potted in good earth, and set in the shade till autumn, and then plunged in the
ground under a warm wall. See arbutus, observations on.

Savin, the variegated is beautifully ornamental, and it not getting out of
bounds, seldom growing above a yard high, should be more frequently met with
than it is.

VI.
LIST of low evergreen trees and shrubs.

3 Adam's needle, common and Virginian, pur. and wh. s.r. 4 Alaturnus, large, a
variety in leaf, pl. and str. s.l. Feb. 3 -- lower growing, ditto Andromeda,
yellow flowered Virginian, s.su.c. July, m. 1 -- box leaved, poly, shining,
etc. ditto 4 Box tree, tall sort, see the last list. 1 -- dwarf, plain, and
striped leaved, sl.l.c.s. 4 Briar, sw. evergreen double red and yellow fl.
su.l.b. May 2 Butcher's brown, common, knee holm, or holly, s.r. 2 -- broad
leaved, or Alexandrian laurel, s.r. 1 -- long leaved, or Alexandrian bay, s.r.
3 -- large, or shining leaved Alexan. bay. s.r. 3 Celashus, or staff tree,
climbing and upright, s.l. July, d. 3 Crstus, popular leaved, gum, etc.
several, wh. s.c. May 4 Clematis, evergreen, or Spanish climber, c.l.s. Nov. 3
Cytisus, hairy evergreen, Spanish, ye^. fl. s.c. June, etc. d. 2 -- Austrian,
ditto 2 Furze, common, yellow and white flowered, s. April 3 -- French, yellow
flowered, ditto 4 Groundsel tree, ivy leaved, oleander, etc. wh. fl. s.l.c. 1
Heath, com. English pur. wh. and yel. flow. l.r.s. July 1 Hyslop, blue and red
fl. and striped leaved, s.sl.c. June 3 Jerusalem sage, yellow and purple slow.
r.l.c. June 4 Jasmine, trailing yellow flowered, l.c. July 2 -- dwarf upright,
ditto 4 Ivy, tall plain, wh. and yel. strip. c.l.s. fl. Sep. fr. Jan. 2 -- com.
dwarf bl. berried, and yel. berried, ditto 1 Germander tree, yel. white and
purple flow. s.sl.c. July, d. 1 Horse tail, shrubby, the greater and less,
su.r. July 4 Juniper, common shrubby English, yel. flow. s. April 4
Honeysuckle, evergreen scarlet trumpet, c.l.s. June 4 Kalmia, broad leaved,
pale red flower, s.su.l. July 3 -- narrow leaved, bright red flower, ditto 2 --
hairy leaved, reddish purple flower, ditto 1 -- glaucous leaved, pink flower,
ditto 1 Lavender cotton, com. and rosemary leaved, yel. r.s. Ju. 1 -- sea, com.
and shrubby Siberian, bl. r.sl.c. 2 -- French, (staechas) yel. flow. r.sl.c.
June 3 Laurustinus, com. br. and nar. leaved, l.s.c. Aug. etc. 3 -- bairy,
shining, and striped leaved, ditto 4 Moon-trefoil. (medicago) shrubby, yel.
flow. May, etc. 4 Phillyrea, mock privet, or privet leaved, s.l. March --
striped, box leaved, bay, rosemary, etc. do. 1 Periwinkle, trailing and
upright, blue fl. l.c.su. Feb. etc. 1 -- doub. fl. and white and yel. striped,
ditto 2 Purstain tree, sea, silvery leaves, com. and Spanish, c. 2 Ragwort,
common sea, hoary leaved, s.c. June, etc. d. 4 Rhododendron, large, or laurel
leaved, red fl. s.l. Aug. 3 -- dwarf, or the Pontic rose bay, s.l. Aug. 4 Rose,
common musk evergreen, wh. flow. l.su. Aug. 4 Rosemary, com. plain, and
variegated, c.l.sl. June, d. 3 Rue, broad, narrow and striped leaved, c.l.sl.
June 3 -- Aleppo, broad and narrow leaved, ditto, d. 3 Savin, common plain
spreading, and variegated, s.l.c. 4 smilax, or rough bind-weed, wh. fl. red sr,
l.r.s. June 3 Widow-wail, (cneorum) a trailer, pl. fl. c.l.s. May, etc. 1
Wormwood, sea, or lavender leaved, and Roman, sl.r.
* If the tenderer sorts of these shrubs are judiciously planted, they may
succeed abroad, and are worth the trial, as their place may, at any time, be
easily supplied by some shrub from the nursery. While young, for a winter or
two, in severe weather, a few bushes laid round, and a little peace haulm on the
top, would save many a curious exotic, when they are nearly hardy enough to
endure our climate.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR SHRUBS.
Adam's needle (yacca) is somewhat tender, and should be out of the way of
cutting winds.

Andromeda tree is too tender for the open ground in general, but has survived
abroad, our ordinary winters, being in a favorable situation. It naturally
likes a moist soil, but the roots should be kept dry in winter.

Celastrus, the upright, or Virginian studded, is somewhat tender, and must be
planted accordingly: It is the pret^^est of the two, bearing white flowers, and
scarlet fruit.

Cistus, all the sorts are rather tender, but if brought up as hardy from the
sowing as may be, and planted in a dry soil, shelter and sun, will stand
ordinary winters abroad in the shrubberry, and prove delightful ornaments:
Cuttings do not make so fine plants as seedlings, but are hardier.

Cytisus, Spanish, must have a dry warm situation.

Germander tree, though generally considered as a green house plant, it is
asserted, by some, will endure ordinary ^^^ters abroad, with proper management.
Risk of experiment in these cases, or the trouble attending, should not be
minded, for if a shrub will live abroad, it is surely much better there; and it
has been found that several things will do so, which have been used to be
housed, even in stoves.

Groundsel tree, or ploughman's spikenard, must have a snug situation abroad,
as hard frosts are apt to cut it; and if it is potted and housed, it must have
a great deal of air, as it only needs protection in severe weather. This is an
argument for trying all things abroad, of which there is a chance of living
there, for they cannot have the air they require in a green house, where are so
many plants of a tenderer nature.

Honeysuckle, evergreen, allow it a sheltered situation, and let it be as much
as possible in sight.

Moon-tresoil is a very beautiful evergreen, flowering from May to October; but
as it is tender, must have a dry warm situation, and then a little attention in
severe frosts may secure it.

Phillyrea in all its varieties, though rather a rambling grower, is considered
as one of the standing ornaments of our shrubberies; yet it has beauty in
neither flower, nor fruit, as is the case with some other plants, (particularly
evergreens) being retained only for their foliage. The striped sort should have
a sheltered situation, as indeed is, in a measure, necessary to all variegated
plants, as their ornamental nature, in this respect, is the consequence of
hereditary weakness.

Periwinkle is a pretty under shrubby evergreen, if properly kept up to the
lower part of pales, or a wall, or the larger sort may be trained to a low
stake, or even kept as a little bush. It is very well to confine the roots
(being apt to run) by slaty stones, or tiles: It succeeds well in shade and
moisture.

Purslain tree, the Spanish is not so hardy as the common sort, but will
generally survive our winters, in good situations.

Ragwort, this sort (as all the others) used to be housed in winter; but will
stand abroad in a warm, sheltered, dry situation, and its hoary leaves are very
ornamental, though there is no great beauty in its flowers. When raised from
seed, it is apt to get greener in leaf, and therefore it will be best raised
from cuttings, which should be taken from the whitest plants. A likeness to the
original is frequently lost from seed, but is assuredly maintained from
cuttings and layers, though the former method is generally to be recommended,
where no inconvenience attends it.

Rose, this sort will need support, being rather trailing.

Rosemary will not do in all situations. See page 261.

Smilax, as it is nailing, or climbing, is commonly planted to run up he trunks
of trees, etc. It may be trained to tall stakes, and should be planted in
sight, as in the front of plantations. There are several sorts of it, and the
bay leaved Virginian has black fruit.

VII.
THE FLOWERS in the following list of annuals are numbered (as the shrubs were)
agreeable to their most usual heights. The time of flowering is not mentioned,
because that will vary, according to the time of sowing, management, and
season; very few before, or after June and July. Many continue longer in flower
than a month.

TENDER ANNUALS.
4 Amaranthus tree, tricolor and bicolor 3 -- globe, purple, red, white and
striped 4 -- coxcomb, com. large red, scarlet, yellow, etc. 2 -- common dwarf
of colors as ditto 3 -- spike flowered coxcombs, a variety 3 Balsams, double,
red, scarlet and purple striped 3 Browallia, spreading and upright, blue
flowered 2 Calceolaria, or slipper-wort, winged leaved 4 Capsicums, red, yellow
and white podded 3 Cleome, prickly stalked, and five leaved 4 Colutea, or
scarlet African bladder sena 4 Con^olvulus, scarlet, (ipomaea quamoclit) a
climber 3 Egg plant, white, yellow, red, and prickly fruited 2 Humble, or
spreading branching sensitive plant 1 Ice plant, or diamond ficoidas, white and
yellow flowered 4 Pemapates phaenicia, scarlet flowered 3 Physalis, or winter
cherry, angular and downy Sensitive, see humble plant and observation 4 Sida,
or Indian mallow, heart leaved, pink 4 Stramonium, or thorn apple, double
purple, etc.
* Some persons cultivate the serpentine cucumber, or melon, as a curiosity of
the summer, the fruit being produced from one to two yards long, under good
management; but it is to be remembered it will take up much room.

As to the spirting (or wild) cucumber, though it may be mentioned here, it is
very hardy, so as to sow itself in autumn, come up in spring, and will abide as
a perennial. Sow in March, and allow it two yards square. This is merely
propagated for diversion, as a noli me tangere; for if the fruit is touched
when ripe, it bursts, and throws its foeted contents to some distance, perhaps
over the clothes of the adventurer.

In order to have gigantic flowers of the taller sorts of this class,
(particularly coxcombs, tricolors, and stramoniums) drawing, or multiplying
frames are used by some. These are made of boards about five or six inches
broad, to put under the top frame, for it to rest upon; and two, or three of
these are used, as the plants increase in height. But this business may be
effected, by strong stakes at the corners, with holes, to p^t iron pins in to
rest the frame on, nailing matting, or cloth, round the bottom.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR FLOWERS.
Amaranthus, the tree sort, grows larger than the others, and bears purple
flowers. The tricolor and bicolor are so called, from the former having the
leaves of three colors; i. e. a bright red, yellow and green; and the latter
of two, a deep red and purple; and it is for these, and not the flower, that
they are cultivated. The flowers of the globe sorts have the peculiar property
of retaining their form and color a long time (years) when gathered, and have
therefore the denomination of everlasting. Clear the seed of this flower from
its downy covering before sowing, as a means of forwarding the germination.

Balsam, when double and well marked, is a very fine flower. The plain colored
red and white, semi-double and single ones, are not of much account with the
curious, but may be put out in ordinary borders to make a show. The seed of
this flower should be nicely saved from the fullest blossomed, and distinctly
striped sorts, that have not grown near small, or self colored ones. The
plants elected for seed, should be protected from the wet and cold, after
Mid-August, by putting them under lights, or in a green house window, where
they may have the full sun.

Calceolaria, the flower of, is esteemed only for the curiosity of its slipper
shape. The blow may be continued all summer, by planting cuttings at different
times.

Capsicums are usually ranked in the less tender class, and though they are in
nature so, yet to have them fine, and to fruit in time, they should be brought
forward, by being treated as balsams, etc. at least in situation far north of
London. They are grown only for the beauty and use of their pods, and these are
variously shaped, as long, heart, cherry, etc.

Cleome is a very tender annual, (has been long considered as a stove plant)
but may come under the cultivation of the ordinary florist, by continuing it
longer in a frame, as suppose to Mid-July, or later, if the season is then
unkind; and then plunging the pots in a warm border. When autumn approaches, a
hand glass may be set on forked sticks over this, or any tender plant, and thus
preserve it abroad longer.

Colutea is a perennial shrub of somewhat tender nature; and though the seed
will come up on cold ground in high spring, yet by sowing it as one of this
class, it may be brought forward enough to produce its beautiful flowers the
same autumn. See lists IV. and X.

Egg plant must have a dry soil, and warm situation, but yet plenty of water in
hot weather. The blossom is not striking, but the fruit is often as large as a
swan's egg, and with common management will be as big as a hen's. This plant
requires, however, to be sown forward, and should be brought on by a third hot
bed, if it might be.

Humble plant is one of the sensitive plants, the property of which is to close
its leaves, or drop them upon being touched. The common sensitive plant will
grow erectly to eight feet, in a hot house, (which is its proper place) but the
humble plant is spreading, and seldom reaches more than a stature of two feet;
for its lower growth it is therefore more proper for our purpose here. It is
called humble from its receding and dropping so completely when touched,
footstalk and all, as it were making a bow. The humble plants are distinguished
from the common upright growing sensitives, as the latter only closes the leaf,
without dropping the stalk.

Ice plant trails and spreads wide on the ground, makes no show in its flower,
but is beautifully covered with crystal drops, shining like diamonds when the
sun is on it; or as the frozen drops of iciles. It is not nice in its culture,
or weather, though it should not be put out too young. The best way is to plant
one in a pot of six or seven inches diameter, without any thing at bottom over
the hole; and keeping it in the frame till it gets too big for the pot, plunge
it in the ground a little over the rims. Thus the plant will not be too
luxuriant, but yet sufficiently nourished, (for it has small roots) and will
flower sooner, and ripen the seed better for this treatment.

VIII.
LESS TENDER ANNUALS.
3 Alkekengi, or winter cherry, angular and downy 3 Amaranthus, trailing, or
pendulous flowered, red 3 -- bloody leaved, with erect flowers, purple 3 --
upright, reddish purple flowered 3 After, China, double, white, red, purple,
brown, strip, etc. 2 Balsam, yellow, noli me tangere, or touch me not 2 Basil,
common sweet, red and purple flowered 1 -- dwarf, or bush, a variety in leaf
Capsicums, see the last list 2 Carthamus, or common bastard saffron, yellow 2
-- woolly, or distaff flower, yellow 2 Cerinthe, or honeywort, great and small,
purple and yel. 4 Chrysanthemum, double, white and yel. plain and quilled 4
Convoloulus, major, pink, purple, and deep purple 1 Geranium, African trailing,
variegated flower 4 Hollyhock, Chinese, single and double variegated 1 India,
or Chinese pink, single and double, striped variously Love apple, or tomatum,
see page 264 Love lies bleeding, see amaranthus trailing Mignenette, see
observation, next list 4 Marigold, African, pale and deep yellow, plain and
quilled 3 -- French, yellow and crimson striped, velvety 2 -- dwarf sorts of
both African and French 4 Marvel of Peru, white, yellow, red, purple and
variegated Nasturtium, yellow and orange flower, July, see observation 1
Nolana, Peruvian dwarf, a trailer, blue flower 4 Palma Christi, large and
small, a variety in stalk Persicaria, see next list 2 Poppy, Mexican, or
prickly poppy, yellow flower Prince's feather, see amaranthus upright Scabious,
sometimes made an annual, see biennials 2 Stock, com. ten week, red, scarlet,
purple and white 1 -- dwarf French fine scarlet, and ditto 2 -- Prussian, or
wall flower leaved, ditto 2 Sweet sultan, yellow, purple, red and white
flowered 4 Tobacco, common broad and narrow leaved Virginian 3 Xeranthemum, or
eternal flower, white violet and purple 3 Zinnia, yellow flowered, and red many
flowered.
* The seeds of most of these flowers will come up very well in cold ground,
(if not sown too early) but are forwarded by a little heat, so as to have them
much earlier, and a finer blow, producing seed, which late plants will not. The
sorts of these that naturally require heat are, after, basil, gerarnum, love
apple, marvel of Peru, palma Christi, yellow ^ultan, and zinnia

The gourd may be added to this class; but to succeed well, it should have a
good south wall to be trained against, and it will take up a good deal of room
there. Sorts numerous, as to size, shape and color. The common pumpion (see
page 243) is the hardiest; and the warted orange gourd is commonly thought the
prettiest.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR FLOWERS.
After, to have it forward and fine, should have a second slight hot bed to
prick a few out upon, and indeed this would be a great advantage to any of the
other sorts. Those not thus forwarded, will make a second blow. The striped
sorts are much the prettiest, yet the plain ones make a good show, and do very
well for shrubberies, etc. particularly the superb white and red. It is a good
way to plant a few asters, or any flowers designed for seed, in beds by
themselves, in a way of nursery, as in the best borders it is much neater to
have all flowers pulled off regularly, when their beauty is over: Pull up all
bad flowers (as soon as discovered) from amongst such seeding plants.

Balsam, yellow, is more frequently sown in cold ground, (as others of this
list, carthamus, cerinthe, poppy, prince's feather, and xeranthemum) but it is
worth while to afford the assistance of a little heat. This flower is
sufficiently ornamental to merit a place in the garden; but is chiefly curious
for the elastic property of its seed pods bursting with force, when just
pressed between the fingers, throwing the seeds to a distance.

Chinese hollyhock should be brought forward (especially northwards) to insure
a timely blow. See page 12, vol. 2.

Chrysanthemum, to preserve some of the finest doubles, plant cuttings, or
slips, in September, in pots, and house them before November, or the frost
comes; and they will survive the winter, and flower much earlier, though not so
strong as those sown in spring.

Convolvulus major will need support by a wall, stake, or otherwise, to be
trained, or run up, as a scarlet bean. The deep blue is called convolvulus nil,
or anil. The major convolvulus makes a good show, and may be sown in April, in
the places designed to flower; but it is the best way to sow three or four
seeds in a small pot, which being placed on a gentle heat, will be much
forwarder and finer, and may be turned out whole (when about three inches high)
into open ground; for this flower, (as many other annuals) does not transplant
well: Nil will not do without heat to bring it up.

India pink is now brought to blow much more double and variegated than
formerly, and it is a very neat, engaging flower, blowing a long time. Prick
them out when quite small, (for they readily strike) that they may not be drawn
up weak, and let them grow in single detached plants, in a dry light soil, and
they will be strong. If cut down as soon as the principal blow is over, they
will stand another year.

Marigold the African, grows strongly erect. There is a variety in the form of
the flower, and the quilled sorts are mostly admired. The French grows weakly
spreading, and there are beautiful varieties of it from seed, which should be
carefully saved from the most double flowers, having had not single ones
growing near them. The smell of these flowers is unpleasant, but there are
sweet scented sorts of each.

Marvel of Peru is considered as an annual, yet is naturally perennial in root
-- our climate makes it annual. If the roots of those growing abroad are taken
up in October, and dried a few days, they may be packed in dry sand, and kept
in a dry place from frost) till spring; when potted and placed on a gentle
heat, they will shoot, and come forward. Or if the plants are housed in autumn
(before the leaves are damaged by frost) and the pots stand till the mould gets
very dry, that may be cut down, and the roots (probably) live, having no
moisture to rot them.

Palma Christi, the large leaved (often half a yard broad) will grow from seven
to ten feet high, according to culture, as early sown, etc. As it is valued for
its noble stature, and ample foliage, some gardeners bring it forward as a
tender annual, in order to produce a giant; but it is not advisable. The small
leaved grows to about four feet high, and is an agreeable plant in the leaf, in
other respects then size.

Nasturtium seed comes up well on natural ground, but a little frost kills the
plants, hence it has been considered in this class, to have it flower early.
Late sown plants, if potted and housed, will blow in winter, and live round to
spring. Cuttings of it will grow. The spreading, rambling nature of this shewy
annual, makes some people object to it; but the evil may be remedied, by
growing it in a poor dry soil, or treating it as directed for the ice plant, in
last list. The dwarf sort is preferred by some for flower borders, but is not
so floriferous as the large. See page 259.

Stock, ten week, (as beautiful and fragrant) is the most important annual
flower we have. Every one admires it, and its absence is always felt. It
therefore merits every attention, to raise fine double flowers, to have them
early, a continued succession, and as late as possible.

There should be four sowings of this flower in the year. Let the first be in
the spring, (as at the end of February, or beginning of March) on a gentle
heat; and being soon thinned a little, they should be pricked out in about a
fortnight upon another moderate hot bed, at four inches asunder, where they may
grow till this distance is thought too crowding; but the best rule is, to give
them their final station as soon as they have acquired eight leaves.

The second sowing should take place on a little heat, when the first plants
are pricked out; and let this sowing be presently thinned to an inch asunder;
prick the plants out in the full ground, (or on a moderate hot bed, if you wish
to forward them) at six inches asunder. Here they may grow till either put out
with eight leaves, or stand till their flower buds appear, which show plainly
whether they will be double or single; the double having round buds, and the
single long ones. But if every other is drawn with eight leaves, the rest will
do the better, and may be taken up with large balls of earth; concerning the
method of doing which, see page 9, vol. 2. Or, every other being taken up from
the bed, the rest may remain to make a grand show in flower. Let as many single
ones as are not wanted for seed, be pulled, or cut up.

The third sowing is to be upon cold ground, in a warm border, or rather under
a hand-glass, some time, between the first and tenth of May. Let the plants be
thinned in time, so as not to draw one another up weak, and pricked out at four
inches, as soon as may be, in showery weather, for stocks will transplant very
young; and when they have eight leaves, let them be planted where they are to
blow. It is a good way (in furnishing borders) to plant three or four stocks
together, about four inches from one another, and those that prove single, may
be cut out as soon as discovered.

The fourth sowing is designed for plants to be preserved through the winter
for a spring blow, and should be made either the last week in July, or the
first in August. Plant some close under a south wall, and pot others for
housing; but let them not be sheltered before, or more than necessary. If two
or three plants are put in a pot, the single may be cut away from the double as
soon as discovered.

The French stock is very floriferous, and there generally comes more double of
this than the others. The Prussian is sometimes called the seagreen stock, to
distinguish it from the others, which are somewhat hoary leaved.

To save seed that is most promising for double, mark those flowers which have
five or six leaves, by tying a bit of thread round them. A single flowering
plant that has double ones growing near it, produces good seed; but those
single flowers that come out before the double ones appear, it is proper to
take off, as also all the late flowers, which if they ripen their seeds at all,
would be weak; and a plant having but few pods to ripen, will certainly produce
the boldest seed, and of course the largest plants and flowers may be expected
from it. Be sure that the seed is ripe before gathered, and that it is kept
dry, which will be best in their pods, close tied in paper bags.

Sultan, the yellow is the finest flower, and has a very agreeable musky scent;
but it is the tenderest, and will hardly do without the assistance of heat to
bring the seeds up: It has a chance, however, if sown under a small hand-glass,
that is air tight, on a warm border. The yellow will produce many fine flowers,
if pricked out upon a second slight hot-bed.

Zinnia, the colors of this flower are dingy, but yet agreeable. Some
gardeners choose to treat it as the balsam; but a moderate hot bed will produce
the plants large and forward enough to ripen their seeds. Zinnia is, however,
rather more impatient of cold than others of this class.

IX. HARDY ANNUALS.
2 Adonis, pheasant's eye, or bird's eye, red and yellow 1 Amethystea, the
flower is a pretty amethy it blue one 1 Alysson, sweet scented, white flowering
2 Balm, Moldavian, blue and red flowered Balsam, yellow, see last list, and
observation 2 Belvidere, annual, summer or mock cypress 2 Borage, variegated
leaved, purple and red, see page 253 1 Campion, dwarf, viscous, or dwarf
lychniss, purple 1 Candy tuft, white, red, crimson and purple 1 -- bitter, and
sweet scented white 1 Caterpillar plant, four sorts yellow, see page 5, vol. 2
2 Catchfly, Lebel's red, purple and white Cerinthe, or honey wort, see last
list 2 Clary, annual pink, purple and white topped 1 Convolvulus minor, blue,
white and striped 4 Cyanus, or corn bottles, blue, red, purple, white and
strip. Devil in a bush, see nigella 1 Geranium, annual red musk, and a showy
blue and purple 1 Erigeron, or Canada flea wort, white 2 Hawkweed, (bastard)
red, pale and deep yellow 1 Heart's ease, or pansey, large Dutch, etc. a
variety 4 Indian corn, dwarf, or maize, yellow flower, red fruit 2 Ketmia
bladder, or flower of an hour, yellow 4 Larkspur, tall, unbranched, branching
and rocket 2 -- dwarf rocket, as of ditto, a variety 3 -- Neapolitan, branched
and spotted 2 Lathyrus, joint podded, blue flowered 3 Lavatera, or cretan
mallow, red, white and purple 2 -- three month's Syrian, pale red flower 1
Lupine, sweet scented, yellow flowered 3 -- common, two blue sorts, and a white
4 -- hairy giant blue, and rose colored -- scarlet, see pea, Tangier Lychnis,
dwarf annual, see campion 4 Mallow, curled leaved Syrian, and Chinese, pink --
Venetian, see ketmia -- Cretan and a Syrian, see lavatera 3 Marigold, giant, or
large common double 2 -- large cape, hybrid, or mongrel 1 -- dwarf cape, leafy,
and naked stalked 1 Mignonette, (trailing) or sweet scented reseda 3 Mulberry
blight, or strawberry spinach, red fruit 1 -- dwarf plain and variegated leaved
Nasturtium, see observation, last list 2 Nigilla, blue, white and yellow,
single and double Normandy tuft; i. e. red candy tuft, which see 4 Pea, sweet,
purple, scar, wh. pink and wh. or painted lady 4 -- Tangier, sometimes called
scarlet lupine 2 -- blue flowered, or cultivated lathyrus 4 -- crown, rose, or
cape horn, pink and white 1 -- winged, or winged podded lotus, red flower 4
Persicaria, oriental, red flowered, see pages 6,13, vol. 2. 4 Poppy, tall,
double purple, scarlet, carnation, etc. 2 -- dwarf, or corn poppy, double, a
variety 2 -- prickly Mexican, or yellow flowered 3 -- chelidonium, or horned
scarlet Scabious, see next list 1 Snails, hedge hogs and horns, yellow, see
page 5, vol. 2 2 Snapdragon, annual Sicilian, white flowered 1 Stock,
(maritime) dwarf annual, or Virginian 4 Sun flower, large double, pale and full
yellow 3 -- dwarf double ditto 2 Toad flax, or three leaved antirhinum, yellow,
blue, etc. 1 Whitelow grass, white and yellow flowered 1 Venus's locking glass,
blue, white and purple 1 -- naval wort, common and Portugal, white Xeranthemum,
or eternal flower, see last list.
* There will not need many observations on the flowers of this class.
Directions respecting their cultivation will be found in the last section. It
was there said, that May was not too late for sowing those annuals that come
quick into flower; -- the season may be extended (for the blows) to some,
through June, or even the beginning of July, as annual stock, candy tuft,
convolvulus, minor, corn bottles, heart's ease, yellow lupine, mignonette,
sweet pea, and pheasant's eye. But, if dry weather, the seeds must be watered
to bring them up, and the plants also to bring them forward.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR FLOWERS.
Belvidere is of a beautiful regular growth. The autumn sown seed make far the
finest plants, and as self sown ones often come up, they should be preserved.
This flower is adapted for potting, in which situation it looks well. See pages
5, 14, vol. 2.

Ketmia, the flower fades in a short time, when the sun is out; but the plant
produces a great number, in long succession.

Larkspur is seldom permitted to attain its utmost perfection, not allowing it
room enough. The large sorts should be from a foot to eighteen inches asunder,
and the dwarf half this distance: A first rate florist directs two feet for the
branching larkspur. See page 14.

Mignonette is often sown on heat, early in the spring, to obtain forward
plants for pricking out into pots, boxes, or baskets, to be housed in windows,
etc. But, as it does not transplant well, take it up with a little earth about
the roots; and, if convenient, put the pots, etc. on a little heat, till well
rooted.

Mulberry blight or more properly blite, i. e. the herb blitum, whose fruit
resembles a red unripe mulberry. It is also called strawberry spinach, and the
fruit like a scarlet strawberry. The branches of this plant must be supported
by a wall, pales, or sticks, or the weight of the fruit (not eatable) will
bring them to the ground. It looks best, and is very handsome, when trained to
a wall, which it should be, just as a fruit tree, suffering no side shoots to
remain on. The seed is near a month coming up, which makes autumn sown plants
valuable, in order to have the fruit forward and fine. Some persons sow it in
spring upon a slight hot bed, and prick the plants out where they are to grow;
but to sow forward, in their proper place, (not to be transplanted) generally
does very well; as it will then decorate the autumn, when other things begin to
fail.

Stock, annual, if sown about Mid-August, for an edging, or in little patches,
will make a pretty early spring blow, as it is very hardy: A light soil suits
it best. This little flower is commonly spoiled by being suffered to grow
thick, which makes it trail, and ramble too much. Four in a patch, about four
inches asunder, is sufficient.

X.
LIST of biennial flowers.
2 Campion, rose, single red, white and striped and doub. crims. 8 Canterbury
bells, blue, purple and white flower, June 2 -- variegated, and double flower,
June 2 Carnation, (or gilliflower) a great variety, see observation 2 Chelone,
forking, penciled, American, purple, September 2 Clary, garden, a variety in
leaf, purple, see P. 254, June Colutea, see sena, bladder, below 3 Honeysuckle
French, red, white and striped flower, June, d. 3 Honesty, satin flower, or
moonwort, purple and white May 2 Lion's tale Virginian, or monarda punctata,
yellow July 4 Mallow tree, (proving sometimes biennial) purple, June, d. 2 --
vervain, ditto, red and white, June, d. 3 Milk vetch, fox tail, (often
biennial) yellow, s. June, d. 4 Mullein, branching, phlomoide and sinuated,
yellow, June 2 Penstemon, (a biennial perennial) violet and pl. s. Sept. 2
Poppey, common, horned podded, yellow flower, July 4 Primrose tree, com. hairy
and smooth stemed, yellow, June 2 Rampion, (see page 261) a large blue bell
flower, June 4 Rudbeckia, three lobed Virginian, yellow flower, July, d. 3
Scabious, purple, black, red, white and striped, flow. June 3 -- hen and
chicken flowered, purple, June 3 -- sta^^, Spanish and Montpelier, purple, July
4 Sena, bladder, (colutea) Ethiopian scarlet, August 2 Snapdragm, red, purp.
white, yellow and variegated, June 2 -- red, etc. with variegated leaves, June,
d. 3 Stock, Brompton, scarlet, blush and white, May 3 -- queen, red, blush and
white, May 3 -- Twickenham, purple flowered, May 3 -- shrubby, white, tinged
and spotted, May 4 -- large red Dutch and Patagonian, May 2 Sweet William,
single and double, a variety, June 2 -- mule, or sweet Will. pink, doub. red,
June 2 -- broad leaved, striped and red flower, June 2 Wallflower, large,
yellow and bloody, single and double 1 -- white, and dw. yellow, single and
double, May 2 -- winter and early spring, single yellow
* Several biennial flowers, if sown early, or brought forward upon a little
heat, will blow the same year, only later, as French honeysuckle, honesty,
scabious, senna, and stocks; but it is not generally desirable to attempt this;
as they do not come so fine and strong, when made annuals of. Those just named,
of course, though sown late the preceding year, will blow the next; but some of
the biennials, in this case, will not blow the next year, as has been
particularly experienced with Canterbury bells, a few of which, though sown at
their proper season, may stand over for another year.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR FLOWERS.
Campion, though a perennial, should be considered as biennial, in order to a
timely supply, as it sometimes is of no longer duration: The double (as bearing
no seed) is propagated by slips from the roots.

Carnation is seldom considered as a biennial, though in fact it is so, as much
as several others, usually denominated of this class; for, after the first
blow, the plants become straggling, and flower weakly; it is, therefore, that
they are always layered, etc. to continue them. The plain, deep red, or clove
scented carnation, is the original, and an established cultivated sort. The
rest are classed under the heads, flakes, hizarres, picquetees, and painted
ladies, according to their colors, stripes, spots, and pouncings. For
layering, and raising carnations, see the end of this section.

Chelone, the seed of this flower is best sown as soon as ripe, in autumn; and
coming up in the spring, they may be planted in the borders, in June and July,
and will flower the same season.

Primrose tree, produces so immense a quantity of seed, that it becomes rather
a troublesome weed to some people. Cut the flower stems off, or pull up the
plant, just before the seed pods are ripe enough to shed their contents.

Rudheckia, or American sun-flower, this biennial sort is called hardy, but
should nevertheless have a dry sheltered situation. The narrow leaved dwarf
perennial (about three feet) sometimes proves biennial, and may be sown as
such, a little every year, by those who would extend their work in the culture
of flowers.

Scabious has been noticed in the two last lists as an annual, which it
becomes, if sown early; and some gardeners make a point of doing it on a little
heat to forward them. As a biennial, it should not be sown too soon; but if
forward plants are transplanted in June, it will prevent their flowering till
next year, when they will come very fine and strong.

Sena, bladder, or colutea, E^^^opian scarlet, is rather tender, and the
seedling plants must be potted and housed, or sheltered by a frame from sharp
frosts. This flower is a perennial, (see list IV.) but as it is apt to be cut
off in severe weather, it is here considered as biennial, and may take its
chance after the first flowering. It is sometimes made an annual. See colutea,
list VII.

Snapdragon we consider as biennial, it not blowing so handsome afterward. The
variegated (as all stripes are) is tenderish; this must be propagated from
cuttings, as indeed the plain may be, though the finest plants come from seed.
This flower is of longest continuance in a poor soil, and will grow out of
cracks in walls.

Stock, or stock gilliflower, is apt to get too rampant (in some seasons)
before winter, and when killed by frost, it is chiefly owing to this
circumstance; for nothing stands severe weather well, that has grown very
freely. Hence it used to be the custom of florists to transplant them several
times in the summer; (even at every full moon) but to keep them down, and
hardy, by this means, tends directly to weaken the blow, if not to kill the
plant. The most reasonable method in this business is, not to sow too early,
(or before the first week in April) to thin them, and to prick them out in
time, that they may not be drawn up long legged; and by no means to let them
have a dungy soil to grow in, or a very rich one. Prick them out the first cool
weather after they have six leaves, at six or eight inches asunder, where let
them remain till August, choosing a showery time, (rather about the middle) to
plant them out where they are to blow; but let not this be into a moist soil,
or damp situation. It is a good way to mix half sand in the mould that lies
about the shanks above the roots; and when wet and frost comes, to lay coarse,
or drift sand, round about them, two or three inches high, which remove at
spring. Some plants may remain in the nursery bed till spring, to put out in
cooler or moister ground, for in such a soil they blow best, though they do not
stand the winter well in it: Stocks blow much finer in a showery summer than in
a hot one. It will be a great advantage to those moved at spring, to have balls
of earth to the roots, though they do not well retain it. To dispose them to
it, and make them fitter to transplant, they may be cut round in autumn, with a
long knife, five or six inches deep, and three inches from the stem, making one
slanting cut under the root, at six inches depth, to cut those asunder that
strike directly down. This is a practice that would answer in most things that
are to be removed at spring; and if not, it would generally be of service, as
the cutting off the end of a root, occasions it to throw out several others of
a more fibrous nature.

Sweet William (or bearded pink) is distinguished into broad and narrow leaved
sorts. This flower comes very diversified, from seed, many plain, others
beautifully striped, and a few double, perhaps one in thirty or forty. But the
single ones are generally so ornamental, that the want of doubles is not much
lamented. The double sorts are propagated from layers, as carnations. The sweet
William is perennial, but as the plants cease to be handsome (and in some cases
die) after the first blow, it is necessary to raise some every year.

Wall-flowers, raised from seed, produce some doubles; but the chance is not
great for fine ones, which are to be continued from slips in May, June, or
July, planting them in a rich soil and shade till rooted. The double white
wall-flower is tender, and should be potted for housing, as indeed other good
sorts should be, and generally are.

XI.
LIST of fibrous rooted perennial flowers.
2 Adonis, or perennial pheasant's eye, yellow, r.s. August, m. 3 Acanthus,
smooth and prickly, white and pink, s.r. July, d. 3 Agrimony, the large, or
odoriferous, yellow, s.r. July 3 -- hemp, common wild, red, s.r. August, m. 2
-- spotted stalked American, purple, ditto 3 -- lower Pennsylvanian and
Virginian wh. ditto 4 -- Canada or tall purple flowered, ditto 4 -- tallest
Pennsylvania, white flowered, ditto 2 Alkekengl, com. winter cherry, red fr.
wh. fl. r.s. June 1 Alysson, rock, Cretan, and prickly, yel. and wh. s.r. May 1
Anthemis, or sea camomile, a trailer, white, s. July 3 Anthemis, ox eye sort,
yellow, white and red, r. June 1 Anthyllis, double, purple and scarlet
trailing, s.r. June 1 Arum, com. spotted leaved, wh. fl. red berry, r. June 1
-- white striped leaved, and friar's cowl, r. May 4 -- dragon, common spotted
stalked, purple, r. June 1 Asarabacca, Virginian vein leaved, etc. purp. r. May
2 Asphodel, or king's spear, yellow and white, s.r. June After, a variety, see
starwort 1 Auricula, or bear's ear, see observation 1 Avens, com. alp. yel. and
marsh, pur. etc. s.r. May, m. 3 Bachelor's button, sing. and double, red and
wh. s.r. May -- blue, see cyanus 1 Balm, grandiflorus, purple, red and white r.
June 2 Barrenwort, alpine (epimedium) red, r. May, shade Bear's breech, see
acanthus 1 Bear's ear sanicle, of Matthiolus, fine red, r. June, d. 1 Bear's
foot, or hellebore, greenish flower, s.r. Feb. 2 Beto^^y, com. Danish,
oriental, par. red, wh. s.r. July, m. 2 Birthwort, upright yel. and trailing
purple, s. August, d. 4 Be larkspur, common, and great flow. blue, s.r. July 2
Bl^odwort, or bloody stalked dock, white, s. April 2 Borage, oriental
perennial, blue flower, s.r. May, d. 1 Bugle, com. pyramidal blue, red and wh.
r. May, m. 1 B^gloss, com. (see p. 2^3) blue wh. and red, s. June 1 -- oriental
trailing and Virginian yellow, s. May 2 Burn^t, com. (253) and agrimony leav.
red, s.r. June 4 Bryony, common white flowered, red berried, s. May 2 Ca^a^^a,
alpine purple, a variety in leaf, s.r. June Calamint, Hetrurian, see balm
grandiflorus 4 Campanula, pyramidal, or steeple flow. blue, s.s^. August 1 --
grandislora, and Carpathian, purp. s.r. July Campion, rose, see biennials, last
list 3 Cardinal flower, scarlet, blue and violet, s.r.c. Aug. d. Carnation, see
biennials, last list 2 Catchfly, or viscous campion, doub. red and wh. r. June
4 Centaury, great pur. and woad leaved yel. s.r. June 2 Chelone, Virginian,
etc. wh. blue, red and purple, r. Sep. 4 Chervil, perennial, or sweet fern,
white, s. June 1 Christmas rose, or black hellebore, white, r. January 4 Clary,
Indian blue, and glutinous yellow, s.r. June 3 Columbine, com. plain, striped
and spotted, s.r. June 3 -- feathered, (thalictrum) wh. and pur. ditto 2 --
mountain, or alpine, large blue, s.r. May 1 -- Canada dwarf early, red with
yel. s.r. Cookoo flower, or meadow pink, see ragged robin 4 Coreopsis,
verticillate, yellow, a long blow, r. July 1 Cowslip, double yellow, and double
scarlet, r. May 1 -- American, or Meadia purple, s.r. May 2 Crowfoot, meadow,
double yellow flowered, r. May 1 -- mountain, double white flowered, r. May 2
Cyanus, mountain, or perennial blue bottle, s.r. June 1 Daisy, wh. red, scar.
variegated, coxcomb, etc. r. Apr. 1 -- globe, (globularia) a fine blue flower,
r. June 3 -- ox eye, American and Montpelier, wh. s.r. July -- Michaelmas, see
starwort tradescants Dittany, see fraxinella 2 Dodartia, oriental, deep purple
flower, r. May 2 Dog's bane, willow leaved, purple and white, etc. r. July 3
Dragon's head, Virginian purple flowered, s.r. August 2 -- hussop leaved, blue
flowered, s. June 3 Eryngo, or sea holly, Amethystine and Russian, s. July 2 --
maratime English, and aquatic American, ditto 2 Eternal flower, pearly, or
white everlasting, r. June 3 Feverfew, two doub. fl. and a curled leav. wh.
s.r.c. June 4 Figwort, Spanish, elder leaved, red and gr. s.r.sl.c. July 4 --
aquatic variegated leaved, ditto 4 Flax, perennial Siberian blue flowered, s.
June 3 Foxglove, pur. red, wh. and iron colored, s.r. June 2 -- great and less
yel. and Spanish purple, ditto -- American, see monkey flower 3 F^axin^lla, wh.
and purple flowered, s.r. June 3 French honeysuckle, Canadian red, wh. pur. s.
June, d. 3 -- sensitive branched, yellow, ditto 1 Fumatory, diffused branching,
yel. and wh. s. June 2 -- upright American purple, ditto 3 Gentian, great
yellow, and purple flowering, s. July 1 -- asclepias leav. and crosswort, blue,
s.r. May 1 Gentianella, fine azure blue flower, s.r. May 1 Geranium, (English)
blue, purple, red, black, r. May 1 Geranium, African, or tender sorts, see
observation 2 Globe flower, European and Asiatic, yellow, s.r. May, m. 4 Globe
thistle, great, blue, and white flowered, s. June 2 -- less, deep blue, and
white flowered, ditto 3 Golden Rod, common Mexican and American, r. August 4 --
tall late blowing American, r. September 4 -- New York, fleshy leaved,
evergreen, r. Octo. 1 -- lowest, or dwarf Pyrenean, r. August 2 Goldyl^cks,
German, a bright yellow flower, r.c. July 1 Hawkweed, (or grim the collier)
orange color, s.r. July 1 -- great yellow or French goat's beard, s. June
Hedge mustard, single and double, see rocket yellow 4 Hellebore, (veratrum)
white, black and yellow, s.r. May 2 Helonias, two sorts, white and cream
colored, s.off. July 1 Hepatica, red, blue, white and str. sing. and doub. r.
Mar. 1 Heart's case, or tricolor violet, yel. pur. wh. r. April Herb bennet,
(geum) see avens 4 Herb Christopher, com. and long spiked, white, s. June 4
Hollyhock, com. doub. Wh. yel. pink, red, sea. etc. s. Aug. 4 -- fig leaved, or
palmated, a variety, ditto -- Chinese, or painted lady, see list VIII. 1
Ladies' mantle, common fringed, Alpine, etc. r.s. May 1 Ladies' smock, double,
purple and double wh. r. May, m. 1 Ladies' slippers, yellows, purples, red,
etc. s.r. May, m. 1 Lavender sea, great, etc. white and blues, r.sl.c. July 1
Lily of the valley, wh. red, str. sing. and doub. r. May, m. 2 Lion's foot,
single and double, blue flow. s.r. June, d. 2 Lion's tail, scar. and pur. fl.
pl. and strip, leaf, r.st. c. July 1 London pride, or none so pretty, spotted
flow. r. May 3 Loose strife, common great yellow flowered, r. June 3 -- willow
leaved white Spanish, ditto 1 -- ciliated Canadian yellow, ditto 1 --
moneywort, or herb two pence, yellow ditto -- see willow herb, list IV. 2
Lupine, perennial Virginian blue flowered, s. June 1 Lungwort, blue, purple,
red and white, r.s. April 3 Lychnis, single and double scar. pink and white,
s.r.c. July 3 -- Chinese, fine orange colored flower, ditto, d. 2 L^^hnidea,
red, purple, blue and wh. sw. ^^ented, r.c. July Madwort, see Alysson 2 Mallow,
Virginia smooth and rough leaved, wh. s.r. June 1 Marsh marigold, double
flowered yellow, r. April, m. 2 Masterwort, great black rooted, yellow, r. June
4 Meadow rue, common and Montpelier, yel. r.s. June, m. Michaelmas daily, is
starwort, tradescants, which see 1 Milkwort, com. and bitter, blue, red, wh.
etc. s. June, d. 3 Milk vetch, goats rue leaved, and oriental, yellow, s. July
2 Monkey flower, or American fox glove, blue, r.s. July 3 Morina, purple,
white, pale and deep red, s.off. June 4 Mullein, yellow, purple and iron
colored, r.s. June 1 -- myconic bo^age leaved, trailing, blue, ditto 1
Navelwort, perennial trailing, blue flowered, r.c. April Or^bus, see vetch
Orchis, biennial, see next list Orobus, see vetch, bitter 2 Orpine, the
greater, purple and white, sl.c. July, d. 1 -- the lesser, (anacampseros) a
trailer, pur. ditto 1 -- true, (telephium) white flowered, s.r.sl.c. July 4 Ox
eye daisy, American and Montpelier, white, r. July 2 -- corymbous flowering,
white, ditto Pasque flower, see next list 4 Passion flower, com. palmated blue
rayed, c.l.s.su. July 4 Pea, everlasting, red, scar. purple and large fl.s.r.
June Poeony, being tuberous rooted, see next list 1 Pink, com, red, white,
plain and fringed, damask 1 -- red cob, white cob, painted lady 1 -- maiden, or
matted, and gray leaved mountain 1 -- pheasant's eye, etc. a great variety 3
Plumbago, or European leadwort, blue, purp. wh. r. Oct. 1 Polyanthus, a great
variety in flower, s.r. April 2 Poppy, oriental scarlet, and Welsh yellow, s.r.
June 1 Primrose, white, red, scarlet, double yel. etc. r. March 3 -- tree, the
larger, (perennial) yel. s.r. June 2 Ragged robin, or meadow pink, double red,
s.r. May 4 Reed, Portugal, or Spanish, and variegated, offsets 2 Rest harrow,
common purple with red flowers, s. May 3 Rhubarb, com. and waved leaved
Chinese, wh. s. June 4 -- palmated Chinese, and large Tartarian, etc. 2 Rocket,
sing. and double wh. pur. and red, s.c.r. June 2 -- double yellow, or double
erysimum, r. June 4 Rudbeckia, jagged leaved Virginian, orange, r.s. July 2 --
dwarf hairy, yellow, purple, etc. ditto 4 Rush, sweet flowering, pink, white
and purple, r. July, w. 1 Sanguinarea, Canada, (puccoon) sing. and double, wh.
r. 2 Sarrac^na, or side saddle flower, purple and yel. s.r. July 4 Saw wort,
New York and Maryland, pur. flow. r. June 3 Saxifrage, pyramidal, often called
sedum, wh. off. June 2 -- spotted hairy, and strawberry, wh. ditto 1 -- ladies'
cushion, a low trailer, wh. off. May 1 -- golden, two sorts as to leaf, yellow,
r. July -- double flowered, see next list 4 Scabious, perennial Alpine blue
flowered, sl.c.r. July 2 -- oriental silvery, and grass leaved, s. July 3
Scullcap, tallest, or nettle leaved, purple, s. June, d. 2 -- Alpine violet,
and white flowered, ditto 2 -- eastern, germander leaved yellow, ditto Sea
pink, see lavender and thrift 3 Sena, wild, or Marilandic, (cassia) r.s. July,
d. 1 Sisyrinchium, Virginian and Bermudian, blue, r.s. June -- see iris, next
list 2 Sneezewort, double flowered white, r.s. July, m. 1 -- hoary yel. and
silvery leaved wh. r.s. July 3 Soapwort, double flowered purple and scarlet, r.
July 1 Soldanella, purp. blue, wh. and fringed, r. March, m. 3 Soloman's seal,
many flow. sweet scented, etc. r. May, m. ^ Sophora, oriental, fox tail like,
blue, r.s. July 4 -- four winged podded, yellow, r. June 1 -- tinctorious
Virginian, trailing yellow, r.s. July Speedwell, see veronica Spiderwort, see
next list 1 Starwort, dwarf alpine, purple flowered, r. June 2 -- sea, or
tripolium after, blue, r. July 3 -- flax leaved, blue flowered, r. August 4 --
New England, violet colored, r. September 4 -- tradescants, a pale blue
flower, r. October 3 -- Catesby's pyramidal Virginian, blue, r. Nov. 2 --
Italian, large bright blue flower, r. Nov. 1 Stock, dwarf shrubby, or window
flow. red, s. June 1 Stonecrop, small and great, trailing, yellow, c.r. July 1
-- poplar leaved, upright, pinkish, ditto 4 Sunflower, many flowered, com.
double, etc. r. July 3 Swallow wort, common, wh. black and yellow, s.r. June 1
Thrift, greater and smaller, red, scar. and wh. sl.r. June 3 Throatwort, great,
double, white. blue and purple, r. June 4 -- giant, blue, white, red, and
striped, ditto 2 -- dwarf, small fine blue flower, s. June 2 Toadflax, a
variety, yellow, purple and white, sl.c.r. July 1 -- dwarf Alpine purple
flowered, ditto 2 Toothwort, five, and nine lobed, blush and pl. s.r. June 3
Valerian, common red and white mountain red, s.r. June 2 -- Greek pur, wh. and
variegated, s.r. May 4 Veronica, a variety, blue, white and blush, r.s. June 1
-- dwarf blue and wh. and Welsh blue, ditto 3 Vervain, common, and spear
leaved, blue, s.r. June 4 Vetch, white wood, and tufted blue, s.r. July 3 --
bitter, (orobus) a variety, blue and pur. s.r. May 2 -- Siberian, unbranching
orobus, yel. s.r. April -- see orobus, next list 1 Violet, com. blue, purple
and white, sin. and doub. r. Mar. 1 -- Austrian purple, and Canissian blue, r.
April 1 -- Alpine, double red, and purple, r. March 1 -- yellow, and
grandiflorus yellow, etc. r. April Wake robin, see arum Willow herb, see
loosestrife 1 Wood sorrel, common white and purple, s. June, m. 1 Worm grass,
Maryland, (spigelia) red flower, r. July 2 Yarrow, or milfoil, the purple
flowered, August -- see maudlin and sneezewort.
OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR FLOWERS.
Acanthus, or bear's breech, is admired for the elegance of its leaf, and was
so much so by the ancients, that they introduced it into the capital of the
Corinthian order. It spreads wide, and should I have room allowed it, in a warm
light soil, and sheltered situation; but still rather a shady, than a sunny one.

A^kekengi roots run much, and are sometimes kept in pots, or boxes, to confine
them. It is not a pretty plant; but has been long admitted into gardens for the
show of its red berries in winter, when there are few ^^^^^nts to adorn the
ground.

Alyssons do best in a dry hungry soil, but should have a favorable situation,
where they will blow long and prettily.

Avens will grow in any cold moist shady ground.

Auricula, from the great and elegant variety of its flower and leaf, arising
perpetually from seed, is one of the florist's chief delights, and to which he
pays much attention in the culture. It is one of the first flowers, and ranks
in nature with the primrose and polyanthus. The sorts admitted in the present
collections, are about four hundred. The auricula, the carnation, tulip,
hyacinth, ranunculus, anemone, etc. are called fancy flowers. For the
propagation and culture of the auricula, see the end of this section.

Bear's ear sanicle is very hardy, but is a proper plant to pot. It may be
planted in any cold place, and should have a dry lean soil, but be duly watered
in summer; and most things that a poor soil suits, must still have water freely
in warm weather. This sanicle is about six inches high; that of Gmelin only
four, and is not so pretty.

B^tony, as it is a native of the woods, is proper to plant in shrubberies, and
shady places.

Birthwort is tender, and seedlings of it must be sheltered by a frame in
winter.

Bryony is a climber, and will grow in plantations to run up trees, etc.

Campanula, pyramidal, may be propagated (as well as from seeds and slips) by
pieces of its root, planted about an inch and half in the ground, in a shady,
but not moist border. The finest plants are produced from seed; but will be
three or four years before they blow. Sow a few every year in April, in a light
fresh soil, where the morning sun only comes. As much wet in the cold seasons
is apt to rot this root, it will be proper to guard against it, by some
occasional covering, when there is a continuance of rain, or snow. A few potted
may be removed under shelter. A mat set high over is a proper covering for a
bed of them. In the summer they must never want water, especially when
spindling, or in blow. There is a white sort.

Cardinal flower must have a dry soil and a warm situation; occasionally also a
little protection. They are commonly potted, and some should at least be so,
lest those in the open ground be cut off. This flower is very ornamental, but
the scarlet much more so than the blue, and is not tall of growth.

Christmas rose is very hardy, but a dry warm situation may be allotted it; and
when in flower, a little protection to preserve it in beauty, as a hand-glass,
may be advisable. A plant or two potted (large pots as it spreads) is a
agreeable enough, to house when in blow.

Columbine, when sown in spring, is rather apt to miss. Autumn is therefore
preferable; and these plants will also be much stronger, as they do not blow
the next, but following year. The plants should not stand above two years, as
afterward they get unsightly, and plain in flower.

Cowslip American is commonly potted, as indeed some plants should be, as it
thus appears to advantage; but it is hardy, and grows best in borders that are
somewhat shady, or have not the afternoon sun.

Dragon's head should have a moist shady situation.

Figwort, the plants are somewhat tender, and may only be expected to stand
through ordinary winters, in a warm soil and situation. Let some be potted, for
housing, lest those abroad be cut off. The pilewort is sometimes called
figwort; but this is a different plant, whose proper name is scrophularia,
whereas the pilewort is ranunculus ficaria; -- this has a red flower, that a
yellow; -- this a fibrous, that a tuberous root -- this grows to about five
feet, that attains only to so many inches.

Fox gloves do best in a somewhat strong soil, and shady situation, and will be
found a useful flower in shrubberies, etc. in all its varieties.

Geranium, or crane's bill, (so called from the shape of the seed vessel) the
exotic sorts are tender, Africa being their native climate. As favorite
flowers, the different sorts are cultivated by all descriptions of people, as
opportunity affords to preserve them in winter: They are properly green house
plants. The principal kinds are as follow, classed according to their ordinary
height of growth:

1. Flaming, or Vervain mallow leaved, scarlet. Three colored; i. e. red,
black and white. Ladies mantle leaved, whitish and bluish. Sweet scented mallow
leaved, white. Gooseberry leaved, reddish. Caraway leaved, or variable
geranium, red, crimson, purple, white, etc. Vine leaved, red and white. Night
smelling, yellowish with dark spots, three sorts. Pinnated, or proliferous, of
different colors.

2. Spear leaved, white. Fleshy stalked, or celandine leaved, white. Square
stalked, flesh colored.

3. Birch leaved, reddish. Sorrel leaved blush, plain and stripe flowered, and
variegated leaved. Three gouty stalked, or columbine leaved, purple.
Rosescented, a purplish blue. Glutinous vine leaved, reddish purple and white.
Horseshoe, green leaved, variegated, silver edged, silver striped, gold
striped, pink, two scarlets and a purple, and one large scarlet, or
grandiflorum.

4. Vine leaved, balm scented, blue. Shining, and mallow leaved, scarlet and
deep scarlet. Butterfly, or variegated flowered, with a pointed mallow leaf.
Marsh mallow, or hood leaved, purplish; and a variety of this with angular
leaves. Rasp leaved, flesh color, spotted red. Two colored, purple and white.
See the end of this section.

Gentianella likes a cool loamy soil, and eastern situation, and should not be
often removed, or in too small pieces.

Globe flower, or globe ranunculus, is very ornamental. The European is
sometimes called locker gowlans. They both do well in a cool soil, and north
border; though (...) name Asiatic seems to direct to a dry soil, and warm
situation. The case is, they are natives of moist, shady places; and whenever
this is the case, we may conclude such plants are organized accordingly, and
that they must be accommodated by us agreeable to their nature. The
constitution of plants is necessary to be known, in order to their proper
culture; and a gardener cannot direct his attention more to his credit, than to
make observations and experiments to discover it.

Golden rod will grow in shade, and particularly the evergreen sort; but being
late blowers, this circumstance rather directs to an open, or forward situation.

Hellebore, the white flowered, is the common officinal plant. A light soil and
dry situation, not subject to snails, suits it best.

Helonias is a very elegant and ornamental plant, worthy of the most
conspicuous part of the pleasure garden. It requires only the ordinary culture
of perennials. Seeds are imported from North America, as it does not ripen them
here.

Hepatica is found to transplant best when in flower; but it must not be in
small portions, lest it wither away; and they never look well in small patches,
as is the case with all dwarf blowers. Situation and soil as gentianella.

Ladies smock, and ladies slipper, do best in a moist soil and shade, as in a
north border, where not many things do well.

Lily of the valley should have a cool situation, and if not in a moist soil,
give it at least a^ east border, or where it has only a little of the morning
fun.

Lion's foot is somewhat tender, and to do well must have a favorable place in
the garden, as to sun and shelter; and it does best in a light, or sandy soil.
Let some be potted, for it is pretty, and blows all summer.

London pride (a saxifrage) used to be planted much as an edging; but it does
not answer this purpose well. A few plants here and there in patches is best;
and by no means allow it a good border, for it is not very handsome, though it
has such fine names: It prefers a moist soil and cold situation.

Loosestrife, the common, is found wild; but it is a showy plant, and where a
variety is wanted is very admissable. It grows in shady moist places, and
should be planted accordingly, in the borders of a shrubbery, etc. The smallest
is a trailer.

Lupine will be best raised from seed, without transplanting, as the roots
strike down deep: If they are transplanted, let it therefore be while quite
young.

Lungworts prefer a shady situation; but the Virginian (an elegnt little plant)
rather one dry and sheltered.

Lychnis, the double scarlet is a beautiful flower, but not apt to increase
much at root; recourse is therefore to be had to cuttings, which also are not
certain in striking root. In June, or July, take cuttings from the side shoots,
(without flower) and let the pieces planted have three, or at the most four
eyes. Put them into a good soil, fine and rich, but not dungy, as deep as half
way between the second and third joint, in an east border; and keep them cool,
but not wet. A hand-glass will greatly assist in this business. See pink at the
end of this section. The Chinese lychnis is rather too tender for open culture;
but in a choice situation may abide moderate winters. It makes a good potted
plant among myrtles and geraniums.

Lychnidea, take the cuttings off close to the ground, and discharge the tops;
and plant them in pots, or borders, in a place not of much sun.

Masterwort (a medicinal plant) is of no great ornament; but is commonly
cultivated for borders of shrubberies, etc. as being of low growth, and hardy
nature. There is an alpine sort about a foot high.

Marsh marigold is a flower, (as its name imports) that will flourish in a wet
soil; but yet it does not do much amiss in a dry one. In default of a moist
soil, any plant that requires one, should at least be accommodated with a shady
situation, and never want water in summer.

Milk vetch is somewhat tender, particularly the seedlings, which should be
protected by a garden frame in winter. Fox tail sort, see biennials.

Monkey flower is very ornamental, and of easy culture, not difficult in
situation.

Monk's hood is a poisonous plant in every part, but very ornamental, and
commonly cultivated. Shade suits it, and it will even grow under trees, or in
any damp place, where few other things will.

Morina is worthy of a conspicuous place in the garden. It has a strong
taproot, and should be transplanted whilst young, that it may not be damaged;
but sowing in the place where it is to grow (as directed for the lupine) is the
best way.

Mulleins prefer a light soil, but like a north border; and the borage leaved
being very low, is proper for an edging in a cool shady situation.

Orpine, this, as all succulent plants, should have a dry soil and situation,
and not often watered.

Passion flower should be planted against a warm wall, where it may have room
to spread, as it is a very free shooter. The sorts are numerous, (for green
house and stove) but only this well suits open culture. In fine situations, and
the southern parts of England, there are two more, however, that may do abroad.
Prune it about Michaelmas, leaving the shoots from two to four feet long, as
the strength of the plants, or room, dictates, and a foot asunder. Before the
frosts come, cover the roots, a yard round, with dry litter; and renew it with
dry, when afterward it gets much and long wet. The branches also should be
covered with a mat (a thin one, and not over close) before severe frost sets
in; but uncover as soon in spring as may be, or, in short, in mild weather, on
days through the winter, if not too much trouble. This flower has been
sometimes trained to a stake, in which case, shorter pruning must take place to
keep it down. It bears upon the young shoots, which should be regularly trained
in, and the flowers are the glory only of a day, but generally a great number
are produced in succession. This flower takes readily from cutting, of about
seven or eight inches long, taken off in March, and planted in a good soil,
kept cool by water, and shaded from much sun.

Pink, the sorts are numerous, for seed is c^^^antly producing new varieties,
occasionally one that vies with its predecessors in beauty, and whose superior
excellence is not neglected by the florist. He gives it a name as fancy
directs, and it is enrolled in the nurserymen's catalogues of worthies.
Maddocks mentions in his, and ever blooming pink, price 2s. 6d. The pink (as
the carnation was) might be considered biennially, the good sorts being
regularly layered, etc. every year for increase: They do, however, stand on for
older plants, better than carnations. For propagation, etc. see the end of this
section.

Polyanthus produces an infinity of sorts from seed, and the florist pursues
his object of obtaining prize flowers of this kind. The polyanthus delights in
a loamy soil, and shady situation. It is an excellent edging flower for
shrubberies; though fine blows are not to be expected under trees, or in much
wet. An cast border is the place for producing the best flowers. For raising
them, etc. see the end of this section.

Plumbago, though it be a native of Italy, is hardy enough to abide our
ordinary winters in the open ground. Afford it a dry, sunny, sheltered
situation, which will be a means of preserving it, and also tend to forward the
blow, as it is so late: All plants that produce their flowers toward the end
of autumn, (however hardy) should have a favorable aspect, as to sun, lest
winter overtake them.

Poppy, allow the eastern sort a light dry soil.

Reed, Portugal, is curious for its lofty and ample growth, but rarely flowers
with us. It attains to ten or twelve feet high, and its stems are strong enough
for walking sticks. The variegated sorts come only to half the size, and more
frequently flowers.

Rhubarb, the common serves for show, and the ribs of the leaves for tarts; but
the Chinese principally, and then the Tartarian for medical uses of the root:
The Chinese is deemed the true officinal rhubarb.

Rocket, (sometimes called dame's violet, and queen's gilliflower) the single
is raised from seed, and the double from rooted slips and cuttings. The double
is rather uncertain in continuance, and requires some attention. Cut the stems
down as soon as off their principal show and time of flowering, which is a
means to help them to increase, and get strong at root, as it is from offsets
formed in the present year, that they flower in the next. If weak, or small
roots are planted, they should not be suffered to blow the first year. To
propagate by cuttings, do it when the stems are about eight or nine inches
long, (i. e. before flowering) making each into two; and plant them a little
more than half way deep in an east border, in good fresh undunged soil. Keep
them cool by occasional watering, and if the cuttings attempt to flower, nip
the buds off. Cuttings of stems that have flowered, will sometimes grow, but
they make weak plants. A hand-glass would be of service over them. See pink at
the end of this section.

Rudbeckia, or American sunflower, is a little tender, and must be accommodated
accordingly. Like the rocket, it is rather (some sorts at least) unapt to form
offsets; and therefore to encourage the putting them forth, (without which the
plant dies) the stems may be cut down to prevent flowering: That is, when
plants are more desired flowering.

Rush will be proper only for places that are constantly wet, by standing
water; and whoever has such a situation for them, they will prove ornamental.

Sarracena is a native of the boggs of North America. It requires therefore a
moist situation; but is found to need protection from our sharp frosts. The
whole plant is of curious formation. It is not apt to ripen its seeds here, or
to make offsets; so that both are frequently imported.

Saxifrage plants are usually potted to move into the house when in flower, as
indeed the pyramidal in particular should be; but they are all very hardy,
except the strawberry sort, (not very handsome) which is too tender to endure
much wet and cold.

Senna, of Maryland, must have a dry soil and warm situation. It is annual in
stalk, and therefore the roots may be well protected in winter: This flower
makes a very handsome show.

Solomon's seal is in greater variety, and one with double flowers. They all
suit well in shady moist places.

Starworts are in general of that hardy nature, that they will flower almost
any where, and increase apace from the least slip. They are apt, however, to
lose their lower leaves, in proportion to the shade, cold, and wet, they grow
in; and the Alpine sort will require an open situation, though, like the
others, a stiff moist soil suits it. There are other sorts, as a Philadelphian
purple, eight feet, and two whites of rather low growth, etc. The two last, as
blowing late, and not rampant, may be planted near the house.

Stock, this plant is rather of a biennial nature, but is commonly of longer
duration. It is proper to pot and place in a window, on account of its size,
rising only a few inches. It is sweet and floriferous, and altogether very
proper for an edging.

Sisyrinchum, allow it an east border, but dry soil; and as it is a small
flower, pot some.

Throatwort, the two first sorts are classed with campanulas. The latter, which
is the proper, or mountain blue throatwort, likes the shade, but must have a
light dry soil. This, as the snapdragon, and some others, will grow in the
crack of walls, etc. and continue longer in such a situation, than a better: In
most soils it proves often biennial.

Toothwort, as it delights in shade, is proper for the borders of walks in
plantations; though it will grow any where.

Whitlow grass is a wild (medicinal) herb, that grows on roofs and walls of old
houses, and rubbish heaps; but makes a pretty dwarf spring flower as an edging,
etc. in a poor soil.

Worm grass is a very neat little plant, with a flower bright red without, and
a deep orange within.

XII.
LIST of bulbous, tuberous, and fleshy rooted perennials.

1 Aconite, or winter wolf's bane, yellow flower, Feb. 2 Albuca, or bastard
star of Bethlehem, (least) yellow, June 3 -- greater, or spear leaved, red
flowered, June 4 -- tallest, with spiked clusters of wh. flow. June 2 Anemone,
double broad and narrow leaved, variety, May 2 -- common wood, dou. wh. purp.
blue, red, March 2 -- Appenine wood, doub. blue, purp. wh. April 2 -- yellow
wood, or ranunculus anemone, April -- pulsatilla, see pasque flower 1
Bulbocodium, or spring colchicum, violet, April 1 Colchicum, com. sing. and
double, purp. pink, wh. etc. Sep. 1 -- variegated flow. and a striped leaved,
Sep. 1 -- mountain, (Spanish) red and strip. red, Aug. 1 -- eastern, variegated
leaf, checquered flow. Aug. 4 Comfrey, oriental, blue (April) and German, yel.
June 4 Cornflag, or sword lily, crims. red, purple and white, June 1 Crocus,
spring, yellows, a variety, plain and strip. March 1 -- ditto, blues, purples,
white, plain and strip. March 1 Crocus, autumnal, or saffron, pur. blue, white,
yel. Oct. 3 Crowfoot, Alpine plantain leaved, white, April -- see crowfoot,
last list 3 -- Pyrenean grass leaved, yellow, May 4 Crown imperial, single and
double reds and yellows, May 4 -- double crowned, triple crowned, May 4 -- gold
and silver striped leaved, May 1 Cyclamen, European, spring and autumn, pur.
wh. April 3 Daffodil, a variety of yellows, single and double, April 3 --
double yellow, with cup in cup, April 3 -- yel. with white cup, and wh. with
yel. cup, April 4 -- tradescants, large double, yellow, April 2 -- dwarf, or
short-stalked yellow, March 1 -- hoop petticoat, or rush-leaved yellow, April 3
-- odorous, or sweet-scented starry, yellow, April -- white, see narcissus --
sea, see pancratium 1 Dog's tooth violet, purples, red and white, April 1 --
narrow leaved, colors ditto, April 4 Dog's bane, (tuberous asclepias) orange,
July 2 Dropwort, doub. flow. and varieg. leaved, white, June 3 Fritillary,
common and Pyrenean, a variety, April 1 Fumatory, solid, and hollow rooted,
red, pur. wh. April Garlic, (the flowery kinds) see moly 1 Herb true love,
nodding and sessile flower, purple, April 2 Hyacinth, a great variety, white,
red, blue, etc. May 3 -- tufted, (or fair-haired) bl. pur. and white, April 1
-- Spanish nodding flowered, red, April 3 -- amethystine, a deep blue color,
March 3 -- musk scented, purple and yellow, April 4 -- monstrous flowered, or
feathered, blue, April 1 -- grape sorts, blue, white and gray, April 2 -- lily,
(yellow rooted) a blue star flower, June 1 -- Peruvian starry, blue and white,
May 2 -- Italian and Byzantine starry, blue, April 1 -- English starry, (autumn
squill) blue, Sept. 1 -- bell flowered starry, white with purple, May -- Indian
tuberous, see tuberose 3 Jonquil, single, semi and double yellow, April 4 Iris,
or flag, a variety, pur. blue, yel. wh. etc. June 4 -- striped leaved stinking
gladwin, purple, July 4 -- Siberian narrow leaved, blue with white, July 1 --
dwarf Austrian, purp. blue, red and white, May 1 -- vernal, or dwarf Virginian,
blue, May 3 -- snake's head, or tuberous iris, purple, May 3 -- Xiphium, or
Spanish bulbous, a variety, June 1 -- Persian bulbous, finely variegated, March
1 -- bulbous Sisyrinchium, blue and yellow, June 1 -- Ixia, large flowered, or
crocus leaved, variety, June 1 -- Chinese sword leaved, yellow with red, July 4
Lily, com. sing. and doub. wh. orange and fiery, June 3 -- striped flowered,
purple and white, June 3 -- striped leaved, of white and orange sorts, June 3
-- dwarf stalked, orange, or red flowered, June 4 -- Constantinople, dependent
flowered, June 4 -- proliferous, or many flowered ditto, June 4 -- com.
martagon, or Turk's cap, purple, June 4 -- ditto, wh. red, imperial and double,
June, July 4 -- pompony martagons, several colors, June 4 -- Chalcedonian
martagons, scarlet and purp. July 4 -- superb pyramidal, martagon, variegated,
July 4 -- Canadian martagon, plain, and spotted yel. Aug. 4 -- day, or lily
asphodel, yel. and ^awney red, June 1 -- daffodil, or autumnal narcissus,
yellow, September 1 -- atamasco amaryllis, carnation colored, July 3 --
Guernsey scarlet, and belladonna purple, September 3 -- pancratium common, and
Illyrian, wh. August, July Martagons, see lily above Meadow saffron, see
colchicum 2 Moly, (flowering garlic) yel. wh. pur. and red, June 4 -- magicum,
victorialis, and descendens, purple, July 3 Narcissus, poet's daffodil, variety
in cup, wh. May 3 -- peerless, or two colored, wh. and yel. April 3 --
polyanthus, or multiflorous, ditto 2 -- late flowering, yellow cup, white,
August 2 Orchis, perennial, purples, reds and white, June, d. 2 -- biennial,
be, or gnat orchis, red, June, d. 1 Orobus, tuberous, or wood pea, red flower,
May -- fibrous rooted, see last list 4 Poeony, com. sing. doub. reds, purple,
black, white, May 4 -- Constantinople, large flower, blood red, June 4 --
Portugal sweet scented, deep red, May 3 -- small narrow leaved, red flowered,
May 3 -- dwarf, with a white flower, May 2 Pasque flower, common blue, red and
white, April 2 -- Siberian, or alpine yellow, April Pilewort, see ranunculus
ficaria 2 Ranunculus, plantain leaved Alpine, white, April 2 -- grass leaved
Pyrenean, straw col. May 3 -- grandiflorous, or oriental great yel. May 1 --
ficaria, or pilewort, double yellow, April 2 -- Turkey, or turban, red, scar.
yel. black, May 1 -- Persian, a great variety, fine colors, May -- see
crowfoot, last list 2 Saxifrage, granulous rooted, double white, May 1
Snowdrop, single, semidouble and double, white, Feb. 3 -- great, spring, summer
and autumn sorts 4 Spiderwort, savoy, (Bruno's lily) and others, wh. June, m. 4
-- Virginia, (trade scants) blue, purp. etc. ditto 4 Squill, or common sea
onion, white flower, June, d. 4 Star of Bethlehem, pyramidal Portugal, white,
June 4 -- Arabian, or Alexandrian lily, ditto 1 -- common wild, greenish white,
May 1 -- ditto, with yellow flower, April 3 Tootirwort, bulbiferous, seven
lobed, purple, June 4 Tuberose, single and double flowered, white, July 4
Tulip, double, a variety, yel. and red striped, etc. June 4 -- parrot, or
hooked leaved, ditto, June 4 -- Turkey sorts, striped, great variety, May 2 --
ditto, early dwarfs, a variety, April 2 -- wild European, small yellow flower,
April
* The propagation of flowers in this list, is generally by (...) or p^^ces of
roots, having an eye, or bud to it. Most of them may be raised also from seed;
but this is a tedious method, and not ordinarily practiced, except by curious
florists. See page 16, vol. 2.

Some of this list, as most of the bulbous and tuberous roots, may be kept out
of ground a long time, others a shorter; (see page 18, vol. 2) but those
denominated fleshy roots, must either be planted immediately, or at least in a
few days. It is common to them all to be taken out of ground for removal, as
soon as their leaves decay, the roots then being in a state of rest, which is
naturally longer, or shorter, in different plants; and if they stay in the
ground till new fibers are shot, they are always removed with damage.

OBSERVATIONS ON PARTICULAR FLOWERS.
Albuca is too tender a bulb to endure much wet and frost, and therefore is
usually planted in pots, for putting under shelter (as in a frame, etc.) in
winter; but may be protected in the open ground, by covering with a glass, or
garden pot, toward the end of autumn, to keep the roots dry; and before sharp
frosts come, covering round with litter. By such a practice, many tender things
that die down to the ground, may be preserved abroad.

Anemone, the garden (in contradistinction to the wood) is in great variety of
very fine sorts, divided generally into two kinds; i. e. narrow and broad
leaved; the latter is reckoned the hardier. The full doubles only are esteemed
choice flowers; but the semidoubles, and singles, are showy enough for ordinary
border. The single or (...) ap^monies, (so called from (...) (...)) frequently
(...) as early as February, or sooner; and thus become valuable, for decorating
the ground at so dreary a season. The wood kinds bear large flowers, and are
very useful ornaments for the borders of shrubberies, etc. at an early season,
for which reason, they should be planted in the most frequented shady places.

Colchicum, or meadow saffaron flowers about Mi^^elmas, and may be kept out of
ground from May (or decay of the leaf) to Mid-August. It is a remarkable
property of this flower, (not however peculiar to it alone) that it makes its
appearance before the leaves, which grow all winter and spring. The colohicums
are pretty plants for the end of the flowery season, (October) which makes them
estimable objects near the house, where they may be often seen.

Cyclamen, the sorts flowering in winter (Persian) are too tender for open
culture; but close under a warm wall, with occasional protection of a
hand-glass, they have succeeded. A culture of this nature is rather to be
attempted, as housing (except in places where they have much air) does not suit
them; the roots often moulding and rotting when kept too close. The colors of
the Persian sorts are red, purple and white. Let them have a light, and deeply
dug dry soil, not too much water, and none at all after the leaves begin to
decay; for the roots now ceasing to act, would suffer by absorbing much wet,
the leaves not performing their accustomed office of drawing it up, and
discharging it. This observation applies to all burbs and tubers in a degree)
though few are so liable to rot as these.

Fritillary is of several colors, plain, checquered and spotted, white,
purple, black, red and yellow. The kinds are broad and narrow leaved; and there
is a large double sort, a tall Persian, (a yard high) and a dwarf Persian about
half size, both having deep purple flowers.

Jonquil, or rushleaved daffodil, has been always justly admired for a very
neat sweet flower; but we (...) ^o often meet with it, as might be expected.
The single kinds are the most fragrant, and the large double is quite
scentless. It is proper always to pot some, in order to bring them into the
house when in flower, for their perfume.

Iris, the four first sorts rather prefer a shady moist situation; but will
grow any where, and are commonly planted in odd spare corners of ground.

Ixias are generally green house and store plants; but these two are found
hardy enough to do ordinarily in open borders, in a light dry soil, and warm
situation, a little protection being afforded them in severe weather.

Lily is a very ornamental and hardy flower in all its varieties increasing
abundantly, and needing only to be removed every three or four years, for the
purpose of taking away the offsets, and renewing the soil, for a superior blow.
The whites will not keep out of ground above one month, but the orange for
several. The white will flower tolerably in shade, but the orange much better:
and as it is a gay flower, it serves well to enliven plantations. The martagons
are generally not nice as to soil and situation; but the scarlet and yellow
sorts, and striped lily, should have a light dry soil, and some sun. The single
white lilies are very sweet; but the doubles have no smell, as is the case with
some other flowers, the fragrance arising from the stamina and antheroe, which
are smothered by the numerous petals. The Atamasco Guernsey, belladonna, and
parcratium lilies, are tender, and should have a warm, or a good auricula soil,
a full sunny border, and well sheltered situation; with protection also from
much wet in cold seasons, and security from frost. These are very elegant and
noble flowers, and the Gaernsey lily is equal to, if not beyond, any competitor
^n the flowery creation: This is, however, the tenderest of the form; then the
belladonua and pancratium lily, o^ sea daff^dil, and the at ima^es is the
hardiest. All of them are usually potted for removing into shelter, but they
may be managed so as to do abroad, except in the more northern and bleak parts
of this island: They blow much the finer in open ground, (all things going on
well) the roots having a free scope to draw rourishment, etc.

O^chis is rather difficult of culture: It likes a dry barren soil, and the
roots should be taken up (from the places it grows wild) just as the leaves
decay after flowering; and, if with a ball of earth about them, the chance of
succeeding is much greater. Upon removal, let them be planted directly. If
raised from seed, (as the biennial, though it is not always so) let it be sown
as soon as gathered; and the plants being thinned, let them remain, as more
likely to do well, than when transplanted. It is evidently not proper to move
these bulbs (as others) often, but should stand for several years.

Poeony, the single kinds are showy, but the doubles are nobly ornamental. Let
this flower have room, as it will spread (when in full sized bunches) a yard
round: and let it be planted out of the way of the full sun, and of much wind.
It need not be removed for many years, and will grow in any soil and situation,
even among trees, which adapts it for shrubberies, etc. The sorts are divided
into male and female; and the former, having lost its flower, produces pods,
containing rich crimson grains, interspersed with black berries of seed, that
look very pretty when burst; and may be gathered as soon, or rather just before
they open, and brought into the house as curiosities. Let this root be removed
early in September, or at least before the month is out, before new fibers are
formed to the knobs of the roots.

Pilewort, (the double) prefers a shady moist situation; and is a pretty wild
plant, though an humble trailer. It is called sometimes the lesser celadine,
and also figwort.

Ranunculus, in all its sorts, is very ornamental; but the Persian kinds are
beautiful, and of infinite variety. This flower is left too much to the culture
of professed florists; for why should not every garden be adorned with it,
seeing, that not much skill is necessary in the management, and that it is
hardy, and increases freely?

Saxifrage roots are like so many small peace, and should be planted five or six
together, in order to form a full tuft of its flowers, which are double, and
white like a stock. The stems, being slender, will need the support of a light
stick, which it is best to fix in the middle at the time of planting, as
putting one in afterward might injure the roots. All solid rooted plants are
liable to be hurt by pushing in a stick too near for tying to, and more care
should be taken in the business than usually is: The practice of placing a
stick at the time of planting is the best way, when it may be fixed close; and
it would serve to show where the roots are, that they may not be disturbed
before they appear above ground. This saxifrage is usually and properly potted,
though it does very well in borders, and makes a good show.

Spiderwort likes shade and moisture.

Star of Bethlehem, the two last sorts, are proper for the edges of borders in
plantations; and the pyramidal sort is a proper flower to pot, mixing with
others very ornamentally: The two first should have a light dry soil.

Squill will need a little protection from hard frosts; but is sufficiently
ornamental to reward the trouble.

Toothwort thrives best in shade and moisture.

Tuberose, there is a dwarf stalked, and a variegated leaf sort of, but they
are not so worthy of cultivation as the common single and double; of which two
the single is preferable, as it blows better, and is more fragrant. See the end
of this section.

Tulip (the Turkey) is classed into two sorts; the taller, called serotines, or
late blowers; and the shorter, praecoces, or early blowers; some have made
another distinction, medias, but it is not necessary. The plain tulips (as they
generally are when they first blow from seed) are called whole blowers, or
breeders; and according as they break into other colors, stripes, and
variegations, are denominated and classed into baguettes, bybloemens, verports,
and bizarres. As the dwarf sorts blow so early as March and April, (the dake
van tol earlier) allow them a warm border and soil, to preserve them from frost
and wet, which they are rather impatient of. These are often potted and forced
on a hot bed, etc. or brought forward by water-glasses, in a warm room; but an
increase is only to be expected from open ground culture, and there these early
sorts do it sparingly. Take them up every year to remove the offsets, and renew
the soil; and keep each sort separate, and plant them so, for then they will
blow together, and be all of one height. There are about fifty of the early
sorts; but the number of fancy tulips in Maddock's catalogue is more than eight
hundred, besides breeders, etc.

THE following articles are detached as most conveniently inserted here:

Auricula is increased by parting the roots, or slipping rooted offsets from
them; but offsets without roots will sometimes strike, if well managed, by
setting them in a good soil, (in pots best) where they have but little sun, and
keeping them cool by occasional watering. When the roots are divided, (in
autumn) let it be with a sharp knife; and cutting off any cankered part,
shorten also their ends, and let not the lap part of the root be too long.

The soil for auriculus should be a good fresh light loamy maiden one, to which
is added one third of wood pile, or willow earth, one of sea, or any sharp, or
drift: sand; and a quantity, equal to the whole, of rotted cow dung, or in lieu
of this, horse dung. This mixture should be well incorporated, at least a year
before, by frequent turning over, which ought to be repeated once a month.

Dress the pots toward the end of January, for then the plants begin to push
for flower, and must be attented to, and assis^ed. Take as much of the top
mould off as can be, without disturbing, or bruising the roots; and fill up
with the compost, a little pressed down. If the pots are dry from the shelter
afforded them, give a little soft water in mild weather, about ten o'clock.

Shift, or transplant auriculas every second year, and that as soon as they are
out of blow; those, however, that produce many offsets, or are luxuriant
growers, may be shifted every year. The more common practice is to move all in
August.

To raise auriculas from the seed, in February, fill boxes, or pots, with fine
sifted middling compost; smooth the top perfectly level; scatter the seeds
evenly, and cover not more than the thickness of a shilling. Set the pots, etc.
on tiles, or boards, under a warm wall, and keep the surface moist. It is a
good way to mix the seed with a like quantity (or a little more) of fine wood
ashes; and to lay some small pieces of furze, or light thorns over. Remove them
(as occasion dictates) to shelter, or protect them from much frost, or heavy
rain, etc. and by May expect them to appear, when take the furze off; after
which set them where they have only the morning sun, and when they have got six
leaves, prick them put three inches asunder, in boxes, or pots; and early in
the next spring, plant them again at six inches asunder, and protect them from
wet and frost.

Much might be advanced respecting this flower; and the most satisfaction will
probably be obtained from a little tract on its "Culture and Management,"
printed for BULL, at Bath, and sold by WALLIS, in Ludgate Street, 1782.
Something more will occur in the calendar.

Carnation is usually propagated by layers, (sometimes by pipings or cuttings,
as pinks) about Midsummer, or as soon after in the season as they will admit of
it, by their length and strength, and the work is thus: Strip off the leaves
from the lower part of the shoot; at the middle of it, close below the joint,
cut it half through by an upward direction, with a thin, narrow, sharp knife,
and continue the slit exactly up the middle from half to three-fourths of an
inch; peg the shoot down into the earth (being before well loosened) as low as
it will bear bending, setting the layer upright. This business must be done
with a nice hand, and much care, lest the layer should snap off. Now, or rather
before, cut off the ends of the longest of the top leaves, that the worms may
not draw them in, and disturb the layer. The soil should be fine and good, and
may be raised about the layers as occasion requires. Water them ^o set the
earth close, and always keep it cool. In six weeks, or two months, they will be
rooted, fit for transplanting; cut them from the old plant (at the peg) with a
sharp knife, and take them up carefully, that their very tender roots may not
be broken off, keeping a little mould about them, if possible: but plant them
not deep, as they are then liable to decay.

The soil proper for carnations, is a hazelly, or sandy loam, procured from a
pasture, by a spit of about eight inches depth, the turf being well broke,
frequently turned, and laid so long together, as to be nearly consumed; them
add a little lime, (or not) and one-third, or one-fourth of very rotten dung, (
cow's best) and let this be well mixed, and turned over, till thoroughly
incorporated, which will be some months first; then screen it, or sift through
a coarse sieve. The soil for carnations must be rich; but yet dung is found so
injurious to carnations, that some florists depend upon a good fresh soil
alone; carnations are also (except in summer) impatient of much wet. Turf
ashes, or those of any vegetable, may be mixed with a fresh maiden soil, but
not too freely: A small quantity of fine soot, or wood ashes, may me also used,
to avoid dung.

To raise carnations from seed, sow thin in boxes, or pots, (in a soil as
above) early in April, and let them have only the morning sun. When advanced a
little in growth, (as about Midsummer) take the first opportunity of moist
weather, and prick them out at three or four inches asunder, and give a little
water. If dry weather, contrive to shade them ten days, or a fortnight, with
mats hooped over, which remove in shady or showery weather. When they have
grown here a month, or six weeks, (or before August is out) plant them at nine
or ten inches distance, and shade, if necessary. Protect them in hard frosts by
mats, or hoops, set high. Seed is best saved from good seedling plants, rather
than those long propagated from layers, etc.

Geranium (the African sorts) are propagated by seeds and cuttings. The former
produces the most free growing plants; but as luxuriance is not desirable in
things confined to pots, (as geraniums must be) and as the propagation by
cuttings is so easy and expeditious, it is the mode of culture that generally
prevails. The young plants from cuttings are also hardier than those from seed.
If raised from seed, sow in April, in a light and good soil, warm border, and
under a hand-glass, keeping the earth somewhat moist; but it is best to make
use of a gentle hot bed, giving plenty of air to the plants, when they appear,
which on natural ground will be five or six weeks in coming up, and on a
moderate heat about three. If raised from cuttings, use shoots of the last
year's growth, strait and short jointed. Plant them in a fine rich soil, two or
three inches or at the most four deep and eight or nine inches asunder, or
less, if more convenient. Or the rule may be, to plant the shorter cuttings in
two thirds of their length, and the longer one half; but it is an error to put
them in the ground so deep as some people do. Those raised on a little heat
will be sufficiently rooted in two months to transplant into small pots;
(shortening the longer roots a little) and those in the cold ground will be
ready in three months, and sometimes less. A hand-glass set over geranium
cuttings (or any other) will greatly facilitate the business, as is directed
for pinks. If the cuttings are raw, or long, take the upper part off down to an
eye. In general it may be proper to keep the cuttings out of ground a day, or
two; but the soft and succulent ones should by all means, in order to dry the
ends, and so heal the wound, which, if put directly in the ground, might decay
and rot.

The proper season for planting is from Mid-May to Mid-July; a little earlier,
or later, may however do: Some choose to forward them on heat, in March and
April; but they must not be kept close. It is advisable, to take cuttings from
toward the top, in order to keep the plants down; but where they can be best
spared for maintaining a good form, is the general rule.

The management of geraniums is, to keep them from forced, and as much as may be
from harsh winds, particularly in the spring; as after being housed all winter,
they are then tender, and far less able to bear unkind weather, than in autumn;
when having been used to the external air, and the colder weather coming on by
degrees, they are seldom hurt much, but by absoulte forced. In the spring, they
must be brought to bear air by degrees, and the more carefully, according as
the winter has occasioned them to be more or less deprived of the external air,
being let in upon them. When the weather is mild in April, let them be taken
out in the day, (if convenient) and put in on nights; and venture them not
wholly abroad till Mid-May, or after. In the summer, they should be placed in
shelter and shade; but not under trees, or any roof: The morning sun is all
they should have, for more of it dries the mould in the pots too fast, and
fades the flowers. They will want frequent watering, see page 10, vol. 2. They
may take up their summer residence about Mid-May, (as directed) but the season
must govern; and it will not do to bring them out in a harsh one, which would
pinch up the leaves, and deprive them of their beauty. If put close under a
south wall for a week or two at first, it would be proper; or an awning of mats
might be used for nights.

Shifting geraniums should generally take place once a year, from smaller p^rs
into others one size bigger: This may be in the first mild weather in April, or
May. Loosen and take off the top mould down to the roots, (without damaging
them) then turn the pot up, and shake it out. If the roots adhere to the sides
of the pot, give the edge a tap upon the knee, or something, and little
pressure at the hole, with the thumb, or finger, at the same time, which will
help to discharge it. Pare off the matted roots round the sides and bottom,
with a sharp knife; and plant it in a fresh pot, (or the same again may
sometimes do) putting in as much fine light rich mould, or compost, at the
bottom, as will raise the ball of earth, which is about the roots, within an
inch of the top of the pot; then fill round the sides, putting the mould gently
in, and pressing it down a little, make all level to the top within half and
inch; finally, give a watering that shall soak to the bottom, and sprinkle some
dry mould over. All shifted plants should be kept rather in the shade for a
week or two.

If any sticks are to the plants, they must be taken away first, and replaced
(if necessary) again before watering, or rather the next day, if the plants
will stand up without. This may be a proper time to trim off all dangling, or
too crowding shoots; but if cuttings are wanted for increase, they should not
be trimmed till these are to be planted. At any rate, dead leaves, or unsightly
crooked parts, should be discharged, and symmetry, in a snug round head,
provided for. Geraniums are free growers, and it is always advisable to take
off some shoots to keep them down. A few of the plants, that most need it, (as
least handsome or (...)) should be severely cut, for a late blow, which
generally proves a fine one in consequence. A judicious regular use of neat
slender sticks is of much advantage to geraniums, or other potted plants.

What has been said of geraniums, applies to all exotics; in the management of
which, it is a material thing not to shift into too large pots, as the roots
(...) directly to the outsides, and so would be too hastily brought to require
the biggest pots. Another thing is, to take off some of the top soil, not only
as directed in spring, but once or twice in the summer; and always before
housing in autumn, and replacing it with a rich compost, as one of almost all
rotten cow dung, which being black, is the most suitable soil for the purpose;
and it is cool and nourishing.

It is material to neatness, and the end of ornament, (for which plants are
chiefly potted) that the pots should be occasionally washed, or scoured, and by
no means suffered to get moldy. This is a point of little attended to, that we
often see a beautiful plant in a disgusting habitation. It is equally
offensive, and is also injurious to suffer the surface earth to get mossy, or
caked hard by the necessary waterings; to prevent which, often stir it a little
depth, and lay it smooth, which makes all look neat and creditable.

Pints are sometimes layered, or more usually propagated by cuttings, or
pipings, about Midsummer; and may be also by slips, set in March, April, or
May, with, or without roots, four inches asunder. Cuttings should be young
strong shoots of three or four inches long, taken off just below a joint; from
which stripping the lower leaves, and cutting the top ones short, plant them in
a fine good soil, about two inches asunder, and in depth full half of their
length. They will strike root, so as to be fit to move, in seven or eight
weeks, with a little earth about their roots; or may be left to an early time
in the spring; but where this is designed, they will be best six inches
asunder. They may be either put in pots, or borders, where they are to blow, or
rather into a nursery bed, to grow a year at six inches distance. Pipings are
obtained by drawing the heads of the young shoots out, of their sockets, of the
length of cuttings. In both methods, push the shoots carefully into the earth,
gently press the mould about them, and give a watering; shade also from much
sun. They will strike more certainly, and much sooner by being covered close
with a hand-glass, as much as possible air tight. They must be kept cool, by
occasional watering; but when under glass, they will not need so much shading,
or may do without any; for though the enclosed air is warmer. It is always more
humid, which refreshes the cuttings with answerable supply for their support;
and it is this moisture and warmth that facilitates the growth. When they
appear to be growing, the glasses must be raised, and in a short time removed.
To raise pinks from seed, follow the directions given for carnations.

Polyanthus is propagated by parting the roots in autumn, or (for new
varieties) by seed sown and managed (nearly) as directed for auriculus: But as
this flower is not so delicate in the cultivation, it may be sown in borders,
where there is only the morning sun, any time from August to April; and as soon
as the plants are at all big enough to prick out, set them four inches,
asunder; and sometime in August, plant at six inches, where they are to remain
for their first blow; which should be attended to, in order to mark the best
flowers, dividing these into two sorts, prime and midling; and the rest may be
either planted into ordinary ground in plantations, etc. or cast away: There
will be but few good ones in a great many; but the culture of this plants is so
easy, that it is worth while to try for them. Some sow in pots, and boxes, in
December, placing them in the sun, and housing them in severe weather; and when
the plants appear, set them in an east aspect, left much sun destroy the young
plants; early in autumn, or spring, is however better: The seed may be covered
a little less than a quarter of an inch. Both seeds and seedling plants should
have occasional watering, (except in winter) as moisture suits them.

A compost for the polyanthus is simply a light loam, (as the first spit from
the pasture rotted down with the tarf) and about one fourth part cow dung, or
wood pile earth. If the loam is strong, a little drift sand amongst it will be
proper. The polyanthus grows any where, but a cool soil and situation suits it
best; and the above compost, and an cast border, is necessary for a capital
blow.

Tuberose is best blown in a hot house; but if planted in pots, and plunged at
the back of a hot bed frame, it will succeed very well. This will be best done
about Mid-April, as sooner they are apt to get too tall before they can safely
be exposed abroad. Provide a good fresh light earth, and use no dung, except a
little rich and dungy, to lay an inch below the bottom of the bulb; fill the
pots only three parts, and place the root only half way, or a little more, in
it. Let the mould be somewhat moist, but give no water till the shoot appears,
and then moderately; at which time, fill up the pot, just to cover the bulb,
which should be but barely hid, when the pot is full. The best shaped pots for
bulbous roots is, when the bottoms are as wide as the top; and the size for the
tuberose should be those of eight or nine inches diameter at top, according as
the bottom is for width; for the more space below, the less is required above.

As the shoots advance in growth, the more air must be given; and as freely as
possible on mild days, shutting close on cold nights, and almost so on moderate
ones. When they get too high for the frames, and the season is forward, with
kind weather, they may be plunged in the ground, close under a warm wall; and a
covering of mat contrived to protect them a while on nights, or may do if left
to take their chance. If the weather is foul, they may be housed in a good
window, for a week or a fortnight, and then put in the ground as directed
above. Here let them remain, giving occasional watering, (and that freely in
dry weather) till in flower, when the house (allowing them light and sun) will
be their proper residence, to enjoy their fine powerful scent, and to protect
the blow, that it may the longer continue. In their flowering state, they will
want much water.

The heat on which this flower is forwarded, should be moderate, otherwise it
will run up too fast. If planted under a south wall in May, covering the root
about an inch, and guarding against much wet till it is growing, it will do for
a late blow: A hand-glass of course would be serviceable, both to assist it in
shooting, and shelter it from unkind weather; but close covering is as much as
possible to be avoided. Fresh roots are imported every year; -- the double
never flowers twice with us, but the single may, if kept in a dry warm room.

SECTION XX.
A CALENDAR.
THE general work of gardening has been pretty fully spoken of, in the parts
concerning the formation, cultivation, and management of a garden, propagation,
etc. The particular culture of esculents, herbs, fruits, and flowers, has been
treated in the sections appropriated to each. It therefore remains to give here
little more than short hints, by way of assisting recollection, and to make
proper references to the pages, where father instructions may be found of those
that need, or choose to consult them.

What is said concerning seeds and sowing, page 58 to 65. must be attended to.
It need only be father observed, that as to the season proper to do the several
works of gardening, it is not the same (exactly) every where, as soil and
situation make a difference. The time mentioned in this calender is, that which
the author judges will be found most generally right in the midland counties,
as the extremes of north and south necessarily make a difference in this
business.

The work of gardening being very multifarious, it would be a practice not
unworthy, even the skilful gardener, to make it a rule, once a week, to
consider what is to be done the following week; and to made memorandums
accordingly, numbering them in the order he would have them performed. Thus he
would never be at a loss, what to set, himself or his laborers about, and the
mortification of omissions, or appearance of neglect, would be avoided: This
calendar, it is presumed, will be found a ready and sufficient assistant upon
such an occasion, the author having endeaveoured to make it as plain and
comprehensive as it is concise.

JANUARY.
LET every thing be done now, that the weather and circumstances will permit,
(though not absolutely necessary) in order to lessen the work of next month,
which when in happens to he an open season, is a very important one in the way
of gardening, in which the loss of a single fine day is of consequence. Many
things might be prepared in the winter, in readiness for spring, which are but
too often neglected.

MISCELIANEOUS WORK.
Dung for lot bed should be duly attended to, 176.

Manure and compost heaps turn frequently over.

Espaders, garden frames, and such things, rectify.

T^^^s, make, repair, sharpen and brighten, 9, vol. 2.

Brusn wood, prepare ready for sticking peace, etc. 23^.

Planting, trench and prepare ground for, 29, 98, etc.

New planted trees product and tie to stakes, 102.

Prune espalier trees, standards and shrubs, 164,166,171.

M^ss, clear trees and shrubs from, as convement.

Webs and nests of caterpillars, slugs, snails, destroy.

Beds and borders, weed, stir the ground, and rake.

Cauliflowers and lettutes in frames, etc. attend, 220,232.

Endive, tie up, when dry, to blanch; and protect it,226.

Cions, procure for graffing, except apples, 83, 86.

Hot beds, prepare for, or make, cucumbers, etc. 174,181.

Drain ground, scour ditches, plash hedges, etc.

SOW
Cucumbers, 181. Melons, 197. Peace, 236. Beans, 213. Spinach, 249. Radishes,
244. Lettuces, 231. Cress, 255. Mustard, 259. Carrots, 218. The five last on
heat; to which may be added, rape and lap lettuce, 233, as sallading; toward
the end of the month, however, they may be sown on warm borders, the sallading
being under hand-glasses.

PLANT
Mint on heat, 259. Cabbages at distances, as 217. Trees and shrubs of the
deciduous kinds, grape vines, currants, gooseberries and raspberries, if mild
weather, so that the ground will work loose. Layers may be removed; but rather
prepare the ground now for planting next month, 98, etc.

PROPAGATE
Trees and shrubs by suckers, layers, cuttings, 65, etc.

FLOWERS.
Pots of, see December tulips, anemonies, ranunculuses, hyacinths, narcissuses,
etc. protect, 21, vol. 2.

Bulbous and tuberous roots out of ground, now plant for a late blow, or in the
next month, 18, vol. 2; preserve choice sorts from much wet, lest they rot.

Auriculas, if disturbed by frost, immediately earth up; or if not, yet do it
for assisting the blow, 91, vol. 2; and let them be protected from snow and
wet, by frames, etc. or set the pots close under a south wall, where, in severe
weather, they may be covered, though frost rarely hurts the plants, if kept
tolerably dry: The Pots will be safer, if plunged in the ground, see November.
Some persons lay the pots on their sides, to keep them dry, and to cover them;
but, in this position, they should not remain long, as it gives the bud a twist.

Carnations, and all hardy plants, in pots, placed under any cover, must have
as much air and sun as can be given them; wet is now peculiarly injurious to
carnations, which those in pots, at least, may be easily protected from, by
frames or mats.

Flowering shrubs may be planted, if open weather, covering the roots well; but
it is better done next month, getting the ground ready now, 110, etc.

NURSERY.
Vermin, guard against in time, on seed beds, etc. 73.

Dig beds for sowing, next month three seeds, etc. 72.

Protect seedling trees (particular exotics) from frost.

Plant, or transplant, hardy things, cover the roots.

Prepare ground for next month's planting out seedlings, or stocks for grassing
another year, 73.

FEBRUARY.
WHEN the ground can be conveniently worked, this is a very busy month, and no
time must be lost, nor hands spared, that every thing may be done in its
proper, or earliest season.

The last week is the principal, in which many things are to be done, and some
full crops sown: The skilful gardener is aware of this, but ordinarily this
season is lost.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Ground, prepare for planting and sowing, by digging, trenching, manuring,
levelling, etc.

Borders should be stirred, dug, or dressed, 29, 141.

Gravel walks, weed, put in order, and roll firm.

Grass plats, etc. clean up, cut the edges, or lay turf.

Composts and manures, turn over, and break well.

Hot beds, attend regularly, and no neglect, 184, etc.

Stable dung, for hot beds, manage properly, 176.

Cauliflowers and lettuces, see last month, and stir the surface of the mould a
little about them.

Earth up and protect plants from frost and wind.

Stick peace, when about five inches high, 237.

Weed and thin crops, as winter onions, radishes, etc. 49.

Endive, attend to blanch and ridge when quite dry, 226.

Vermin and insects, see to, as mice, snails, slugs, etc. 238.

Prune wall and other trees, but first grape vines, 132.

Cions for graffing, provide, 83, and use then, 84, etc.

Edgings of box, thrift, etc. make and repair, 55.

SOW
Cucumbers, 181, 224. Melons, 197, 233. Peace small, 237, large, 238. Beans, the
broad sorts, or the mazagons, if wanted early, 214. Radishes on heat, or not,
244. Lettuces on heat, or not, 231. Small sallading on heat, or on a warm
border under glass, 255. Cabbages, the sugar loaf sorts, 217; or if early ones
are wanted, sow the Yorkshire on a little heat. Savoys, 247. Onions, 234.
Leeks, 231. Parsley, 260. Spinach, 249. Carrots on heat or not, 218. Parsneps,
235. Celery, 222. Kidney beans on heat, 229. Turnips on heat, 250. Cauliflowers
on heat, 221.

PLANT.
Cucumbers, 189. Melons, 200. Cauliflowers, 220. Cabbages, 217. Herseradish,
227. Garlic, 227. Rocombole, 261. Shalots, 249. Cives, 254. Mint on heat, 259.
Potatoes, early sorts, on heat, and warm borders, 241. Vines, wall, espalier,
and standard fruit trees, forest trees, and deciduous shrubs, 30,98,111,115.

PROPAGATE
Trees and shrubs by graffing, 84, by suckers, layers, and cuttings, 65. Sow
kernels, stones, and seeds of fruit, etc. on fine well broke earth, allowing
excties a little heat, 72.

FLOWERS.
See last month. Hardy biennials and perennials should now be planted, before
they shoot, 15, 16, vol. 2. Shrubs, protect, etc. 112; prune and dig about
them, 114.

Auricula and polyanthus seed should be sown now.

Bulbs and tubers, plant by the middle of the month; and for variety, a few may
be potted, 18, vol. 2.

Annuals, all sorts, may be sown about last week, 6, vol. 2, some of the latter
may be sown in pots, 13, vol. 2.

NURSERY.
See last month. Sow hardy trees and shrubs, 72. Transplant hardy seedlings of
last year, and stocks for graffing next year, or the following, 73.

MARCH.
THE first week in this, like the last in February, is very valuable to the
good gardener, and must be made the best use of by those who would have things
in season. It is therefore proper to have no regard to the charge of necessary
assistance: Nature now waits for us, let us not neglect to attend upon her. See
management, page 57.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Order and neatness are now principal objects, 54.

Vacant ground, dig and apply manure where wanted.

Borders, dress by weeding, digging, etc. see last month.

Gravel walks, clean, relay, or make new ones, rolling them repeatedly after
rain, 55.

Edgings of box, thrift, etc. clip, repair or make.

Grass, plats and walks, cleanse, mow, and cut the edges.

Herb beds, weed and dress, see article balm, 252.

Asparagus beds, weed, carefully fork, and dress, 212.

Strawberry beds, weed, stir the mould, and dress, 171.

Artichokes, dress at the end of the month, 209.

Composts and mould heaps, turn over, and screen, or sift some ready for
dressing pots of flowers, etc.

Vermin, insects, and destructive birds, see to, 238.

Earth up peace, beans, and whatever else needs it.

Stick peace in time, and stop them, or not, 237, 239.

Graff now, but apples toward the end of month, 81.

Prune wall trees without delay, but first vines, 152.

Blossoms of choice wall tree fruit, defend, 148.

Dig, dress, prune, shrubberies and plantations, 111.

Hot beds must be very carefully attended to, 184, etc. and new ones made in
due time, 188.

Dung heaps for future hot beds, manage, 176.

Cauliflowers, etc. under glass, give air freely to, 220.

SOW.
See last month. Radishes, the spindle rooted, and lettuces of sorts once a
fortnight; small sallads every week. The following ten things in the first
week: Alexanders, 208. Asparagus, 211. Beets, 215. Hamburgh Parsley, 235.
Salsafy, 246. Scorzonera, 247. Skirrets, 249. Finochlo, 256. Red cabbage, 218.
Turnip radishes, 24^. Second week: Turnips on a gentle heat, and in open
ground, 250; and kidney beans on heat, or in a warm dry border under
hand-glasses, or not, 229. Last week: Broccoli of the purple autumn sorts, 216.
Nasturtiums, 259. Capsicums, 254. Love apples, 264. Herbs of all sorts, 252,
etc. Grass seeds for plats. Strawberries in pots, particularly the alpine
sorts, 78.

PLANT
Trees and shrubs, 30,98,111,115. Herbs in rooted slips or cuttings, 252, etc.
Strawberries, 39. Asparagus 210. Artichokes 208. Jerusalem artichokes, 228.
Lettuces, 231. Cauliflowers, 220. Other things as directed last month.

PROPAGATE
Trees and Shrubs by graffing, 84; by suckers, offsets, layers, and cuttings,
65. Herbaceous plants, by parting roots, etc. 17, vol. 2.

FLOWERS.
The hardy kinds of flowers in pots that have been housed, should be inured by
degrees to the weather, and soon left out on nights: Let no flowers be housed,
or under cover more than necessary.

Pot desirable hardy plants for moveable ornaments, when in flower; not too
many, 9, 11, vol. 2.

Carnations, and auriculas, if not before, dress, 91, vol. 2.

Tulips, hyacinths, etc. of the best sorts, protect, 21, vol. 2.

Water potted plants as the weather is, 10, vol. 2. auriculas will want it most
as pushing of flower.

Sow annuals, 6. vol. 2. Blennials, 15, vol. 2. Perennials, 17, vol. ^.

Take up, remove offsets, and divide fibrous rooted perennial flowers early in
the month, 17, vol. 2.

Layers of carnations, pinks, and sweet williams, take up carefully, and plant
with earth to the roots, 93, vol. 2,

Anemonies and ranunculuses may be put in ( east border) the first week; but
they will blow late, 19, vol. 2.

Bulbous roots may also yet be put in, first week, with prospect of a like
success, 20, vol. 2.

Box, thrift, daises, pinks, etc. plant soon for edgings.

NURSERY.
Remove litter, weed, stir the ground, rake neatly.

Prune plants into form, taking off side shoots, shortening the leader, etc. to
make a head, etc. 70.

Graffs of last year cut down to a few eyes; but at the end of the month is
soon enough.

Transplant and sow as last month, and do it quickly.

Exotics, or tender plants, sow on a gentle hot bed.

Water give in a dry time, to seeds, seedlings, cuttings, and newly planted
things; but not over much.

APRIL.
IF by any means the proper early cropping of the ground has been prevented,
make no delay to finish, and to get the garden into a complete state of
cultivation. This month may be mild enough to invite us abroad, to traverse the
walks, and view nature in her spring attire, "all blooming and benevolent." Let
nothing therefore be met with that appears slovingly, or disgusting. See page
54.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Borders, etc. weed, stir, rake, and clean up neatly, 49.

Gravel walks and grass plots, put in order, roll, etc. 55.

Edgings of box, etc. make, repair, trim, or cut, 55.

Watering omit not where necessary in a dry time, 50.

Pruning finish soon, head down young trees, 133, 147.

Graffs, see to, that the claying remains safe on, 86.

Blossoms of wall fruit, protect in bad weather, 148.

Dung for hot beds, collect and take due care of, 176.

Hot beds, make in time for fruiting cucumbers.

Melons, tender annuals, etc. 188,199,6, vol. 2. II, vol. 2.

Asparagus, strawberries, artichokes, see last month.

Cauliflowers, stir mould about, and earth up, 220.

Peace, earth up, and stick before they droop, 237.

Beans in blossoms, crop and earth up firmly.

Thin in time all seedling crops, by hand or hoe, 49.

Prick out plants of every kind as soon as fit, 50.

Potatoes, early sorts, earth up, protect from frost, 241.

Lettuces, tie up, and stir the ground about, 233.

Cabbages, earth up, and also tie up forward ones, 217.

SOW
As soon as possible, what may have been omitted last month, or the preceding.
Then, Salsafy, 246. Scorzonera, 247. Pumpions and gourds, 243. Boorcole, 215.
Broccoli, 216. Brussels sprouts, 217. Chou Milan, 224. Chardons, 223. Kidney
beans, the ground being dry, 229. Cabbages, chiefly the large sugar loaf, for
autumn coleworts, 217, 224. Herbs, culinary and medicinal, 252, etc.
Nasturtiums, cold ground, 259. Basil, on heat, 253.

Succession crops of cucumbers and melons, for bringing, up under hand-glasses,
etc. 193, 204. 224, 233. Peace, large and small. Beans, the broad sort Savoys,
spinach, carrots, turnips, celery, radishes, lettuces, finochio, small
sallading, onions to draw young. Observe that succession crops should have
cooler situations as the summer advances.

PLANT
Strawberries yet but alpines succeed best so late, 39. Asparagus, 210.
Artichokes, 208. Lettuces, 231. Chives, garlic, rocombole and shalots, first
week, fee February. Cabbages, (if any remain) 217. Cauliflowers, 220. Kidney
beans that have been raised on heat, 229. Potatoes, for a full crop, 239. Herbs
in rooted slips, 252, etc. Trees and shrubs immediately, and do it in the best
manner, water, cover the roots, and stake the stems, 98, 102, etc.

PROPAGATE
Trees and shrubs, by graffing, layers, cuttings, and sowing, which may yet be
performed, 65, 72, 84.

Herbs, by slips, or cuttings, in a good soil, and a shady situation, but not
under trees, 252, etc.

FLOWERS.
Sow, in the first week, (if not done before) annuals, 6, 11, 13, vol. 2.
Biennials, 15, vol. 2. Perennials, 17, vol. 2.

Plant, or prick out, annuals in fresh hot beds, pots, or borders, as the
several sorts require, 7, vol. 2. Biennials and perennials of the late blowers,
may yet be transplanted into borders or pots, giving an immediate watering, and
shading a few days from sun, 12. vol. 2. Carnation layers, taking them up
carefully with a scoop trowel, 9, vol. 2. Pinks, the same.

Tuberose, as directed, page, 99, vol. 2.

Tulips, ranunculuses, anemonies, etc. of choice sorts, protect in severe
weather, as cutting wind, 21, vol. 2.

Aurtculas in bloom, shelter from rain, wind, sun, and support the stems by
neat forked sticks.

Pots of flowers, shift, and dress, tie up, water, etc.

NURSERY.
Weed, water, stir the soil, rake neatly, and clean up.

Transplant (yet) seedlings of trees and shrubs; the evergreen sorts it is now
a good time for, 72.

Sow (if not done before) the seeds of forest trees, flowering shrubs and
evergreens; but keep them cool, by watering, as every things should be, that is
sown or transplanted late in the spring: Yet they must not be soaked with wet.

MAY.
LET this charming month be ushered in with due respect, by the gardens being
in excellent order, to which end let no help be spared, when the gardener is
not competent to perform the work himself: It is often too much for the most
industrious man.

We now gather vegetables that have stood the winter, and been the care of many
months, with some of the products of spring also; and it is the hope and
fruition of reward that sweetens labor: All the senses are gratified, -- The
softening air is balm;
And every sense and every heart is joy!
THOMSON.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Neatness must be pursued, stir the ground, rake, etc. 49.

Gravel walks and grass plats, keep in good order, 55.

Weeds, destroy every where, by the hand or hoe, 49,54.

Water, if dry weather, new planted trees, shrubs and flowers, strawberries,
cauliflowers, etc. 40,51.

Thin all sorts of seedling crops enough, and in time, 49.

Prick out lettuces, celery, broccoli, boorcole, cauliflowers, savoys,
cabbages, leeks, etc. 51.

Earth up potatoes, peace, broad beans, kidney beans, cabbages, savoys, forward
celery, etc.

Tie up forward lettuces, and early cabbages, 217 233.

Cucumber plants, air, water, shade, train, 190, etc.

Hot beds, make for cucumbers and melons, 178,194,205.

Prune figs, first week, regulate wall-trees, 135,154,156.

Graffs, see to, and repair the claying, if they have not taken, and made some
shoot, 86.

Thin fruit that is superabundant on wall trees, 150.

Beans, top, when in blossom, as it helps to forward the crop, and prevents
their being top heavy.

SOW
Nasturtiums, herbs, and tall kidney beans, first week, 259. Endive, 226, and
purslain, 261, second week, Cauliflowers about the middle for a late autumn
crop, 221. Pumpions and gourds, 243.

Succession crops of cucumbers for picklers, 195. Melons for mangoes, 206.
Dwarf kidney beans, celery, radishes, turnips, cabbages, savoys, broccoli,
peace, beans, fin^chio, salsafy, scorzonera, chardons, spinach, lettuces,
radishes, and small sallading; chiefly in the first week.

PLANT
Kidney beans that have been forwarded on heat, 229. Cucumbers and melons,
second crop, 194, 205. Forward gourds, 243. Lettuces, 232. Cauliflowers,
savoys, cabbages, coleworts, 217, 224. Celery, if forward, in trenches, 222.
Artichokes, 208. Potatoes, 239. Nasturliums, 259. Capsicums, 254. Loveapples,
264, and basil, 253, toward the end of the month. Herbs, by parted roots, 252,
etc. Trees and shrubs may yet succeed under good management, 103.

PROPAGATE.
Herbs, c^^inary and medicinal, by slips and cuttings, but rather the latter.
For sage it is now the best time, 252, etc.

FLOWERS.
Sow annuals of all sorts for a late blow. Scarlet bean, sow as a flower to run
up pales, etc. 6, vol. 2. etc.

Thin seedlings soon, that they may not be weak, 6, vol. 2.

Prick out, or plant, the tender annuals in new hot beds, pots, etc. as
directed, 7, 9, 11, vol. 2.

Hot beds of flowers, manage, as to air, water, etc. 6. vol. 2.

Biennials and perennials, thin in time, and water them; also prick out any
that are forward enough; they may yet be sown, 15, 16, vol. 2.

Auriculas out of flower, remove out of the sun.

Tuberese^, pot on heat, or under a south wall, 99, vol. 2.

Tulips, anemon^es, etc. in beds and in flower, protect, 21, vol. 2.

Bulbs and tubers of dying spring flowers, take up, 18, vol. 2.

Slips and cuttings of pinks, double wall flowers, double sweet williams,
double scarlet lychnis, double rockets, and lychnidea, plant as soon as the
young shoots are forward enough.

Geraniums plant cuttings of last year's shoots, 94, vol. 2.

Water seed beds lightly and moderately in a dry time, 13. vol. 2: and pots of
flowers regularly, 10. vol. 2.

Air, give to housed plants freely, as the season is.

Dress, shift, and tie up, flowers and shrubs in pots.

Pot some ten week stocks, mignonette, etc. 9, 11, vol. 2.

Support spindling flowers and weak shrubs, 56.

NURSERY.
Weed, water, and occasionally shade tender seedlings.

Seed beds, keep cool, for without moisture, germination cannot be expected;
but give water lightly, so as not to cake the ground, 51.

JUNE.
IN this month the gardener begins to find some pause to his labor. The ground
is now fully cropped, as to principals, and the chief business is to see that
the various plants, according to their different ages of growth, do not stand
in need of the necessary assistance of culture, or good management.

Weed, etc. keeping the crops and ground neat, 54.

Gravel walks, grass plats, and edgings, see to, 55.

Water, let it be duly applied where necessary, 51

Thin by hoe, or hand, all sorts of crops, 49.

Prick out celery, endive, savoys, broccoli, etc. 50.

Cauliflowers showing head, break leaves over, 221.

Earth up high peace, beans, etc. see the last month.

Tie up the leaves of garlic and rocambole, 227.

Blanch lettuce, white beat, and sinochio, 215,233,256.

Stick peace and top beans, when in full flower, 237.

Cucumbers, attend duly, to air, water, train, etc. 190.

Melons, ditto, prune and lay tile under the fruit, 201.

Prune wall trees, vines and espaliers, 135, 154, 164.

Blighted trees, pull off curled leaves, in time, and water them frequently
with an engine, 52.

Graffs that have taken, unclay and unbind, 86.

Bud, or inoculate, at Midsummer, or soon after, 91.

Asparagus, finish cutting by Midsummer, 212.

Herbs for drying, gather as directed, page 252.

SOW
Cucumbers, last crop, for picklers may do in cold ground, if a good soil and
sunny situation, 195. Pumpions and gourds may succeed as ditto, 242. Turnip
radishes of all sorts, but chiefly the large white and black Spanish for autumn
use, in cool ground, 245. Endive for a principal crop, 226.

Succession crops of broccoli, peace, broad beans, kidney beans, spindle rooted
radishes, lettuces, small sallading, purslain, turnips, cabbages, carrots,
finochio, and spinach, which will however soon run.

PLANT
Cucumbers, 194. Melons, 205. Pumpions and gourds, 243. Nasturtiums, 259.
Capsicums, 254. Love apples, 264. Leeks, 231. Celery, 222. Cauliflowers,
broccoli, b^^rcole, savoys, cabbages, and such like greens, at two and a half
feet, or rather more for cauliflowers; less for broccoli, and cabbages if a
small sort. Seedling herbs, 252, etc. Moist weather at this season is very
advantageous for pricking out, or planting, and it must not be neglected if it
occurs: Water at the time, and afterward as the weather may require.

PROPAGATE
Herbs by slips, or cuttings, in a good soil, and as cool a situation as may
be, not under trees, 252, etc.

Layer the young shoots of roses, evergreens, or any shrub, or tree, that does
not readily strike root from older wood, or send forth suckers, 69.

Cuttings, or the young shoots of some woody plants, may be made to strike
root, see page 43, vol. 2.

FLOWERS.
Annuals, tender sorts, pot and plant out into the borders; they will require a
good soil, water, and a little shade at first, and choose rainy or cloudy
weather, 9, vol. 2.

Pots of flowers set where they have only the morning sun, but not under trees,
or any roof, except for ornament, when in blow.

Trim, from dead parts, etc. perennials and biennials, 57.

Carnations, and other spindling flowers, support, 56.

Water pots of flowers duly, borders occasionally, 10, vol. 2.

Prick out seedlings of biennial and perennial flowers, particularly
carnations, 93, vol. 2. Pinks, 98, vol. 2. Auriculas, 92, vol. 2, and
polyanthuses, 98, vol. 2, into shady places.

Plant slips, or cuttings of walls, etc. see last month.

Layer carnations, pinks, and sweet williams.

A^riculas should be set in shade, except for seed.

Spring baths, the leaves being decayed, take up, 18, vol. 2.

(...) baths, plant at the end of the month, 18, vol. 2.

NURSERY.
Weed, water, stir the soil, rake and clean up.

Shade tender seedlings, and late planted things.

Seed beds, spring sown, keep moist, and earthed up; in very hot weather, an
awning of mats is advantageous.

Thin young plants from growing thick and weak.

JULY.
THOUGH in this month there is a cessation from the great bustle, and more
laborious works of gardening, yet "its many cares" still find employment for
the willing hand; and most assuredly a good success in the end will not be
attained without perseverance in the means. Let nothing therefore by omitted,
that may tend to crown the gardener's credit with a continued production of
fine vegetables, fruits, and flowers. The garden now abundantly gratifies the
sight, the taste, the smell; and those who have the opportunity to enjoy it,
should be graceful to GOD -- and the gardener.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Prepare vacant ground for cropping, and let as little of it as possible lay
rude and unproductive.

Weed, stir the borders, hoe between crops, etc. 54.

Water cauliflowers, and whatever else may need it, 5^.

Gravel walks, grass plats, and edgings, keep in order, 55.

Box, yew, etc. should be clipped after, or in rain.

Earth peace, broad and kid. beans, celery, cabbages, etc.

Blanch lettuce, white beet, and finochio, 215, 233, 256.

Stick peace, and running kidney beans in time, 237, 230.

Thin all small crops to their due distances, 49.

Prick out celery, broccoli, cabbages, savoys, etc. 50.

Seeds, gather as they ripen, lest the best are lost, 59.

Herbs for drying, gather as soon as in flower, 252.

Take up garlic, roca^bole, shalots, 227, 249, 261.

Cucumbers and melons, attend, water, train, etc. 190, 201.

Pumpions and gourds, train, and water plentifully, 243.

Artichokes, take off small side heads in time, 208.

Wall trees, etc. regulate and occasionally prune; also stop vines, and take
off side shoots, 135, 154, 159, etc.

Thin wall trees, etc. of superabundant fruit, 150, 161.

Bud-graff, or inoculate, fruit trees, roses, etc. 91.

Blighted wall trees, attend to, see the last month.

SOW.
Broccoli, first week, cool ground a little, for late use.

Endive, principal winter crop, in open ground, 226.

Peace and beans, of any kind, may yet be sown, if ground to spare, before the
15th, and chance to do tolerably; prefer the mazagan bean and Leadman's dwarf
peace, 238: Sow under shelter, if convenient, from N. and E.

Kidney beans, dwarfs, first week, south border, 230.

Carrots, a few, cool ground, to draw young late in autumn, water both seeds
and roots occasionally in dry weather to forward them.

Radishes of any kind, but chiefly the large black and white Spanish turnip
sorts, 245.

Lettuces, the hardier, or winter sorts, open ground, 231.

Spinach, beginning of the month the round, and toward the end the prickly
seeded, 249.

Onions, a few Welsh, and Strasburgh, second week, 234,

Coleworts, first week for winter, last week spring, 224.

Turnips, any sort, both early and late in the month, 250.

PLANT.
Celery and leeks at six inches. Endive, lettuces, coleworts at a foot.
Cabbages, savoys, broccoli, boorcole, and cauliflowers, at two feet, or a
little more, in a rich soil, particularly the latter: Give water at planting,
and two or three times after, if not much rain should fall.

PROPAGATE
Herbs, particularly sage, propagate yet, by cuttings, or slips, occasionally
watering, 252, etc.

Trees and shrubs, by laying shoots of the present year; i. e. of those that
are not apt to strike from older wood. Slips and cuttings of some sorts, may
strike, by the help of a hand-glass, 67. 122, 43, vol. 2.

FLOWERS.
Stir flower borders, and rake them neatly, 54.

Pots of flowers, set in shade, and regularly water, 10, vol. 2.

Carnations and double sweet williams, layers, 92, vol. 2.

Pinks, plant slips, cuttings, pipings, or layers, 97, vol. 2.

Geraniums, double, scarlet lychnis, lychnideas and double wall flowers, plant
cuttings, or slips of, 94, vol. 2.

Annuals, the beginning of this month is a good time to plant out the tender
sorts into borders; any that are in too small pots, shift into bigger, 12, vol.
2.

Biennials, thin seed beds of, prick out, water, etc. 15, vol. 2.

Perennials, ditto, particularly auriculas, 92, vol. 2. Carnations, 93. vol. 2.
Pinks, 98, vol. 2, and polyanthus, 98, vol. 2.

Larkspurs and stocks, pull up single ones; i. e. all the former, and most of
the latter, 58, vol. 2.

Seeds, gather very regularly as they ripen, 57, 66.

Bulbous and tuberous roots take up in due time, 19, vol. 2.

Trim off dead stems, or other parts of plants and shrubs, straggling branches,
etc. 57.

Support weak flowers and shrubs by proper ties, 56.

NURSERY.
Weed, water, shade, young tender seedlings, etc. 70.

Prune away suckers, or shoots from stems, etc. particularly those that have
been graffed, 96.

Thin seedlings that grow thick; if those drawn are planted out, afford
occasional watering, and the shade of a single mat, which should only be over
on days, for the night dews greatly refresh new planted things. A little moss
laid round the roots of any curious sorts would preserve them from drought.

AUGUST.
IN this month (as in some measure before) the gardener anticipates products of
the future year, and sows various vegetables in autumn to stand the winter, for
spring and summer use; so that, in this, and other respects, August is in truth
an important season, as will be seen by the work directed to be done. The times
for several sowings should be pretty exactly observed in order to success.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Weed and water, stir borders, clean up, be neat, 50, 54.

Walks and grass plats, attend, roll, mow, sweep, 55.

Thin by hoe, or hand, young crops, in dry weather, 49.

Prick out celery, and other things that are ready, 50.

Earth up peace, beans, kidney beans, celery, cauliflowers, cabbages, savoys,
winter greens, etc. 49.

Blanch endive, beet, chardon, fin^chio, 226, 215, 223.

Dig, or use a strong hoe, between rows of plants, and water to settle earth
about the roots, 49.

Vacant ground, clean, and, considering how it will be best disposed of,
prepare accordingly, 46, etc.

Stick peace, and take up the haulm of old crops, 237.

Stake tall plants which are standing for seed, 59.

Seeds, gather as they ^ipen, lest the best shed, 60.

Herbs, gather (...) drying just when in flower, 252.

Onions, press down the leaves to the ground, 235.

Grape vines, prune, and keep in due order, 155.

Wall trees, espaliers, climbing shrubs, etc. regulate, 136*

Insects about wall trees, see to, and hang up vials of sugar and water for
wasps, etc. See blight, June.

Budding may yet be performed, first week, 91; buds that have taken of former
work, unbind, 96.

Net fruit trees to keep off birds and also fingers.

Gather fruit before the sun has been long on it.

Mat currants and gooseberries for late fruit, 169.

Strawberries, clear from runners, weeds, leaves, 171.

Cucumbers, melons, pumpions, and gourds, train, water, etc. but melons like
not much wet, 202, etc.

Pickling cucumbers should be gathered twice a week.

SOW
Coleworts in the first week, 224; cabbages in the second, 217; and
cauliflowers in the third, 220. Onions for winter and spring, a full crop of
Welsh, and a few Strasburgh in a warm border, first week, 234. Lettuces at the
beginning, middle, and end of the month, 231. Small sallading, in a shady
place, and water it, 255. American cress, it is the best time for, second week,
256. Radish, both spindle and round rooted, but chiefly the large Spanish
turnip sorts, cool ground, 245. Peace, early frame, and Leadman's dwarf, may be
tried first week, for the chance of a rarity, close under a warm wall, 238.
Kidney beans, dwarf, as ditto, 230. Spinach, round and prickly, first and third
weeks, the former at broad cast, and the latter rather in drills, 249. Turnips,
first or second week, 250. C^rrots, ditto, but they will be sticky. Herbs may
be sown, first week, 252, etc.

PLANT
Leeks, celery, lettuces, endive, cabbages, coleworts, late broccoli, and
boorcole, distance as last month, though every thing planted late, may be so
much the nigher. Strawberries and herbs, culinary and medicinal, toward the
end of the month, that they may be well rooted before winter, 39, 252, etc.

PROPAGATE
Trees and shrubs, by laying young shoots in fine rich earth, and keep the
ground cool about them, 69.

FLOWERS.
Decayed parts, take off, trim, and tie to sticks, 56, 57.

Shrubs, ditto, thin a little, and prune off suckers, 114.

Edgings, or hedges of box, yew, etc. may be cut now.

Water potted flowers regularly, others occasionally, and particularly new
planted things, 10, vol. 2.

Annuals, hardy, sow toward end of the month, 13, vol. 2.

Biennials and perennials, plant, last week, 15, 17, vol. 2.

Saxifrage pyramidal, and double plant in pots, 81, vol. 2.

Geraniums, raised from cuttings, (or seed) pot soon.

Auriculas and polyanthus, transplant, part the roots, etc. any time this
month, 91, 98, vol. 2.

Carnations may yet be layered; early layered ones will be rooted, which
carefully take up, and plant in pots, or open ground, water and shade, 92, vol.
2.

Pinks from cuttings, etc. and sweet william layers may be fit to move; but, if
late and weak, leave some of them till spring, 97, vol. 2.

Bulbous roots, as lilies, etc. take up for planting, 18, vol. 2.

Bulbous offsets, replant without delay, 19, vol. 2.

Bulbs of autumn flowers, plant in first or second week: see atamasco,
Gaernsey, belladonna, and pancratium lilies.

NURSERY.
Prune suckers, side stem shoots, straggling and luxuriant ones from the heat;
stir the ground, weed, water, thin, seedlings, etc. See last month.

SEPTEMBER.
GARDENS being now to fail of their wonted beauty, and therefore dying flowers,
all litter, and every thing unsightly, admonish the gardener to trim his
plants, and clean the ground frequently, that all may be neat, if not gay. An
attention of this sort, stirring the ground, and raking it, will give an air of
freshness and culture highly pleasing and creditable.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
See beginning of last month, twelve first articles.

Prepare ground for planting trees and shrubs, 108.

Turf, lay as a good time, beat, roll, and, if dry, water.

Gather, fruits as they ripen, and store them well, 269.

Gra^es, tie fine ripe bunches up in gauze or crape.

Figs, keep in close training to ripen the fruit.

Cucumbers and melons, cover the frames, etc. on nights; melons must be
protected from cold and wet, 206.

Pickling cucumbers, gather before they spot.

Cauliflowers, prick out, and some on a slight hot bed to strengthen them, at
three inches, to grow three weeks; these must then be put under the protection
of frames, or hand-glasses, as choice plants; every other may be drawn, and the
rest remain to be covered. The Michaelmas crop, if dry weather, water to bring
forward.

Herb beds should be cleaned and dressed this month, 252.

Onions, being dry and hard, taken in and sort, to rope, etc. 235.

Garlic, shalots, and recambole, tie up, and store, 277.

Seeds, such as are well dried, dress and put up, 57, 60.

SOW
Spinach, turnips, Welsh onions, and endive, first week, for late spring use.
Radishes of all sorts, but chiefly the large black turnip, 245. Small
sallading, every ten days, warm borders, 215. Corn sallad, 255. Chervil, 254,
and sorrel, 263.

PLANT
At distances as before, coleworts, endive, lettuces, and yet winter cabbages,
savoys, broccoli, boorcole, Brussels, sprouts, chou-milan, and celery. The
lettuces should be on dry warm ground, 232. Herbs, pot and medicinal, from
parted roots, or offsets, 252, etc. Strawberries, any time this month, but the
sooner the better; dress old beds and plants, 39, 171. Shrubs, being to plant
toward the end, especially if moist weather, but let not the roots be long out
of ground, 110, etc.

PROPAGATE
Trees, and shrubs, by laying young shoots, and at the end of the month,
cuttings may be planted, as of gooseberries, currants, laurels, honeysuckles,
jasmines, etc. 65, etc.

FLOWERS.
Remove dead ones, trim the decaying, tie up, etc. 56, 57.

Annuals, sow some of the hardy sorts, first week, 13, vol. 2.

Biennials, plant out, reserving a few for spring, 15. vol. 2.

Perennials, ditto, also take up, and part old roots 17, vol. 2.

Pinks, from cutting, etc. (if well rooted) plant out; also carnations, sweet
williams, etc. from layers, 97, vol. 2.

Geraniums, from cuttings, or seed, plant without delay, in small pots,
shortening the roots, etc.

Auriculas, dress pots, shift plants, or sow, 91, vol. 2.

Polyanthus, plant, part roots, or sow the seed, 272.

Bulbs of autumn flowers, plant yet in first week, see last month; and those of
spring in last week, as crocuses, early tulips, common anemonies, etc. 18, vol.
2.

Lilies and other scaly bulbous roots, plant soon, 19, vol. 2.

Offsets from bulbs must be planted immediately, 19, vol. 2.

Beds for choice bulbous and tuberous roots, prepare for planting next month,
19, vol. 2.

Edgings of box, or thrift, plant, cut, or repair.

Pots of flowers bring from shady situations to more sunny ones; the exoties,
or tender plants, begin (second week) to put under some degree of shelter,
according to their nature.

Succulent plants are impatient of wet, and more so of frost, but still do not
well endure housing, therefore they require a peculiar attention at this
season, so as to have the open air as long as may be exposed without danger.

NURSERY.
Weed, stir the soil, clean up, and water, if dry weather.

Dig about young trees, at the end of this, or the beginning of next month, as
directed, 80.

Prepare ground for planting next month. Stocks and seedlings, and sowing seeds
of trees and shrubs, 72, 73. Evergreen seedlings should be planted out by the
end of this month, and be watered regularly, if a dry time.

OCTOBER.
THIS is the chief month of the year for planting trees, shrubs, etc. No part
of it should be lost, in either working the ground well for the purpose, or
putting in the plants as soon as possible: Early planting, if the ground is
fit, is of more consequence than many of those who do, or ought to know better,
will admit of.

Now the virtue of industry and perseverance will be tried, to keep the grounds
clean from falling leaves, etc. The garden, however, ought yet to be a source
of pleasure, and the weather is often still inviting abroad: All impediments
should be surmounted.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Dig, dung, trench, and drain, ground thoroughly, 46.

Prepare for planting, lay open the holes for trees, 99.

Rake leaves off borders and quarters, sweep, etc.

Gravel walks and grass plats, cleanse, roll, mow, etc.

Turf will be well laid now, and do the work soon.

Caterpillars, destroy, for they do mischief rapidly.

Thin by hoe, spinach, etc. small crops, by hand, 49.

Prick out cabbages for winter or spring planting, 217.

Hoe between roes of cabbages, etc. and earth up, 49.

Blanch celery, finochio by earthing up; endive, beet, chardons, by tying up,
223, 226, 256, 215, 223.

Cauliflowers that are heading, break leaves over, 221.

Asparagus beds and seedlings, dress, second week, 212.

Strawberries, if not before, dress out of hand, 171.

Raspberries, dress, and plant coleworts between, 169.

Seeds, gather duly, and lay up thoroughly dry, 60.

Fruits, gather carefully, and house well, 269, 274.

Dig up, and store clean and dry, carrots, 219; potatoes, 242; parsneps, 235;
Jerusalem artichokes, 228.

Dress (for fine fruit) about current and gooseberry bushes, by digging in a
little manure.

Herb beds should always be dressed at this time, 252.

Vines, wall-trees, etc. regulate, if not prune, 146.

SOW
Beans, mazagan 213. Peace, early sorts, 236. Lettuces, hardy sorts, first week,
warm border, 231. Small sallading, warm border, under glass, 255. Radishes,
early purple short top, may succeed, south aspect, 245. Carrots, a few early
horn, warm border, but they will prove sticky.

PLANT
Broccoli, a few, first week, for latest spring use, at eighteen inches, but
the heads will be small. Coleworts, first week, at about a foot, 224. Cabbages,
any time, choosing strong plants, 217. Endive, first week, warm border, 226.
Celery, first week, open ground, for late spring use, 222. Cauliflowers, settle
soon in their winter quarters, and manage well, 220. Lettuces treat as
cauliflowers, 232. Shalot^, garlic, rocambo^e, dry ground, 249, 227, 261.
Strawberries, first week, 39. Walt trees, and other shrubs, but evergreens in
the first week. Herbs, rooted sorts, 252, etc. Mint on a little heat,
protecting it, 259. Layers of trees and shrubs made last year; being rooted,
take them up well, and plant immediately, 99, etc.

PROPAGATE
Trees and shrubs, by suckers, 65. By layers of the young wood, roses,
jasmines, bay, laurel, laurustinus, vines, figs, filberts, codlins, mulberries,
etc. See lists of trees and shrubs. By cuttings or slips, gooseberries,
currants, berberry, jasmines honeysuckles, laurels, box, etc. See lists.

FLOWERS.
Look over, trim, tie up, gather ripe seeds, etc. 56, 57, 60.

Geraniums, and other tender plants, dress, house, 97, vol. 2.

Auriculas and carnations in pots, preserve from much wet, and set in sunny
situations.

Seeds, or seedlings, in pots, or boxes, ditto, and shelter from the cutting N.
E. winds.

Annuals, self sown, etc. may be taken up with a little earth, and planted
where wanted.

Biennials, plant out, but leave a few for spring, 15, vol. 2.

Perennials, ditto, also slip or divide old roots, 17, vol. 2.

Bulbous, tuberous and fleshy roots of spring and summer flowers, plant, but
the earliest first, 18, vol. 2.

Saxifrage, pyramidal and double, plant in pots, 81, vol. 2.

Edging of dwarf flowers, box, etc. plant, or repair.

NURSERY.
Stir, and fork in neatly a little well rotted manure, 71.

Dig ground to be planted, a week before wanted.

Sow seeds of trees, etc. and guard against mice, etc. 72, 80.

Transplant seedlings to wider distances, as those designed for stocks, etc. at
about two feet, 73, 74.

Suckers of plums, etc. plant for stocks, and cuttings of codlin, quince, and
mulberry, for trees, 75.

Prune, or dress up, young trees and shrubs from suckers, straggling shoots,
and form the heads.

NOVEMBER.
THOUGH the last be the better month for planting, yet this is more commonly
the time adopted: It cannot be now proper to delay it. The leaves not being all
off should be no obstacle.

The object of pleasure should not yet be given up; and let the gardener do all
in his power to be cleanly and neat, giving his grounds that proof of good
culture, which is so essential to his credit.

MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Wet, if water stands any where, let it be well drained.

Vacant ground, dig manure, trench, or at least hoe, 49.

Clear away dead plants, leaves, and all litter, 54.

Weed borders and crops, as spinach, winter onions, etc.

Grass plats, cleanse, roll, mow, and lay turf soon.

Gravel walks, weed, clean and roll hard after rain.

Composts, collect, and mix well the materials for.

Cucumber and melon earth, store in dry time, 183, 200.

Earth up peace and beans as soon as above ground; celery, cauliflowers,
broccoli, and winter greens.

Blanch endive, 226, chardons, 223, and finochio, 256.

Dig up carrots, potatoes, Jerusalem artichokes, and parsneps, but not all the
latter, 235. Also when in prospect of frost, some red beet, scorzonera,
falsify, skirr^ts, Hamburgh parsley, leeks, turnip radishes, and horseradish,
all of them to be preserved a while in a cellar, or longer in dry sand. See
cauliflowers farther on.

Cauliflowers and lettuces in frames, etc. attend, 220, 232.

Artichokes, see to, when in prospect of frost, 209.

Asparagus, dress beds of, and also seedlings soon, 212.

Raspberries, dress in the first week; see last month.

Hot beds may be used for small sallading, 255, mint, 259, lettuces, 233, or
for radishes at Christmas, 245.

Frost, consider what should be protected from it.

Fruit, latest sorts, gather in the first week; and manage that already housed,
269, 273.

Onions, store of, look over to remove decayed ones, 235.

Seeds, dress, and put up clean and dry, and keep so.

Caterpillars on winter greens, pick off in time.

Grubs about the roots of lettuces, search for.

Shrubs, prune and dig about; fasten trained ones, 114.

Prune all trees, except figs, but cherries first, 146.

Pigs, pull off green fruit, and fasten the shoots as close as may be without
force, 156.

Cover the roots, and stake new planted trees, or tall shrubs: fasten those of
the wall, 102.

Cauliflowers in head, break leaves over. This vegetable, and broccoli, may be
taken up when in prospect of frost, and planted with balls of earth, and only
laid in a cellar, where they will keep (perhaps) a month; but tie the leaves
together at the tops with a hay band before taken up.

SOW
Small sallading and lap lettuce, under glass, warm border, or on a little
heat, 233, 255. Radishes, purple short top, warm border, 244. Carrots, early
horn, may chance to succeed. Beans and peace for first principal crop, 213, 235.

PLANT
Celery yet, 222. Lettuces, 232; and cauliflowers yet, in frames, under
hand-glasses, or close under a south wall, 220. Coleworts, 224. Cabbages, 217;
and all in the first week, though the latter may be later. Mint on heat, 259.
Wall trees, and others soon, 30, etc. 98, etc. Shrubs, deciduous, but not
evergreens, 110, etc. Strawberries, if desired, but soon, 39.

PROPAGATE
See last month, by cuttings, slips, layers, and suckers; or divided roots, as
roses, etc. 66, etc.

FLOWERS.
Take up dead ones, trim and tie those in blow.

Frost, beware of, as to the care of tender ones.

Auriculas, and carnations in pots, (though hardy) protect.

Seedlings in boxes, etc. place in the sun, and protect.

Pots of hardy flowers are themselves preserved, as well as the plants, by
plunging (rather above their rims) in the ground; place a bit of tile under
them to keep out worms. If the soil is moist, lay drift sand, or ashes, about
the pots.

Bulbous and tuberous roots, plant early; and valuable sorts protect from much
wet and frost, 21, vol. 2.

Biennials and perennials of hardy sorts, plant early, in dry soils, and water
in the morning, 15, 16, vol. 2.

Thrift, or box, plant or repair, as soon as may be.

NURSERY.
See last month; and do soon what was omitted.

Transplant hardy seedlings, in fine broke earth, 73.

Cover the roots of newly planted things, 73.

Traps, set or mice, etc. about seed beds, 73.

DECEMBER.
THE garden is no longer decorated with flowers, or verdure; but it contains
many things of promise, which demand attention, and which the industrious
gardener will duly afford, agreeable to the culture that each requires.

There are still some works of labor; and where there is plenty of dung and
frames, hot beds may be made use of, and spring anticipated.

If this month be called dreary, yet still the face of nature has its charms,
and invites us sometimes abroad, even when covered with snow. Frost is cleanly
and beneficial, it dries the path, it strings our nerves, exhilarates our
spirits, purifies the air, and prepares the ground for future produce.

All nature feels the renovating force
Of winter, only to the thoughtless eye
In ruin seen. The frost-concocted glebe
Draws in abundant vegetable soul,
And gathers vigor for the coming year.
THOMSON. MISCELLANEOUS WORK.
Weed crops, etc. clean up litter, and still be neat.

Gravel walks, roll hard, if dry, against wet and frost.

Gross plats, cleanse from worm casts, sweep and roll.

Mice traps, set about peace, beans, cauliflowers, etc. 239.

Caterpillars, snails and slugs, see after duly.

Tools, make, repair, grind, and keep bright, 9, vol. 2.

Seeds, look over the stock to keep clean, dry, etc.

Fruit and onions examine, to remove decaying, 235.

Straw, damp or musty, remove from store rooms.

Frost, guard against ill effects of every where.

Wheat straw, useful to protect things, see radish, 244.

Vegetables, before hard frost, take up, see last month.

Artichokes, asparagus and raspberries, (if not before) give their winter
dressing soon, 209, 212, 169.

Endive, tie up when perfectly dry, and ridge some, 226.

Earth up high celery, cauliflowers, chardons, broccoli, savoys, cabbages, etc.
pressing the mould to.

Cauliflowers and lettuces in frames, etc. manage, 220, 232.

Planting, prepare for, and open the holes ready, 29, 98.

Vacant ground, clean, dung, rough dig, or trench, 46.

Barrow, make use of in frost to wheel in dung, etc.

Hot beds, see and manage the materials well for, 174.

Cucumbers may be sown in the last week, 1^8, 181.

Composts, make, and incorporate well by turning over.

Orchards, prune trees, dress, dig, or plough the soil, 43.

Prune wall pear trees, espaliers and shrubs, 146, 157.

Hedges and ditches, manage as the case requires.

Drain wet from standing in gardens, or plantations.

Spring, have a constant eye to, and prepare for.

SOW
Beans, 213. Peace, 237. Radishes, 244. Carrots may be tried as radishes, 218.
Lettuces under glass in a warm border. Small sallad and lap lettuce on a slight
heat, 255, 233.

PLANT
Mint on heat, 259. Tress and shrubs of the deciduous kind, covering the roots
and staking; if against a wall, fasten them to it, 99, etc.

PROPAGATE
By suckers, cuttings, layers, etc. see October, 65, etc.

FLOWERS,
Take care of, but neither sow nor plant; yet some choose to sow auriculas in
this month.

Covering of every kind is to be no closer, or longer kept on than necessary,
for great dangers arises from much nursing, when plants come to be exposed, see
last month.

NURSERY.
Protect seed beds, as the frost may require.

New planted things, cover the roots of well.

Seedlings of tender things may be covered lightly all over, but uncover in
time.

Frost-cracks in beds, fill up with sifted mould.

Wet (much of) gives frost so great hold, that it should be particularly
guarded against.

Vermin must be attended to, particularly mice, which are even apt to bark
young trees, 73.

CLOSE.
As it has been one of the objects of this book to afford some entertainment
and moral instruction, the following lines from Thomson may properly follow the
calendar, and will serve for a finish.

ON THE SEASONS.
THESE, as they change, ALMIGHTY FATHER, these
Are but the varied GOD. The rolling year
Is full of THEE. --
Nature attend! join every living soul,
Beneath the spacious temple of the sky,
In adoration join; and, ardent raise
One general song. --
Soft roll your incense, herbs, and fruits, and flowers --
In mingled clouds to HIM, whose sun exalts,
Whose breath perfumes you, and whose pencil paints.
Great source of Day! best image here below
Of thy CREATOR, ever pouring wide,
From world to world, the vital ocean round,
On nature write with every beam his praise.
For me, when I forget the darling theme,
Whether the blossom blows, the summer ray,
Russets the plain, inspiring autumn gleams;
Or winter rises in the blackening east;
Be my tongue mute, my fancy paint no more,
And, dead to joy, forget my heart to beat!
THOMSON. THE END.
AN ESSAY ON QUICKLIME, AS A CEMENT AND AS A MANURE.

BY JAMES ANDERSON, L.L.D. F.R.S. F.A.S. S.

Author of "Essays relating to Agriculture and Rural Affairs," 3 Vols. 8vo, and
of several other performances.

Honorary Member of the Society of Arts, Agriculture, etc. at Bath; of the
Philosophical, and of the Agricultural Societies in Manchester; of the Society
for Promoting Natural History, London; of the Academy of Arts, Sciences, and
Belles Lettres, Dijon; of the Philosophical Society, Philadelphia; of the Royal
Economical Society, Berlin; and correspondent Member of the Royal Society of
Agriculture, Paris.

And he gave it for his opinion, that whoever could make two ears of corn, or
two blades of grass, to grow upon a spot of ground where only one grew before,
would deserve better of mankind, and do more essential service to his country,
than the whole race of politicians put together. SWIFT. BOSTON: PRINTED BY
SAMUEL ETHERIDGE, For JOSEPH NANCREDE, NO. 49, Marlboro'-Street. 1799.

AN ESSAY ON QUICKLIME, AS A CEMENT AND AS A MANURE.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE nature of the subject discussed in the following Essay, necessarily
required that it should be treated in a scientific manner. The Author has
endeavored to render it as perspicuous as possible; but is afraid, that, to
those who may never have been versant in studies of this sort, it may still in
some places appear a little abstruse. On this occasion, he hopes to meet with
the indulgence of those who think no exertion of mind improperly bestowed, when
it is in the pursuit of useful knowledge. -- Others who do not care to engage
in intricate discussions of any sort, he would advise to pass over this Essay
entirely; or at least the first part of it. The reasons for what is advanced in
the second part, will not indeed be in that case so clearly seen; but the
practical farmer, if not thoroughly instructed by that, may at least be
directed to what he ought to do.

AN ESSAY ON QUICKLIME.
QUICKLIME is a calx, or a very fine powder, obtained by burning marble,
chalk, or limestone, and afterward throwing water upon it.

This powder, when newly burnt, is soluble Capable of being dissolved. To avoid
disagreeable circumlocution, I shall be obliged, in this Essay, to employ some
technical terms not commonly understood; but shall explain their meaning as I
go along.
in water; -- is capable of being formed into a firm cement, if properly mixed
up with water, -- and is possessed of many other peculiar qualities that it is
unnecessary here to enumerate.

But if this powder has been exposed to the influence of the air for some time,
it is found to be no longer capable of being dissolved in water; -- it has
become incapable of being formed into a cement, and has lost many of the other
peculiar qualities for which it was at first remarkable.

In common language, this powder is usually distinguished by the name of LIME
simply. But, in the language of philosophic precision, it is called QUICKLIME,
so long as it remains soluble in water, and capable of being used as a cement.
After it loses these properties, it is distinguished by the name of EFFETE-LIME.

In either of these states, it is employed by the farmer as a manure: And as it
is a manure of the most universal utility that has yet been discovered, its
nature and qualities deserve to be very particularly investigated.

The design of this Essay, is to point out some of the peculiarities that
constitute the excellence of this substance, as a manure, and as a cement: And
as what may be said of it as a manure, will be better understood after its
nature as a cement has been explained, it will be necessary to consider it
first in that point of view.

PART FIRST.
OF QUICKLIME AS A CEMENT.
1.
IF limestone or marble be exposed to the action of a pretty intense fire for
a sufficient length of time, its color is altered, and its weight considerably
diminished: but it retains its former figure and dimensions.

In this state of burnt stone, it is in many places distinguished by the name
of lime-shells, or shell-lime, or simply shells.

2.
If water be thrown upon these lime-shells, a considerable heat is in a short
time generated; the burnt stones begin to crack and fall asunder, and the mass
increases in bulk as it gradually crumbles down, or falls, as it is more
commonly said, into a fine powder; which is always of a white color, whatever
was the color of the stone before calcination. Calcination is the operation by
which any solid compact body is, by means of fire, reduced from its former
coherent state, to that of a dry incoherent powder, which is called a calx.




This powder is called slacked lime, or simply lime; and the operation that
reduces it from shells to this state is called slacking.

3.
If this powder is intimately mixed with as much water as reduces it to the
consistence of a thin paste, and afterward dried, it concretes into one
coherent mass, which adheres to stones, or other unpolished bodies, very
firmly; and thus it becomes a proper cement for building walls of any sort.

After this paste has been once fully dried, it becomes indissoluble in water,
so as never to be softened by the moisture of the air; on which account, it
greatly excels clay, or any other cement that can be easily obtained.

This cement, when composed for building walls, is called mortar. When intended
to be applied only as a smooth coating upon the surface of any place, without
being mixed with stones, it is called in this country simply plaster.

4.
It has been found by experience, that the cement made of lime that had been
obtained from a limestone which consisted of pure calcerous Calcerous is a
general term denoting all those substances that consist of the matter of which
lime may be made, in whatever state it may be found -- whether alone -- or
mixed with other substances, that prevent it from being reduced to powder after
calcination.
earth alone, without any proportion of sand, never attained any great degree
of hardness but remained a soft crumbly mass, that might be easily broken down
by any small force applied to it.

And, on the contrary, if the original limestone contained a very large
proportion of sand, the cement made of it alone was a much harder, firmer, and
more durable substance.

And as it was discovered, that the purest lime might be rendered a very firm
cement by the addition of a due proportion of clean hard sand, the practice of
mixing sand with lime, when intended for mortar, came to prevail very
universally -- The oldest lime built walls that are now to be found, clearly
show that this practice has been adopted before these were built.

But it still remains a desideratum to ascertain the due proportion of sand; as
authors, as well as practical masons, differ very much from one another as to
this particular.

They likewise differ very much in their directions about the mode of mixing
the materials, and of applying the cement; -- some modern authors especially,
attributing amazing effects to a small variation in these particulars, while
others deny that these circumstances have any sensible effect on the durability
or firmness of the cement.

These different and contradictory opinions seem to arise from an imperfect
knowledge of the nature of quicklime, and the variations it may admit of: For,
these variations are so very great, as to render it impossible to give any
general rules that can possibly apply in all cases. It therefore behooves those
who wish to attain any consistency of knowledge on this subject, to endeavor,
first, to ascertain the circumstances that render calcareous substances capable
of becoming a cement at all, and then to trace the several changes that may be
produced upon it by other extraneous causes.

This I shall endeavor briefly t^ do.

5.
Limestone and marble are nothing else than a calcareous matter chrystalized,
Saline substances, when dissolved in water, and put into proper circumstances
for that purpose, separate from the water, and shoot into regular figures,
which assume different forms, and are more or less transparent according to the
different nature of the salt, as nitre, alum, etc. These regular transparent
bodies are properly called chrystals. -- Hence every body in nature that
assumes a form and appearance similar to these, and is produced in the same
manner, is said to be chrystallized.
and assume different appearances, according to accidental circumstances that
have occurred at the time of their original formation.

1 st. The more perfect these chrystals are, the harder, and more compact, will
the stone be that consists of them.

2 d. The smaller the proportion of extraneous matter that is entangled among
these chrystals, the purer and finer will the lime be that is made from the
stone which consisted of them.

From a variation in one or other of these two particulars, arise all the
varieties of calcareous matter that can be converted into lime; which varieties
may be distinguished from one another by the following particulars.

1 st. When the calcareous matter is pure, and perfectly chrystallized; when it
assumes a clear and somewhat transparent appearance, and is found in regular
strata, without many fissures, it is then called marble.

2 d. When the calcareous matter, is pure, but the chrystallization less
perfect, though in regular strata, it still obtains the name of marble; but as
it is more opaque, and less compact than the former, it is reckoned less
valuable, and coarser.

3 d. When the calcareous matter is still pretty pure, but hastily concreted
into an uniform mass, without having been in a state that permitted it to
chrystallize, or to subside into regular strata, it is called chalk; which,
when reduced to a powder without calcination, is called whiting.

4 th. When the chrystals are tolerably perfect, but have had a considerable
proportion of sand entangled among them, it is no longer called marble, but
limestone. And this is more or less pure, or affords a richer or poorer lime,
as it contains a greater or smaller proportion of calcareous matter; and is
more or less hard, according to the degree of perfection of the chrystals.

Even the purest calcareous matter, perfectly chrystallized, is called
limestone, and not marble, when it consists of small pieces that have not been
concreted into regular strata.

5 th. When the calcareous matter is perfectly pure, and shot into smaller
chrystals, of a transparent whiteness, it is called sparr -- and, in other
circumstances, stalactites.

6 th. When the calcareous matter has been formed by nature as a covering for
animals, it is called shell; in which class may be included corals and
corallinos.

These are all the substances that have hitherto been employed for making lime.
The other varieties of calcareous matter, (that I may bring them all under one
view, and point out their essential distinctions) are as follow:

7 th. When the calcareous matter, while in its fluid state, has been absorbed
into a bed of clayey matter, and with it concreted into an uniform, compact,
unchrystallized mass, it has been denominated marle; which is more or less
pure, according to the proportion of calcareous matter it contains; and more or
less hard, according to the nature of the clay, and the proportion of sand that
may have been mixed with it. And,

8 th. When shells, by the lapse of time, and by long macerating in water, have
lost the animals gluten that cemented them, and are crumbled down to a fine
whitish powder, they are denominated shell-marle.

9 th. When shells are broken into down small fragments, that are still hard
and gritty, it is called shellsand.

It would be a curious disquisition to inquire how these masses of calcareous
matter were originally formed? -- How they were reduced to a state that
rendered them soluble in water, which must have been the case before they could
admit of being chrystallized? -- What were the circumstances which contributed
to render some of these chrystals so much more perfect than others? etc. etc.
-- But these disquisitions, however curious they might be, are here omitted, as
not absolutely necessary for the elucidation of our subject. The explanation of
the nature of the different calcareous matters above given, was necessary; as,
without a knowledge of these, it would have been impossible to have explained,
in a satisfactory manner, the way in which these substances are more or less
fitted to be employed as a cement, or a manure.

To avoid unnecessary repetitions, the Reader is desired to observe, that for
the future, I shall mention all matters that can be converted into quicklime,
under the name of limestone, whether they be in the form of marble, chalk, or
common limestone, distinguishing either of these when it may become necessary.

6.
Limestone, in the state we find it, is always a compound substance. -- In its
purest state, it consists of a calcareous earth, united with a considerable
proportion of water; for saline matters, when chrystallized, always contain
water.

Limestone likewise contains another substance, the nature of which will be
afterward explained.

When limestone has been exposed for a sufficient length of time to the action
of a sufficiently intense fire, the whole of the water it contained is
evaporated: So that lime-shells are always lighter than the stone of which they
are made, by the whole weight, at loast, of the water the chrystals contained.

And as perfect chrystals always contain a much larger proportian of water than
those that are less perfect, it follows, that of two kinds of limestone of
equal purity, that which is hardest, and most transparent, will lose a greater
proportion of its weight in calcination, than that which is softer and more
opaque. -- Hence marble loses more weight by burning than chalk. Such readers
as are totally unacquainted with the circumstances that are necessary to the
formation of chrystals in general, will probably be at a loss easily to
comprehend the chain of argumentation followed here, and in some other parts of
this Essay. The following explanation will make it more intelligible*

As saline matters, properly so called, are more easily chrystallized by art
than any others, it will be best to take our illustrations from that class of
bodies.

It is a property of saline bodies, that they may all be dissolved in water.

They may also be separated from that water, and obtained in a dry form; but
they assume very different appearances, according to the nature of the process
that is followed for separating them from that water.

If a watery solution of any salt be suddenly evaporated by means of fire,
there remains behind a white substance, sometimes slightly conherent, as in
pearl-ashes, etc. and sometimes it falls into a powdery calx, as in evaporating
a solution of Glauber's salts, alum, etc.

But if the water be gently evaporated by a moderated heat -- before it becomes
a dry powder, the salt quits the water, and shoots out into regular figures of
a transparent glassy-like appearance, which have obtained the name of chrystals.

These chrystals vary in figure, hardness, etc. according to the nature of the
salts of which they are composed.

But they all agree in one re^pect, that they contain a considerable proportion
of water united with the saline matter. -- Some kinds of salt absorb a very
large proportion of water in this way. -- Chrystallized Glauber's salts contain
two thirds of their weight of water. -- Common salt does not contain near such
a large proportion.

Hence is happens, that no chrystals of any kind of salt can possibly be
formed, unless these salts have been perfectly dissolved in water.

And the perfection and transparency of these chrystals depend entirely on
their being allowed to shoot leisurely, in that degree of heat which is best
adapted to themature of each particular kind of salt.

For it often happens, that water can be made to dissolve a much larger
proportion of salt, when it is hot, than when it is cold; so that if a solution
of these kinds of salts is continued in a considerable heat, it will still
remain fluid, even after it has less water than would be necessary for forming
the chrystals. -- In which case, if it is taken from the fire, and allowed to
cool, it suddenly concretes into a solid opaque kind of mass between a crystal
and a calx -- as may easily be experienced, by melting chrystallized Clauber's
salt in a fire-shovel, and allowing it to cool before it is entirely evaporated
to dryness.

The same circumstances contribute to the formation of calcareous matters into
chrystals, and may be easily applied by the Reader. -- Lime is the calx
produced by evaporating the chrystals to dryness; -- and it only differs from
other saline calces in this respect, that they always retain the quality of
being soluble in water, and may be converted into a liquid mass, and again
chrystallized what ever that is administered to them: -- whereas lime loses
that quality in a short time; and if it has not been dissolved, and again
chrystallized, in that short space, it must ever remain unalterably in the
state it chanced to be in when it lost its saline quality. -- Hence it appears
in all the different stages of more or less perfect chrystallization, from the
most transparent spar, or marble, to the most opaque chalk, -- from the
hardness nearly of a slint, to the looseness of an almost incoherent powder.




Again, -- As sand loses, nothing of its weight by calcination, it likewise
follows, that in two kinds of limestone equally firm and well chrystallized,
the purest, or that which contains the greatest proportion of calcareous
matter, will lose in calcination, the greatest proportion of weight.

From these facts it appears, that no rule can be given for ascertaining the
proportion of weight that limestone loses by calcination. It must vary in all
possible degrees, according to circumstances.

7.
Limestone, besides the ingredients abovementioned, contains a considerable
proportion of another fluid, that enters into its composition, and greatly
alters its chemical qualities, to which philosophers have given the name of
fixed air. Since this Essay was written, a total change has taken place in
regard to the names of chemical substances -- but I do not think it necessary
here to make any change in that respect, the terms being here all explained as
they occur, so as to prevent ambiguity.
This is also disentangled from the stone, and dispersed, in the act of
calcination; as has been demonstrated by the very ingenious Dr. Black, of
Edinburgh, to whose most satisfactory Essay on this subject, in the Physical
and Literary Essays, I refer the curious Reader.

When limestone is thus deprived of its fixed air, it acquires many of the
properties of saline bodies. It is in consequence of this that it then becomes
capable of being dissolved in water, -- is extremely acrid, -- and acts most
powerfully on many bodies upon which it has no sensible effect while in the
state of limestone.

On these accounts, chemists have given it the appellation of caustic, when in
this state, in contradistinction to its ordinary state before calcination, or
after it is again united with its fixed air, when it is said to be in its mild
state.

Hence, then, the phrase mild when applied to calcareous earth, denotes that it
is then united with its fixed air; which may be said equally of it before
calcination, when it is called limestone; or after calcination, when it is
denominated effete lime: And caustic calcareous earth is a phrase exactly
synonymous with quicklime, in its strict and philosophical acceptance; --
that is, calcareous earth perfectly deteached, in a chemical sense, from every
other substance.

8.
But although it is possible by art to free limestone from its water and air,
and reduce it to the state of an unmixed acrid saline calx; -- yet no art can
keep it long in that state, as it has an irresistible propensity to unite
itself again to these substances.

If water is poured upon the stone immediately after calcination, which in that
state is usually called limeshells, it has been already said, that it pervades
every part of the stone; each particle of the lime seems greedily to seize some
portion of the water, with which it instantly and intimately unites. In the act
of union, a considerable heat is generated, and in a short time its whole
particles are perfectly detached from one another, so as to fall down in the
form of a fine, white, and seemingly dry powder, notwithstanding the large
quantity of water that is thus united with it. The quantity of water contained
in dry slaked lime, is much greater than any one could possible imagine. -- By
experiment, I find that pure lime perfectly calcined, requires at least its own
weight of water, before it can be reduced to a powder. By the heat generated in
the operation, about one tenth of that water is evaporated, -- so that the
direst slaked lime, if pure, consists of about equal parts of calcareous earth
and water. -- Such as is slaked to the ordinary degree, contains a great deal
more water than is here mentioned.


If lime-shells be exposed to the influence of the air, without throwing water
upon them, they quickly attract moisture from thence, which slowly, and without
any sensible heat, slakes the lime-shells, and reduces them to powder.

Still, however, the lime retains its caustic quality, even after its partial
union with the water: But it as irresistibly, though more slowly, continues to
absorb the air, as the water of which it had been deprived by this calcination,
and without intermission, perpetually tends toward that mild state which seems
to be natural to it.

9.
If water is poured upon slaked lime in large quantities, that water dissolves
a certain portion of the saline calx, which forms the solution called
limewater, that has been much praised as a medicine by physicians.

But the lime has hardly had time to be dissolved by the water, before the
calcareous earth absorbs a proportion of its fixed air from the water itself,
and the surrounding atmosphere; with which it forcibly unites, and immediately
again becomes mild calcareous earth, or, if you will, limestone. And as it is
not in this state soluble in water, it immediately separates from it, and forms
a thin film of chrystallized limestone on the surface of the water.

In this way, all the lime is in a short time separated from the lime water;
and it quickly loses all those qualities for which it was remarkable, becoming
pure and simple water again, unless some caustic lime be allowed to remain at
the bottom of the vessel, upon which the water may again act, after what it had
formerly dissolved had left it.

10.
It is by a process somewhat similar to the former, that calcareous
stalactities are formed in caverns under the earth, depending from the roof in
the form of very large icicles, and other grotesque figures, that afford matter
of admiration and astonishment to the curious who visit these subterraneous
caverns. It is but seldom that we are able to give such a distinct account of
the operations of nature, as in the present case.

These stalactities are always formed by water dropping from the roof. This
water, in these cases, is always slightly impregnated with caustic calcareous
matter, which it meets with in the bowels of the earth, and dissolves. -- By
what process that calcareous matter is there rendered caustic, remains as yet
to be explained, and affords a subject well worthy the investigation of the
curious. Chemical philosophers have now been enabled to account for this
phenomenon by the solvent power of certain gass -- but it is unnecessary here
to enter more at large into that discussion, as it does not affect the
explanation in the text.


This natural limewater, when it comes to the roof of the cavern, hangs for
some time in the form of a drop, till at length so much water is accumulated
there, as, by its natural gravity, overcomes the power of cohesion, and makes
it fall to the ground. But it is no sooner fallen, than it is again succeeded
by another, -- and another, -- and so on ad infinitum.

While these drops remain suspended from the roof, the calcareous matter
contained in them greedily attracts the air all around the surface of the drop;
and before it falls, and small part of it is reduced to a mild state, leaves
the water with which it was formerly united, and adheres firmly to the roof;
which in time accumulates so much solid matter as to form a sort of nipple
depending directly downwards.

After this nipple is formed, each drop, as it descends, flows from its root
toward its point, so as to be diffused in a thin stream over its whole
surface. In this situation, the water is so much exposed to the action of the
air in its descent, that a part of the calcareous matter is rendered mild, and
is left adhering to the former, so as to increase its diameter toward the
root; while a part flows forward to the point, and adds to its strength, in the
same manner as it first began to be formed.

In this manner these tangles It is doubtful, if tangles, in the sense here
used, is a proper English word; but as it is common in Scotland, and as I know
no single English word that is equivalent to it, I have ventured to adopt it.
It denotes any kind of pendent concretion, resembling the shape of an icicle,
of whatever kind it is formed. An^ person who reflects on this subject, will
feel what a want it would be in the language, if the word icicle were
abolished: the want would hardly be less perceptible, if I were debarred the
use of this term.
continue to increase in size so long as they are suffered to remain, -- and as
ought to be expected from the above induction, there is always a small hole
through the heart of each of them.

The tangles under bridges, and other artificial arches through which water is
permitted to percolated, are found exactly in the same manner, though usually
they are less perfectly chrystallized.

All sorts of calcareous spars owe their origin to a similar cause.

While these natural stalactites are of a small size, they will continue to be
regularly formed, and retain the figure of icicles; because the water, as it
oozes out, will be sufficient to surround the whole of the nipple, and augment
it equally on every side. But, in time, these will become so large, as to cause
the water to flow down only on one side, after which the figure will become
distorted and irregular. Two or more will sometimes unite into one; and, in the
course of ages, and infinite diversity of fantastic forms will gradually be
produced which may exhibit, on many occasions, figures of stupendous
magnificence.

11.
The operations of nature are so simple, that when we once get a glimpse of the
manner in which they are effected in one instance, it is easy to extend our
observations, in a satisfactory manner, to others of a similar nature. When we
once perceive the manner in which calcareous stalactites are formed, it is easy
to comprehend the way in which more regular strata of calcareous substances
have been produced. The same cavern that produces the one, will always afford
examples of the other.

The drop of limewater that falls from the roof of the cavern, although it has
lost some of the calcareous matter with which it was impregnated, still retains
a part. When it reaches the ground, it either remains stagnant, so as to form a
poole, or flows over a smooth surface. In either of these cases, it will be
allowed time to absorb some more of its air; and a part, or the whole, of the
calcareous earth will be rendered mild, and remain in a firm chrystallized
solid caked of marble.

If the stream is considerable, the sheet of calcareous matter may be extended
to a great distance, thinly spread over a large declivity, as the water flows
in its course, till at last the whole cavity may be filled with a regular
stratum of limestone or marble.

In this manner, within the memory of man, have huge rocks of marble been
formed near Matlock, in Derbyshire, which furnish matter of astonishment to
those numerous travelers who flock to see this uncommon phenomenon. It is
seldom that nature's operations are so rapid as in this instance. But there is
no room to doubt, that all the strata of calcareous matter in the world, have
been formed by a process exactly similar to this.

When the drops are smaller, so as not to be sufficient to form a large stream,
but still to flow over a small part of the surface, irregular swelling cakes of
lime stone are produced. -- When smaller still, they rise up into high
prominences, with roundish heads, -- sometimes resembling collyflower, and
sometimes broccoli-heads.

If a current of air hastily promotes the evaporation of the water, the
chrystallization will be less perfect. But enough has already been said to
illustrate the subject I have undertaken.

I now return from the operations of Nature, to those of Art.

12.
If slaked lime be exposed to the air for any length of time, in the form of a
dry powder, it absorbs the fixed air also in this state, in a short time loses
all its qualities as a quicklime, and, chemically considered, differs in no
respect from the stone of which it was composed.

If no more water has been added at slaking than was barely sufficient to make
it fall, and if it be kept dry ever afterward, or mixed with any dry powder,
it does not harden as it absorbs its air, but remains in a powdery state, to
all appearance in on respect differing from quicklime.

But if a larger proportion of water has been added than was necessary for
slaking the lime, -- in proportion as it absorbs its air, and becomes mild, it
concretes into a coherent mass; first, upon the surface, which quickly becomes
covered with a hard crust, greatly resembling the thin crust that is formed on
the surface of moist earth by a moderate frost. Masons, ignorant of the real
cause of this phenomenon, call it frosted lime; although, their own experience
ought to satisfy them, that this crust is formed as readily in summer as in
winter.

As lime that has absorbed its air in any of these ways, ^s altogether unfit
for becoming a cement, it is evident, that a great change may be produced upon
the quality of any lime, by having allowed less or more of it to be in this
state, before it is worked up into mortar.

13.
If a large quantity of water be added to fresh slaked quicklime, and beat up
with it into a thin paste, the water dissolves a small proportion of the lime,
which, as it gradually absorbs its air, is converted into chrystals; between
the particles of which chrystals, that part of the lime which was not
dissolved, and the other extraneous matters that may have been mixed with it,
are entangled, so as to form a firm coherent mass of the whole.

The paste formed in this manner, is called mortar; and this heterogenous,
imperfectly semi-chrystallized mass, constitutes the common cement used for
building ordinary walls.

These circumstances being premised, it will not be difficult to comprehend
what are the particulars that are necessary to form the most perfect cement of
this sort.

14.
Since lime becomes a cement only in consequence of a certain degree of
chrystallization taking place in the whole mass, it is sufficiently obvious,
that the firmness and perfection of that cement, must depend upon the
perfection of the chrystals, and the hardness of the matters that are entangled
among them. For, if the chrystals are ever so perfect and hard of themselves,
if they be separated from one another by any brittle incoherent medium, it is
evident, that the whole mass must remain in some degree brittle and incoherent.

15.
Water can only dissolve a very small proportion of lime, even when in its most
perfect saline state The reader will observe, that I often speak of lime in its
saline state. I presume, he will easily understand, that, by that phrase, is
meant lime while it remains capable of being dissolved in water: -- that is, as
long as it remains deprived of its fixed air; -- or, in other words, while in
its caus^le state.
; and, as happens with all other saline matters, no more of the lime can be
reduced to a chrystalline mass, than has been actually dissolved in the water.
-- Hence it happens, that if mortar be made of pure lime and water alone, a
very small proportion of the lime only can be dissolved by that small quantity
of water that is added to it: And as this small proportion alone, can be
afterward chrystallized, all the remaining undissolved particles of the lime
will be entangled among the few chrystals that are formed.

And as the undissolved lime in this mass will in time absorb its air, and be
converted into mild calcareous earth without having had a susticiency of water
to allow it to chrystallize, it must concrete into a friable mass, exactly
resembling chalk: It follows, that this kind of mortar, when as dry as it can
be made, and in its highest degree of perfection, will be always soft, and
easily crumbled into powder.

16.
But if, instead of forming the mortar of pure lime alone, a large proportion
of sand be added to it, the water will, in this case, dissolve as much of the
lime as in the former, and the particles of hard sand, like sticks or threads,
when making sugar candy or other chrystals, while surrounded by the water
solution, will help to forward the chrystallization, and render it more perfect
than it otherwise would have been, so as firmly to cement the particles of sand
to one another.

And as the granules of sand are perfectly hard of themselves, so as not to
admit of being broken down like the particles of chalk, it necessarily follows,
that the cement made of these materials must be much more perfect, in every
respect, than the former.

17.
That the reader may see the full force of the above reasoning, it is necessary
be should be informed, that when calcareous matter is reduced to a caustic
calx, it becomes, in every sense of the word, a perfect saline substance, and
is in this state as entirely soluble in water as common salt or sugar; although
with this difference, that lime can be suspended by water only in a much
smaller proportion. Water can dissolve one third of its weight of common salt,
and keep it suspended in a fluid state; but it can hardly dissolve one
thousandth part of quicklime before it is saturated The term saturation is
employed to denote that state of a fluid, when it has dissolved as much of a
solid body as it can possibly suspend in it at one time.

When any saline substance is put into water, it is dissolved by the water, and
suspended in it till it attains what is called the point of saturation; --
after which, if every so much salt be added, not one particle more will be
dissolved, -- but it will remain at the bottom in its original solid state.

Water dissolved very different proportions of different salts before it is
saturated. It will dissolved its own weight of Glauber's salt, one-third of its
weight of common salt, and not one-thousandth of its weight of lime.

Hence it may very readily happen, that although any particular salt could be
wholly dissolved in water, a part of the salt may remain untouched, if too much
has been added. Thus, if one ounce of lime is put into ten ounces of water,
that water will become saturated before it shall have dissolved one-third of
the quicklime, and the remainder will remain in a solid state, untouched.


.

But although lime be as entirely soluble in water when in its caustic state,
as any other purely saline substance, it so quickly absorbs its air, as to have
some part of it rendered mild, before it can be wholly dissolved on any
occasion, in which state water cannot act upon it; so that to obtain a total
solution, that proportion of it that becomes mild, requires to be again and
again cal^ined, after fresh solutions have been drawn from it.

As such a large proportion of water is necessary to dissolve any quantity of
lime, it seldom happens, even in making lime water, but that more lime is added
than is sufficient to saturate the whole of the water: In which case, some of
it still remains at the bottom, in a condition capable of being dissolved, if
more water be added to it.

But lime, it has been already said, differs from purely saline substances, in
this respect: that it cannot possibly be long suspended in water; for it soon
absorbs its air even from that element, and is thus reduced to a mild state,
when it immediately chrystallizes, and separates from the water. Although
purely saline substances, in every state, continue to he ^^luble in water, yet
many of them become more or less so, in proportion to the quantity of air that
is united with them at the time; and in so far resemble lime in this
particular, that they are more easily dissolved when deprived of their air,
than when united with it.

Alhaline The term (...) employed to denote a certain of class of saline
bodies. whose certain disting^^ (...) ^^^acteristic is, ^^at they may be united
with acids, and with them form (...) common salt, and..
salts, strictly so called, like lime, may be either in a caustic or mild
state; which appellations they in like manner obtain when they are deprived of
their air, or united with it.

When these salts are in a caustic state, they are soluble in water in any
proportion. They have even such a tendency to unite with it when in this state,
that it is extremely difficult, if not altogether impossible, to free them from
the water till they are reduced to a mild state. No art has ever yet been
discovered, by which a caustic volatile alkali could be exhibited in a solid
form; and although dry concretions of the fixed alkali are sometimes obtained
while it is possessed of a certain degree of causticity, yet these concretions
are only obtaine^ ^n consequence of some part of it becoming mild in the
operation: nor can they be kept in that state without the utmost care.

Ordinary pot ash is an alkaline salt, obtained from the ashes of burnt
vegetables. This is, in some measure deprived of its air in burning the plant;
but during the process, before they watery solution is thoroughly evaporated to
dryness, the alkali has absorbed some part of its air, and is in some measure
rendered mild, so as to admit of being reduced to a dry state by the force of
fire. But as the salt is not in this state perfectly mild, the caustic part of
the alkali attracts the moisture from the air with so much power as soon to
obtain enough to reduced the whole to a watery solution, if it is not preserved
from damp air with the utmost care.

This, and every other saline substance, which attracts moisture from the air,
and dissolves in it, is called a deliquestecnt salt.

But if this alkali be exposed to the air for a sufficient length of time, till
it has slowly absorbed it whole proportion of fixed air, and with it has become
one chemical mixed, forming a perfectly mild alkali, it is then capable of being
dissolved in water, only in one certain proportion, like other salts; and may
be made to shoot unto regular chrystals, which may be kept in a solid dry
state, when the atmosphere is in a due temperature of heat, in the same manner
as any other salt.

In this case, the alkali, it is plain, leaves the water as soon as it has
united with its air, in the same manner as lime separates from water, and
assumes a dry chrystalline form. The alkali may, indeed, be again dissolved, by
adding a larger proportion of water, which the other cannot; but, in the first
particular, the parallel is alike.

Common salt is, in like manner, in part decomposed Common salt is a compound
substance, formed by the union of a particular acid with the (...) (...).
by the violent heat that takes place in our ordinary way of boiling it. A part
of its acid is dissipated; the alkali that remains, is left in its caustic
state. Hence it has a perpetual tendency to absorb water; in consequence of
which, the whole becomes it deliquescent salt. If the evaporation is made
slowly enough, the chrystals are more perfect; and it may be easily kept dry in
the ordinary state of our atmosphare. -- This is the reason why great salt may
be more easily kept dry than small salt.

If, however, the alkali that is mixed with the salt had not been in a caustic
state, it is well known it would not have deliquseed; for the nattrum of the
Ancients, or the fossil alkali of the Moderns, in its native mild state, is a
firm chrystalline salt, much resembling n^tre, from whence it originally
derives its name.

Exactly similar to these are the changes produced upon common sugar, by the
different processes it may be made to undergo. Sugar is a solid concrete,
obtained by evaporating to dryness the juice of the sugar cane. In the ordinary
process for obtaining that substance, it is deprived of some part of its fixed
air, -- and is hastily concreted into an imperfect sort of chrystalline mass.
In this state, it is possessed of a certain degree of acrid causticity, and can
be dissolved in water in any proportion from the slightest degree of
impregnation to perfect dryness. -- But when it is placed in proper
circumstances, and is allowed time to absorb its air, -- like the other
substances above mentioned, it can only be dissolved in certain proportions;
and therefore quits the water as it gradually unites with its air, and assumes
a regular chrystaline form.

These chrystals are distinguished by the name of sugar candy, and are well
know to be more dissiplely soluble in water. -- to be a milder and less acid
sweet. -- and to possess many other qualities different from the sugar of which
they were originally formed.




In consequence of this peculiarity, it necessarily happens, that in proportion
as these chrystals separate from limewater, a part of it becomes pure water
again, and it instantly capable of dissolving as much caustic lime as it had
lost by the former chrystallization; so that it immediately acts upon, and
dissolves another portion of the quicklime that remained below after the water
was saturated. This portion of lime is also chrystallized in its turn, and a
fresh solution takes place; and so on, it continues constantly chrystallizing
and dissolving anew, as long as any caustic lime remains in the water to be
dissolved.

It is in consequence of this constant action of the water and air, that
limewater always continues of an equal degree of strength, so long as any
caustic lime remains in the vessel for the water to act upon, notwithstanding
the large proportions of calcareous chrystals that are continually separating
from it.

18.
From the foregoing induction, it appears, that when a large quantity of sand
is mixed in the mortar, that sand will bear a great proportion to the whole
mass; so that the water that may be mixed with the mortar will be much greater
in proportion to the quantity of lime contained in this mortar, than if the
whole had consisted of pure calcareous matter. -- And as the sand absorbs none
of that water, after a part of the lime is chrystallized, and separated from
the water, that water, now pure, is left at liberty to act once more upon those
few particles of caustic lime that may still remain in the mortar, which will
be dissolved and converted into chrystals in their turn.

In this manner, it may happen, in some circumstances, that a very large
proportion of the lime may become chrystallized; so that the mortar shall
consist almost entirely of sand enveloped in chrystalline matter, and become,
in due time, as hard as stone itself; whereas mortar, consisting of pure lime,
without sand, can hardly ever be much harder than chalk.

19.
It is not, however, to be expected, that in any case, this dried mortar will
assume that transparent chrystalline from, or the compact firmness of marble,
or limestone. -- In mortar, in spite of the utmost care that can ever be taken,
a very considerable quantity of the lime must remain undissolved; which
undissolved lime, although it may be so much separated by the sand and
chrystallized limestone, as not much to affect the hardness of the mortar, yet
it must still retain its white chalky-like appearance.

But, as marble and limestone, are always formed by those particles of lime
that have been wholly dissolved in water, and from which, they have been
gradually separated by a more slow and more perfect mode of chrystallization,
they have nothing of that opaque calx-like appearance, but assume other
colors, and appear more firm, uniform, and compact; the sand, and other
matters that may be enveloped in them, being entirely surrounded with a pure
chrystallized matter.

20.
To obtain the most perfect kind of mortar, however, it is not enough that a
large proportion of sand should be employed, and that the sand should be
intimately mixed with the lime. It is also of the utmost importance, that a
large proportion of water be added: For, without this, it is impossible that a
large proportion of the lime can be chrystallized; and the mortar, in that
case, would consist only of a mixture of chalky matter and sand, which could
hardly be made to unite all -- would be little more coherent than sand by
itself, and less so that pure chalk. In that case, pure lime alone would afford
rather a firmer cement than lime with sand.

21.
It is also of very great importance, that the water he retained as long in the
mortar as possible: For, if it be suddenly evaporated, it will not only be
prevented from acting a second time upon the lime, after a part of what was
first dissolved has been chrystallized, but of even the few chrystals that
would be formed when the water was suddenly evaporating, would be of
themselves, much more imperfect than they otherwise most certainly would have
been.

Common salt, which consists of chrystals hastily formed by a sudden
evaporation of seawater by means of fire, has the appearance of a dry whitish
calx, that may be easily broken to pieces: -- The same salt, when slowly
chrystallized by a gentle evaporation in the shade, consists of large cubical
chrystals, as transparent, and little softer, than crown-glass.

Ordinary lump sugar, it has been said, likewise consists of another substance
hastily concreted by a sudden evaporation of the fluid in which it was
dissolved: -- Sugar Candy, is the same substance, slowly chrystallized by a
more moderate evaporation. Every one knows, what a difference there is between
the firmness of these two substance. As great must be the difference between
the firmness of that cement which has been slowly dried, and that which has
been hastily hardened by the powerful action of warm air.

It is owing to this circumstance, that the lime which remains all winter in a
mortar-tub filled with water, is always found to be much firmer, and more
coherent than the mortar that was taken from the same tub, and used in any work
of masonry; although, in this case, the materials were exactly the same. From
the same cause, any work cemented with lime under water, if it has been allowed
to remain unhurt till it has once become hard, is always much firmer than that
which is above the surface of the water.

22.
To make the reader comprehend the full force of the foregoing reasoning, I
would compare lime-cement, or mortar, to a mass of matter consisting of a
congeries of stones closely compacted together, and united by a strong
cementing matter, that had, while in a said state, pervaded all the interstices
between the stones, and had afterward become a solid indissoluble substance.

If the cementing matter be exceedingly hard and coherent, and if the stones
bedded among it are also very hard and firm, the whole mass will become like a
solid rock, without fissures, that can hardly be broken to pieces by the power
of man.

But although the cement should be equally firm, if the stone of which it
consists be of a soft and friable nature, suppose chalk or sand-stone, the
whole mass will never be capable of attaining such a degree of firmness as in
the former case; for, when any force is applied to break it in pieces, although
the cement should keep its hold, the solid matter cemented by it would give
way, and the whole would be easily broke to pieces.

Now -- in mortar, the sand that is added to it represents the stones of a
solid matter in the composition, the particles of which are united together by
the lime that had been formerly dissolved, and now chrystallized, which becomes
an exceedingly solid and indissoluble concretion.

And as the particles of sand are of themselves exceedingly hard, and the
cement by which they are united equally so, it is plain, that the whole
concretion must become extremely firm, so as to require a very great force to
disunite any particle of it from the whole mass.

But if, instead of employing sand, the only solid body that is entangled among
the cementing matter should be chalk (which, as has been said, must always be
the case when the mortar consists of pure lime alone) or any other slightly
coherent substance, let the cementing particles of that composition be ever so
perfect, it is impossible that the whole can ever attain a great degree of
firmness; as these chalky matters will be easily broken asunder.

23.
Many conjectures have been made about the nature of the lime-cement employed
by the Ancients. It has been thought they possessed an art of making mortar,
that has been long since entirely lost; as the cement in the walls that have
been built by them, appears to be, in many cases, much firmer than that which
has been made in modern times. -- Yet, when the mortar of these old buildings
is analized, it is found to consist of the same materials, and nearly in the
same proportions, which we now employ.

It is probable, however, that their only secret consisted in mixing the
materials more perfectly than the rapidity or avarice of modern builders will
permit; in employing their mortar in a much more fluid state than we do now;
and in allowing it to dry more slowly, which the immoderate thickness of many
of their walls would naturally produce, without any preconcerted design on
their part.

Tradition has even handed down to our times the memory of the most essential
of these particulars; as the lower class of people, in every part of the
country, at this moment, invariably believe that these old walls were composed
of a mortar so very thin, as to admit of its being poured, like a fluid,
between the stones, after they were laid in the wall. And the appearance of
these old walls, when taken down, seems to favor this popular tradition.

Nor have I any doubt but this may have been actually the case. The stones in
the outer part of the wall were probably bedded in mortar, nearly as we
practice at present; and the heart, after being packed well with irregular
stones, might have the interstices between them entirely filled up with fluid
mortar, which would insinuate itself into every cranny, and in time adhere as
firmly as the stones themselves, or even more so, if the stones were of a sandy
friable nature.

As these walls were usually of very great thickness, it might often happen
that the water in this mortar, by acting successively upon different particles
of caustic-lime, would at length be entirely absorbed by successive
chrystallizations, so as to become perfectly dry, without any evaporation at
all; in which case, a very large proportion of the original lime must have been
regularly chrystallized in a slow and tolerably perfect manner, so as to attain
a firmness little inferior to limestone or marble itself.

Upon these principles, it is easy to account for the superior hardness of some
old cement, when compared with that of modern times, in which a practice very
different is usually followed, without having recourse to any wonderful arcana
whatever.

24.
A modern French author, Monsieur Loriot, after meditating much upon this
subject, imagines, he has made a perfect discovery of the way in which the
Ancients employed their quicklime, so as to obtain such an extraordinary firm
cement; from which discovery, he thinks very important benefits may be derived
to society.

According to his opinion, the ancient cement consisted of lime and sand,
nearly in the same proportions as are commonly employed, for that purpose at
present. But instead of making it of slaked lime entirely, as we do now, he
says they employed a certain proportion of their lime unslaked, which they
mixed with their mortar immediately before it was used.

This composition, he says, forms a firm and durable cement, possessing so many
valuable properties, that I choose to give them in words of his own panegyrist:

In the course of the 1770, It deserves to be noted, that about the same
period, Mr. Dossie, secretary to the Society of Agriculture and Arts, in the
Strand, London, published a receipt for making mortar, in imitation of that of
the Ancients, which was in every respect the same with this of Monsieur Loriot.
-- Which of these was the original discoverer, let the parties themselves
determine.
" says he, These extracts are taken from a Treatise, entitled, A Practical
Essay on Cement and Artificial Stone, justly supposed to be that of the Greeks
and Romans, lately rediscovered by Monsieur Loriot, Master of Mechanics to his
Most Christian Majesty, (...) Translated from the French Original, lately
published by the express order of the above Monarch. London, ^^^del, 1775.
(...) appears to have been written not by M. Loriot himself, but some of his
friends, as he is always mentioned in the third person.
"Monsieur Loriot had the happiness to discover a kind of mystery in Nature,
which for several ages past, had not, it is most probable, manifested itself to
any body but himself; -- a mystery on which all the merit of his discovery is
founded.

Taking some lime which had been a long time slaked, out of a pit covered with
boards, and a considerable quantity of earth over them again, by which means
the lime had preserved all its original freshness, he made two parts of it, and
plashed and beat them both perfectly well.

He then put one of these parts, without any addition, into a glazed earthen
pot, and in that condition set it to dry of itself in the shade. Here, in
proportion as it lost its moisture by evaporation, it cracked and split in
every direction; parted from the sides of the pot, and crumbled into a thousand
pieces, all of them equally friable with the bits of lime dried up with the
sun, which we usually meet on the banks of our lime-pits. It is impossible, in
reading this Essay, not to remark the extreme ignorance or inaccuracy of the
compiler of it, on many occasions. The present paragraph affords a proof of it.
There can be no doubt, but that lime, if it has been very long slaked, will
lose all its qualities as a quicklime, and become perfectly effette, let it be
ever so carefully covered. -- He gives no other test of the lime being still
possessed of its caustic quality, but that it was covered. -- For ought that
appears, it might have been entirely effette-lime; in which case, it is not at
all surprising if it should not be capable of being converted into a cement of
any kind. -- Indeed the effects he describes, could only arise from its having
been actually in this state: For, there is no man, who does not know, that lime
which has been some time slaked, may, on many occasions, be employed as a
cement, which, at least, is capable of adhering together, and not falling down
at once into a loose powder as it dries.


With regard to the other part, Monsieur Loriot, just added to it one-third of
its quantity of powdered quicklime, and then had the whole well kneaded, in
order to make the two kinds of lime perfectly incorporate with each other. This
done, he put this mixture likewise into a glazed earthen pot, as he had done
the first; when, behold, it soon began to heat, and, in the space of a few
minutes, acquired a degree of consistence equal to the best plaster, when
prepared in the best manner. In short, it set and consolidated as readily as
metals in fusion when taken from the fire, and turned out a kind of
instantaneous lapidification, having dried completely within a very small space
of time, and that too without the least crack or flaw; nay, it adhered so
strongly to the sides of the pot, as not to be parted from them without
breaking it.

As to this passage, I shall only say, that I repeated the above experiment
several times, with all the accuracy I was capable of; with this only
difference, that I employed lime that had lain a considrable time beat up with
water, as is usual, to allow it to sour, in the common language of masons,
instead of lime that had been long covered up in a pit, like that which he
employed.

The result was, what any man who bestows a moderate degree of attention to the
subject, and the experience of masons, might have expected, -- but extremely
different from that of Monsieur Loriot.

The paste made of the old slaked lime alone, dried slowly, -- became in time a
mass slightly coherent, somewhat harder than chalk, it having been very pure
lime I employed, without sand or any other addition.

That which was made with the same slaked lime, with one-third of its quantity
of unslaked lime reduced to powder, kneaded through it, did indeed heat, as is
usual in all cases when the lime is slaked, -- swelled up, as is also usual; --
but acquired no degree of hardness greater than the other, nor differed in any
respect from it, excepting that it absorbed the water more quickly; and in a
day or so after it was kneaded up, when it became pretty dry, some particles of
limestone, which had not been burnt so perfectly as the rest, and were
therefore longer of slaking, began to heave up afresh, having lain till this
time unslaked.

On this account, although it must only be considered as an accidental
misfortune that will not always happen, it was evidently a much worse cement
than the other.

Such is the fact. Nor is it easy to see a reason why any beneficial
consequences should result from the practice recommended. -- It is well known,
that if water be added to burnt limestone in any way, the first effect is,
that it heats, swells, and falls down to a powder. -- Even under the water, the
effect is the same. After that powder is formed, it may, by remaining under
water, concrete into a solid mass; but with whatever substances it is mixed, it
must first separate before it unites. In the name of common sense, then, where
can be the difference in first reducing it to that powdery state, and then
beating it up with the water; or in pouring the water that is necessary to
reduce it to powder upon it, and allowing that powder to remain as it may fall,
without being beat up with the materials? -- Some of the watery particles will
at first be absorbed, which is evidently a loss to the mortar; and the lime
will be far less intimately mixed with the other ingredients, than if it had
been properly blended and heat up with them after it was in its smallest
powdery state; which must tend to render the mortar still less perfect.

Monsieur Loriot's panegyrist, however, is at no loss to produce reasons for
these wonderful effects, that seem to him to be entirely satisfactory. He thus
proceeds:

The result of this addition of the quicklime, surprising as at first sight it
might seem, is, notwithstanding, so easily explained and accounted for, that it
seems somewhat strange that Monsieur Loriot should be the first to suspect and
discover it. In fact, what can be plainer than that the sudden setting and
consolidating of these two substances must necessarily arise from the
quick-lime's being carried, by a perfect amalgamation, or admixture, into the
inmost recefles of the slaked lime, saturating itself with the moisture it
there meets with, and thereby effecting that instantaneous and absolute
deliccation Any one who has bestowed a moderate degree of attention to the
operation of slaking lime, as it is usually performed, must have observed many
instances of that sort of sudden desiccation, -- but without perceiving any of
the other effects her mentioned.

In slaking lime-stones, especially when of the purest sort, so much water is
necessary, and it is imbibed so slowly, that the operators, knowing it will be
all drunk up in due time, often to throw so much on one place at once, as to
reduce it to almost a fluid state. -- This water soon sinks through it to the
unslaked lime below. -- But if the lime on the top was regularly slaked before
the last effusion of water, it retains a smooth uniform surface, like plaster,
is dried almost entirely in a few minutes, -- and, if* not broke by the
swelling of the lime below, continues ever afterward to retain that form
without crumbling away at all. If this is allowed to dry perfectly, and no more
water is poured on it, till it has absorbed all its air, it is perfect chalk.
It has the same hardness, consistency, etc. and cannot be distinguished from
it, either in appearance or by any other property.

This, however, will never be the case, unless the lime has been perfectly
pure, so as to dissolve in acids as entirely as sugar does in water.


, which, because we are so well accustomed to it, we so little mind in the use
of gypses or plaster?"

If I understand this paragraph, it means neither more nor less than that these
two substances unite, because they necessarily do unite most perfectly. If it
has any other meaning, I am dull enough not to perceive it.

It would be tiresome to quote more passages from this Treatise. Let it suffice
to observe, that the author proceeds to tell, that this newly discovered cement
dries and hardens almost under the hand of the operator, without cracks or
flaws of any sort; P. 31.
that it neither expands nor contracts with the air; P. 32.
-- that it is impervious to moisture, Ibid.
-- and may not only be employed for making roofs to houses that are subjected
to the continual dropping of water, P. 44.
basins, acqueducts, canals, P. 44,45,46.
etc. that will instantly contain water in any quantities, but even finer works
of the pottery kind: P. 52.
that it perfectly resists frosts; with a long et coetera of other qualities
which it would be tiresome to enumerate; for an account of which I must refer
to the pamphlet itself.

That Monsieur Loriot has not discovered a cement possessing these peculiar
qualities, it would be unbecoming in me to say; seeing it is affirmed, that
works have been erected with it that prove that facts in the clearest manner.
But that such effects will be invariably produced, merely by adding a certain
proportion of unslaked lime in powder to mortar, as he asserts, or even by
making the mortar entirely with powdered quicklime, I may without hesitation
venture to deny, not only from the reasoning above given, but from actual
experiment again and again repeated by myself; which is likewise in some
measure corroborated by the experience of Mr. Dossie. Although Mr. Dossie
recommends his new discovered cement for many qualities, yet he differs
extremely from M. Loriot in his account of the manner in which the union is
effected: For, instead of saying that 'it consolidates as readily as metals in
fusion when newly taken from the fire,' he says, 'it continues soft for some
time, and only gradually hardens in the air.' See Dossie's Mem. of Agriculture,
vol. 11. p. 20.

Mr. Dossie does indeed ascribe to his cement some of the same qualities that
M. Loriot attributes to his. -- Some of these, however, are common to every
sort of lime-mortar, when carefully made; and were it not a little foreign from
our subject, it would be no difficult matter to show in what manner an
inexperienced person might have his judgment missed with regard to some of the
other qualities that may be called more equivocal. -- The imagination is a more
powerful magician than all the wise men of Egypt!




For these reasons, I am induced to think, that if Monsieur Loriot has really
experienced these uncommon effects from the mortar he has tried, it must have
been occasioned by some other unobserved peculiarity, and not merely by the
circumstance to which he seems to ascribe it. Possibly it may have been
impregnated with gypsum, Gypsum is an earthly salt, consisting of the vitriolic
acid and calcareous earth. -- It is best known among artizans in this country,
by the name of Plaster of Paris.
a saline substance, naturally abounding in France; and as one of its principal
ingredients is limestone, there is nothing extraordinary in its being found in
the same quarry chrystallized along with the limestone, nor any impossibility
of its escaping undecomposed, on some occasions, during the calcination of the
lime. Or it may perhaps have been otherwise accidentally mixed with the lime in
these experiments.

But in whatever way the gypsum may come there, if it be present, it is not to
be doubted but effects similar in kind (though not in degree) to what M. Loriot
describes, would, in some measure, result from the practice he recommends: For,
if gypsum be deprived of its moisture by calcination, it becomes a fine powder,
greatly resembling the purest lime, which coagulates, if I may use that phrase,
immediately upon the addition of water, and acquires at once all the firmness
that it ever can be made to attain.

These properties of gypsum have been long well enough known; but it never
acquires the stony hardness that lime-cement is sometimes endowed with,
although it takes the smoothest polish of any cement we know: on which account,
it has long been employed as a plaster where fine ornaments are required.

I have bestowed more attention on this performance of M. Loriot than my own
opinion of its importance would have exacted from me; and it is purely in
deference to the opinion of others that I have endeavored to account for some
of those phoenomena he describes, supposing they have really happened. The
inaccurate and unscientific manner in which that pamphlet is written, makes it
afford the philosophic reader but very little satisfaction; and that
affectation of the mavelous which runs through the whole, and the many
hyperbolic compliments paid to M. Loriot with which it abounds, are but ill
calculated for giving the reader a favorable opinion of the intention of the
compiler. Future experiments will bring to light those circumstances which seem
to be at present doubtful and mysterious. -- I now proceed to point out some
other circumstances, that may influence the quality of lime-mortar.

25.
If limestone be sufficiently caleined, it is deprived of all its moisture,
and of all its fixed air. But experience shows, that limestone will fall to a
powder on the effusion of water upon it, when it is much less perfectly
calcined, and while it still retains almost the whole of its fixed air. And as
masons have hardly any other rule for judging whether limestone be
sufficiently calcined, except this single circumstance of its falling to a
powder when water is poured upon it, we may thus easily perceive, that the same
lime may be more or less fitted for making good mortar, according to a
circumstance that, in a great measure, eludes the observation of operative
masons: For, if it should happen that all the lime-shells drawn from a kiln at
one time, were just sufficiently calcined to make it fall to a powder with
water, and no more, that powder would be altogether unfit for making mortar of
any kind.

This is a case that can seldom happen. -- But as there are a great many
intermediate degrees between that state and perfect calcination, it must often
happen that the stone will approach nearer to one of these extremes at one
time, than at another, so that mortar may be much more perfect at one time than
at another; owing to a variation as to this particular.

26.
Every author who has written on the subject of lime as a cement, has
endeavored to ascertain what is the due proportion of sand for making the most
perfect cement. But a little attention to the subject will show, that all rules
that could be prescribed as to this particular, must be so vague and uncertain,
as to be of little use to the practical mason. For,

Besides the variation that may arise from a more or less perfect degree of
calcination, and which has just now been taken notice of, it is a certain fact,
that some kinds of limestone are much more pure and contain a much smaller
proportion of sand, than others do.

I have examined limestone that was so perfectly free from any mixture of sand
whatever, as to dissolve in acids as entirely as sugar does among water: I have
also tried another kind that contained eleven-twelfths of its whole weight of
sand, and only one-twelfth part of lime; and have met with other sorts in all
the intermediate proportions between these two extremes.

Now it would surely be absurd to say, that the pure lime would require as
small a proportion of sand when made into mortar, as that which originally
contained in itself a much larger proportion of sand than any writer on the
subject has ever ventured to prescribe for being put into mortar.

What adds to this uncertainty is, the variation that may arise from the
circumstance last mentioned, viz. the greater or less perfect degree of
calcination that the stone may have undergone. For it ought to be remarked,
that although limestone, when pure, requires a very intense degree of heat to
convert it into a vitrified A vitrified substance is one that has been melted
by heat, and assumes somewhat of a glass-like appearance.
mass; yet when sand is mixed with the limestone in certain proportions, a very
moderate heat is sufficient to convert the whole mass into vitrified scorioe,
or in the common language of the country, make it run into danders.

From this circumstance, it happens, that those who are possessed of a very
impure limestone, are obliged to be extremely cautious not to give it an over
proportion of fuel, lest it should vitrify the stone; and they are very happy
if they can get their stone calcined just enough to make it fall with water,
and no more; so that, in general, it may be presumed, that a very large
proportion of such lime is never so sufficiently burnt as to be reduced to a
perfectly caustic state, or to be capable of forming a cement.

But as there is no danger at any time of giving pure limestone too much fire,
those who possess such a limestone are not under the necessity of being afraid
of erring on that side: And as it is a loss to them if the whole does not fall
after it is drawn from the kiln, it is natural to think they will in general
give it a full proportion of fuel. From hence it may be reasonably concluded,
that, in general, a much larger proportion of this kind of stone will be
perfectly calcined, than of the other sort.

At a venture, we may with some show of probability, conclude, that about
one-tenth of pure limestone is not enough calcined to admit of being made into
mortar; and that, of the most impure sorts of limestone, stone, not above
one-fourth part of the lime contained in it is so much calcined as to be in a
caustic state.

Let us see what variation this ought to produce as to the proportion of sand
that might be added to the lime in the one or the other case: and, that the
calculation may be more easily made, we shall suppose that the poorest
limestone that is ever burnt, contains one-tenth of its whole weight of lime.

Ten parts of pure lime, before it could be reduced to the same degree of
sandiness with the other, without considering the variation that arises from
the burning, would require each of them nine parts of sand to be added:
Therefore, ninety parts of sand should be added to the ten, to reduce them to
an equality with the other lime in its native state.

But if we are likewise to take into the account the variation above supposed,
that arises from their different degrees of calcination, the account will stand
thus:

Of the ten parts of pure lime, one is supposed to be not enough burnt to be
capable of acting as a cement; so that there remains nine only in a perfectly
caustic state.

Of the ten parts of impure lime, nine are sand, and only one is lime; -- and
from this one is to be deduced three-fourths as not enough calcined. Hence
there remains just one-fourth of one tenth-part (one-fortieth) of pure caustic
lime.

But this fortieth part of the whole is united to thirty-nine other equal parts
of sand and uncalcined limestone.

There remained nine whole tenth parts of the pure lime in a caustic state; to
each of which must be added thirty-nine tenths, including the one-tenth of
uncalcined lime; -- so that to reduce it to the same state with the former,
there would need to be three hundred and fifty parts of sand added.

It seems to be altogether inconceivable, that such a small proportion of
calcareous matter could ever become sufficient to cement firmly together such a
prodigious mass of other matters: Nor do I pretend to say, that this could
actually be the case, as there may be some error in the data. The following,
however, I know to be a fact:

The best modern mortar I ever saw, was made of lime, that I myself had
analyzed, and found it contained eleven parts of sand to one of lime. To this
there was added between twice and thrice its whole bulk of sand by measure;
which may be allowed to have been at least three times its quantity by weight.

Now, supposing that every particle of that lime had been so perfectly calcined
as to be in a caustic state, there could not be less than forty-seven parts of
sand to one of lime. The reader may allow what he pleases for the uncaustic
part of the lime, and make his calculation accordingly. But it is hardly
possible to suppose, that above one-hundredth part of this mass, independent of
the water, consisted of pure caustic calcareous earth.

But, whatever was the exact proportion of caustic lime, the mortar was made of
these materials in the proportions expressed, and was employed for pinning the
outside joints of the stone-walls of a house situated in a tempestuous climate,
and exposed to every blast. It is now about fourteen years since it was
finished; and I do not believe there has fallen to the ground, in all that
time, one pound weight of the mortar. After seven years longer trail, the
mortar still proves good and firm, and exhibits no appearance of ever falling.


Had this mortar been employed in building a thick wall, where it would have
been suffered to dry slow enough, there seems to be little reason to doubt but
it would in time have become as firm as the stones of the wa^l itself.

From these considerations we may clearly see, that it is impossible to
prescribe any determinate proportion of sand to lime, as that must vary
according to the nature of the lime, and other incidental circumstances, which
it would be tiresome to enumerate, and which would form an infinity of
exceptions to any general rule.

But it would seem we might safely infer, that the moderns in general, rather
err in giving too little sand, than in giving too much.

It deserves, however, to be remarked, that the sand, when naturally in the
limestone, is more intimately blended with the lime, than can possibly be ever
effected by any mechanical operation; -- so that it would be in vain to hope to
make good mortar artificially from pure lime, with such a small proportion of
caustic calcareous matter as may sometimes be effected when the lime naturally
contains a very large proportion of sand. But, there seems to be no doubt, that
if a much larger proportion of sand were employed, and if that were more
carefully blended and expeditiously worked than is common, the mortar would be
much more perfect than usual in modern times.

This I have tried experimentally, with the desired success.

27.
Another circumstance that tends greatly to vary the quality of the cement, and
to make a greater or smaller proportion of sand necessary, is the mode of
preparing lime before it is beaten up into mortar.

When lime is to be employed for making plaster, it is of great importance that
every particle of the limestone be slaked before it is worked up: For, as the
smoothness of the surface is the circumstance most wished for in plaster, if
any particles of lime should be beaten up in it, and employed in work before
they had had sufficient time to fall, the water still continuing to act upon
them after it was worked up, would infallibly slake these particles, which
would then expand themselves with great force, and produce those excrescences
upon the surface of the plaster, that are commonly known by the name of
blisters.

Hence, therefore, if we hope to obtain a perfect kind of plaster, that shall
remain smooth on the surface, and free of blisters, there is an absolute
necessity to allow the lime to lie for a considerable time macerating in water
before it is worked up.

This operation is called in this country, souring.

If the limestone be pure, and has been very perfectly calcined, there will be
little danger but that the whole of the lime will fall at first: But if it has
been less perfectly burnt, there will be many particles that will require to
lie a long time before they will be reduced to powder. This operation is
therefore more necessary with impure than pure lime; but it ought on no
occasion to be omitted, as there is not the smallest probability but some
blisters would appear on plaster made even of the purest lime, if worked up and
used immediately after it has been slaked.

It is also a common practice to sour the lime when it is intended to be used
in mortar. And although it is not so indispensably necessary in this case as
when it is intended for plaster, yet, if properly performed, it is evident,
that it must, even here, be of use; as any dry knots that may fall after the
mortar is used, must tend to disunite the parts of it that had been already
united, and render the cement much less perfect than if the whole had been
properly mixed up with the materials before using.

But more circumspection is requisite in souring lime for mortar, than for
plaster. For,

As it is not necessary that plaster should be endowed with a stony degree of
hardness, there is no loss sustained by allowing a great proportion of the lime
that is intended for that purpose, to absorb its air before it be used; for a
very small quantity of quicklime will be-sufficient to unite the whole into
one slightly coherent mass.

Therefore, the only circumstance necessary to be attended to in souring lime
for plaster, is, that it be allowed to macerate long enough, as there is no
danger of ever erring on the opposite extreme. It is indeed necessary that it
should lie a very long time on some occasions, before we can be certain that
all the particles are thoroughly slaked. I have known pieces of lime-shells lie
upwards of six months exposed to all the vicissitudes of winter-weather, and
fall after that time. Such slightly burnt stones are indeed usually separated
in sifting the lime for plaster; but as some small chips may escape, it is
always safest to allow it to lie in the sour a very long time.

This practice is also attended with another advantage of some consequence. --
For, if by this means a great proportion of the lime be allowed to absorb its
air, and become effette, when it is beaten up for use, the water can have no
sensible effect upon that effette-lime -- it will only separate the particles
of caustic lime more perfectly from one another, so as to suffer it to dry
without cracks of any sort, and render the surface of the plaster much more
smooth and entire than it could have been if the whole had been employed while
in its perfectly caustic state. By this means also, those chrystalline
exudations, so common on newly plastered walls, will be most effectually
obviated. On all which accounts, the practice of allowing lime intended for
plaster to macerate very long with water, ought never to be omitted but in
cases of necessity.

But as lime is no sooner slaked than it begins to absorb its air, and as it
continues to absorb more and more every minute from that period, till it
becomes entirely effette, so as to be rendered gradually less and less fit for
forming a cement of any sort: -- it follows, that if lime intended for mortar
is allowed to lie long in the sour, much of it will be converted into chalk, or
unchrystallized effette-lime; in which condition it will neither admit of so
much sand in using, nor ever become such a firm cement, as if a larger
proportion of sand had been employed at first, and worked up as quickly as
possible into mortar, and used.

This malady will be increased, if the limestone has not been very well burnt;
therefore care ought to be taken to choose the very best burnt lime for mortar;
in which case, a very short time, if it has been carefully sifted after
slaking, will be sufficient to make it fall as much as is necessary. For the
object of principal importance here, is to have the cement as firm as possible;
and the bursting of a very small particle of unslaked lime amongst it
afterward, will not produce such a sensible inconvenience as it would have
done in plaster.

Those, therefore, who wish to obtain the hardest and firmest mortar, will be
careful to get well-burnt lime, and allow it to macerate with the water only a
very short time before it is used. But the best burnt lime I ever saw, would
require to macerate some days in the water, before there can be a certainty
that the whole will be sufficiently slaked. It is no unsatisfactory proof of
the justness of the foregoing reasoning, to observe, that the practice which
would necessarily follow from it, is exactly what was followed by the ancients,
if we can rely on the account given of this matter by Vitruvius, and Pliny.

Vitruvius, so far from recommending unslaked lime for making plaster, as
Monsieur Loriot would suggest, recommends expressly that it should be soured or
macerated in water -- for the very same reasons as are given above; as it is
only by that means, he says, that the plaster can be prevented from blistering
-- His words are (lib. vii. cup. 2) -- "Tune de albariis operibus est
explicandum. Id autem erit recte, si glebae calcis optime, ante multo tempore
quam opus fuerit, macerabunter. Namque cum non penitus macerata, sed recens
sumitur -- haben^ latentes crudos culculos, pus^ulas emittit -- Qui calculi
dissolvunt, et dissipant tectorii politiones."

Pliny points out, still more clearly, the difference between the quality of
the lime necessary for making mortar and plaster -- a certain proof that the
ancients had been very accurate in observing facts, as they could have no idea
of the reasoning by which these facts might have been explained or corroborated.

'Ruinarum urbis,' says he, 'ea maxim causa, quod furto, calcis sine ferrumine
suo coementa componuntur. Intrita quoque quo vetuslior, eo melior. In
antiquarum (antiquis) aedium legibus invenitur, ne recentiore trima uteretur
redemptor; idio nulla (nullae) tectoria eorum rimoe foedavere.' Plin. Hist.
lib. xxxvi. cap. 23.

In this passage, Pliny strongly contrasts mortar (coementa) with plaster
(intria.) The first, he says (by implication) ought always to be composed of
lime cum ferrumine suo, that is, lime that still retains its gluten, -- lime
that still retains that quality by which it is enabled to unite detached
matters into a solid body, and glue them as it were together. In other places
of his work, he describes it as calcis quam vehementissimoe, lime in its most
acid state, that is, perfectly caustic lime.

This quality, he plainly hints, it gradually loses by time, so as to come at
length to be sine ferrunune suo; in which state, as it is impossible to become
a firm cement for building, he severely reprehends those who use it as such.

But although he condemns the practice of using that old and inert lime for
mortar, he immediately adds, that for plaster it is better than new, because it
is not so subject to crack in the work. " Intrita quoque quo vetustior, eo
melior -- ideo nulla tectoria eorum rimoe foedavere."

Monsieur Loriot quotes this passage, and contends, that calcis sine ferrumine
suo, means merely slaked lime, in opposition to his favorite powdered
lime-shells. -- What reason he has to think so, the reader is left to judge. --
It is to be observed, however, that Monsieur Loriot does not confine the use of
his cement to making mortar. -- Like those medicines that cure all diseases, it
is equally proper for plaster, and indeed it is as a plaster he chiefly
recommends it. There can be no doubt, however, from the authorities above
quoted, that the Ancients were as great strangers to the use of it in this
sense, as the Moderns.




28.
The reader, if he has followed me thus far, will easily perceive, that
although it be in vain to expect those wonderful effects from the practice
recommended by Monsieur Loriot, that he so pompously describes, yet it may
happen, that if circumstances accidentally concur to that end, a very perfect
mortar may be obtained, by following his directions. For, if the slaked lime
that shall be employed has not had time to become, in a great measure, effette;
-- if the unslaked shells that are to be pounded have been perfectly calcined;
-- if the limestone has been of a sandy sort of itself; -- if the sand added
to it has been of a proper kind, and in due proportion; and if these materials
be carefully mixed before they are applied, there can be no doubt but the
mortar would be very good: So that it may sometimes happen, that those who
follow the practice recommended by him, in making mortar for ordinary uses, may
be lucky enough to succeed to their wish. But, as these favorable
circumstances may not chance to occur in other cases, they may be at other
times very far from succeeding.

That gentleman, with his usual want of accuracy, takes no notice of any of
these circumstances. -- He only recommends that powdered quicklime, by which
he means pounded lime-shells, be mixed up with common mortar, made of old
slaked lime, in certain proportions. He does not give the smallest hint as to
the state of old slaked lime to be used as common mortar; but seems to think it
a matter of no moment, whether it shall have been so long slaked, as to be
perfectly effette, or the reverse; -- he does not, indeed, seem to know any
thing about that peculiarity of lime distinguished by that term.

But, independent of that circumstance, the practice he recommends is much
worse in other respects than that usually followed in modern times, either for
making plaster or cement, especially the first. For, in the ordinary operation
of slaking, those lime-shells that are not enough burnt, have some chance of
being rejected when the lime is sifted; whereas, in this method of pounding the
whole promiscuously, these will be mixed with the others; and therefore it may
be expected that some of the particles will remain unslaked for a very long
time, which will be in danger of disuniting, and blistering the work long after
it is put up.

29.
Authors almost universally agree in asserting, that the hardest limestone
affords a lime that will consolidate into the firmest cement; and hence it has
been, in general concluded, that lime made of chalk, affords a much weaker
cement than what is made of marble or limestone.

It appears, however, from the foregoing observations, that if ever this be the
case, it is only incidentally, and not necessarily so.

Lime made of pure chalk, differs not in the least from lime made of the purest
marble. Both consist of a fine impalpable powder, without any mixture of
extraneous matter; and if they have been equally calcined, are possessed of the
same chemical qualities in every respect. Indeed, nothing is more easy, than to
form artificial chalk from pure limestone, as I have more than once
experienced, which the reader may also do, by following the directions in the
margin, In slaking lime composed of pure limestone, it will be observed, that
the pieces fall into powder much more slowly than when the limestone has
contained any sand in it.

If a great quantity of water be successively poured upon a large heap of these
pure lime-shells, without stirring them, and if it be allowed to lie some time
afterward, it will be found, on opening the heap, that some pieces of
lime-shells have only expanded considerably in bulk by the operation of
slaking, without being crumbled down to a powder. These pieces, if allowed to
remain in a close place, where they are not exposed to the vicissitudes of the
weather, will still retain their form; and as they gradually absorb their air,
they acquire a sort of firmness of consistence, and in time become chalk in
every sense of the word, -- having the same degree of firmness, of softness,
and every other quality of chalk.

This is the most perfect resemblance of chalk that can be made: but, if any
quantity of that pure lime be reduced to a very thin paste, at the time of
slaking, and be hastily dried to a certain degree, it acquires a sort of
consistency so as to be capable of retaining its form. And if this be kept in a
place not exposed to the vicissitudes of the weather, till it has attained its
whole air, it will resemble chalk almost as much as the former, and might be
employed for every purpose that the chalk is used for.

The reader will please to observe, that this can only be done with lime that
is perfectly free of sand; for if it has the least particle of sand among it,
no art can give it the softness of chalk.


if his curiosity prompts him to it.

And the practice of the southern provinces of Britain, sufficiently confirms
the justness of these observations. For, to the south of the Humber, on the
east coast, almost all the lime they use is made of chalk; yet, there are many
buildings in these counties, in which the cement is as firm as in any part of
the island. Nor does the ordinary mode of building in these places, indicate
any deficiency in the quality of their mortar; for many of their houses are
coated on the outside with a crust of lime, stuck full of small pebbles, which
remain in it very firmly for many years. We know well, that this is the most
trying manner of employing mortar.

There is, however, greater danger that lime made of chalk, should form, on
some occasions, a weak cement, than that from limestone.

For, as chalk never contains any sand, its lime will always form a very soft
cement, unless care be taken to mix a large proportion of sand with it, in
beating up the mortar; which is not so indispensably necessary in forming
mortar from limestone, as it sometimes contains so much sand as to form a
pretty firm cement, without any additional sand at all.

Even if the limestone should be equally pure calcareous matter as the chalk,
the lime of the first has a chance of becoming a firmer cement than that of the
last

For, as it is impossible to reduce the pure limestone to a powdery calx,
without subjecting it to the action of a very strong fire, which, while it
dissipates the water, and fully dries the chrystals, carries off the whole of
its fixed air, so that the calx is almost entirely caustic.

But chalk may be reduced to calx, by such a moderate heat as is scarcely
sufficient to dissipate any of its air; -- so, that what assumes the appearance
of lime made from it, may be nothing else than a powdered effette calcareous
earth, which never can become a cement of any sort. But as there is no danger
of vitrifying chalk by over-burning, this inconvenience may be entirely
obviated by a careful and perfect calcination.

In those countries, therefore, where chalk-lime is common, care ought to be
taken to choose only that kind of it for mortar, that has been calcined by a
very strong fire, and to reject that which has been burnt by furze or brakes,
as unfit for that purpose.

But it is obvious, that as this defect arises entirely from the unskilfulness
of the operator, which may be easily avoided, it ought not to be considered as
any objection to the quality of the lime, considered in itself.

30.
It is unnecessary to extend our observations to all the other kinds of
limestone that may be met with; as these general observations on the two
extremes, marble and chalk, may be easily applied to all the intermediate
kinds. It has been already said, that the different friability of different
sorts of limestone arises entirely from a smaller or greater degree of
perfection in the chrystallization, which must have been occasioned by
accidental circumstances that have occurred at the time the concretion was
effected, and can have no influence on the quality of the lime when it is once
more reduced to the state of a caustic calx.

And as it does not yet appear that there is the smallest difference between
the chemical qualities of any one kind of fossile calcareous earth and another,
when perfectly pure, there is no reason to suspect that there can be any
difference between one kind of lime and another, as a cement, unless what may
arise from the nature of the extraneous bodies that may be accidentally mixed
with that calcareous matter in its native state, or from its being more or less
perfectly calcined.

But the only extraneous matter that is ever found in limestone is sand, This
expression requires some limitation. See the Postscript to this Essay.
in greater or smaller proportions. And as no limestone that can be calcined,
contains such a large proportion of sand as is necessary for making a perfect
cement, we may naturally conclude, that every kind of lime is equally fit for
becoming a firm cement, if it be first reduced to a proper degree of
causticity, and has afterward a due proportion of sand properly mixed with it,
before it be employed in work.

Different sorts of lime, no doubt, vary very much from one another in the
proportion of sand they naturally contain, and therefore must require very
different proportions of sand to be added to them before they can be made
equally perfect as a cement. This is an economical consideration, of no small
moment in some cases, as it may make one sort of lime vastly cheaper than
another on some occasions, and therefore deserves to be attended to by every
builder. Directions shall be given in the Second Part of this Essay, by the
help of which he may be enabled to discover the exact proportion of sand
contained in any sort of lime he may wish to examine.

31.
In the preceding parts of this Essay, I have spoken of sand as the only
substance that is ever added to lime in forming cement; but as others have, on
some occasions, been employed for this purpose, it will be proper here to point
out their several excellencies and defects.

Almost the only substances that I have known used as an addition to mortar,
besides sand of various denominations, are powdered sand-stone, brick-dust, and
sea-shells, that have been broken into small fragments.

And for forming plaster, where closeness rather than hardness is required, the
useful additions are, lime that has been slaked, and kept long in a dry place,
till it has become nearly effette; powdered chalk or whiting, and gypsum in
various proportions; besides hair, and other substances of that sort.

Others that have been lately recommended by Mons. Loriot, are, balls of any
sort of earth slightly burnt and pounded; -- the rubbish of old buildings (by
which I understand the old mortar after it has been separated from the stones)
reduced to powder, and sifted; or almost any other thing that can be reduced to
a moderately fine powder.

From what has incidentally occurred relating to this head, the reader will be
able to judge, in some measure, of the comparative value of these several
additions. But, to render the subject still more clear, the following
observations may be of use:

It is sufficiently ^^ain, that none of these additions enter into the
composition, so as to affect its qualities as a chemical mixed; they only
operate in a manner purely mechanical: For, whatever the nature of the addition
may be, it possesses the same qualities, when so united, as if by itself, and
may be separated by mechanical means from the compound, unaltered. Therefore,
we need give ourselves no trouble about ascertaining their chemical qualities,
but consider them merely as masses of matter that may be more or less fitted
for this purpose by their peculiar form, degrees of hardness, etc.

It has been already shown, that sand ought to be preferred to chalky matters,
chiefly on account of the hardness and firmness of the particles of which it
consists. And as the purest sand consists of detached chrystals, which are so
hard as scarcely to admit of being broken into smaller parts, this kind of pure
chrystalline transparent sand is, perhaps, on this account, the most proper
addition that can possibly be made to lime in forming mortar.

Sand-stone consists of an almost innumerable congeries of small particles of
sand united to one another, in a slight manner, by some kind of natural cement.
But as it is troublesome to reduce this kind of stone to its smallest component
parts, and as the particles of it, when not reduced to that ultimate degree of
fineness, may be easily broken into smaller parts, it can never be looked upon
as such a proper addition for a lime-cement as the purest sand.

There are also many substances that are called sand, which are nothing else
than fragments of decomposed granite, moor-stone, sand-stone, etc. all of which
may be easily reduced into smaller particles by moderate triture, and are
liable to the same objections as pounded sand-stone.

But almost any of these is preferable to brick-dust. Fine clay, when perfectly
burnt in the fire, may be made to assume almost a stony hardness. But common
brick is so imperfectly burnt, as to admit of being reduced, without much
trouble, to a fine impalpable powder; insomuch, that it is often used, when in
this state, for scouring polished iron or brass, especially if the brick has
had no fine sharp sand in its composition.

As the rough particles of brick-dust may be so easily reduced to a fine
powder, the mortar formed with it can in no case be of the most perfect sort.

But brick-dust is still liable to a greater objection, when considered as a
component part of mortar.

Clay only looses its quality of absorbing water, and in some measure of
dissolving in it, by a very perfect degree of burning; so that if any part of
it has escaped the violent action of the fire, that part, when mixed in mortar,
will still be apt to absorb water whenever it may reach it, and lose its
firmness, and make the mass of which it is a part, crumble to dust.

It is exactly in this manner that all sorts of marle are liable to fall into
powder when drenched in water, and exposed to the air; even although they
sometimes appear, when dry, to be endowed with a stony hardness.

On this account, brick-dust, which usually consists of the imperfect burnt
bricks, ought to be considered as a very dangerous mixture for mortar, and
should never be employed but in cases of absolute necessity.

But the balls of other sorts of earth, slightly burned, as recommended by
Monsieur Loriot, must be, on many accounts, far less proper; as many of these
sorts of earth cannot, by the action of fire, be deprived of their quality of
absorbing water, and of becoming soft with it. So that he who should be foolish
enough to employ these substances, may be certain that his cement will not only
be incapable of attaining any considerable degree of hardness at any time, but
will also be liable to turn moist in a damp air, nor will be capable of
retaining its firmness or cohesive quality in an exposed situation.

Powdered lime-rubbish is liable to the same objections with the softest
sand-stone or brick-dust; as the particles of which it consists, never can be
endowed with the adhesive firmness that is necessary for forming a perfect
cement.

Fine shells are perhaps firmer than any other substance, next to pure sand,
and may be employed where the other cannot be got, if this abounds. I have seen
a cement that was as little affected by the weather as any other, and had stood
firm in the work a great many years, that had been originally formed with a
sand consisting almost entirely of the fragments of shells. But it had not the
rocky hardness of some old mortar that we frequently meet with.

Roughly powdered glass, if such a thing could be got, at a moderate expense,
would form a most perfect sort of mortar; as it would not be liable to be
affected with the weather, would be sufficiently hard, and consist of very
irregular fragments.

Thus it appears, that of all the substances that can be easily met with, sand
forms the most proper addition to lime in making mortar; on which account, it
has been justly preferred to all others for that purpose.

Pure firm chrystallized sand is better than any other sort: -- But all pure
sands are not equally proper for this use.

32.
It has been already shown, that the principal advantages which resulted from
the addition of sand in making lime-mortar, were, that it augmented the
quantity of hard indissoluble matter, -- and put it in our power to employ a
larger quantity of water in proportion to the lime, and thus forwarded the
chrystallization of the calcareous matter, augmented the quantity of these
chrystals, and rendered their quality more perfect. Those kinds of sand,
therefore, which promote these purposes in the highest degree, will be best
adapted for mixing with mortar.

But if sand consists of irregular angular particles, a greater quantity of
water will be retained in the vacuities formed between these angular pieces,
than could have been if the whole had consisted of round smooth globules; and
therefore it is natural to think, that rough angular sand, will be more proper
for this use than that which is smoother.

Hence, if equally pure, sea-sand, which consists of round globules, that have
been worn perfectly smooth by the continued attrition upon one another on the
shore, (like the larger pebbles in the same situation) will be worse than any
other sort. -- River-sand will be better than it; -- and pit-sand, when quite
free of earth, the best of all.

33.
If the sand be hard, and the particles angular, it is perhaps of very little
importance whether these be very small, or of a larger size. -- The sand in the
lime that formed the extraordinary firm cement mentioned 26, was as small as
could well be imagined.

Because sea-sand is usually smaller than any other sort, and is acknowledged
to be less proper for making mortar than many other kinds of sand, a prejudice
has been in general adopted against fine sand for this purpose. But this, there
is reason to imagine, is only a vulgar prejudice, arising from the peculiar
figure of that sort of sand.

34.
There is another and better reason for not employing sea-sand in mortar, viz.
that there is always a chance that some particles of salt may be formed among
it, by the evaporation of the seawater upon the shore. And as common salt
continues always to be a deliquescent substance, it will have a perpetual
tendency to attract moisture from a humid air, and thus render the wall in
which this mortar has been employed extremely damp and unwholesome.

It is from the same cause that any porous sort of stone, that has been taken
from the sea shore, continues at all times to be wet in damp weather: For,
while the stone remained on the shore, its pores would be, from time to time,
filled with salt water; upon the evaporation of which, the salt it contained
would remain behind, within the pores of the stone, which would thus become
endowed with the quality of attracting moisture from a damp air, sufficient to
dissolve the salt, and make the watery solution ooze out through all its pores.

This is a phenomenon for which it is more easy to account, than to prescribe
an effectual cure. -- Perhaps, no art can render the stone sufficiently dry,
after it is once put into the wall. -- To let it lie for a considerable time in
a stream of running fresh water before it was employed, might mitigate, at
least, if not entirely obviate, the disease.

35.
For the same reason, lime that has been slaked with seawater, is always unfit
for being used as a mortar. For, as it is impossible ever to extract that salt
from the mortar, it continually attracts moisture from the air in damp weather,
and oozes through the pores of the wall in form of drops of sweat, which again
disappear when the weather becomes dry.

This is an inconvenience often felt: -- But as the real cause of it is seldom
known, few persons are at proper pains to guard against it. Those who obtain
their lime by water-carriage, are in a peculiar manner liable to be hurt by
this circumstance, as the lime is, for the most part, slaked at the ship's
side, by the seawater, which is more easily got than any other.

When lime that has been slaked in this manner is employed as a plaster, it is
rather worse than when used as a mortar, as it has less sand added to it, and
has fewer pores in the inside, in which the drops of water might be allowed to
lodge; so that the wall becomes alternately covered with a crust of dry powdery
salt, and with damp tears running down its surface.

Too much care, therefore, cannot be taken to avoid using lime that has been
slaked with seawater, -- as it will be impossible, or extremely difficult,
ever to render these walls perfectly dry.

I have thus enumerated at much greater length than I originally intended, the
several circumstances that contribute to render lime-cement more or less
perfect. In doing this, I have had occasion to explain the nature of many of
those calcareous matters which have been generally used as a manure, which will
considerably shorten our labor in what remains of this Essay.

If I have reprehended, with some degree of asperity, those who, either through
ignorance, or a wilful intention to deceive, have endeavored, by specious
pretexts, to mislead the ignorant, I hope the candid will be rather ready to
ascribe this to a desire of rectifying those abuses that might have been
introduced by their means, than to any other motive. I have never found fault,
but where it was necessary to correct. Before I quit this branch of our
subject, I may be allowed to remark, that although the discoveries of Modern
Philosophers have enabled us to account for some of the phoenomena relating to
quicklime as a cement, that were altogether inexplicable to the Ancients, yet
here, as in almost every branch of natural knowledge, we are still far from
having attained that summit of perfection which some may, perhaps too hastily,
be disposed to imagine. -- In many respects, we have as yet been just able to
penetrate the mysterious veil of nature, so far, as to let us know that much
remains to be discovered, of which we have now only a very saint idea. -- The
following hints will illustrate my meaning, and deserve the consideration of
Chemical Philosophers;

There is little reason to doubt, that flint is nothing else than calcareous
matter combined with some substance that has hitherto eluded the knowledge of
Chemists.

It is likewise highly probable, that the native chrystalline concretion called
quartz, by Naturalists, is only another modification of the same calcareous
matter, combined with some other substances that prevents the action of acids
upon it, and gives it other sensible qualities very different from calcareous
substances in their ordinary state.

There is even some reason to suspect, that all the other varieties of
chrystalline earths, including sand of every denomination, are other
modifications of the same calcareous matter.

Even argillaceous earths (clays) however different in appearance and natural
qualities, in their ordinary state, afford evident marks of the same original.

But in what manner it comes to be so differently disguised in these several
bodies, -- what are their several component parts, -- how they may be analyzed
and recompounded, are secrets of Nature, reserved for the discovery of future
ages: And, till these are discovered, it is probable, we will never be able to
account for the manner in which the most perfect cement may be sometimes
produced.




I now go on to consider calcareous matters as a manure.

PART SECOND.
OF QUICKLIME AND OTHER CALCAREOUS SUBSTANCES, AS A MANURE.
IN the First Part of this Essay, I have been able to give, as I hope, a
tolerably satisfactory account of the raticuale of the operation of lime as a
cement; and it is much to be wished, that I could pursue the same method in the
investigation of this substance as a manure. But in this respect, I have as yet
been able to discover no clue that could, with safety, be trusted for leading
through the intricate labyrinth that lies before us; on which account, I
willingly shun the arduous undertaking.

It would be easy for me here to amuse the reader with a critical analysis of
the several theories that have been invented by ingenious men, to account for
the manner in which lime operates as a manure. It would be no difficult matter
to demonstrate the defects of their several systems; and I might, with great
facility, make an idle display of apparent superiority by ridiculing their
several hypotheses. But as I could not substitute any thing in their stead,
that would be more satisfactory to the sensible Reader, I choose to wave this
ungracious discussion; and shall content myself with enumerating a few facts
concerning the use of calcareous substances as a manure, that it much imports
the practical farmer fully to understand.

1.
The first idea that occurs in reflecting on this subject, is, that all
substances in which calcareous matter is contained, have been successfully
employed as a mannure, at different times, and in different places.

Thus -- lime, -- marie of all sorts, -- chalk, -- limestone -- gravel, --
shelly sand, or pure shells of every denomination, have all been employed as
manures, with the greatest success.

2.
And as all these, excepting lime, always contain the calcareous matter in its
mild state, we are led to conclude, that they operate on the soil merely as
calcareous, and not as saline substances.

Lime, indeed, is sometimes applied to the soil in its caustic state, as it
comes fresh from being slaked, but more commonly at some considerable distance
of time after it has been burnt. However, as burning is the only mode usually
employed for reducing limestone to powder, and thus preparing it for a manure,
the opinion in general prevails, that calcination is as necessary for rendering
lime capable of becoming a manure, as for making it fit to be employed as a
cement.

It is, however, of importance to the practical farmer, to be informed that
this is not the case. -- Mr. Du-Hamel, was the first, who, from an accidental
experiment, was led to believe that powdered limestone was a manure equally
efficacious with lime itself. He recorded the experiment as a great discovery.

Having had occasion to dress a marble chimneypiece, for repairing one of his
country-houses, the mason chose a lawn near the house as the most convenient
place for hewing the stone. After the operation was finished, all the large
chips were picked up and carried away, that they might not disfigure the lawn;
but the fine powder that had been grinded off by the action of the chissel,
mixed so intimately with the grass, that it could not be gathered up. -- In
consequence of this very full dressing of powdered limestone, the grass
afterward grew upon that spot with much greater luxuriance than on any other
part of the lawn, and always continued to have a much livelier verdure.

From hence, he, with good reason, concluded, that powdered limestone might be
employed as a manure with success. To try if this would always be the case, he
repeated the experiment several times, by causing some limestone to be pounded
on purpose; and found that it never failed to promote the fertility of the spot
on which he applied it, in very high degree.

3.
I chose to relate this experiment at large, for the satisfaction of those who
may be unacquainted with the physical cause of the difference between lime and
limestone. To such as are fully apprised of this, a little reasoning might
have been sufficient to afford a certain conviction, that the result of the
experiment must have been what Mr. Du-Hamel found it.

Lime is no sooner slaked, than it immediately begins to absorb its air, and
return to its former mild state; or, in other words, it becomes off^tte; in
which state it possesses the same chemical qualities, in every respect, as
limestone.

If this be spread out thinly upon the surface of the earth, it absorbs its air
in a very short time. -- A few hours, in this situation, restores a large
proportion of its air; and, in a day or two, at most, it becomes perfectly
effette, as masons experience when they sweep together the scattered particles
that have lain round their heaps of lime, and attempt to use it in mortar by
itself, for it is then no more coherent than sand, or moistened earth.

Hence, then, it must follow, that in every case, lime is converted into the
same state with limestone, in a few days after it is mixed with the soil; so
that if it produces any effect at all as lime, as a saline substance, -- it
must only be at the very first, when it is applied; and it must act ever
afterward merely as powdered limestone.

But it is well know, that lime produces scarcely any sensible effect as a
manure at the beginning. Even the first year after it is applied to the soil,
its effects are inconsiderable, in comparison of what it produces in the second
and succeeding years. From whence we must conclude, that it operates upon the
soil, merely as a mild calcareous earth; and that its calcination is of no
farther utility in preparing it for manure, than as a cheap and efficacious
method of reducing the limestone to a fine powder.

4.
It is of importance, that these facts should be generally known; because it
may sometimes happen, that good limestone shall be found in places where fuel
could not be obtained for burning it; in which case, such limestone could be
of no use to the farmer, if calcination were absolutely necessary. But, seeing
this is not the case, limestone, even in these situations, may be converted
into a most beneficial manure, if a stream of water can be commanded,
sufficient for driving a mill, for reducing the stone to powder.

I have seen the model of a mill that had been invented for that purpose, which
was constructed on the same principles with an ordinary gunpowder mill. It had
several large massy stampers, composed of huge blocks of cast-iron, that were
successively lifted up and let fall by a wheel that catched their handles, and,
after a proper time, slipped them again as it revolved round its axis. These
stampers fell with great force upon the limestone, that had been previously
broken into pieces of a moderate size, and placed in a strong trough, formed
for that purpose. Through this trough, a small stream of water was conveyed,
which washed away with it, the small pieces of limestone as they were
successively reduced to powder by the stampers. This stream of water was
received into a large reservoir, in which it was allowed to stagnate, and
deposit, as a sediment, the limestone powder it brought along with it; the
pure water flowing gently over a part of the brim, which was made lower for
that purpose.

When the reservoir was nearly full of this fine powder, the work was stopped;
the water was drawn off from the reservoir, by taking out some plugs left for
that purpose at different heights, till all that was clear had run off: the
powdered stone was afterward thrown out to the bank, and allowed to dry
sufficiently for use.

I have heard that a mill, upon these principles, was erected by the Honorable
the Trustees for managing the forfeited estates in Scotland, and that a good
deal of limestone was pounded with it. But, as it was erected in the Highlands
of Scotland, where roads were bad, and where there was but little, spirit for
improvements in agriculture; as there was no public demand for the manure,
after the experiment was sufficiently tried to show that it might be practiced
with advantage in other places, the mill was suffered to lie unemployed.

5.
But although this may be considered as a most valuable discovery for those who
may have a good limequarry so situated as not to be within the reach of any
kind of fuel for burning limestone; yet, to such as can obtain fuel at a
moderate expense, there can be no doubt but that burning is the easiest and
most efficacious mode of reducing limestone to powder that ever was invented,
and therefore ought always to be adopted where necessity does not prevent it.

Reducing limestone to powder by calcination, is attended with this farther
advantage to the farmer, that it considerably diminishes his expense of
carriage. Pure limestone loses about two-thirds of its weight by being
thoroughly burned; so that the man who is obliged to drive this manure from a
great distance, will find a very considerable saving by driving it in the state
of shells. But if it were reduced to a powder by mechanical triture, he could
not be benefitted by this circumstance.

Many persons choose to drive limestone from a considerable distance, and burn
it at home: But it is obvious they then subject themselves to a very heavy
charge in carriage, which would be avoided by an opposite conduct. This,
therefore, ought never to be practiced but where other circumstances may
counterbalance this unfavourable one.

6.
But as limestone is often, in its native state, mixed with sand in various
proportions; and as sand loses nothing of its weight by calcination, it must
happen, that those kinds of limestone which contain the largest proportion of
sand, will lose least in calcination, and of course afford the weightiest
lime-shells.

Hence it is obvious, that those who are under the necessity of driving lime
from a great distance, ought to be particularly careful to make choice of a
kind of limestone as free from sand as possible, and to drive it in the state
of shells; as they will thus obtain an equal quantity of manure, at the least
expense of carriage that is possible; and the lightest shells ought, of course,
to be always preferred.

7.
When lime is slaked, that which contains most sand falls most quickly, and
absorbs the smallest proportion of water. What is pure, requires a very large
proportion of water, and is much longer before it begins to fall.

Hence it happens, that those who drive sandy lime-shells in open carriages,
must be very careful to guard against rain; because a heavy shower would make
the whole fall, and generate such a heat as to be in danger of setting the
carts on fire; whereas pure lime-shells are in no danger of being damaged by
that circumstance. I have seen a cart loaded with such shells, which had been
exposed to a continued shower of rain, as violent as is ever known in this
country, for more than three hours, and seemed hardly to be affected by it in
the smallest degree. I ought to observe, however, that my experiments were
continued to only one kind of pure lime, so that it is not from hence
demonstrated, that all kinds of pure lime will be possessed of the same
qualities.

8.
Lime shells formed from the purest limestone, require more than their own
weight of water to slake them properly; I have found, by experiment, that pure
lime-shells cannot be slaked with less than about one-fourth more than their
own weight of water. When slaked in the ordinary way, the same lime-shells took
more than double their weight of water.
whereas some kinds of lime-shells that contain much sand, do not require above
one-fourth part of that quantity.

Hence it is much worse economy in those who have pure lime-shells, to slake
and carry them home in the state of powdered lime, than it is in those who have
only a sandy kind of lime-shells.

9.
It is even, on some occasions, more advisable for those who have very sandy
lime, to drive it in the state of powdered lime, than in that of shells: For,
as it is dangerous to give that kind of limestone too much heat, lest it
should be vitrified, those who burn it can never be certain that the whole of
the stone will fall to powder when water is added, till they have actually
tried it; nor do they think it a great loss if some part of it should be
imperfectly burned, as it requires much less fuel on a future occasion than
fresh limestone; and therefore they much rather choose to err on this, than on
the opposite extreme.

But, should any one attempt to drive this poor sort of lime in the state of
shells, he would be in danger of carrying home many stones that would never
fall, which would more than counterbalance the benefit he would derive from the
want of the small quantity of water that is required to slake it.

On these accounts, it may be admitted, as a general rule, that those who can
have access to limestone which is free of sand, will save a great deal in the
carriage of it, by driving it in the state of shells; -- and that, on the
contrary, it will be most economical in those who can only get lime of a very
sandy quality, to drive it in the state of powdered lime.

From hence it follows, that the practice which now prevails, of carrying
shell-lime by water from one part of the country to another, is only an
imaginary saving, obtained at a very high risque, to those who drive shells of
a sandy quality; -- but a real and unequivocal advantage, of very high
importance to the community, at large, if these shells are obtained from a pure
limestone.

These observations relate only to the saving of carriage to the farmer; an
article of capital importance to him. It is proper now to take notice of some
other particulars that may equally affect him in this way, as well as in the
application of the lime to his ground.

10.
A vague opinion, in general, prevails in every part of the country, that one
sort of lime may be more valuable than another: but it does not appear that
farmers have hitherto had almost any rule to direct them in the choice of
different sorts of lime; some esteeming one sort strongest, as they term it,
and some valuing another sort more highly, without being able to assign any
satisfactory reason for the preference they give, in either case.

It is of importance, that this matter should be elucidated.

Although it does not always happen, yet, in many parts of the country, the
real nature of lime is so little understood, that the weightiest lime is
preferred, as a manure, to that which is lighter; because it is imagined the
first has more substance, and will therefore produce a more powerful effect
upon ground, than the finest and lightest lime.

But, there seems to be no reason to think, there is any difference in the
specific gravity of different parcels of pure calcareous matter, when fully
calcined; therefore, if there is any difference in the weight of various sorts
of lime, it must arise entirely from a variation in the quantity or gravity of
some extraneous matter that is mixed with the lime.

And as sand is almost the only extraneous body that is ever found in
limestone, and is always of much greater specific gravity than pure
quicklime, -- it follows, than the weighty lime only owes its superior gravity
to a larger proportion of sand that is mixed with it.

But sand is of no value as a manure; so that he who voluntarily purchases this
kind of lime, in preference to the other, is guilty of a great degree of folly;
which will be the greater, if he has likewise to drive it from a considerable
distance. It would be better for him, if he is determined to use nothing but
weighty lime, to buy such as is pure, if it can be obtained, and mix it with
sand after he has got it home, so as to give it the gravity required. Some
might laugh at this, as a proof of his folly, and justly: but, it is, surely,
less foolish in him to do this, than to pay money for the sand which he would
thus obtain for nothing, and drive it from a distance, when he might have it at
his door. This practice would also be attended with the farther advantage of
enabling him to know exactly, what quantity of real lime he applied to his
ground, as he would not be in danger of considering the sand as a part of it.

11.
Those who have access to only one sort of limestone, must be contented with
it, whatever may be its quality. But such as have an opportunity of choosing,
may be benefitted by the following observations:

Pure limestone, when fully calcined and slaked, is reduced to a fine
impalpable powder, that feels soft between the singers, without the smallest
tendency to grittiness Such lime as contains sand, is never so fine nor so
soft, but feels gritty between the fingers, and is more or less so as the sand
is coarser or finer, or in greater or smaller proportions.

The lime from pure limestone, is always of a bright white, when perfectly
calcined, without a tendency to any color. When it has any color, it proceeds
from the sand, or other uncalcareous matters in its composition. There are,
however, some sorts of sand, that are of such a pure whiteness, as not to
debase the color of the lime in the smallest degree; but these are rare: --
And there are some matters that alter the color of the lime a good deal,
without debasing its quality in any considerable degree; but these are still
more rare than the former.

Hence it follows, that the best lime for the purpose of the farmer, is that
which is lightest, softest to the touch, Softness to the touch is not an
unequivocal proof of the purity of lime. I have seen one kind of lime, that
contained a large proportion of an uncalcareous impalpable powder, that was as
soft to the touch as the purest lime; but this was a singular exception to a
rule that is very general.
and whitest. The more they deviate from either of these tests of purity, the
worse they are for him.

12.
That the farmer may have under his eye, at one time, the several criteria of
the purity of lime, that have been enumerated in different places of this
Essay; I choose to mention them here all at once. If he is attentive to mark
these peculiarities, he needs be very little solicitous about examining the
qualities of his lime, by any more minute or troublesome trails. They are as
under:

If the limestone loses much of its weight in calcination, and the lime-shells
are extremely light; if the shells require a very large proportion of water to
slake them fully; if it is long before they begin to fall; if the limestone is
not apt to run (or be vitrified) in the operation of burning; if it falls
entirely when it gets a sufficient quantity of water, after it has been
properly calcined; if it swells very much in slaking, and if the lime is light,
fine to the touch, and of a pure white; he may be satisfied, that it is
extremely good, and may use it in preference to any other lime that is inferior
to it in any of these respects.

These rules are perfectly sufficient to decide as to the comparative value of
any two kinds of lime that may be opposed to one another and may be relied upon
as sufficiently accurate for the ordinary purposes of the farmers.

13.
But such as may discover a new quarry of lime stone, and who wish to ascertain
with certainly its real value, before they put themselves to any expense about
it, will do well to employ the following more accurate, and in that case, more
easy analysis.

As all calcareous matters are capable of being dissolved in acids -- and as no
other earthy matter can be dissolved in them -- it follows, that if a
sufficient quantity of acid is poured upon any body that contains calcareous
matter, this matter will be quickly dissolved, while the others are left
behind; and the proportions of each may be accurately ascertained.

To try the exact value of any kind of limestone, or other calcareous matter,
-- take a quantity of aquafortis, Nitrous acid.
or spirit of salt; Muriatic acid.
and having prepared them as in the margin, All the mineral acids effervesce
and unite with calcareous earths. But as the vitriolic acid (spirit or oil of
^^^riol) does not dissolve the calcareous matter, but forms a new concrete,
that still retains its solid state, it is not fit for this experiment.

And as it sometimes happens, that a little vitriolic acid is mixed with either
the nitrous or muriatic acids, it becomes necessary to be certain that this is
not the case, before they are employed in this experiment.

The easiest way of trying if these acids are free from the vitriolic, is to
put a little chalk into them before you employ them. If the acid is pure, the
chalk will dissolve very readily; but if not, some part of the chalk will fall
to the bottom, in the form of a pure white sediment. When this is the case, add
small bits of chalk, by little and little, till no more of that white sediment
appears; after which, the acid may be kept for use, as sufficiently pure.

If the nitrous acid is so strong as to have a slight brown, or reddish
appearance, it ought to be diluted with water, till it assumes a greenish look.
As it is bought in the shops, for the use of dyers, etc. it is usually weak
enough.

If the muriatic acid is so strong as to have a bright yellow color, or emits
fumes when the bottle is opened, it ought to be diluted, by adding water, till
it assumes almost a colorless transparency, with a very faint tinge of yellow.

When they are thus prepared, either of these acids may be used
indiscriminately for this experiment, as they are equally proper.


put them into a glass or earthen vessel; -- add to that, by little and little,
a known a quantity of the matter you mean to examine, which had been previously
dried, and reduced to power. After each addition, suffer the violent
effervescence or ebullition that will ensue to abate before more is added. When
the whole of the powder is put to the acid, and the effervescence entirely
subsided, stir it about several times with a piece of tobacco-pipe, and allow
it to remain for some time, that the acid may act upon every par^^^^ of the
matter, and thoroughly dissolve it. And to be certain that there has not been
too little acid, put a few drops of fresh acid to the solution, which will
excite a fresh effervescence if the whole is not fully dissolved. When no
change is produced by this addition, it is a certain proof that the whole of
the calcareous matter is already dissolved.

Take then a piece of filtering paper, thoroughly dry, the weight of which is
also known, fold it properly, and put it in a glass funnel; pour the whole of
the solution, with the matter that may have subsided, into the funnel, and
allow it to filtre through the paper slowly. When the fluid part has thus
drained off, fill up the filtre again with pure water, to wash off the whole of
the saline parts from the residuum. The matter that remains undissolved.
Add water, in this manner, till it comes off without any saline taste; suffer
it then to drop off entirely, dry it thoroughly, and weigh the paper, with its
contents. The difference between which, and what the powder and paper were at
the beginning, is the whole weight of the calcareous matter; so that its
proportion to the whole mass is perfectly ascertained.

In this manner I have examined a great many different kinds of limestone, and
have found them vary in all degrees of purity, from such as were entirely
soluble in acids, as sugar or salt is in water, to others that contained only
one-twelfth of their weight of soluble matter, and eleven-twelfths of sand. The
ordinary kinds of limestone contain from one-third to twothirds of their
weight of sand. Hard chalk is usually a pure calcareous earth, soluble in
acids; and some sorts of limestone may be met with that are equally pure, but
these are rare. The only extensive lime quarries of such pure limestone, that
I have met with, are at Sunderland, in the county of Durham, where there are
several quarries of exceedingly fine limestone, the best of which belonged, in
the year 1777, to Mr. James Galley of that place. There are some quarries
farther up the river WEAR, the stone of which is of a much inferior quality.

Were all the stones in the same quarry equally pure, the above would be a
perfect and unexceptionable method of ascertaining the purity of any
limestone: But it often happens, that in a quarry of the very worst quality,
there are some pieces found that consist of pure spar, that are entirely free
of any mixture of sand; and in other quarries of a better sort, there are often
small veins of an impure sort of stone, mixed through the rock; so that if
either of these should chance to be picked out as a specimen for trial, the
result would not be just.

To avoid falling into this mistake, any one who wishes to make an accurate
analysis of any newly discovered limestone, will do well to take eight or ten
stones from different parts of the quarry, that are somewhat different in
appearance from one another; and, having taken a chip from each, pound the
whole together, to afford a proper subject for the experiment.

The same experiment might be tried with lime; but it is evident the
proportions would be different in the same stone, from what they would be if
tried before calcination -- as lime wants its fixed air, etc. which it had when
in the state of limestone. But as the lime is more liable to be varied by
accidental circumstances, it is best to try the experiment with limestone.

14.
It is in general believed, that the lime made of the hardest limestone is
stronger, as it is called, by which is meant more powerfully efficacious as a
manure, than that which is made from materials of a softer nature. Hence it is
in general asserted, that lime made from chalk, is much weaker, as a manure,
than that which is made from harder limestone.

Nothing, however, can be more erroneous than this hypothesis. In the former
part of this Essay, I have had occasion to explain pretty fully what is the
real difference between chalk and limestone; and nothing can be more certain,
than that the lime made of chalk is purer than that made from almost any
limestone, and contains a much larger proportion of calcareous matter; on
which account, it must be more efficacious as a manure, than any of these more
impure kinds of lime.

The hardest limestone that I know, is that belonging to Mr. Galley, at
Sunderland. Its external appearance rather resembles flint than limestone; yet
the lime made of this exceedingly hard stone, is as light, as white, and as
soft to the touch, as the purest chalk-lime. It differs not from that in any
respect, insomuch that I defy the greatest connoisseur in these matters to
distinguish between it and the purest chalklime, when perfectly calcined, by
any other means than by the pieces of flint that are so often met with among
chalk-lime.

And from this lime, obtained from these very hard stones, as perfect chalk may
be artificially made by the simple process described 24, as was ever obtained
from any quarry in England.

From these considerations, therefore, I am obliged to conclude, contrary to
the common opinion, that chalk-lime is, almost in all cases, more efficacious
as a manure, than any lime obtained from limestone, in equal quantities; as it
is extremely rare to meet with a limestone that contains near such a large
proportion of calcareous matter; on which account it ought always to be
preferred by the farmer, where both can be had at the same price.

15.
We know little certain about the mode in which lime operates, excepting that
it acts merely in consequence of its being mixed with the soil in substance. If
a heap of lime, of a considerable thickness, shall have lain ever so long upon
one spot, and be afterward carried clean away from it, so that none of the
particles of the lime remain to be mixed with the soil, -- that spot will not
be richer, or carry more luxuriant crops, than the places around it; which,
every one knows, is not the case with regard to dung.

Again -- If lime be spread upon the surface of the soil, and allowed to remain
there, without being ploughed in, its effects will scarcely be perceived for
several years, till it has had time gradually to sink through the sward, and
mix with the soil; after which, its effects begin to be perceived, although
much less sensibly than if the same quantity of lime had been intimately mixed
with the soil by means of the plough and harrow.

I am not a stranger to the improvements that have been made in Derbyshire, by
means of lime, without the plough; but this is no exception to what I have
said. The effects are slow though certain. Those who inhabit countries that
admit of the plough, are often advised to lay lime upon the grass, and are made
to believe that their pasture will be instantly mended by it, nearly in the
same perceptible manner as if it had been dunged. This, I myself have tried,
and have seen it tried by others, but always found that the grass for the first
year was rather hurt than benefitted by it; nor was it so much improved in
succeeding years, as if the same quantity of lime had been applied, and
intimately mixed with the soil. In this mode of applying lime, therefore, it is
long before it yields a proper return; and is not to be recommended to a poor
man, unless where necessity obliges him to practice it.

16.
If, then, lime acts upon the soil more efficaciously in consequence of being
intimately mixed with it, we may naturally conclude, that it will produce a
more sensible effect, when it is reduced to exceedingly small particles, than
when it is applied to the soil in larger lumps; as these do not admit of being
so intimately mixed with the particles of the soil.

But no method has ever yet been discovered for reducing calcareous matter to
such small component parts, or of spreading it so evenly over a field, or of
mixing it so intimately with the soil, as by calcination. Accordingly, it is
found, that lime will produce a very sensible effect upon the soil, when
applied in much smaller quantities, than any other calcareous matter whatever.

Considered in this view, it can never be expected that limestone, reduced to
powder by any kind of mechanical triture, will produce, such a sensible effect
upon the soil, as the same quantity of calcareous matter in the state of lime,
if properly applied; because it is impossible, by mechanical means, ever to
reduce it to such a fine powder as it naturally falls into after calcination.

17.
Much, however, depends upon the mode of applying the lime to the soil, after
calcination. If it is spread as soon as it is slaked, while yet in a powdery
state, a very small quantity may be made to cover the whole surface of the
ground, and to touch an exceedingly great number of particles of earth. But if
it is suffered to lie for some time after slaking, and to get so much moisture
as to make it run into clods, or cake into large lumps, it can never be again
divided into such small parts; and, therefore, a much greater quantity is
necessary to produce the same effect, than if it had been applied in its
powdery state.

But if the soil is afterward to be continued long in tillage -- as these
clods are annually broken smaller by the action of the plough and harrows, the
lime must continue to exert its influence anew upon the soil for a great course
of years: -- it will produce an effect nearly similar to that which would be
experienced by annually strewing a small quantity of powdered lime over the
surface of the soil. But as the price of the lime must, in the first case, he
paid by the farmer altogether, at the beginning, which only comes to be
successively demanded in the other case, this deserves to be attended to, as it
may become a consideration of some importance where lime is dear, and money not
very plentiful.

18.
In few particulars are practical farmers more divided in opinion, than about
the quantity of lime that may be laid upon an acre of ground with profit, or
even with safety. Some require that it should be applied in such small
quantities, as thirty or forty bushels to the acre; and aver, that if more is
used, the ground will be absolutely ruined: while others maintain, that ten
times that quantity may be applied with safety.

A great variation may, no doubt, be produced in this respect, by a difference
in the nature of the soil, -- in the state of culture it is under at the time,
-- in the quantity of calcareous matter with which it may have been formerly
impregnated; -- and perhaps a variation may sometimes arise from other
circumstances that have never yet been attended to.

A difference will likewise arise from the quality of the lime that is applied,
and from the manner in which it is employed. Some kinds of lime contain,
perhaps, ten times more calcareous matter than other kinds: -- And it has been
shown above, that a very great difference may arise from the mode of applying
the lime.

Considering all these circumstances, it would appear a little presumptuous in
any one to prescribe positive rules that should be generally adopted in this
respect. This I shall not attempt -- but shall relate, with candor, such
observations as have occurred to myself, in the course of a pretty extensive
experience of this manure.

19.
It is common to hear those, who have had little experience of lime as a
manure, recommend very great caution, lest too great a quantity be employed,
for fear of burning the soil, as they express it. This idea of burning has been
evidently adopted, from what is experienced by applying caustic lime to animals
or vegetables, in large quantities, as it often corrodes and shrivels them up,
and produces other effects which greatly resemble those of fire: But it cannot
produce any such effects, unless there are vegetables growing upon the soil at
the time. In that case, the vegetables might, indeed, be corroded by the lime,
if rain should fall immediately after it was spread, when newly slaked; -- but
as it loses this fiery corrosive power in a few days after it is spread,
nothing of that kind can be expected to happen to the soil. Accordingly, we
never hear of crops being burnt up with too great a quantity of lime, in those
countries where it has long been used as a common manure -- although it is
there often employed in much larger quantities than in any other places where
it is more rare.

I myself have had the experience of lime in all proportions, from one hundred
to above seven hundred bushels to the acre, upon a great variety of soils; and
have always found, that its effect in promoting the fertility of the soil, has
been in proportion to the quantity employed, other circumstances being alike.

The expense in most cases prevents farmers from employing this manure in
greater quantities than those above mentioned; but accidental circumstances
clearly show, that if it were applied in much larger quantities, the effect
would only be to promote the luxuriance of the crop in a higher degree.

20.
A gentleman of my acquaintance, in whose veracity I perfectly confide,
happening to be from home when a large field was limed; and having no occasion
for the whole quantity of lime that had been brought for that purpose, and laid
down in one corner of the field, his servants, without driving it away, mixed
what remained with the soil, although the lime lay there about four inches
thick over the whole surface. The effect was, that for many years afterward,
the grain in that place was so immoderately luxuriant, that it fell over, and
rotted before it came to the ear. After many years, this luxuriance abated a
little, so as to allow the grain to ripen; -- but it was there always much more
luxuriant than in any other part of the field.

An accidental experiment, nearly similar to this, fell under my own
observation. It happened that the servants of another farmer laid, by mistake,
a few heaps of lime upon a grass field that he did not intend should be broken
up at the time. The mistake was soon discovered, and no more lime was laid down
at that place, and the few heaps (about a bushel in each) were allowed to lie,
neglected, without being spread. The field was pastured upon for seven or eight
years after that, before it was converted into tillage; and the heaps were by
that time become so flat, and so far sunk into the ground, that they could
hardly be discovered.

Before it was ploughed up, the whole of the field was limed, and this part of
it equally so with the rest; nor were the old heaps touched till the plough
went through them in tilling the field, when the lime was there turned up, with
only a very small mixture of soil. The consequence was, that at every one of
these heaps, a tuft of corn sprung up with such luxuriance as to be entirely
rotted before harvest; -- and for many years afterward, these tufts could be
distinguished from the other parts of the field, at a very great distance, like
so many buttons on a coat; -- and, perhaps, continue so to this day.

From these experiments, as well as other considerations that will afterward
occur, -- there seems to be reason to conclude, that on soils which do not
naturally abound with chalk, or other calcareous matter, there is less danger
in giving too much lime, than in applying too little; except in those cases
where an overluxuriance is dreaded.

21.
I have often heard it urged, as an objection to the use of lime as a manure,
that although it does indeed promote the fertility of a soil, in a higher
degree at first, yet, in the end, it renders it much more steril than formerly;
on which account, they say, it ought not to be at all employed.

This, like many other objections to useful practices, takes its rise entirely
from the avarice and unskilfulness of those who complain. It is chiefly heard
of in those parts of the country where it is not uncommon for a farmer, after
once liming a poor soil, to take fifteen or sixteen crops of oats successively,
without any other dressing or alternation of crops. It must be a good manure
that enables these soils to produce such a number of successive scourging crops
of any sort: But it would be a mavelous one, indeed, if it should prevent
those fields from being exhausted by them.

But, is it not well known, that in all the richest and best improved parts of
the country, lime has been long employed as a manure? Yet, so far are these
soils from being rendered steril by it, that it is doubtful if any art, without
the assistance of lime, or some calcareous matter, could ever have brought
these fields to their present degree of fertility. Those, therefore, who
complain of the hurtful effects of lime as a manure, proclaim what they ought
to conceal, -- that they have had in their possession a treasure, which might
have enriched their posterity, but which they have idly squandered away in
their own lifetime.

22.
We are not only unacquainted with the mode in which lime operates upon the
soil, but we are even, in a great measure, ignorant of the actual changes that
are produced upon the earth, after this manure is applied. So much time is
necessary to discover these, -- and such accuracy of observation is required,
that it will, perhaps, be long before the whole shall be fully ascertained. I
shall mention a few that have occurred to myself.

It is often asked, how long the effects of lime may be perceived on the soil?
and, if by this question it be meant to ascertain the length of time that the
effects of lime will be perceptible in promoting the luxuriance of the crop
after one manuring, it is no wonder that very different answers should be
given, as the effects must vary with the quantity or quality of the lime
employed; the nature of the crops that follow, and many other circumstances,
that it would be impossible here to enumerate.

But if it be viewed in another light; if lime be supposed to alter the soil,
so as to render it susceptible of being affected by other manures in a more
sensible degree, so as to make it capable of producing crops, that no art could
otherwise have effected, and to admit of being improved by modes of culture
that would not otherwise have produced any sensible benefit; the answer to the
question would be more easy, as, in this light, it is pretty plain, that its
effects will be felt, perhaps, as long as the soil exists.

I believe, farmers are seldom accustomed to consider lime, or other calcareous
manures, in this last point of view; although, when it comes to be inquired
into, I doubt not but this will be found to be by far the most valuable effect
of these manures. A few facts will best illustrate my meaning:

In Derbyshire, the farmers have found, that by spreading lime in considerable
quantities upon the surface or their heathy moots, after a few years, the heath
disappears, and the whole surface becomes covered with a fine pile of grass,
consisting of white clover, and the other valuable sorts of pasture-grasses.
This shows, that lime renders the soil unfriendly to the growth of heath, and
friendly to that of clover.

It is found by experience, that in all porous soils, which are not exposed to
too much dampness, in every part of Scotland, where lime ha^ not been employed,
heath has a natural, and almost irresistible propensity to establish itself. In
those parts of the country where lime has been much used as a manure, we find,
that the fields may be allowed to remain long in grass, without being covered
with that noxious plant.

Again: -- It is well known by those who have been attentive, and have had
opportunities of observing the fact, that peace, of any sort, can never be
successfully cultivated in any part of the country, where the soil is not of a
very strong clayey nature, or where lime or other calcareous manures have never
been employed. If the ground be made as rich as possible with common dung,
although the peace, in that case, will vegetate, and grow for some time with
vigor; yet, before they begin to ripen, they become blighted; usually die away
entirely before the pod is formed, and but rarely produce a few half-formed
peace.

But if the ground has ever been limed, although, perhaps, at the distance of
thousands of years before that period, it never loses its power of producing
good crops of peace, if it is put in a proper tilth for carrying them at that
time.

Again: -- In countries that have never been limed, the kinds of grass that
spontaneously appear, if left to themselves, are the small bent-grass and
feather-grass. In places where lime has ever been used, the ground, if
exhausted, produces fewer plants of these grasses; but in their stead, white
clover, the poa and fescue grasses, chiefly abound.

The soil, in either of these cases, may become equally poor; -- that is, may
produce equally scanty crops: But, the means of recovering them will be
somewhat different. In the last case, a fallow seldom fails to prove
beneficial. In the first, it is often of no effect, sometimes, even hurtful. In
the last, a moderate dressing of dung, produces a much more sensible and
lasting effect, than in the other. In the last, the quality of the grass, as
well as its quantity, rather improves by age. In the first, these circumstances
are reversed.

I might mention several other observations, tending to show that ground, which
has been once impregnated with calcareous matter, acquires qualities from that
moment which it did not possess before, which it ever afterward retains, and
never returns exactly to its former state. But, I have said enough to suggest
this idea: -- future observations will show how justly it is founded.

23.
Although lime has such powerful effects on the soil, it does not seem ever to
incorporate with the mould, so as to form one homegeneous mass; but the lime
remains always in detached particles, which are larger or smaller, in
proportion as it has been more or less perfectly divided when it was spread, or
broken down by the subsequent mechanical operations the soil may have been made
to undergo.

Hence it happens, that in ploughing, if there chance to be any lumps of
calcareous matter in a dry state, upon the surface, they naturally tumble into
the bottom of the open furrow, as soon as the earth is edged up upon the
mould-board, so as to fall into the lowest place that has been made by the
plough before the furrow is fairly turned over.

In consequence of this circumstance, it must happen, that, in the course of
many repeated ploughings, more of the lime will be accumulated at the bottom of
the soil, than in any other part of it. And as the plough sometimes goes a
little deeper than ordinary, the lime, that on these occasions chances to be
deposited in the bottom of these furrows will be below the ordinary staple of
the soil, it will be useless for the purposes of the farmer. It is commonly
thought, that the lime has sunk through the soil by its own gravity; --
although it is certain, that lime is specifically lighter than any soil, and
can only be accumulated at the bottom of the mould by the means above
described; others think, that the lime is chemically dissolved, and afterward
deposited there; but this idea is not corroborated by the facts that have
fallen under my observation. The directions that follow are equally applicable
in either case.

To obviate this inconvenience, it behooves the farmer, in the first place, to
be extremely attentive to have his lime divided into as small particles as
possible at the time of spreading: For, if these are sufficiently small, they
incorporate so intimately with the mould, as to be incapable of being easily
detached from it. On this account, as well as others, it is always most
advisable to spread the lime when in its dry powdery state, immediately after
slaking, before it has had time to run into lumps.

It is also of importance to plough the soil with a more shallow furrow than
usual, when lime is put upon it; especially the first time it is ploughed after
the lime has been spread upon its surface: Because, at that ploughing, the lime
being all on the surface, a larger proportion of it is turned into the bottom
of the last-made furrow, than at any succeeding ploughing; and therefore more
of it will be buried beneath the staple than at any other time, if the furrow
shall have been very deep.

This circumstance becomes more essentially necessary in ploughing grass-ground
that has been newly limed; because, in this case, the lime is less capable of
being mixed with any part of the soil than in any other.

It also becomes extremely necessary, in all succeeding times, to guard as much
as possible against ploughing to unequal depths.

I have hitherto spoken only of lime as a manure; but most of these
observation, it will appear, may be equally applied to other calcareous
matters. That the comparative value of these, and the real difference between
them, when compared separately with lime, as well as with one another, may be
fully understood, it will be necessary to consider each class of these
substances separately, and point our with precision its peculiar distinctive
qualities.

24.
OF CHALK.
All the writers on agriculture whom I have ever yet met with, have considered
the several classes of calcareous substances as distinct kinds of manures, and
as possessing qualities extremely different from one another on many occasions.
And hence it happens, that sometimes one of these, which chances to have become
the favorite of the author, and sometimes another, is highly recommended,
while the others are despised as useless, or reprobated as pernicious.

In this manner, a very late Writer, The Author of the Complete English Farmer.
with whom chalk is a peculiar favorite, says, 'I will lay it down as a
certain and incontrovertible maxim, that chalk fresh from the pit, laid on and
managed as before directed, in the proper season, will enrich every sort of
earth it is laid upon; and that lime, on the contrary, laid on at whatever
time, or managed in whatever manner, will, after the first or second year,
impoverish every soil it mixes with.

It would be no difficult matter to produce other authors, who, in a like
decisive manner, reprobate the use of chalk, while they enlarge, without
bounds, on the qualities of lime; and others who prefer marle of different
sorts, or some of the other classes of calcareous earths, as the most valuable
of all manures, while they condemn the others beyond all bounds of moderation.

The truth, however, is, that although these authors may be right in
recommending their own favorite manures, the beneficial effects of which they
may have often experienced; as they usually condemn the others merely from
early prejudices, or imperfect trials of them, which have not succeeded, their
decisions ought only to be considered as a proof of their being unacquainted
with the real qualities of the matters they condemn, and of that presumptuous
weakness which is ever the attendant of ignorance.

Nothing can afford a stronger proof, that the author above mentioned was
totally unacquainted, either in theory or practice, with the real difference
between chalk and lime, than the positive distinction he has made between these
two substance as a manure. The Reader ought to be informed, that the lime he
condemns, is lime made from the very chalk he so much approves of.


25.
It has been demonstrated in the preceding part of this Essay, that lime
differs not in any of its qualities from chalk, except that it is deprived of
its fixed ai^^; which can have no effect on it as a manure, because (...) again
absorbs that fixed air before it has been a few days applied to the soil. After
this period, therefore, what was originally lime, is now chalk, and must have
the same effects upon the soil in every respect, as art equal quantity of
chalk, equally spread upon it, would have had.

It is easy, however, for those who attend to the practice of this Gentleman,
to account for he partiality to chalk. The quantity of chalk he recommends, is
twenty-five loads per acre; which, I suppose, may be about twelve hundred
bushels. A load, I understand, to be a waggon-load -- which, I suppose, may
contain between five and six quarters,
He advises only ten or fifteen bushels of lime. Is it surprising that the
effects of these two dressings should be extremely different?

He ventured once to give a field of clay a dressing of sixty bushels of lime;
after which he took, 1. wheat, produce 16 bushels, 2. oats, 4 quarters, 3.
barley, 5 bushels, 4. clover, worth nothing.

Hence, says he, the lime has ruined my soil.

The soil was acknowledged to be poor -- Instead of sixty, it is doubtful if
six hundred bushels would have been sufficient to make it produce good crops,
under a management so execrable in other respects.

But -- to leave off these ungracious strictures, I now proceed --

26.
CHALK, as has been often said in the course of this Essay, is a pure
calcareous earth, hastily concreted. Sometimes it is mixed with a small
proportion of argillaceous Clayey,
matter, in which state it approaches to the nature of marle. In either the one
or the other of these states, it is employed as a manure in the countries where
it abounds.

Chalk differs not from lime in any particular that can affect the farmer,
unless it be that lime, by being in the state of a fine powder, admits of being
more equally spread upon the ground, and more intimately mixed with the soil,
than chalk; -- from whence it follows, that a much smaller quantity of lime may
be employed successfully as a dressing for ground, than could possibly be the
case with chalk.

In order, therefore, to make chalk produce the greatest possible effect upon
the soil, it becomes necessary to reduce it into as small pieces as can be
done; so that it ought to be an object of great importance to those farmers who
have an opportunity of employing this substance, to discover what is the
easiest and least expensive method of reducing it, as soon as possible after it
is spread upon the soil, into very small portions.

Chalk is such a porous substance, that when in its native bed, after long and
continued rains, it is found to have imbibed a great deal of moisture, by which
it assumes a softish feel to the touch.

But if chalk be dug out of the pit and dried slowly and perfectly by the heat
of a summer's sun, its pores become in some degree contracted; -- it resists,
in a great measure; the fresh admission of water, and acquires a much greater
degree of hardness, than when it was originally dug from the quarry.

On the contrary, if it be taken from the pit during the wet weather in winter,
and exposed to the rains that usually fall at that season, it has never time to
dry -- its pores remain quite full of water; and when the frost comes on, that
water in the act of freezing, being greatly expanded, bursts it forcibly
asunder, and makes it crumble down into a slimy kind of powder: And as the
pieces that may remain undecomposed, continue to absorb more as the rains fall
from the heavens, the frosts that may succeed occasion a new dissolution; -- so
that by these alternate rains and frosts, the whole is in time totally divided,
so as to admit of being pretty evenly spread, and mixed with the soil.

For these reasons, it is always expedient to dig the chalk in the beginning of
winter, and to spread it immediately upon the field as well as can be done, so
as to expose it to the vicissitudes of the winter weather, before it has had
time to harden after being taken from the pit.

27.
As the chalk ought always to be carried to the field while yet wet, it, in a
great measure, prevents those who may be at a distance from the place where it
is found, from being benefitted by this manure; because the carriage of it
would in these circumstances be extremely burdensome.

To obviate this inconvenience, it becomes a very economical practice, to
reduce it to the state of lime before it is carried home: For, in this way, the
weight is not only much diminished by the dissipation of all the moisture from
the chalk, but it can also be carried home in summer, when the weather and
roads are at the best; and a much smaller quantity will produce an equal
effect, than when it is in the state of chalk.

Those, therefore, who have no other calcareous manure within reach of them but
chalk, when that is at a considerable distance, ought always to drive it in the
state of lime. But those who are close by the pit, will, in general, find it
more economical to employ it in the state of chalk.

28.
Chalk so much abounds in the southern parts of Britain, that ships sometimes
bring it as a ballast to the north; on which occasions, it may be purchased at
a moderate price by the farmer. But although it contains perhaps nearly an
equal quantity of calcareous matter as the same bulk of some very pure kinds of
lime, yet it will not be good economy in him to purchase it at the same price
with the lime, as at least three or four times more chalk than lime will need
to be applied to his soil, before it produces an equal effect: For, as it is
impossible to get that hard dry chalk reduced to small enough parts, a great
quantity must be applied before it can produce any sensible effect; and
although the effects of this manure may be lasting, yet it is never any thing
near equal to lime, if applied in equal quantities.

Another calcareous matter, of great utility as a manure, is marle -- The
distinctive properties of which fall now to be considered.

29.
OF MARLE.
Few substances appear under a greater diversity of forms, than marle. Hence it
is usual for writers on agriculture, to enumerate, as distinct manures, the
several varieties of this general class of bodies. But as all the different
kinds of marle that have hitherto been discovered, may be reduced to two
general classes, viz. earthy marles, which are always found in festal strata
under the earth, and shell marle, which always retains evident marks of its
animal origin. I shall consider each of these separately, as distinct
substances.

30.
Of Earthy or Fossil Marle.
The varieties of this class of bodies are distinguished by names suggested by
the appearance they assume when fresh dug from their native beds. When they are
soft, and of an uniform texture, they are called clay marles; when firm and
hard, stone marles; when these assume a thin foliacious appearance, they are
denominated slate marles, and so on.

But whatever appearance they assume when fresh dug, or by whatever name they
are known, they all agree in this, that if they be exposed for a sufficient
time to the action of the air, they crumble into smaller parts, and fertilize
the earth to which they have been properly applied.

The ingenious Dr. Ainslie has demonstrated, by an accurate set of experiments
recorded in the Physical and Literary Essays, in the third vol. of my
Agricultural Essays, That all the varieties of this class of bodies contain a
considerable proportion of clay; united with calcareous matter; whereas
limestone, if it does not consist of pure calcareous matter, is usually united
with sand in various proportions.

The calcareous matter in marle, does not differ in any respect from that in
limestone, and its proportions in many cases is the same in marle as in
limestone; -- so that the difference between the appearance and qualities of
these two substances, arises entirely from the nature of the heterogeneous
bodies mixed with the calcareous matters.

When marle is exposed to the air, the clay, in its composition, absorbs the
moisture that falls from the clouds -- swells with it -- becomes soft -- and,
gradually losing its cohesion, crumbles to pieces. If limestone is exposed to
the air, the sand in its composition is not in the least affected by moisture,
and it retains its original figure and dimensions for a great length of lime.

When sand is mixed with the clay that enters into the composition of marle, it
assumes a stony-like appearance, and is more or less firm, according to the
quantity of sand, or other circumstances. But where there is clay at all in the
composition, it will be gradually softened by water acting upon it; and it is
owing to this circumstance alone, that stone-marles fall in time to pieces when
exposed to the air.

But if marle be exposed to the action of a moderate fire, the clay in its
composition, becomes hard -- it is no longer capable of absorbing water, or of
being affected by it in any degree; so that the marle, if not of a very pure
sort, or such as contains only a very small proportion of clay mixed with the
sand in its composition, will become firmer after burning than it was before,
and be in this state with more difficulty reduced to powder, which is the
reverse of what happens with limestone.

Marle, therefore, is fit to act as a manure, without any other preparation
than digging it from the pit, and spreading it upon the ground; whereas
limestone always requires to be reduced to a powder, either by burning or
otherwise, before it can be of any use in that way.

But as limestone is at once reduced into much smaller parts by calcination
than marle ever can be brought to at first, a much smaller proportion of lime
may be equally spread over an acre of ground, than of marle; and therefore it
will produce, in equal quantities, a much more sensible effect.

31.
The discerning reader, who attends to these circumstances, will easily
perceive the reasons for all the peculiarities of practice that prevail with
regard to the application of lime and marle, and be able, without
embarrassment, to judge in what cases it may be most for his profit to employ
the one or the other of these manures, when they are both within his power.

He may ascertain the proportion of calcareous matter contained in the marle,
by the same process already described for trying lime stone, page 72, and thus
compare the intrinsic value of the lime and marle in any case. For this is
always in proportion to the calcareous matter contained in either.

He will easily perceive, however, that the same quantity of calcareous matter
in the state of lime, will produce a much greater effect than when it is in the
state of marle; because it is divided into infinitely smaller particles, can be
more equally spread upon the ground, and more intimately mixed with the soil.

Hence it universally happens, that a much larger quantity of marle is applied
at one dressing, than of lime. From one to two hundred cart-loads of marle is a
common dressing to an acre, that is, from three thousand to six thousand
bushels; whereas, from thirty to three hundred bushels of lime is a common
dressing for an acre of ground.

In these proportions, it is reasonable to think that the effects of the marle
will continue to be longer felt than those of the lime: For, as the marle is
gradually broken into smaller pieces every year, these will successively mix
with the soil, and produce an effect nearly similar to what might be expected
from an annual dressing of lime.

It may likewise be expected, that a full dressing of marle, in the proportions
above named, will produce a more capital improvement upon light spungy grounds,
than an ordinary dressing of lime; -- because, independent of the calcareous
matter, the large proportion of clay applied in this manner, may produce some
alteration on the quality of the soil. This alteration, however, will be
different, according to the nature of the extraneous matter contained in the
marle.

But as all marles contain clay, it is natural to think that clay lands will
not be benefitted at all by this circumstance, as in these cases the calcareous
matter alone in the marle will be to such soils an useful addition. Hence light
land will be in general more highly benefitted by this manure than clay land,
which has given rise to the following vulgar rhyme: He that marles sand,
Will (...) ^ay land;
But he that marles clay,
Throws all away.


The truth, however, is, that clay is as highly benefitted by the calcareous
matter in marle, as sand is; so that a rich marle will be nearly equally
beneficial in both cases. But there are some kinds of clays that are very free
from any mixture of sand, and assume the appearance of marle; and are so
called, although they hardly contain almost any calcareous matter at all. These
may perhaps, on some occasions, be an useful addition to light soils, and worth
the expense of carrying to them when near, but could scarcely be of any use at
all upon clayey soils. It has probably been some poor kind of marle of this
sort that has given rise to the proverb above quoted.

32.
I shall not pretend to prescribe positive rules for determining when the one
or the other of these substances, lime or marle, ought to be preferred as a
manure; as a decision in favor of the one or the other must, in a great
measure, depend upon the situation of the place where they can be both
obtained; the purity of either of them respectively; the price at which they
may be purchased, and the expense of carriage: all these circumstances may be
best ascertained by every individual for himself.

But I may be allowed to observe, that it argues a great want of knowledge of
the real qualities of these substances, when a man prefers the one of these,
and condemns the other, in all cases. For it is merely a matter of calculation,
when the one, or when the other, may be most valuable to any particular person.

If the marle be tolerably rich, and can be obtained at little expense near the
field in the proportions usually employed, it will be, in general, more
advantageous to the possessor, who has a prospect of enjoying his farm for a
long time, to use marle in preference to lime.

But when it must be brought from a distance, lime, in all cases, will be
cheaper, and on that account better than marle.

If marle contains a great proportion of clay, it may be worth the expense of
driving to a light soil on some occasions, even where lime could be procured as
cheap: But, on all occasions, if the same quantity of calcareous matter in the
state of lime can be obtained at the same price, that will be a much more
beneficial manure for clayey soils than marle. Impure marle is indeed seldom
worth the expense of carting on a clayey soil.

Some readers will be much dissatisfied at reading this short account of the
nature of marle, and its operation as a manure. For as they have been
accustomed to look upon this manure as possessing some very singular qualities
peculiar to itself, and to think that it differed from lime in some very
essential respects, and would produce effects upon the soil nowise similar to
that which would be produced by lime in any case; they will feel a kind of
uneasiness at being obliged to strike this one off their list of distinct and
separate manures. But it is the business of true philosophy to eradicate that
spirit for mysterious credulity, which is so apt to lull the reasoning faculty
asleep, and make the mind rest satisfied with the contemplation of ideal
phantoms created by the fancy, instead of real objects of useful knowledge.

33.
Of Shell Marle.
Shell marle is always found in low places, that either are, or have been
covered with water. It is a whitish powder, that has been formed by the gradual
decomposition of shells, in the course of many ages. It is, therefore, a pure
calcareous matter, without any other mixture than the mud and other sediments,
that may have sunk to the bottom of the water, in ponds where it has been
formed.

As the proportion of sediment that may have mixed with the shells, may be very
different in different situations; this kind of marle, like all others, may be
more or less pure, and, of consequence, of greater of smaller value to the
farmer. Its purity may be determined by the mode prescribed, page 72, and its
value thus ascertained with precision.

It is usually a light, spungy substance, very slightly coherent; and contains
more calcareous matter in proportion to its weight, than the common sorts of
lime. And as it admits of being spread as equally as lime, it may in general be
carried with profit as far as lime.

But as it is more spungy than lime, perhaps a smaller quantity will fill the
measure; on which account, the prime cost of the same quantity of marle ought
to be a little below that of lime, to be equally profitable to the farmer.

Shell marle, however, cannot be carried so far with profit as shell lime of
the best sort; as this last, in that state, wants a great proportion of its
moisture, air, etc. which greatly diminishes its weight.

It is, nevertheless, a very great treasure to those who can discover it, as it
is almost in all cases of equal value with lime, produces the same effect upon
the soil, admits of being equally easily spread, and can for the most part be
obtained, upon the spot, at a much smaller expense.

But, in situations where fuel is scarce and dear, it is of much greater value
than the best limestone, and ought to be prized accordingly by every possessor
of ground: nor ought any one, in such a situation, to omit searching diligently
every place where there is the smallest probability of finding it.

34.
Of Shelly Sand.
On many parts of the seacoast, great beds of shells are to be found, which
have been broken into such small parts as to assume the appearance of sand.
This is a rich and valuable manure, that deserves to be highly prized by those
who are within reach of it; but, it is too often neglected and unobserved, as
this kind of sand has, on many occasions, very much the appearance of ordinary
sand.

This may readily be discovered, by pouring a little aquafortis, or any other
mineral acid, Many persons make this trial with vinegar, instead of the mineral
acids; but this ought never to be done, as it often happens, that vinegar makes
no sensible effervescence with calcareous substances. I would, therefore,
advise every country gentleman, to keep a phial of aquafortis, or muriatic
acid, always by him, for making trials of calcareous substances: the expense is
next to nothing; and I am pursuaded, from the want of it alone, many persons
have failed to make discoveries of calcareous matters that might have been of
high importance to themselves and families.
upon the sand you wish to examine. If it contains shells, an effervescence
will ensue; and the proportion of calcareous matter contained in any sort of
sand, may be ascertained by the same process already so often referred to, p.
72. Nor ought this trial ever to be omitted before the sand is employed as a
manure; because, a very small proportion of shells will make it effervesce
violently, so that the degree of effervescence is no proof of its purity, and
because the proportion of shells varies in all possible degrees.

If the shells are broken into very small fragments, and if the proportion of
sand be inconsiderable, it will be nearly as valuable as lime, and may be
driven to a great distance with profit. If the proportion of ordinary sand be
very great, the expense in using it will be greater, as the quantity must be
considerably increased.

But as it may, for the most part, be procured at little expense, those who are
possessed of it, are usually able to employ it in great quantities; in which
case, it will produce amazing effects, especially upon strong clay-land.

A much smaller quantity of calcareous matter in this state, will produce a
more sensible effect, than when it is in any sort of earthy marle; because it
admits of being more equally spread upon the ground, and more intimately mixed
with the soil. Those, therefore, who are upon the seacoast, ought to search
for it with care, as they will usually obtain an invaluable treasure when they
discover it.

This sort of sand is much more common on the east coast of Scotland, than is
usually imagined. All along the coast of Fife, especially about St. Andrew's,
the sand upon the shore is richly impregnated with shells; -- but, it has never
there been employed as a manure. On the north coast of Aberdeenshire, shelly
sand abounds, and has been of late employed as a manure, with the greatest
success, by a gentleman distinguished for his knowledge and public spirit in
that corner. It is likewise found in Banff-shire, where it has been applied
with the highest success. And all along the coast of Southerland and Caithness,
the sands upon the shore consist almost entirely of shells.

These are treasures which will enrich posterity, although they are at present,
in a great measure neglected. I mention them here, to induce my countrymen not
to neglect a treasure of such inestimable value. But on the west coasts of
Scotland, and among the islands, shelly-sand much more abounds, and its effects
as a manure, are much more generally known than on the cast coast, so that it
is there universally employed as the most efficacious manure with which they
are acquainted. Its effects upon some of their heathy mossy soils, appears to
be, in some cases, little short of enchantment.

The ingenious Mr. Craik, in Dumfrieshire, so well known for his judicious
improvements in the drill husbandry, has, I am told, employed this manure for a
longer time, and in greater quantities, than any other person in Scotland, and
has been highly benefitted by it. I wish to produce such a respectable
authority, with a view to induce others to follow his example.

35.
Mr. Arthur Young, in one of his Tours, mentions a bed of shells near
Colchester, in Essex, which the inhabitants distinguish by the name of Cragg,
and employ as a manure, with great success. From his account of this substance,
it would seem doubtful, whether it was a real calcareous matter or not: But he
only tried it with vinegar, an acid too weak to produce any sensible effect on
many sorts of calcareous matters, in certain circumstances. There is little
room to doubt, but that, with a mineral acid, the effervescence would have been
sufficiently violent.

36.
In some places, there are found large beds of oystershells, almost entire.
These are so large as to require to be broken into smaller fragments, before
they can be profitably employed as a manure. -- And as these may be easily
calcined, they ought always to be reduced to the state of lime before they are
used. Whoever finds a bed of these shells, finds a lime-quarry of the most
valuable sort, and ought to value it accordingly.

It may be sometimes necessary to burn shelly sand into lime; and this may, on
extraordinary emergencies, be practiced, although it is rather a troublesome
operation: For, as the incoherent sand always mixes with the fuel, and
extinguishes the fire when in its native state, it becomes necessary to reduce
it first to some degree of consistency. -- This may be effected by kneading the
sand with a little clay, and moulding it into the form of bricks; which, when
dried, will retain their form so long as to permit the fire to act upon the
shells, and burn them to lime, which may be afterward slaked and used. A
manufacture of this kind was for some time carried on at the Duke of
Bridgewater's great works, near Warrington, in Lancashire, as I am told, under
the direction of the ingenious Mr. Brindley.

In situations where limestone cannot possibly be had, and where the carriage
of lime would be extremely expensive, it may sometimes be advisable to burn
some of this shelly sand into lime, for the purpose of building; The small
quantity of clay that is introduced in this way, will not sensibly injure the
power of the lime as a cement; for, before the shells can be sufficiently
calcined, the clay will be burnt ^o such a degree, as to render it impervious
to moisture, like sand.
-- but if the lime is to be employed as a manure, it is a very idle and a
useless process: For, the burning, in this case, can only be of use in dividing
the calcareous matter into small parts, which has already been performed by
Nature, when the shells were reduced to the state of fine sand.

37.
Of Lime-Stone-Gravel.
This is a manure little known in Britain, although it is common in many parts
of Ireland. It is a hard sort of marle, that assumes the appearance of small
stones, or gravel, which, when spread upon the ground, and mixed with it,
gradually falls into smaller pieces, and fertilizes the soil in proportion as
it breaks down and mixes with it.

After what (...) already occurred, little needs be said as to the qualities or
mode of applying this manure. The reader will easily be able to perceive, that
if the pieces of which this gravel consists are large, and dissolve but slowly,
the quantity applied at one dressing ought to be great, and the effects will be
slow and lasting; -- and, if the gravel is small, it will require a smaller
quantity, will operate more quickly, and last for a shorter time, like all
other calcareous substances in the same circumstances.

These are all the varieties of calcareous matter that I have ever known to be
used as a manure. They are all extremely useful in proper circumstances --
perhaps equally so, if these circumstances are duly attended to. To assist the
farmer still farther, the following general Aphorisms relating to the
application of calcareous matters, as a manure, may be of use:

38.
APHORISM 1.
There seems to be only one kind of calcareous matter; and all the varieties of
calcareous substances that we meet with, are entirely occasioned by a diversity
in the nature of the extraneous bodies with which the calcareous matter is
united, or a difference in the form it may appear in at the time.

Considered as a manure, these extraneous matters may be more or less
beneficial, according to particular circumstances relating to the soil, etc. In
all the fossil calcareous concretions, clay or sand seem to be the only
extraneous matters worth attending to, neither of which can ever be of great
consequence as a manure, although they may be more or less proper for different
soils. In those calcareous substances that belong to the animal kingdom, the
fleshy parts of the animals may be sometimes united with the calcareous, which
will greatly promote their effects as a manure on every sort of soil whatever.
This does not, however, seem to be the case, either with shell-marle, or fine
shelly sand; as, in both these cases, the animals which once inhabited these
shells, have been so long dead that no part of the fleshy substance can remain.
But the recent shells obtained from fishing towns, operate much more powerfully
as an animal manure, than as a calcareous matter, when first applied.

It is not impossible but that man may in time fall upon some contrivance for
obtaining this animal calcareous manure in much greater abundance and
perfection than it has hitherto been obtained. There is a small species of
fresh water wi^^ -- which increases so fast, as, in a surprisingly short time,
to fill a considerable space with solid wilks, if a few of them have been
placed in a proper receptacle for that purpose, and water duly administered to
them. If then ponds were prepared for this purpose, and properly stocked with
this animal, and if they were allowed to increase till a bed of them, of
considerable thickness, was accumulated, might they not then be taken out in
abundance to be employed as a manure? These, if bruised under a stone like a
tanner's wheel, to reduce the shells to small fragments, would certainly form
as rich and efficacious a manure as could possibly be devised: nor could there
be any difficulty in disposing the ponds in such a manner as to afford a
constant annual supply.

It has probably been by a natural process similar to this, that all those beds
of shell-marle we now meet with, have been originally produced. This species of
marle is generally found to consist of the shells of this sort of small wilk,
more or less decomposed. The animals which inhabited these shells have been
once nourished by the water contained in those hollow places where this sort of
marle is always found, and have probably been entirely destroyed by some
accidental drought, which deprived them of the water necessary for their
existence, or to some other disastrous circumstance that it is impossible for
us now to point out; and the shells remaining behind, gradually mouldered down
to the state in which we now find them.

39.
APHORISM II.
The same quantity of calcareous matter, will, in all cases, operate equally
powerful on soils of a similar quality, when in a similar state. But these
effects may be accelerated or ret^^^ed, -- be more uniform or unequal,
according as the calcareous matter is more or less perfectly divided when it is
(...) applied to the soil.

If the calcareous matter be divided into very small Particles, so as to admit
of being equally spread over a very large surface, a small quantity of it will
produce a much more sensible effect, than if the same quantity of calcareous
matter had been applied in large lumps, which could, in that case, have
operated only upon a very few particles of the soil: -- Therefore, lime, sine
shelly sand, or shell marle, if equally pure, may be applied, with profit, in
much smaller quantities than any other class of calcareous manures.

Hence also it follows, that if equal quantities of calcareous matter are
employed as a manure, that kind which admits of being most minutely divided;
will produce the greatest effect at the beginning; because the separate
particles will be at liberty to act on a much greater number of particles of
the soil at once, than when it is less perfectly divided.

But if a sufficient quantity of calcareous matter has been applied, when in
pretty large masses, so as to cover the ground pretty equally; and if these
lumps continue to dissolve in the soil in all after-periods, the effect of this
dressing will be much longer perceived, than that of a dressing of calcareous
matter in fine powder, that should produce at first an effect equal to this. --
Perhaps, in this case, the virtue of every particle of the calcareous matter
will come, in time, to produce a full effect upon the soil, and benefit it
nearly as much as an equal quantity of very finely powdered calcareous matter
would have done, applied at different times. Stone and clay marles, therefore,
are equally efficacious manures as powdered lime, although more slow in their
operation.

But as lime that has been suffered to run into solid cakes before it is
applied to the soil, can neither be properly spread upon it, nor has any chance
of being dissolved by the action of the air afterward, it never can be made to
produce its full influence on the soil; and therefore this mode of applying
calcareous matter is the most uneconomical that could ever be practiced.

40.
APHORISM III.
Calcareous matter, alone, is not capable of rearing plants to perfection:
mould is necessary to be mixed with it, in certain proportions before it can
form a proper soil. It remains, however, to be determined, what is the due
proportion of these ingredients for forming a proper soil.

We know, that neither chalk, nor marle, nor lime, can be made to nourish
plants alone; and soils are sometimes found, that naturally abound with the two
first of these to a faulty degree. But the proportion of calcareous matter in
these is so much larger than could ever be produced by art, where the soil was
naturally destitute of these substances, that there seems to be no danger of
erring on that side. Probably, it would be much easier to correct the defects
of those soils in which calcareous matters superabound, by driving earth upon
them as a manure, than is generally imagined, as a very small proportion of it
sometimes affords a very perfect soil. I shall illustrate my meaning by a few
examples.

Near Sandside, in the county of Caithness, there is a pretty extensive plain
on the seacoast, endowed with a most singular degree of fertility. In all
seasons, it produces a most luxuriant herbage, although it never got any manure
since the creation, and has been for time immemorial subjected to the following
course of crops:

1 st, Bear, after once ploughing from grass, usually a good crop.

2 d, Bear after once ploughing, a better crop than the first.

3 d, Bear after once ploughing, a crop equal to the first.

4 th, 5 th, and 6 th, Natural grass, as close and rich as could be imagined,
-- might be cut if the possessor so inclined, and would yield an extraordinary
crop of hay each year.

After this, the same course of cropping is renewed. The soil that admits of
this singular mode of farming, appears to be a pure incoherent sand, destitute
of the smallest particle of vegetable mould; -- but, upon examination, it is
found to consist almost entirely of broken shells: the fine mould here, bears
such a small proportion to the calcareous matter, as to be scarcely
perceptible, and yet it forms the most fertile soil that ever I yet met with.

I have seen many other links (downs) upon the sea shore, which produced the
most luxuriant herbage, and the closest and sweetest pile of grass, where they
consisted of shelly sand, which, without doubt, derive their extraordinary
fertility from that cause.

A very remarkable plain is found in the Island of Tir-eye or Tyre-ty, one of
the Hebrides. -- It has long been employed as a common, so that it has never
been disturbed by the plough; and affords annually the most luxuriant crop of
herbage, consisting of white clover, and other valuable pasture-grasses, that
can be met with any where. -- The soil consists of a very pure shelly sand. And
the finest crop of bear, without exception, I ever saw grow out of the earth, I
found in the island of Barra, one of the Hebrides, growing upon a bed of
shell-sand, in which, I could not perceive the smallest particle of earth. I do
suppose, that the produce would have exceeded that of the best crop of barley I
ever saw, by two quarters, at least, per acre. -- It had been manured with sea
ware.

From these examples, I think it is evident, that a very small proportion of
vegetable mould, is sufficient to render calcareous matter a very rich soil
Perhaps, however, a larger proportion may be necessary when it is mixed with
clay, than with sand; as poor chalky soils seem to be of the nature of that
composition.

At any rate, however, from these examples, as well as from those that have
occurred in the preceding parts of this Essay, I think we may be sufficiently
authorized to conclude, that there is no danger of ever applying calcareous
substances to any soil in an over-proportion, if that soil was not originally
impregnated with some kind of calcareous matters, and if it shall be
afterward, cropped in a judicious manner.

41.
APHORISM IV.
Calcareous matters act as powerfully upon land that is naturally poor, as upon
land that is more richly impregnated with those substances which tend to
produce a luxuriant vegetation.

Writers on agriculture have been long in the custom of dividing manures into
two classes, viz. enriching manures, or those that tended directly to render
the soil more prolific, however sterile it may be, -- among the foremost of
which was reckoned dung, -- and exciting manures, or those that were supposed
to have a tendency to render the soil more prolific, merely by acting upon
those enriching manures that had been formerly in the soil, and giving them a
new stimulus, so as to enable them to operate anew upon that soil which they
had formerly fertilized. In which class of stimulating manures, lime, was
always allowed to hold the foremost rank.

In consequence of this theory, it would follow, that lime could only be of use
as a manure when applied to rich soils, and, when applied to poor soils, would
produce hardly any, -- or even perhaps hurtful effects.

I will frankly acknowledge, that I myself, was so far imposed upon by the
beauty of this theory, as to be hurried along with the general current of
mankind, in the firm persuasion of the truth of this observation, and for many
years did not sufficiently advert to those facts that were daily occurring to
contradict this theory. I am now, however, firmly convinced, from repeated
observations, that lime and other calcareous manures, produce a much greater
proportional improvement upon poor soils, than on such as are richer: And that
lime alone, upon a poor soil, will, in many cases, produce a much greater and
more lasting degree of fertility, than dung alone.

In direct contradiction to the theory, I must add, that I never yet met with a
poor soil in its natural state, which was not benefitted in a very great degree
by calcareous matters, when administered in proper quantities. But I have met
with several rich soils, that were fully impregnated with dung, and therefore
exactly in that state in which the theory supposes that lime would produce the
greatest effect; but, upon which, lime, applied in any quantities, produced not
the smallest sensible effect.

As I concern myself little about theories, this discovery gave me much less
uneasiness than it will give to some of my readers; on which account, I shall
not be much surprised, if they withhold their assent to this proposition for a
very long time. I do not desire any one to agree to it, till their own
observations extort assent, -- which, I have no hesitation in saying, will
sooner or later happen to every unprejudiced and attentive observer.

42.
I shall conclude this very long Essay with a cautionary advice, that might,
perhaps, have been more properly introduced before, if it had occurred at the
time; but it is of too much importance to be omitted entirely. It is this:

When farmers employ a great deal of lime, it sometimes happens that their
horses' feet are burnt by it, which is extremely troublesome, and sometimes
proves even fatal to the poor animals, I have known several horses actually
killed by this means, and others so disabled as never to be perfectly well
afterward.
; a method of preventing or remedying that inconvenience will therefore be of
use.

The best method of preventing any inconvenience of this sort, is to spread the
lime, when in its powdery state, upon the field, as evenly as possible, and
allow it to lie in that state for some time, before you begin to plough it. If
the lime has been in fine powder, it will have become perfectly eff^tte in a
week or so; after which time it will be as little corrosive as any kind of
common earth, so that the horses may work among it with perfect safety. But if
it has been suffered to run into clods before it was spread, these, if not
broken small, will be longer in absorbing their air, and, of consequence, will
remain longer in an acrid state, so that the ploughing may, in that case, be
deferred for a week or so longer; nor will it be even then so perfectly safe as
the other.

But if it becomes necessary at any time to plough in the lime immediately
after it is spread, -- take care to do it only when the soil is perfectly dry;
and in leading your horses to the plough, take care to prevent them from going
through any wet place, so as to wet their hoofs or ankles; for lime acts not at
all upon any dry substance, -- but when it is in its acrid caustic state, it
would corrode the hair and flesh in a moment, if it has access to water. As
soon as the horses are unyoked, keep their feet dry till you have got them
carefully brushed, so as to wipe away all the dry powdery lime that may adhere
to them; and if the least shower should fall, unyoke your horses immediately
and carry them off the field.

With these precautions, they may work among caustic lime for any length of
time, without receiving any damage.

But in case of any accident, by which a horse or man that is working among
lime should be scalded by it, it is always advisable for every farmer who has
work of that kind going forward, to keep a tub of very sour milk or whey in
some place ready to wash the part affected well with it, which will quickly
destroy the poignancy of the lime, and prevent the mischief that would
otherwise arise from it. The sourer the milk or whey is, the better it will be
for this purpose; it ought therefore to be long kept. For want of this, vinegar
will produce the same effect, or very stale urine will be of use; but, the milk
or whey is the cheapest and best remedy, and ought to be always in readiness.

POSTSCRIPT.
Directions for ascertaining the purity of Lime, and discovering the Nature of
the Bodies that may be mixed with it.

1.
In the preceding Essay, I have supposed that no other absorbent Absorbent
earths are all those that unite with acids, of which there are several
varieties; calcareous earths being one of these.
earth is ever mixed with the calcareous in any sort of limestone; because, in
fact, if ever any of these are mixed with the calcareous in these substances,
they are in such small proportion as not to be worth regarding. Those, however,
who want to be critically exact in their analysis of limestone, may discover
if there is any other sort of absorbent earth contained in it, by dropping into
the filtred solution obtained by the process 13, p. 72, a few drops of a clear
solution of volatile alkali. If no turbidness ensue, the calcareous earth has
been pure. If any precipitation takes place on adding the alkali, drop more,
and more, till no turbidness arises: then filtre the whole: what remains in the
filtre, is absorbent earth, that is not calcareous; for acids attract volatile
alkali more strongly than any of the absorbent earths, except the calcareous
class alone.

2.
It may oftener happen, that a considerable proportion of gypsum may be united
with limestone in the same quarry; and as this substance would greatly alter
the nature of the lime as a cement (see p. 37) and would probably affect it as
much as a manure, it is of more importance to inform the reader of the easiest
way of discovering this substance when it is present in limestone.

It has been already said, that gypsum is a compound, consisting of the
vitriolic acid and calcareous earth; and as the vitriolic acid attracts this
earth more strongly than any of the other acids, this composition is not in the
least affected by either the nitrous or muriatic acids.

Hence it follows, that if gypsum shall be contained in any calcareous mass
examined by the process described 13, p. 72, it will remain untouched by the
acid, and be found in the filtre, after the calcareous earth dissolved in the
acid shall have passed through it, forming a part of the residuum.

Take this residuum, therefore, -- add to it nearly its weight of fixed alkali
Potash.
previously dissolved in a considerable quantity of water, and filtered; digest
it in a warm bath, or even boil it for some hours; pour the whole into a
filtre, while yet warm; as the fluid passes through the filtre, pour upon it
more boiling water; as that passes off, continued to add more water, till it
comes through the filtre quite insipid and pure, and then let it run off
entirely.

By this process, the vitriolic acid leaves the calcareous earth to unite with
the fixed alkali (to which it has a stronger affinity) and with it forms a
vitriolated tartar: -- this vitriolated tartar, and the superfluous alkali, are
dissolved by the water, and carried through the filtre along with it; so that
what remains behind is the earthy part of the gypsum, and the heterogeneous
matters contained in the original limestone. By pouring upon (...) residuum,
therefore, some nitrous or muriatic acid, and treating it as directed in 13,
page 72, the calcareous earth that was in the gypsum will be now entirely
dissolved; so that when it is filtered and dry, the difference between the
weight of this residuum, and what it formerly was, is the real weight of the
gypsum originally contained in the limestone.

N. B. If the alkali employed to decompose the gypsum was in a mild state, the
calcareous earth that remains will effervesce strongly when it is dissolving in
the acid; but if a caustic alkali has been employed, the solution will be
effected without any effervescence at all.

As vitriolated tartar is not readily soluble in water, a considerable quantity
of water requires to be employed, which ought always to be hot, that the
solution may be effected the more readily.

3.
It has also been said, ( 30, p. 52,) that the only extraneous matter contained
in limestone is sand. But although sand, in general does predominate so much
over the other extraneous matters in limestone, as to authorize the expression
in general, yet there are some exceptions that ought to be taken notice of.

1 st, There are some kinds of limestone, that, when analyzed, are found to
contain a residuum consisting of a soft slimy-like substance. This is always in
very small proportions, and has probably been formed by a sediment subsiding
from the water while the rock was forming. It seems probable, that this kind of
lime would be less proper to be employed as a cement than as a manure.

2 d, Although marle and limestone are justly enough distinguished in the text
( 5;) yet it happens, that clay and sand are found naturally mixed with one
another, in such various proportions, and in these states joined with
calcareous matter, than there is no possibility of ascertaining the exact point
where marle ends, and limestone begins.

A very small proportion of clay is sufficient to make an exceedingly hard
limestone relent in time in the air, and fall to pieces; so that there are
many sorts of stone marle that consist chiefly of sand and calcareous earth,
and only a very little clay.

These very hard kinds of marle may be easily burnt into lime, so that they may
be indifferently called marle or limestone.

3 d, The same may be said of the distinction between marle and chalk ( 5. p.
9.) Many substances which have the appearance and distinguishing properties of
chalk, contain clay in different proportions. These dissolve in the air, or
run, as it is termed, more readily than the pure hard kinds of chalk, and feel
more unctuous or fatty to the touch; from whence they are called fat chalks.
These, however, may be converted into lime; so that they might indifferently be
called chalk, marle, or limestone.

The lime that is made from any of those substances that contain clay in their
composition, is more proper for manure than for cement; especially that made
from those substances that may be made to fall after they have undergone only a
small degree of heat in calcining them, as in chalk; because, in these cases,
the clay will not be sufficiently burnt to prevent it from being affected by
water, and rendered soft by it.

The proportion of clay and sand contained in any limestone or marle, may be
ascertained, by diffusing in water the residuum obtained by the analysis, ( 13,
p. 72 Observe, it is unburnt limestone, or marle only, that should be
subjected to this (...).
allowing it to subside a little, and gently pouring off the fluid parts from
the coarser sediment that subsides to the bottom; for, as clay remains much
longer suspended in water than sand, it may be thus separated from the sand
entirely; -- when the water comes off clear, after having been left to subside
a little, the residuum may be evaporated to dryness, and the loss of weight it
has sustained by this operation, denotes the quantity of clay.

This is rather a mechanical, than a chemical process, which is called
elutriation.

4.
It has been demonstrated above, 35, p. 58, that the quality of lime,
considered as a cement, is greatly altered, by being more or less perfectly
calcined; -- it may therefore be, on many occasions, of use to those who are
concerned in building, to be able to escertain what proportion of any
particular kind of lime is really reduced to a caustic state. -- This may be
done as under:

Take a known quantity of the quicklime, perfectly dry; -- add to that its own
weight, or more, of common crude sal-ammoniac, Observe, it is not volatile
sal-ammoniac.
previously dissolved in a large proportion of water, and filtered; -- digest
this nearly in a boiling heat for some hours, till no more smell of volatile
alkali is found to arise from it, adding fresh water as it evaporates. When the
volatile alkaline smell is no longer perceived, throw the whole into a filtre,
-- let that pass off, -- add more hot water, -- and more still, till it come
through the filtre tasteless and pure; -- then dry the residuum, and weigh it;
-- the difference between that and the weight of the original lime, denotes the
proportion of pure caustic lime that was contained in the original mass.

For, as the muriatic acid attracts caustic calcareous earth more strongly than
it does the volatile alkali, the acid of the sal-ammoniac, Crude sal-ammoniac
is a compound salt, consisting of the muriatic acid and the volatile alkali.
during the process, quits the alkali, and unites with the lime, and the alkali
is suffered to fly off in a pungent vapor. The now substance formed by the
union of the quicklime with the muriatic acid, is called liquid shell; and as
this is readily soluble in water, it passes off, together with the remaining
undecomposed ammoniacal salt, with the water through the filtre; while the
uncaustic lime, as it was neither capable of acting upon the ammonia^, nor of
being dissolved in the water, remains behind in its solid state.

BOOKS Lately published by J. NANCREDE, No. 49, Marlboro-Street, BOSTON.
"On the title page of its Laws, as well as on its standards, was written the
motto of, "Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain." JUST PUBLISHED,
Embellished with an Emblematical Plate, THE HISTORY OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE
HELVETIC UNION AND LIBERTY; BY J. MALLET DU PAN.

"Its situation (Switzerland's) is correctly and energetically drawn in the
picture of Athens, left us by a writer of the middle ages, after the invasion
of Alari^, It is the empty and bloody skin of an immolated victim! She has
nothing left but ROCKS, RUINS, and DEMAGOGUES!" Preface, p. 5.

"IF it be true, that the AMERICAN UNION AND LIBERTY have been and are still
threatened by France, -- That a number of American Citizens still doubt it; --
and that it is equally their wish and their interest, to transmit both to their
descendants, in all their integrity -- surely there can be nothing more
interesting, or more useful for them, at this time of danger, than to read the
melancholy account of the annihilation of a people, who, being situated like
them, but more credulous, and less energetic, in their exertions for defense,
fell under the combined weight of foreign and domestic intrigue! -- the most
dreadful scourge against which the American Government has had to contend, ever
since the beginning of the present European war!"

2.
POEMS on various Subjects, by ROBERT SOUTHEY, Author of Joan of Arc.

"It can scarcely be necessary for us formally to recommend this little volume
to the notice of our poetical readers, and its author to their esteem. No one
who possesses a true relish for Poetry, we conceive, will open with
indifference, a volume by the author of Joan of Arc. Genius is a despotic
power, and irresistibly commands homage." Monthly Review.

3.
JOAN OF ARC, an Epic Poem, by ROBERT SOUTHEY; with Notes.

"We do not hesitate to declare our opinion, that the poetical powers displayed
in it are of a very superior kind. -- Conceptions more lofty and daring,
sentiments more commanding, and language more energetic, will not easily be
found: nor does scarcely any part of it sink to langour, as the glow of
feelings and genius animates the whole. The language is, for the most part,
moddled on that of Milton; and not unfrequently, it has a strong relish of
Shakespeare."

Monthly Review, vol. 19, p. 361. 4.
JUST PUBLISHED, Price 20 Cents.

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF L. MURRAY'S ENGLISH GRAMMAR, with an Appendix, containing an
exemplification of the parts of speech and exercises in syntax, designed for
the use of the younger class of learners; by LINDLEY MURRAY. Its Character.

"Having already expressed our approbation of Mr. Murray's English Grammar, we
have only, in announcing this Abridgment, to observe, that it appears to us to
be made with great judgment, and that we do not know a performance of this kind
better fitted for the use of Children."

Analytical Review, Oct. 1797. 5.
IN THE PRESS, And speedily will be published, AN INTRODUCTION TO THE KNOWLEDGE
AND PRACTICE OF GARDENING, by CHARLES MARSHALL, Vicar of Brixworth,
Northamptonshire.

God Almighty first planted a Garden; and indeed it is the purest of human
pleasures: It is the greatest refreshment to the spirits of Man; without which,
buildings and palaces are but gross handy, works. Bacon's Essays.

Character of Marshall's Gardening.

"We have examined this performance, and we are well satisfied that the
respectable author has, as he professes, given to the public the result of his
experience; delivered with that plainness and perspicuity, which cannot fail of
rendering his work highly useful to every reader who shall consult it, either
for pleasure, or instruction. We say with pleasure, because Mr. Marshall has
not dryly written his book in the common didactic and unvaried style: His
manner is his own; and he has occasionally, but not too frequently, enlivened
his precepts by short poetic quotations from THOMSON, COWPER, and other moral
bards, who often, with useful and delightful effects, direct their readers to
"Look through nature up to nature's God."

Monthly Review. 6.
THE STUDIES OF NATURE, translated from the French of J. H. B. de St. PIERRE,
by H. HUNTER, D. D. 3 vols. 8 vo. -- fine wove paper, embellished with plates.

* This very ingenious, interesting, and instructive work has, since its first
publication, gone through four successive impressions, tender the author's
immediate inspection: besides a variety of pirated editions in different parts
of the European continent.

"No book displays a more sublime Theology, inculcates a purer morality, or
breathes a more ardent and expansive philanthropy. St. Pierre has enabled us to
contemplate this universe with other eyes; has furnished new arguments to
COMBAT ATHEISM; has established, beyond the power of contradiction, the
doctrine of a Universal Providence; has excited a warmer interest in favor of
suffering humanity; and has discovered sources, unknown before, of moral and
intellectual enjoyment."

7
THE only Work of the kind extant in any language, which is of the greatest
utility to the Merchant -- the Seaman -- the Student -- Schools, Academies,
etc. -- and recommended by the LORDS of the ADMIRALTY.

Lately published, in two volumes, in 8vo. Price 6 Dolls. bound, The NAVAL
GAZETTEER; Or, SEAMAN's COMPLETE GUIDE.

Comprising a full and accurate account, alphabetically arranged, of the
several Coasts of all the Countries and Islands in the known world, showing
their Latitude, Longitude, Soundings, Stations for Anchorage, etc.

With a particular description of the several BAYS, CAPES, CHANNELS, COVES,
CREEKS, CURRENTS, GULPHS, HARBORS, HAVENS, LAKES, OCEANS, RACES, RIVERS,
ROADS, ROCKS, SANDS, SHOALS, SOUNDS, STRAITS, TIDES, VARIATION of the COMPASS,
etc.


Together with a picturesque Description of the form and appearance at sea of
the several Headlands, Isthmusses, Peninsulas, Points, Promontories, etc. With
ample directions for failing into or out of the different Ports, Straits, and
Harbors of the four Quarters of the Globle, and for avoiding Dangers on the
various and extended coasts; in which more than 12,000 Names of Places, etc.
are treated of and explained.

Illustrated with 17 correct Charts, including a Whole Sheet Chart of the
World, on Mercator's Projection.

BY JOHN MALHAM. Author of Navigation made Easy and Familiar, etc.

Character of the NAVAL GAZETTEER.

"The Author has given Directions for avoiding Dangers, and all other
information that he could collect necessary for Pilotage; and he has carefully
consulted the Discoveries of modern Navigators. The whole bears the Mark of
Diligence and Ability; and we are of opinion that the NAVAL GAZETTEER is a
valuable Addition to the Seaman's Library."

MONTHLY REVIEW for July, 1797. "We may venture to recommend the NAVAL
GAZETTEER as an important Acquisition in the Study of maritime Affairs, and no
less useful to the general Student than to the Merchant. The Charts are
numerous, and distinctly delineated."

CRITICAL REVIEW for September 1798. * This Work has been found particularly
improving to Youth, and is therefore a valuable and acceptable Present to
Persons entering on a Seafaring Life, or learning Navigation.

8.
A VINDICATION OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE, derived from a moral and philosophical
survey of nature and of man. By the Author of Studies of Nature. -- 2 vols.
8vo. with plates.

9.
The same work abridged, in I vol. 8vo. plates.

10.
BOTANICAL HARMONY DELINEATED; or, Applications of some general Laws of Nature
to Plants; by the Author of Studies of Nature, with three botanical plates,
elegantly engraved, I vol. 8vo.

11.
THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS, Son of Ulysses, by M. SALIGNAC FENELON.

* Of Fenelon, the Monthly Reviewers said in March, 1796. "The annals of time
do not, perhaps, contain a name more revered, by the best and wisest friends of
the human race, than that of Fenelon; and it is to be doubted, whether any
production of human genius ever was so effectual in enlightening mankind, and
in rendering them benevolent and just, as the beautiful philosophic poem of
Telemachus. It contain a greater portion of political and moral wisdom, than,
as we believe, is to be found in any proceeding work."

12.
The same work is to be had in English, with the French text on the opposite
page, with corrections, in two vols. 12mo.

13.
Also in French, separate. -- For execution and accuracy, the above is superior
to the late English edition.


