AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT RUTLAND; IN THE STATE OF VERMONT, ON THE ANNIVERSARY
OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4th, 1799.

BY NATHAN OSGOOD, Esquire.

RUTLAND: PRINTED FOR S. WILLIAMS.

1799.

THE Committee of Arrangement for the celebration of the 4th of July, in behalf
of the Citizens of Rutland and the vicinity, return their thanks to NATHAN
OSGOOD, Esquire. for his Oration delivered this day, and request a Copy thereof for
the press.

COMMITTEE.
T. TODD, R. CRAFTS, J. BUTLER. J. RAMSDEL, M. WATKINS, N. LEE S. GRIDLEY,

RUTLAND, 4 th July, 1799.
AN ORATION.
My friends, fellow citizens, and soldiers,
TWENTY THREE years have elapsed since America wearied with repeated acts of
oppression imposed by Great Britain, under impressions of the duty which she
owed to posterity, made a solemn appeal to heaven for the rectitude of her
intentions, and declared herself an independent nation.

To do justice to the merits of that worthy and honorable band of patriots, who
in succession from the first settlement of America bravely withstood British
oppression, and insured to the colonies the exercise of just and equal laws,
would take more time than is alloted to me on this occasion. With a prophetic
view they foresaw that this vast continent would at some future day be covered
with inhabitants: And from a disposition discovered in Great Britain from the
earliest infancy of the colonies not, only to regulate their external but
internal concerns, they judged that instead of those mild and conciliatory
measures, which would have insured to her the friendship and affection of the
colonies, and have been her interest as well as policy to cultivate; she would
become jealous of their growing strength, and attempt by tyrannical measures to
destroy that sensibility, for which the colonies had been distinguished from
their first settlement in America. But with such wisdom did that firm band of
patriots conduct, their affairs that no measures formed against them were
successful, which had a tendency to enervate public sentiment, or to prepare
the way for the introduction of European despotism. Unawed by danger, steadily
attentive to the interests of their country, every measure they adopted had the
designed effect, and prepared the way for, the introduction of that great and
eventual day, which gave birth to the American Nation.

IN tracing the events of this ever memorable day, the successes and victories
obtained in a severe war of eight years, no nation could with more propriety
pronounce those sacred words, "If God be for us, who can be against us." We
began the war destitute of every military preparation. Agents and ministers
were appointed to the different courts in Europe to procure military stores,
and form such alliances as would be useful to America. During the severe
struggles of war, patriotism gave law. The different States had confederated
together, and a power was given to Congress to estimate the expenses, and make
requisitions on the individual States for their just proportions. Some of them
were punctual in obeying those requisitions, others were delinquent.

AT the close of the war the delinquent States were called upon to pay up their
arrearages. The expenditures of the contest had nearly exhausted the
circulating wealth of the country. Those States which had contributed their
just proportions, and those which had not, seemed to be equally exhausted. That
patriotism which gave rule during the continuance of the war, and influenced
men to contribute to the l^st of their property, now languished. -- The brave
old soldier who had fought the battles of America with success, now returned to
his family poor and worn out in his country's service. Widows, and the orphans
of those who had been slain in the field, together with those who had advanced
their all to government, men who had been in affluence and ease, but now in
poverty all appeared pentioning for relief; setting forth that the faith of
America was pledged to do them justice. -- Commerce had now deserted our
coasts, for want of commercial regulations: Agriculture had declined; and for a
moment the fruits of our independence seemed to have been blasted.

BUT the American genius under the smiles of a kind providence, was not to be
conquered but by insurmountable obstacles. A convention of the elders, men
experienced in difficulties, was assembled from one end of this vast continent
to the other, to consult on such measures as would give relief. Solemn were
their deliberations: such a variety of difficulties were to be surmounted, and
such different interests were to be combined, as seemed to defy human wisdom --
The necessity of union was strongly felt. A spirit of conciliation prevailed. A
constitution was formed, and adopted by the people, which has been the
admiration of the lovers of liberty, containing the fundamental principles of
freedom, good government and social order -- Europe was astonished at the
policy and wisdom of America. They had seen her carry on a successful war with
one of the most powerful nations on the globe. They had seen her form two
constitutions, and a change from one to the other effected without shedding a
single drop of blood. History does not furnish one solitary instance of a
similar nature. Attempts to effect even a change in the European constitutions,
have at different periods drenched one half of their fields in blood. America
once more began to flourish. Commercial regulations were formed, and the
American commerce was extended to every part of the globe. Agriculture was
revived, and infant manufactures were erected, which began to vie even with
those of Europe.

EUROPE now became the theater of war. France in aid to America had sent men
who became enamored with American liberty. At the close of the war they
returned to their native country, with the most laudable designs of procuring
some amendments in their own government. Without considering the necessity of
first disseminating the American knowledge and principles, among every class of
the people, before the pillars of their own government were removed, they began
the revolution, which like an overflowing deluge swept the vast fabric of the
French government to its foundations, that its traces could not be seen but in
blood.

THE tried friends of America were swept away in the deluge. The enormities
which succeeded are too awful to be related among men: and in decency to
religion, to virtue and morality, we would here draw a veil over her vices, had
they not reached America and polluted some of her sons.

WHEN the news of the revolution first reached America, an universal joy spread
from one end of the continent to the other. And never was joy more generous and
sincere. But when the evils became general, and instead of a blessing their
revolution became a sword in the hand of the most profligate, and devoured the
innocent and the guilty in one common destruction, the Americans who were
attached to the purest principles of republicanism, and to those mild and
gentle laws dictated by a spirit of philanthrophy, began to shudder and abhor
those devouring laws dictated by revenge, and sealed with the blood of the
innocent.

THE contagion now threatened all Europe. The nations contiguous to France
coaleseed to prevent its baneful influence. Washington our president, who had
fought the American battles, and seen the distresses to which our country had
been reduced, was convinced of the necessity of peace, to give to the people of
America an opportunity to recover from the distresses of the war just
terminated; and resolved to steer the American ship through the storm that
gathered, without becoming a party. Those talents so remarkable for wisdom and
prudence were again exerted, and shone forth with redoubled luster. A
proclamation enjoining the duties required by the strictest principles of
neutrality, and forbidding any practices not conformable thereto, was
published. The conduct of Genet who had arrived in America, and before his
arrival was known to our government, had enlisted both citizens and foreigners,
and commissioned them to cruise against nations with which we were at peace,
was a convincing proof that the French government meant to force us into a war,
and awakened the keenest sensibilities in the Americans. Faucher, his
successor, finding our government determined to maintain their neutrality
resolved on other measures, which the western counties of Pennsylvania, and the
precious consessions of a Randolph can witness. Adet his successor, pursued
measures as hostile as his predecessor. The conduct of the French ministers
occasioned difficulties with the British nation, which threatened the
destruction of our commerce. The American policy was to negotiate before an
appeal to arms was made. An envoy extraordinary to Great Britain was appointed.
The disputes between the two nations were adjusted, and a commercial treaty
formed.

PREVIOUS to this period vast quantities of American produce had been carried
into France, and sold in her ports, for which no other payment could be
obtained but assignats, a species of paper without value, which now gave such
an alarm to the American merchants who had given them unbounded credit, that
they avoided their ports. The French government now ordered the most piratical
and indiscriminate seizures to be made of our vessels, and justified their
rapacity on account of the treaty made with Great Britain, which the conduct of
their own ministers made indispensably necessary. Munroe, our minister then in
France, an apostate from the true American character, represented to the French
government, that the American people would submit to be plundered of their
commerce, if it would be useful to France. Such unworthy conduct occasioned his
recall. A minister whose integrity was unquestionable, was appointed; a man who
would not barter his countrymen's property to the gratification of any foreign
despotism. Integrity seems not to have been a necessary qualification for a
minister in France: He was not received by that perfidious government. The
President still inclined to peace, determined to make use of every expedient
before he would recede from conciliatory measures: two envoys were appointed to
join the one already there, with instructions, as liberal as the French
government could have desired, if justice and peace had been their object. The
fate of their mission has been delineated in the publication of their
dispatches. The conduct of the French government is unequalled for corruption,
and will remain a stain on their character to all future ages; and be recorded
on the heart of every true American characteristic of French perfidy, and serve
as a caution to all future alliances.

THE measures of our executive to maintain peace have met with an almost
unanimous approbation, and have been applauded in the addresses of the people
to the President from one end of the confederation to the other, promising
their warmest support to such measures as should be thought expedient for that
purpose. Defensive measures have been adopted, such as prudence dictated, and
the exigences of our situation required. Merchants have been allowed to arm in
their own defense, a measure as rational as politic. Government has built
several armed vessels which have given safe passages to our merchants. Although
no declaration of war has been made against France, such an actual state of
hostilities exists between the two nations, that it becomes the good man, and
lover of his country to give firm support to our government, and enable it to
preserve our independence against foreign despotism. We deprecate a war with
any nation, if it can be avoided with safety; but rather than become tributary
to France, war would not only be justifiable, but the present generation could
not justify themselves to posterity without resorting to it.

LET us examine for a moment, into the situation of the those nations which
have been drawn within the vortex of French revolution, and in their fate learn
our own, unless by timely exertions we avert the dangers which surround us. Let
their conduct to other nations, serve as a caution against confidence in that
nation of atheists, who spurn at peace, and from whose impious embraces have
issued all those plagues which destroy human happiness.

HOLLAND, one of the most industrious and opulent nations of Europe, and under
a republican form of government, had rendered herself respectable to all the
nations of the earth. If we look among the ruins occasioned by French
diplomatic skill, we shall find her name blotted from the catalogue of nations;
a poor needy French colony, requisition after requisition, until her wealth has
been exhausted. -- Geneva a republic too small to excite the ambition of any of
the monarchs of Europe, and too happy to wish for innovation, but too wealthy
not to excite French licentiousness, is now robbed of her wealth and
revolutionized -- Switzerland, we compassionate thy unhappy lot! The mountains
which surround thee have not been able to protect thee from the all devouring
armies of France. Negotiation benumbed thy exertions until French perfidy had
ruined thee. We mourn the fate of thy hardy sons, who though too late, exerted
themselves to save their country from impending ruin. Happy have thou been for
many years in thy retired situation, free from the contentions which have
embroiled Europe. Thy freedom and hospitality have invited many of the
destroying nations, to seek repose in thy happy country: But thy generous and
unsuspecting temper has well suited the designs of thy rapacious enemy.

NAPLES sought by presents to satiate the desires of her perfidious ally, until
the king found himself surrounded with French missionaries altenating the
affections of his citizens from their government, and too late roused by the
dangers which surrounded, collected an army sufficient in numbers to have drove
the disturbers of mankind from his dominions; but to the disgrace of his army
they were corrupted by the promises of promotion, and the alluring prospects of
plunder, to desert him. Such indiscriminate massacres and plunder succeeded, as
seemed to touch the feelings even of the five-headed monster. -- Rome and
Sardinia two nation who had sought by tributary contributions, to appease the
desires of the French government, little thought that these desires would
increase in proportion to their exertions to appease them. The pampered enemy
excited quarrels among the populace and some French soldiers, and charged them
upon the citizens; and under pretense of chastising them for the abuse which
they themselves had occasioned, have destroyed the two governments, and
plundered them of their wealth, and are now forcing their requisitions by
standing armies.

IN every nation in Europe which France has conquered they have first gained a
party in their councils, who were in favor of negociating until a French army
had arrived within their territory; introduced large numbers of incendiaries,
whose business it was to excite jealousies and provoke contentions; and under
some pretext of abuses, justified themselves in seizing on the government; and
the plenipotentiary generals with constitutions in their pockets, manufactured
by the French directory at Paris, have ordered the people to receive and adopt
them, who at the point of the bayonet are compelled to become a military
republic, under the control and direction of the French armies.

IT has ever been acknowledged in America, that the views of the first movers
of the French revolution were good: That there were radical evils in their
government, and in the modes of administrating justice among the citizens of
that nation, have never been controverted. And the idea of the people's
obtaining some amelioration in their situation, afforded to the freemen of
America the most sincere pleasure. -- The Americans had from their first
setttlement of this country, then inhabited by beasts of prey and men more
savage, considered themselves as martyrs for civil and religious liberty; and
as having sacrificed the case and luxury of Europe to establish colonies where
freedom might be triumphant. These ideas have been handed down from generation
to generation to their present descendents. The genuine principles of religion
and liberty, have been constantly inculcated among every order of people. Their
effects were obvious: they regarded the rights of all nations, and their good
will was extended to all men; considering themselves in possession of liberty,
they wished it to be extended to all others.

THESE sentiments and feelings of the people of the United States were
favorable to the views of the French government. The conduct of the first
French minister, who came to America was a convincing proof that he so
considered them. The people expressed themselves in term of the warmest
approbation at his first arrival. The American government was the first of all
nations to acknowledge the new government of France, and receive its ministers.
Those persons who began the revolution with designs to give freedom to France
were opposed to those violent outrages which began to be introduced, and were
compelled either to suffer under the guillotine, or quit their country to
preserve their lives. The succeeding parties have exercised a despotism
hitherto unknown, even to the French nation. The people now found that instead
of obtaining freedom and liberty, they had exchanged a mild and gentle prince
for the most unprincipled tyrants, who by their acts of barbarous cruelty and
murder had disgraced the name of man. These new crimes had not reached America.
That irregularities would succeed for a time, every person of political
knowledge foresaw.

THE minister from France began now to dictate to our government the part they
had to act in the great drama, which his matters had planned. The American
councils were composed of men of too much knowledge and experience not to
discern that the men of France would be intoxicated with the ideas of liberty,
which were as little understood in France as in Algiers; and that nothing but a
thorough knowledge of the true principles on which the happiness of society
depends, joined with great experience, could ever teach them. They gave them
every privilege within the limits of a neutral station, and endeavored by the
most friendly and conciliatory measures to convince them that the happiness and
prosperity of America greatly depended, on taking that ground. But French
haughtiness was not to be satisfied with principle. They had now formed a party
in America, who became obsequious to their wishes. This party, from that
moment, have never ceased to revile our own government, and to oppose every
measure adopted for defense. If Robespierre and Talleyrand, whose acts of
cruelty and murder would blacken the pages of savage barbarity, had been
representatives in our national legislature from the French government, their
cause could not have been better advocated.

AMONG the many objects of their execration I will mention a few: The British
treaty, on which the alarm was first sounded with so much vehemence from one
end of the union to the other, what has been the effect of it? Has any mortal
heard of any evil occasioned by it, except that France and her partisans have
been disgusted by it? And what then? Ought not the freedom and happiness of
America to be consulted? I do not propose this question, to have it answered by
the French party: But I ask it of men, who have fought to establish the
independence of their country, of men who are cultivating their farms to obtain
their support. Among these I have from my infancy resided, and know their
integrity, which I revere. Has the treaty with Britain contravened any article
of agreement with France? And their right to object to it, never existed.
Commercial men have approved of it, who are principally governed by it. My soul
would abhor any connection with great Britain, or any other nation on earth,
which could not be justified on the present principles of American safety and
freedom. But that we should be obliged to ask leave of France, whether America
may form commercial regulations with any nation with whom her citizens have
intercourse, is a degree of degradation, to which I pray God, America may never
submit.

THE alien and sedition laws have also been execrated by the French partisans.
The legislatures of the States which have had a session since those laws were
passed, (Virginia and Kentuckey excepted) have expressly declared their
approbation of them; not only as constitutional but as expedient and necessary.
Should it be demanded what is their use, the answer is at hand. The alien law
was expressly provided to remove foreigners, who by their hostile practices had
rendered their reesidence in America dangerous to our independence; precisely
such men, as have been the principle instruments in overturning every
republican government in Europe, and are avowedly enemies to that order both in
religious and civil affairs, which the God of nature has dictated to men in
civil society, not only by creation, but by the express revelation of his will,
as necessary to preserve even the appearance of the social state. -- The
purposes for which the sedition law was made are equally obvious, to prevent
falshhood and imposition, and to punish persons who should be guilty of them.
Such persons as should be guilty of speaking or publishing false, scandalous,
libellous things against the members of government, with a malicious intent to
defame and render them odious, and excite seditious practices among the people.
The malice and falshhood constitute the crime; and on proof of the truth of the
things spoken or published, by law the accused is discharged. As soon should I
have thought that a law punishing men for murdering their fellow creatures,
should be considered an abridgment of the freedom of men's actions, as
punishing the foul crime of wilfully disseminating falsehood and abuse, should
be considered as an abridgment of the liberty of speech or of the press.

THE imperfection of man subjects him to imposition, and the cry of liberty and
patriotism too often covers the base designs of a corrupt heart, and too
frequently give to men consequence, who like Judas for thirty pieces of silver
betrayed his Lord and Savior; so would they for a small reward sacrifice the
independence of their country. To avoid the evils occasioned by the exertions
of such men, to pervert the measures of government from the true and legitimate
principles on which the safety of society depends, such measures will be
resorted to as will effectually counteract the evils designed. In the execution
of such measures the minds of men too frequently become heated, and without
examination adopt the sentiments of the most noisy and profligate. The wisdom
of men would be to examine with candor, and investigate every subject to its
source, and decide with accuracy and impartiality on every measure, on which
their interest and happiness depend. The variety of relations in which every
individual in society stands, imposes this as a solemn duty. And the true
interests of America as a nation possessing freedom, and wishing its
continuance, will enforce it.

WE are situated far from Europe, where the passion for war seems to
predominate. We are in possession of a country with such a variety of soil and
climate as to be able to raise on our own American ground, almost every thing
necessary for the common comforts of life, or even its luxuries. Could America
preserve peace with all nations, and when the ravages of war depopulate Europe
enter her ports without danger, how interesting would be the event? These seem
to be the blessings which heaven designed for the people of the United States.
And nothing but the want of a national unanimity, has prevented their enjoying
them long before this. But to make these blessings permanent in America a
national character must be established. Not as a nation cap^ious of her rights,
but determined deliberately and perseveringly to defend them, it is our
business when injuries and insults are offered us by any power, with firm and
steady measures to pursue redross; and if the measures pointed out by ^e^son
fail, to extirpate from our land and coasts every nation that dare invade our
rights.

How constantly have our great and good presidents, WASHINGTON and ADAMS,
exerted themselves to preserve peace in America? Men whose lives have been
devoted to the service of their country, and whose measures have been marked
with the greatest prudence and wisdom. Their conduct deserves the gratitude and
applause of every freeman in America. Their exertions to maintain peace have
been unexampled. -- Difficulties had existed with Great Britain, ever since the
war with that nation. Others had arisen which became intolerable, and
threatened the most violent hostilities. An envoy was appointed with competent
powers to a just existing disputes. The result has been mentioned. -- Spain has
territory lying contiguous to the United States: Questions arose respecting the
rights of the two nations, and occasioned disputes, which for a time wore a
serious aspect; but they have been amicably adjusted. -- With France, repeated
have been the attempts for peace; and in some instances the most submissive
measures to obtain an audience of that government, have been adopted, but
without success. They have plundered us of our wealth, excited insurrections
against our government, and threatened even the annihilation of our
independence. By the aid of their diplomatic skill, joined with their party
here, they have boasted that they would revolutionize our own government. This
party have justified their insinuations by the most vindictive virulence, and
outrageous falsehoods circulated against our government; approving even of the
most vile and brutal conduct, of which the French government have been guilty;
conduct too disgraceful to name on this anniversary of our independence.

NOTHING is more common than to hear this party boast, that if France should
invade us, they would be the first to oppose and fight them. The experience of
every nation in Europe contradicts their assertion. Just such fighting zealots
were in Holland: Just such fighting zealots were in Venice: Just such such
fighting zealots were in Geneva: Just such fighting zealots were in
Switzerland, Sardinia and Naples, who boasted of their patriotism, courage and
bravery. But the moment the French army arrived within their territory, to the
disgrace of humanity, they joined them and fought their own countrymen: and are
now rioting on the plunder wrested from the possession of the honest
industrious laborer. Let Americans look into the records of the destruction of
these nations, and learn the truth of these assertions, before their liberties
shall be consigned to the abodes of despotism.

To use arguments with men devoted to the interest and views of France,
determined that religion and liberty shall have an end in America, would be
futile. These men are implacable in their views, and nothing can save them from
the just indignation due to traitors, and the destroyers of human happiness --
But to those men who are not convinced of the corrupt conduct of the French
government, and are opposed to our own from a conviction arising from the false
representations of the French partisans, our breasts ought to feel compassion.
But even to these men, since the most undeniable proofs exist, of the hostile
design of the French nation against our liberties, should they continue their
opposition to our government, that GOD who has been bountiful in his gifts to
fallen man, has never required charity to be extended. An injured country can
never permit them to escape a just punishment.

LET us be reminded of the obligations we are under to the author of all
mercies, who inspired our forefathers with resolution to cross the wide
Atlantic, where they could form colonies for the worship of GOD according to
their consciences; that he encircled them with his presence and protection;
that he caused them to increase in number, beyond human calculation: That he at
all times of difficulty and distrust, caused his guardian angels to protect and
defend them; and that at a time when it became necessary for their happiness to
be separated from their mother country, he conducted their armies to success
and victory, and enabled them to become an independent nation; that he caused
wisdom and knowledge to be disseminated among all orders of men; and that he
has given to us their descendants, a government, where the true principles of
representation are clearly displayed in the great body of the people, from
whence all authority flows, and at stated periods return. This is a privilege
granted only to the people of America. There is not another nation on earth,
where this right remains exclusively to the people. Let our gratitude ascend to
the author of all mercies, that we participate in the rights of a people, who
under his providence govern themselves.

SHALL the people of America let the siren song of an insidious foreign foe
divert them from the true point on which their happiness and interest depends,
and rob them of these privileges which were given to them by that GOD who deals
bountifully to his people. Those nations who deny his providence he permits to
perish. And whether that providence which has afforded its fostering care to
America, did not permit the French Directory to harden their hearts to refuse
our ministers of peace, to prevent the contagious effects of their baneful
influence from corrupting the minds of the people of the United States, we will
submit to the candid enquiry of the freemen of America.

Citizens of the United States,

LET our government be respected, as the organ through which the sentiments of
community are conveyed to each individual. Let the laws be respected, and
carried into effect. In this, each individual in society has an equal interest.
By the laws of our country the life and property of every citizen are
guaranteed to him, and whoever violates them becomes guilty before the public
tribunal; and unless the criminal receives the just punishment provided by law
for his offense, public justice is cutraged, order ceases, and anarchy with all
its baneful horrors succeeds!

To our military friends we will suggest the importance of their station in
society. To them is committed, under the direction of our government, the
protection of our independence against foreign invasion, and internal
insurrections. The experience necessary to render yourselves completely useful
to your country, necessarily requires a devotion of some part of your time; for
which, may you be completely recompensed, in the grateful acknowledgment of
your approving country. Should the period arrive when you may be called into
the field, to exert your military talents, may you, under the command of that
able and experienced general who has, under the God of Armies, been the
military and political savior of our country, march to victory and success;
and teach those nations who dare to invade us, a lesson of prudence: that
although the Americans with to cultivate friendship with all nations, and that
the banners of peace may forever encircle them; yet that their sons are
soldiers, and that the army which meets with them, meets with their destruction.

My fellow Citizens,

THE tokens of prosperity in our agricultural concerns, call upon us all to
give an able support to our government, that the blessings of peace and
tranquillity may be preserved. May the precious blood which has flowed from our
departed friends, and heroes, to purchase the freedom which we enjoy, never
upbraid us with sacrificing those liberties to the demon of faction, or of
bartering them for French despotism.

To that Being who exalts one nation and humbles another, and agreeable to
his sovereign pleasure distributes his blessings to nations and individuals,
may our gratitude and adoration ascend for his liberality to America. And under
his guidance and care, may the liberties committed to us by our venerable
ancestors together with the additions which his bountiful hand has made to us,
be handed down from generation to generation, a perpetual inheritance to his
favorite people of the United States.

The GENIUS of COLUMBIA: AN ODE FOR THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1799.
Written by the Honorable TIMOTHY TODD.
I.
AS down a dark valley with shadows surrounded,
Columbia sat mufing; in mourning her bays,
With anguish and sorrow her thoughts were confounded,
And sadly despondent she thus (...) her lays:
"My mind, oh how gloomy! how poignant my pain,
"Oppression approaches, and war joins her TRAIN.
II.
"Proud Gallia with specious pretenses is trying
"My rights to usurp, whilst my bosom she maims;
"Before her dread arms lurid nations are ^l^ng
"While others admit with reluctance her claims:
"Who submit, are her slaves -- who resist her are slain;
"Lust, power and dominion, have joined in her TRAIN.
III.
Thus lamenting her ills nor scarce seeking relief,
Her Genius approached her in splendour and smiles:
"Columbia, now banish your cares and your grief,
"For vain are French efforts, and sutile their wiles;
"No longer their pirates shall ravage the main,
"For bravely your seamen willl join in your TRAIN.
IV.
"With safety and vigor, your commerce reviving:
"Your ships again boldly are ploughing the seas:
"From firmness and courage, your sons are deriving
"The blissful possession of freedom and ease:
"Your rights to old Ocean they will proudly maintain,
"For conquest and TRUXTON have joined in your TRAIN:
V.
"Lo, great are the blessings, your trade is preparing,
"For the strength of your empire -- the tiders of land:
"The gold of your merchants your farmers will share in,
"And tillage and commerce advance hand in hand:
"No more shall blind factions their discord maintain,
"For Wisdom and ADAMS have joined in your TRAIN.
VI.
"Should envy provoke, or should conquest allure
"The sons of old Gaul to descend on your coast,
"Your rights shall remain unimpair'd and secure,
"For legions of Freemen will add to your host;
"With arms and with ardor they would scour the (...) plain,
"For Glory and WASHINGTON join in your TRAIN.
VII.
"Then rise, blessed Columbia your safety attend,
"Unite all your children in concord and love;
"Let wide over your empire, religion extend;
"Free under your banners, securely they would move;
"Then atheists may the eaten to conquer in vain,
"For JEHOVAH's bright armies will join in your TRAIN."

