A MIRROR FOR THE FEMALE SEX.

HISTORICAL BEAUTIES FOR YOUNG LADIES.

INTENDED TO LEAD THE Female Mind TO THE LOVE AND PRACTICE OF MORAL GOODNESS.

DESIGNED PRINCIPALLY FOR THE USE OF LADIES' SCHOOLS.

BY MRS. PILKINGTON.

When such a specious Mirror's set before ye, you needs must see yourselves.
Shakspeare. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN, FOR OLIVER D. AND I. COOK.

1799.

TO SUPERIORS OF Female Seminaries.
LADIES,
THE Historical Beauties has a natural claim on some share of your patronage:
It aims at the same objects with you, co-operates with all your labors in
improving and polishing our sex, is the associate of your wishes, and
facilitates their completion. What approbation it deserves, were as unnecessary
for me to solicit, as unhandsome in you to refuse. I have done what I could,
and you will judge as you ought. From that imperfection which tarnishes every
human production, mine pleads no exemption; but has the less to fear, that my
readers are more or less conscious of similar infirmity; and experience may
have taught them the equity and necessity of showing the same measure of lenity
in my case they may wish in their own.

To you it comes, with perfect confidence in your favorable or candid
acceptance at least. It makes an humble tender of assistance, in disclosing,
for the benefit of your charming pupils, the purest sources of whatever is best
calculated for amusing their fancies, informing their understandings, and
bettering their hearts. The nature of the work will show the close application
and extensive reading it has cost me; and your acquaintance with the various
authors from whom the selection is made, may enable you to give me credit for
my strict adherence to correctness in every article extracted.

Should the Historical Beauties receive from you the least degree of attention,
or gain admission into your elegant societies, the good intention with which it
is published, leaves no doubt on my mind that it may be useful. In this hope,
and with my best wishes for its success and yours, I have the honor to be,

Ladies, Your most humble Servant, M. P.

PREFACE.
"THE task of an author" says Doctor Johnson, is either to teach what is not
known, or to recommend known truths by his manner of adorning them; either to
let new light upon the mind, and open new scenes to the prospect, or vary the
dress and situation of common objects, so as to give them fresh grace, and more
powerful attractions.

This, however, can only be performed in works of originality; and is all that
can be expected even from the most masterly of these. The range of genius,
except, perhaps, in a few of the sciences, seems to be pretty generally
monopolized by the writers of the classic ages; and little is left for us, but
the gleanings of what yielded them so plentiful an harvest. The following
pages, though professedly extracted from labors sanctioned by public
approbation, are now for the first time, applied to one specific object of
improvement, and meant to operate in a new direction. The idea was suggested to
my mind by a little very popular work; Dodd's Beauties of History. Yet, as this
was evidently written for the edification of his own sex, and mine for that of
ours, let me flatter myself the Historical Beauties will not be considered as
wholly destitute of novelty; that its uniform aim is rather to amuse and
instruct, than agitate or surprise.

Of the advantages to be derived from an acquaintance with history, every
person of a liberal education, and an enlightened mind, must be sensible. The
world at large has, indeed, been long convinced, that it expands the intellects
by anticipating the sources of experience; corrects and moderates our passions,
by exemplifying the various excesses and obliquities to which they are liable;
and lays a foundation for the culture and exercise of every noble virtue and
honorable pursuit, by a series of moral painting in perfect unison with the
original. And it must be acknowledged, all we perceive of human life, and the
manners of the world, is calculated to teach us, that lessons of such an
important tendency cannot be more indispensible to one sex than another. Poor,
indeed, were our compensation for studying the best digested histories of
ancient or modern times, were the information they afford confined to the
competitions of nations, the treaties and alliances of courts, the projects and
politics of princes, the improvement of tactics, the horrors of battles, the
havoc of sieges, the achievements of heroism, and the bickerings of faction.
Of all, such shocking scenes and occurrences our own experience may furnish
enough to tear and harrow up our souls, without subjecting us to the drudgery
of traversing the world over, for what is so habitually transacting at our very
doors. But though the present imperfect condition of our natures renders these,
in some measure, inseparable from a faithful record of truth, the fates that
accompany them, the causes in which they originate, the objects to which they
are directed, the passions, the talents, the characters, the virtues, and the
vices, most conspicuous in their accomplishment, are full of useful
instruction, and lead to maxims of the soundest wisdom.

It has been long matter of general and sincere regret, that the exterior of
female education is cultivated but too frequently at the expense of qualities
more valuable; that a showy outside leaves hardly any taste for mental
excellence; and that reality is every where avowedly sacrificed to appearance.
The requisites for indulging this fashionable propensity, give young ladies,
especially while at school, no time for acquiring the least idea of general
history, as they enjoy no leisure for reading, or digesting what little they
may read. To alleviate this inconvenience, and prevent, as much as possible,
its pernicious influence on the feminine mind, these selections from ancient
and modern authors, of established reputation and celebrity, are published for
their accommodation; that, without intense application, or any superfluous
waste of time, they may have the advantage of an early acquaintance with such
extraordinary characters in their own sex, as have either adorned or disgraced
the page of biography. And while their young minds are thus occupied in the
honest contemplation of great or good actions, it becomes them very maturely to
consider, that they have it still in their power to imitate the virtues they
admire, and avoid the vices they abhor.

INTRODUCTION.
LADY Stanley was one of those amiable characters who consider the parental
duties of such high importance as to demand a constant and unwearied attention,
and therefore she retired to a small house within a few miles of the
metropolis, and spent her whole time in the cultivation of her childrens'
minds, and the improvement of their hearts.

Sir Edward Stanley had been appointed to an office of high importance in the
East Indies; and not thinking it right to hazard the health of his children, by
taking them to a climate generally unfavourable to an English constitution, had
left them under the care of their excellent mother, who was anxious they should
acquire those virtues, and excel in those accomplishments, that would be most
likely to attract his affection.

Emily Stanley, at the time of Sir Edward's departure, had just entered her
fourteenth year; Charlotte, her thirteenth; and Louisa, her eleventh. Their
dispositions were naturally amiable; but there was an indolence of mind, and a
distaste to study, in the two elder, which frequently gave Lady Stanley the
utmost uneasiness.

Ever anxious to promote their happiness, as well as improve their
understandings, she endeavored to render her precepts both pleasing and
instructive; and, by the gentle sweetness of her manner, made the path of
knowledge appear an enamelled mead rather than a thorny desert.

Although she was particularly anxious her children should be perfectly
acquainted with both ancient and modern history, yet they had hitherto perused
only that of England; and their natural dislike to application made her
apprehensive they would feel a repugnance to the course of reading necessary
for them to pursue. This circumstance induced her to select a variety of
anecdotes from the different authors she had perused, and form them into a
small volume, that, by reading an account of abstracted events, they might feel
desirous of becoming acquainted with the causes which produced them.

On the morning of the new year, when the children entered Lady Stanley's
apartment, she informed them she had been preparing a present, which, she
flattered herself, would be more acceptable than toys or trinkets; because it
would be an additional proof to them of her affection for their persons, and
her solicitude to promote the improvement of their minds.

From this little work, my dear girls, said that amiable woman, addressing
herself to her daughters, you will have an opportunity of drawing examples for
the regulation of your future conduct; and likewise be enabled to form an
opinion of the different virtues and vices which have embellished or deformed
the female character both in the past and present ages.

A thorough knowledge of history is certainly one of the most essential parts
of a girl's education, and I confess myself very anxious to inspire you with a
relish for the study of it; and if you have any ambition to render yourselves
either pleasing or entertaining companions, you must endeavor to store your
minds with a fund of useful knowledge; for that flippancy of conversation which
flows from a prating tongue and empty head, is disgusting to a sensible, and
fatiguing to a rational, companion.

A young woman totally unacquainted with history, must of course have her ideas
bounded to the spot where she resides, and be incapable of deriving any
advantage from a knowledge of the manners and customs of people who inhabit the
different parts of the globe. But the most important point of view in which
history appears so essentially necessary, arises from the impression which the
perusal of great and amiable actions is so peculiarly apt to make upon the
youthful mind. Not that I have merely selected such as appear under that
denomination; for I thought that, by contrasting vice with virtue, both would
appear the more striking.

I have endeavored to arrange my characters upon the principle of a work which
was written by the late ingenious Doctor Dodd, and which has met with that
universal applause it so justly merits: and though I know myself incapable of
acquiring that degree of credit he obtained, yet, if I have the satisfaction of
inspiring my childrens' breasts with the love of virtue, it will be more
gratifying than the voice of fame, or the sound of applause.

CONTENTS.
DEDICATION iii PREFACE v INTRODUCTION xi RELIGION. Sentiments 1 EXAMPLES.
Lady Jane Gray 3 Anne Askew 8 Catherine Parr, Wife of Henry the Eighth 11
Catherine of Arragon 12 Lord Burleigh 13 Queen Elizabeth ib. Bertha, Wife of
Ethelbert, King of Kent, 14 Queen Mary 17 Catherine de Medici 18
FILIAL DUTIES. Sentiments 22 EXAMPLES.
Extraordinary Instance of filial Affection in a Roman Lady 24 AEneas 27
Anapias and Amphinomus ib. T. Manlius 28 Cimon, a young Athenian 31 Mrs. Roper,
Daughter of Sir Thomas Moore ib. Countess of Pembroke 32 Naomi, a Story from
the Sacred History 33 Tullia, the Wife of Tarquin 36 Henry the Fifth, of
Germany 37 Gallian, Son of the Emperor Valerian 39 Nero 40
FRATERNAL AND SISTERLY LOVE. Sentiments 42 EXAMPLES.
Pulcheria, Sister to the Emperor Theodosius 44 Eudosia, Daughter to Heraclitus
45 Anna Commena 46 Singular instance of fraternal Affection and Courage 48
Eumenes 51 Cato 52 Titus ib. Timoleon 53 Story of Joseph and his Brethren 54
Boleslaus, King of Poland 56 Queen Mary 57
ON THE ADVANTAGES OF A GOOD EDUCATION. Sentiments 58 EXAMPLES.
Calphurnia, Wife of Julius Caesar 60 Plautina, Wife of Trajan 61 Agrippina,
Wife of Germanicus ib. The Mother of Tarmujin, Emperor of the Tartars 62 Henry
the Eighth 63 Sir Thomas Moore ib. Sir Anthony Cook 64 Augustus Caesar 65
Olympias, Wife of Philip of Macedon 66 Irene, Empress of Constantinople 67
Cleopatra 69 Lycurgus 70
FORTITUDE. Sentiments 72 EXAMPLES.
Arria, Wife of Caecinna Poetus 74 Paulina, Wife of Seneca 77 Epeniae, Wife of
Sabinus 78 Wife of the Governor of Minchew 81 Princess of Jaskes ib. Duchess of
Bavaria 82 Octavia 83
BEAUTY. Sentiments 87 EXAMPLES.
Princess Egilve 88 Elfrida, Daughter of the Earl of Devonshire 90 Cleopatra 95
Anne Bullen ib.
HUMILITY CONTRASTED WITH PRIDE. Sentiments 97 EXAMPLES.
Charles the Second 99 Singular Instance of the Attachment of two Servants to
their Mistress 100 Another Instance of extraordinary Attachment of a Servant to
his Master 101 Pride not humbled by Distress 103 Catherine the First, Empress
of Russia 105 Empress of China ib.
PRIDE. Sentiments 107 EXAMPLES.
Marchioness de Tavera 108 Poppaea Sabina, Wife of Nero 111 Spanish Pride ib.
HUMANITY CONTRASTED WITH CRUELTY. Sentiments 113 EXAMPLES.
Sir Philip Sidney 114 Henrietta Maria, Wife of Charles the First 115 Matilda,
Wife of Henry the First 116 Alfred the Great ib. Marchioness de Astrogus 119
Amestris, Queen of Persia 121 Fulvia, Wife of Anthony 122 Joan, Queen of Naples
123 Inhumanity of Three Hundred Roman Ladies ib.
ON THE PROPER EMPLOYMENT OF TIME. Sentiments 126 EXAMPLES.
Andromache, Wife of Hector 131 Anna Maria Shurman ib. Penelope, Wife of
Ulysses 132 Duchess of Newcastle ib. Queen Elizabeth 133 Countess of
Bridgewater ib.
POLITENESS OF ADDRESS AND POLISH OF MANNERS. Sentiments 137 EXAMPLES.
Lord Chesterfield 138 Mary, Queen of Scots 140 Joan, Queen of Naples 141
Bertrade, Wife of Philip of France ib. Catherine, Empress of Russia 142 Lady
Jane Gray 143 Octavia ib.
FRIENDSHIP. Sentiments 145 EXAMPLES.
Damon and Pythias 148 Alcander and Septimius 151 Laelius and Cicero 156
INGRATITUDE. Sentiments 159 EXAMPLES.
Inkle and Yarico 161 A Macedonian Soldier 165
TRUTH. Sentiments 168 EXAMPLES.
Calphurnia, Wife of Julius Caesar 170 Aristotle 171 Petrarch ib. Zenocrates 172
VIRTUE. Sentiments 173 EXAMPLES.
Lucretia, Wife of Collatinus 176 Virtue held more sacred than Life, instanced
in the Conduct of a Nun 179 Timoclea 180 A Russian Lady 181
CONTENTMENT. Sentiments 185 EXAMPLE.
Story of the disabled Soldier, as related by Dr. Goldsmith 190
PASSION AND ANGER. Sentiments 201 EXAMPLES.
Queen Elizabeth 205 Sister of Frederick, late King of Prussia 206 Olympias,
Wife of Philip of Macedon 207 Roxana, Wife of Alexander the Great 208 Zenobia,
Wife of Odenatus ib. Zoe, Wife of the Emperor Romanus 209

HISTORICAL BEAUTIES.
RELIGION.
SENTIMENTS.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise wisdom
and instruction. Proverbs. A great, a good, and a right mind, is a kind of
divinity lodged within us, and may be the blessing of the slave as well as the
prince. Seneca. A good conscience is both the testimony and reward of a good
life. Seneca.
I SHALL commence my work, my beloved children, by introducing to your
knowledge some of those characters who have rendered themselves conspicuous by
the union of piety and morality, and whose lives were spent in the performance
of devotional exercises, and in the practice of benevolence to their
fellow creatures. I have always endeavored to convince you, that piety toward
God is the foundation of those virtues which will make you estimable in the
eyes of men; and that to be void of it, evinces a cold heart, destitute of the
best affections which can grace a youthful character. At your time of life it
is natural for the heart spontaneously to rise into admiration at what is
great, glow with the love of what is fair, and melt at the discovery of
tenderness and goodness: and where can any object be found so calculated to
kindle those affections, as the Father of the universe, and the Author of all
your felicity? Untouched by gratitude, can you behold that profusion of good
which his beneficent hand pours around you? Unmoved by veneration, can you
contemplate that grandeur and majesty which his works every where display?
Offer to God, therefore, the first fruits of your affections and
understandings; and be assured, that the more you increase in love to him, the
more you will increase in happiness, excellence and honor.

The principles of piety and devotion have often been evinced at that early
period of life, when it might have been supposed the infant heart was incapable
of such exalted sentiments: a striking proof of the justness of this
observation is recorded in the history of Lady Jane Gray.

Lady Jane Gray was eldest daughter to the Duke of Suffolk; a man whose mind
was too much occupied by plans of ambition to be capable of admitting
sentiments of tenderness. In her earliest childhood she was unaccustomed to
receive those endearing caresses which are calculated to attract the affection
of a youthful heart; and, instead of considering her father in the light of a
tender friend, she was compelled to behold him as a rigid judge, who, instead
of palliating the trifling errors of childhood, magnified them into crimes, and
condemned them with severity. This ill-judged rigor probably might have been
the first incitement to that uniform piety which marked her future conduct; and
being withheld, by fear, from expressing the effusions of a susceptible heart
to her earthly parent, she sought consolation at the throne of her heavenly
one, and poured out her sorrows to him who heals the brokenhearted, "and
raises up them whose spirits are cast down."

When she was arrived at an age to be informed of the ambitious views of the
Duke of Suffolk, who taught her to aspire to the possession of a crown, instead
of being dazzled by the glaring prospect, she foresaw the dangers with which it
was surrounded; and though Edward had declared her his successor, yet the
superiority of his sister's claim made her strenuously refuse the proffered
dignity: and when her father, and the Duke of Northumberland, (whose son she
had married,) compelled her to accept it, she expressed her fears that she was
committing an action that would be displeasing to heaven, and usurping that to
which another had a right. But if her humility and justice was conspicuously
displayed in her manner of accepting an unwished-for dignity, her sweetness and
humility were no less strikingly evinced in her manner of resigning it; for
when she was informed that the body of the people had declard for Mary, she
expressed her satisfaction at being relieved from the burdens of a crown, and
rejoiced in the prospect of being able to devote her time to the service of her
Creator, and the improvement of her mind. But, alas! these visionary prospects
of future felicity were all suddenly and unexpectedly overclouded! The inhuman
Mary, fancying herself insecure on the imperial seat whilst her rival was in
existence, sent an order for her immediate imprisonment; and, lost to the voice
of tenderness and humanity, decreed that Lady Jane and her unfortunate husband
should both perish together!

It was at that dreadful period that the amiable Lady Jane found the inspiring
aid of that rectitude, which had been the rule of all her actions, enable her
to support with cheerfulness the rigor of her destiny, and meet her
approaching dissolution with calmness and resignation.

Previous to her execution, several Roman Catholic priests were sent to her by
the Queen, to attempt converting her to that religion to which she was so
bigoted a zealot; but her faith was established upon too firm a basis to be
shaken by the crafts of priesthood, or the persuasion of power; and she died a
firm disciple to the Christian faith.

Her person is discribed by historians as being exquistely lovely; and her
manners so strikingly engaging, as to attract the affection of all those who
had the satisfaction of enjoying their influence. Her temper was naturally
grave, yet blended with an uncommon share of ineffable sweetness. She was
completely mistress of the Latin and Greek languages, and had made some
proficiency in the Hebrew, when her inhuman persecutor decreed that her
learning and virtues should perish together. The humility of her mind could
only be equalled by its liberality; for she pardoned the greatest wrongs
committed against herself, though her heart was incapable of injuring others.
In short, whether she is viewed in the character of a daughter, a wife, a
queen, or a prisoner, she appears adorned with such perfections as must command
praise, and defy censure.

"Virtue (says Seneca) is the only immortal thing that belongs to mortality: it
raises the mind above griefs, hopes, fears, or chances; and makes us patiently
submit to the decrees of heaven."

The truth of this observation is fully exemplified in the history of a
daughter of Sir Thomas Askew's, whose sufferings and persecutions were of a
nature to shake the firmest resolution, unless supported by the principles of
virtue, and the aid of religion.

Anne Askew had been originally educated in the principles of the Roman
Catholic persuasion; but having been at an early age forced into a marriage
contrary to her inclination, her mind naturally acquired a tincture of
seriousness, and she devoted many hours every day to the duties of religion.
When she attentively examined into the principles upon which her faith was
founded, she gradually became sensible of the errors that were connected with
it; and abjuring it altogether, became an entire convert to Christianity. This
circumstance was a pretense for her husband's treating her with the most
barbarous cruelty, and refusing to support her in his own house: he turned her
out of it, and abandoned her to the miseries of the world, defenseless,
forlorn, and unprotected!

A woman reduced to so wretched a situation, by the cruelty of him who ought to
have shielded her from every kind of distress, one would have imagined had a
claim upon the humanity of her fellow creatures; but, alas! that religion which
ought to have taught compassion for the unfortunate, breathed only oppression
and persecution; and her having abjured her faith, was considered a crime of so
heinous a nature, as demanded the vengeance of all those who wished to promote
the Roman Catholic persuasion. She unfortunately went to London (with a view of
suing for a divorce) at a period when the fanatic zeal for the Roman Catholic
religion was raging with the utmost ardour, and became a cloak for the most
unheard of barbarities. The partisans of her husband were sufficiently powerful
to controvert all the arguments she could adduce in favor of her own conduct;
and she was not only arrested, and thrown into prison, but treated there with
studied indignity, and premeditated insolence. Yet she submitted to the
severity of her fate with the most cheerful resignation; and, sustained by that
power who arms the afflicted with fortitude, and the oppressed with patience,
endured the most exquisite tortures that human imagination could invent, rather
than acknowledge herself the member of a religion that was established upon the
foundation of cruelty, and the basis of oppression! When the moment arrived
that destined her to fall a victim to persecution, she met her fate with an
heroism that would have done honor to the greatest general, and looked upon
death as the messenger of peace, and the harbinger of felicity!

Thus you see, my dear girls, that religion prepares the mind for encountering
with fortitude the most severe shocks of adversity; and those afflictions which
appear to the wicked as messengers of the wrath of heaven, seem to the good as
merciful dispensations, sent to make trial of their fortitude, their faith, or
their resignation.

Catherine Parr, wife of Henry the Eighth, was a woman of the most exemplary
piety, and refined morality. Amidst the gaiety and splendor of a court, her
mind was occupied upon the duties of religion; and the variety of her
compositions prove that to piety was united humility, and a perfect reliance
upon the dispensations of Providence. From her earliest infancy her mind had
been habituated to the practice of devotional exercises; and though the
frequency of that practice was one of the failings alleged against her (by the
Bishop of Winchester) to the King, yet, to preserve her life, she never
remitted any of her duties, believing that if she forsook her God, he would
also forsake her.

Catherine of Arragon, who was a former wife to Henry the Eighth, was also a
woman of great piety and uncommon erudition: her education had been such as to
enable her not only to indulge her taste for literature, but to become an
excellent judge of the merits of those who trod in the path of science, and she
was the universal patroness of learned men.

When the versatility of her husband's disposition induced him to search into
remote causes for a pretense to annul his marriage, the arguments she used in
favor of its validity, are in themselves sufficient to mark the superiority of
her understanding: but admirable as it was, it could not preserve her from
sinking under the severity of her misfortunes; and when she was degraded from
the dignity of a queen, the remainder of her life was spent in the practice of
the most rigid devotion, and in the strict observance of those duties which she
imagined would be most acceptable to Heaven.

From the instances I have represented of the powerful effect of Religion in
enabling the mind to support afflictions, you are not to imagine that it will
only be necessary to apply to its aid in the season of distress; for the
greater the benefits are which you receive from Heaven, the stronger must be
your motives for the exertion of your piety and gratitude to the great Author
of them, who, for all his mercies, requires no other return than that of a
grateful and pious heart.

The late Lord Burleigh (who was one of the ablest politicians of the age in
which he lived) used to say, that he would never trust any man whose actions
were not governed by the principles of religion; and alleged as a reason, that
those who were not true to God could never be so to men.

Queen Elizabeth, who is universally allowed to have beeen one of the greatest
characters that ever swayed the British throne, not only regularly devoted a
portion of each day to acts of piety, but composed several treatises on
religious subjects; and at the age of twelve years, she translated into Latin,
French, and Italian, a book of prayers and meditations, which she dedicated to
her father. Before she died, she had the happiness of seeing the Protestant
religion established throughout her kingdom; and the rage for the Roman
Catholic persuasion, which had filled her predecessor's reign with such cruelty
and persecution, was by her judicious conduct entirely subdued.

Though Queen Elizabeth had the happiness of establishing the Protestant
religion in England, yet Christianity was introduced into it many ages before
her accession to the throne; for at the time this kingdom was divided into an
heptarchy, Ethelbert, king of Kent, espoused Bertha, daughter of Carribert,
king of Paris, who had been educated in the Christian religion.

The sweetness of her manners, the superiority of her understanding, and the
benevolence of her heart, all conspired to give her an ascendancy over
Ethelbert's mind: and attached, as she was, to his person, it was natural for
her to exert her influence in a cause wherein she conceived his present peace,
and future felicity, was so entirely interwoven. As her own actions were guided
by the mild influence of that religion to which she was so anxious her husband
should become a convert, her persuasive arguments soon convinced him of its
purity; and he not only embraced the Christian faith himself, but endeavored
to establish it throughout his kingdom.

Virtue has sometimes been imagined an hereditary possession, which like an
estate, descends from generation to generation. Though you will find, in the
perusal of this work, that I have controverted that idea, yet in the instance I
am about to record it is fully exemplified.

The uncommon care which the amiable Bertha bestowed upon the education of her
child, and the advantages she derived from daily beholding instances of her
mother's virtue, had so happy an effect upon the mind of the young Ethelburga,
that she not only endeavored to imitate the bright example that was set before
her, but, if possible, to surpass it. The fame of her virtues, and the account
of her exemplary conduct, extended to a distant part of the country; and Edwin,
king of Northumberland, was attracted by the universal applause. He saw
Ethelburga; admired and married her; and, like Ethelbert, king of Kent, became
a convert to the precepts of Christianity.

You must now, my dear girls, view a far different picture to that which I have
just represented; and instead of beholding Christianity adorned with that
gentleness which its Divine Teacher inculcated, you must observe religion
disguised in the veil of priestcraft, and superstition establishing her
foundation in bloodshed, cruelty, and horror.

From having perused the character of Lady Jane Gray, the very name of Queen
Mary must strike you with a sensation of abhorrence. Your knowledge of the
History of England will almost render it unnecessary for me to tell you that
she was daughter of Henry the Eighth, by Catherine of Arragon, who was
particularly careful of her education, and engaged some of the most able men of
the age for her instructors; and, if precept could have inculcated the
principles of humanity, she would not have been regarded by posterity as
Christianity's greatest scourge. Her mind was naturally weak; and acting under
the influence of craft and priesthood, she authorized such atrocious acts of
cruelty as would make even a savage nature shudder. During the three years that
this persecution of the Protestant religion was carried on with its insatiate
violence, it is computed that no less than two hundred and seventy persons were
brought to the stake for refusing to acknowledge the Pope's supremacy, and
remaining firm to the Protestant faith; and amongst that number fifty-five were
women, and four children! Upon how mistaken a principle must that religion have
been founded, which was established upon the lives of the unoffending, and upon
the blood of the innocent!

Tenderness and compassion are generally allowed to be the peculiar
characteristics of the female mind; but Mary is not a single exception to that
partial rule; for Catherine de Medici, widow of Henry the Second of France, was
her equal in cruelty, though her superior in understanding.

Upon the death of Henry, his son Francis ascended the throne; and as he was a
prince of very moderate abilities, he submitted entirely to the direction of
his mother, whose policy in affairs of state, and ardour in the cause of the
Roman Catholic religion, have rendered her a conspicuous character in the
French history. The Protestants, during the reign of Francis, were treated with
all the severity inquisitorial malice could invent; but it was in the reign of
his brother Charles that it was carried to the utmost extent of inhuman
barbarism. Catherine, finding that all her attempts entirely to abolish the
Protestant religion had proved ineffectual, suggested to her son the inhuman
idea of having a general massacre throughout his dominions of all those who
professed that persuasion. The cruel proposal met with a favorable reception,
and orders were immediately sent to the magistrates of the different provinces
to have it put in practice. In Paris the conspiracy was carried on with such a
profound secrecy, that not the smallest suspicion was entertained of the
inhuman design. The eve of St. Bartholomew's day was pitched upon for this
barbarous undertaking, and the signal for the commencement of it was the
tolling of a bell. The guards and militia had been previously put under arms,
and the command given to the Duke of Guise. The whole night, and part of the
next day, was spent in this inhuman butchery; and in Paris, and the provinces,
it is computed that upwards of thirty thousand souls perished. So execrable and
bloody a design, formed by a woman whom the Protestants had never provoked, is
one of those uncommon instances of barbarism which requires the utmost
confidence in the historian's veracity to give credit to. But, alas! the
different authors who have disgraced the page of history by a relation of it,
are too consistent in the account of the fact, to leave a doubt upon the mind
as to its authenticity!

I cannot, my dear girls, close a section which has so interesting a subject as
religion for its theme, without endeavoring to point out the peculiar
advantages which are likely to result from the practice of it.

You are not to imagine, that when I exhort you to be religious, I wish you to
become more formal or solemn in your manners than others of the same years, or
expect you to become their supercilious reprovers. On the contrary, I admire
the volatility that is attendant upon youth, and would rather promote than
lessen it; but the spirit of true religion breathes gentleness and affability;
it gives a native unaffected ease to the behavior; is kind, social, and
cheerful; and very different from that gloomy and illiberal superstition which
clouds the brow, sharpens the temper, and dejects the spirits. It corrects and
humanizes constitutional vices; and, above all, produces an universal charity
and love to all mankind.

FILIAL DUTIES.
SENTIMENTS.
My son, hear the instructions of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy
mother.

Whosoever loves instruction, loves knowledge; but he that hates reproof, is
foolish.

Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work is pure, or whether it
is right.

Proverbs.
IN the catalogue of human duties, none have a stronger claim upon your
attention than those which I mean to make the subject of this section; for next
to your Maker your parents are entitled to your veneration, gratitude, and
esteem. Yet, with all these claims upon their childrens' affection, how often
has the unhappy parent the misery of finding pertness substituted in the place
of humility, arrogance in that of dependence, and indifference in that of duty!
and instead of their children submitting with docility to the experience of
age, beholds them vain through ignorance, and presumptuous through folly!

Although, my beloved girls, I am not fearful of becoming one of those unhappy
parents, yet I cannot help cautioning you against a contagious evil, which is
the general source of all those calamities that are attendant upon the season
of youth: I mean that degree of self-conceit which is usually attached to that
period of life. But it is most peculiarly unfortunate that the age which stands
most in need of advice, should be the most prone to reject it. In China, so
great is the veneration and respect in which the parental character is held,
that an instance of disputing its authority is absolutely unknown. And the
ancient Romans even gave parents a right over the lives of their children.

Mr. Addison, in his Spectator, has written an excellent paper upon the subject
of filial respect, wherein he paints the parental solicitude in those natural
colors which cannot fail of touching every heart that is not lost to feelings
of tenderness, and sensations of duty. But, as my memory is stored with many
historical facts, in which the virtue of filial tenderness, and the barbarism
of its deficiency, are both strongly exemplified, I shall relate them for your
instruction; convinced, at the same time, that your own hearts will incline you
to imitate the one, and abhor the other.

A Roman lady, of some rank, was accused of a crime against the state, for
which she was tried, and condemned to suffer death. The keeper of the prison,
who was ordered to be her executioner, not only felt a great degree of
repugnance to the office, but was absolutely incapable of performing it; yet,
aware that his own life depended upon the discharge of his duty, he dared not
attempt preserving her existence. Thus circumstanced, the cruel idea (which yet
had compassion for its foundation) occurred, of letting her remain without
sustenance, knowing that she must then die from want, and that he should escape
the pain of becoming her executioner. A man in that situation, who could shrink
from the discharge of his duty from motives of humanity, it is natural to
suppose, might easily be subdued by tenderness, and overcome by persuasion: and
it is no wonder that he yielded to the entreaties of the daughter, and
permitted her to visit her unhappy mother; though he was under the necessity of
searching her, to prevent her being the conveyor of any kind of nourishment.
Several days elapsed without any striking alteration in the unfortunate woman's
appearance: this circumstance called forth the keeper's astonishment so much,
that he began to imagine the daughter had contrived some means of eluding his
vigilance, and therefore resolved to watch them when the daily meeting took
place. He did so, and beheld a sight that called forth his pity, and produced
his admiration. An affectionate daughter was presented to his view, lengthening
out her parent's existence by that nourishment nature had given for the support
of her own offspring, and endeavoring to avert the decrees of justice by the
nutricious qualities of the milk of tenderness! The humane keeper instantly
flew to her judges, described the interesting scene he had beheld, and had the
happiness of procuring a pardon for the unfortunate offender. The senate were
so struck with this instance of amiable tenderness, that they ordered a temple
to be erected to filial piety on the spot where the prison stood, and both
mother and daughter to be maintained at the public expense.

A similar instance to the one I have related is recorded in the Grecian
history, with this single difference, that Euphrasia (which was the name of the
Grecian heroine) sustained her father by the same nourishment which the amiable
Roman had supported her mother.

At the siege of Troy, when every person was attempting to rescue their
property from the fury of the flames, AEneas, the amiable son of Anchises,
considering an aged parent the greatest treasure he possessed, placed him upon
his shoulders, and, whilst others were bending under the weight of their riches
and possessions, he triumphantly passed the gates of the city, exulting in the
idea of having preserved the life of him to whom he was indebted for existence.

Many years ago mount AEtna raged with such dreadful violence, that it was
apprehended all the hamlets within its vicinity would be destroyed by the
torrents of lava that it poured forth. The wretched inhabitants, terrified at
the prospect of the approaching danger, secured their little property, and fled
from a scene of such devastation and horror. Amidst the number of those who
preserved their treasures, and escaped the threatened danger, were two
brothers, whose names were Anapias and Amphinomus; who, instead of attempting
to secure wealth, or protect property, those amiable youths thought only of
preserving the lives of the authors of their being; and one taking their
father, and the other their mother, on their shoulders, fled with them to a
place of safety.

Filial tenderness is a sentiment so strongly implanted in the breasts of those
whose hearts are particularly open to impressions of tenderness, that even
cruelty and unkindness has sometimes been unable to eradicate it. A remarkable
instance of the truth of this observation is recorded in the Roman history.

T. Manlius had from his infancy been treated by his father with a degree of
inhuman severity; and when he arrived at the age of manhood, was even banished
from his presence, without being conscious of having committed a fault. During
the period of his estrangement from his parental abode, report whispered that
the tribune of the people intended prosecuting his father for illegal
practices. Forgetful of his own injuries, and solicitous to save his father
from the misery of a public disgrace, he instantly flew to the tribune's house,
and soliciting a private audience, presented a dagger to the breast of the
astonished magistrate, and at the same time demanded him immediately to swear
he would not prosecute his father, or else expect to receive the weapon in his
own bosom. The tribune, unable to make any terms, and struck with the heroic
proof of filial affection, took the oath that was extorted, and ever after
became the young man's friend.

A gentleman of Sweden, who had for many years filled one of the highest
offices in the state with credit and respectability, was at length accused of
such illegal practices as demanded public scrutiny, and occasioned his
condemnation. His son, a young man of nineteen, was at that period absent from
Sweden, but being informed of his father's disgrace, and the punishment that
awaited him, he traveled post, until he arrived at the house of the magistrate
who had condemned his father, and throwing himself at his feet in an agony of
grief, besought him to accept his life as a ransom for his father's! The judge,
struck with such a proof of filial tenderness, immediately sent an account of
it to the king, who instantly ordered the father to be pardoned, and a title of
nobility to be conferred upon the son. The humane judge, pleased at the
opportunity of conferring happiness, went to the young man's house, and, after
imparting the joyful intelligence of his father's pardon, saluted him by the
title the king had bestowed. Grateful for the preservation of a life that was
dearer than his own, the exalted young man expressed his joy in terms that
evinced its sincerity; but that honor which would have been so flattering to a
less noble mind he modestly declined, saying, he thought it would be a means of
perpetuating his father's disgrace, which he was anxious should be buried in
oblivion. This uncommon instance of refined delicacy was so pleasing to the
king, that he sent for him into his presence, and bestowed upon him the
applause he deserved, and made him his confidential secretary.

A young Athenian, whose name was Cimon, voluntarily surrendered himself a
prisoner to redeem his father's body for burial, who had died during the time
of his confinement for debt; and though Athens was allowed to be the encourager
of arts, and the rewarder of noble actions, that filial son was neglected by
the state.

When Sir Thomas Moore, the great lord chancellor of England, was sent to the
tower for opposing the measures of that tyrant Henry the Eighth, his daughter,
the amiable Mrs. Roper, forced her way through the guards that attended him,
and throwing her arms round the neck of her unhappy parent, broke out into such
agonizing expressions of tenderness and sorrow, as absolutely produced tears
from the surrounding multitude: and when the fatal moment arrived that for ever
robbed her of a father's love, her anguish had nearly proved fatal to her
existence. By great interest she obtained permission to bury the body; but the
head remained fourteen days upon London Bridge, and was with much difficulty
then purchased, and enclosed in a small leaden box, which she preserved with
the most pious care, and when she died it was buried in her arms.

The Countess of Pembroke, whose history has been recorded by a very able
writer, has rendered her name no less immortal by her filial piety, than by her
superior understanding and exalted virtues. A remarkable instance of her
attachment to her mother is related by the author above alluded to.

The last parting which took place between the countess and her mother made so
strong an impression upon her mind, that she had an elegant marble pillar
raised upon the spot in commemoration of it; and at her death left a certain
sum of money to be paid the poor of the parish of Broughton for ever on the
anniversary of that day.

In the sacred history there is a very beautiful description of a young woman's
duty and affection to her husband's mother, which met with that reward that
generally attends virtuous actions in this life, but which they are certain of
meeting with in the next.

Naomi (which was the name of the mother) had, by the severity of a famine in
Bethlehem, been driven into a foreign country with her husband and two sons,
but had not long been settled there, when death deprived her of the affection
of a husband, and the tender assiduity of her children. One of the young men
had married a beautiful girl, whose name was Ruth, who, upon the death of her
husband, devoted her time to relieving the cares and soothing the afflictions
of her mother-in-law; and when she proposed returning into her own country,
resolved to follow her, thinking an old woman incapable of undertaking so long
a journey without some one to support and protect her. It was in vain that
Naomi-endeavoured to dissuade the amiable Ruth from following the miseries of
an unfortunate old woman, for a sense of duty made her resolute; and the desire
of promoting her mother's happiness rendered her inflexible. When Naomi arrived
in Bethlehem, she had the misfortune of hearing many of her relations were
dead, and that the estate of her husband was in the possession of a stranger.
Thus miserably situated, she was obliged to depend upon the exertions of her
amiable daughter for the common sustenance nature required. It happened to be
in the time of harvest, and Ruth daily gleaned in the fields of a man of
fortune, who was a distant relation of her deceased husband. Boaz accidentally
saw her at this menial employment, and, charmed with the native loveliness of
her appearance, made enquiries into her circumstances and connections; and the
moment he was informed of her tender behavior to her aged mother, he was so
struck with the delicacy of it, that he resolved to make her an offer of his
hand; and the amiable Ruth had by that means the power of raising the
unfortunate Naomi from poverty, and supporting her in affluence.

If the actions which I have now related have inspired your breasts with
sensations of pleasure, those which I am going to record must produce an effect
directly contrary; and your minds will be struck with horror at the relation of
circumstances that disgrace human nature, and shock humanity.

In the two hundred and twentieth year of Rome, Tullia, the wife of Tarquin,
and daughter of Severus the king, had the inhumanity not only to approve her
husband's intentions of dethroning her father, but absolutely persuaded him to
embrue his hands in his blood. And when Tarquin had basely dragged him from the
regal seat, and assisted at his murder, she was the first to enter the forum,
and salute her husband by the title of king. Then mounting her chariot in
triumph, she desired to be driven to her late father's palace. In one of the
streets, through which the carriage passed, the murderers had left the body of
the unfortunate king, which the charioteer perceiving, was struck with horror
at the sight, checked his horses, and was unable to proceed. "Why do you not go
on?" cried the inhuman Tullia. "What stops you?" "The body of the king, your
father," replied the man; "which I must drive over if I proceed." "Drive on,
then," she exclaimed in a rage; "and do not be afraid of a dead body:" and
snatching up a stool that stood at the bottom of the carriage, threw it at his
head. The coachman obeyed the order, and the wheels of the chariot were stained
with her father's blood!

Amidst the various misfortunes which Henry the Fourth, emperor of Germany, had
to encounter, none affect a feeling mind with more tenderness than those which
he endured from the turbulent and ungovernable spirit of his son, who was
afterward Henry the Fifth. That young man not only refused all submission to
parental authority, but absolutely united with his father's enemies, and forced
the scepter from the hands of one of the most amiable princes that ever swayed
it!

The unfortunate emperor, reduced to the most abject state of poverty by the
intrigues of his son, and the oppression of the pope, wrote to the former,
imploring his permission to retire to Liege, that he might no longer be
compelled to wander about in search of a resting place in a country that had
once owned him for its lawful sovereign, and where he once might have commanded
any part of its possessions. This supplicating epistle was wholly unattended
to, and the unfortunate prince was reduced to the utmost extremity of poverty
and wretchedness. In this forlorn situation he applied to the citizens of
Cologne for relief, who, compassionating his misery, instantly raised a body of
troops, in order to enable him to reinstate himself in his dominions; but the
unhappy prince, worn out by the severity of his misfortunes, was unable to
avail himself of their friendly intentions toward him. His spirits forsook
him, his health declined, and in the fifty-sixth year of his age he fell a
victim to the barbarism of his son. That inhuman murderer, lost to the
sentiments of humanity, and dead to those of nature, not contented with having
shortened the existence of his father, continued his persecutions even beyond
the grave; for when he was informed that the emperor's body had been interred
in an elegant sepulcher, he commanded it to be dragged out, and thrown naked
into an open vault, where it remained uncovered five years.

When the Roman emperor Valerian, and his amiable wife Mariniana, were made
captives by Sapor, king of Persia, the inhuman cruelty with which they were
treated, had such an effect upon the health and spirits of the empress, that
death soon relieved her from captivity. When the nobility went to pay their
visits of condolence to Gallian, Valerian's son, who was left guardian of the
empire, he received them with the utmost unconcern; and, upon expressing their
regret for the misfortunes that had attended the emperor and empress, he
replied, with perfect coolness, "they were mortal, and therefore liable to
misfortunes as well as others:" and instead of taking any pains to procure his
father's deliverance, he passed his days in riot, and his nights in debauchery.

The emperor Nero had several times (but in vain) attempted poisoning his
mother Agrippina. At length he resolved to have a vessel made with loose
planks, supported by bolts, that were so contrived, as to be unfastened at the
pleasure of those who would undertake the perpetration of the inhuman plan he
suggested. Vice, supported by the aid of wealth and power, has little
difficulty in finding tools ready to execute its designs; and Nero easily
persuaded some of his associates to assist him in the inhuman plot. The
empress, unsuspicious of her son's intentions, consented to go on board the
vessel; the fatal bolts were soon undrawn, and she was precipitated into the
sea. At that moment a ship appeared, the captain of which perceiving her
situation, sent out his boat, and saved her life. Her son hearing of the
failure of his diabolical plan, instantly became frantic with rage and
disappointment, and, unable to disguise his feelings, sent for Amicetus, an
officer of the guards, and commanded him immediately to go and put his mother
to death. The moment the unhappy empress saw him enter the room attended by a
party of his soldiers, she suspected his inhuman design, and pointing to her
stomach, said, "Strike first here: for it gave birth to a monster."

FRATERNAL AND SISTERLY LOVE.
SENTIMENTS.
We are all members of one great body; and tenderness, justice, and equity,
ought to be the foundation that supports it.

Human society resembles an arch of stone: all would fall to the ground, if one
piece did not support the other.

Of all the felicities attached to human nature, that of a firm and tender
friendship ranks the first: it sweetens cares, dispels sorrows, and is an
antidote against the severest calamities.

Seneca.
TO strengthen the bonds of nature and cement the ties of affection, I consider
as one of the strongest duties a parent has to perform. How lovely and
interesting a sight is it to behold a family mutually endeavoring to excel
each other in the practice of tenderness, and in acts of affection,
participating in each others joys, and lessening, by kindness, each others
sorrows! The friendships of the world are often formed upon the basis of
interest, and the structure of expectation: destroy either, and it falls to the
ground. But the friendship which exists between brothers and sisters can have
no such degrading principle for its foundation: no separate interest can weaken
their attachment, no disappointed hope can lessen their tenderness; what
promotes the happiness of one, increases, that of the other: and the sorrows
that gain admittance into the breast of either, bear an equal participation.

Thus, my beloved children, finding yourselves linked together by the chain of
nature, how greatly does it behove you to strengthen the tender bond, and, by
mutual offices of kindness and affection, render it invulnerable to the attacks
of the interested, and the attempts of the artful! I shall now produce some
examples of those who, by the practice of tenderness and affection, have
rendered their characters respectable in the opinion of posterity; and of
others who, from a deficiency in those amiable qualities, have entailed a
disgrace upon their names which time itself is unable to eradicate.

When the emperor Theodosius ascended the regal throne, he was not of an age to
take the administration of affairs into his own hands; but instead of
appointing governors to direct the actions of the youthful monarch, his sister
Pulcheria (though but a few years older than himself) was permitted not only to
take the charge of the empire into her own hands, but was consulted upon all
matters of importance to the state. When Theodosius was old enough to take an
active part in the government, he never transacted any business of moment
without the concurrence and advice of his sister; and all historians agree in
ascribing the great qualities which adorned his character to the prevailing
influence of Pulcheria's example.

Eudosia, the daughter of Heraclitus, an Athenian philosopher, was, by her
father's will, left joint sharer of his estate with her two brothers; but,
instead of their fulfilling the desire of their deceased parent, and
endeavoring to console their sister for the loss she had sustained, they not
only treated her with studied neglect, but refused her the smallest share of
that property which was by right her own.

Heraclitus had taken uncommon pains in his daughter's education; he had
informed her understanding, embellished her mind, and refined her manners.
Possessed of advantages far superior to wealth, she left Athens, and going to
Constantinople, was introduced to Pulcheria, the emperor's sister, to whom she
related the situation of her affairs, and from whom she solicited redress.
Pulcheria, struck with the delicacy of her sentiments, and the polish of her
mind, instantly felt interested in her affairs; and upon a more intimate
acquaintance, discovered that she was possessed of such admirable
qualifications, that she persuaded Theodosius to make her his wife. The moment
her brothers heard of this unexpected turn in her affairs, they trembled at the
recollection of their past conduct, and, dreading that vengeance they deserved,
left their estate, and fled from Athens. Eudosia, with a generosity that is
always attendant upon true greatness, felt the utmost concern at the terror she
had unintentionally inspired, and, after taking every means in her power to
convince them of her tenderness, at length prevailed with them to appear at
Constantinople; and, after embracing them with the utmost affection, raised
them to some of the first employments about the court.

Anna Commena, daughter to the emperor Alexias, was indefatigable in her
endeavors to persuade her father to appoint her husband his successor, and
exclude a brother who had always treated her with the most unbounded affection:
but though the emperor loved her with a tenderness she did not merit, yet he
could not be persuaded to act with injustice to a son who had never offended
him; and, at his death, John was proclaimed emperor. That amiable prince was
informed, by some of his courtiers, of his sister's attempts to deprive him of
the empire; but his heart was too noble to harbor resentment, or to retain a
sense of injuries; and, with a generosity that was truly admirable, he not only
avoided naming her former conduct, but loaded her with favors that evinced his
affection: but her heart was too callous to be subdued by kindness, and she
actually headed a conspiracy to dethrone him!

Upon the discovery of this iniquitous plot, the emperor immediately ordered
her into confinement; but, upon her writing him a penitential letter, and
expressing her contrition for her past conduct, he not only forgave her crime,
but restored her to the possession of his favor and affection.

A Portuguese vessel having for many hours encountered the fury of a violent
storm, at length struck upon a rock. The love of life is a natural impression;
and the hope of preserving it induced part of the crew to jump into the boat:
but their situation was so perilous when they entered it, that they had not
time to make preparations for their future support; and a few biscuits, and a
little marmalade, was all the sustenance they secured for nature. Five days
they encountered the fury of the elements, and endured the pressing call of
hunger; and as their little stock of provision was just exhausted, they
determined upon throwing one of their companions overboard, that his share of
food might be divided amongst the rest. The idea was dreadful; but their
situation demanded the sad alternative and a lot was to decide who was to be
the unfortunate victim. It fell upon a merchant who had a wife and several
children that depended upon his exertion for their support, and who by his
death would become destitute of the means of subsistence. The merchant had a
brother with him, a youth about eighteen years of age, who feeling for their
distress, and being incapable of beholding a brother whom he fondly loved fall
a sacrifice to necessity, offered his life to redeem one he thought more
valuable! The merchant, struck with the youth's generosity, and finding his
affection increased by the proof he had given of it, strenuously refused the
noble offer: but the young man painted in such glowing colors the agonizing
sensations of his brother's wife, and the misery of his children, that at
length he was induced to accept the offered ransom; and, after taking a most
tender farewell of his brother, the gallant youth was precipitated into the sea!
Whether the near approach of death was the means of endearing life, or whether
he repented having given so strong an instance of fraternal love, I cannot
pretend to say, but he swam after the boat, called to the rowers, and at length
caught hold of the rudder. One of the crew, whose heart was dead to humanity,
and whose breast was a stranger to compassion, snatched up a hatchet, and
aiming a blow at the extended arm, severed the hand from the body! Agonized by
torture, yet desperate by despair, the miserable youth pursued the vessel, and
with his other hand attempted to save his life. The inhuman monster, who had
struck one decisive blow, now aimed a second, and with the same success; and
the hapless youth was seen struggling against the waves with the stumps of
those unfortunate limbs his barbarity had robbed him of. At that moving
spectacle humanity shuddered, and all the crew endeavored to save his life. He
was taken into the vessel, the bleeding limbs bound up, and each man offered
his little share of food. The rowers continued at their labor, and a few hours
after they were blessed with the sight of land. A Portuguese vessel soon
appeared, took them on board, and conveyed them to Lisbon; where the amiable
young man's wounds were dressed, his filial piety applauded, and his person
viewed with absolute veneration!

Eumenes, an Asiatic monarch, being engaged in a war with the Persians, and a
report having been spread that he was killed, his brother Attalus, without
enquiring into the truth of it, ascended the throne, and married his brother's
wife; but in a short time was informed Eumenes was not only alive, but
returning victorious to take possession of his kingdom. Alarmed at this
intelligence, and apprehensive of encountering his brother's resentment, he
dreaded the sight of a man whom he had injured: but the generous Eumenes
discovered no symptoms of anger, when his brother, accompanied by all the men
of consequence, went out to meet him, and congratulate him upon his safety; and
only whispered in his ear, that he should not have married another man's wife,
before he had assured himself her former husband had been dead.

Cato, the Roman censor, was so remarkably attached to his brother Caepes,
that, from the earliest days of childhood, he could never bear to be separated
from him: and Plutarch, in his life of that great man, observes, that they were
scarcely ever seen asunder: and when death deprived him of his loved companion,
he felt the blow as the greatest misfortune that could have befallen him.

Titus, the Roman emperor, one of the greatest men that ever adorned a throne,
though he was informed that his brother Domitian had endeavored to persuade
the army to rebel against him, yet always treated him with the utmost
tenderness, and with tears of regret would often solicit a return of that
affection which he felt in so unbounded a degree toward his unworthy relation.

In the conduct of Timoleon, a Corinthian officer, you will find another
charming instance of fraternal affection. Timoleon and his brother were both
engaged in the same battle, and the fortune of war was unfavourable to both.
Timoleon received a dreadful wound, but, smarting under the anguish, had the
misfortune to see his brother fall! Unmindful of his own torture, he flew to
the spot, and beheld a sight that called forth all his tenderness; a brother,
whom he fondly loved, stretched bleeding on the ground, and no longer sensible
of his sorrow, or capable of returning his unbounded affection! Instantly he
spread his shield over the lifeless form, and, dead to a scene of his own
sufferings, protected it from insult and plunder, until some of his friends
appeared, who, struck with the greatness of the action, carried the body from
the field, and then supported the amiable Timoleon to his tent.

These instances of brotherly love, which have been related by some of the
ablest historians, are sufficiently numerous to convince you that fraternal
affection adds luster to the greatest characters, and that the virtuous have
always considered the ties of consanguinity as demands upon affection, and
claims upon tenderness; but it has always been found, that great virtues, and
great vices, have embellished and deformed each succeeding age; and I shall now
present to your view a few characters that come under the description of the
latter. You will now behold affection sacrificed to interest, tenderness
supplanted by envy, and cruelty substituted in the place of benevolence.

I shall begin with a story from the sacred writings, which, though it must
frequently have met your eye, possibly might not have made a deep impression
upon your minds.

Joseph, the youngest but one of Jacob's twelve sons, was endowed by nature
with a superiority of understanding, and a sweetness of disposition, that
ensured him the love and esteem of all his friends. The filial respect he paid
his aged father, and the tender solicitude he constantly evinced for his
happiness, naturally impressed the old man's heart with a greater degree of
tenderness toward him than his other children; and, desirous of evincing this
favorable impression, he bought him a very beautiful variegated coat, (which
in those days was thought fashionable,) without purchasing his other sons one
like it. This circumstance, united to some extraordinary dreams, which seemed
to foretell Joseph's future greatness, inspired his brothers with such a
malevolent hatred against him, that they resolved to become his murderers.
However, one of them, who possessed more humanity than the rest, dissuaded them
from this barbarous design; and, instead of murdering him, they sold him for a
slave to some merchants who lived in a distant country. But, as the favor of
heaven always attends those who merit it, Joseph was, by the hand of
Providence, raised from the degrading situation of a slave to be the governor
of Egypt; and in that station, instead of punishing his brothers' for their
inhuman conduct, he treated them with the greatest kindnees, sent for them into
Egypt, and gave them some of the most valuable estates in that country.

Boleslaus, king of Poland, was one of those unfortunate characters who suffer
their passions to acquire an ascendency over their principles; and, upon his
brother Stanislaus, bishop of Cracovia, venturing to admonish him upon the
impropriety of his conduct, he gave way to one of his paroxysms of fury, in
which he terminated his brother's existence; but being unable to support the
torture of reflection, and the pangs of remorse, he soon after became a
self-murderer.

Amidst the numberless acts of inhumanity that disgraced the character of Queen
Mary, that to her sister Elizabeth is a striking proof of the innate cruelty of
her disposition. Wholly forgetful of the relationship between them, she was not
satisfied with having her treated with insolence and scorn during her
imprisonment, (for no fault,) but actually wished to find a pretense for taking
away her life; and had not her husband insisted upon her sister's enlargement,
in all probability she would have accomplished her detestable design.

ON THE ADVANTAGES OF A GOOD EDUCATION.
SENTIMENTS.
If the mind is well cultivated, it produces a store of fruit: if neglected, it
is overrun with weeds.

A wise man carries all his treasure within himself. What Fortune gives, she
may take away: but a wise man does not depend upon her mercy, and is therefore
beyond her reach.

Seneca.
THERE are many prejudices entertained against the character of a learned lady;
and perhaps, if all ladies were profoundly learned, many inconveniences might
arise from it. But it does not appear to me that a woman will be rendered less
acceptable in the world, or worse qualified to perform any part of her duty in
it, by having employed her time from six to sixteen in the cultivation of her
understanding. The literary education of women ought indisputably to be varied
according to their fortunes and expectations. Much refinement and too great
taste for reading, will injure her whose time, from prudential motives, must be
engrossed by economy. Few women are indeed entirely exempted from domestic
cares; yet the opulent and unmarried have many intervals which ought to be
devoted to improvement; and wherever a young lady of fortune appears to possess
a genius and inclination for learned pursuits, she ought to be permitted to
indulge it: for the mind of a female is certainly as capable of acquiring
knowledge as that of the other sex; and the instances which I shall insert will
possibly prove the validity of this opinion, and will be sufficient to confute
those authors who have taken so much pains to depreciate the capability of a
female understanding. But if an enlightened mind must consequently be a
conceited one, I should be a strenuous advocate for your remaining in
ignorance. Or should I, by endeavoring to improve your understandings, attract
your inclinations from the performance of those duties which are peculiarly
attached to a female station, I should then have reason to lament my having
bestowed the culture, and prefer a barren rock to a flowing mead. But as I
dread no such melancholy effect from the improvement of your minds, and flatter
myself I am laying a foundation for virtue, I shall persevere in the course I
have began, and present to your view some examples of female characters, where
humility is attached to greatness, gentleness to refinement, and genuine piety
to scientific knowledge.

Calphurna, the wife of Julius Caesar, was at once the object of his love and
admiration. Her wit amused, her understanding charmed, and her sweetness
captivated the conqueror of the world. Her mind had been cultivated with the
nicest care, and her manners were formed upon the most perfect model. Anxious
to promote the happiness of her people, she in fact became their idol; and it
is difficult to say whether she was most venerated, loved, or esteemed!

Plautina, wife to the emperor Trajan, was as much celebrated for the sweetness
of her manners, as she was for the solidity of her judgment, and the refinement
of her understanding; and so thoroughly was the emperor acquainted with the
capability of her intellectual powers, that he always consulted her upon
affairs of importance: yet this flattering compliment to her abilities neither
filled her with pride, or puffed her up with presumption; for her humility was
equal to her penetration, and her affability to her judgment: and so great was
the ascendency she obtained over the emperor, that historians ascribe many of
his noble acts to the influence of her virtues.

Agrippina, wife of Germanicus, was a woman in whom were united great talents,
exalted virtues, and refined delicacy. Her perfections were founded on an
innate principle of virtue, which withstood the pernicious effects of had
example; for her mother's character was as much disgraced by censure, as her
own was adorned with praise.

The Tartarian historians who are loudest in the praise of Tarmujin's virtues,
unanimously ascribe them to his mother's influence. The tender age of that
young prince at the death of his father, induced several of his tribes to place
themselves under the protection of more experienced chiefs; but by the able
conduct of his surviving parent, they were soon recalled to a sense of duty;
and those who were deaf to the voice of persuasion, were compelled by the aid
of force; for the young prince, by the advice of his mother, assembled his
army, collected his forces, and, headed by his female general, easily conquered
those who had been disaffected.

Amidst the various failings that disgraced the character of Henry the Eighth,
that of inattention to his childrens' education was certainly not one of the
number; and the Princess Elizabeth was known to have been put under the tuition
of some of the most learned men of the age in which she lived. Her abilities
were of that transcendant kind, as rather to astonish than to conciliate; and
we find more to admire than to love in her character.

Sir Thomas Moore, Lord Chancellor of England, whose name I have before had
occasion to mention, bestowed not only a liberal, but a learned, education upon
his three daughters; and they were all completely versed both in the Latin and
Greek languages; yet I never heard those acquirements gave them a disrelish for
domestic occupations; on the contrary, their biographer represents them as
dutiful daughters, affectionate sisters, tender wives, and amiable friends.

The sixteenth century has been agreed by all authors to have been peculiarly
distinguished by female excellence: It was at that period as much the fashion
for men of fortune to give their daughters a learned education, as it is now
the taste to give them a polite one: and amongst the number of those who might
pride themselves upon their childrens' abilities, was Sir Anthony Cook, one of
the learned tutors to King Edward the Sixth, who not only engaged the most able
masters of the age to instruct his children in the learned languages, but
devoted all his leisure hours to their advantage and improvement. The eldest,
who afterward married Lord Burleigh, was go great a proficient in the Greek
language, that she wrote a most elegant letter in it upon presenting a Hebrew
bible to the public library at Cambridge. His second daughter was united to Sir
Nicholas Bacon, and, if possible, transcended her sister both in virtue and
abilities; and to the ascendency of her example, and the efficacy of her
precepts, historians have ascribed the brilliant qualities that adorned her
sons. His third daughter, who had a natural taste for poetry, as well as
science, was married to Lord John Russell; and equally proves that an attention
to study does not unfit the mind for the more important duties of life; for
lady Russell was an excellent wife, a tender mother, and a sincere friend.

Although education is allowed to have a most powerful influence on the
youthful mind, yet there have been instances where the depravity of nature, and
the force of appetite, have predominated over the most virtuous education; and
where an innate propensity to vice has defied the power of precept, and the
influence of example.

Augustus Caesar was one of the most affectionate, and, at the same time, the
most solicitous of fathers; and to have heard his daughter applauded for her
virtues, or praised for her abilities, would have been one of the most
gratifying sounds that could have reached his ear. But though Julia was
educated with all the delicacy and refinement a parent's care could suggest, an
innate principle of depravity prevented her reaping any advantage from his
instructions; and her conduct at length became so publicly notorious, that he
was forced to banish her to the island of Pandeteria, where she languished
several years the miserable victim of unconquered vice and illicit passion.

Olympia, wife of Philip, king of Macedon, had been educated by her parents
with the greatest care, and the fondest solicitude; but, instead of her
disposition being softened, and her nature humanized, by the enlargement of her
understanding, it seemed only to have taught her the method of refining upon
cruelty, and varying the art of barbarity. Not satisfied with employing agents
to accomplish her barbarous designs, she inhumanly chose to witness the
execution of them; and would frequently proportionate the tortures she
inflicted to her opinion of the sufferer's ability to bear them; that, by
lengthening out their miserable existence, she might have the gratification of
beholding a repetition of their agonies. She was herself the murderess of two
of her husband's children, one of whom fled for shelter from her fury into the
arms of its unhappy mother: but the sacred repository was not able to arrest
her inhuman hand, or save the wretched victim of her resentment. The dreadful
blow was struck, although the distracted parent offered her life to save that
of her child!

Irene, empress of Constantinople, though she had not had a learned education,
yet had received such a one as would have fitted her for the exalted station
she was destined to fill, had not the propensities of an over-bearing spirit
counteracted all the attempts of her parents to render her an amiable
character. Though she had always been treated with gentleness and kindness by
her mother, yet, when she bore that endearing name, her breast was a total
stranger to all those tender sensations that are usually connected with it;
and, instead of treating her son Porphyrogenitus with that gentleness which
would have ensured his affection, she adopted a mode of severity which was
rather calculated to inspire his hatred. As the emperor died when his son was
only ten years old, Irene took the administration of public affairs into her
own hands; and, delighted at the homage she received in that situation, refused
to relinquish it when her son was old enough to assume it himself; and, upon
discovering that he was endeavoring to form a party of his own, she actually
chastised him with her own hands, and confined him to his apartment. She then
compelled him to marry a woman of low origin, although he was tenderly attached
to a princess to whom he had long been betrothed. At length, finding that the
army murmured against her authority, and were only inclined to acknowledge
Porphyrogenitus for their sovereign, she procured some assassins to inhumanly
murder the young prince as he was returning to Constantinople unattended by his
guards.

An inhuman parent is certainly the greatest monster in the creation, and is an
absolute contradiction to the very law of nature, which even inspires the
brutes with sensations of love and tenderness for their offspring! Yet history
has handed down to posterity a few instances of such degeneracy, to prove how
completely depraved human nature can be, when left to the dominion of its own
passions, and the entire guidance of its vicious propensities.

Cleopatra, widow of Demetrius, king of Syria, having assumed the reins of
government during the minority of her son Seleucus, was so exasperated with him
for attempting to diminish her authority, by taking them into his own hands,
that, in a fit of rage and fury, she plunged a dagger into his bosom, to secure
herself the continuance of her power.

Polydectus, king of Sparta, not knowing that his queen was pregnant, ordained
that his brother Lycurgus should become his successor. The queen, who had long
felt a criminal attachment for that great lawgiver, upon the death of her
husband, informed him of her situation, offering to kill the child, if he would
consent to marry her. Lycurgus, shocked at this proof of parental inhumanity,
yet fearful of offending a woman capable of it, disguised his real intentions,
and amused her with professions of his regard until the birth of the child,
when, taking it from its cruel mother, he presented it to the nobles as their
future king, and resigned his claim to that title.

I have mentioned these instances of parental barbarity, to prove the necessity
there is for endeavoring to subdue the passions, and to form the principles;
for if parents can be forgetful of the duties they owe their children, how much
more likely is it that children should become forgetful of the duty they owe
their parents! But human nature is composed of such fragile materials, that the
most cautious conduct cannot preserve it free from blemishes; and so prone is
it to error, and so liable to failing, that it is impossible to attain
perfection: yet, where the passions are under the guidance of principle, and a
virtuous intention inspires the conduct, vice can never find admission into the
heart, nor depravity corrupt it by its baneful influence.

FORTITUDE.
SENTIMENTS.
To know how to support adversity, is to deserve prosperity. Afflictions are
sent for the exercise of virtue.

We are all surrounded and beset with evils; and as they cannot be avoided, the
mind ought to be prepared for encountering them.

Seneca.
THERE are many things that are termed evils, which often turn out to the
advantage of those that suffer them; but as they are appointments of heaven,
they ought always to be supported with resignation and fortitude. Life has ever
been considered as a state of uncertainty, full of vicissitudes, anxieties, and
fears. The fairest prospects may be suddenly overshadowed, and the brightest
sunshine obscured by clouds of darkness.

As you are placed in a state so full of variety, and as pleasure is allowed to
be so transitory, how necessary is it that you should endeavor to arm
yourselves against the approaches of misfortune, that you may rise superior to
its attacks! A virtuous mind, struggling with affliction, has resources in
itself, which the vicious are unacquainted with; and supports, which they can
never expect to receive. In prosperity they neglect their Maker, and in
adversity they dare not hope for his assistance; they therefore sink under
calamity, and tremble at the approach of distress.

Those writers who have wished to exalt the abilities of their own sex, by
depreciating the mental faculties of ours, have endeavored to prove, that the
female mind is neither calculated for sustaining misfortunes with resignation,
or camities with fortitude; imagining there must be a natural connection
between delicacy of body and weakness of mind. Though softness and sensibility
are certainly the characteristics of our sex, yet those amiable qualities are
often united with a firmness to endure, and a capability to sustain, the
greatest hardships: and history records many instances wherein femenine
fortitude has not only learned to endure calamity, but to despise existence; of
which the following are striking examples.

In the reign of Claudius, the Roman emperor, Arria, wife of Caecinna Poetus,
was an illustrious pattern of magnanimity and conjugal affection. It happened
that her husband, and only son, were both attacked with a violent and dangerous
indisposition. The young man was endowed with every quality of mind and person
that could endear him to a parent's heart, and render his loss one of the
severest misfortunes it could sustain: but the unhappy mother was not only
doomed to encounter it, but compelled to wear a smiling countenance when her
heart was laboring under the most agonizing affliction; for had Poetus known
the calamity that had befallen him, in all probability it would have been fatal
to his own existence; and whenever he enquired after the situation of his son,
she endeavored to quiet his anxiety by the pious deception of saying he was
better; though, upon those occasions, she was always obliged to find some
pretense for leaving the apartment, to hide her emotions, and disguise her
tears; and would then return with a countenance composed by resignation, and a
mind supported by fortitude!

Some time after the misfortune of having lost his son, Poetus was apprehended
for having espoused the cause of Camillus Scribeninanus, governor of Dalmatia,
who had raised an army with an intent of deposing the emperor. When the guards
were going to conduct him from Dalmatia to Rome, Arria besought their
permission to be admitted into the same ship; and, upon their inhumanly
refusing her request, she hired a small fishing boat, and, unmindful of the
danger that attended the undertaking, boldly ventured to follow the ship, and
then obtained the emperor's permission to accompany the object of her affection
to the dreary dungeon that was prepared for him, where, by acts of tenderness,
and proofs of affection, she endeavored to make him forget his misfortunes.
Whether it was the tenderness that Poetus bore to the amiable Arria, or that
death by the hand of an executioner appeared armed with an increase of terrors,
I cannot pretend to say, but his mind sunk under his misfortunes, and all the
exertions of Arria, to raise and support it proved ineffectual. The day before
that fixed for his execution, she endeavored to persuade him to save himself
the misery of a public disgrace, by a voluntary extinction of his own
existence; but, finding her arguments fail, and that her husband's resolution
was not equal to her own, she drew a dagger from under her robe, plunged it
into her breast, and drawing it instantly out, presented it to him with a
smile, saying, " It is not painful, my Poetus."

When the tyrant Nero had issued a warrant for the death of that great
philosopher Seneca, (who had been both his friend and tutor,) his wife Paulina
firmly resolved to die with the object of her affection, and all his arguments
to dissuade her from her fatal purpose seemed but to strengthen it. At length
he reluctantly yielded to her desire, and their veins were opened at the same
time. Paulina undaunted beheld the stream of life flowing in a rapid course,
and appeared to hail the happy moment that would place her beyond the power of
a tyrant, and eternally unite her to the husband of her love. This enlivening
reflection was soon destroyed, by a total insensibility pervading her
faculties, and a general lassitude seizing her frame. In that situation she was
removed from the apartment where her husband was stationed, and carried into
the air, where her domestics (by whom she was adored) resolved to try and
preserve a life they so highly valued; and, after binding up her arms, they
forced a reviving cordial into her mouth; and, by persuasion and entreaties, at
length reconciled her to existence.

Sabinus, a general in the Roman army, having attempted to gain possession of
the empire, was frustrated in his designs by the discovery of his plan, and was
then forsaken by those very men who had aided his ambitious views. As a high
reward was offerded for apprehending his person, the forlorn Sabinus knew not
where to secret it; but at length recollecting there was a remote cavern at no
great distance from his country seat, he resolved to fly thither, in hopes of
avoiding the emperor's fury. A servant, whose fidelity had long been tried, was
the only person who was privy to his design; as his wife Eponia was not with
him at the time the treason was discovered. As soon as Sabinus was lodged in a
place of security, the servant was ordered to set fire to the house, that it
might be generally imagined his master had perished in the flames. The plan
succeeded, and that idea universally prevailed. Eponia, who loved her husband
with the most unbounded tenderness, lamented his loss with an excess of sorrow
that threatened to terminate her own existence; and the faithful servant,
shocked at her altered appearance, at length revealed the secret which had been
committed to his trust. With a heart animated with joy, and glowing with
affection, the amiable Eponia flew to the cavern, and in the embraces of the
man she loved forgot all her former misery! It was impossible she could reside
constantly with him, from an apprehension of creating suspicion; but she made
frequent excuses to her friends for absenting herself from Rome, and then, by
offices of kindness, and proofs of affection, made Sabinus's confinement lose
all its gloominess. In this manner she passed nine years, and her frequent
absence only then began to create suspicion; her visits were watched; and the
unfortunate Sabinus discovered! The wretched Eponia, agonized with fear, and
tortured with apprehension, instantly pressed through the guards, and, with a
child in each hand, threw herself at Vespasian's feet, and, with all the
eloquence of unfeigned sorrow, besought him to spare the father of her
unfortunate children! The emperor appeared moved at the excess of her grief,
and attempted to console it, yet rigidly adhered to the decrees of justice;
which Eponia perceiving, rose from her posture of humiliation, and after
reproaching him with his inhumanity, told him, the affection which had induced
her to share her husband's captivity, now urged her to become the partner of
his sufferings; and though he had the means of taking away their lives, he
should not have the power of separating them; for one sepulcher should contain
them both.

When the Moguls were besieging Minchew (a Chinese city) the governor, after a
valorous defense, at length found himself obliged to yield; but sending for his
wife, he informed her his life must fall a sacrifice to his foes, yet that he
had secured a place of safety for her and her sons, and a faithful guide would
conduct them to it; adding, that he was prepared to meet his fate with
fortitude, now he had provided for her security. After expressing her thanks
for that instance of his affection, she tenderly embraced him, declaring, at
the same time, that no force should separate them; for as she had shared with
him the pleasures of existence, so would she be his partner in the pangs of
death.

The prince of Jaskes having refused to pay tribute to the emperor of Persia,
the latter sent a large body of troops into his province, with orders to take
the prince into custody, and bring him into the presence of his imperial
majesty. The orders were rapidly executed, the prince's person secured, and the
army on their return with the royal captive, when the princess of Jaskes
overtook them. She had heard of her husband's misfortune, and having assembled
all his troops, put herself at their head, and traveled with such astonishing
rapidity, that in a few days she came up with the emperor's guards, whom she
surprised when they were sleeping, and having killed the general, and cut off
the greatest part of his troops, she returned triumphant into Jaskes,
accompanied by her husband.

In a contest between the emperor of Germany and the duke of Bavaria, the
latter was obliged with his followers, to retreat to the castle of Wensburgh,
and solicit terms of capitulation. The emperor consented, and a truce was
granted for the drawing them up: but the duchess of Bavaria, not possessing an
exalted idea of the emperor's honor, presented herself before him, and
requested that herself, and the ladies in her train, might have permission to
leave the castle with as great a load as each could carry. And Conrade
imagining they intended conveying away their jewels and trinkets, politely gave
them his permission: but how was his astonishment called forth, at beholding
them all tottering under the weight of their different husbands, and securing
from his power the choicest treasure they possessed! It is said that he was so
affected at the spectacle, that he burst into a flood of tears.

Seneca, in his account of the life of Octavia, says, there never was a
princess more deserving of happiness, or one who possessed so small a share of
it. Her whole life was one continued season of misery and vexation and it might
be positively affirmed, that she died without having tasted one day of
happiness! By the artful intrigues of her mother-in-law, she was prevented
marrying the man whose virtues had made an impression on her youthful heart,
and compelled to unite herself to one whose vices had created her abhorrence.
Her beauty was as astonishing as her wisdom; and her virtue could only be
equalled by her prudence. In a wicked and abandoned age, surrounded by
temptations, and beset with vices, her conduct was always irreproachable; and
though every scene of depravity was practiced in the court, her apartments were
the abode of purity, and the receptacle of virtue. Yet these perfections were
destined to be the possession of a man who could neither feel their value, or
appreciate their worth; and, instead of cherishing them as a treasure above all
price, he first despised, and then destroyed, them! Amidst the variety of
enormities that disgraced Nero's character, none create a greater degree of
abhorrence than his conduct to the amiable and much injured Oc^avia. So greatly
was she beloved, and so highly was she venerated, by all ranks of people, that
the slightest murmur from her would have roused them against the author of her
sufferings: but, instead of repining at the indignities she sustained, or
attempting to injure her oppressor, she submitted with fortitude to the cruelty
of her destiny, and patiently awaited the arrival of that period which would
relieve her from the tyranny of an inhuman husband, who, desirous of raising an
abandoned prostitute to the throne, had the inhumanity to accuse that virtue
which was unspotted, and that delicacy which calumny could not stain! When the
moment arrived that power triumphed over principle, and the unhappy Octavia's
life was sacrificed to an unlawful passion, she met her fate with the calmness
of a philosopher, and the composure of a saint.

In the examples of fortitude which have been presented to your view, I have
chosen an exalted, rather than a common, station of life, to prove that an
exemption from misfortunes is not the lot of humanity; and likewise to convince
you, that, though a splendid situation is allowed to enervate the mind, and
render it incapable of great exertions, yet, where the principles have been
taught firmness, and the passions subservience, it rather inspires than
destroys greatness.

When you are admiring the conjugal affection of Arria and Paulina, it is
necessary you should reflect that the same mode of conduct would be disgraceful
in a Christian. To despise death, or meet it with open arms, was the grand
basis of Roman virtue; and acts of suicide were dignified with applause: but in
this enlightened age, both religion and revelation teach us the heinousness of
the crime! To refuse supporting those afflictions which heaven decrees, and to
rush uninvited into the presence of an offended God, can only be the action of
a madman, or the premeditation of an atheist.

BEAUTY.
SENTIMENTS.
Beauties in vain their pretty eyes may roll.
Charms strike the sight; but merit wins the soul.
Pope. Beauty, as a flowery blossom, soon fades: but the divine excellencies of
the mind, like the medicinal virtues of a plant, remain in it when all those
charms are withered.
ALTHOUGH beauty is allowed to be one of the most desirable, it certainly is
one of the most dangerous, possessions that can fall to the lot of females. It
lays them open to the malignancy of the envious, the artifices of the
profligate, and the temptations of the designing; and, unless it is guarded by
principle, and defended by prudence, it becomes the destruction of virtue, and
the ruin of innocence. Even when adorned with those attractive graces, it has
sometimes been the source of the severest misfortunes. A remarkable instance of
the truth of this assertion is to be met with in the early part of the History
of England, which I shall relate for your amusement, amidst a variety of
others, which will convince you that beauty derives its greatest ornament from
virtue; and that loveliness, unattended by purity, is both the disgrace and the
ruin of its possessor.

The heart of the youthful monarch Edwy was enslaved and captivated by the
transcendant charms of the princess Egilve; but as ecclesiastic authority was
at that time very powerful in England, it was necessary that he should obtain
the consent of the clergy before he ventured to espouse his cousin. Whether
from pique, propriety, or prejudice, they opposed the marriage, it is not easy
to determine; but the ties of consanguinity was the reason they alleged, and
the king was threatened with ecclesiastical vengeance if he acted in opposition
to their decree. It was in vain that this youthful monarch declared the
strength of his attachment, and his inability to surmount it, or described the
virtues and excellencies of the object who had inspired it; the fiat was given,
and they were inexorable. Exasperated at their opposition, and enraged at their
arrogance, the king resolved to brave their authority, and in an evil hour was
united to the object of his love. As soon as the enraged bishops were informed
of the measure he had adopted, their fury knew no bounds, and seducing the
soldiery from their allegiance, they broke into the apartment of their
sovereign, tore the terrified Egilve from the embraces of her lord, and
delivering her to the infatuated guards, commanded them to destroy with burning
irons those charms which had subdued their monarch's heart. After this act of
inhuman barbarity had been executed, the unfortunate princess was sent over
into Ireland, where the account of her injuries, and the affability of her
manners, soon attracted the affections of the people. Her wounds were healed;
and her beauty, though slightly obscured, was by no means effaced. A party of
her friends attended her to England; and the prospect of once more beholding
the husband of her affections rendered her superior to the dread of danger.
But, alas! her security soon proved her destruction; for her enemies, having
received information of her design, met her at Gloucester, and, with an
inhumanity that would have disgraced a savage, not only deprived her of her
existence, but made her suffer the most cruel and agonizing death.

Elfrida, daughter to the earl of Devonshire, was a woman of such exquisite
beauty, that its fame extended even to young Edgar's court. Being a strong
admirer of female beauty, and having at that time no prior attachment, he
resolved to declare himself her suitor, if she really possessed those
transcendant charms which rumor had ascribed to her. Not choosing to publish
his intention until he was convinced it would not be likely to produce
repentance, he made a confidant of the earl of Ethelwold, desiring him to make
a pretense for visiting Elfrida's father, and if he found the young lady as
lovely as was reported, declare the honor that was intended her. Anxious to
promote his royal master's wishes, Ethelwold immediately began his journey, and
soon arrived at the earl of Devonshire's; but the moment he beheld the fair
Elfrida, his fidelity became the sacrifice of his affection, and, instead of
promoting his master's passion, he declared his own! Ethelwold was the known
favorite of his sovereign, and such a man was not likely to meet with a refusal
from the earl of Devonshire, who not only consented to the union, but agreed
that the marriage should remain private, until the Earl could formally obtain
the king's consent. On his return to court, he informed Edgar, that it must
have been the high birth and immense fortune of the earl of Devonshire's
daughter that had occasioned the tongue of fame to be so loud in the praise of
her charms, as they were far inferior to what he had expected, and by no means
sufficient to attract the king's affection. Edgar, satisfied with his
favourite's account, entirely relinquished his design, and new pursuits
obliterated the fair Elfrida from his imagination. Some months had elapsed,
when Ethelwold informed his sovereign, that, though the earl of Devonshire's
daughter was not possessed of sufficient charms to render her a desirable match
for a king, yet her immense fortune was sufficiently attractive to make her an
object of desire to one of his subjects, and therefore requested his
approbation to the alliance. Edgar instantly consented; and Ethelwold publicly
received the hand which had before been bestowed upon him in private. A
thousand pretenses were formed for detaining the lovely bride in the country;
for though Ethelwold had been blinded by the excess of passion before his
marriage, he soon afterward began to dread the effects of his sovereign's
displeasure. To become the favorite of a monarch, is a certain method to
obtain the disregard of his courtiers, and Ethelwold felt the truth of the
observation; for those who envied the favor he possessed, were anxious to
establish their own upon his ruin. Edgar was apprised of his favourite's
conduct, and, exasperated at the idea of having been deprived the possession of
so lovely an object, instantly resolved to have vengeance for the perfidy.
Disguising his resentment, and smothering his rage, he one morning told
Ethelwold that he purposed going to his castle, and paying his compliments to
the bride, desiring him, at the same time, to prepare for their immediate
departure. The affrighted earl, terrified at the apprehension of the king's
displeasure, yet incapable of forming any plan by which he could avoid it,
requested permission to precede his royal guest, and make prepartions for the
honored visit. A few short hours was all the time that Edgar would allow, and
those the earl employed in pleading the strength of his attachment to his wife,
and urging her to veil (as much as possible) those charms that had robbed him
of his fidelity. Though Elfrida's beauty was transcendant, her virtue was
certainly obscured by vanity; for the idea of becoming mistress of a throne,
and obtaining an ascendency over the youthful monarch's heart, induced her to
forsake her duty, and become regardless of her husband's safety! Instead of
endeavoring to obscure her charms, she studied the most likely method of
making them alluring, and succeeded so effectually in her design, that the
heart of Edgar was instantly enslaved! Burning with rage, and glowing with
resentment, he invited the unsuspicious Ethelwold to hunt with him in a wood
adjoining his castle, and there with a dagger avenged the injuries he had
sustained. Elfrida was easily persuaded to accept the hand of her husband's
murderer; and, when seated on a throne, totally forgot the inhuman means by
which she had ascended it.

Cleopatra, daughter to Ptolemy king of Egypt, and joint successor with her
brother to that throne, was a young woman whose beauty of person could only be
equalled by the brilliancy of her understanding: in her were united all the
perfections that allure, and all the charms that captivate and enslave the
mind. Her wit was refined by judgment, her taste improved by science, and her
manners formed by the hands of the graces. Thus favored by nature, and
improved by art, Cleopatra was at once the object of admiration and contempt:
her virtue fell a sacrifice to her charms, and her innocence became the victim
of her vanity.

Anna Bullen, wife of Henry the Eighth, was one of the most lovely women of the
age in which she lived, and her beauty was at once the means of her exaltation
and debasement. The inhuman being who had raised her to the possession of a
throne, became suspicious of the charms which had attracted his capricious
mind, and attributing the openness of innocence to the effects of guilt, he
pretended to doubt the existence of her virtue; and, by the force of artifice,
and the prevalence of power, at length convicted her for infidelity. The beauty
which had once captivated, no longer charmed; and her accession to a throne was
the fatal means that led her to the scaffold!

All authors have been unanimous in describing the person of Mary, queen of
Scotland, as formed by elegance, and refined by grace. Had she been less
beautiful, she might have been more virtuous* and had she possessed fewer
attractions, she might have been more entitled to pity.

From the instances I have now related, you are not to imagine, my dear girls,
that I think either vice or misfortune are peculiarly attached to charms; but I
have selected them with the view of proving, that, though beauty is by many of
your sex considered as an inestimable treasure, it often proves the bane if its
possessors' peace, and the destroyer of their happiness.

HUMILITY CONTRASTED WITH PRIDE.
SENTIMENTS.
Why should we value ourselves upon nobility of blood, when we consider that
the original of all mankind was the same?

It is only a clear conscience, and an upright heart, that can make a man truly
noble.

It is the part of a good and wise man to deal with his inferiors as he would
wish his superiors to deal with him.

Seneca.
AS man is of all creatures the most dependent, how little pretense can he have
for assuming an arrogant superiorty over his fellows! for even the comforts of
a prince are derived from the services and attentions of his subjects. The
higher a human being is exalted, the greater is his dependence upon the aid of
others; for it has frequently been observed, that the mind, instead of
acquiring independence by power, is apt to degenerate into total imbecility,
and the most trifling efforts become absolute exertions.

Although the truth of this observation is universally allowed, how continually
do we behold external grandeur disgraced by overbearance, and nobility debased
by the practice of superciliousness!

But if pride and arrogance have the power of rendering age contemptible, they
are the certain means of making youth despicable; for that is the period of
life in which gentleness should be peculiarly cultivated, and condescension
invariably practiced.

Amidst the various calls upon your gentleness and kindness, few have stronger
claims than those who are constantly contributing to the ease of your person,
and the comforts of your existence. Seneca observes, that we should not only
consider our servants as our fellow creatures, but our humble friends, whom
fortune has no more power over than their masters. "Why (says that great man)
should not a brave action rather dignify the condition of a servant, than the
condition of a servant lessen a brave action?"

If you would obtain the faith of servants, you must banish their fear; yet, by
blending kindness with reserve, always insure to yourself their docility and
respect.

The fidelity of a servant has frequently withstood the attacks of bribery, the
persuasions of power, and even disdained the preservation of existence; as I
shall show from the following examples.

A large reward was offered for apprehending the person of Charles the Second,
at the time he had escaped from the pursuit of his enemies. Fatigued with
traveling, and exhausted by fear, the king arrived at the castle of one of his
followers. The moment he entered, he requested a tumbler of wine, to enable him
to pursue his intended journey. The butler, not returning with it immediately,
the king followed him into the cellar; but was terrified and astonished at
beholding the man drop upon his knee, and present the glass. "Do you know me?"
said the king. "Yes, and please your majesty," replied the man: "And know also
how to preserve my own honor; for I would lose my life rather than become an
informer."

Two servants made their escape from a town that was besieged by the Romans,
and immediately joined the enemy's forces. A short time after, the place was
subdued, and the Roman army entered in triumph. All the outrages that lawless
fury could commit, the wretched inhabitants were destined to sustain;
themselves, their children, and their property, fell victims to the rapacious
soldiery! The men who had so lately joined the Romans, requested they might be
allowed to punish the mistress they had served for her oppressive inhumanity
toward them; and having obtained it, went directly to the house, possessed
themselves of the most portable of her valuables, and then with scourges drove
her through the ranks until they came to the city gate. As soon as they had
passed it, and no one could witness their behavior, they restored her
treasures, entreated her forgiveness, and assured her it was the only method
they could have adopted to save her ruin or preserve her existence.

In the civil wars of Rome, a party of soldiers went to the house of a man of
quality, who was proscribed, with a view of fulfilling the orders of their
commander, and depriving the unfortunate nobleman of his life. A servant, long
tried in fidelity and attachment, perceiving them approach, and suspecting
their designs, instantly flew to his lord's apartment, and hurrying on his
robes, presented himself before them. The soldiers, deluded by the heroic
deception, joyfully made him their prisoner; and, before the pious fraud could
be discovered, his life was sacrificed to their fury and resentment.

These instances of fidelity and attachment are sufficient to prove that
exalted sentiments are the gift of nature, not the fortuitous effects of chance
or situation, and that a noble mind may be the attendant of an humble fortune.
If, by the practice of humility and kindness, you could obtain the attachment
of such a character, even the base principle of self-advantage would point out
the necessity for that mode of conduct.

But in no circumstance of life is condescension of manners so essentially
necessary to be adopted as in the method of conferring favors; for a benefit
bestowed with pride and ostentation, is the produce of ambition, not the effect
of benevolence. Seneca observes, that no obligation can be perfect, unless it
is bestowed with delicacy, humanity, goodnature, and address: and adds, it is
so grievous a thing to say the word, "I beg," that the very mention of it puts
a man out of countenance.

The fear of exposing poverty often deters the possessor from disclosing a
situation that requires the assistance of friendship; a remarkable instance of
which is related by the author I have just quoted.

A Roman of some distinction, was reduced from a state of affluence to one of
absolute poverty; yet the same independence of mind which had attended him in
an exalted followed him into his humble situation. But that pride which
prevented him from soliciting assistance, could not guard him from feeling that
he stood in need of it. His spirits sunk, his health declined, and nature
languished for its accustomed supports!

A friend, whose delicacy of mind could only be equalled by the generosity of
his heart, hearing, by accident, of the proud man's misfortunes, instantly went
to visit him; but, instead of wounding his feelings by a display of
benevolence, sat by his bedside, and administered cordials for the recovery of
his health; and occupied in that tender employment, contrived to slip a purse
under the pillow, containing a sufficient sum to supply him with present
comforts, and prevent his suffering future exigencies.

How noble, how exalted, is such an action! How greatly to be admired the
character which was capable of it! And how must the benefit have been augmented
by the manner of bestowing it!

It is a general observation, that those who are raised from an humble to an
exalted situation, are most apt to cherish pride, and practice arrogance; yet
history records several instances which counteracts that received opinion.

Catherine the First of Russia, from a dependent on the parish, was exalted to
the dignified station of an empress on a throne; yet, amidst the splendor of a
court, she never forgot the poverty of a cottage, and bestowed the greatest
rewards upon those who had befriended her in distress.

One of the emperors of China having been captivated with the beauty of a
mason's daughter, immediately made her the partner of his throne. The amiable
empress, being thoroughly acquainted with the weakness of human nature, became
apprehensive of her own imperfection, and, fearful that grandeur should efface
humility, she constantly kept one of her father's trowels in her possesson; and
if ever her mind inclined to arrogance, she immediately looked at the trowel,
and was taught humility.

PRIDE.
SENTIMENTS.
Pride is a vice grows up so insensibly in society, steals into the heart so
imperceptibly, that it requires the utmost vigilance to prevent its attacks,
and the utmost caution to guard against its approach.
PRIDE is a passion so full of torment to its possessor, that even the
inconvenience which attends it, I should imagine, would be a sufficient reason
for endeavoring to eradicate it from the breast: yet, surrounded, as it is,
with thorns, and beset with vexations, it too often contrives to obtain
admission, to the destruction of goodnature, the subversion of ease, and the
total banishment of humility.

Despicable as it appears, attended with these consequences, yet it is
frequently beheld under much greater disadvantages; and the two following
examples will show, that instead of being merely contemptible, it has
degenerated into atrocity.

The Marchioness de Tavera was a woman in whom was united an excess of pride,
and an insurmountable share of ambition. Notwithstanding her being elevated to
the rank of marchioness, yet her having any superiors was a constant source of
disquiet to her; and she was continually tormenting her husband with
complaints, and soliciting him to request the king to add to his dignities by
conferring upon him a dukedom. In Portugal titles are not quite so easily
obtained as in England; and, instead of their being the purchase of fortune,
they are only the reward of merit, and therefore the marquis's solicitation was
unattended to.

Mortified by a refusal, and exasperated against the author of her
disappointment, the artful marchioness instantly began to attach herself to a
party whom she knew were disaffected to the government; and when she had once
discovered the nature of their sentiments, she ventured to disclose the horrid
plan that had so long occupied her own ideas. Imagining her husband's claim to
the desired dukedom would be acknowledged by the king's successor she resolved
to pave the way to the accomplishment of her ambitious views, by the murder of
a prince whose virtues were calculated to inspire the affection of any but a
very depraved mind. Not satisfied with insuring her own ruin in the desperate
undertaking, she contrived to involve that of her husband's and son's, by
making them the agents of her iniquity. The scheme was well contrived, though
Providence prevented its execution; and the king, instead of being murdered,
was only slightly wounded. The Duke Aviero, the Marquis de Tavera, and two of
his domestics, were the persons pitched upon for the perpetration of the horrid
act, who, watching the king's return from visiting a favorite lady, were
stationed on the road through which he was to pass, with the intent of firing
into the carriage. The duke's blunderbuss happily missed fire; and the rapidity
with which the postillions drove, prevented the second party from taking aim;
but following the carriage, they fired into the back of it, and wounded his
majesty in the arm. Instead of proceeding directly to Lisbon, as the assassins
imagined (who had divided into three separate parties) he ordered the drivers
to go directly to the surgeon general's house, which was a few miles out of the
city, and by that means escaped the attack of the third firing. By great
exertions, and wonderful secrecy, the whole of this detested plot was
discovered: the marquis and his sons were broken on the wheel, and the detested
marchioness was beheaded.

Poppaea Sabina, wife of the tyrant Nero, was as remarkable for pride as he was
for cruelty: her mules were adorned with bridles of gold, and shod with shoes
of silver; and every article of her dress was most expensively magnificent. Her
vanity was not inferior to her pride; for, to preserve the delicacy of her
complexion, and make it retain an appearance of youthfulness, she kept five
hundred asses for the purpose of bathing herself in their milk.

The Spaniards are universally allowed to be the most haughty race of people in
Europe: distress cannot lower, and poverty cannot abate it. A proof of the
truth of this assertion is fully exemplified in the following authentic little
anecdotes.

A poor woman in Spain, who was reduced to the utmost extreme of poverty, found
herself utterly incapable of providing food for her children; and, accompanied
by three of them, besought relief from the liberality of a French merchant. As
the eldest boy was a stout able lad, the gentleman (from motives of compassion)
proposed taking him into his service: but the woman, with the most striking
marks of disdain, refused the offer, saying, that none of her family had been
disgraced by servitude.

A poor Spanish cobbler, being pronounced past recovery, his eldest son
approached the bedside, and humbly solicited his blessing and advice; when the
dying man, with scarcely strength to articulate, earnestly besought him to be
sure and retain the majesty of the family.

If the former instances of pride appear detestable, the latter are certainly
ludicrous; and when it becomes the ruling principle of beggars and cobblers, it
surely must be time for real gentlewomen to explode it.

HUMANITY CONTRASTED WITH CRUELTY.
SENTIMENTS.
The merciful man shall obtain mercy.

He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord; and that which he has
given, shall be repaid unto him again.


HUMANITY is a virtue so frequently called into action, and so delightful in
its offices, that, even from motives of self-gratification, I should suppose a
susceptible heart must be inclined to cultivate it. But I flatter myself, my
beloved girls, you will practice it from better principles, and become humane
both from duty and inclination. Compassion for the afflicted, and a wish to
relieve their sufferings, I consider as a kind of instinctive propensity, which
Providence has implanted in every virtuous breast, for the comfort of the
distressed, and the support of the unfortunate.

In the characters both of Lady Jane Gray and the Countess of Pembroke,
compassion for the unfortunate appears as one of their brightest features; and
history teems with a variety of instances of the practice of this amiable and
attractive virtue; but amongst the number, none can be more strikingly engaging
than the following, which is recorded to the honor of Lady Pembroke's brother.

Sir Philip Sidney, exhausted by the fatigue of battle, faint with the loss of
blood, and parched with the intensity of the heat, entreated one of his
soldiers to endeavor to procure him a draught of water. Bountiful as nature is
of her gifts, yet the plains of Zutphen partook not of them; no fresh springs
meandered through or purling rivulets adorned them; and water, instead of being
the bounty of nature, was the boon of man. The precious beverage, however was
obtained; and Sir Philip was in the act of putting it to his lips, when a
soldier, languishing under the torture of a mortal wound, and gasping from an
excess of drought, was by his comrades carrying to his tent. The generous hero
beheld him with an eye of pity, and instantly withdrawing the cup from his own
lips, humanely held it to the soldier's, saying, "Poor fellow! thy necessities
are far greater than mine."

Henrietta Maria, queen of Charles the First, as she was one day walking in the
environs of Exeter, had her footsteps suddenly arrested by the voice of
distress, and the murmurs of complaint; and sending one of her attendants
forward to enquire the cause, was informed that a poor old woman was lamenting
her inability to supply her daughter (who was lying in) with the common
necessaries of life. The queen, imagining the sum she had about her was not
sufficient for that humane purpose, immediately took a chain of gold from her
neck, and giving it to one of her attendants, desired they would take it to a
goldsmith's and appropriate its value to the supply of the poor woman's
necessities.

Matilda, daughter of Malcolm, king of Scotland, and the amiable wife of Henry
the First of England, was a woman in whose character was united refined
humanity and exalted benevolence. She not only devoted great part of her
private income to acts of charity, but herself witnessed that those acts were
properly bestowed. What an interesting sight must it have been to have beheld a
queen attending the sick, feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked!

When the incursions of the victorious Danes had compelled Alfred the Great to
retire to Athelny, in Somersetshire, he was reduced to such extremity as only
to be master of one single loaf of bread. But that vicissitude which would have
depressed a weak mind, seemed to exalt that of Alfred's; for, instead of
drooping under, he actually rose superior to his misfortunes: and though unable
to assist himself, he stretched out his hand to relieve his fellow creatures.
An humble mendicant solicited the queen's assistance, who, knowing the
scantiness of her own store, mildly denied the reiterated request. The king,
finding the petitioner importunate, desired the loaf might be divided between
them; saying, "He who could feed five thousand men with five loaves and two
fishes, can certainly make that half loaf more than suffice for our
necessities."

If these instances of humanity are delightful even in contemplation, how much
more gratifying must they have proved in the performance; and how wonderful is
it that the human mind should ever become dead to such amiable sensations!

Softness and humanity are certainly the general characteristics of our sex;
yet, alas! (to their disgrace) many instances prove the rule to be exceptional;
and if once the female breast becomes deaf to the voice of humanity, or lost to
the claims of compassion, insensibility easily degenerates into cruelty, and
indifference into inhumanity.

How necessary, therefore, is it, my beloved girls, that you should encourage
that amiable propensity to humanity which Providence has happily bestowed upon
you! And whilst you are endeavoring to lessen the misfortunes of others,
remember that you are laying up a store of comfort for the alleviation of your
own; for those who have practiced benevolence in prosperity, are certain of
receiving its reward if they fall into adversity.

"If I was desired to describe cruelty and revenge, (says Seneca,) I would draw
a tiger bathed in blood, and ready to take a leap at its prey, as emblematic of
those horrid passions; and yet, notwithstanding the disgrace that is attached
to them, they contrive to gain admission into the mind, disgrace the heart,
pervert the understanding, and render the whole character completely
contemptible." Some remarkable instances of the truth of this assertion will be
found in the following examples.

The Marquis d'Astrogus, a Spanish nobleman, being unfortunately united to a
woman of unamiable manners, became violently attached to a beautiful girl,
whose parents lived within the vicinity of his castle. The enraged marchioness,
glowing with resentment against the object who had inspired her husband's
breast with tenderness, and robbed her of those attentions she fancied herself
entitled to, by the power of bribery, secured the fidelity of some of her
domestics, who, lost to feeling and humanity, became the agents of her
iniquitous design. It was not only resolved to deprive the unfortunate young
woman of existence, but to add cruelty to the atrocious deed; and, instead of
terminating her life by one fatal blow, to linger it out by a succession of
tortures! The heart was at length torn from the beauteous form that enclosed
it, and presented bleeding to the inhuman marchioness, who, sending for her
cook, desired it might be dressed in a manner most likely to please the palate of
his lord.

The savage banquet was immediately prepared, and the unsuspicious marquis
swallowed it with delight! But, what must have been his sensations, when his
detestable wife, exulting in the success of her inhuman plan, informed him he
had eaten that heart which he had taken so much pains to inspire with
tenderness and affection!

Amestris, queen of Persia, having discovered that her husband was attached to
his brother's daughter, a very lovely young girl, imagined her mother not only
knew of his affection, but encouraged the indulgence of it; and, exasperated
more against her than the object who had inspired it, was resolutely bent upon
her destruction.

By an ancient custom amongst the Persians, the queen, on the king's birthday,
was entitled to make a request, which could not be denied; and Amestris
impatiently waited the anniversary of that day, for the accomplishment of her
resentment, and the gratification of her design.

It was in vain that Xemes endeavored to save the life of his injured sister,
whose virtues were as exalted as her mind was pure, and who, so far from
promoting his affection for her child, was even ignorant of its existence.
However, the request had been made, and the king was compelled to grant it.

As soon as the inhuman Amestris found the victim of wrath delivered into her
power, she immediately ordered her breasts, nose, and lips, to be cut off and
thrown to the dogs, and forced the unhappy sufferer to stand by, and see them
devoured by those hungry animals.

When the head of Cicero was brought into Antony's presence, his wife Fulvia
took it in her hands, struck it on the face, and, after uttering many
execrations against it, placed it between her knees, and opening the mouth,
tore out that tongue which could almost have softened cruelty by its eloquence;
and spitting upon it with contempt, pierced it several times through with her
bodkin.

Joan, queen of Naples, was possessed of abilities which were calculated to
demand respect, but her cruelty was such as to inspire abhorrence; and her
unfortunate husband became its victim; for although the force of her eloquence,
and the power of her bribes, induced her judges to pronounce her innocent, yet
there is no doubt remaining of her having been accessory to the king's murder.

These detached instances of inhumanity, I am convinced, are sufficiently
numerous to inspire your breasts both with detestation and abhorrence; yet I
cannot avoid mentioning a circumstance where the combination of numbers adds
horror to atrocity, and where a cool premeditated design tends to augment the
crime of cruelty.

In about the four hundred and twenty-eighth year of Rome, near three hundred
ladies of the first distinction disgraced their nature, destroyed their fame,
and cast a stigma on their sex, by entering into a conspiracy against their
husbands' lives. An epidemic disorder favored the inhuman plot, and many of
the senators were the unhappy victims of art, who were supposed to have fallen
a prey to disease. Their numbers at length began to create suspicion; yet no
one would have imagined a female arm could have been raised against the life of
its supporter; or the insidious deadly draught be administered with smiles of
affection, and appearances of tenderness, whilst the heart was the instigator
of cruelty, and the inspirer of unheard of barbarity. But a female slave, who
had assisted her mistress in the preparation of the destructive dose, shocked
at the part she had performed, and tortured by the pangs of remorse, confessed
the whole of the iniquitous plot, and described the names of those who were
then occupied in preparing the fatal potion. Officers of justice were instantly
dispatched to the respective houses, and the ladies discovered at the dreadful
employment. At first they attempted to deny the fact, pretending they were
making an antidote to save them from the pestilential disease; but finding
their assertions disregarded, and the sword of justice hanging over their
heads, they swallowed the destructive draught, and by so doing escaped the blow.

ON THE PROPER EMPLOYMENT OF TIME.
SENTIMENTS.
We complain of the shortness of Time, and yet have much more than we know what
to do with; for our lives are either spent in doing nothing at all, in doing
nothing to the purpose, or else in doing nothing that we ought to do. Seneca.
MELANCHOLY as this picture appears, and disgraceful as it certainly is to a
rational and reflecting being, I fear, if we were to take an impartial view of
our lives, too many of us would have reason to acknowledge the justness of the
author's censure; but that you my beloved girls, should avoid falling under so
severe an imputation, and, instead of wasting, improve the time that is
committed to your trust, has been one of the first wishes of my heart, and one
of the greatest objects of my solicitude.

"Every fool(Lord Chesterfield observes) who slatterns away his whole time in
nothings, has some trite observation at hand, to prove both its value and its
fleetness; and though they pretend to feel the necessity of employing it well,
they squander it away without considering that its loss is irrecoverable. There
are two sorts of understanding (says that judge of human nature) which prevents
a man from ever becoming considerable; the one is a lazy, and the other a
frivolous, mind. The lazy mind will not take the trouble of searching to the
bottom of any thing, but, discouraged by the slightest difficulties, stops
short, and contents itself with easy and superficial knowledge, rather than
submit to a small degree of trouble."

Although it is not necessary for a young woman to study with that closeness of
application which is essentially requisite in the education of a boy, yet
whatever you pretend to learn, you ought to have ambition enough to desire to
excel in; for mediocrity is a proof of weakness; and perfection may always be
purchased by application. "Knowledge (says an elegant writer) is a comfortable
and necessary shelter for us in an advanced age; but if we do not plant it
while young, it will afford us no shade when we grow old." Yet I neither expect
or require so close an application to the improvement of your minds, as to
banish recreation, or exclude pleasure: I only wish that you should remember
that your foundation of knowledge must be established before you are eighteen;
for when you are once introduced into the world, your application will be
incessantly interrupted, and your studies broken in upon. All difficulties may
be overcome by perseverance; and even the defects of nature may be conquered. A
remarkable instance of the power of perseverance is demonstrated in the conduct
of Demosthenes, an Athenian orator, who anxious to obtain perfection in the art
of speaking, not only conquered an absolute impediment of speech, but, from
being one of the most ungraceful, became one of the most graceful, orators in
Athens.

In the distribution of your time, I scarcely need inform you, that the first
hour of the day ought to be devoted to the service of your Maker. Accustom
yourselves to the practice of religious homage, as a natural expression of
gratitude to him for all his bounty and benevolence. Consider it as the service
of the God of your fathers; of him to whom your parents devoted you; of him
whom, in former ages, your ancestors honored, and by whom they are now
rewarded and blessed in heaven. Seneca tells us, that the first petition we
offer to God, ought to be for a good conscience; the second for health of mind;
and the third for health of body. After having offered these petitions, it will
be necessary you should accustom yourselves to make a regular distribution of
time, for the different avocations which are to occupy it: this will be found
one of the best methods that can be adopted, both for the practice of youth,
and those of a more advanced period. Doctor Johnson, who was rather a severe
critic upon the failings of our sex, attributed most of them to habitual
idleness; and was so great an advorate for a female's being taught every kind
of needlework, that he absolutely fancied it a foundation for morality. In
Poland, it is a custom amongst the people in middling ranks of life, that no
young woman should be suffered to marry, until she has done as much work as
will fill twelve large baskets, which on the wedding day is divided in presents
to the different guests. Though I think needlework a necessary, I certainly
consider it as a very inferior, kind of employment, when compared with the
gratification you may enjoy, by spending your time in the practice of virtue,
and in acts of benevolence; yet, as excellence even in trifles is praiseworthy,
I shall in the following examples unite the names of a few females who have
acquired it in that art, with those who have obtained applause for superior
qualifications.

Andromache, wife of Hector, prince of Troy, was so beautiful an embroidress,
that, after the death of her husband, and the destruction of the city, she
amused her leisure hours by delineating the melancholy event with her needle
upon white satin.

Anna Maria Shurman, a German lady, is, by the historians of that country,
considered as an absolute prodigy; and the facility with which she learnt all
female accomplishments was certainly most astonishing. At six years of age she
could cut paper with a taste and elegance entirely her own; at eight she
painted flowers in a beautiful style; at ten she was taught embroidery, and was
only three hours in acquiring the art. Her writing was the most elegant that
can be conceived, and she could imitate a variety of hands. The powers of her
understanding were equal to the most metaphysical enquiries; and she was not
only the most accomplished, but the most learned, woman of the age.

Penelope, wife of Ulysses, king of Ithaca, whose character has been celebrated
by historians for the strength of her affection, and delicacy of attachment to
her husband, has also been praised for her adherence to those duties which
particularly belong to a female station; and, instead of interfering with
affairs of state, we are told that her time was spent in the regulation of her
family, and the employment of weaving.

Amidst those ladies whose names are rendered eminent by the number of their
literary productions, the Duchess of Newcastle has certainly a title to
pre-eminence, if variety can constitute merit, and application deserve
applause; for her grace was so unwearied in her labors, and so indefatigable
in her endeavors to promote knowledge, that she would not even allow herself
time to read her works before they were sent to the press.

Queen Elizabeth, who is universally allowed to have been a woman of exalted
genius and superior understanding, always allotted different portions of the
day for arranging those affairs which were unconnected; and it was by that
regular distribution of her time, that she was enabled to transact with ease a
multiplicity of business, that must have distracted a mind which was devoid of
regularity.

Elizabeth, countess of Bridgewater, was a woman whose time was spent in the
performance of those duties which rendered her the object of universal love and
admiration. She was the comforter of the afflicted, the supporter of the
distressed, and the reliever of the unhappy. But I cannot give you a better
idea of the perfection of her character, than by transcribing part of her
epitaph, which was taken from her monument in Gaddesden church.

"Sacred to the memory of the late transcendently virtuous lady (now glorious
saint) the Right Honorable Elizabeth Countess of Bridgewater. She was a woman
in whom all the accomplishments both of body and mind concurred to make her the
glory of the present, and the example of future ages. Her beauty was absolutely
so unparalled, that neither pen or painting could describe it without
disparagement. She had a winning and attractive behavior, a charming
discourse, a most obliging conversation. She was so courteous and affable to
all persons, that it was impossible to avoid loving her. She was of a noble and
generous soul, yet of so meek and humble a disposition, that never any woman of
her quality was greater in the world's opinion, or so little in her own. The
rich at her table tasted her hospitality; the poor at her gate bore testimony
of her charity. Her devotion was exemplary; and her writings upon religious
subjects (which were only submitted to the eye of her husband) proved at once
the purity of her soul, and the refinement of her sentiments. She was an
affectionate wife, an indulgent mother, a kind mistress, and a sincere friend.
In a word, she was so superlatively good, that language is incapable of
expressing her deserved character; and her death was as religious as her life
was virtuous."

I consider it impossible to read an account of such transcendent excellencies
either with apathy or indifference; and the heart which is not totally devoid
of sensibility, must feel an animating glow pervade it even in the
contemplation of such exalted greatness! And when you consider that this
amiable woman was a mere human being, subject to the failings and imperfection
of mortality, ought it not to be an incitement to your virtue?

It has always been allowed, that the desire of fame is universally implanted
in the human breast; and that the wish of leaving a name unsullied, has been
the foundation of many virtues. If you, my beloved girls, are sensible of that
impression, or desire to leave a character spotless as Lady Bridgewater's,
imitate her actions, and you will receive her praise.

POLITENESS OF ADDRESS, AND POLISH OF MANNERS.
SENTIMENTS.
The desire of pleasing may be termed the happiest of all desires because it
seldom fails of attaining its ends when not disgraced by affectation. Fielding.
It Is a fair step toward virtue and happiness, to delight in the society of the
good and wise; and if those cannot be met with* the next point is to keep no
company at all. Seneca.
POLITENESS and good-breeding are such requisite introductions into genteel
society, that it is absolutely astonishing any one can gain admittance into it
who are deficient either in the one or the other.

I consider politeness as the child of goodnature; though there are instances
where the one may exist without the other; yet is is almost impossible for a
young woman, who is possesed of the latter amiable quality, to remain long
deficient in the former, if she has any opportunities of mixing in genteel
life; for a desire of pleasing, with the precaution of not being troublesome,
is doubtless the best structure for true politeness. Lord Chesterfield, in his
Letters on Politeness, says, that a friend of his has defined good breeding to
be the result of "much good sense, some goodnature, and a little self-denial
for the sake of others, and also with a view of obtaining the same indulgence
from them." As to absolute rules for politeness, I flatter myself, those would
be unnecessary; for I have the pleasure of observing you possess a native
civility, which I consider as its foundation; and, indeed, the modes of it must
vary according to persons, places, and circumstances; for the same behavior
that you would adopt to one who is greatly your superior, would be improper to
use to her who is your inferior; therefore, observation and experience will be
your best directors, and good humor and civility your ablest guides.

The desire of being pleased is universal; and if the desire of pleasing was so
too, politeness might then have its foundation in virtue, be considered as a
moral duty, and be included in the principle of doing to others what one wishes
they should do to us. There are, indeed, some moral duties of a much higher
nature, but none of a more amiable one; and, like Lord Chesterfield, I am
inclined to place it at the head of the minor virtues.

A studied attention to the little wants, and a desire to anticipate the
wishes, of those which chance or inclination brings into your company, is one
of the first duties which you owe society; and a careless negligence to please,
is one of the most unpardonable things you can be guilty of; though, I grieve
to say, it is a striking failing in the young people of the present age. But,
in being civil, avoid being ceremonious; yet always beware of freedom and
familiarity. Let your conduct to your superiors be respectful, but not
humiliating; to your equals be courteous and affable; and to your inferiors,
gentle and condescending.

Politeness, when attached to a virtuous character, actually embellishes that
which seems not to require any other ornament; and so strong is its influence
on the human mind, that it seems even to cast a veil over imperfections, as I
shall show in the two following examples.

Mary, queen of Scotland, whose misfortunes have been universally deplored,
though her failings have been highly condemned, might have attributed the
commisseration of the former, in a great measure, to the sweetness of her
manners, and the affability of her disposition. Her behavior to her attendants
was at once so mildly gentle, and so sweetly condescending, that any of them
would almost have sacrificed their lives to have preserved her existence.

Joan, queen of Naples, whose inhumanity and cruelty I have before had occasion
to mention, was yet such an adept in artifice, and was so sensible that a
polish of manners was a frequent apology for an abandoned course of life, that,
by her condescension, persuasion, and politeness, she absolutely blinded the
minds of her judges, and at length induced them to pronounce her innocent!

Bertrade, wife of Philip the First, king of France, though unamiable in her
character, and despicable in her conduct, yet was possessed of such an
interesting sweetness of manner, that even those who despised found it
impossible to avoid being pleased with her. So completely infatuated was Philip
by this artful mode of behavior, that, though he was acquainted with her
endeavors to destroy the life of his son by a former marriage, yet he found
himself incapable of withstanding the softness of her pleadings; and not only
forgave the crime, but appeared to have his affection augmented by her
pretended sorrow.

If polish of manners, and elegance of address, can have the power of making an
unamiable character attractive, with what superior advantages must it be viewed
when it is attached to goodness and virtue! and how desirable an acquirement
ought it to be to young people, if they consider that a polite address is
absolutely a general passport to universal favor!

It was the sweetness of Catherine's manners, more than the charms of her
person, that enslaved the heart of the Emperor Peter. The latter might attract
his eye, but the former secured his esteem, rooted his regard, and was the
means of exalting her to the Russian throne!

All English historians are unanimous in their description of Lady Jane Gray,
and all ascribe to her a sweetness of manner that at once captivated the mind,
secured the heart, and called forth the admiration of all beholders.

In the exalted account which is given of the Countess of Bridgewater, the
elegance of her manners, the sweetness of her behavior, and the affability of
her address, constitutes no trifling part in the praise which is bestowed upon
her character; and if they are not the most striking features for admiration,
they certainly are traits which must ensure affection, and create esteem.

Octavia, the amiable wife of the inhuman Nero, has been more celebrated for
the sweetness of her manners than for the superiority of her understanding; and
though her conduct was calculated to call forth admiration, yet it was still
more likely to inspire love.

If arguments were wanting to enforce the necessity there is for young ladies
habituating themselves to the practice of politeness, I might urge as a motive,
the strong influence they are universally allowed to possess over the minds of
the other sex. Those men who are best judges both of the failings and
perfections of human nature, are willing to ascribe the polish of their manners
chiefly to the influence of virtuous and elegant-minded females, in whose
society they have imperceptibly lost that innate roughness which is their
peculiar characteristic; and I am sure you will allow the necessity of not
being deficient in any accomplishment you may hereafter be called upon to teach.

FRIENDSHIP.
SENTIMENTS
It requires time to deliberate upon friendship; but the resolution once taken,
my friend is entitled to the secrets of my heart; and I look upon my thoughts
to be as safe in his breast as my own.

Never condemn a friend unheard* without letting him know both his accuser and
his crime.

Seneca.
THE ancients ranked friendship in the second class of human virtues* and many
are the instances recorded in history, where its energy has produced effects
that almost might be considered as divine. Of all the passions that adorn human
nature, that of friendship is certainly the most sublime, because the least
selfish affection of the soul; for honor, frankness, and generosity, are the
superstructure on which it is established. Amidst the various ties and
dependencies which constitute the happiness of life, it is the most delicate,
and yet the most fragile. Wealth cannot purchase, titles cannot obtain it; and
the great, alas! rarely enjoy the blessing! It cannot exist in a vicious mind,
and only thrives in a sympathetic one.

The word friendship is at present generally understood to be a term of little
import, or extending merely to a preference of liking or esteem. This I
consider as a shameful prostitution of a word that ought only to be attached to
an exalted character, and a soul capable of the most disinterested actions. In
the choice of a friend, much care is necessary, and much precaution ought to be
observed; but good sense, good nature, and firm principles, are absolute
requisites in the composition. A weak mind is incapable of attachment; a bad
temper would soon weaken the strongest; and want of principle must destroy it.
Doctor Johnson observes, that so many qualities are necessary to the
possibility of friendship, and so many accidents must concur to its rise and
continuance, that the greatest part of mankind content themselves without it,
or supply its place with interest and dependence.

If friendship was really so extraordinary a production, and of so rare a
growth, history would not teem with such various proofs either of its
disinterestedness or existence; and those who have endeavored either to lessen
or debase the sentiments, are, in my opinion, guilty of an injury to society.
Perhaps, you will be astonished that, in the instances I have selected for your
observation, with the intent of controverting the Doctor's opinions, I should
have drawn them from the male instead of the female character; but as history
has not furnished me with proofs of such great and disinterested friendship in
our sex as I have found in the other, I thought it right to record those which
were most impressive; though, at the same time, I am inclined to believe, we
are equally capable of an exalted attachment; and I have no doubt but if all
the acts of refined friendship which the female heart has instigated, had been
recorded in the page of history, it would have been as highly adorned by the
account, as it has been by the following examples of the other sex.

The friendship of Damon and Pythias was founded on affection, established on
esteem, and confirmed by principle. Damon had the misfortune to fall under the
displeasure of Dionysius, the Sicilian tyrant, whose breast was a stranger to
the sensation of compassion. To create displeasure, was to forfeit existence;
and to murmur at a decree was to insure its immediate execution. Damon repined
not at the severity of his fate, yet ardently wished to award the blow. He had
a wife and children in a distant part of the country, whom he longed to press
to his tortured bosom before the dreadful moment arrived that was to separate
them for ever! Pythias, apprised of his friend's desire, presented himself
before his inhuman judge, and earnestly besought the indulgence Damon wished
for, yet dare not expect, offering to surrender his own person as a pledge for
his friend's return. The singularity of a man's offering his life in the place
of a condemned criminal, when so many circumstances might prevent the
punctuality of his return, made an impression on the callous heart of
Dionysius, and he granted the request; but, at the same time, allowed so short
a period for Damon's absence, that it appeared almost impossible for him to be
back by the day fixed upon for his execution. The time for his return drew
near, and the heart of Pythias exulted in his absence! To doubt the honor of
his friend, or distrust his sincerity, was impossible; and he knew that adverse
winds could only have prevented his punctuality. Curiosity induced the tyrant
to pay a visit to the noble-minded Pythias, who, delighted at the idea of
saving the life of his friend, ardently prayed that he might not return. It was
in vain that Dionysius endeavored to persuade him Damon was unworthy of his
friendship, and had formed the excuse of visiting his family for the purpose of
preserving his own life, and sacrificing that of his friend! He grew indignant
at the base idea, and boldly vindicated the honor he had so often tried! The
hour of execution at length arrived, and the intrepid hero ascended the
scaffold with a heart animated by friendship, and glowing with affection. Death
was robbed of all its terrors; and the prospect of saving the life of the man
he loved, made it appear arrayed in smiles! The people had crowded round the
scaffold, whilst astonishment and admiration was visible in every countenance.
The executioner was going to strike the fatal blow, when the cry of "Stop"
arrested his uplifted hand, and Damon rushed into the arms of Pythias
breathless with haste, and tortured with apprehension! "You are safe, my
friend, my much-loved Pythias!" he exclaimed: "and oh, ye gods! receive my
thanks!"

"Oh fatal haste, and cruel impatience!" replied the dejected Pythias.
"Triumphant had I fallen, if my Damon had been spared; but as the gods have
opposed my wish of dying for thee, still I will not be wholly disappointed, for
we will bleed together!"

So affecting a scene softented even the adamantine breast of Dionysius; and
the heart which had hitherto been insensible to pity and compassion, felt for
once its divine influence! Rising from his seat, and approaching the two
friends, he congratulated them upon the strength and delicacy of their
attachment; and then, with a generosity wholly unexpected, bestowed life upon
Damon, and happiness upon Pythias.

Alcander and Septimius were two Athenian students, whose mutual taste for the
arts and sciences became the foundation of their future friendship, and they
were scarcely ever seen apart. Although Alcander's breast was animated by that
tender sentiment, a still more lively one found entrance, and the fair Hypatia
became the object of his love. He declared his passion, and was accepted.
Septimius happened to have left the city, when his friend first saw the
blooming fair one, and did not return until the day fixed upon for his
marriage. The moment that introduced him to the view of such perfection, was
fatal to his peace; and the struggle between love and friendship became too
violent for his resolution. A sudden and dangerous fever attacked him; and the
unsuspicious Alcander introduced the object of his affection to assist him in
his unwearied care of his friend. The moment the physicians beheld Hypatia
enter, they were no longer at a loss to account for their patient's illness;
and calling Alcander aside, they informed him of the nature of it, and also
expressed their fears that Septimius's recovery was impossible! Tortured
between the dread of losing the friend of his heart, and agonized at the idea
of relinquishing the object of his affection, his anguish for some moments
deprived him of utterance; but recovering that fortitude which had ever marked
his conduct, he flew to the bedside of the apparently dying man, and promised
to renounce his claim to Hypatia, if she consented to a union with Septimius.
Whether Hypatia had not been strongly attached to the amiable Alcander, or
whether compassion urged her to accept the hand of his friend, I cannot say,
but they were united, quitted Athens, and went directly to Septimius's house at
Rome. Hypatia's friends, imagining Alcander had relinquished his betrothed
bride for the sake of a rich reward, commenced an action against him for a
breach of promise; and the judges, biassed by the representations of his
enemies, ordained that he should pay a heavier fine than his whole property
amounted to. The wretched Alcander was now reduced to the most melancholy
situation; his friend absent, his mistress lost, and his own character
stigmatized with baseness! Being absolutely unable to pay the demand, his
person became the property of his oppressors, and he was carried into the
market place, and sold as a common slave. A Thracian merchant became his
purchaser, and for several years he endured a life of torment. At length
liberty presented itself to his view, and the opportunity of flight was not to
be rejected. Alcander ardently embraced it, and arrived at Rome in the dusk of
the evening. Friendless, hopeless, and forlorn, the generous Alcander had no
place of shelter, and necessity compelled him to seek a lodging in a gloomy
cavern. Two robbers, who had long been suspected to frequent that spot, arrived
there soon after midnight, and disputing about their booty, fortunately did not
perceive his presence. One of them at length was so exasperated against his
companion, that, drawing a dagger from his side, he plunged it into his heart,
and left him weltering in his blood at the mouth of the cave. Alcander's
miseries had been so accumulated, and his distresses so undeserved, that his
mind at length was worn down by his afflictions, and he became indifferent to
everything around him. In this situation he was discovered, and dragged to a
court of justice, as the murderer of the man whose body had been found in the
cave. Weary of existence, he did not deny the charge; and sentence was going to
be pronounced against him, when the murderer, smitten with a pang of
conscience, entered the court, and avowed the fact! Astonishment seized every
mind, but particularly that of the judge that was going to condemn him, who,
examining the countenance of a man capable of such singular conduct, discovered
the features of the once-loved Alcander! Rising from the throne of justice, and
flying to the bar of guilt, he caught the unhappy sufferer in his arms, and,
after shedding over him tears of joy and compassion, presented him to the
senators as a man whose disinterested conduct had been the means of preserving
his own existence.

Never was a stronger friendship between two men than that which subsisted
between Cicero and Laelius; but, by transcribing the real sentiments of the
latter upon that exalted subject, I shall give you a perfect idea both of its
strength and delicacy.

"Of all the gifs of nature or fortune, (says Laelius,) there were none, I
think, comparable to the having Cicero for my friend. I found in our friendship
a perfect conformity of sentiments in respect to public affairs, and an
inexhaustible fund of council and support in private life; a tranquillity and
delight not to be expressed. I never, to my knowledge, gave Cicero the least
offense; nor ever heard a word escape him that did not please me. We had but
one house, and one table; the frugality of which was equally the taste of both.
In war, in traveling, and in the country, we were never separated. I need not
mention our studies, and the desire of us both always to learn something; for
this was the employment of all our leisure hours, whenever we were removed from
the sight and commerce of the world."

Can you, my beloved girls, conceive any human felicity to be greater than that
which Laelius experienced from such an exalted friendship? What a consolation
is it to have a second self, from whom we have nothing secret, and unto whose
heart we may pour forth our own with a perfect effusion! Prosperity is
imperfect to those who have no one to share their joys; and adversity is almost
insupportable to them who have no one to pity it! Indeed, I am inclined to
believe there is not a being in existence, who would deliberately accept of all
the wealth and all the affluence this world could bestow, if offered them upon
the severe terms of being unconnected connected with a single mortal whom they
could love, or by whom they should be treated with affection. This would be to
lead the wretched life of a detested tyrant, who, amidst perpetual suspicions
and alarms, passes his miserable days a stranger to every tender sentiment; and
utterly precluded from the heartfelt satisfaction of pure friendship. But you,
my dear girls, can never be strangers to that noble passion; the ties of
consanguinity will strengthen the bonds of friendship, and the claims of
relationship augment your tenderness.

INGRATITUDE.
SENTIMENTS.
Ingratitude wounds the mind, pierces the heart, and does an irreparable injury
to human nature.

Ingratitude is more baneful than a pestilential vapor, and more destructive
to society than a band of robbers.

Ingratitude is so dangerous to itself, and so detestable to other people, that
one would imagine nature had sufficiently provided against the practice of it,
without the necessity of enforcing it by law. Not to return one good office for
another, is absolutely inhuman; but to return evil for good, is diabolical.

Seneca.
AMIDST the various vices to which human nature is prone, and which mark the
degradation it has suffered, none more strikingly evince its debasement than
the practice of ingratitude. For other vices, and other failings, reason may be
able to assign a cause; but for that she must search in vain. That kindness
should ever be returned with cruelty, or affection be treated with neglect, is
humanity's shame, and man's disgrace!

It is certain that ingratitude can only find existence in a depraved mind, a
corrupted heart, and the breast that is a stranger to every virtuous sentiment!
There is something so contrary to honor, so repugnant to humanity, and so
devoid of principle, even in the bare forgetfulness of favors, that those who
are capable of practicing such a mode of conduct, are thought of with contempt,
and treated with scorn.

Seneca observes, that it is one man's happiness to give, and another's
misfortune to receive; but the gratification which a liberal mind would enjoy
from the power of conferring benefits, the ungrateful man totally destroys, and
deprives benevolence of its just reward. In short, ingratitude is so
contemptible in itself, and so generally despised by the world, that naught but
authenticated facts could prove that so detestable a vice was really in
existence; but, amongst the various instances which history has recorded to
prove it so, none can be attended with more aggravating circumstances than a
story accidentally met with in Sigon's account of Barbados, which Mr. Addison
has given his reader's in the author's words, and which I shall also begin with
in relating the following examples of it.

Mr. Thomas Inkle, a young London merchant, was the third son of a wealthy
citizen, who had carefully instilled into his mind a love of gain, and a desire
of acquiring wealth; and this propensity, which he had imbibed from precept,
and felt from nature, was the grand inducement for him to try his fortune in
the West Indies. Inkle's person was absolutely the reverse of his mind: The
former was manly and noble; but the latter mean and contracted. During the
voyage, the Achilles (which was the name of the vessel in which he had
embarked) put into a creek to avoid the fury of a storm; and young Inkle, with
several of the party, went on shore, to take a view of a scene so entirely new.
They had not traveled far up the country before they were observed by a party
of the Indians, and fear and apprehension lent wings to their flight. Inkle
out-ran his companions, and, breathless with terror, sought security in the
thicket of a forest. He had not long remained in that forlorn situation, when
his astonishment was called forth by the appearance of a youthful female, whose
benignant countenance seemed instantly to compassionate his forlorn situation.
Gentleness and sweetness was displayed in every feature; and when Inkle, by
signs, acquainted her with his forlorn situation, she evidently proved that
sympathy was confined to no particular climate, and that humanity depends not
upon the color of the skin.

The generous Indian was a woman of high birth; and knowing that the tenderness
she felt for the unfortunate stranger would be displeasing to her parents, she
felt the necessity of disguising it. She carried Inkle to a remote cave,
supplied his wants, and daily administered to his comforts. Her affection in
time became so strong, that she scarcely could exist but in his presence.
Fearful that he should grow weary of his confinement, she used to watch the
opportunities of her parents absence, and then conduct him into the beauteous
groves with which that country abounds; then persuade him to lie down and
slumber, and anxiously watch by him for fear he should be disturbed! His little
dwelling was adorned with all the art that native elegance could suggest, and
unsuspecting innocence employ, to make it appear pleasing to her lover's eyes.
At length Yarico had the happiness of finding Inkle understood her language,
and had the felicity of hearing him express the strength of his gratitude, and
power of his love. Inkle was constantly representing the joys that would await
them if they could once return to England, and painted the excess of his
passion in such glowing colors, that the unsuspecting Yarico could not doubt
its sincerity, and at length promised not only to become the partner of his
flight, but daily watch the arrival of some vessel to promote it. The
wished-for object soon appeared; the unsuspicious Yarico left the abode of her
doting parents, and, forgetful of her duty, thought only of her affection. The
ship in which they had embarked was bound for Barbados, and all Inkle's ideas
of acquiring wealth returned with double force. Love, which had been a
transitory passion, and which had acquired its foundation in interest, now
yielded to a superior claim. His freedom once obtained, the means were totally
forgotten, and the unfortunate Yarico considered as a tax upon his bounty. As
^^^n as the vessel arrived at Barbados, the merchants crowded round it for the
purpose of purchasing their slaves.

The despicable Inkle was animated at the sight, and resolving to relieve
himself of what he considered as a burden, offered the beauteous Yarico to the
best bidder. It was in vain that she threw herself on her knees before him, or
pleaded her tenderness and affection; the heart that could be dead to gratitude
was lost to love; and the unfortunate Yarico was doomed to a life of a slavery!

A soldier, in the service of a Macedonian king, was shipwrecked on an island
at some distance from the court as he was going to transact some business of
importance for the general. Although he was in a subaltern capacity, his
bravery and courage had obtained him the favor of his sovereign; and the
shipwreck happening at the time that he was expecting promotion, was a calamity
of the severest nature. Forlorn and destitute, cast upon an unknown island, the
sole survivor of the unfortunate crew, he found his spirits sinking under his
calamities, when his hopes were revived by the appearance of a stranger, who
accosted him with humanity, and saluted him with kindness. Hearing of his
misfortunes, his heart sympathized in them; and inviting him to his house, he
gave him the strongest proofs of his liberality. After having furnished him
with clothes, and supplied him with money, he procured a vessel to carry him to
the place of his destination, and desired that whenever he wanted a home, he
would consider the little farm he occupied entirely as his own. The soldier
expressed his gratitude, admired the beauty of the place, and promised, when he
made his sovereign acquainted with the misfortune that had befallen him, to
mention the benevolence with which he had been treated. As soon as he had
executed his commission, he returned to Macedon, and, after describing his
distresses in the most glowing colors, requested, as a reward, the very farm
which was occupied by the generous stranger. Philip, not suspecting such
ingratitude could exist in a human breast, instantly ordered it to be purchased
for him; and the amiable possessor was turned out of an abode which had been
inhabited by his forefathers for several generations. As Philip was known to be
the avenger of the injured, and the redresser of the oppressed, the farmer
resolved to represent his guest's ingratitude, and, going to Macedon for that
purpose, humbly solicited an audience. Fired with indignation, and exasperated
with rage, the king instantly sent for the ungrateful soldier, and, after
expressing his displeasure, and ordering him to restore the estate, he
presented it as a gift to its former owner.

TRUTH.
SENTIMENTS.
When a man loses his integrity, he loses the foundation of his virtue.
TRUTH is so great a perfection, that an ancient philosopher observed, if the
Almighty thought proper to render himself visible to man, he would choose light
for his body, and truth for his soul. The advantages which are attendant upon
an habitual love of truth, and a constant practice of its precepts, are so
striking to every thinking mind, that it is absolutely astonishing, that even
from motives of policy, it is not universally practiced.

The happiness I have hitherto experienced, my beloved girls, from observing
that you have a detestation to falsehood, and an abhorrence of every kind of
deceit, was the reason of my not sooner entering upon a subject which I
consider of the utmost importance; but as I was convinced your natures required
neither examples to allure you to the habit of truth, or deter you from the
practice of falsehood, I did not intend lengthening out my advice: but when I
reflect that the strongest virtue may be shaken, and the firmest principles
subdued, by bad example, I cannot resist the inclination I feel to strengthen
the amiable propensity which nature has bestowed, and entreat you always to
recollect that truth and sincerity are the basis of every virtue; and that
deception and hypocrisy are the foundation of every vice. If, at an age when
the heart is warm, when the emotions are strong, and when nature is expected to
show herself free and open, you could then smile and deceive, what should I
expect when you were longer practiced in the artifice of the world?
Dissimulation in youth is the sure forerunner of perfidy in old age; and its
first appearance is the fatal omen of growing depravity and future shame. The
path of truth is plain and easy, but that of falsehood is a perplexing maze.
One artifice unavoidably leads on to another, till, as the intricacy increases,
you are lost and entangled in your own snare.

As you value, therefore, the approbation of heaven, the esteem of the world,
and the affection of your friends, cultivate that love of truth which has
hitherto been my gratification and your glory.

Amidst the various amiable qualities which have been attributed to Calphurnia,
the wife of Julius Caesar, that of her love for sincerity, and adherence to
truth, is particularly mentioned with the applause they merit.

Aristotle, the Macedonian philosopher, being asked what a man could gain by
telling a falsehood, replied, "Not to be credited when he speaks the truth."

Petrarch, a celebrated Italian poet, resided in the family of Cardinal
Colonna, by whom he was loved for his virtues, and esteemed for his abilities.
A violent quarrel having happened which that nobleman was anxious to know the
foundation of, that he might do justice to the injured party, he assembled all
his household, and compelled them to take a solemn oath that they would
represent the circumstances with fairness and impartiality; and even his
brother, the Bishop of Luna, was called upon to make the sacred assertion: but
when Petrarch appeared, with an intent of following the bishop's example, the
cardinal instantly closed the book, saying, "As to you, Petrarch, your word is
sufficient."

Zenocrates, an Athenian philosopher, was so highly celebrated for his truth
and veracity, that one day, when he approached the altar, to confirm by oath
the truth of what he had asserted, the judges unanimously declared his word was
a sufficient evidence, and would not suffer him to take the oath.

Was I to write volumes with an intention of convincing you of the advantages
which result from the habit of speaking truth, or the honor which is obtained
by the practice of it, I could not convey a stronger proof of either, than what
may be derived from the above little historical anecdotes of Petrarch and
Zenocrates.

VIRTUE.
SENTIMENTS.
There is so wonderful a grace attached to virtue, that even the worst of
characters acknowledge its power, though they are incapable of feeling its
effects.

So powerful is the influence of virtue, and so gracious the designs of
Providence, that every man has a guide within his own bosom for the practice of
it.

Seneca.
VIRTUE is a word of such general acceptance, that it takes in all those
qualities that adorn the mind, improve the character, and add a dignity to
human nature. But in this section I intend confining its bounds, and merely
naming it as the greatest ornament of the female character, and as the
inseparable companion of modesty and delicacy.

The virtue to which I here allude, is composed of so fine a texture, that the
breath of surmise would taint, and the blast of suspicion become its
destruction.

Reputation is a female's choicest possession, and it is necessary to guard it
with unremitting care. The slightest deviation from general forms has sometimes
been the means of tarnishing it; and those errors which have had innocence for
their foundation, have frequently been construed into indications of guilt.

As your conduct is liable to the severity of the morose, and the criticisms of
the illiberal, how necessary is it, my beloved girls, that your actions should
be submitted to the guidance of caution, that they may never become the food of
slander, or the sustenance of reproach! Yet do not imagine that I am
endeavoring to rob the season of youth of those joys to which it is entitled,
or substituting seriousness in the place of gaiety; for I think that innocent
cheerfulness of heart, which is the natural attendant upon youth, one of its
greatest ornaments; yet, in the midst of gaiety, I would have you attend to
caution, and, surrounded by pleasure, be guided by propriety.

In your intercourse with the world, you may have the misfortune to meet with
characters who, under the appearance of promoting your happiness, may be aiming
at the destruction of your virtue; and whilst alluring you to a bed of roses,
may be artfully concealing the thorns! But if, to obtain pleasure, they advise
you to act contrary to principle, their society is contagious, and you ought to
avoid it with as much caution as a pestilential vapor.

Let your manners to the other sex be open and unaffected, free from the
embarrassment of prudery, or the freedom of familiarity: yet do not suppose I
wish to prevent your receiving, with condescension, those little attentions
which are the effect of politeness, or the efforts of goodnature; but beware
of suffering the slightest deviation from respect, or the most trifling
infringement upon delicacy.

The Romans had so high a veneration for the very names of virtue and chastity,
that they erected temples and altars in honor of their existence; and so
tender were the females of their character, and so anxious to preserve it from
blemish, that they would have preferred death to the misfortune of having it
tarnished. Amongst the numberless instances which might be brought to prove the
truth of this assertion, I shall give the story of Lucretia the preference.

Sextus Tarquinius, son of the inhuman Tullia, was a young man of the most
depraved disposition: his passions had never submitted to control, nor his
inclinations to restraint; and if he felt an unlawful desire, his principles
never opposed the gratification of it. Chance had introduced him to the
acquaintance of Lucretia, the wife of Collatinus, a general in the Roman army;
and all the schemes which artifice could invent, or passion suggest, were made
use of to win her affection from the worthy Collatinus. At length finding that,
instead of inspiring tenderness, he had created abhorrence, he resolved to
adopt a different mode of conduct, and, unsheathing his sword, vowed he would
bury it in her spotless bosom, if she did not consent to let him become the
partner of her bed. Death the virtuous Lucretia would willingly have preferred
to dishonor; but the inhuman monster declared that he would kill her slave,
lay him by her side, and then publish to Collatinus that he had committed the
act to punish his injuries, and to avenge his disgrace. The unfortunate
Lucretia too well knew the depravity of the wretch who threatened, to doubt for
a moment his intention of executing; and the horror of having her fame
traduced, and her character stigmatized, at length induced her to consent to
his base proposals: but the next morning she sent a messenger to the camp,
requesting her husband would come to her immediately; and dressing herself in
deep mourning, she went to her father's house, and there waited the general's
arrival.

Collatinus, who loved his wife with the most unfeigned affection, instantly
obeyed the summons; and, with a heart animated with delight, at the prospect of
beholding the object of his tenderness, flew to the house of her father, where
he was told she had retired. But how was he shocked when he beheld her! Instead
of the smile of joy, and the embrace of tenderness, with which he was
accustomed to be greeted, his welcome was announced by a flood of tears, and a
groan of anguish! Many minutes elapsed before she was able to account for this
melancholy alteration, or reply to the tender interrogations of her tortured
husband. At length, checking the violence of her emotions, she began by
assuring him of the strength of her affection, and the tenderness of her
attachment, and then proceeded to describe the whole conduct of the inhuman
Sextus; and, after declaring her inability to support a life that had been
disgraced by dishonor, she drew a dagger from her robe, and plunging it into
her bosom, fell lifeless at her distracted husband's feet.

An Arabian prince, of the name of Merwan, in his rage for plunder and
persecution, made himself master of a convent, and was so captivated by the
beauty of one of the unfortunate nuns, that he resolved the sanctity of her
character should be no protection against the brutality of his desires. The
amiable young woman finding it impossible to make an impression on his
principles, or elude his power, at length resolved to try the effect of
artifice, and informed him she was in the possession of a secret to make an
ointment that would render those invulnerable who used it, and requested
permission to retire to her cell, and prepare it. Delighted at the prospect of
becoming invincible, Merwan instantly permitted her to retire, and prepare for
him the precious unction. In a short period she returned, displayed her throat
covered with ointment, and desired he would draw his sabre, and prove the
efficacy of the preparation. The vicious Merwan, incapable of an exalted action
himself, had no idea of it in another; and not suspecting it possible that the
beautiful nun could prefer death to dishonor, instantly drew the weapon, and
aiming a violent blow at the part he imagined invulnerable, was shocked and
astonished at beholding the object of his love instantly fall, deprived for
ever both of sense and life.

When the prince of Thracia took possession of the city of Thebes, instead of
becoming the protector of innocence and virtue, he inhumanly proved himself its
destroyer; and, amongst those who fell victims to his lawless passion, was a
young lady whose name was Timoclea. Shocked at the indignity she had received,
and exasperated against the author of it, rage and resentment took possession
of her mind; and inviting him to a room wherein there was a well, she informed
him her riches were buried in it. The prince, unsuspicious of her design,
instantly stooped down to gratify his curiosity; and Timoclea, availing herself
of his situation, instantly precipitated him to the bottom. The action being
discovered, she was immediately apprehended, and carried before Alexander as
the murderer of one of his captains; but the moment he was informed of the
injury she had sustained, he not only pardoned the act, but restored her to
liberty.

Peter, the czar of Russia, was a man of great abilities, but very strong
passions, and indulged them at the hazard both of his peace and honor. Having
been captivated by the beauty of a young lady at Moscow, he made her the most
splendid offers to induce her to listen to his love, and tormented her so
continually with the declaration of his passion, that, to avoid his
persecutions, she resolved to quit Moscow, and retire to some remote spot,
where her virtue might be secure from his attacks, and her delicacy be spared
the mortification it constantly received: but being thoroughly acquainted with
the czar's disposition, she was convinced, that if she informed her parents of
her intention, it would be a means of involving them in difficulty and
distress; and therefore she withdrew herself from their protection without
giving them the slightest hint of her design; and going to the house of an old
woman who had nursed her, described her situation, and entreated the husband to
direct her to a place of safety, where she would be likely to be unsought for,
and undiscovered. The man, who was a wood-cutter, advised her to secret
herself in a wood adjoining his cottage, and offered to build her a little hut
to shelter her from the inclemencies of the weather. Accustomed, as she had
always been, to the ^legancies of life, how great must have been the
alteration, and how melancholy the change! yet, supported by virtue, and
protected by innocence, she forgot grandeur, and met poverty with resignation!
Her parents were inconsolable for her loss; and the czar's disappointment was
evinced in all his actions. Spies were sent into different parts of the
country, and great rewards were offered for the discovery of her person. The
unhappy father and mother were the first objects of his resentment; but when he
became sensible they were unacquainted with their daughter's flight he
endeavored to console instead of increasing their sorrows. Twelve months
elapsed, and no tidings were heard; and it was universally imagined this
amiable young woman had found some means of ending her existence to avoid the
czar's persecutions: but at length she was discovered by a colonel in the
Russian service, who, shooting in the wood, was struck with the sight of her
humble dwelling, embosomed in the deepest recess. But if he was astonished at
beholding an habitation in so unfrequented a spot, how much more so was he,
when he viewed its lovely inmate, and heard her reasons for having chosen so
forlorn an abode! The impression of astonishment was soon converted into
sentiments of tenderness and esteem; and, after imparting the joyful
intelligence of their daughter's existence to her disconsolate parents, he
informed them of the impression her virtues and beauty had made upon his heart,
and earnestly entreated their consent to his marriage. The parents considered
themselves too much the colonel's debtor to deny their consent, and the czar
was cautiously informed of the young lady's existence. Struck with so uncommon
an instance of delicacy and virtue, he resolved it should not go unrewarded;
and sending for the colonel into his presence, informed him he would not only
attend the marriage ceremony, but bestow upon him the hand of the most virtuous
woman in his dominions: and, in addition to it, give him with her three
thousand roubles a year!

CONTENTMENT.
SENTIMENTS.
The foundation of content must spring up in a man's own mind; and he who has
so little knowledge of human nature as to seek happiness by changing any thing
but his own disposition, will waste his time in fruitless efforts, and multiply
the griefs which he wishes to remove. Johnson. A contented mind is a continual
feast: and the pleasure of the banquet is greatly augmented by knowing that
each man may become his own entertainer.
A CONTENTED temper is one of the greatest blessings that can be enjoyed, and
one of the most material requisites for the discharge of social duties. The
mind that is continually repining at its lot, and lamenting the miseries of its
fate, at length becomes so habituated to the practice, that it forgets its own
unworthiness, and, by constant murmurings, grows impious toward its Maker.
Discontent may be termed a gangrene, which preys upon the vitals, infects the
whole constitution with disease, and at length totally destroys the pleasure of
existence!

If I was desired to give an allegorical description of contentment, I should
term it the offspring of Piety, the sister of Resignation, and the parent of
Cheerfulness.

Mr. Addison, in one of his excellent discourses, observes, that there are but
two things which ought to deprive us of cheerfulness of heart. The first of
these (says that elegant writer) is a sense of guilt; for no man can be easy or
tranquil whose conscience convicts him of acts of impiety, or deeds of
desperation: And the second proceeds from a doubt or disbelief of the existence
of a Supreme Being. "There is something (says the author I have just quoted) so
particularly gloomy in the last idea, that it is no wonder the being who
indulges it should be incapable of cheerfulness."

For my own part, I consider contentment as a duty which I owe my Maker; and
cheerfulness as another which I owe society. A repining, gloomy temper is,
doubtless, one of the greatest misfortunes that can be attached to human
nature, and yet certainly one that is least entitled to pity, because it is
brought on by peevishness, and nurtured by caprice.

Can you, my beloved girls, look abroad into the world, and behold the
miserable objects with which it abounds, without feeling your hearts glow with
gratitude to the Author of your own felicity? Can you see wretchedness pining
under want, disease struggling with poverty, and virtue bending under the
tyranny of oppression, without adoration to your Maker for an exemption from
such calamities?

Your situation has hitherto been so fortunate as to preclude the entrance of a
repining thought; for, devoid of want, you must be happy; and, unused to
disappointment, it is impossible you should complain: But the day of affliction
may arrive, and the sunshine of prosperity may be veiled in a cloud of
darkness! The prospect which is now so enlivening may be suddenly overshadowed,
and a dreary gloom succeed the brilliant view! Then will be the time for the
exertion of fortitude, and the practice of contentment; and till then neither
can be called into action.

Little merit can be ascribed to those who are contented with a lot which
abounds with felicity, or who appear satisfied because they have no opportunity
for complaint. Contentment can only be considered as a virtue when trials have
called forth fortitude, and misfortunes have produced resignation.

History abounds with instances of exalted characters, who, from habitual
contentment, have despised wealth, disdained power, and even declined regal
dignity, though their stations were humble, and their fortunes circumscribed.
Highly as those actions have been applauded, and great as they certainly
appear, I shall prefer giving you the history of a poor soldier, whom Doctor
Goldsmith accidentally met with, to every other I ever read; as I consider it
the finest lesson in favor of contentment that can be selected either from the
past or present age.

No observation is more common (says the author I have just quoted) than that
one half of the world are ignorant how the other lives. The misfortunes of the
great are held up to engage our attention, are enlarged upon in tones of
declamation, and the world is called upon to gaze at the noble sufferers. There
is nothing magnanimous in bearing misfortunes with fortitude, when the whole
world is looking on, and sympathizing in the distress; but he who, in the vale
of obscurity, can brave adversity, who, without friends to encourage,
acquaintance to pity, or even without hope to alleviate, his misfortunes, can
encounter them with fortitude and tranquillity, may certainly be considered as
a truly great character.

The Story of the disabled Soldier.
"Accidentally meeting (says Doctor Goldsmith) a poor fellow, whom I knew when
a boy, dressed in a sailor's jacket, begging at one of the outlets of the town
with a wooden leg, I was anxious to become acquainted with the circumstances
that had reduced him to his forlorn situation; for knowing him to have been
both honest and industrious, I felt an interest in his misfortunes, which
induced me to request he would oblige me with the relation of them."

"As to my misfortunes, Master," replied the heroic philosopher, I cannot
pretend to have gone through more than other folks; for, except the loss of my
limb, and the being obliged to beg, I don't know any reason (thank heaven!)
that I have to complain. There is Bill Tibbs, of our regiment, has lost both
his legs, and an eye to boot; but, thank God! it is not so bad with me yet.

I was born in Shropshire. My father was a labourer, and died when I was five
years old; and so then I was put upon the parish: but as he had been a
wandering sort of a man, the parishioners were not able to tell to what parish
he belonged, or where I was born; and so they sent me to another parish, and
they sent me to a third. I thought, in my heart, they kept sending me about so
long, that they would not let me be born in any parish at all: but, however, at
last they fixed me. I had some disposition to be a scholar, and was resolved at
least to know my letters; but the master of the workhouse put me to business as
soon as I was able to handle a mallet; and here I lived an easy kind of life
for five years. I only worked ten hours in the day, and had meat and drink
provided for my labor. It is true I was not suffered to stir out of the house,
for fear, as they said, I should run away: But what of that! I had the liberty
of the whole house, and the yard before the door; and that was enough for me. I
was then bound out to a farmer, where I was up both early and late: but I ate
and drank plentifully, and liked my business well enough, till he died, and
then I was obliged to provide for myself, and so then I was resolved to go and
seek my fortune. In this manner I went from town to town, worked when I could
get employment, and starved when I could get none. But happening one day to go
through a field that belonged to a justice of the peace, I spied a hare
crossing the path just before me, and, as ill luck would have it, without
thinking what I was about, I threw my stick at the poor animal, struck it on
the head and laid it sprawling at my feet. Just as I had tucked it under my
coat, who should I have the misfortune to meet but the justice himself. He
called me a poacher and a villain; and collaring me, desired I would give an
account of my breed, seed, and generation: and though I gave a true account of
myself, the justice doubted it; and so I was found guilty of being poor, and
sent up to Newgate, in order to be transported as a vagabond.

People may say this, and that, of being in jail, but, for my part, I found
Newgate as agreeable a place as ever I was in in my life. I had my bellyful to
eat and drink, and did no work at all. But this kind of life was too good to
last for ever; so I was taken out of prison after five months, put on board a
ship, and sent off with two hundred more to the plantations. We had but an
indifferent passage; for being all confined in the hold, the greatest part died
for the want of fresh air; and those who recovered were sickly enough, God
knows. When we came ashore, those which remained alive were sold to the
planters, and I was bound for seven years more. As I was no scholar, I was
obliged to work amongst the negroes; but I served my time out, as I was in duty
bound to do. When it was expired, I worked my passage home; and right glad was
I to see Old England once again, because I loved my country. I was afraid,
however, that I should be indicted for a vagabond once more, so did not much
care to go down into the country, but kept about the town, and did little jobs
when I could get them.

I was very happy in this manner for some time, till one evening coming home
from work, two men knocked me down, and then desired me to stand. They belonged
to a press-gang, and I was carried before the justice; and as I could give no
account of myself, I had my choice, whether to go on board a man of war, or to
list for a soldier. I chose the latter; and in this post of a gentleman I
served two campaigns in Flanders; was at the battles of Val and Fontenoy; and
received but one wound through the breast, which our doctor soon cured.

When the peace came, I was discharged; but as I could not work, because my
wound was sometimes troublesome, I listed for a landman in the East India
Company's service. I have fought the French in six pitched battles; and I
verily believe, that, if I could read or write, our captain would have made me
a corporal: but it was not my good fortune to have promotion; for I soon fell
sick, and so got leave to return home again with forty pounds in my pocket.
This was at the beginning of the present war; and I hoped to be set on shore,
and to have the pleasure of spending my money; but the government wanted men,
and so I was pressed for a sailor before ever I set my foot on land.

The boatswain fancied I understood my business, (though God knows I was quite
ignorant of it,) and used to flog me for faults I could not correct; but as I
had still my forty pounds in my pocket, I looked forward to better days. But my
happiness was of short duration; for our ship was taken by the French, and all
my money torn from me.

Our crew was carried into Breast, and many of them died because they were not
used to live in a jail; but, for my part, it was nothing to me, because I was
seasoned. One night, as I was sleeping on my bed of boards with a warm blanket
about me (for I always loved to lie well) I was awakened by the boatswain, who
had a dark lanthorn in his hand. "Jack," says he to me, "will you knock out the
French centry's brains?" I don't care, says I, (striving to keep myself awake,)
if I lend a hand." "Then follow me," says he; "and I hope we shall do the
business." So up I got, and tied my blanket (which was all the clothes I had)
about my middle, and went with him to fight the French. Though we had no arms,
one Englishman is able to beat five French at any time. So we went down to the
door where both the centries were posted, and, rushing upon them, seized their
arms in a moment, and knocked them down. From thence nine of us ran to the
quay, and taking possession of the first boat, got out of the harbor and put
out to sea. In three days we were taken up by the Dorset privateer, who was
glad to meet with such a number of stout hands. But here Fortune did not favor
us; for we fell in with the Pompadour privateer, of forty guns, which was
seventeen more than the Dorset. But to it we went yard-arm and yard-arm. The
fight lasted three hours; and if our men had not been all killed, I verily
believe we should have obtained the victory! I was once more in the hands of
the French, and fancy it would have gone hard with me, if I had not been
retaken by the Viper. I had almost forgot to tell you, Sir, that in the
engagement I lost my leg, and four fingers off my left hand: But if I had had
the good fortune to have met with the accident on board a king's ship instead
of a privateer, I should have been entitled to clothing and maintenance all
the rest of my life; but that was not my chance. One man is born with a silver
spoon in his mouth, and another with a wooden ladle. However, blessed be God, I
enjoy good health, and will forever love liberty and Old England! Liberty,
property, and Old England for ever, hazza!

Such an instance of fortitude, and such an example of contentment, I have
scarcely met with in the page of history; and I am convinced, that if the
unfortunate soldier had been placed in such a situation of life as to have
rendered his conduct conspicuous, he would have immortalized his name by some
heroic exploit: for the resignation with which he endured misfortune, the
cheerfulness with which he encountered adversity, and the contentment with
which he supported oppression, could only have arisen from true greatness of
mind.

But if an untaught, uneducated, and neglected being, could cheerfully
encounter an accumulation of misfortunes, and gratefully acknowledge that
others were more miserable than himself, what a lesson ought it to be to those
whose minds have been informed by precept, and instructed by religion, to
support adversity with resignation, and distress with fortitude! And if your
situation, my beloved girls, should ever be such as to require the exertion of
those qualities, I flatter myself with the hope, that the recollection of the
poor soldier's contentment will inspire you with the wish of imitating his
virtue's; and at the same time remember that poverty can only be attended with
shame, when vice accompanies the actions of its possessor; for as Mr. Pope
justly observes, Honor and shame from no condition rise:
Act well your part -- there all the honor lies.


PASSION AND ANGER.
SENTIMENTS.
It is much easier to check our passions in the beginning, than to stop them in
their course.

Our passions are a disease which, by frequency and negect, become fatal.

Seneca.
PASSION and anger are propensities so contrary to that softness which is a
female's greatest ornament, that it even seems difficult to suppose it possible
they could ever obtain admission into the mind: yet, unamiable as they are in
appearance, and dreadful as they have been in consequences, they too frequently
have contrived to enter, to the destruction of gentleness, the banishment of
peace, and the total overthrow of domestic comfort.

Doctor Blair, in his excellent discourse upon the Dominion of the passions,
says, "the history of all mankind has ever been a continual tragedy; and the
world a great theater, exhibiting the same repeated scene of the follies of men
shooting forth into guilt, and of their passions fermenting by a quick progress
into absolute misery." Melancholy as this picture appears, I fear there is too
much truth in the observation: but if you would avoid falling under the
disgraceful censure, always oppose the very beginning of passion; and as soon
as you find the tempest rising, have recourse to every proper method of
allaying its violence, or of escaping to a calmer shore.

Anger and resentment are so turbulent in their effects, so pernicious in their
consequences, and so destructive to the peace and order of society, that it is
wonderful the desire of self-gratification should not be sufficiently powerful
to root out such troublesome companions from the human breast; yet, though all
are willing to acknowledge the bad tendency of passion, few will take the
trouble of endeavoring to eradicate the destructive evil; and though they
blame the failings of their neighbors, they are partially blind to their own
imperfections.

It has long been the subterfuge of the passionate and revengeful, to throw
that odium upon nature which ought only to be attached to themselves, and to
say they are born with passions which it is absolutely impossible for them to
subdue; and therefore, however outrageous their actions may appear to society,
or however destructive they may prove to the happiness of those with whom they
are connected, still they are objects more deserving of pity than meriting
blame.

This mode of arguing may be very satisfactory to themselves; but I am
convinced that even you, my dear Louisa, (who are certainly prone to the
indulgence of passion,) will acknowledge both its weakness and injustice: for
if, as a child, you are capable of subduing resentment in the presence of those
whose displeasure you stand in awe of, how much more able to acquire that
ascendency over their passions must those be, whose judgments are ripened by
years, and improved by observation!

Let me then conjure you, my beloved girls, if you value my peace, or your own
felicity, to endeavor to acquire an absolute ascendency over your passions;
and, instead of nourishing resentment, check it in its first approach.
Cultivate a kind, generous, and sympathizing temper, which feels for distress,
and stretches out a hand to relieve it. Thus you will be kept free from that
constant irritation which imaginary injuries are continually creating in a
suspicious mind, to the destruction of its repose, and the banishment of its
peace.

That weak heads or bad hearts should be under the dominion of passion, is
neither extraordinary or uncommon; but that great talents, or superior
abilities, should have been disgraced by the indulgence of so lowering a
practice, is at once inexplicable and astonishing; yet, amongst the following
examples, which I have selected from history for the purpose of inducing you to
guard against the slightest appearance of passion, you will find that even
royalty has been stained by its indulgence, and great abilities been disgraced
by its practice.

Elizabeth, who, as a queen, stands unrivalled in the page of history, and
whose superior abilities were calculated to call forth universal admiration,
tarnished her glory, and disgraced her character, by the unjustifiable
indulgence she gave her passions; for who can read of a queen having placed
herself upon a level with one of the meanest of her subjects, by giving a blow
to the favorite of her affections, without despising her fury, and feeling
contempt for the being who, in defiance of all delicacy, was so great a slave
to her passions?

In the life of Frederick, king of Prussia, there is a remarkable anecdote
related of his sister, which neither tells to her honor, or is recorded to her
credit.

A custom-house-officer, in the discharge of his duty, seized some silks which
were intended for the princess, because they had not been entered according to
the established rule, and by that means had avoided paying the accustomed duty.

The princess, enraged that any of her brother's subjects should venture to
detain her property, commanded the custom-house-officer to appear before her;
and, forgetting the softness of her sex, and the dignity of her character,
upbraided him in no very gentle language for (what she termed) the impertinence
of his conduct. The man, conscious that he had only properly discharged the
duties of his station, presumed to remonstrate upon her displeasure; and this
circumstance so entirely put the princess off her guard, that, running up to
him with fury in her aspect, she not only loaded him with abuse, but struck him
several blows upon the face.

Olympias, wife of Philip, king of Macedon, was a woman of so turbulent a
spirit and ungovernable temper, that the king found it impossible to live with
her upon terms of peace or cordiality; and though he once loved her with the
most unbounded affection, yet the violence of her temper, and the depravity of
her heart, soon taught him to conquer his tenderness; and finding she was
neither to be won by persuasion, or intimidated by fear, he sued for a divorce,
and was afterward married to Cleopatra.

A lovely form is often the covering to a turbulent temper. Roxana, a Bactarian
princess, whom Alexander the Great had brought into captivity, was so
transcendantly beautiful, that it was impossible to behold her without
admiration; and the hero who had subdued thousands, found himself enslaved by
her charms. Too generous to take advantage of Roxana's situation, he sued for
that which he had a right to demand, and fancied himself the happiest of
mortals, when Roxana consented to share his throne. But though her person was
lovely, her mind was vicious, and her passions strong and ungovernable; and,
after the death of Alexander, she rendered herself so obnoxious to the people,
that a party was formed against her, and she was put to death.

Zenobia, wife of Odenatus, king of the Palmyrenians, was a woman endowed with
a masculine greatness of mind; yet those historians who have extolled her for
feats of bravery, and acts of valor, cannot avoid censuring her for the
indulgence of passion, and the practice of cruelty; and though she possessed
many virtues, yet those vices were sufficiently great to throw a shade over the
brightest of them.

Zoe, wife to the emperor Romanus, had from her infancy, yielded to the
dominion of her passions; and whoever opposed the gratification of them, were
certain of feeling the weight of her resentment; for her anger was excessive,
and her fury without bounds. Deaf to the voice of principle, and lost to a
sense of virtue, she put no check to the violence of her desires; and even the
life of her husband fell a sacrifice to their accomplishment; for having fallen
in love with a young man whose person was attractive, she contrived to have the
emperor murdered, and then made him her partner in the throne!

If to paint vice is to render it despicable, the instances I have now selected
will be sufficiently numerous for that purpose; and you will feel as repugnant
to the practice of it, as if I had written volumes upon the subject. Whilst I
am anxious to guard you against the approach of passion, I am solicitous that
you should correct every appearance of harshness. Let not ease and indulgence
contract your affections, or wrap you up in selfish enjoyments: accustom
yourselves to think of the distresses of human life; and though you are
exempted from them, yet harden not your hearts against another's sufferings;
but cheerfully contribute to the relief of woes you never felt, and miseries
you have the good fortune never to have endured.

I have now only to conjure you, my beloved girls, to let truth be the guide of
your hearts, and sincerity the dictator of your actions. Avoid artifice, adhere
to honor, and uniformly practice the duties of benevolence. Impress your minds
with the original and natural equality of man, and by those reflections check
the approaches of presumption. The advantages of birth, and the splendor of
fortune, are trifles when compared with greatness of mind; and it is only those
who can bear prosperity without arrogance, and adversity without meanness, who
deserve to be considered as truly great.

FINIS.
BOOKS AND STATIONARY, CONSTANTLY FOR SALE, BY OLIVER D. and I. COOK.
HARTFORD, CONNECTICUT. GAY's Fables, Father's Legacy, Death of Abel,
Dictionary of Love, Penn's Maxims, Mental Improvement, Whole Duty of Women,
Chesterfield's Advice, Clarissa Harlowe, Fables for the Female Sex, Wisdom in
Miniature, Rowe's Devout Exercises, Thomsons Seasons, Moral Sketches, History
of the Devenport family, Pamela, Tom Jones, Lives of the British Admirals,
Ladder to Learning, History of a Pin, A new Mirror for the Female Sex or
Historical Beauties for Young Ladies, a new publication, Johnson's Dictionary
in Miniature, Biographical Dictionary, Tablet of Memory, Pocket Dictionaries of
all kinds, The Rule of Life.

STATIONARY. BEST of English and American Writing and Letter Paper for Schools,
Gentlemen and Ladies Morocco Pocket Books, Pocket Globes, Pencils, Slates,
Wafers, Ladies Drawing Books, Instrumental Music Books, the very best of
Penknives, price from 4 d. to 6 s. Warranted Ink Powder, Ink Chests and Stands.

SCHOOL BOOKS. SCHOOL Bibles and Testaments, Webster's Institute all parts per
groce, Morses Georgraphy abridged, do. Elements of Geography, Dwight's School
Geography, Scott's Lessons, Monitor, Bennett's Letters, Preceptor, Fisher's
Companion, Pike's Arithmetic, Root's Arithmetic, Dilworth's Assistant, New
Childs' Spelling Book, Primmers, Psalm Books plain and gilt, 50 groce London
Chap and Childrens Books sorted, (price from 2 d. to 3 s.) consisting of Moral,
Instructive and Entertaining Essays, Stories, Lives, Small Histories, Voyages,
Travels, Adventures, etc. etc. etc.


