THE HISTORY OF THE FIGHT OF THE INTREPID Captain JOHN LOVELL, WHICH TOOK PLACE
On the Eighth day of May, 1725, ON THE BEACH OF LOVELL'S POND, IN FRYEBURGH, In
the District of MAINE. TOGETHER WITH THE Commemoration SERMON, DELIVERED By the
Rev. Mr. T. SYMMES.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT Fryeburg, BY AND FOR ELIJAH RUSSEL. 1799.

Introduction.
ONE principal design of the present edition of this little book is, to
preserve a Complete History of a BATTLE or FIGHT, which, though in itself but
trifling, yet, in its issue or consequences, has been justly deemed of great
importance; it is an interesting incident in the history of New England. To
attempt a march of upwards of an hundred miles, through a wilderness, into a
forest, where not a friendly but or civilized inhabitant were to be met with,
where Savages and wolves were "lords of the soil!" where "dangers pressed on
every side!" this was a forlorn and desperate adventure, big with danger,
reserved for the daring genius of an intrepid LOVELL. Who, though he fell in
the contest, by this enterprise, opened a road into a wide extended country,
rich in soil, in climate healthy; and pointed the way to the settlement and
civilization of this (at that time desolate and uncultivated, but now) pleasant
and populous country.

This enterprising adventure of Lovell was begun in April, and his Fight with
the Indians, was on the 8th of May, 1725. By the best information which could
be obtained from Indians who were in the Fight, there were about Eighty of the
Savages opposed to the brave Lovell with only thirty two men! who killed forty
five of the Indians, with their Chief Captain, Paugus, and put the rest to
flight. Never was a battle sustained with more fortitude and courage, than was
this on the part of Captain Lovell and his men; they were engaged the whole day
with nearly three times their own number of Savages, and obtained a victory
over them!

There was not, at the time of this battle, a white inhabitant within fifty
miles of the scene of action! Saco was the nearest settlement of white people!
and the whole of this now civilized country, was then a wide extended waste,
clothed with Nature's rudest wild attire!

In the summer of 1763, Mr. Nathaniel Smith moved his family into Fryeburg;
this was the first family of white people which erected a habitation in the
country, vulgarly called Pigwacket. On the 20th Nov. of the same year, Messrs.
Samuel Osgood, Moses Ames, John Evans, and Jedediah Spring, moved into
Fryeburg, from Concord in New Hampshire, through a rough, hilly country,
uninhabited for 50 or 70 miles; Mr. David Evans and Mr. Nathaniel Merrill,
(then young men) accompanied them, as first settlers. These were they, who
encountered the hardships, the fatigues, the sufferings, the losses, of the
first settlement of this new country -- These were they, who lived, like " a
band of brothers," in friendship, who formed the first happy society, on this
(till then) desolate plain -- who established themselves in the bosom of an
extensive wilderness, and constituted the First Civil Family of a howling
forest. They laid the foundation for a large settlement, which all of them have
had the pleasure to behold increasing to a populous and wealthy land. To them,
and to those worthy Matrons who, with heroic courage and fortitude of soul, set
hardship and danger at defiance, and reared with tender care a race of hardy
sons -- to their spirit of enterprise, we are indebted for the enjoyment of
this flourishing country -- May their days roll on in peace, may they ever
enjoy ease, and plenty; and when in a good old age, they shall be called to the
land of their fathers, may they depart with the good will and honors of all who
participate in the Fruits of their First adventure.

The nearest White Neighbors which these first settlers had for a long time,
were at Saco; and with those even they had no communication -- their nearest
place of resort to obtain those articles of necessity which they could not
forego, was Sanford; nearly sixty miles distant!

With what pleasure can they look back to the infancy of the country which they
first planted! and what a satisfaction must they enjoy, when they contrast
their present scences of ease and plenty with those when the fatigues of
hunting gave but the scanty meal! The recollection of those days, must give a
zest to the enjoyments of the present, which none can realize but those who
have seen villages grow up, the Arts and Sciences flourish, where themselves
were the fellers of the forest!

In 1764, a few more families moved into Fryeburgh, and in 1765 the population
began to increase with considerable rapidity.

In October 1774, the people of Fryeburg invited the Rev. WILLIAM FESSENDEN to
settle with them; and in October 1775, he was ordained to the work of the
Ministry -- He has continued in a happy Union with his people -- and has seen
the number of families in Fryeburg increase from sixty to one hundred and eight.

In March 1791, twenty five of the inhabitants of the towns of Fryeburg Conway
and Brownfield, assembled for the grand purpose of establishing a Grammar
School -- they agreed upon a mode; opened a subscription for the purpose, which
was filled the very day it was opened -- [Heaven smiled upon their plan] -- a
building was erected and completed, an Instructor was engaged, and on the 15th
day of November, 1791, a School commenced with Fifty scholars. In February
1792, it was incorporated with academic privileges, by the Government of this
Commonwealth, with the liberal donation of twelve thousand acres of land, to
which three thousand acres more were added in 1793. -- The funds of this
Institution (which are increasing) are sufficient for the support of a
Preceptor, etc. and will continue so as long as value shall be attached to Land.

This country, whose inhabitants are now numerous, robust and hardy, was,
before Lovell's adventure, nothing but a dreary, waste a howling wilderness,
the Land of Indians -- But now, on the very plain where the famed Paugus, the
Chief of those savage tribes, held his dreary reign, and danced in midnight
pow-wows, there is erected an Academy, (a Seat for the Muses,) where the Sons
of Apollo may quaff the Pierian Stream -- In this Academy, the Polite and
Useful branches of Literature are taught -- Youth, and others, are instructed
in Reading, Writing, Arithmetic, Geography, History, Astronomy, and the
Languages, with distinguished facility and propriety, by an able Master, whose
works are his best eulogium: he shares the love and esteem of his pupils, and
he has ever had the approbation of the authority of Colleges where several of
them have been admitted as acknowledged good scholars.

This academy affords an easy mean to all classes of people to give their
children a good education; the whole expense for tuition is only 1 dollar per
quarter; and boarding, etc. for those who want, may be obtained on easy terms.

There has been also a Printing Office lately established in Fryeburg, and this
History of Lovell's Fight is from a Press within two miles of the place where
he fell -- But, from the small Funds of the Proprietor, this establishment is
not in so flourishing progress as could be wished -- it is, however, hoped that
it may not fail -- The expense of establishing and carrying on this Business is
great -- and a general patronage alone will be sufficient to support it -- A
Press in Pigwacket, is deemed a novel adventure by those elder towns whose
towering spires beheld it a remote wilderness but thirty years ago! Yet, they
may rest assured that, if every Head of a Family in Pigwacket will say, This
Press shall have my support, I will take the Newspaper, and now and then buy my
children a "Friendly Monitor," a "Lovell's Fight," or some other little book;
if every Man in Pigwacket only, would do thus, (and every one might, all are
able, the expense individually is a mere trifle) the Press in Pigwacket should
not stop until the owner became blind, or [worse] turned Jacobin! But, as "
without the Rain from Heaven, the Corn shall WITHER on its Stalk*" so also
without the OIL of Public Aid, Printing Presses will Creek with RUST. -- That
this may never be; but, that the Wilderness may continue to " bud and blossom
as the rose;" shall be our "Constant Prayer."

Printing Office, Fryeburg, Jan. 1799.
The Ancient PREFACE.
By the Rev. Mr. SYMMES, of Bradford.
WHEN Joshua, with his brave soldiers, had discomfited Amalek, with the edge of
the sword, (while Moses, with the rod of God in his uplifted hands, supported
by Aaron and Hur, made intercession to the God of Armies on the top of the
hill) the Lord said to Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse
it in the ears of Joshua, Exodus xvii. 14. For this would be an unspeakable
encouragement to that renowned general, in his wars with the aborigines of
Canaan.

Now from this story we learn, not only that Israel would prevail against their
enemies, they should all, their magistrates and ministers especially, lift and
keep up the hand of prayer; Agreeable to which made* upon intelligence of great
numbers of Indians coming down on the frontiers and the march of several of our
companies in search of them; at the instigation of his honor the Lt Gov and the
Ministers of Boston, the public lecture there, on the 29th of April* was turned
into a day of Prayer, which was but nine day before the fight at Pigwacket --
the success whereof should therefore be ascribed with thankfulness and praise
to God, and gracious answer of the humble prayers of his people, and improved
at their further encouragement.
But also, that the remarkable preservation and success of soldiers in fighting
the Lord's battles, are very proper to be commemorated, for the honor of God,
and the encouragement of his servants, in future expeditions and military
actions.

In consideration hereof, I have the more easily complied with the request of
some of the hearers of the ensuing sermon, that it might be accompanied with a
Narrative of the Memorable Occasion of it.

And though I at first proposed only to reprint the Relation of this Action,
given us in the public newspapers; yet, having been favored with a more
particular account from the valorous Captain Wyman, and some others of good
credit, that were in the engagement, I hope it will not be unacceptable to any,
and am sure it will be very grateful to some, to have the account published
with some enlargement; and particularly to make a public record of the names of
those courageous Soldiers, who have so nobly played the man for their country;
several of whom have been grievously wounded, and others have died in the field
of battle, or of the wounds they received there -- all of whose names I am
persuaded the greatest part of the country will allow, deserve to be
transmitted unenvied to posterity, with bright encomiums.

It is to be desired that all who have returned from Pigwacket to their own
houses, will consider and show what great things God has done for them. And
that they and all our brave soldiers, will still take for their Motto, when
going forth to War, the inscription made by Moses on his altar of gratitude,
after the defeat of Amalek JEHOVAH-Nissi, The Lord is my Banner.

I have related the story of the action at Pigwacket, in a style adapted to our
common way of telling it, and according to the best information I could obtain;
and hope there are no material, I am sure there are no willing or careless,
mistakes in it. And I have only to add: -- That whoever considers the distance
our people were at from any English settlement, in a howling wilderness, and
very far in the enemy's country, who were at home, and more than double the
number of our men; -- their fighting from morning till night in a long, hot day
-- the number of killed and wounded, amongst whom were some who were persons of
distinction on both sides; will doubtless grant that this action merits a place
in the history of our New England wars. If any judge I have observed some
circumstances of this action too minutely, I have only to say, if some such
persons, or their relations had been in the action, it is possible they would
not have been of this opinion. However, those who I am firstly obliged to
gratify, will not easily come into their sentiment in this matter. And I must
beg of the others to forgive me this wrong, and that they would only consider,
the different taste of readers, and consequently the extreme difficulty, if not
impossibility, of pleasing every body, in a performance of this nature. And yet
none would be more willing to do it, than the unworthy author, who is a hearty
lover of his country, and of all good men of every denomination.

T. SYMMES.

LOVELL's FIGHT.
IT was about the 16th of April, 1725, that the brave and intrepid Captain JOHN
LOVELL began the arduous and perilous undertaking, of marching from Dunstable
to Pigwacket, with forty six men under his command.

They had traveled but a short distance before TOBY, an Indian, falling sick,
was obliged to return, which he did with great reluctance.

When they had marched as far as Contoocook, Mr. William Cummins, of Dunstable,
became so disabled by a wound that he had received from the enemy some time
before, that the Captain dismissed him, together with a kinsman of his to
accompany him back.

They proceeded on to Ossapy, and at this place Mr. Benjamin Kidder, of
Nutfield, falling sick, the Captain made a halt, and tarried while they built a
small fortification for a place of refuge to resort to if there should be
occasion. Here he left his doctor, a sergeant and seven other men, to take care
of Kidder. And they left at this place also, a considerable quantity of their
provisions, to lighten the loads of the men and facilitate their march; and
which they intended should serve as a recruit on their return.

With his company now reduced to only thirty four men with himself, Captain
Lovell, not at all disheartened by his misfortunes, proceeded on his march from
his fortification at Ossapy for Pigwacket, about forty miles distant from said
fort, through a rough wilderness.

The names of those who proceeded on from Ossapy, and who engaged PAUGUS, with
his gang of about eighty Indians, are as follow, (except one who, like a
coward, ran from them at the beginning of the engagement, and sneaked back to
the fort, and whose name is unworthy of being transmitted to posterity) --
These are the names of those brave fellows, who boldly and successfully
contended with more than twice their number, viz.

Captain JOHN LOVELL, Lieutenant JOSIAH FAREWELL, Lieutenant JONATHAN ROBBINS,
Ensign JOHN HARWOOD, Sergeant Noah Johnson, Robert Usher, Samuel Whiting, all
of Dunstable. Ensign SETH WYMAN, Corporal Thomas Richardson, Tomothy
Richardson, Ichabod Johnson, Josiah Johnson, all of Woburn. Eleazer Davis,
Josiah Davis, Josiah Jones, David Melvin, Eleazer Melvin, Jacob Farrah, Joseph
Farrah, all of Concord. Chaplain JONATHAN FRYE, of Andover. Sergeant Jacob
Fullam, of Weston. Corp. Edward Lingfield, of Nutfield. Jonathan Kittridge,
Solomon Kies, of Bellerica, John Jefts, Daniel Woods, Thomas Woods, John
Chamberlain, Elias Barron, Isaac Lakin, Joseph Gilson, all of Groton. Ebenezer
Air, Abiel Asten, of Haverhill.
From the Thursday before the battle, the company were apprehensive they were
discovered and dodged by the enemy; and on Friday night, the watch heard the
Indians about the camp and alarmed the company, but it being very dark, they
could make no further discovery.

On Saturday the eighth of May, while they were at prayers, very early in the
morning, they heard a gun; and some little time after they espied an Indian on
a point, that ran into Saco Pond.

They now concluded that the design of the gun, and the Indian's discovering
himself, was to draw them that way -- They expected now without fail to be
attacked, and it was proposed and consulted, whether it would be prudent to
venture an engagement with the enemy, (who they perceived were now sufficiently
alarmed) or endeavor a speedy retreat. The men generally and boldly answered,
"We came out to see the enemy; we have all along prayed God we might find them;
and we had rather trust Providence with our lives, yea, die for our country,
than try to return without seeing them, if we might, and be called cowards for
our pains."

The Captain readily complied to lead them on, though not without manifesting
some apprehensions; and, supposing the enemy were ahead of them, (when, as it
proved, they were in the rear) ordered the men to lay down their packs, and
march with the greatest caution, and in the utmost readiness.

When they had marched about a mile and a half, or two miles, Ensign WYMAN
espied an Indian coming toward them, whereupon he gave a signal, and they all
squatted, and let the Indian come on. In a short time, several guns were fired
at him; upon which the Indian fired upon Captain LOVELL, with beaver-shot, and
wounded him mortally, (as is supposed) though he made but little complaint, and
was still able to travel, and at the same time wounded Mr. Samuel Whiting --
Ensign Wyman immediately fired at and killed, the Indian, and Mr. Frye and
another scalped him.

They then marched back toward their packs, (which the enemy had found in the
mean time and seized) and about ten of the clock, when they came pretty near to
where they had laid them, at the north east end of Saco Pond, on a plain place,
where there were few trees and but little brush, the Indians rose up in front
and rear, in two parties, and ran toward the English* three or four deep, with
their guns presented: The English also instantly presented their guns, and
rushed on to meet them. When they had advanced to within a few yards of each
other, they fired on both sides, and the Indians fell in considerable numbers,
but the English, most if not all of them, escaped the first shot, and drove the
Indians several rods. Three or four rounds were fired on both sides; but the
Indians being more than double in number to our men, and having already killed
Captain Lovell, Mr. Fullam, (only son of Major Fullam of Weston) Ensign
Harwood, John Jests, Jonathan Kittridge, Daniel Woods, Ichabod Johnson, Thomas
Woods, and Josiah Davis, and wounded Lieutenants Farewell and Robbins and Robert
Usher, in the place where the fight begun, and striving to surround the rest,
the word was given, to retreat to the pond, which was done with a great deal of
good conduct, and proved a great service to the English, (the pond covering
their rear) though the Indians got the ground where the dead of our party lay.

The Fight continued very furious and obstinate, till toward night -- The
Indians roaring and yelling and howling like wolves, barking like dogs, and
making all sorts of hideous noises -- The English frequently shouting and
huzzaing, as they did after the first round. At one time, Captain WYMAN is
confident, the Indians were diverting themselves in powowing, by their striking
upon the ground, and other odd motions -- but Wyman creeping up, and shooting
the chief actor, broke up their meeting.

Some of the Indians, holding up ropes, asked the English if they would take
quarter; but were briskly answered, that they would have no quarter but at the
muzzles of their guns.

About the middle of the afternoon, the ingenious Mr. Jonathan Frye, (only son
of Captain James Frye, of Andover) a young gentleman of a liberal education,
who took his degree at college, 1723, and was chaplain to the company, and
greatly beloved by them, for his excellent performances and good behavior, and
who fought with undaunted courage, till that time of day, was mortally wounded.
But when he could fight no longer, he prayed audibly several times for the
preservation and success of the residue of the company.

Some time after sunset, the enemy drew off and left the field to our men. It
was supposed and believed, that not more than twenty of the enemy went off
well. About midnight, the English assembled themselves, and upon examining into
their situation, they found Jacob Farrar just expiring by the pond, and
Lieutenant Robbins and Robert Usher unable to travel.

Lieutenant Robbins desired his companions to charge his gun and leave it with
him, which they did; he declaring that, As the Indians will come in the morning
to scalp me, I will kill one more of them if I can.

There were eleven more (...) the English, who were badly wounded, viz.
Lieutenant Farewell, Mr. Frye, Sergeant Johnson, Timothy Richardson, Josiah
Johnson, Samuel Whiting, Elias Barron, John Chamberlain, Isaac Lakin, Eleazer
Davis and Josiah Jones; but they however marched off the ground, with the nine
others who received no considerable wounds, viz. Ensign Wyman, Edward
Lingfield, Thomas Richardson, the two Melvins, Ebenezer Air, Abiel Asten,
Joseph Farrah and Joseph Gilson. These all proceeded on their return for the
fort, and did not perceive they were waylaid or pursued by the enemy, though
they knew our men had no provision, and must therefore be very saint.

Four of the wounded men, viz. Farewell, Frye, Davis and Jones, after they had
traveled about (...) mile and a half, found themselves unable to go any
further, and with their free consent, the rest kept on their march, hoping to
find a recruit at the sort, and to return with fresh hands to relieve them.

As they proceeded on, they divided into three companies one morning, as they
were passing a thick wood, for fear of making a track by which the enemy might
follow them. One of the companies came upon three Indians, who pursued them
some time; meanwhile Elias Barron, one of this party, strayed from the others,
and got over Ossapy river, by the side of which his gun case was found, and he
was not heard of afterward. Eleven, in another party, reached the fort at
Ossapy; but to their great surprise, found it deserted. The coward who fled in
the beginning of the battle, ran directly to the fort, and gave the men posted
there, such a frightful account of what had happened, that they all fled from
the fort, and made the best of their way home.

Solomon Kies also came to the fort. When he had fought in the battle till he
received three wound, and had become so weak by the loss of blood that he could
not stand, he crawled up to Ensign Wyman, in the heat of the battle, and told
him, he was a dead man; but, (said he) if it be possible, I will get out of the
way of the Indians, that they may not get my scalp. Kies then crept off by the
side of the pond to where he providentially found a canoe, when he rolled
himself into it, and was driven by the wind several miles toward the fort; he
gained strength fast, and reached the fort as soon as the eleven before
mentioned; and they all arrived at Dunstable on the 13th of May, at night.

On the 15th of May, Ensign Wyman, and three others, arrived at Dunstable. They
suffered greatly for want of provisions. They informed, that they were wholly
destitute of all kinds of food, from a, Saturday morning till the Wednesday
following; when they caught two mouse-squirrels, which they roasted whole, and
found to be a sweet morsel. They afterward killed some patridges and other
game, and were comfortably supplied till they got home.

Eleazer Davis arrived at Berwick, and reported; that he and the other three
who were left with him, waited some days for the return of the men from the
fort, and at length, despairing of their return, though their wounds were
putrefied and stank, and they were almost dead with famine, yet they all
traveled on several miles together, till Mr. Frye desired Davis and Farewell
not to hinder themselves any longer on his account, for he found himself dying,
and he laid himself down, telling them He should never rise more, and charged
Davis, if it should please God to bring him home, to go to his father, and tell
him, that he expected in a few hours to be in eternity, and that he was not
afraid to die. -- They left him, and this amiable and promising young
gentleman, who had the journal of the march in his pocket, was not heard of
again.

Lieutenant Farewell, who was greatly and no doubt deservedly applauded and
lamented, was also left by Davis within a few miles of the fort, and was not
afterward heard of. But Davis, getting to the fort, and finding provision
there, tarried and refreshed himself, and recovered strength to travel to
Berwick.

Josiah Jones, another of the four wounded who were left the day after the
Fight but a short distance from the scene of action, traversed Saco river, and
after a fatiguing ramble, arrived at Saco, (now Biddeford) ematiated, and
almost dead from the loss of blood, the putrefaction of his wounds and the want
of food. He had subsisted upon the spontaneous vegetables of the forest, and
cramberries, etc. which he had eaten, came out at a wound he had received in
his body. He was kindly treated by the people at Saco, and recovered of his
wounds.

Several of the Indians, particularly Paugus their Chief, were well known to
LOVELL's men, and frequently conversed with each other during the Engagement.
In the course of the Battle, Paugus and John Chamberlain discoursed familiarly
with each other; their guns had become foul, from frequent firing; they washed
their guns at the pond, and the latter assured Paugus that he should kill him;
Paugus also menaced him, and bid defiance to his insinuations: when they had
prepared their guns they loaded and discharged them, and Paugus fell.

A son of Paugus, after it had become a time of peace, went to Dunstable, to
revenge his father's death, with the death of Chamberlain -- He did not go
directly to Chamberlain's, but to the house of a neighbor, where he tarried
several days, upon some pretended business, that his design might not be
discovered; his errand was however suspected, and a hint given to Chamberlain
-- who cut a port-hole above his door, through which he very early one morning
discovered an Indian behind his wood pile, lying with his gun pointing directly
to the door; and it was supposed that the same musket which had conveyed the
mean of death to the bosom of the great Paugus, also proved fatal to his son,
as he was not afterward heard of

It is also reported of this Chamberlain, (who was a stout and a courageous
man, and who used to say that he was not to be killed by an Indian) that he was
once fired at by an Indian, as he was at work in a saw mill, at night; he was
in a stooping position, and did not discover the Indian till he fired, who was
so near him that he immediately knocked him down with a crowbar, with which he
was setting his log.

After the return of the English from their fight, Col. TYNG, with a company,
went to the place of action, where he found and buried the following men, viz.
Captain John Lovell, Ensign Jonathan Woods, Ensign John Harwood, and Robert
Usher, of Dunstable; Jacob Fullam, of Weston; Jacob Farrar, and Josiah Davis,
of Concord; Thomas Woods, Daniel Woods, and John Jefts, of Groton; Ichabod
Johnson, of Woburn; Jonathan Kittridge, of Billerica.

Lieutenant Josiah Farewell, of Dunstable, Mr. Chaplain Frye, of Andover, and
Elias Barron, of Groton, were wounded, and died by the way in attempting to
return home.

Col. Tyng found where the Indians had buried three of their men, which were
dug up, and one of them was known to be the bold Paugus, who had been a great
scourge to Dunstable.

Ensign Wyman was rewarded with a Captain's Commission after his return; and
every man was crowned with the grateful thanks of their countrymen, for this
heavy blow given to a plundering savage foe, the common enemy of their country.

S. Wyman, E. Air, and A. Astin, attested to the General Truths of this
History.

END of the HISTORY.
Mr. Symmes's Sermon.
II. Sam. I. 27. How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!


THE book before us is entitled the second of Samuel, not that it was written
by the famous prophet of that name; for it contains a history of what came to
pass after his death; of which we have an account in the 25th chapt. of the
former book; but the latter part of the former, with the whole of this book,
are supposed to be written by Nathan or Gad, or by Hezekiah or Ezra. And
probably it is called the Second of Samuel, by the Hebrews, because it is a
continuation of the history began by him; and so, being a supplement to the
history of Samuel, it goes under his name; as is usual in such cases now a days.

In the chapter before us, we have a very celebrated elegy; of which our text
is the conclusion. And here we may observe,

1st, Who was the author of this elegy, or funeral poem namely, David;
agreeably it is in our psalmbook termed David's Elegy. The Sweet Psalmist of
Israel was a Poet, as well as musician; and has given us a noble specimen of
his admirable poetic genius, in the mournful poem before us. But we are to
consider him here not only as a finished poet, but as an eminent servant of
God, even the man after God's own heart; who duly considering the works of the
Lord, and regarding the operations of his hands, has set us a very bright
example, how to behave upon, and what improvement to make of, the death of
useful men; especially of such as not only have jeoparded their lives unto
death, but nobly laid down their lives in the high places of the field, in the
service of their king and country -- David lamented with this lamentation.

2dly, Observe the subject and occasion of this elegy, viz. the death of Saul
and Jonathan, who with many of their army fell down slain on Mount Gilboa, 1 Samuel 31.1, 2, 3. Tidings of this slaughter being brought unto David, he was
greatly affected therewith, and (as was customary amongst the Hebrews on such
sorrowful occasions) David took hold on his clothes and rent them, and likewise
all the men that were with him. And they mourned and wept and fasted until
even, for Saul and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and
for the house of Israel, because they were fallen by the sword. Context 11 and
12 ver. And having done justice on the young Amalekite that brought the news,
who by his own confession had stretched forth his hand to slay the Lord's
anointed, he further gave vent to his grief, in the elegant composition before
us.

3dly, Observe the matter and substance of this elegy: or, what David said on
this great occasion. And first he utters this mournful assertion, The Beauty of
Israel is slain upon thy high places! ver. 19. Expert soldiers are no
inconsiderable part of the beauty of Israel. Then follows a very pathetical
exclamation, which is thrice repeated, v. 19, 25, 27, and is the burden of the
song, How are the mighty fallen! We have then his wish, with the reason of it,
that the tragical news might not be published, v. 20. Tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the streets of Askelon: lest the daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. The Imperative mood
is used in the beginning of the verse for the Optative, after the manner of
passionate mourners, who often wish for things impossible. And by this form of
speech David rather expresses his detestation of what was done, than sorbids
the doing of it: q. d. O that this doleful story had never been told in Gath!
for so it surely was, 1 Samuel 31.8, 9, 10. We have next David's imprecation, on
the place of the defeat, with the reason of it, v. 21. Ye mountains of Gilboa,
let there be no dew, neither let there be rain upon you, nor fields of
offerings; for there the shield of the mighty is vilely slung away. Some think
this only a figurative speech, supposing the very heavens and earth had a kind
of sense and feeling of this calamity; others think it a prophetical curse,
that took effect accordingly, even as our Savior's, denounced on the barren
fig tree. But this has been confuted by Brochard and others, who have been upon
the place. We may therefore look upon it, as only an hyperbolical imprecation.

David then goes on to commend Saul and Jonathan, for their wonderful success
at arms v. 22. From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow
of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty. -- They
were won to be victorious over their stoutest enemies. And that it is otherwise
now, and that these valiant men are fallen, argues that God is angry; which
should awaken his people to repentance. He further celebrates (as, their
affection to one another and union in death, v. 23. so,) their agility and
courage. They were swifter than eagles, they were bolder than lions. They were
swift and nimble to pursue their enemies, and to avoid danger; and strong and
valiant to resist and overcome such as dared to oppose them. Briefly, he
commends Saul for his royal bounty to the daughters of Israel, whom he calls
upon to lament him, v. 24. Even the daughters of Israel had been wont to bear
their part in Readiness triumphs, and now it became them to mourn his fall. As all
share in common calamities, so all should be suitably affected therewith.
Finally, David particularly laments over Jonathan, professing his deep distress
for him, the dear affection between them, and the pleasure he took in his
conversation, v. 25, 26

4th, Observe some of the properties of this elegy. And first, it is extremely
elegant, the ideas are very bright, and well adapted; the phrases are very
expressive and emphatical, and hence the whole (...) very moving and
pathetical. And particularly, where he speaks of his friend Jonathan, nothing
can be more soft and tender, and expressed with a greater pathos. And what more
passionate than his repeated exclamation, How are the mighty fallen! Those
valiant and renowned commanders, Saul and Jonathan, with their brave and
undaunted soldiers, that fell with them. So that the Weapons of War are
perished, i. e. those who wielded them are dead. And what will weapons do,
without men of skill and courage to handle them, for their country's
preservation and defense, and the suppression and extirpation of their enemies?

Again. The whole Poem is sufficiently brave and manly. David shows himself a
man of a great soul, now that Readiness day was come to die, and God had delivered
him out of his hands; and Saul could now no longer persecute and hunt him as a
partridge on the mountains, as he had a long while done; (for as in the grave
the weary servants of God are at rest, so, blessed be God, when the wicked are
lodged there, they cease from troubling) I say, though David was now delivered,
he scorns to trample with insulting feet on the monument of the dead, and boast
over a breathless corpse; but buries all the faults of Saul in perpetual
oblivion, in the land of forgetfulness, lays aside all spleen, and heartily
mourns his country's reproach and loss, though the very means of his own
deliverance and advancement, (a noble instance of public spiritedness) and
commemorates what was commendable, even in Saul. For, de mortuis, nil nisi
bonum. None that are men after God's own heart, will unnecessarily rip up the
faults of others; and speak evil of those that cannot speak for themselves.
Those that are not thus tender of the reputation of others, may justly fear
that others will be as free with them, when they are silent in the grave.

But then it is also a martial poem: it is written with a martial air. The
subject is entirely military. He laments his heroes, considered in their
military character. He celebrates their military accomplishments and
achievements. And he dedicates it to the militia of Judah, as in the
parenthesis in the preface, 18th v also he bade them teach the children of
Judah the use of the bow. Whence it is evident, That David in the midst of his
mourning, is not unmindful of what was necessary for the good of the
commonwealth: Teaching us, not to be so overcome with grief, on such sorrowful
occasions, as to forget our duty, and neglect means for our own or our
country's safety.

Furthermore, This Elegy is very ancient. It was written about eight and twenty
hundred years ago. And according to some chronologies, before the famous Iliads
of Homer, who was the very father of all the Heathen Poets, and said to be born
in the reign of Solomon the son of David. It is then one of the first born of
elegies, and venerable for its antiquity. It is said to be recorded in the book
of Jashe^, i. e. the Just or Upright. We read of it Josh. 10 13. It is supposed
this book was continued from (...) to age, as a collection of State Poems, (say
some) or of the memorable acts of God's worthies; and though laid up at length in
the temple (as Josephus reports) yet being not canonical, is now lost.

Finally, To remark no more characters of this poem, it is a scripture elegy:
for though we do not suppose it at first written by inspiration; yet being
agreeable to the will of God, was adopted (if I may so express it) by the Holy
Spirit, who inspired those that inserted it in the sacred pages, so that it is
now a part of Canonical Scripture, And thus it is probable the penman of the
chronicles collected many things out of the book of Jasher, being guided
therein by the unerring spirit of God. And though the name of God is not to be
found in this elegy, yet it is consonant to religion, and approved by God; and
hence we learn, that what is spoken or written by the servants of God, may be
very agreeable to the will of God, and for his glory, though the name of God or
Christ is not to be found therein -- Thus the book of Esther wherein are no
less than ten chapters, has not the name of God in it.

5th, Observe the main scope and design of this elegy. And there are two things
more especially that David had in view, after the glory of God, his ultimate
end. First, To perpetuate the memory of Saul, and his dearly beloved Jonathan,
his bosom friend. "Great indeed was the love between Damon and Pythias; for
when Dionysius the tyrant, had on some occasion signified his resolution that
one of them should die, and permitted Damon to go home and settle his affairs
before his death, provided he could find one to be surety for his return;
Pythias forthwith offered voluntarily, and put himself in the tyrant's power.
Damon coming back precisely at the time appointed, Dionysius did so much admire
their mutual fidelity, that he pardoned both, and prayed that he might be
admitted the third into their friendship." But the love of David and Jonathan
was more divine and excellent, than that of these brave heathen philosophers.
We have the account of its commencement, 1 Samuel 18. begin. And it came to pass
when he [David] had made an end of speaking to Saul, that the soul of Jonathan
was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. And
Saul took him that day and would let him go no more home to his father's house.
Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul.
And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to
David, and his garments, even to his sword and his bow, and to his girdle. For
such a friend, one would even dare to die. To be sure, David would have the
memory of this just man blessed. He would have him had in everlasting
remembrance. And be here does his part, that it might be so, and the event was
agreeable to his pious desire, for wherever the Bible is enjoyed, this elegy is
still to be found on record for a memorial of him.

But then David had a further reach than barely to embalm the name of his
friend, and perpetuate the remembrance of Saul, for his relation to Jonathan
and to his country; For, by this elegy, or funeral song, David designed to fire
the ambition of his contemporaries and successors, to seek to excel in
chivalry; and to fire them also with zeal to prosecute the war against the
barbarous Philistines, and to avenge the death of their sovereign, and several
of the royal family, and many other gallant soldiers; and to defend themselves,
against their insults and depredations. Agreeably in the ^^^enthesis before
mentioned, v. 18. He bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow.
The best interpretation of which passage (says Junius) is, that it expresses
the design of David, that this song, being put into the hands of Judah, it
might serve to excite and provoke them to addict themselves to martial
exercises, and to acquire skill in the use of the bow, which is here put for as
warlike weapons then in fashion. And may the same use be made of the discourse,
you are now reading, to provoke all among us, of a military character, to inure
themselves to the use of the Gun, and all such exercises as may accomplish them
for service in the doleful war, we are unhappily involved in.

Having, observed these things in General in this elegy, I come now to remark
from the conclusion of it.

That the fall of brave and successful warriors in the field of battle, is very
much to be lamented by the people of God, in whose immediate service they lost
their lives. We should lament over them with this lamentation, How are the
mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished! First, It is sometimes the lot
of the bravest warriors, and of such as have been very successful, to fall at
last, or be slain in the field of battle. Saul had been a brave warrior, and
did worthily in the beginning of his reign. The history of his deliverance of
Jabesh Gilead when Na^ash the Ammonite came up and encamped against it, is very
noble and brave, 1 Samuel 11. begin. He discovered both great courage and
conduct, in that whole action: at the 11th. we read, Saul put the people in
three companies, and they came into the midst of the host in the morning watch,
and slew the Ammonites, until the heat of the day; and it came to pass that
they which remained were scattered, so that two of them were not left together.
Thus he effectually rased the siege of poor Jabesh-Gilead, and delivered the
city. And when some hotheaded people proposed to Samuel that the malcontents
should be put to death, who had said, Shall Saul reign over us? Saul very
generously suppressed the motion, and snubbed those that too officiously
proposed it; saying. There shall not a man be put to death this day! And as he
was once returning from the slaughter of the Philistines the women came out of
all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet King Saul with tabrets,
with joy and with instruments of music; and the women answered one to another
as they played, and said, Saul has slain his thousands. We read also of
Jonathan, that he smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, 1 Samuel 13.3. And in the beginning of the 14th chapter we are informed how
Jonathan and his armourbearer, did miraculously smite the Philistines. And in
the context, ver. 22. David gives them this encomium, From the blood of the
slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Janathan turned not back, and the
sword of Saul returned not empty. And he calls them, the mighty, and the flower
or beauty of Israel. Now these brave, successful soldiers were slain in battle
at last, upon mount Gilboa.

And, not to mention any other instance, thus "Gustavus Adolphus, styled the
great King of Sweden, who took for his motto, If God be for us, who can be
against us? And who was an incomparable warrior, venturous sometimes even
without necessity; and especially in war, would neglect his life and perform
rather the duty of a soldier than of a general; and to excuse himself would
say, The armies slight the danger they share in with their king; and that if
Generals do not act in person, they can never atchieve a glittering reputation;
and that such as shun death, meet it oftener than they that seek it; that Julius
Caesar was never wounded in battle, though he ever fought in the foremost ranks
of his troops; and that Alexander the Great marked out the way with his own
blood, that led him to the empire of the East; and that to be as famous as
these great men, he ought to be no more timorous than they: this great man,
after he had obtained diverse victories over the Danes and Poles and Muscovites,
and received thirteen wounds before those of which he died, was at length slain
in a battle with the Germans, having first almost got the victory, which his
army completed after his death. And thus the Great Gustavus died, in the 38th
year of his age, 1632, whilst victory (as one expresses it) lay bleeding by his
side.

Secondly, The fall of brave and successful soldiers is very much to be
lamented by the people of God. There is a time to weep, as well as a time to
laugh. And every thing is beautiful in its season. Now when brave and
successful soldiers are slain in the field of battle, who have been improved by
Providence as Instruments of checking the pride and insolence, and weakening
the force, and thinning the number, and discouraging the hearts of the enemies
of God's people, and of preserving the lives, liberties and properties of the
Israel of God; and might if God had spared them been a further scourge to the
enemy, and defense to the people of God, by contending with the enemy in
battle; it is very proper and highly reasonable such especially in whose
immediate service they have courageously ventured, and undauntedly laid down
their lives should lament their death. And the contrary is, how indecent? how
sottish? how stupid and unreasonable? Now whatsoever things are lovely,
decorous and of good report, christians should love and practice these things,
Phil. 4.8. The civilized heathen will rise up in judgment against Christians;
yea, and the barbarians also, if they do not do such deserving persons the
honor of lamenting their untimely death. It is humane and manly to do so: but
the contrary is, indeed, inhumane, and worse than heathenish.

Secondly, It is just and equal, for the people of God to lament the death of
brave and successful soldiers slain by their enemies, and in their service.
Tears and proper lamentations are a debt we owe them. They have dearly merited
this piece of respect from their people. It is but just, to shed tears for
them, that have shed their hearts blood for us. And surely, if they deserved
the applause and commendation of all while they lived; they ought to be honored
with the lamentations of all when they are slain in the high places of the
field. And the law of equity calls for it. Surely it is to do as we would be
done by; or as we should desire any of our dear relatives should be treated, in
like circumstances. If it had been the lot of any very nearly related to us
(and it has been so) to be slain in battle, or sea fight, playing the man for
their GOD; surely a due notice taken of their death, by the people of God,
would be what we should expect and be pleased with. Now whatsoever we would
that men should do to us, we should do the same to them; or, we transgress a
golden rule. But if this rule be out of fashion with any; yet

Thirdly, Agreeable lamentations for expert and successful soldiers slain in
war, are very useful and advantageous. It is a comfort to their bereaved
relatives, when they observe that the people of God do greatly bewail the death
of their friends, and heartily sympathize with them, though their loss may
possibly be in some respects irreparable; yet this should and will contribute
not a little, to alleviate their sorrow, ease their distressed minds, and dry
up their tears.

And then, it is a spur to Virtue. When surviving soldiers (and particularly
such as have been eyewitnesses of the fall of their brethren, and sought with
uncommon bravery, and were either wounded, or equally exposed in the same
battle, with those that are slain) take notice that the death of their officers
or fellow soldiers is deeply resented by the people of God, that they still
speak of them with great honor in their lamentations; this will animate them,
we hope, to do worthily, and rather die with honor, if called to battle, than
live with disgrace; and for their cowardice, have the offer of a wooden sword,
and be branded with the infamous character of cowards, even by the weaker sex.

Whereas, on the other hand, it is a great aggravation of the affliction of
distressed mourners, when they observe that the generality only give the news
of their friends death the hearing, but seem as stoical and unconcerned about
it, as if their lives were of no value. -- Such inhumanity is very exercising
to ingenuous minds and such as have any sense of honor. Besides such a sordid
insensibleness is very discouraging to our brave soldiers. Who could be willing
to venture their lives for such ungrateful people!

Finally, It is pious and scriptural to bewail the death of such brave and
successful soldiers, whose lot it is to be slain at last in the field of
battle, God expects we should lay to heart the death of all our fellow
creatures: that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart,
Eccl. 7.2. And particularly, we are obliged to lament the death of eminently
useful men, though they die quietly in their beds, and come to their graves in
a good old age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in it is season. How much more
should we mourn their loss, when slain in battle, in the midst of their days,
or in the very flower of their age, while their breasts were full of milk, and
their bones were moistened with marrow. It is a sore judgment when God suffers
such to fall by, and into the hand of the enemy, and does not cover their heads
in the day of battle. This is an awful frown, and argues the great displeasure
of God. Hence he threatened the men of Anathoth, that said to the prophet
Jeremy, prophesy not in the name of the Lord, that their young men should die
by the sword, Jer. 11.21, 22. and alike threatening he denounced against Moab,
Jer. 48 15. -- His chosen young men are gone down to the slau'ter, says the
King, whose name is the Lord of Hosts. And when the wrath of the Lord was risen
against Israel, for their measure-filling sin, in mocking the Lord's
messengers, despising his words and misusing his Prophets, it is said, 2 Chronicles.
36.17. Therefore he brought upon them, the King of the Chaldees, who slew their
young men with the sword. Now what greater cause of mourning and lamentation
than the manifestations of God's displeasure? If the Lion roar, who will not
tremble? but alas, who can stand when God is angry! and he highly resents it,
when his people are insensible under the tokens of his holy anger: if they cry
not, when he corrects them. He says to such, why should ye be stricken any
more? ye will revolt more and more, Isa. 1.5. and again, they are not humbled
unto this day, Jer. 44.10.

Besides, we have many scripture precepts and examples that teach us to lament
on the occasion under consideration. When God threatened Israel, by the weeping
prophet, that a people should come from the North Country, that should lay hold
on bow and spear, being cruel, and having no mercy: Jer. 6.22, 23. It is added,
ver. 26. O Daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow thyself
in ashes: make thee mourning as for an Only Son, most bitter lamentation; --
Surely then, there should be a proportionable lamentation, when several chosen
young men, and some very promising and hopeful, are actually flain by men of
the Chaldean Character. Another instance we have, Jer. 9.17. -- Consider ye,
and call for the mourning women. -- Let them make haste -- that our eyes may
run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters -- and teach your
daughters wailing and every one her neighbor lamentation. For death is come
up, -- to cut off the young men from the streets. And even the carcases of men
shall fall as dung upon the open field -- and none shall gather, or, bury them.
This evinces, that God calls to mourning when young men fall by the sword, and
the mighty in the battle. And then to mention no other Scriptures, our text and
context is a full and direct proof of our doctrine. For, as was observed
before, this mournful song was David's lamentation over those that were slain
by the Philistines on mount Gilboa.

But I proceed to the Application. And,

First, If it is sometimes the lot of the most valiant and successful soldiers,
to be slain at last in battle; then they that gird on the harness should not
boast as they that put it off. This was well observed by Ahab to Benhadad King
of Syria, 1. Kings 20.11. All such preposterous boasting is evil; very foolish
and ominous, and commonly followed with fatal consequents. Boasting Benhadad
had cause and leisure in his inner chamber to think of this army miserably
broken a first time, and slain with a great slaughter, by a company of
striplings, under the command of Ahab their King: and a second time totally
routed; an hundred thousand footmen being slain in one day by the Israelites;
and twenty seven thousand more by the falling of a wall upon them; and he
reduced to such abject circumstances, as to beg quarter by his ambassadors with
sackcloth on their loins and ropes on their heads. How was the scene now
changed, and his tune turned, 1. Kings 20. And thus we find the swaggering
Goliath, who defied the armies of the living God, one minute cursing David by
his Gods, and disdainfully saying, Come to me and I will give thy flesh to the
fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field; and the next minute tumbling
headlong with his face upon the earth: and the beauty of Israel cutting off his
Head with his own sword, 1 Samuel 17.1, -- 51.

God allows us indeed, in our spiritual warfare, (and in extraordinary cases,
as, in David's, answering the challenge of the Giant, in a carnal warfare also)
to triumph before the battle and to say, thanks be unto God, that gives us the
Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. For in all these things we are more
than conquerors through the Captain of our Salvation, whose is the Victory, and
who has loved us, and will give it to us!

But without particular Revelation, not now to be expected, none can tell,
whether the many, or the few; the strong or the weak; the righteous or the
wicked; the friend or enemy will get the day in the field of battle. Boasting
then, upon the going forth of armies, is to be condemned; both in such as go
forth to war, and in such as tarry at home, on their account.

Secondly, The most skilful, dexterous, courageous and successful soldiers, had
need to be truly religious and well prepared for death; seeing they are not
invulnerable, but as liable to die as others. An Indian bullet will kill a
hero, a champion, as easily as a faint hearted coward: a Captain, or Chaplain,
as soon as a bringer up of the front half files; or the most inferior private
soldier. There must indeed be the swiftness of the eagle, the subtilty of the
fox, the strength and boldness of the lion, as well as the grace of the
christian, to constitute a brave soldier; and every devout christian, that is
fit for heaven, is not most fit to go forth to war. But, though such as are
destitute of grace may possibly be stout soldiers and noble commanders, and
deserve well of their prince and country; and in answer to the prayers of God's
people, in whose cause they are employed, they might fight valiantly, and play
the man for their people, and tread down the enemy; yet if they are slain, they
cannot groundedly expect salvation. Seeing then our soldiers carry their lives
in their hands, when they go forth to war, and are still liable to be ambushed,
wherever they travel in the vast howling wilderness, and, killed unexpectedly,
as well as slain in a pitched battle, they had need be always ready not only to
fight, but to die, and make their appearance before God. And in order thereto,
they should now believe in Christ, and repent of all their sins, and so get
into, and keep in good terms with God, who can easily preserve them, though a
thousand fall at their side, and ten thousand at their right hand; and can
cause one of them to chase a thousand, and two of them to put ten thousand to
flight.

The wretched Jesuits or friars, are wont (it is said) to absolve their
deluded Proselytes, the barbarous Indians, when they come forth to war against
us: and flatter them with the promise of an immediate passage to Paradise,
without any stop at purgatory, if they fall in battle: and these delusive hopes
may possibly animate them, to fight with great fury in their engagements with
us. And many private soldiers and inferior Officers in the campaigns in
Christendom, merely from the prospect of applause, promotion, or filthy lucre;
or for thirst after revenge, and a vain opinion that fighting in a good cause,
and on the right side they shall surely be happy in the next world, if they are
killed in battle, have possibly been led on to fight with undaunted resolution,
and the utmost intrepidity. Surely then the motives of pure Religion, such as
serving God and their Country; having God to go before them, and fight for
them, and either to cover their heads, or, receive their departing souls to the
blessed mansions above, where there is no adversary nor evil occurrent, where
they shall rest from their labors, and their works shall follow them, must
needs be sufficient, by the influence of the holy Spirit that dwells in all
real Christians, to cause to wax valiant in fight, and to raise them above the
fear of what Earth or Hell can do unto them.

So then, a well grounded persuasion of a part in Christ, and an Interest in
the favor of God, is what all that go forth to war, would do wisely to give
all diligence to obtain.

Thirdly, Since the best of soldiers are liable to be overcome and slain in
war, it ill becomes the people of God to put their trust in man. Though it is
their duty and wisdom to employ and encourage expert soldiers; yet it is their
sin and folly to trust in them. As it is idolatry for soldiers to trust in
their arms, or in their dexterity and courage to handle them; or in one
another; so it is idolatry for the people of God, in whose service they go
forth, to trust in them. For, alas! what is man, whose breath is it his
nostrils, and wherein is he to be accounted of? His breath goes forth, he
returns to his dust; in that very day, all his projections and resolutions,
and accomplishments for war, perish.

Surely then, it is the greatest folly for a people to trust in their forces,
how well soever qualified, spirited and equipped, and how successful soever
they have been. For, every creature is that to us that God makes it to be; and
unless God give help, vain is the help of man, Jer. ^ 23. Truly in vain is
salvation hoped for (...) the hills, and from the multitude of mountains; truly
in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. And we know who has said,
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm -- But blessed
is the man, that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, Jer. 17.5,
7. Agreeably we find the People of God, resolving, in the name of our God we
will set up our banners. And whilst some trust in Chariots and some in horses,
we will remember the name of the Lord our God, Psalm. 20 5, -- 7. And again,
through thee we will push down our Enemies: through thy name we will tread them
under that rise up against us, Psalm. 40.5. and Psalm. 60.12. through God we
shall do valiantly, for he it is, that shall tread down our Enemies.

Men may fail us, be overcome, and utterly frustrate our expectations: but, if
we trust in God, we may pray with Asa, when Zerab the Ethiopian came against
him, with an host of a Thousand Thousand, and three hundred Chariots; Lord,
(said he) it is nothing with thee to help whether with many, or with them that
have no power: help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we
go against this multitude. O Lord thou art our God, let not man prevail against
thee. The Lord of hosts is immortal, and invincible; he has all Creatures at
his Command, and can cause the Stars in their courses to fight against the
Enemies of his people; and sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. In a word,
whatsoever the Lord pleases that he does; it is therefore better to trust in
him, than to put confidence in man, Psalm. 118.8.

Fourthly, Are the bravest and most successful soldiers, liable to fall in
battle, such then as are preserved in military expeditions and engagements and
safely returned to their families and friends, ought to study what they shall
render to the Lord, and take heed, they don't forget his benefits, but that all
their days they perform their vows. It is the Lord that has covered their heads
in the battle; it is the Lord that redeemed their lives from destruction, when
those, no more exposed than they, are fallen, and gone down to the Grave and
shall come up no more, and return to their houses no more. O that all such as
have experienced the distinguishing favor of heaven, would praise him for his
goodness, and not content themselves to desire thanks to be returned for them
in the public assemblies of God's people, though that is commendable, but that
they would endeavor to live the praises of God. It is very displeasing to God,
when his people do not render to him according to his benefits, 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
David celebrates the praises of God, for preservation and success in war, Psalm.
18. and Psalm. 144 begin.

Fifthly, Hence the people of God ought to ascribe to him the Glory of all
their success in war. His is the victory and he gives it to whomsoever he will.
He furnishes men with military skill and courage, teaches their hands to war
and their fingers to fight. He finds out the Enemy for his people, and gives a
presence of mind to their forces; and if they are not swallowed up quick, when
men, vastly superior in number, and other advantages rise up against them, it
is because the Lord is on their side, Psal^ 124. Again, we find Deborah and
Barak giving Glory to God, for avenging his people in the defeat of Sisera and
his host, Judge. 5. and how often is David the famous warrior of Israel, harping
on this string as we noted before.

God highly resents it, when his people sacrifice to their own drag: when they
ascribe that to instruments that is due to God alone. This no doubt often
provokes God, to deprive a people of their chosen soldiers. For he is a very
Jealous God, and will not give his Glory to another. And as the former pastor
of this Church would say of Ministers, we may say of soldiers, people kill them
two ways: either by ascribing too much, or too little to them: idolizing of
them.

Finally, Let us all religiously lament the fall of the Brave LOVELL, and
several of his Gallant Company, that offered themselves willingly among the
people. Let us take up this lamentation over them, how are the mighty fallen!
and if we would herein approve ourselves to God, let us consider that these
brave men (though I hope, we have many left as capable of serving their
Country) yet they were no considerable part of the beauty and strength of
New England. Indeed, being wholly a stranger to most of them, I cannot pretend
to give their character; yet it is evident to the Country, they were men formed
and raised up by Providence to serve us in pursuing an Enemy, of whom we may
say as of the wild ass, the wilderness yields food for them and for their
Children, Job 24.5.

These our worthy friends could endure hardship as good soldiers: and were well
(...) to encounter the fatigues of long march, (...) in winter and summer. Some
of them were well acquainted with the woods, and with the customs and lurking
places of the Enemy, and were mightily spirited to pursue them, and God did
graciously preserve and prosper them this last winter in two expeditions,
first, delivered two Indians into their hands, and then ten stout fellows as
you all remember, whom they killed, without receiving any harm from them. This
was the Lord's doings and marvelous in our eyes! and in this last engagement,
they were inspired with a great deal of bravery and good conduct, and their
company crowned with wonderful success. Now to lose such experienced soldiers,
and men so respected in the Country, is a great loss.

Again, Let us consider, that this is the finger of God. Let not any say
profanely and atheistically, it is the fortune of war: or, as a good man said
on a bad occasion, the sword devoureth one as well as another, 2 Samuel 11.25.
For tho it is true the battle is not to the strong, and time and chance happen
to all men, yet the hand of the Lord, is herein gone out against us, there are
tokens of his dsipleasure to be seen in this affair. That this brave company,
should be so weakened by leaving so great a number with one that fell ill, and
that at so great a distance from them. That one of the Company should so
unhappily leave (...) in the beginning of the fight, and bring such we (...)
those left behind, that occasioned their immediate return; when their
continuance there, might have been such an unspeakable advantage to those that
survived the battle. And indeed, it appears a frown, that they should venture
so far with so small a number at that season of the Year, when the Enemy are
capable of better subsisting in bodies, than in the winter season. I say, the
hand of the Lord appears in all this, that so many brave men should descend
into battle and perish.

But then we are also to consider. Why the Lord's anger against us is not
turned away; but his hand stretched out still. Have not our sins as really
slain our magnanimous soldiers, as ever, David slew Uriah the Hittite by the
sword of the children of Ammon? and should we not hear the rod, and him that
has appointed it: and consider in this day of adversity, what we have done;
and humble ourselves and pray and seek God's face? thus did David and his men,
as in the context. And the men of Jabesh Gilead, 1 Samuel ult.

Should we not endeavor to find out and put away the accursed thing from the
midst of us? and turn to him that smites us? should we not be awakened by such
providence to get our peace made with God, and engage and secure his gracious
presence with us, under our present dark views?

How many calls have New England (...) the Pulpit, and by the Press also, from
Year to Year; to remember whence we are fallen and repent and do our first
works! how many Election Sermons have been published amongst us, filled with
solemn warnings, most earnest exhortations and ample testimonies for God, and
against the provoking evils of the land! but alas, how many are still acting
the part of the deaf Adder, or as the Prophet expresses it, they refuse to
hearken, they pull away the shoulder and stop the ear that they should not
hear, Zech. 7.11. How many hate to be reformed? yea hate to be told by those
that have good right, full power, and lawful authority to do it, wherein we
should be, and what is to be done that we may be a reformed People. How sad is
it, if all the notice taken by the generality of people, of the solemn messages
sent to them from the Lord God of their fathers, is only to give them the
hearing and either humm or hiss the Preacher and his performance, pretty much
as they stand affected to him; and it may be with some considerable formality,
give him thanks for his sermon (and then he comes off mighty well!) however if
they carry the matter so far as to Print the sermon, yet perhaps they do not
put it in practice! but now don't they deceive themselves that hear, and read
God's word, but do it not? or, what means that saying, Jam. 1.22.

Furthermore, by the sore judgment of war, and particularly by the fall of our
brethren, we are now weeping over, God is loudly calling upon us, to amend our
ways and doings. And God expects we should all in our places endeavor a
reformation, that we should do our part in this work: and if we do so, whatever
be the event, God will set a mark upon us, and our labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord. Let not any then be discouraged, because some proper essays and
noble efforts have miscarried and proved abortive. Necessity is laid upon us:
New England must reform, or without a spirit of prophecy any one that observes
the signs of the times, may I think, evidently foresee, that in one twenty
Years more the glory of New England as New England, will be much more than
hitherto, if not totally Eclipsed. God in his infinite, sovereign mercy,
prevent it!

But then, our soldiers that are fit to go forth to war, and may probably be
called forth, you my brethren in an especial manner are obliged to take the
alarm given you by the late Intelligence. Be prevailed with if you have not yet
done so, to cast away the weapons of your rebellion against Heaven, (for there
is no making peace sword in hand) and come as with ropes about your necks, and
lie in the dust, if there may be hope; and there is hope in Israel concerning
you. Now is your time to make ready for Death. You will have other work to do,
when engaged in battle. And besides, every battle of the Warrior is with
confused noise, and garments rolled in blood: hearing the hideous yellings and
ejaculations of the Enemy, and the groanings of deadly wounded men, and seeing
them lie all bathed in their gore, may awaken you to cry to God and make your
vows: but alas, that is no time for consideration, and confession, and
deliberate resolution to forsake sin and return to God. This should be done
now! and then as you should be excited by this awakning providence to yield
yourselves to the Lord; to make have and not delay to believe in Christ, and
secure an interest in him: so, you should be prevailed with to see that you
have good arms and kept in good order, with good store of ammunition, and inure
yourselves to military exercises, especially to the art of shooting, and be
always ready, that you may issue out at an hour's warning.

Many and great are the transgressions of the people of our land; as a people,
great has been and is our backsliding from the ways of God's testimonies; we
have revolted from our God more and more; these things are for a lamentation,
and call for an amendment of our evil doings -- To conclude, when the sword of
the enemy is reeking with the blood of our brave countrymen, the survivors
should cleave wholly to the Lord, that so his anger may be turned away from us,
and the sword of the enemy be no more the scourge of our land; O may God hasten
the time when the alarm of war shall no more be heard in our land; but that the
people thereof may fit in safety every one under his own vine and figtree,
without disquietude from any quarter.

Finis.
SERMON. American Publication. PROPOSAL OF JOHN M'MILLEN and VERE ROYSE, Of
FRYEBURGH in the District of (...), Printing, by Subscription, a NEW YORK,
entitled, A SYSTEM OF PRACTICAL ARITHMETIC, and NEW METHOD OF SURVEYING; -- IN
TWO PARTS.
The First Part being an EASY and CONCISE ARITHMETIC, containing the
Fundamental Rules necessary for Business; together with Several Curious Rules
never before published, among which is a New, Short and Exact Rule for Casting
Interest, agreeably to the Solar System, without losing a fraction; the whole
arranged upon a New Plan, more Plain and Easy than any other -- Designed for
the Use of Schools, and those who wish to acquire an Accurate Knowledge of
Figures without an Instructor.

The Second Part containing a NEW METHOD of Surveying, different from any the
Author has ever seen, by which the Exact Contents of a piece of Land are
ascertained, without the trouble of Planning, being performed entirely by
Calculation, with the assistance of Tables annexed. BY VERE ROYSE,
MATHEMATICIAN.

The price to subscribers will be One Dollar a volume, neatly bound and
lettered, to non subscribers (...) Those who subscribe and pay for six books,
shall have one, gratis.


