THE SOCIAL COMPANION, AND Songster's Pocket Book, A CHOICE COLLECTION OF NEW
SONGS.

PORTSMOUTH, N. H.

PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY SAMUEL LARKIN, AT THE PORTSMOUTH BOOKSTORE, 1799.

SONG.
Sung at Portsmouth, the 17th of July, 1799. Composed by J. M. Sewall, Esquire
Tune -- "Rule Britannia."

HAIL, INDEPENDENCE' second birth,
That freed our Land from Gallic-ties!
Let songs of joy, and festal mirth,
Ascend, in incense to the skies.
CHORUS
This day we broke proud Gallia's chain,
This day COLUMBIA's born again!
To arms (not Treaties) we appeal;
On Gallic-saith, we ground no claims;
Perfidious France tore off the seal,
And we consign it to the flames.
CHO.
Then shout (released from Gallia's chain)
This day COLUMBIA's born again.
No more shall ADAMS envoys choose,
To cringe at Paris, cap in hand,
While Cerberus The French Directory.
COLUMBIA views,
Dance to the tune of Talleyrand.
CHO.
This day, we snap the ^^^web-chain,
This day COLUMBIA'S born again!
And would you still negociate? say,
Ye hardy sons of Freedom's growth?
If that is the order of the day,
Negociate at the Cannon's mouth.
CHO.
No other treaty will we deign,
This day COLUMBIA's bora again!
Though many a traitor, knave and sool,
COLUMBIA's vengeance madly brave,
We Have scores of Freemen to one tool,
A hundred Patriots to each knave.
CHO.
Who know to curb those fiends of earth,
And guarantee our second birth.
Hail Gratitude! celestial dame!
Reproach from thee, we need not fear,
While France profanes that sacred name,
Thy holy dictates we revere.
CHO.
She taught us to despise her chain,
Compelled us to be born again.
Ye JACOBINS! for crimes renowned,
Repent, reform, and be forgiven.
Each in the Patriot's mill new ground,
Else hope not mercy, peace, or heaven,
CHO.
To enter Freedom's hallowed fane,
You must, like Saints, be born again.
To ADAMS charge the goblet high,
And WASHINGTON, COLUMBIA's boast,
Let echoing plaudits reach the sky,
While with united hearts we toast,
CHO.
The day that rent proud Gallia's chain,
And Freedom's sons were born again!
SONG, sung the Fourth of July, 1799.
Tune -- "Vicar of Bray."

WHILE Holland gagged and fettered sprawls,
Like kitten in the mud, sir,
And France like madman swears and brawls,
And hankers after blood, sir:*
Americans by wisdom led,
Both eat and drink their fill, sir,
They smoke their pipes or go to bed,
As safe as thief in mill, sir.
CHORUS
For while an ADAMS rules in State,
And WASHINGTON the Field, sir,
Though Jacobins may swear and fret,
Yet we will never yield, sir.
What though the Diplomatic skill,
Of Frenchmen set in motion,
Like the electric glass and wheen,
Shoots sparks across the ocean;
AMERICANS have found a way
To crack the wheel asunder,
For nothing so consounds its play,
As TRUXTON's homespun thunder.
For while an Adams, etc.

See Buonaparte, like wandering Jew,
With Egypt's plagues behind him,
Flying to hide his motly crew,
Where Devil could not find him;
But Nelson, with his British tars,
In very little while, sir,
Found out his hole, lot down the bars,
And banged him at the Nile, Sir.
For while an Adams, etc.

The politics of France, we find,
Are known to nice precision,
To conquer first, the rascals blind,
Then make a sure division;
But Austrians and Turks from Port,
To stop this growing evil,
Deprive them of their darling sport,
And pop them to the Devil.
For while an Adams, etc.

Lame Talleyrand, that arrant knave,
With lowest bow, be sure, sir,
A limping government to save,
Asked millions for douceur, sir,
But we who love our CASH AT HOME,
Despising Gallic notion,
Sent guns and powder in its room,
And ships to scour the ocean.
For while an Adams, etc.

Five-headed monsters rule in France,
Like Cerberus in hell, sir,
Yet though they make French puppies dance,
They rule but where they dwell, sir,
Though we indeed have Monsters some,
The difference is quite wide, sir.
Ours cannot even bark at home,
For says their tongues are ti'd, sir,
For while an Adams, etc.

Then knock about the flowing cann,
And toast our Constitution,
Which guarantees the rights of Man,
And banishes confusion.
For while old time shall shake his hand,
And show the hours that pass, sir,
We'll drive the Frenchmen from our land,
And take the other glass, sir,
For while an Adams, etc.

SONG, for the celebration of Washington's Birthday
Tune -- "Rule Britannia."

FROM Helicon's embow'ring shades,
Descend each muse, on rapture's wings,
Apollo, join the inspiring maids,
And sweep the loud resounding strings!
While answ'ring echoes hail the morn
That Thou, Great WASHINGTON! was it born!
Thy martial deeds, all tongues employ,
From Georgia, to Hantonia's bounds,
And shouts of universal joy
The extended Continent resounds!
"This day (re-echoing skies return)
"Illustrious Washington was born!
He leaves the sweet abodes of peace,
And mounts Bellona's iron ear,
Ensur'd, by destiny, success,
He rules the thundering tide of war!
'Till vanquished Vet'rans curse the morn
Victorious Washington was born.
His Country freed, he sheathes the sword,
Untainted by ambition's sires,
And joy'd to see her rights restored,
In silent majesty retires.
His brows, eternal wreaths adorn!
This day, Great Washington was born.
Our Glorious Constitution owes
To HIM its beauty, strength and grace,
Who with com-patriot peers arose,
And Freedom built on Law's firm base.
Then hail the Patriot, by whose aid,
The glorious cornerstone was laid!
The Fabric built, his country claimed
Her Great Defender for its head,
He took the helm, with zeal inflamed,
While all the Statesman shone displayed:
Columbia's traitors curse the morn,
Their great Antagonist was born.
To ADAMS then he gave the helm,
Well skilled the glorious bark to guide.
Rocks, shelves and storms he makes her stem,
And proudly brave the opposing tide,
His brows with laurels then entwine,
And blend Creat Washington! with thine.
But hark! his Country calls! again
Behold the godlike Chief advance,
He grasps the sword! resumes the plain!
To curb the arrogance of France.
Applauding millions hail the morn
Their Bulwark of defense was born!
While the warm blood bedews our veins,
This annual tribute we will pay,
And famine, plagues, consume our plains
To France, and pestilence a prey,
If ever our Sons forget the morn
When thou, Great Washington was it born.
ADAMS AND LIBERTY.
Tune -- "To Anacreon in Heaven."

YE sons of Columbia, who bravely have fought,
For those rights, which unstained from your sires had descended,
May you long taste the blessings your va or has bought,
And your sons reap the soil, which their fathers defended.
Mid the reign of mild peace,
May your nation increase,
With the glory of Rome, and the wisdom of Greece;
And never may the sons of Columbia be stoves,
While the earth hears a plant, or the sea rolls its waves.
In a clime, whose rich vales seed the marts of the world
Whose shores are unshaken by Europe's commotion,
The Trident of Commerce should never be hurled,
To incense the legitimate powers of the ocean.
But should pirates invade,
Though in thunder arrayed,
Let your cannon declare the free charter of trade.
For never shall, etc.

The fame of our arms, of our laws the mild sway,
Had justly ennobled our nation in story,
'Till the dark cloud of faction obscured our young day,
And envelop'd the sun of American glory.
But let traitors be told,
Who their country have fold,
And bartered their God, for his image in gold --
That never shall, etc.

While France her huge limbs bathes recumbent in blood,
And society's base threats with wide dissolution;
May Peace, like the Dove, who returned from the flood,
Find an Ark of abode in our mild Constitution!
But though Peace is our aim,
Yet the boon we disclaim,
If bought by our Sovereignty, Justice or Fame.
For never shall, etc.

It Is the fire of the slint, each American warms;
Let Rome's haughty victors beware of collision!
Let them bring all the vassals of Europe in arms,
We Are a world by ourselves, and disdain a division!
While, with patriot pride,
To our laws we are allied,
No foe can subdue us -- no faction divide.
For never shall, etc.

Our mountains are crowned with imperial Oak,
Whose roots, like our liberties, ages have nourished.
But long ere our nation submits to the yoke,
Not a tree shall be left on the field where it flourished.
Should invasion impend,
Every grove would descend
From the hill-tops they shaded, our shores to defend.
For never shall, etc.

Let our Patriots destroy Anarch's pestilent worm,
Lest our liberty's growth should be checked by corrosion;
Then let clouds thicken round us, we heed not the storm;
Our realm sears no shock, but the earth's own explosion.
Foes assail us in vain,
Though their fleets bridge the main,
For our altars and laws with our lives we'll maintain!
And never shall, etc.

Should the tempest of war overshadow our land,
Its bolts could never rend Freedom's temple asunder;
For, unmoved, at its portals would Washington stand,
And repulse, with his breast, the assault of the thunder!
His sword from the sleep
Of its scabbard, would leap,
And conduct, with its point, every flash to the deep.
For never shall, etc.

Let Fame to the would found America's voice;
No intrigue can her sons from their Govermnent sever;
Her pride is her Adams -- his laws are her choice,
And shall flourish till liberty slumber forever!
Then unite heart and hand,
Like Leonidas' band,
And swear to the God of the ocean and land,
That never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant, or the sea rolls its waves.
Sung at Windsor, the 4th of July, 1799, composed by Royal Tyler, Esquire
Tune -- 'Here's to our Noble Selves, boys,"

COME fill each brimming glass, boys,
Red or white has equal joys;
Come fill each brimming glass, boys,
And toast your country's glory:
Does any here to sear incline,
And over Columbia's danger whine,
Why let him quaff this generous wine,
He Will tell another story.
Here Is WASHINGTON, the brave, boys,
Source of all Columbia's joys;
Here Is WASHINGTON, the brave, boys,
Come rise and toast him standing:
For he is the hero firm and brave,
Who all our country's glory gave,
And once again he shall us save,
Our armies bold commanding.
Here Is to the gallant Tar, boys,
Whose cannon's roar our foe annoys;
Here Is to the gallant Tar, boys,
His country's cause defending:
For Warlike Truxton's noble name,
Like Nelson's shall extend his same,
And loud through all the earth proclaim,
His glory never ending.
Here Is to our native land, boys,
Land of liberty and joys;
Here Is to our native land, boys,
Your glasses raise for drinking:
And he that will not drink this toast,
May he in France of freedom boast,
There dangling on a lantern post,
Or in the Rhone be sinking.
Here Is to our Vermont FAIR, boys,
Pledges bright of Fed'ral joys;
Here Is to our Vermont FAIR, boys,
Fill high to Love and Beauty:
For while we toast their glowing charms,
Their virtue every bosom warms,
We'll die to guard them safe from harms,
It is a Fed'ral duty.
Here Is to Vermont State, boys,
And all her manly rustic joys;
Here Is to Vermont State, boys,
Columbia's brave defender:
For while our pines ascend on high,
And while our Mountains mock the sky,
Our Independence, Liberty,
We never will surrender.
Here Is to the sage of Quincy, boys,
Legal head of all our joys;
Here Is to the Sage of Quiney, boys,
Who guards us while we are drinking:
For while we quaff the boozy wine,
And sense and tipsy mirth combine,
With temperate head he sits sublime,
And for our good is thinking.
Now come join hand in hand, boys,
Mystic type of Fed'ral joys;
Now come join hand in hand, boys,
Like brother, brother greeting:
For while our union we pursue,
It Is I and he, and you and you,
Our pleasure all may yet renew,
At our next Fed'ral meeting.
CHIEFTAINS of COLUMBIA.
YE Chiestains of Columbia, your sorces marshall eat,
It Is time you make inquiry what these Frenchmen are about;
Your flag has been insulted, your commerce has been stopped;
Your citizens are plundered, and into prison popp'd.
Yankee Doodle, mind the tune,
Yarkee Doodle dance,
If Frenchmen come, with naked bum,
We'll spank 'em hard and handy.
Your ministers degraded, your senate they condemn;
They say no treaties you shall make, but what is approved by them:
Will you who sought so bravely, and bled in freedom's cause,
Now tamely sit and suffer France to trample on your laws?
Yankee Doodle, etc.

They say they gave you freedom, and call you all ingrates;
For by their valor you were made the independent states:
We know they joined Columbia, and (...) them selves our friends,
As well we know their plan was laid to answer their own ends.
Yankee Doodle, etc.

But let me ask how, when and where these Frenchmen set you free?
Was it their conquest made by land, or victory gained by sea?
When lord Cornwallis yielded, (...) their fleet,
By lying off the harbor, preve^^^^^ (...) retreat.
Yankee Doodle, etc.

Ye advocates for Frenchmen, what can you more advance,
To prove your independence originates from France?
The Count D' Eslang at Georgia was glad to make retreat,
And by a force inferior, confessed his own defeat.
Yankee Doodle, etc.

When Burgoyne and his army were forced to own your sway
The Yankee boys alone shared the honors of the day.
Should any dare assert that France by victory gained at sea,
Secured your independence and set Columbia free.
Yankee Doodle, etc.

Tell them of Count de Grasse's fall, and quick the charge deny.
Or from the shades old Rodney's ghost will thunder out "you lie."
I say Columbia's glory, which she this day enjoys,
Was gained by General Washington, who led the Yankee boys.
Yankee Doodle, etc.

Then shall your Senate be reproached, your citizens oppressed,
Your ministers degraded, your swords in scabbards rest?
Say, shall your Eagle's wings be clipped, your stars' great luster sade,
And shall Columbia's stripes no more with honor be displayed?
Yankee Doodle, etc.

Arise ye sons of freedom, Columbia's rights maintain,
Brave Washington you will find prepared to wield the sword again.
Then raise your standard, draw your sword, prepare the pointed lance,
Evince your Constitution shall never be swayed by France.
May wisdom guide your commerce, and justice never cease,
To shidd Columbia's glory, till victory brings you Peace.
Yankee Doodle, etc.

The Philadelphia Patriotic Song.
Tune -- President's March.

HAIL COLUMBIA! happy land;
Hail ye Heroes! Heaven born band,
Who fought and bled in freedom's cause,
Who fought and bled in freedom's cause,
And when the storm of war was gone,
Enjoyed the peace your valor won,
Let Independence be our boast,
Ever mindful what it cost:
Ever grateful for the prize,
Let its altar reach the ^^^^s.
Firm -- united -- let us be,
Rallying round our liberty,
As a band of brothers joined.
Peace and safety we shall find.
Immortal Patriots! rise once more,
Defend your rights, defend your shore,
Let no rude so with impious hand
Let no rude so with impious hand,
Invade the shrine where sacred lies,
Of toil and blood the well earned prize.
While offering peace, sincere and just,
In heaven we place a manly trust,
That truth and justice will prevail,
And every scheme of bondage sail.
Firm -- united -- let us be, etc.

Sound, sound the trump of same,
Let WASHINGTON's great name,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Ring through the world with loud applause,
Let every clime to freedom dear,
Listen with a joyful ^^r
With matchless skill, with godlike power,
He governs in the fearful hour
Of horrid war, or guides with ease
The happier times of honest peace.
Firm -- united -- let us be, etc.

Behold THE CHIEF WHO NOW COMMANDS,
Once more to save his country stands,
The rock on which the storm will beat,
The rock on which the storm will beat,
But armed in virtue, firm and true,
His hopes are fixed on heaven and you.
When hope was sinking in dismay,
When glooms obscured Columbia's day,
His steady mind from changes free,
Resolved on death or liberty.
Firm -- united -- let us be, etc.

THE HOBBIES.
ATTENTION pray give while of hobbies I sing;
For each has his hobby, from cobbler to king;
On some favorite hobby we all get astride,
And when we are once mounted, full gallop we ride.
All on hobbies, all on hobbies,
All on hobbies, gee up, gee O.
Some hobbies are restive, and hard for to govern;
Even just like our wives, they are so cursedly stubborn.
The hobbies of scolds are their husbands to teaze;
And the hobbies of lawyers are plenty of fees.
All on hobbies, etc.

The beaux; those sweet gentlemen's hobby good lack!
Is to wear great large poultices tied round the neck;
And they think in the ton and the tippy they are dressed,
If they have breeches that reach from the ankle to chest.
All on hobbies, etc.

The hobbies of sailors, when safe moored in port,
With their wives and their sweethearts, to toy and to sport.
When our navy's completed, their hobby shall be,
To show the whole world that America's free.
All on hobbies, etc.

The hobbies of soldiers in time of great wars,
Are breaches and battles, with blood, wounds and scars;
But in peace you will observe that quite different their trade is:
The hobbies of soldiers, in peace, are the ladies.
All on hobbies, etc.

The ladies, sweet creatures! yes, they now and then,
Get astride of their hobbies, ay, just like the men:
With smiles and with simpers beguile us with ease;
And we gallop, trot, amble o'en just as they please.
All on hobbies, etc.

The Americans' hobby has long since been known;
No tyrant or king shall from them have a throne.
Their states are united -- and let it be said,
Their hobby is WASHINGTON, peace and free trade.
All on hobbies, etc.

THE CAPTIVE.
S^ng in the Purse.

O THINK on my fate! -- once I freedom enjoyed,
Was as happy as happy could be!
But pleasure is fled -- even hope is destroyed,
A captive, alas! on the sea!
I was taken by the foe -- 'twas the fiat of fate,
To tear me from her I adore!
When thought brings to mind my once happy state,
I sigh, while I tug at the oar.
Hard, hard is my fate -- oh how galling my chain,
My life's steered by misery's chart;
And though against my tyrants I scorn to complain,
Tears gush forth to ease my full heart:
I disdain e'n to shrink, though I seel the sharp lash,
Yet my breast bleeds for her I adore,
While around me the unfeeling billows will dash,
I sigh and still tug at the oar.
How forture deceives! -- I had pleasure in tow,
The port where she dwelt we'd in view,
But the wished nuptial morn was o'erclouded with woe
And, dear Anna, I was hurried from you:
Our shallop was boarded and I borne away,
To behold my dear Anna no more,
But despair wastes my spirits, my form seels decay --
He sighed and expired at the oar.
POOR TOM, Or the Sailor's Epitaph.
HERE a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling,
The darling of our crew,
No more he will hear the tempst howling,
For death has broached him too.
His form was of the manliest beauty,
His heart was kind and soft,
Faithful below he did his duty,
And now he is gone alost.
Tom never from his word departed,
His virtues were so rare,
His friends were many and true-hearted,
His Poll was kind and fair:
And then he would sing so blithe and jolly,
Ah many's the time and ost!
But mirth is turned to melancholy,
For Tom is gone alost.
Yet shall poor Tom find pleasant weather,
When he who all commands,
Shall give, to call life's crew together,
The word to pipe all hands.
Thus death who kings and tars dispatches,
In vain Tom's life has doff'd,
For, though his body's under hatches,
His soul is gone alost.
THE TOPERS.
MY friend and I,
We drank gallon-pots
Full of sack up to the brim:
I drank to my friend,
And he drank his pot,
So we put about the whim:
Three bottles and a quart
We swallowed down our throat,
(But hang such puny sips as these,)
We laid us all along,
With our mouths unto the bung,
And tipp'd whole hogsheads off with ease.
I heard of a sop
That drank whole tankards,
Styled himself the prince of sots;
But I say now, hang
Such silly drunkards,
Melt their flaggons, break their pots.
My friend and I did join,
For a cellar full of wine,
And we drank the vintner out of door;
We drank it all up,
In a morning at a sup,
And greedily roved about for more.
My friend to me
Did make this motion,
Let us to the vintage skip:
Then we embarked
Upon the ocean,
Where we found a Spanish ship
Deep laden with wine,
Which was superfine,
The sailors swore five hundred tun;
We drank it all at sea,
Ever we came unto the key,
And the merchant swore he was quite undone.
My friend, not having
Quenched his thirst,
Said, let us to the vineyards haste:
Straight then we sailed
To the Canaries,
Which afforded just a taste;
From thence unto the Rhine,
Where we drank up all the wine,
Till Bacchus cried, hold, ye sots, or you die;
And swore he never found,
In his universal round,
Such thirsty souls as my friend and I.
Out sie! cries one,
What a beast he makes him,
He can neither stand nor go!
Out you beast, you,
You're much mistaken,
Whenever knew you a beast drink so?
It Is when we drink the least,
That we drink most like a beast;
But when we carouse it six in hand;
It Is then and only then,
That we drink the most like men,
When we drink till we can neither go nor stand.
THE COTTAGER's DAUGHTER.
AH tell me ye swains have you seen my Pastora,
O say have you met the sweet nymph in your way?
Transcendant as Venus and blithe as Aurora,
From Neptune's bed rising to hail the new day.
Forlorn do! wander, and long time have sought her,
The fairest the rarest, forever my theme;
A goddess in form though a Cottager's daughter,
That dwells on the borders of Aln's winding stream.
Tho'lordlings so gay and young 'squires have sought her
To link her fair hand in the conjugal chain,
Devoid of ambition the Cottager's daughter
Convinced them that flattery and offers were vain.
When first I beheld her I fondly besought her,
My heart did her homage, and love was my theme,
She vowed to be mine, the sweet Cottager's daughter,
That dwells on the borders of Aln's winding stream.
Then why thus alone does she leave me to languish?
Pastora to splendour could never give her hand;
Ah no, she returns to remove my fond anguish,
Over her heart, love and truth retain the command.
The wealth of Golconda could never have bought her,
For love truth and constancy still is her theme,
Then give me kind heaven the Cottager's daughter,
That dwells on the borders of Aln's winding stream.
JACK AT THE WINDLASS.
COME all hands ahoy, to the anchor,
From our friends and relations to go;
Poll blubbers and cries, devil thank her,
She Will soon take another in tow.
This breeze like the old one will kick us
About on the boisterous main,
And one day if death should not trick us,
Perhaps we shall come back again.
With a will, ho then, pull away, jolly boys,
At the mercy of fortune we go;
We Are in for it, then damme what folly boys,
For to be down hearted, yo ho.
Our boatswain takes care of the rigging,
More spessiously when he gets drunk;
The bobstay supplies him with swigging,
He the cable cuts up for old junk.
The studdingsail serves for his hammock,
With the clue lines he bought him his call,
While ensigns and jacks in a mammoc,
He sold to buy trinkets for Poll.
With a will ho, etc.

Of the purser this here is the maxim,
Slops, grog and provision he sacks,
How he would look if you was but to ax him,
With the Captains Clerk who it is goes snacks,
O he would find it another guess story,
That would bring his bare back to the car,
If his Majesty's honor and glory
Was only told just about that.
With a will ho, etc.

Our chaplain's both holy and godly,
And sets us for heaven agog,
Yet to my mind he looks rather oddly,
When he is swearing and drinking of grog.
When he took on his knee Betty Bowser,
And talked of her beauty and charms,
Cried I, which is the way to heaven now sir;
Why, you dog, cried the chaplain, her arms.
With a will ho, etc.

The gunner's a devil of a bubber,
The (...) cannot fish a mast,
The surgeon's a lazy land lubber,
The master cannot steer if he is ast.
The lieutenants, conceit are all wrapped in,
The mates hardly merit their flip;
Nor is there a swab but the captain,
Knows the stem from the stern of the ship.
With a will ho, etc.

Now sore and ast having abused them,
Just but for my fancy and gig,
Could I find any one that ill used them,
Damn me but I Would tickle his wig.
Jack never was known for a railer,
'Twas fun every word that I spoke,
And the sign of a true hearted sailor
Is to give and to take a good joke.
With a will ho, etc.

LUCY, OR SELIM's COMPLAINT.
NIGHT over the world her curtain hung,
The vale was silent, late so gay;
The bird of night melodious sung,
Her anthem at departing day:
When Selim on a bank reclined,
Beneath a spreading willow tree,
Thus spoke the feelings of his mind,
Oh! Lucy shed one tear for me.
Yes, had I all that heaven could give,
Were my possessions rich and great,
Then for my Lucy would I live;
Then at her feet a suppliant wait.
But since hard poverty's my lot,
No hope remains to wed with thee,
Thy beauties never can grace my cot,
Oh! Lucy, shed one tear for me.
Deprived of all that life could bless,
The torment of life no more I crave,
The hour that offers happiness,
Is that which makes my hapless grave.
Be each fond wish enjoyed of thine,
May heaven protect and comfort thee,
The turf must press this head of mine,
Oh! Lucy, shed one tear for me.
The Federal Constitution and Liberty forever.
POETS may sing of their Helicon streams,
Their Gods and their Heroes are fabulous dreams.
They never sang a line,
Half so grand so divine,
As the glorious toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution boys and Liberty forever.
ADAMS, the man of our choice, guides the helm,
No tempest can harm us, no storm overwhelm:
Our sheet anchor's sure
And our bark rides secure,
So here is to the toast
We Columbian's boast,
The Federal Constitution, and the President forever.
A free Navigation, Commerce and Trade,
We'll seek for no foe of no foe be afraid,
Our frigates shall ride,
Our defense and our pride;
Our Tars guard our coast
And huzza to our toast,
The Federal Constitution, Trade and Commerce bo forever.
Montgomery, Warren, still live in our songs,
Like them our Young Heroes shall spurn at on wrong
The world will admire
The zeal and the fire,
Which blaze in the toast
We Columbians boast,
The Federal Constitution and its Advocates forever
When an enemy threats all party shall cease,
We bribe no intriguers to buy a mean peace;
Columbians will scorn,
Friend or foe to suborn,
We'll never stain the toast
Which as freemen we boast,
The Federal Constitution and Integrity forever.
Fame's trumpet shall swell in Washington's praise,
And Time grant a furlough to lengthen his days,
May health weave the thread
Of delight round his head;
No nation can boast
Such a name, such a toast,
The Federal Constitution boys and Washington forever.
MEG OF WAPPING.
'TWAS Landlady Meg that made such rare slip,
Pull away, pull away, hearties;
At Wapping she lived at the sign of the ship,
Where tars meet in such jolly parties.
She Would shine at the play and she would jig at the ball,
All rigged out so gay and so topping.
For she married six husbands and buried them all,
Pull away, pull away, pull away,
I say,
What do you think of my Meg of Wapping.
The first was old Bluff with a swinging purse;
Pull away, pull away, jolly boys!
He was cast away, said Meg who cares a curse?
As for grieving why, lord, that is a folly boys,
The second in command was clear eyed Ned;
While the surgeon his limb was a lopping,
A nine pounder came and smack'd off his head,
Pull away, pull away, pull away,
I say!
Rare news for my Meg of Wapping.
Then she married to Sam, and Sam loved a sup,
Pull away, pull away, brother!
So grogy Sam got and the ship blew up
And Meg had to look for another:
The fourth was bold Ben who at danger would smile,
'Till his courage a crocodile stopping,
Made his breakfast of Ben on the banks of the Nile,
Pull away, pull away, pull away
I say,
What a fortunate Meg of Wapping!
Stay who was the fifth? O 'twas Diek so neat,
Pull away, pull away so merry!
And the Savages Dick both killed and eat,
And poor Meg she was forced to take Jerry:
Death again slood her friend, for, killed in a fray,
He also the grave chanced to pop in;
So now with my song I shall soon belay,
Pull away, pull away, pull away,
Belay,
The six husbands of Meg of Wapping.
But I did not tell you how that she married seven,
Pull away, pull away, so neatly!
'Twas honest Tom Trip and he sent her to heaven
And her strong box rumaged sweetly;
For Meg growing old, a fond dotard proved,
And must after a boy needs be hopping;
So she popp'd off and Tom with the girl that he loved,
Pull away, pull away, pull away,
I say,
Spent the shiners of Meg of Wapping.
THE LITTLE SAILOR BOY.
THE sea was calm the sky serene,
And gently blew the eastern gale,
When Anna seated on a rock,
Watched the Livona's lessening sail;
To heaven she thus her prayer addressed,
Thou who can save, or can destroy,
From each surrounding danger guard,
My much loved little sailor boy.
When tempests over the ocean howl,
And even sailors shrink with dread,
Be some protecting angel near
To hover round my William's head:
He was beloved by all the plain,
His father's pride, his mother's joy.
Then safely to their arms restore
Their much loved little sailor boy.
May no rude foe his course impede.
Conduct him safely over the waves;
O may he never be compelled
To fight for power or mix with slaves:
May smiling peace his steps attend,
Each rising hour be crowned with joy,
As blessed as that when I again
Shall meet my much loved sailor boy.
MONSIEUR NONGTONGPAW.
JOHN BULL for pastime took a prance,
Some time ago to peep at France,
To talk of sciences and arts,
And knowledge gained in foreign parts.
Monsieur obsequious heard him speak,
And answered John in heathen Greek;
'To all he asked 'bout all he saw,
'Twas Monsieur Je vous n'entend pas.
John to the Palais royal come,
(...) splendour almost struck him dumb;
I say whose house is that there here?
Hosse? Je vous n'entend pas Monsieur.
What, Nong tongue paw again? cries John,
This fellow is some mighty Don;
No doubt has plenty for the maw,
I Will breakfast with this Nong tongue paw.
John saw Versailles from Marlis height,
And cried, astonished at the sight,
Whose fine estate is that there here?
Stat? Je vous n'entends pas monsieur:
His? what the land and houses too?
The fellow's richer than a jew;
On every thing he lays his claw;
I should like to dine with Nong tongue paw.
Next tripping by a courtly fair;
John cried, enchanted with her air,
What lovely wench is that there here?
Ventch? Je vous, n'entend pas monsieur.
What he again? upon my life;
A Palace, lands, and then a wise.
Sir Joshua might delight to draw;
I should like to sup with Nong tongue paw.
But hold, whose funeral's that? cries John;
Je vous n'entends pas: What is he gone?
Wealth, same and beauty could not save
Poor Nong tongue paw, then from the grave.
His race is run, his game is up,
I Would with him breakfast, dine and sup;
But since he chooses to withdraw;
Good night to ye Monsieur Nong tongue paw.
POOR JACK.
GO patter to lubbers and swabs de you see,
'Bout danger and fear and the like,
A tight water boat and good sea room give me, should smite,
And 'tent to a little I Will strike.
Tho the tempest top-gallant-masts smack smooth
And shiver each splinter of wood;
Clear the wreck, stow the yards and bouse every thing tight,
And under reef'd foresail we'll scud.
Avast nor don't think me a milksop so soft,
To be taken for trifles aback,
For they say there is a providence sits up alost
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Why I heard our good chaplain palaver one day,
About souls, heaven, mercy and such;
And my timbers what lingo he would co^ and belay,
Why it was just all as one as high Dutch:
But he said how a sparrow cannot founder do you see,
Without orders that comes down below;
And many fine things that proves clearly to me
That providence takes us in tow.
For says he, do you mind me, let storms ever so often,
Take the top lists of sailors aback,
There Is a sweet little Cherub sits smiling aloft
To keep watch for the life of Poor Jack.
I said to our Poll, for do you see she would cry,
When last we weighed anchor for sea,
What argusies sniv'ling and piping your eye,
Why what a damned fool you must be.
Cannot you see the world's wide and there is room for us all,
Both for seamen and lubbers on shore,
And if to old Davy I should go friend Poll,
Why you never will hear of me more.
What then, all is a hazard come don't be so soft,
Perhaps we way langhing come back,
For do you see, there is a cherub sits perched up alost
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Do You mind me, a sailor should be every inch,
All as one as a piece of the ship;
And with her brave the world without offering to flinch
From the moment the anchor's atrip.
As for me in all weathers, all times, sides and ends,
Noughts a trouble from duty that springs;
My heart is my Poll's and my Rhino's my friend's,
And as to my life it is the king's.
Even when my time comes never believe me so soft
As with grief to be taken aback;
The same little cherub that sits up aloft,
Will look out a good birth for poor Jack.
THE CALEDONIAN MAID.
OH say, have you my Mary seen,
The Caledonian Maid;
Or heard the shepherds on the green
Say where my Mary's strayed.
The damsel is of angel mien,
With sad and downcast eyes;
The shepherds call her sorrow's queen
So pensively she fighs.
But why those sighs so sadly swell,
Or why her tears so flow?
In vain they press the lovely girl,
The innate cause to know.
Ever reason formed her tender mind
The virgin learnt to love;
Compastion taught her to be kind,
Deceit she was above.
And had not war's terrisir voice a
Forbid the nuptial bands,
Ever now had Sandy been her choice,
And Hymen joined our hands:
But since the sword of war is sheathed
And peace resumes her charms,
My every joy is now bequeathed
Unto my Mary's arms.
BRIGHT CHANTICLEER.
BRIGHT Chanticleer proclaims the dawn,
And spangles deck the thorn,
The lowing herds new quit the lawn,
The lark springs from the corn.
Dogs, huntsmen round the window throng,
Fhet Towlet leads the cry,
Arise, the burthon of their song,
This day a stag must die.
With a hey, ho, Chivey,
Hark forward, bark forward, tantivey,
With a hey, ho, Chivey,
Hark forward, bark forward, tantivey,
Hark forward, bark forward, bark forward,
Hark forward, tantivey tantivey,
Hark, bark, forward, bark forward tantivey.
Arise, the (...) of their song,
This day a stag must die, this day a stag must die,
This day a stag must die.
The cordial takes its merry round,
The laugh and joke prevail,
The huntsman winds his jovial horn,
The dogs snuff up the gale;
The woodland winds they sweep along,
Over hill and dale they fly,
The Game is roused too true the song,
This day a stag must die.
With a hey ho, etc.

Poor stag the dogs thy haunches gore,
The tears run down thy face,
The huntsman's pleasure is no more,
His joys were in the chase;
Alike the sportsmen of the town,
The virgin game in view,
Are full content to run them down,
Then they in turn pursue.
With a hey ho, etc.

YOUNG WILLY FOR ME.
I HAVE plenty of lovers who sue me in vain,
My heart is with Willy far over the sea,
For haudsome and witty, and brave is the swain,
The bonny bold soldier, young willy for me.
In the trumpet's shrill sound my soldier delights,
For honor, his king and his country he fights.
I share with his dress in the heart of the beau,
A Doctor my pulse feels and never takes a see,
The one is pedantic, the other all show,
The bonny bold soldier young Willy for me.
In the trumpet's, etc.

HENRY's COTTAGE MAID.
AH! where can fly my soul's true love,
Sad I wander this lone grove,
Sighs and tears for him I shed,
HENRY is from LAURA fled.
Thy love to me thou did impart,
Thy love soon won my virgin heart,
But dearest Henry thoust betrayed
Thy love with thy poor cottage maid.
Through the vale thy grief appears,
Sighing sad with pearly tears,
Often thy image is my theme
As I wander over the green.
See from my cheek the color slies,
And love's sweet hope within me dies;
For oh; dearest Henry thou'st betrayed
Thy love with thy poor Cottage Maid.
THE GENIUS OF COLUMBIA.
A WAKE from delusion, yesons of the brave,
Cries the Genius that watches our Freedom and Fame;
Thy virtue no longer from rapine can save,
Since Gallia lights up of dissension the flame
Then to arms let us repair,
While our wrongs sill the air,
That France, and the world may behold,
That our freedom, our fame,
And our virtuous name,
We prize above friendship and gold.
Away with the veil, which thy charity spread,
Over the deeds of a nation where tyrants preside;
No glory of thine can its influence shed,
On the friends of deception, destruction and pride.
Than to arms, etc.

Arise from thy bowers of contentment and ease,
And gird on the sword of thy vengeance anew;
For in vain would thy wisdom their madness appease,
In vain will thy caution their plottings pursue.
Then to arms, etc.

Deep died with the blood of the valiant and good,
And clothed with deformity, guilt and despair,
In the portals of peace, like demons they have slood,
And poisoned, with venom, sweet Liberty's air.
Then to arms, etc.

To freedom, to VIRTUE, and bliss they pretend,
And vauntingly osler redemption to slaves,
While abroad, through the world, their assaslins they send,
And prove, by each law, that they glory in knaves
Then to arms, etc.

Rise, scornful, my sons, from a friendship so base,
And again be the banner of Freedom unfurled;
While Time, on his records, Columbia shall place,
The pride, the delight, and the boast of the world.
Then to arms let us repair,
While our wrongs sill the air;
That France, and the world, may behold,
That our freedom and same,
And our virtuous name,
We prize above friendship and gold.
THE GIRL I LEFT BEHIND ME.
I AM lonesome since I crossed the hills,
And over the moors that is sedgy,
Such heavy thoughts my mind does sill,
Since parting from my Sally.
In search for one that is fine and gay,
And several does remind me,
Blessed be the hours I past away,
With the girl I lest behind me.
The hour I remember well,
When constancy reminds me,
A pain within my breast I self,
When first she owned she love'd me;
But now I Am bound to Brighton Camp,
Kind heaven then pray guide me,
And send me back safe home again,
To the girl I lest behind me.
I Would tune my lays to sing her praise,
Had I the tongue of Homer,
With compliments most elegant,
I Would recompense my lover.
So let the night be ever so dark,
Or ever so wet or windy,
I will return safe back again,
To the girl I lest behind me.
Her golden hair in ringlets were,
Her eyes like diamonds shining,
Her slender waist, her carriage chuste,
She lest the swain repining;
Ye gods above, pray hear my prayer,
The beauteous fair who binds me,
And send me safe back home again,
To the girl I left behind me.
The be shall lavish, make no store,
The dove become a ranger,
The falling waters cease to roar,
Whenever I mean to change her;
If ever I return that way,
And she has not declined me,
I Will reconcile myself and stay,
With the girl I left behind me.
THE PETIT MAITRE.
FROM Paris I come and I landed at Dover,
I was but tree hours in my passage over,
And ven I come dear, for London I vas running,
Where de people I sound vas for the too much de cunning.
Fall de ral, etc.

And ven I come dare, oh dear me vat a noise, sir,
It vas noting at all but "a Fox my brave boys, sir;"
I say to them all pray vat is de matter,
Fray vat is de reason for dis dam noise and clatter.
Fall de ral, etc.

Den von step up to me and he say you dam dog, sir,
Go home to you country and eat up you frog, sir,
And he hit me von lick vid such a dam spite, sir,
It gar enter nous it vas not vast polite, sir.
Fall de ral, etc,

I did not much like in dis way to be beat, sir,
But I did not tink it worth while to fight in destreet, sir,
Den von step up to me and he hit me on the nose, sir,
But I did not choose for to dirty my clothes, sir.
Fall de ral, etc.

Den I go to von house and I ask for some drink, sir,
And I say to de landlord, pray vat you do tink, sir,
Dare be von dam blackguard he use me very ill, sir,
I will have him to de justice, begar dat I will, sir.
Fall de ral, etc.

Den he bring me some liquor 'twas much better den sack, sir,
It vas made of de vater, sugar, lemon and de rack, sir,
But I believe it vas noting but de contradiction,
For it make in mine head such a damned confusion.
Fall de ral, etc.

Now dis be de drink, if I understand right, sir,
Which make de dam Englis to swear and to fight, sir,
But in my poor stomach it make such a rout, sir,
Begar I vas tink it vou'd punch my poor guts out, sir.
Fall de ral, etc.

Den he bring me some ting vas made in von plate, sir,
I say to de landlord pray vat you call dat, sir,
Why dat be de beef buried in de pie crust, sir,
Oh! begar I vas eat till I tink I should have burst, sir,
Fall de ral, etc.

Now in England you beef and you drink it be good, sir,
But I tink you dam fist and you gun draw de blood, sir,
Which make it so true vat de Englisman vill say, sir,
When de French see de blood begar dey all run away, sir.
Fall de ral, etc.

RECRUITING SERVICE.
COME ye lads who wish to shine
Bright in future story, --
Haste to arms, and form the line
That leads to martial glory!
Charge the musket, point the lance,
Brave the worst of dangers;
Tell the blustering sons of France,
That we to fear are strangers.
Columbia, when the lion's roused,
And her flag is rearing,
Always finds her sons disposed
To drub the foe that is daring.
Charge the musket, etc.

Honor for the brave to share,
Is the noblest booty;
Guard your coast, protect the fair,
For that is a glorious duty.
Beat the drum, the trumpet sound,
Manly and United,
Danger face, maintain your ground,
And see your country righted.
New Hampshire Patriotic Song.
Tune -- Adams and Liberty.

FROM the bright throne of heaven see liberty fly,
Through worlds of pure either the maid is descending,
Winged set aphs surrounding, shout joy through the stay.
And nature herself to the Goddess is bending.
The natious around,
Catch the sight and the sound,
Yet none but Columbia to deserve her is sound.
CHORUS.
For the arms of Columbia shall guard her bright shore,
While the sun rells his course, and till time is no more.
This morn the bright Goddess with trumpets of same,
Resounding sublime to the bounds of creation,
Proclaims that her glory, her wisdom, her name
Are enstamp'd by her hand on the American nation.
While tyrants from sar,
In Bellona's dread car,
Shall behold and desist from the horrors of war.
For the arms, etc.

In vain are the threats of European powers,
In vain is the poison of Gallic delusion,
In vain -- for while Liberty smiles and is ours,
We defy gal, carts and avoid her consusion;
For the skirs that surround,
And the ocean profound,
Can alone to Columbian glory give bound.
For the arms, etc.

Like the flash from the cloud when the anger of Jove,
Dooms cities and forests to quick desolation,
When thunder resounds from the arches above,
And the pillars of heaven are removed from their station.
So in virtue arrayed
With the Eagle displayed
Shall thy sons, O Columbia, make nations afraid.
For the arms, etc.

Though Gauls should assail us, through oceans of blood,
And arm the infernals from Pluto's dread regions,
Our heroes on land, and our tars on the flood,
Shall crush them in triumph, and conquer their legions.
While Truxton shall reign,
Mighty lord of the main,
Men and devils attack our blessed Freedom in vain:
For the arms of Columbia shall guard our bright realm,
While an Adams and Washington stand at the belar.
As the sun from his height, beaming flashes of gold,
In vain looks abroad for the ends of creation,
So the bounds of our power he can never behold,
And his rays are out told by so numerous a nation.
While time from the spheres
Counts his weeks, months and years,
No rival in glory from Europe appears.
For the arms of Columbia shall guard her bright share,
While the sen rolls his course and till time is no more.
THE SHIPWRECK.
ON board the Valliant we set fail,
The streamers waving in the wird,
The fails distended by the Gale,
Seemed to forget the shores behind;
The sailor to the topmast flies,
To wave his handkerchief in air,
And on the towering cliff descries
His own true Polly weeping there,
And hears her sigh adieu!
Now fresher blows the sou'west Gale,
In peace no more the billows sleep;
The storm that rent the swelling sail,
Loud murmured over the sullen deep:
No more the sailor sees the land,
Yet waves his handkerchief in air,
In vain he seeks the well known strand,
To find his own true Polly there,
And hear her sigh adieu!
The storm grown louder split the mast,
The hurricane more fiercely blows;
And as against the rocks we are cast,
Our vessel to the bottom goes:
The sailor to the topmast flies,
To wave his handkerchief in air;
And on the towering cliff descries,
His own true Polly weeping there,
And sighs a last adieu!
HERE IS THE PRETTY GIRL I LOVE.
JACK OAKHAM was a gallant tar,
And doated on the lovely POLL,
Whose charms were like the morning star,
And radiant as the beams of Sol:
To live and for each other true,
They swore by every saint above,
And Jack wherever sailing to,
Gave here is the pretty girl I love.
It happened once they made a port,
Where beauty held its magic reign;
And each bold tar in amorous sport,
Forgot the perils of the main:
Round went the glass and jest at whim,
The song and toast at every move;
But Jack whenever they called on him,
Gave, Here Is the pretty girl I love.
Thus faithful Jack in every clime,
True to his Poll, dwelt on her charms,
And soon arrived the happy time,
When each were looked in t'other's arms:
Safe now they would made the nuptial coast,
And Jack once more his worth to prove:
(When asked by friendship for his toast,)
Gave, Here Is the pretty girl I love.
THE GREEN MOUNTAIN FARMER.
BY THOMAS PAIN, A. M.
BLESSED on his own Paternal Farm,
Contented yet acquiring;
Below ambition's gilded charm,
Yet rich beyond desiring.
The Hill-born rustic, hale and gay,
Ere prattling swallows sally,
Or ere the Pine-top spies the day,
Sings cheerly through his valley.
Green-Mountains echo Heaven's decree!
Live Adams, law and liberty!
With love and plenty, peace and health,
Enriched by honest labor,
He cheers the friend of humbler wealth,
Nor courts his prouder neighbor:
At eve returning home he meets
His nut-brown lass so loving,
And still his constant strain repeats,
Through groves and meadows roving.
Green Mountains echo Heaven's decree!
Live Adams, law and liberty.
Should Faction's wily serpent spring,
With treacherous folds t intwine him,
Undaunted by his venomed sting,
To flames he would consign him.
The hardy yeoman like the Oak,
That shades his woodland border,
Would baffle Anarch's vengeful stroke,
To shelter Law and Order.
Green-Mountains echo Heaven's decree!
Live Adams, law and liberty!
Should hostile fleets our shores assail,
By homebred traitors aided,
No freeborn hand would till the vale,
By slavery degraded,
Each youth would join the patriot brave,
To die proud Freedom's martyr,
And shed his latest drop to save
His country's glorious charter.
Green Mountain's echo then would be.
Fight on, fight on, for liberty.
Put hark, the invading foe alarms!
Responsive cannons rattle;
And Washington again in arms,
Directs the storm of battle.
The locust swarm of gallic fiends,
He sweeps to midway ocean;
While fame the vaulted either rends,
With conquest's loud commotion.
Shout! Shout! Columbians Heaven's decree,
It Is Washington and Victory!
PATRIOTIC SONG.
CELESTIAL choirs are heard on high,
Soblimely swells the sound,
The azure arches of the sky,
With notes divine rebound;
The day of liberty arrives,
The glorious day is come,
The day when Freedom gready lives,
And finds a much loved home,
Columbians once though greatly born,
With Empire in their hand,
Once of their beams, alas, were shorn,
By tyrants' fell command:
The clanking chain by Europe's blast,
Over groaning ocean hurled,
Dashed like the potter's clay, at last,
Emancipates a world.
Hail! thrice immortal, glorious band,
Revered be every name,
Whose efforts saved a sinking land,
Whose valor gave us same.
Your deeds transcending human might,
Like works of Heavenly power,
Shall glow till nature sinks in night,
And time revolves no more!
Hail, matchless Hero, Vernon's pride,
Thou first, thou best of men,
Thy name on Angel wings shall ride,
Thy deeds employ their pen:
Till thou and ADAMS mount sublime,
Where none but angels soar,
Freedom shall stand as fast as time,
And tyrants reign no more.
Not Gallic rage, nor Gallic might,
Nor diplomatic art,
Shall snatch blessed Freedom from our sight,
Or tear her from our heart.
Those monstrous jaws extended wide,
And red with human gore,
Glutted, at last, with Gallic tide,
Shall gape for Man no more.
THE FARCE OF FRENCH LIBERTY.
BY Gar it is von shame, says de French democrat,
To see dese d -- 'd Englis, dey laugh and grow sat;
Vile dey stick to deir King and deir old Constitution,
And turn up de nose at our grande Revolution!
Derra Dong, Dong, Dong, Derra Dong.

In deir land of roast beef, vile roast beef dey can gorge,
For nothing dey care but roast beef and King George;
And vile Pain and Champaigne is despised by dese dogs,
Dey say " France is de land of sham, freedom and frogs."
Derra Dong, etc.

But de grand tree of Liberte, dat is de sort,
Vich de French tout en semble vil ever support;
For vile ronde dat tree, ventre blea, we can revel,
De d -- d tree of Justice may go to de devil!
Derra Dong, etc.

For no laws we will keep, but do just vat we like,
Vit de block and de lantern, de poignard and pike;
Den ve'll pull down de prison to spread liberte,
And by cutting of throats, we'll make all de vorld free.
Derra Dong, etc.

On de march van ve meet vid de friend or de foe,
Ve make them pay de piper wherever ve go;
And ven princes and kings ve have robbed of deir riches,
Den our brave sans culottes dey shall all vear de breeches!
Derra Dong, etc.

John Bull ve vell know you ave great deal of money,
And you live in de land of de milk and de honey;
So as ve vant to cure all your national grief,
All ve vant in return, is to be in your beef!
Derra Dong, etc.

Enter dous, den ma soi, ve'll have reason to laugh,
Ven pauvre John Bull ve can make von bull calf;
For by Gar ve shall den cut him up in von trice,
And de French von and all vill come in for a slice!
Derra Dong, etc.

De Republique Francois it is grown very great,
But vile tousands ve kill ve have noting to eat;
And, Grande dieu, ve are got into such a d -- d poder,
Dat by Gar ve must soon kill and eat von anoder.
Derra dong, dong, dong, derra dong.

ADAMS AND WASHINGTON.
COLUMBIA's brave friends with alertness advance,
Her rights to support in defiance of France;
To volatile fribbles we never will yield,
While John's at the helm and George rules the field.
Our cargoes they have taken, our ships they have delayed;
They often times have promised but seldom have paid;
It Is high time from such rapine ourselves we should shield
Under John at the helm and George in the field.
Our Envoys they have treated with insult and scorn,
A rudeness too vast by the brave to be borne;
To arms then ye heroes, the sword we will wield,
While John rules the helm and George rules the field.
By paying those vultures large tributes in gold,
I should think our dear country in some measure sold;
Columbia the fair, they can never overwhelm,
While George rules the field and John's at the helm.
They talk of Invasions -- nonsensical stuff,
But if they come here we will give them enough;
Make them skip like their Crapauds, down musket and yield, --
While John rules the helm, and George rules the field.
May party and faction from us soon depart,
And friendship with virtue unite every heart;
May the sword for Columbia triumphantly wield,
While John rules the helm, and George rules the field.
YANKEE DOODLE.
COLUMBIANS all, the present hour,
As brothers should unite us,
Union at home's the only way
To make each nation right us.
Yankee Doodle guard your coast,
Yankee Doodle dandy;
Fear not then nor threat nor boast,
Yankee Doodle dandy.
The only way to keep off war,
And guard against persecution,
Is always to be well prepared,
With hearts of resolution.
Yankee Doodle let us unite,
Yankee Doodle dandy,
As patriots still maintain our right,
Yankee Doodle dandy.
Great WASHINGTON, who led us on,
And liberty effected,
Shall see we'll die, or else be free --
We will not be subjected.
Yankee Doodle guard your coast,
Yankee Doodle dandy,
Fear not then nor threat nor boast,
Yankee Doodle dandy.
A band of brothers let us be,
While ADAMS guides the nation;
And still our dear bought Freedom guard
In every situation.
Yankee Doodle guard your coast,
Yankee Doodle dandy,
Fear not then nor threat nor boast,
Yankee Doodle dandy.
May soon the wished for hour arrive,
When PEACE shall rule the nations;
And Commerce, free from fetters, prove
Mankind are all relations.
The Yankee Doodle be divine,
Yankee Doodle dandy,
Beneath the fig tree and the vine,
Sing Yankee Doodle dandy.
THREE WEEKS AFTER MARRIAGE.
WILLY after courting long,
Married me on Sunday,
All that day I held my tongue,
But scolded him on Monday.
Tuesday I grew dull and sad,
Wednesday passed in scorning,
Thursday drove me raving mad,
But Friday, what a morning!
Till at length that balm of life,
Money, brought a better day,
So we loved, like man and wife,
Kissing sweet on Saturday.
WILLY next began the week,
Tippling all the Sunday,
Therefore, I, provoked to speak,
Did scold him well on Monday
Tuesday called him drunken sot,
Wednesday lubber lazy,
Thursday having mended not,
Why Friday made me crazy;
Though I hoped the fool would think
Wiser on the latter day,
Not a sous for meat or drink,
Earnt he on the Saturday.
What was proper to be done,
Every future Sunday,
For 'twas plain I first begun
Wrong upon the Monday;
Tuesday then I calmer seemed,
Wednesday was indulgent,
Thursday peace and comfort beamed,
And Friday shone refulgent:
Chacing thus corroding strife,
Every day's a better day,
Joy and pleasure luming life,
From Saturday to Saturday.
THE MATCH BOY.
YE wealthy and proud, while in splendour ye roll,
Behold a poor orphan, pale, hungry and wan;
And learn, though now doomed to misfortune's control,
He springs like yourselves from the fountain of man;
So scanty the fruits of his humble employ,
Dejected he roams in a sad ragged plight;
Then O! give a mite to the poor little boy,
Who cries "Buy my matches," from morning to night.
Remember, though luxury clogs you by day,
And pampers you nightly on pillows of down,
Adversity soon may plant thorns in your way,
Obscuring your pleasures with poverty's frown.
While apathy's flint and cold steel you employ.
The tinder of feeling you never can light,
Nor ever give a mite to the poor little boy,
Who cries "buy my matches," from morning to night
And you, ye proud fair, of this ocean-girt land,
With beauty external so gisted by sat,
Whose smiles can enrapture, whose frowns can command,
Prove also your mental endowments are great.
The crumbs of your table, which lap-dogs destroy,
Might comfort our orphan, and yield him delight;
O then give a mite to a poor little boy,
Who cries "buy my matcher," from morning to night.
THE PEDLAR.
COME here, come here, my pretty door,
Leave business, care and labor:
Easter comes but once a year;
Come, lads and lasses, come and bear
My merry pipe and tabor.
I fell all sorts of curious wares,
Tapes, garters, ribbons, laces,
That give the form enchanting airs,
And set off pretty faces.
And then I Have philters, drugs, and charms,
That when the nymph's deserted,
Can lure the shepherd to her arms,
And make him tenderhearted.
Come here, come here, etc.

This wonderful love-powder see;
Though ever so hard-featur'd,
To a Venus that converts each she,
By making her good natured.
This eye-water can power dispens,
To cure each jealous blindness,
And turn to gen tous confidence,
Each jarring srife to kindness,
Come here, come here, etc.

When clouds shall wedlock's sky deface,
And dim that brilliant heaven,
Upon your lips this padlock place,
By weary prudence given;
But when, from storms and tempests free,
The horizon looks propitious,
From kindness' hand take pleasure's key,
And open scenes delicious.
Come here, come here, etc.

THE CHRONOLOGY OF FASHION.
WHEN Eve and Adam first were wed,
On dress they threw no thought away,
No fashions, like our great folks, led,
Nor silks nor satins bought away;
Of petticoat, coat, hat, or wig,
They never saw a particle,
They wore a leaf, nor cared a fig
For any other article.
But fashion soon beat up recruits,
New modes in haste came stalking in,
For Nimrod wore a pair of boots,
Though not like ours for walking in:
When Charles the second bore the sway,
They were a set of merry grigs,
'Twas then the ton to dash away,
In square toed punips and periwigs.
Queen Bess no tippet wore, nor muff,
So sond of plaits and quillery,
With pasteboard-looking threefold ruff,
'Twas vastly like a pillory;
The ladies too of ancient same,
With waist so taper, long and small,
Not like our modern tasly dames,
For now they wear no waist at all.
Yet fashion guides the hand of art,
Gives commerce circulation too,
To poverty can wealth impart,
And spue to emulation too:
But may our highborn beauteous fair,
In whatever mode they dress them all,
Columbia's produce ever wear,
And then the poor shall bless them all.
INDEPENDENCE.
HAIL INDEPENDENCE, hail,
Bright Goddess of the skies!
Behold thy sons unite,
Behold thine altars rise!
Lo, freeborn millions kneel and swear,
Their birthrights to maintain,
Resolved no foreign yoke to bear,
To drag no tyrant's chain.
It Is Freedom's day -- let millions rise,
To Freedom's standard fly;
Obey Columbia's call,
Unite -- Live free, or Die!
Long has our favored clime,
Beneath indulgent heaven,
Enjoyed the smiles of Peace,
Mid copious blessings given,
Here Independence' banners waved,
Triumphantly unfurled;
With laurels crowned, Columbia rose,
The envy of the world.
It Is Freedom's day, etc.

But lo! what gathering clouds
Assail Columbia's shore,
From Gallia's crimsoned clime,
What hellish thunders roar?
It Is mad ambition's hydra form,
Loud threatening from afar,
That pours abroad the impending storm,
And swells the trump of war!
It Is Freedom's day, etc.

Rise, injured Freemen, rise!
Out-stretch the indignant arm;
Defend your Country's cause,
Nor dread the rude alarm,
Around fair Freedom's altar throng,
Pronounce the firm decree,
Swear to avenge your country's wrong,
Live, like your fathers free.
It Is Freedom's day, etc.

Hail, Vernon's hoary chief!
Glory's immortal son!
Long may those laurels bloom,
Thy matchless valor won;
And may thy grateful country long
Revere thy deathless name,
And with thy well-earn'd praises swell,
The eternal trump of Fame!
It Is Freedom's day, etc.

Illustrious ADAMS, hail!
To thee the task is given;
To guard thy country's rights,
And share the smiles of heaven,
With what an honest patriot pride
The immortal leader glows,
Firm and undaunted, as a rock,
To crush Columbia's soes.
It Is Frcedom's day, etc.

Hail Independence, hail,
Columbia's proudest boast,
Never shall thy sons forget,
The price thy blessings cost.
Long may our youth undaunted stand,
To stem oppression's flood;
To guard their country's sacred rights,
And seal it with their blood!
It Is Freedom's day, let millions rise,
To Freedom's altar fly,
Obey Columbia's call,
Unite -- live free, or die!
THE FEMALE AUCTIONEER.
WELL here I am: "And what of that?"
Methinks I hear you cry:
Why I am come, and that is pat,
To sell if you will buy.
A semale auctioneer I stand,
Yet not to seek sor pelf:
Ah! no -- the lot I have in hand,
Is but to sell MYSELF!
And I am going, going, going,
Who bids for me?
Ye bachelors! I look at you,
And pray don't deem me rude,
Nor rate me either scold or shrew,
A flirter or a prude:
My hand and heart I offer sair;
And should you buy the lot,
I vow the breeches never to wear,
When Hymen ties the knot.
And I am going, etc.

Though some may deem me pert, or so,
Who deal in idle strise;
Pray where is the girl, I wish to know,
Who'd not become a wise?
At least I own I really would,
In spite of all alarms:
Dear bachelors, now be so good,
Do take me to your arms!
For I am going, etc.

PATRIOTIC SONG, -- FOR 4th JULY.
BY R. TYLER, ESQUIRE
COME all ye fed'ral herocs,
Who crown this festive board;
Come crown your sparkling glasses,
Let union be the word;
And when our brimming bumpers,
We quaff this merry day
We'll gayly sing, we'll gayly sing, huzza America.
Our fathers sought for freedom,
Against despotic laws;
Through hunger, cold and hardships,
They gained their glorious cause,
By cheerful hearts supported,
They never knew dismay,
But gayly sung, but gayly sung, huzza America,
They fought the British Lion,
And tamed his noble rage;
And cannot we their descendants
A paltroon'd Frog engage;
We'll teach poor Mousieur Fricasee,
That in the face of day,
We'll bravely fight, we'll bravely fight, for sam'd America.
Let venal French directors,
Insult our native land;
With insolent demeanor,
A Tribute base demand,
We'll teach intriguing Frenchmen,
The tribute which we pay,
Are cannon balls, are cannon balls, from proud America,
Then rouse ye Vermont sarmers,
It is your countly cheers;
Your plough-shears beat to broad swords,
Your pruning hooks to spears;
Nor let the land that feeds you,
Ever see the fatal day,
When you desert, when you desert, desert America.
And rouse ye Windsor worthics,
Protect your goodly soil;
Remember Starks and Warner,
And all their glorious toil;
And when your country calls you,
Be ready night and day,
Like them to fight, like them to fight, for loved America.
Your wives and sweethearts call you,
To guard their lovely charms;
May he that wont defend them,
Be banished from their arms;
All foreign force we do disdain,
But own their gentle sway;
Huzza the fair, huzza the fair, of North America.
Great Adams rules our councils,
And we obedience yield;
Great Washington shall lead us
Again into the field;
For when they are United,
We fear no foreign sway.
But boldly shout, but boldly shout, huzza America.
Let Us join our hands together,
In token of our love,
In one firm band of union,
Recorded now above;
And as a band of patriots,
We swear this sacred day,
That we'll defend, that we'll defend, defend America.
ANOTHER SONG, FOR 4th JULY.
Tune -- There Is no luck about the house.

HAIL, INDEPENDENCE, happy morn,
We greet thy glad'ning ray;
Let every heart and hand be one,
Let carols crown the day.
While stocks shall graze the tender grass,
Or zephyrs wave the corn;
While shepherds love the charming lass,
We'll bail thy glad return.
No more let faction's hydra form
Infest thy joyful light;
Let sederal sire each bosom warm,
And every heart unite.
While flocks shall, etc.

Ye democratic wights, forbear,
Renounce your factious arts;
Let wisdom be our polar star,
And rectify your hearts.
Then shall ye taste those social joys,
Which fed'ral laws impart;
Each breast shall glow in virtue's cause,
And raptures fill each heart.
Let hateful TRAITORS shun thy boams,
And hide in endless night;
Let ghosts and goblins haunt their dreams,
Till they shall love thy light.
Then shall they taste those, etc.

Hail INDEPENDENCE, happy morn,
We greet thy glad'ning ray;
Let every heart and hand be one,
Let carols crown the day.
While flocks shall graze the tender grass,
Or zephyrs wave the corn;
While shepherds love the charming lass,
We'll hail thy glad return.
TO ARMS, COLUMBIA!
A new Patriotic Song.
BY THOMAS PAIN, A. M.
Tune -- He comes! he comes!

TO arms, to arms, when honor cries,
Nor shrink the brave, nor doubt the wise;
On foes, by earth and heaven abhorred,
It Is Godlike to unsheathe the sword!
To arms, COLUMBIA! -- rule thy natal sea,
United, triumph; -- and resolved, be free!
COLUMBIA's Eagle soars so high,
He kens the sun with sovereign eye:
Nor covers his wing, when rempests pour,
Nor perches, when the thunders roar.
To arms, COLUMBIA, etc.

Like GLORY's dazzling bird of day,
Our realm should bold imperial sway;
Mid clouds and lightnings firmly stand,
Though FACTION's earthquake shake the land.
To arms, COLUMBIA, etc.

Shall GALLIA bid our Oals descend,
Her rubric banner to defend?
Enslave those forests, reared to reign
The future monarchs of the main,
To arms, COLUMBIA, etc.

Can Glowworm vie with noontide Sun,
Or Lodi's chief with WASHINGTON?
Can Earth her maniac Moon obey,
Or Frenchmen free Columbians sway?
To arms, COLUMBIA, and c.

Reverge! Revenge! The flag's unfurled!
Let FREEDOM's cannon wake the world,
And Ocean gorge on pirates slain,
'Till TRUXTON Nelsonize the main?
To arms, COLUMBIA, and c.

The fate of nations waits the hour,
Foretold to end the Serpent's power;
When fallen realms shall break their trance,
And ADAMS bruise the bead of France.
To arms, COLUMBIA! -- rule thy natal sea.
United, triumph; -- and resolved, be free.
FINIS.
INDEX.
A
ATtention pray give while of hobbies I sing Page. 16 Ah! tell me ye swains
have you seen my Pastora Page. 20 Ah! where can fly my soul's true love Page.
32 Awake from delusion ye sons of the brave Page. 33
B
Bright Chanticleer proclaims the dawn Page. 31 Blessed on his own Paternal Farm
Page. 41 By Gar! it is von shame says de French Democrat Page. 44
C
Come fill each brimming Glass, boys Page. 11 Come all hands ahoy, to the
anchor Page. 21 Come ye lads who wish to shine Page. 37 Celestial choirs are
heard on high Page. 42 Columbia's brave friends with alertness advance Page. 45
Columbians all, the present hour Page. 46 Come here, come here, my pretty dear
Page. 49 Come all ye sed'ral Heroes Page. 54
F
From Helicon's embow'ring shades Page. 6 From Paris I come and I landed at
Dover Page. 35 From the bright throne of Heaven see Liberty fly Page. 38
G
Go patter to lubbers and swahs de you see Page. 29
H
Hail Independence, second birth Page. 3 Hail Columbia! happy land Page. 15
Here a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling Page. 18 Hail Independence hail Page.
51 Hail Independence happy morn Page. 56
I
I Have plenty of lovers who sue me in vain Page. 32 I Am lonesome since I crossed
the hills Page. 34 John Bull for pastime took a prance Page. 27 Jack Oakham was
a Gallant Tar Page. 40
M
My friend and I we drank gallon pots Page. 19
N
Night over the world her curtain hung Page. 23
O
O think on my fate! once I freedom enjoyed Page. 17 Oh say have you my Mary
seen Page. 30 On board the Valliant we set sail Page. 39
P
Poets may sing of their Helicon streams Page. 24
T
'Twas Landlady Meg that made such rare flip Page. 25 The sea was calm, the sky
serene Page. 26 To arms, to arms, when honor cries Page. 57
W
While Holland gagged and fettered sprawls Page. 4 Willy after courting long
Page. 47 When Eve and Adam first were wed Page. 50 Well here I am, and what of
that Page. 53
Y
Ye sons of Columbia who bravely have sought Page. 8 Ye chieftain's of
Columbia, your sorces marshal out Page. 13 Ye wealthy and proud, while in
splendour ye roll Page. 48
PRINTED AT THE ORACLE PRESS, IN PORTSMOUTH, SEPTEMBER 1799.


