SERMON ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON PREACHED BY THE REV. JOHN ARMSTRONG
AT POTTSTOWN.

Published by the Request of the Committee.

READING, PRINTED -- by JUNGMANN and BRUCKMANN.

1800.

COLUMBIA'S URN.
POTTSTOWN, JANUARY 12th, 1800. Yesterday the Inhabitants of this village and
its vicinity assembled, to add their tribute of love and veneration for the
great and good GENERAL WASHINGTON, to that so universally paid by other parts
of his admiring country. -- The morning was ushered in by firing sixteen guns,
and a gun was afterward fired every half hour during the day. About noon a
military and masonic procession was formed, which proceeded in the following
order to the Church, the music playing a solemn dirge -- the bell being
muffled, and minute guns firing during the whole ceremony.

A Detachment of Dragoons from Capt. Beitenmann's Troop. Capt. Robert's company
of Infantry. Capt. Townshends company of Infantry. Music. Capt. M'Clentuch's
company of Infantry. Capt. Beitenman's Troop of Dragoons dismounted. Militia
Officers. General Nicholas and suite. Masonic Brethren of different Lodges.
Clergy. Pallbearers. BIER,
David Potts, Esqr. Tho. Potts, Esqr. Wm. Maybury, Esqr. R. Hobart, Esqr. Wm.
Potts, Esqr. Robert May, Esqr.
With the Hat, Sword, and Apron, carried by four Sergeants. Singers. Citizens.


Forming the most numerous procession ever assembled in this town. The Military
marched with reserved arms, their drums muffled, and standards and music in
mourning. On arriving at the Church, they opened their ranks to the right and
left, the whole facing inward, and resting on reversed arms; forming an avenue
through which the Bier and remainder of the Procession passed into the church,
where a suitable discourse was delivered by the Rev. Mr. John Armstrong, from 2 Samuel iii. 38 -- " Know ye not that, there is a Prince and a great Man fallen
this Day in Israel." The Bier was then taken from the church, and the
ceremonies concluded by firing three vollies over it -- After which the troops
were formed, and marched off; the drums unmufflled and colors displayed, the
Music played Washington's march, to the place of parade, and were dismissed.
Capt. M'Clentuch acted as officer of the day.

It would be injustice to the Military and to the Citizens not to observe, that
the greatest order prevailed during the whole of the ceremonies. The solemnity
of the occasion impressed every mind, and the conduct of each individual
displayed the sincere sorrow felt for the loss of the illustrious Man to whose
memory they were paying the merited honors.

SERMON ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON PREACHED BY The Rev. JOHN ARMSTRONG
AT POTTSTOWN.
2 SAMUEL, Chapt. 3, verse 38. Know ye not that there is a Prince and a great
Man fallen this Day in Israel.
These are the words of King David, when Abner fell by the hand of Joab. It was
indeed at a critical moment, at the time when the house of Saul and the house
of David were to be united. And happy it is, when contending nations come to
this blessed period, that they will no longer bath their swords in human blood,
but be united in love, and agree to have one King to rule over them; and that
is Christ, the King of Kings. David seemed much troubled for Abner, for he said
to his servants, Know ye not that a Prince and a great Man is fallen in Israel
-- As if he had said, do you know, are you sensible of the loss of such a man
at this time, a time of trouble, and great changes taking place. It is said,
that David and the people wept over Abner. But my dear friends and fellow
citizens; may I not say, know ye not that there is a Prince and a great Man
fallen -- Know ye not, ye Sons of America and of those nations who are involved
in war, and staining the field with human blood, that WASHINGTON the Great is
fallen; but not by the hands of a Traitor as Abner fell, but by the hands of a
kind Providence. He that in mercy gave him to his Country, has taken him from
us; and it ought to be the language of every Christian, the Lord gave and the
Lord has taken away, and blessed be the name of the Lord. It is our duty to
bless the everlasting God, that he has spared him so long in the Land of the
living. But it is only the grace of God that can enable us to glorify him at
all times. It may justly be said that a Prince and a great Man is fallen. In
the first place it will be necessary to notice the Appellation that is given in
the Text, in the scripture sense of the words, namely a Prince and a great Man,
and see how far these words agree with the present solemn occasion -- The first
of these that comes under our consideration is the appellation of a Prince. It
is well known, that it is a title of honor given to the Son of a King, a
Sovereign or a Chief Ruler -- but some of my hearers may say, that was never
given to our late General. Now I grant it was not. According to our
Constitution, titles are done away. Yet is it not plain to every understanding,
that he possessed those sublime qualifications, which justly merit the title of
a Prince. My friends, were they not like the Sun, giving Light and heat, and
dispersing the (...) and bringing great things to light? But this title is not
only given to King's Sons, but to God the Governor of the world, and likewise
to Christ, the Savior of Mankind. It is said Isaiah Chapt. 9, verse 6, "For
unto us a Child is born -- Unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called the wonderful Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace." He may well be called
the Prince of peace, for it is through him and by him that we have Peace of
Soul now, and Everlasting peace in the world to come -- and it is such that the
world can neither give nor take away -- Sweet peace he gives to that Soul, that
is weeping and longing for his presence, and is willing to become a true and a
faithful Subject to the Prince of peace. Blessed be God, this was Christ's
Legacy, which he left to all his followers to the end of time, John, Chap. 14,
v. 27. "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world
gives, give I unto you, let not your heart be troubled. Neither let it be
afraid." And as Prince he gives peace to his subjects, and (...) mighty Prince
he maintains that Peace as in the case of the children of Israel, when Pharaoh
pursued them, Exodus Chap. 14, v. 28. "And the waters returned and covered the
chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh, that came into the Sea
after them, there remained not so much as one of them." The Lord in all ages
has appeared in their behalf. "The Stars in their courses shall fight for
Israel." Or does he countermand nature in any of its motions, and bid the Sun
stand still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon, it is that the
armies of his people may have long Daylight, to subdue their enemies. Hailstone
and Thunder shall break out of the clouds, to destroy the Cananites, when
Israel is at war with them. But if Israel wants bread in the wilderness the
clouds shall drop down Manna, and give them bread from heaven. And how did the
Lord appear for Peter, when he was kept in prison, Act, Chap. 12, v. 7. "And
behold the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison,
and he smote Peter on the side and raised him up, saying, arise up quickly, And
his chains fell off from his hands." Here you see Peter is bound, the angel
unties him, he knows not where he is, the angel goes before him and guides him.
In Revelation, Chap. 1 and 5. Jesus Christ is styled "the faithful witness, and
the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth." As a
Prince and a King he has a right to give laws and rule over his Subjects. Their
dependence is upon him, from whom they receive their power and government,
their protection and dominion. But more especially are his people, indebted to
him -- for he leads them from victory to victory until he brings them to that
Kingdom of Glory, that shall never end. His power as a King is great, for none
dare say unto him, what does thou -- he can turn the children of men into
dust, and bring down the mighty from their Seats -- and who can stay his hand?
The Kings and Princes of this world have great power over their subjects. Many
of them wantonly spil the blood of their people, and lay many heavy burdens
upon them. But let them remember, they must appear before the mighty Prince,
and answer for their conduct. And as it is common for the Kings and the Princes
of this world, to punish those that rebel against them; so will the Judge of
all the Earth punish those who despise his Council and his reproof, especially
every open and profane sinner. And as Paul tells us -- Titus Chap. 1. 16. "They
profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobates." There are no sort of persons
so odious to God, and so abominable in his sight, as those who make a
profession of his holy name and truth, but walk contrary in their lives to that
profession. And in general, those that profess to love their Prince and prove
Traitors, are severely punished -- and of such St. Paul is speaking; and I fear
there are too many in this our day.

But in order that we may know them, let us see if we cannot discover them in 2 Timothy Chap. 3, verse 4 and 5: "Traitors, heady, highminded lovers of pleasures
more than lovers of God; having a form of Godliness, but denying the power
thereof -- from such turn away." Is not this the case with many, who deny the
power of God, and the love of God in the soul; and positively declare, that
there is no such thing as knowing that Sin is forgiven, and the Spirit of God
bearing witness in men that they are the children of God -- "From such turn
away," for they are robbers of Christ, and dishonor him in the greatest degree
-- and yet they will go to the table of the Lord; And like Judas betray the Son
of Men. But remember that he will appear as a mighty Prince to the utter
desolation of all his enemies, as it is written in Thessalonians Chap. 1, v. 8
and 9. He will come "in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them, that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from
the Glory of his Power." Remember what he decleared concerning the Jews and
Jerusalem, and that the prophecies came to pass. We are told by "Josephus,
fearful sights and great things were seen, a Star in a shape like a sword,
hanging over Jerusalem for a long time together -- Armies fighting in the
clouds, and what he reckons worse than all, the extraordinary conduct of one
Jesus, an apparent Lunatic, who for more then seven years went about the city,
proclaiming, woe to Jerusalem? woe to the city, and to the temple and to the
people, and could by no means be restrained."

The Supreme Judge and Prince of the Kings of the earth did not let the
barbarous conduct of the Jews go unpunished. The most signal marks of divine
Justice pursued them. We are informed by Dr. Mosheim's Church history, Vol 1.
p. 323: "As indulgence was given by Julian for the Jews to rebuild the temble
of Jerusalem, they set about it, from which however they were obliged to desist
before they had even began to lay the foundation of the sacred edifice. For
while they were removing the rubbish, formidable balls of fire, issuing out of
the ground with a dreadful noise, dispersed both the works and the workmen, and
repeated earthquakes filled the spectators of this astonishing phenomenon, with
terror and dismay. This signal event is attested in a manner that renders its
evidence irresistible "God will not be mocked." Call to your minds these words
in the Revelation Chap. 6, v. 15 -- And the Kings of the earth, and the great
men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every
free men, hid themselves in tde dens, and in the rocks of the mountains." When
Christ will appear an angry Lamb, the great ones in the world will fall before
him; those that do not comply with the heavenly Prince, shall feel his wrath.
Where my Fellow Citizens, where can you go from his presence, -- none but Jesus
can do helpless Sinners good -- Sinners turn, why will ye die?
God your maker asks you, Why?
God, who did your being give
Made you with himself to live.


But the Appellation, is given to the Church of Christ -- they are called
Princes, in Samuel 2 Chapt. 8th verse. "He raises up the poor out of the dust,
and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to
make them inherit the throne of glory, for the pillars of the Earth are the
Lords, and he has set the world upon them." But some of my hearers may say,
are they so by nature? I answer -- NO, they were children of wrath as others,
born in sin and brought forth in iniquity, as the Apostle tells us of some who
had been guilty of great crimes -- 1 Cor. Chap. 6, verse 11. "And such were some
of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." Thanks be to God, those
who are of a princely nature, are changed by the Grace of God; that grace that
enables them to press forward to that heavenly Prize. They know that this is
not their resting place, for their Prince and King has a better country for
them -- they have a building with God, not made with hands, they can sweetly
sing: Theer is my house and portion, for
My treasure and my heart is there
And my abiding home;
For me my elder Brethren stay
Till Angels beckon me away,
And Jesus bids me come.


It is natural to think that the followers of Christ will strive to be like
him; for he says: Learn of my, for I am meek and lowly of heart. It is their
wish and desire, that their souls should be happy here and glorious hereafter.
Remember what the Apostle says: Those that are born after the Spirit, do mind
the things of the spirit -- and the same Spirit purifyeth their Souls by faith
in Christ, and longing for a growth in grace, such as Love, Peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, good faith, meekness. These are the beautiful
ornaments the Christian desires to wear. The King does greatly desire thy
beauty, and holiness of heart. They are born for a noble end. It ts common for
the Sons of Kings to wear costly garments -- so do the Princes of God -- they
are clothed with a costly garment, not of their own making, No, that will not
cover them.

Thy Righteousness wearing,
And cleans'd by thy Blood,
Bold shall we appear,
In the Presence of God.
It is true many of them are laboring under great troubles, and sorely
buffeted by Satan, and meanly thought of by the wicked and the ungodly -- It
will be but a little while, and when Christ shall appear they shall be like
him. Yet they are princes and shall wear the glorious garment, Psalm 45, v, 13,
14, 15. "The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought
Gold, she shall be brought unto the King in Remnants of Neadle Work -- the
virgins, her companions, that follow her, shall be brought into thee, with
gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought, they shall enter unto the Kings
Palace." Let the followers of Christ rejoice, for it will not be long until
they shall enter into his glory. The Sons of Kings have a great many attendants
and so have the Princes of Christ, for all is yours for God is yours. Are not
angels ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs
of salvation; Those glorious spirits are their attendants in life and in death,
-- they convoy them to the regions of light. And what is best, they have God --
"Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, for I am with you." Happy
People! When the Prince of Princes, the King of Kings, does meet with them,
they can truly say, he brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over
me was love. But as they are Princes, they are entitled to a crown, and a
kingdom -- In the Revelations, Chap. 1, v. 6 "And he has made us Kings and
Priests unto God -- And his father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever, Amen." Their kingdom is an everlasting kingdom.

How can it be thou Heavenly King;
That thou should us to Glory bring
Make Slaves the Partners of thy throne
Decked with a never-failing Crown.
They reign as Kings, not in a temporal but in a spiritual sense, they reign as
Kings over unruly lusts and corruptions, over Satan, over the world, over
death, the King of terrors -- They reign upon earth, without which it is
impossible to triumph in heaven -- when the Christian has finished his course
with patience and perseverance -- "he shall wear the Crown of Life."

Earthly Princes have great power -- and so have the Princes of God -- It is
said of Abraham "thou art a mighty Prince among us." Great is their power with
God. When the Lord was going to destroy Sodom, Genesis Chapter 19, v. 22, he said to
Lot, Haste thee, escape thither, for I can not do any thing till thou become
thither." And Abraham plead with the Lord for that very city -- I realy believe
if it were not for the Princes of God, there would soon be an end to this
world; they often plead with God in mighty prayers. The Angel that wrestled
with Jacob, said: "Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel, for as a
Prince have thou power with God and with man, and have prevailed." I pray God,
that there were more wrestling Jacobs, that the Lord would revive his work in
this our day, that there might be an ingathering to his kingdom -- There should
we meet, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest. I
can not yet leave this head, without admiring the patience of the blessed God,
and King of Kings, who, though so strong and powerful, yet is provoked every day.
-- Surely as is his majesty, so is his mercy. If I villify but the name of a
monarch, I lose my liberty and am confined to the dungeon or slavery. If I
appear in arms and draw the sword against my national sovereign, my life is
forfeited, and my very blood will scarcely atone for the crime. But have we not
all dishonored thee O thou King, immortal and invisible -- happy are they that
are under the shadow of his wings -- But woe unto his enemies! Hear what the
Prophet Samuel says, Chapt. 2-10: "The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken
to pieces, out of heaven shall he thunder upon them -- the Lord shall judge the
ends of the earth and he shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn
of his anointed."

But we are told in the Text, that he was a great Man: A man may be great, and
not be great in the sight of the Lord. We some times call a rich men a great
men, and often they are very wicked -- and God is not in all their thoughts --
There are great philosophers and men of learning and eloquence -- many of whom
deny that Christ is the Son of the most high God. How little does God esteem
the things that men count great! the endowments of wit and eloquence that men
admire so much: -- Alas! How poor are they to him! "for it is written, I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent -- where is the wise, where is the scribe, where is the disputer of
this world -- has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?" This may be
applied to God for he alone is great, great in goodness and mercy, love and
wisdom -- and great in punishing the wicked, for great is sin when it is
committed against a great God. Deuter, Chap. 10, v. 7. "For the Lord your God
is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible God,
who regards not persons, nor takes reward." For to be great in the sight of
God, is to know God, to have our sins pardoned, and the witness of his holy
Spirit and Grace, to overcome the world, and say with a heartful experience, 1
John Chap. 4, v. 16: "And we have known and believed the love that God has to
us -- God is love and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in
him." This indeed may be called great, where the Lord dwells. It is said, by
Isah. 5, Chap. 57, and verse 15: "For thus says the high and lofty one that
inhabits eternity, whose name is holy -- I dwell in the high and holy place --
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the heart of
the contrite ones." If God reigns in their hearts, they must be great in love
and in says, in usefulness and in integrity: for the glory of God, and the
good of mankind are truly great objects -- They are little men in the sight of
God, that live in the world to little purpose, who do little for God and
mankind -- The Christian has a great desire, that all should come and partake
of the goodness of God -- Psalms, Chap. 18, 35. "Thou have also given me the
shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand has holden me up and thy
gentleness has made me great Great shall be their reward, and great shall be
their glory in the world to ^ome. And they shall be a great number, which no
man can number, when the Lord shall appear in yonder clouds, then we shall see
him face to face. Remember he is great, and he will help the weak.

The Lord shall in your front appear,
And lead the pompous triumph on,
His glory shall bring up the rear,
And perfect what his grace begun.
Let us now enquire and see, how far the words of our Text agree upon the
present solemn occasion -- first, we may view our deceased Hero as a wise
Statesman, as a warrior, and as a noble friend to the revealed religion of
Christ and to his country.

But it is said, " that a Prince and a great Man is fallen" -- Our brave
WASHINGTON is fallen -- O Death! thou mighty destroyer, thou, who have brought
Kings from their thrones and Princes from their seats -- and have cut down the
youth in the prime of life, and vigor of health, while his breasts were full
of milk, and his bones moistened with marrow. O Death! how do thou surprise
the youth, and bring the aged to the grave! Man's best estate is altogether
vanity. -- O! trust not in youth or strength, or in any thing mortal, for there
is nothing certain, nothing to be depended on beneath the unchangeable God. O
death! thou art preparing a bed in the dust whither we shall shortly be
followed by weeping mourners, and must take up our lodging, till the heavens
are no more. Well might Solomon say: "And the doors shall be shut in the
streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the
voice of the bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought low." O
death! thou have taken one of the best of Generals, why did thou take him?
his country weeps -- thou king of terrors -- but it is the Lords doings, let
him do what seems him good. But did I say the king of terrors? No, he is not
the king of terrors to the new born soul -- Death opens the gate for the
beloved of the Lord -- "lift up your heads O ye gates -- and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, that the heirs of glory may enter in." How calm is their
evening of life -- In what a smiling serenity does their sun go down -- the
followers of the Lord seem pleased and triumphant, even in their last moments
-- "God's everlasting arms are underneath them." When they find themselves
surrounded by guardian Angels, instead of weeping friends, how swiftly do they
wing their way and pass to the regions of light.

How happy the people that dwell!
Secure in the city above;
No pain the inhabitants feel,
No sickness nor sorrows shall prove.
They quit the field not as captives but as conquerors, with hopes full of
immortality -- here they sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, in the
kingdom of their father -- here they are numbered with the innumerable company
of Angels, and rejoice around the throne of the Lamb -- here may I for ever
live with all the saints I knew on earth! O comfortable meeting of my old
acquaintances, with whom I prayed and wept, and suffered! -- O what a change is
this -- Farewell sin and suffering for ever! "But this mortal has put on
immortality, and the corruptible incorruption, and death is swallowed up in
victory -- O death were is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory!" Awake then
O my drowsy soul, and look above this world of sorrow, what is honor? what are
riches? and all the glory of this world, compared to the enjoyments of the
saints in the blissfull regions of light.

There has fallen a Prince, but only to rise in glory. Like Elijah. they go
swiftly in a chariot of fire -- Let me live the life and die the death of the
rigtheous, O let my latter end and future state be like theirs."

In Jesus they do sweetly rest,
From all their toil and pain
Till he shall come in yonder clouds,
With all his glorious train:
"Then shall it be; the Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for
brightness shall the moon give light unto thee; -- but the Lord shall be unto
thee an everlasting light and thy God thy glory -- thy sun shall no more go
down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself, for the Lord shall be thy
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended."

Let us be more particular in taking a view of our much lamented WASHINGTON. I
am sensible my friends, of my incapacity of doing justice to the memory of this
truly great Man. It requires a genius like his own. Where shall I begin? Tell
me, ye great men, who often heard wisdom drop from his lips -- and ye noble
warriors, who fought under his banner; you saw him, when troubles surrounded
him; you, who saw him lead the armies of America into the field of battle -- to
maintain your rights -- and saw him with honor returning from the field of
blood. View him as a warrior, he was not like many of the proud kings and
princes, who do not regard the lives of their subjects, but are deaf to the
cries of the widows and fatherless children, -- NO, he knew, that their lives
were dear to their families and to their country, and to themselves. How many
Generals, by their base conduct have been unable to lead their men on in the
day of battle -- and have fallen before their enemies. This was not the case
with our WASHINGTON -- he watched over your camps as well as your liberty --
often surprised your enemies when they thought themselves secure.

May not the words of David be applied to him, Psalm 18, v. 36: "Thou have
enlarged my steps under me, that my feet did not slip. I have pursued mine
enemies and overtaken them. Neither did I return again, till they were
consumed. For thou have girded me with strength unto battle. Thou have subdued
under me those that rose up against me. They cried, but there was none to save
them. Even unto the Lord, but he answered them not. Thou have delivered me from
the strivings of the people, and thou have made me the head of the heathen, a
people whom I have not known, shall serve me. The Lord lives, and blessed be
my rock. And let the God of my Salvation be exalted."

When we consider the successes, and the victorious armies under our pious
General, through the various events of long and bloody war against deep
coun^^^s and formidable strength, we may say the Lord was on our side.

When he returns from the field, he is not like many victorious generals, he is
willing to assume the humble title of a citizen -- here is a great proof of his
love to his country.

But view him when his country calls on him for their Ruler, as President over
a great nation -- with what wisdom and sound judgment does he rule the nation.
When you saw him walking through your streets, you saw the Man whom the people
delighted to honor, and guided the political helm with great wisdom.

I think my hearers, the words of Job may properly be applied to him, Job, chapter
29, v. 7: "When I went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my
seat in the street, the young men saw me and hid themselves, and the aged arose
and stood up, the princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their
mouth. The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of
their mouth. When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw
me, it gave witness to me. Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the
fatherless, and him that had none to help him. I put on righteousness, and it
clothed me: my judgment was as a rope and a diadem." The queen of Sheba came
from Ethiopia, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and see his glory. Many kings and
princes have been astonished at the wisdom of our General, and many thousand
that came from different nations, were ready to say, as the queen of Sheba said
to the king: "It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thy acts,
and of thy wisdom -- Howbeit, I believed not the words, until I came and mine
eyes had seen it, and, behold, the half was not told me. Thy wisdom and
prosperity exceeds the fame which I heard. Happy are thy men -- happy are
those thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom."

After he had filled that important station as President of his country with
honor -- he retired to prepare for a more glorious kingdom, not regarding the
honor of this perishing world, and I have no doubt but he saw it all vanity of
vanities.

Earth but an atom, greedy swords
Carve it amongst a thousand Lords,
And yet they cannot agree;
Let greedy swords, still fight and slay,
I can be poor, but Lord I pray,
To sit and smile with thee.
It appears, my hearers, that our great WASHINGTON, in all the changeable
scenes of life, had his eye fixed on the great Creator of all things. He was
not ashamed to confess his God, as the only ruler of the world, and the
fountain of all happiness. But we trust he is gone to receive the glorious
reward: Well done good and faithful servant. -- And no doubt, it will be
remembered with applause what he has done for this nation, as long as it
exists. May I not say as Moses said: "Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like
unto thee O people saved by the Lord, -- the shield of thy help: and who is the
sword of thy Excellency -- and thy enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and
thou shall tread upon their high places." --

What Nation enjoys such civil and religious liberty as we do -- remember what
troubles the Christians underwent in ages past -- the followers of Christ were
often put to death by wicked kings and rulers. Under some princes we see the
most diligent search made after the followers of Christ, and on bare
information, or their own confession, immediately dragged away to execution --
unless they prevented their punishment by Apostasy. Under others, we see
inhuman magistrates endeavoring to compel them by all sorts of tortures to
renounce their profession. Many fell by the hand of bloody persecutions, and
expired in the cause of the divine Savior -- The Christians suffered under
that monster of cruelty. Nero -- he accused them of having set fire to the city
of Rome, that horrid crime which he himself had committed, with a barbarous
pleasure. -- In avenging this crime upon the innocent Christians he ordered
matters so, that the punishment should bear some resemblance to their offense:
he therefore wrapped up some of them in combustible garments, and ordered fire
to be set to them, when the darkness came on, that thus, like torches they
might dispel the obscurity of the night; while others were fastened to crosses
or torn in pieces by wild beasts, or put to death in some such dreadful manner.
According to some ancient accounts, St. Paul and St. Peter suffered martyrdom
then.

Others have since suffered for the cause of Christ, under Lewis the XIV. --
What horrid scenes then took place! Fathers and mothers having beheld their
suckling infants perish in their sight, were themselves afterward put to death
by the most cruel tortures -- and if any to escape these barbarities
endeavored to save themselves by flight, they were pursued into the fields and
woods, and were shot at like wild beasts.

Many also in England, Scotland, and Ireland, suffered greatly. But those that
are not much acquainted with history, may think these things not true: they are
however established on the best authority. What a great mercy that we are not
under these bloody Princes! But I fear we do not sufficiently value our
privileges. We have line upon line. -- Liberty is only sweet to those who have
lately groaned under the cruel bondage of tyranny and oppression -- and health
is only sweet to those who have long been afflicted with sickness. Happy it
will be for us, if we are truly thankful to God for all his mercies and the
privileges of his Gospel. Deuteronomy. Chap. 4, v. 6-10. "Keep, therefore, and do
them, for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the
nations, which shall hear all those statutes, and say, Surely this great nation
is a wise and understanding people. For what nation is there so great, who has
God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon
him for? And what nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments so
righteous, as all this law which I set before you this day? Only take heed to
thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine
eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life;
but teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons."

Ingratitude is a great sin in the sight of God. The prophecy of our Lord we
have seen remarkably fulfilled in our days -- and yet God has been graciously
pleased not to suffer any one of those calamities to come near our dwellings.

We have seen nations rise up against nations, and kingdoms, against kingdom;
we have seen fire and sword consume round about us, and many fruitful countries
ravaged and destroyed, yet at the same time we have sat, every man under his
vine and under his fig tree, enjoying all the blessings and happiness of peace
-- we have seen want and famine spread desolation over different countries,
whilst we have been even luxurious in the abundance of overflowing plenty, --
we have heard of populous and flourishing towns, overthrown in one day by an
earthquake; while our habitations have been, as the Scripture speaks, the
munition of rocks; he that fears God shall abide under the shadow of the
Almighty, under his secure protection. When we look to the history of the
Jewish nation, from the coming out of Egypt to their final captivity, it is one
continued instance of Providence, watching over the righteous -- when they came
to enter into the promised land, no force was able to stand before them. And
when they were possessed of it, no nation was able to drive them out,
particularly when the whole body of them went up to Jerusalem to appear before
the Lord thrice in the year, -- their land was by a peculiar providence
preserved from being invaded. So long as they kept God's commandments, so that
he did not behold iniquity in Jacob, neither had seen perverseness in Israel;
they were constantly happy and dwelt safely -- And though we often read indeed,
that they were oppressed by their enemies, and brought to great distress, yet
this never happened, but when they had first departed from their integrity. Let
us remember, if we forsake God, He can commission his destroying Angel, to
smite us in a moment -- Or if we continue to provoke him, he can inflict
judgments upon us much more severe, than the most devouring pestilence, by
delivering us into the hands of men, whose mercies are cruelty, and equally
destructive of the lives and the souls of men, by taking away the key of
knowledge, and establishing ignorance and utterly destroying the foundations
(...) all regard to God, and all truth, justice and righteousness toward man.
Then let us with one consent, strive to walk in the fear of God -- and when we
make choice of men for our rulers and judges and magistrates, let them be men
of clean hands, and firm friends to the religion of Jesus Christ. God forbid
that we should make choice of those men, that are enemies to the Gospel of our
Lord. If we do, we shall bring down the judgments of God upon us -- They will
be the greatest enemies to our nation, however, wise they may be in politics.
Let them be men that follow the practice of virtue and true religion, and
especially where it is more necessary, as in the choice of governors, who, if
truly pious most illustriously appear the true vicegerents of God. Remember
the words of our late President, in his Address to the People of the United
States: " Of all dispositions and habits, which lead to political prosperity,
Religion and Morality are indispensible supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness -- these firmest props of the duties of man and citizens, the
mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and to cherish. A
volumn could not trace all their connections with private and public felicity
-- let it simply be asked, where is the security for property, for reputation,
for life, if the sense of Religious obligations desert the oaths, which are
instruments of investigations in courts of justice."

May the Lord send down his holy Spirit upon our President -- and upon all our
Governors, and Judges! And may he raise up more like our worthy General, who
will prove friends to their country, and supporters of the gospel of Christ --
Let us contribute our utmost, each in our proper station, to support a
Government so happily established -- that it may be as little burdensome as
possible in the hands wherein it is lodged, Jer. 29, 7: "To seek the peace of
the city," or country, wherein we dwell, is Man's duty and interest, even under
bad Governments: how much more so under the best and most wisely constituted
Government in the world, by which our rights, liberties and religion are firmly
secured.

Now my fellow citizens, and soldiers, you that are soldiers in defense of your
country, let me entreat you, to be soldiers of Christ, and "put on the whole
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the viles of the devil."
You have lost your General. But may Christ, the King of Kings be your King --
and may you fight under the banner of him, that died for you. --

And, my Fellow Citizens, we have lost a Friend, and Father to his Country --
if the Lord takes an Elijah, he is able to raise up Elisha -- and I trust, that
we have one. -- Let me conclude with a few words by way of application -- I
fear there are some here, this day, that very seldom come to the house of God,
and who are rebels against the Prince of life. -- But remember, if you are yet
in your sins, I say unto you, as the Apostle Peter said to the Jews, "Repent ye
therefore, and be converted that your sins may be blotted out, when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord." God is calling by his
Spirit, by death and judgments, and yet I fear, you sit still, and trifle away
your time. What do you mean, what do you think of the world? It is passing
away, its pleasures are fading, its honors are leaving you, its profits will
prove unprofitable to you -- heaven or hell are a little before you. God is
just and jealous, his threatenings are true -- the great day of his judgment
will be terrible, your time runs on, your lives are uncertain -- I fear, some
of you are far behind hand -- you have loitered long -- you are strangers to
God: -- you are hardened in all evil customs -- have you any assurance of
comfort to show, if you die tomorrow: are you ready -- (is the love of God in
you) if not, with what terror will your souls go out of your bodies? God
stands all this while waiting your leisure -- his patience bears, his
justice forbeareth, his mercy entreats you. -- Christ stands offering you
his blood and merits, you may have him freely -- O! take warning in time --
Remember, if he is not your prince to reign over you, and in you, he will laugh
at your calamity -- and (...) mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes
as a desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind -- when distress and
anguish comes upon you. -- Remember what a nation you live in -- you have the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ -- Let your prayer be like the blind
man: "Thou Son of God, have mercy on me." If you turn unto God, you will be
good Citizens here and reign with your Prince the King of Kings, in glory;
which may God Grant, Amen. --

O what a mournful sound alarms our ears,
It pains the heart, our eyes overflow with tears;
Weep soldiers; weep ye citizens around,
Weep foreigners, who tread Columbia's ground;
Great WASHINGTON to dust, how doleful is the sound!
How vast the stroke is, and how wide the wound!
Oh! painful stroke! distressing death!
Interred within the silent grave, he lies
Mouldering to dust, obscured from human eyes,
But though his body's blended with the dust:
Waiting the Resurrection of the just.
While weighty sorrow's felt in every state;
A thousand groans, his dear remains convey,
To his cold lodging in a bed of clay,
His country's sacred tears well watering all the way;
O faithful WASHINGTON! art thou our of sight?
Yet faith beholds thee in the world of light:
In the full presence of the heavenly lamb,
And crowned with glory by the Great, I am
Where slies our WASHINGTON! some Angel tell me, where?
He wings his passage through the yielding air.
Methinks a Cherub bending from the skies
Observes the question, and serene replies:
Before his Savior's face your WASHINGTON appears,
Prepare to meet him, and dismiss your tears;
He now enjoys his true and only end,
Having his God and Savior for his friend;
And shall enjoy him to Eternity;
O Blissful State! Supreme Felicity!
He has received the great and sure reward,
Reserved for all the servants of the Lord.
Then let us not, as without hope complain,
Since, though the loss is ours, his is the gain --
Night and the grave remove your gloom,
Darkness becomes the vulgar dead --
But glory bids the Christian's tomb
Disdain the horrors of a shade.
Glory with all her lamps shall burn,
And watch the warriors sleeping clay;
Till the last trump shall give the alarm,
To aid the Triumphs of that Day.
FINIS

