A SERMON, PREACHED AT TEWKSBURY, FEBRUARY, 22, 1800. ON ACCOUNT OF THE DEATH
Of General George Washington.

BY THE REVEREND TITUS THEODORE BARTON.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE HEARERS.

PRINTED AT MEDFORD, (Massachusetts.) 1800.

ISAIAH XLV, 1, 2, 3, 4. Thus says the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose
right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the
loins of kings, to open before him the two-leaved gates, and the gates shall
not be shut. I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I
will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron.
And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret
places, that thou may know that I the LORD, which call thee by thy name, as
the God of Israel. For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have
even called thee by thy name; I have surnamed thee: though thou have not known
me.


THIS passage of the word of God, carries the mind above generals, to the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, whose character, ability and perfection are such,
that should the comparison be made, all the generals, nobles and kings of the
earth, yea, and all the kingdoms of this and of all other worlds, would become
as the drop of the bucket, or the unnoticed d^^t of the balance. Hence this
doctrine: God is all and in all.

For proof of this doctrine let us consider how created existences came into
being. The LORD GOD said, let them be, and they were. This is demonstration
that God was all and in all in creation. For further proof of the Doctrine, let
us view the government of the world, here as well as in creation it will be
evident that God is all and in all. When God would have a chosen people in the
world, he took Abraham their ancestor and carried him safely through all his
pilgrimage in the land, afterward to be peopled with his descendants. No enemy
harmed him, for God was his shield and defense. When five kings combined and
wrought wickedness, for which God thought best to punish them, Abraham and his
family were a sufficient host in the hand of Omnipotence to vanquish the
combined forces, liberate their captives and recover the spoil they were
carrying off. God was all and in all, in protecting and defending Isaac and
Jacob with their families, while as pilgrims and strangers, they sojourned
among their enemies. When God's people were reduced to the most abject slavery
in Egypt, he raised up Moses with all the talents, furnished with all the
accomplishments necessary to effect what he then would have done. God with this
noble instrument in his hand emancipated Israel, spoiled the Egyptains, yea,
and conducted his chosen nation through the sea, through the wilderness within
sight of the promised land. And before he dismissed Moses, he had prepaired a
more suitable character to be instrumental in conquering and settling Canaan in
the person of Joshua. This chain of Gods instrument whom he raised up and
qualified to effect those things which were done through the periods of the
Judges and Kings of Isreal, might be traced to advantage, in showing that God
is all and in all.

But let us now attend to proof of the doctrine contained in the text. The text
looks to the period when Israel had been nearly seventy years in captivity,
when God had punished that nation for their wickedness according to his former
threatenings, to the time when he had purposed to redeem them from captivity
and bring them back to Jerusalem. Therefore, God prepares for himself a
character exactly suited to the occasion, to be the instrument in this great
work; yea and out of the heathen world too he makes to himself a general,
furnished with all the arts of war, necessary to be the instrument in his hand
in overturning Babylon that mighty empire, which had been mistress of the world
many years. When Cyrus laid siege to the city of Babylon, such was the strength
and height of its walls, that the inhabitants so far from being terrified at
the siege, made a scoff and derision of the general and his army. The river
Euphrates ran through the middle of Babylon, passing under the wall through
arches: each side of this river, or on each bank within the city were walls of
similar strength to those that surrounded the city, and in those walls at the
bottom of every street were brazen gates through which the inhabitants passed
to the river; the constant practice was to have these gates stand open by day,
and to have them shut and fast barred by night. The way in which Cyrus took the
city was; he turned the course of the river above the city, causing all the
waters to leave the natural channel, then made two divisions of his army and
entered the city on both sides at once in the channel of the river, and passing
up and down the channel, found all the brazen gates open, which gave him an
opportunity to attack all parts of the city at once. Here was fulfilled the
promise of God in the text, I will loose the loins of kings to open before him
the two leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut -- I will brake in pieces
the gates of brass and cut in sunder the bars of Iron. Thus Cyrus in one night
became master of Babylon and all her hidden treasures, he overturned the
Babylonian empire, and erected the Persian. This revolution threw captive
Israel into the hands of the conquering General. Now look at the finger of God,
and realize that he is all and in all. The iron savage heart of the hero Cyrus,
that yesterday was bent on making all the world slaves to himself, to day, in
the hand of God, is melted down so as to say to captive Israel, be free, go,
return to your own land, carry with you the rich treasure brought hither from
Jerusalem, rebuild your temple and city; and lo! ye have also the aid and
assistance of me and my subjects! What an event this! and how striking a proof
that God is all and in all. But for more sensible proof of the truth of our
doctrine, we will come down to things which we have seen, and humbly hope we
shall all be feelingly convinced that God is all and in all.

Our ancestors, to enjoy peaceably their religion, left their native land,
crossed the untraversed ocean, under the guiding hand of God, and settled the
borders of this then savage land. God fought their battles with the savages as
our fathers tell us, and in his hand his little flock was safe. Under the care
of such a Shepherd the flock soon became numerous like Israel of old, was great
and goodly, so as to be seen across the broad Atlantic with a jealous and
envious eye by its parent. She not like other parents, disowned her child, and
not only refused to give it nourishment, but with rapacious hand, attempted to
snatch what the infant had itself gathered for its own support. The infant held
its hard acquired morsel fast. What followed? The monster, for I will no longer
call her parent, drew the glittering sword, and sheathed it in the infants
heart, and called it rebel. But to dismiss the allegory: God was about to make
another nation in the world; and for materials, he chose the British Colonies
in America, the then most weak, and as to the arts of war most unexperienced
part of the nation, which like Babylon of old had long been the terror of the
world. The whole nation besides the Colonies, not to mention the multitudes
scattered throughout them who did The conduct of those people called tories,
who at the commencement of the war with Britain, stayed in America to inform
the British of those things, which would injure the American cause, and afford
the enemy the best means to carry into effect their wicked purposes, may fairly
be said to act a much worse part than the British nation.
worse, flew to arms to crush the The term rebellion was altogether unsuitably
applied in the commencement of the war. For the Americans only asked for their
charter rights, and this they did too without any weapons of war in their
hands. They were suppliant till their blood was murderously spilled. And for a
long time after they only repelled force by force, with a view to obtain their
just rights, till Britain forced them to declare themselves independent.
rebellion, as they termed it, and bind fast in slaveries galling chains
Americans. But it was all in vain, for God who is all and in all, was about to
give birth to, perhaps, the most important nation on earth, and he had his
instrument all prepared. He had his General made and furnished with every
talent, with every qualification necessary to take the field, and at the head
of such men, for we cannot with propriety say soldiers, as the Colonies
afforded, he baffled the councils, defeated and captured the armies, and lay
prostrate the pride of haughty Britain.

Americans, this was the work of God, who is all, and in all, and in this work
WASHINGTON was his noble creature, made of God to be an instrument in freeing
you from the oppressive tyranny of Britian's haughty Monarch. Yes, let it be
realized, let it be felt in every heart that God was all and in all, in raising
up and in qualifying our beloved WASHINGTON to do this important service for
the nation. God in his providence furnished him with wise and good councillors,
and with all the help he enjoyed, he did all for him, and carried him on,
shielding him in his hand in the crimson field, and filling his mind with the
whole system of tactics until as a General he stood unrivalled. With WASHINGTON
as the chief instrument, God has made a nation which of its age, has not an
equal. This done, the benevolent father of mercies was pleased to continue his
noble creature still a rich blessing to the nation, to be an instrument in
forming our execellent constitution.

This being done, and the nation having adopted it; here again God was all and
in all, in qualifying our beloved WASHINGTON for that office in state to which
he was unanimously called by his fellow citizens. Finally, it was God who made
all the difference which there was between our beloved and never to be
forgotten WASHINGTON, and the greatest idiot in the land.

Long did God favor this happy land with all the talents, with all the virtues
that shone in his creature WASHINGTON.

But at length the period arrived, when this, like all other temporal blessings
must be taken away by the same hand. The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken
away, and it becomes the whole nation to say, blessed be the name of the LORD,
for it is in righteousness he afflicts us, as a nation: we deserve not only
this, but much heavier judgment. We ought to realize that the death of this
great and eminently useful man, is a punishment for our sins, and to be humble
before God; yea, and it is suitable that we should accept the punishment of our
iniquities. "Shall we receive good at the hand of the LORD and shall we not
receive evil." The evil we deserve, but the good we merit not, it is therefore
mercy. Should we as a nation, suitably conduct under this afflicting stroke of
God, should it lead us to true repentance and engage us in the service of God,
we may with confidence look to and trust in the great all and in all, to raise
us up another WASHINGTON, should he be needed to lead forth our warriors to
battle, to be an instrument in his hand to do us the good we may need. And in
the midst of our grief for our departed friend, and sorrowing under the rod of
God, it becomes us to be truly grateful to God for the blessing we mourn the
loss of. We are not to view WASHINGTON as a God, nor as a Savior, because he
was only a man, and as a man he is dead, but our God and our Savior are alive,
and will live forever. Therefore let us view WASHINGTON as a man, and as such
mourn his loss: and as he was confessedly one of the greatest and most useful
of men, as such, he though dead, will live in the memory of his fellow
citizens. And his character in this point of view, will ever stand a suitable
example for imitation. Would the youth of our land wish to live respected,
would they arrive to the height of earthly greatness, and die universally
lamented, let them look at the example WASHINGTON has set, and go and do
likewise. But would they wish to arrive to that felicity and glory, to which
the human soul may arrive: let them look to a greater than a WASHINGTON, and
imitate the example which he has set, even Jesus Christ, then they may be
assured of not only such preferment, respect and veneration as WASHINGTON has
on earth, but also the approbation of their God and Judge, and the enjoyment
without end, of such blessedness as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man to conceive of. AMEN.

THE, END.

