ORATION, ON THE DEATH OF General George Washington, DELIVERED AT THE REQUEST
OF THE SELECTMEN AND PARISH COMMITTEE, BEFORE THE INHABITANTS OF CHARLESTOWN,
IN THE COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX, AND COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, ON SATURDAY,
FEB. 22, 1800.

BEING THE DAY SET APART BY THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES, TO TESTIFY THE
Grief of the Citizens, on that melancholy Event.

BY JOSIAH BARTLETT, ESQUIRE. Fellow of the Massachusetts Medical Society, and
Member of the Historical Society.



Charlestown: PRINTED BY SAMUEL ETHERIDGE.

M, DCCC.

EXTRACTS from the Records of the Town of CHARLESTOWN.
ON Tuesday, Dec. 31, 1799, at the hour appointed, the stores and shops were
shut, there was a suspension of business, the bell was tolled, the citizens
attended at WARREN-HALL, and a procession was formed as follows.

Marshal. Male Children from 7 to 14 years of age. Public School Masters. Young
Men from 14 to 25 years. The three Military Companies in uniform, with side
arms. Military officers. Citizens. King Solomon's Lodge of Free Masons, in
Ample Form. Assessors. Parish Treasurer, and Clerk. Trustees of the Free
Schools. Minister, and Deacons. Town Treasurer, and Clerk. Magistrates.
Representative. Selectmen. Band of Music. Marshal.
A DETACHMENT of Artillery posted on Breed's Hill, fired minute guns, till the
procession entered the Meetinghouse, when the following services were performed.

DIRGE on the ORGAN. PRAYER. FUNERAL HYMN. DISCOURSE, from this text, SO MOSES,
THE SERVANT OF THE LORD DIED. HIS EYE WAS NOT DIM, NOR HIS NATURAL FORCE
ABATED. AND THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL WEPT FOR MOSES IN THE PLAINS OF MOAB THIRTY
DAYS. FUNERAL ODE. THE VALEDICTORY ADDRESS of GEORGE WASHINGTON, as President,
to the CITIZENS of the UNITED STATES. OCCASIONAL DIRGE. BLESSING.
THE bell tolled an hour after service.

THE Society of Free Masons, accompanied by the Officers of the town, church,
and parish, with a number of the Rev. Clergy, returned in procession to Warren
Hall, where funeral ceremonies were performed.

THE Inhabitants of both sexes, and of every age, appeared in badges of
mourning. The flags at the wharves and on shore were displayed half staff. The
desk and front of the galleries, in the Meetinghouse, were covered with black,
an extensive festoon passed over the canopy of the pulpit, with suitable
vestments on the organ and chandelier. At Warren-Hall, the walls, pedestal,
tables, and regalia of the lodge were shrouded. In the east was a striking
portrait of the late GEORGE WASHINGTON, surrounded by a display of bright rays
in every direction. In the north stood the figure of a large Eagle, mantled in
black, with its eyes directed to the picture, and from its beak was suspended a
label, with the following inscription; "All Judea, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, did him honor at his death." In the south was a portrait, in
mourning, of the PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES. The light in the room was no
more than sufficient to display those affecting objects, and the hall was
visited in the evening by every description of inhabitants, whose grave
deportment and propriety of behavior, denoted a just estimation of the
transactions of the day.

The foregoing proceedings, with the Prayer, Discourse, and " Valedictory
ADDRESS" were published, and delivered to the respective families in town.

AT a meeting of the Selectmen and Parish Committee of CHARLESTOWN, Feb. 22,
1800.
VOTED, that Deac. JAMES FROTHINGHAM, Messrs. JOHN CARTER, and OLIVER HOLDEN,
wait upon JOSIAH BARTLETT, Esquire. with their thanks for the ingenious ADDRESS
delivered by him this day, and request a copy for publication.

Attest, JONATHAN KETTELL, Parish Clerk.

CHARLESTOWN, FEB. 24, 1800. GENTLEMEN,
THE motives which induced me to appear on the late distressing occasion, have
been fully explained; and conscious that the following performance has neither
novelty or merit to recommend it, I am influenced by the same considerations,
to submit it to the disposal of the Selectmen and Parish Committee, and am,
with respect,

Your humble serv' J. BARTLETT
Deac. FROTHINGHAM, Messrs. CARTER, and HOLDEN.



WASHINGTON.
ORATION.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
SCARCELY had six revolving months assuaged our sorrows for the loss of our
respected SUMNER, when, obedient to the unanimous desire of those, whom your
suffrages have invited to offices of trust and responsibility, with public
unaffected decorum, we closed the memorable year which terminated the labors,
anxieties and cares, of our beloved WASHINGTON.

WITH recent deep-felt sensibility, and the most respectful tokens of filial
reverence, we relinquished our secular concerns, to lament his sudden, eventful
death; summoned by the accustomed knell, the funereal dirge, and agonizing
peals from yonder celebrated eminence, WHERE the battle of June 17, 1775, was
fought, and on which is a Monument, in memory of Genesis WARREN and his ASSOCIATES.
with deliberate, silent footsteps we trod these sacred courts. The shrouded
walls, the expressive harmony, the dejected aspect of a crowded auditory, and
the copious tears of female innocence were well adapted to the solemn scene.

HERE with mingled emotions of despondency, hope and resignation, we bowed in
humble adoration to that ALL WISE, UNSEARCHABLE BEING

"Who views with equal eye as GOD of all,
"The Hero perish, or the Sparrow fall;"
here from a plaintive recital of the distinguished talents and splendid
achievements of an ancient Patriarch, we were led to contemplate the meekness,
prudence, bravery, and zeal, of the VICTORIOUS LEADER in our American Israel,
whose life and death were instructive lessons of pious patriotism; whose
PARENTAL LEGACY, SEE ADDRESS to the People of the United States, Sept. 17,
1796, by GEORGE WASHINGTON.
bequeathed with prophetic reference to future generations, is an invaluable
inheritance to his bereaved country. May a frequent serious recollection of
these affecting transactions, convince us, that a man diligent in business
shall stand before kings, and will be commended, according to his wisdom.

BUT why are we now assembled? did the roar of cannon disturb our slumbers to
welcome the rising sun? are freedom's ensigns waving in the air to excite our
joy? are our youthful friends arrayed in the soldier's garb, or animated by the
martial trumpet, to mirth and innocent festivity? or are our aged citizens
exchanging their mutual congratulations on the birth day of their common friend
and benefactor? These once pleasing realities now pass before us "like the
baseless fabric of a vision," while conformably to the official call, of that
EMINENT PATRIOT and STATESMAN, our VENERABLE ADAMS, on whom we trust the mantle
has descended, we have entered this hallowed temple, "with one heart and one
voice" to join united America, in our last public tribute of respect to his
pre-eminent merit; and there is no situation in which I have ever appeared, so
deeply impressed with the necessity of your well known candor, as on this
interesting occasion.

THE various, wonderful pursuits of GENERAL WASHINGTON, have been so often,
strikingly delineated, with all the flowers of rhetoric, and charms of
eloquence, and you are so amply furnished with an accurate, judicious history
of his life, SEE Sermon, by Rev. JED. MORSE, D. D. Dec. 31, 1799.
that no encomium in my power to bestow, can add one ray to the luster of his
mighty deeds; but if for a moment, my honored fathers and beloved brethren,
with our first emotions of grief, subdued by deliberate reflection, we extend
our fancy to the "elevated lawn" on Potowmac's bank, and collect around the
dreary sepulcher, to remind us that he was but mortal, we may profit by his
experience, and endeavor, at a humble distance, to imitate his virtues.

SELDOM is the morning of life devoted to the engagements of our riper years;
with pleasing expectation we enter the alluring threshold, regardless of the
numerous intricate windings, which conduct us through the extensive edifice,
unmindful of an inevitable, uncertain exit; but different was the case before
us; with a firm athletic constitution, a capacious, vigorous mind, aided by the
advantages of a special instructor, he was taught the useful arts and sciences,
for which, he was ever after, a distinguished advocate; and acquiring unusual
habits of industry, method and perseverance, had scarcely arrived at manhood,
when designated by the government of his native province, for the execution of
hazardous, important enterprises, where he discovered that vigilance,
moderation and punctuality, which have since rendered him the most conspicuous
character of the age, and excited the admiration of the world.

MANKIND in general, possessing a laudable emulation to display their natural
and acquired endowments, are frequently employed, according to their respective
talents, as well on the high places of the field, as in deliberative
assemblies, or by the midnight taper, to mitigate the condition of life, and
enlarge the boundaries of public happiness; but when we review the momentous
changes of states and empires, which at different times have convulsed society,
or recite the boasted achievements of heroes and conquerors, can we find an
instance of superior magnanimity? Accustomed from early life to the toils of
war; deeply interested for the welfare of his bleeding country, with modest
diffidence he accepted the command of her infant armies; amid the most
incredible difficulties and dangers, he led them triumphant, through the varied
fortunes of an eventful revolutionary period, to Peace and Independence; when
with republican dignity, unequalled even by the celebrated Roman farmer, he
relinquished the sword for the pruning hook, and with genuine effusions of a
patriotic spirit to his military brethren, SEE his Farewell Address to the
Armies of the United States, Nov. 2, 1783.
surrendered, to the VIRTUOUS ASSEMBLY, by which they were so worthily
bestowed, his extensive powers to participate under his own vine and fig tree,
the blessings of that freedom he had so largely contributed to establish.

A COMBINATION of those opposite qualities which distinguish the statesman from
the warrior, are seldom discoverable in the same person. The deliberate mind of
the sage civilian is rarely animated with martial ardor, while the successful
soldier, too often looses the finer feelings of the citizen; but here the
magistrate, legislator, and counselor, are no less conspicuous than the
veteran leader. In municipal offices, he was active, impartial, decisive; as a
delegate to the first continental Congress, his services were deservedly
estimated; in the Chair of that AUGUST ASSEMBLY, which formed the Federal
Constitution, his weight of character, accommodating talents, and unexampled
influence, supported the tottering fabric; as PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES, a
novel, untried situation, with every thing at hazard, his integrity, vigilance,
inflexibility and perseverance, were so well adapted to our national
exigencies, that nothing but his ready acceptance of a subordinate trust SEE
his letter to President ADAMS, July 13, 1798.
from the hand of his successor could increase his own celebrity, or the
affections of his grateful countrymen.

PUBLIC employments, with elevated rank, are often rendered subservient to
personal considerations; and political tranquillity is frequently interrupted
by ambition or avarice; but by him, the humble avocations of the husbandman,
sweetened by the allurements of domestic retirement, were courted with eager
solicitude; and his constant refusal of pecuniary reward, is the best evidence
of sincere, disinterested services.

WE need not recur to the records of antiquity to establish a belief, that
patriotism or popular acquirements are not invariably connected with religion
and morality; for it is a humiliating fact, that vice, with gigantic strides,
often boldly traverses the splendid palace, while those milder virtues, which
adorn humanity, are found in the peasant's cottage. Happy is that nation, where
"examples move as precepts teach," great indeed is the character, always
influenced by that unerring guide, which looks beyond this chequered life for
approbation and reward; such is COLUMBIA'S BOAST, such was our DEPARTED FRIEND.
From education, and habit, he was attached to the doctrines and ceremonies of
the episcopal church, which did not, however, prevent a liberal regard to every
other denomination. SEE his Answers to the Addresses of the Clergy, on various
occasions.
He considered public worship as an indispensable duty, and was a strict
observer of the christian sabbath, whilst his religion, equally free from
bigotry or ostentation, was the immovable basis of his morality and
beneficence.

HOW he was esteemed in the endearing character of a husband, the records of
our National Legislature can amply testify. On the delicate subject of removing
his body to the city of Washington, founded by his exertions for the permanent
seat of government; which future historians, will compare with the majestic
elegance of Roman or Grecian splendour, and generations, yet unnumbered, will
venerate, as well for the PRECIOUS DEPOSITE as its own magnificence; the late
communication from the highly honored, WIDOWED PARTNER, of his youth, to the
Chief Magistrate of the Union, SEE President ADAMS's Message to Congress, Jan.
8, 1800.
discovering the keenest, most refined, and affectionate sensibility, evincive
of prompt submission to the public will, is a striking specimen of the
influence of a "great example."

IT was decreed by Unerring Wisdom, that his paternal regards should not be
limited to a single household, but with the tender solicitude of a cautious
attentive parent, his cares and benedictions were imparted to the great family
of man; while the solemnities of this day recognize him, as the FATHER and
PROTECTOR of a rising empire, whose susceptible bosom is the burying spot of
his virtues; whose defensive hills, and fruitful valleys, are lasting monuments
of his extensive fame.

EQUALLY distinguished in the discharge of subordinate duties, as a relative
and friend, he was faithful, candid, sincere; as a master just, considerate,
provident; as a companion courteous, affable, instructive; as a neighbor
hospitable, benevolent, charitable; and as a member of the Masonic Fraternity,
his active and uniform support SEE Hon. TIMOTHY BIGELOW's Eulogy, Feb. 11, 1800.
have united philanthropy with patriotism, literature, arts, agriculture,
commerce, and manufactures, in public demonstration of unfeigned veneration for
his revered memory.

THUS my respected friends, with pure intentions, but conscious inability, I
have attempted a concise, imperfect sketch of the career of this ILLUSTRIOUS
MAN, who was born in the Parish which bears his name, in the county of
Westmoreland in Virginia, on the eleventh of February, by the calendar of
seventeen hundred thirty-two, and specially directed, for more than forty
years, by the singer of SUPREME INTELLIGENCE, as were the Israelites of old, by
the pillar and the cloud, died at his beloved MOUNT VERNON, famous as ancient
Pisgah, on the fourteenth of December, seventeen hundred ninety-nine.

NOT like the eminent law giver with whom he has been justly compared, were his
inanimate remains, secreted from his surviving kindred, and afflicted
countrymen, to prevent excessive sorrow, or idolatrous reverence; but under the
cheering influence of that adorable dispensation, obscured in former ages by
the veil of types and metaphors, he was intered in the family vault on his own
estate, with every testimonial of esteem which local circumstances would allow;
and the numerous exhibitions of a funeral ceremony, in token of humble
acquiescence in the immutable decrees of a Righteous Ruler, are without a
precedent in the annals of America.

BUT did his wonted greatness forsake him at that awful moment, when all his
former deeds were brought to the test of unerring scrutiny? Not with the feeble
principles of modern philosophy, did he shrink from the unbounded prospect
opening to his view, and solicit a reprieve, but having maturely adjusted his
extensive temporal concerns, in a manner no less honorable to his humanity, SEE
the provision in his WILL for the emancipation of his slaves.
than his judgment, with patient submission, he bore the anguish of a rapid,
torturing disease, and with the same composure which had dignified his ordinary
pursuits, he welcomed the faithful herald, to conduct him to everlasting bliss.

"LET this reflection dry a nation's tears,
"He died as ripe in glory as in years.
"And would you prove the HERO's memory dear,
"Learn HIS instructive precepts to revere;
"Let not contention ever your judgment blind,
"Preserve with care an independent mind,
"Support, OBEY the LAWS, believe me friends,
"Your peace on unanimity depends,
"By faction ALL to chaos would be hurld,
"Be but UNITED, and DEFY the WORLD."
FINIS

