MR. BOWERS's DISCOURSE.

A DISCOURSE, ON OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF General George Washington, DELIVERED
IN ST. ANN's CHURCH, PITTSTON, ON SATURDAY, 22d FEBRUARY, 1800.

BY JAMES BOWERS.

Published by request of the WARDENS and VESTRY of the Episcopal Parish in said
Town.

HALLOWELL (DISTRICT OF MAINE) PRINTED BY PETER EDES. 1800.

A DISCOURSE.
IT is an observation of the wisest of men, that "to every thing there is a
season, and a time to every purpose under heaven." Though every day and every
hour comes charged with some important duty; yet wisdom will discern, in that
striking succession of affecting events, with which the life of man is
diversified, the special times and seasons, for accomplishing the benevolent
purposes of GOD, respecting his eternal felicity. Man, both in his individual
and social capacity, is the creature of mutation and vicissitude; and his state
here below, is ever more or less checkered with prosperous and adverse
occurrences. The seasons of rejoicing, and the seasons of mourning are often
returning, with their appropriate lessons of moral instruction. Now he is
surrounded with objects, and inspired with sensations, of pleasure and delight;
his horizon is gilded with happifying prospects; and he is excited to give
scope to the feelings of grateful, innocent, social joy. But there is not less
a time to be sad, than a time to rejoice. Anon, the charm is dissolved; the
visionary phantoms of momentary happiness are fled; and the heart is arrested,
in the career of pleasure, to attend to more interesting scenes. The wandering
and thoughtless mind is summoned, by the sober, monitory voice of misfortune,
to the more chastened engagements of moral discipline, self-inspection, and
religious improvement. To this unexpected fatality of events -- this affecting
reverse of condition, communities, like individuals, are ever subject. They
too, have their times of depression, as well as elevation -- their seasons of
sadness, as well as rejoicing: and most kindly does the great Governor
contemplate, in their dispensation, some benevolent ends of his moral
government.

LET us then improve the present occasion, in connection with that distressing
event, in which it has taken birth, to the purpose of imbuing our minds with
some salutary and useful instruction. It is an occasion singular and novel, in
the annals of our country, as it is interesting to the present generation. The
death of a man like one of us, has whelmed our country in the gloom of
mourning, A man, like Joshua of old, has been raised up, from among his
brethren, whose important services, preeminent virtues, and high excellence of
character, have so endeared him with the hearts of his countrymen, that his
death has caused every description of persons to unite in testimonials of
deepest regret. The enthusiasm of sorrow has, on this occasion, been indulged;
and the tears of America have flowed, in copious effusion, over the tomb of her
departed WASHINGTON. "From Georgia to Maine, and from the skirts of the ocean
to the habitations of the wilderness," the accents of grief have dwelt on every
tongue; the gloom of despondency has sat on every brow. Eloquence has lavished
all her stores, and put forth all her energies! Districts and corporations have
met together, with the badges of mourning and the insignia of woe, to mingle
their condolences, to recount his virtues, to commemorate his achievements and
to blazon his fame. But it is now time that the tide of grief -- the enthusiasm
of sorrow, should have subsided. It is now time that reason and the moral
feelings should resume their wonted calm, dispassionate tone. With a desire
therefore to meet the intention of our political fathers, in the appointment of
this commemoration, let us turn our regards to such obvious and interesting
truths, as the occasion is calculated to suggest.

IT suggests, in the first place, the real connection of eminent superlative
worth, with honorable fame. Before us, is presented a signal evidence, depraved
and degenerate as the human kind are, of the power of merit and real goodness,
to command esteem, veneration and love. However brilliancy of talents may be
envied and maligned; however temporary usefulness, prompted by temporary good
intention, may be misconstrued or neglected; yet uniform inflexible integrity,
indefatigable virtue, and persevering disinterested beneficence, will meet
approbation and be crowned with honor. It is the appropriate privilege of such
a character, to rise above envy, malice and faction. On such a character the
clashing of cabals will often reflect additional luster; the anathemas of
disappointed partisans will in due time, be changed to congratulatory praises;
the labyrinth of error and misrepresentation, as he proceeds in the strait
course of benevolent exertion, will gradually unravel; and when he finishes his
part and makes his exit, envy will die; and the full burst of applause will
break forth, to consecrate his memory and perpetuate his fame.

AGAIN we are led, on the present occasion, to analyze the individual
attributes of an illustrious character; and to consider, in what its grandeur
precisely consists. The virtues, which constitute greatness, conciliate love,
and attract veneration, are fidelity and sincerity, modesty and moderation,
consistency and regularity, humanity and compassion. These virtues informed by
wisdom -- inspired by disinterested philanthropy and undissembled piety, form
the excellence of that character, which Americans will ever delight to extol.
Courage and cunning -- intrepidity in the field, and penetration in the
cabinet, are doubtless qualities, which he eminently possessed. But these
features of his character, are only the rude prominences of that fair piece,
which, with infinite profit, we may critically survey.

TO question the heroism of him, who led our armies to victory and to glory, no
one could pretend. To deny the merit of profound sagacity to him, who conducted
our political bark, with so much success, through so many dangers, would be
equally unjust. Yet the humane and benevolent virtues, inspired by the noblest
principles, actuated by the purest motives, and exerted with most distinguished
fidelity, perseverance and utility, are the traits, which have exalted him far
above others, who may have surpassed him in the trade of slaughter. Introduced
upon the public theater, at an eventful and important crisis; placed in a
situation, which offered scope to patriotic and benevolent exertion, and
possessing an adventrous mind, and a generous disinterested heart, he, in every
period and department of his public functions, displayed the full luster of
those virtues abovementioned. Incorruptible in his principles, indefatigable in
his duties, immovable in his designs, and firm and steady to the trust reposed
in him, he evinced and exemplified that constancy of virtue and purity of
motive, from which nothing could tempt him to swerve.

WE are not unconscious, that the brightest human characters will ever be
shaded with much imperfection. We are conscious moreover, that the fictitious
representation of a faultless monster, would be affrontive to reason, and
disgusting to an enlightened hearer. But if indiscriminate, undiminished
applause were due to any one man, we would cheerfully bestow it on our departed
benefactor, father and friend. Let me not be accused of casting incense on the
altar of an idol if I say, that he stands forth, the highest approximation,
which story exhibits, or the annals of our country affords, to that species of
character, which philosophy loves to portray, and the despots of the world, in
vain, would assume. He has not presented an exception to the maxim, that
modesty is ever an appendage of true greatness. His modest, unassuming
disposition and deportment, strikingly appear, in all his official and popular
addresses. The diffidence and self distrust with which he accepted appointments
assigned him, could only be equalled by that humble piety and modest
affability, with which he returned the congratulations of success, in the
issue. To himself he arrogates nothing; -- to that sovereign providence, which
governs the affairs of the world, he ascribes every auspicious event.

THE benevolence of his heart conspired with the faculties of his mind, to form
a character substantially useful, not ostentatiously great. Of his correctness,
dispatch and promptitude in business; his uniformity, decorum and consistency
in every sphere of life; his moderation in prosperity, and firmness and
fortitude under misfortune; his clemency to the vanquished, compassion to the
miserable, and humanity toward all men -- of these things, the whole series of
his public labors are a legible and fair document. The love of his country and
the love of mankind, reigned pure in his soul, without any alloy of avarice or
ambition. While his mercenary antagonist fattened on the spoils of his country,
he made a noble sacrifice of wealth as well as of ease and pleasure, and served
his country without any emolument. That disinterestedness, which forms the
discriminating line between a WASHINGTON, and the proud pretenders to unmerited
fame, will be subject of eulogy so long as merit shall be revered. Posterity,
in retracing back the current of events, to the memorable epoch of our national
birth, with admiration, will contemplate our political Salvator at the closing
period of his military toils and dangers -- crowned with conquest, firm in the
affections and confidence of his veteran soldiers -- putting off his armor,
resigning back his power, and retiring to the situation of a private citizen.
Nor will posterity be uninformed, with what greatness he, at a subsequent
period, repelled the assaults of the demon of ambition. By a powerful though
corrupt combination, importuned, to place himself at the head of his country,
and assume the title and the powers of royalty, he declared his resolution to
expatriate himself, rather than do an act, which would degrade him to a level
with a Cromwell or a Caesar -- Proofs palpable and convincive of that pure,
disinterested philanthropy, which inspired and actuated all his exertions! To
this source, and not to a blind, misguided, local attachment, we are to refer
the many sacrifices he made for the good of his country; the various expedients
he adopted, to render himself useful; the various forms under which he took
occasion to exemplify goodness; that ardent activity which filled his days; and
that universality of character under which we recognize him. Hence that
consistency, uniformity and correctness throughout; that harmony of principle
with practice, of motive with duty, of private with public life, which can
never be preserved by the interested, the sordid or the insincere. And shall
not that unexampled accumulation of honor and public esteem, thus acquired,
form a new bond of attachment with us, to the same principle and the same
conduct? Are you charmed with the august and lovely image of so much
benevolence, so nobly exerted? If so, then cultivate the same divine spirit.
Does thy bosom bound with honest ardor, to merit the praises which are bestowed
on this ornament of our country? Then emulate his virtues, and copy his
example. Think not, that his merit and this consequent renown, is the exclusive
privilege even of the best man; for no man is privileged with such a monopoly.
The qualities and the virtues, which have consecrated his memory, we have seen,
were such as we may possess. Though we cannot all move in his elevated sphere
-- be first in council and first in the field; yet it may be in the power of
every one, to be second to none in fidelity and sincerity, honesty and
regularity, modesty and humility, humanity and compassion.

FINALLY, we have presented in view a shining example, of the union of moral
goodness with genuine piety; and of that stable basis, which religion affords,
of all that is excellent in human conduct. Too often have the pretenders to
greatness been ashamed of religion. Religion they have considered as fit only
to awe the stupid and the vile. They have regarded it as a yoke, under which
the wise, the mighty, and the noble of this world ought not to submit their
necks. But the man, to whose greatness we reluctantly acknowledge a parallel,
was not so far exalted above himself, as to overlook the importance of vital
piety. He respected it, as the bond of social order and union, and the grand
support of the duties of men and citizens. He cherished it, as the only anchor
of safety, amidst the changes and miseries of this uncertain state. And we have
just reason to believe that in the last dire exigency of nature, he buoyed up
his spirits with its divine consolations. He had not become a proselyte to that
miserable philosophy, which is blind to the clear evidence of divine
revelation: he was not ashamed of the gospel of Christ. To the wise institutes
and sacred rituals of christianity, he paid the most scrupulous attention. He
regarded with due deference, the holy sabbath. And he was constant, on that
day, in the worship of God, in his church. -- But the pleasure, with which I
make mention of this last article, is mingled with a sensation of deep regret.
Shall I believe myself standing on christian ground, that I should exhibit this
humble trait, as appreciating the worth of an illustrious character? When I
reflect on the prevailing indifference to every thing sacred, in this corner of
our country, can hardly believe myself surrounded, at this moment, with a
sufficient number of the friends of Jesus, to shield me from obloquy, should I
enlarge on this topic. Blush, O my fellow sinner! Will you believe, that you
have less reason to bow down before GOD, and to ask his protection, than the
greatest and best of men?

IN this sober, monitory season, we are loudly admonished by the impression of
the occasion, to look to our moral state; to trace out our defections, lapses
and crimes, and form resolutions of instant amendment. While sighing under the
pressure of a most distressing public calamity, it becomes us with all
humility, to review our moral character and conduct, as a people; diligently to
search out the plague of our own heart; and seriously to examine the causes, by
which we are incurring the frown of an offended Deity. In this examination,
shall we not deplore and lament that speculative and practical infidelity,
which too much characterizes the present generation, -- that dereliction of
sound principle both moral and religious; that contemptuous neglect of the
truths and ordinances of our holy religion; that decay of the social and
patriotic virtues; that destitution of benevolence; and that virulent, uncandid
reciprocation of abuse and calumny, which has taken rise and gained frequency,
in our political controversies? And now that we are surveying with
consternation, a most melancholy chasm, in our system of national defense;
shall we not unitedly resolve to renounce our corrupting and demoralizing
habits; and exert our combined endeavors, to check that national degeneracy,
which is threatening to destroy us? Convinced of the folly as well as guilt, of
vainly relying on the strength of man -- convinced of the high importance of
rendering propitious the great Governor of the world; and taught in his holy
word, and in the uniform experience of all nations, that they only are happy,
who have the Lord for their GOD; let us resolve, by repentance, to forsake our
sins, and to walk in future, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the
days of our lives. Reverencing, adoring, and obeying the GOD of our fathers;
let us obey from the heart, the gospel of his son Jesus Christ; and religiously
observe its divine institutions. Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, let us
live soberly, righteously and godly in this world, the fashion of which is
passing away. Then shall we be a peculiar people to the Lord our GOD. GOD, even
our own GOD, shall then give us his blessing. Our righteousness shall then go
before us. Our light and our health shall break forth, as the morning, and the
glory of the Lord shall be our rereward.

FINIS:

