A SERMON ON THE DEATH OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON. DELIVERED IN
THE CAPITOL IN RICHMOND, BY JOHN D. BLAIR, CHAPLAIN to the HOUSE of DELEGATES.

PRINTED BY MERIWETHER JONES, Printer to the Commonwealth.

JANUARY -- 1800.

TO THE PUBLIC.
The following Sermon was delivered and is published by appointment of the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Virginia.

That it met with any favorable reception, from the pulpit, was doubtless,
owing more to the affecting solemnity of the occasion; to the high sense which
the Legislature entertained of the worth of the deceased GEORGE WASHINGTON, and
to their unfeigned sorrow for his death, than to the merit of the performance
itself.

But since they have been pleased to request the publication of it, it is sent
to the Press without hesitation.

JOHN D. BLAIR, Chaplain to the House of Delegates.
Richmond, January 1800.
PREACHED on the DEATH of LIEUTENANT GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, who departed
this life, on Saturday, the 14th of December, 1799.
PSALMS, 12th Chap. 1st. verse: "Help, Lord, for the godly man cease; for the
faithful fail from among the children of men."


IN the familiar course of human events we are apt to be regardless of the hand
of God, in the usual operations of nature, and in all the ordinary instances of
mortality which are presented before our eyes.

There is no doubt that, upon due consideration, the one of these would be
interpreted into clear indications of an overruling Providence, and the other
improved into impressive and affecting memento's of human frailty. Through the
familiarity of both, however, we are sufficiently attentive to neither.

But when the Sepreme Ruler of the Universe makes bare his arm by some signal
display of his power, his sovereignty, or his displeasure, when he visits a
city with some deadly contagion, or removes from amongst us such of our fellow
men as were eminently virtuous and useful, who had engrossed our affections,
and on whose preservation our interests materially depended; when he makes the
Godly man to cease, and the faithful man to fail, he rouses by such high
dispensations the attention of all his creatures, and causes them to mourn
under the afflictive visitations of his rod.

Impressed by such circumstances with a sense of our weakness and dependence,
and affected by the occurrence of such sorrowful events, we are brought to
perform the duty, and exercise the privilege of nature, by putting ourselves
more immediately under the guardian care of Heaven, and flying for succor to
the throne of grace. Hence the importunate application of the Psalmist in the
words of the text.

Who was the particular subject of his plaintive strains, it is not material
that I should now stay to enquire. They are applicable to the case of all good
men; for their lives are more or less important to the peace and prosperity of
this world.

On the present occasion we understand their application, alas! too well. Never
did a people meet with so great a loss as that which we deplore. Never was
there before so loud a call for earnest supplication to the Father of Mercies.
Never had the people of America such cause of funeral grief as that which has
brought us together today. The Godly man has ceased, and the faithful has
failed: -- The beloved WASHINGTON is no more.

Often do we behold the sorrows of the afflicted parent, the disconsalate
widow, or the helpless orphan; but in this sad instance all America is become a
house of mourning, and signals of distress appear on every side. The melancholy
tidings of his death have deeply afflicted all discriptions of persons. The
aged sire, and tender matron bow down the hoary head in pensive sorrow; and the
cheek of the ingenious youth is bedewed with tears. In this numerous assembly I
see sadness depicted in every countenance.

On this memorable day the whole representatives of the people of his native
State, by whose appointment these funeral honors are paid, appear in the sable
badge of mourning in testimony of their grief for the loss of this illustrious,
faithful man; and every individual citizen sympathizes in responsive sorrow.

It is no wonder; he was the "Hero of liberty, the father of his country, the
first of patriots, and the friend of man." NOTE.

Mr. Madisons eulogium in the Assembly.


Great is the worth of men of piety and virtue to every community; but when
these are found to adorn conspicuous and important stations, it is wholly
incalculable. The Godly and the faithful man is not only the most respectable
in his private character -- he is not only an honor to the state that gave him
birth, and to the race from which he sprang, but he is the brightest ornament,
and the most extensive benefactor to the world at large.

Virtue is not only necessary to the peace and happiness of private life, but
it is that alone by which a nation can rise to greatness, or enjoy any lasting
prosperity.

This, in a greater or less degree, is true of all nations; but to those which,
like ours, are blessed with free republican forms of government, of which
virtue is the leading principles, it is of still the greater usefulness, and
the more indispensible necessity. It not only reflects upon them their greatest
luster, but is, in truth, their only sure defense.

When vice and licentiousness, by an injudicious choice, or any unfortunate
accident, are advanced to important and influential stations of honors, of
profit, or of power, they do not confine themselves within the immediate circle
of the court, but they diffuse their baneful influence all around, and
gradually pervade and corrupt all parts of the community. Encouraged by the
practice, instead of being suppressed by the influence of those who are in
authority, they stalk abroad with hardy front, until finally they triumph over
the honor, the dignity, the liberties, nay, the very existance of the people.
Hence the saying of the wise man in the Proverbs; "when the wicked bears
rule, the people mourn."

In contrast with this, let us view the Godly and the faithful man, in a like
situation, and learn hence to estimate the infinite superiority of his
character, and his worth to society.

Walking in the "paths of truth and grace" he is not only himself a most
dignified and venerable character, but becomes to others a pattern worthy of
all imitation. He exhibits virtue in its native comeliness and purity, and from
the eminence of his station he spreads a glory around it. He recommends
religion by his example: He restrains vice by his authority. That prevails and
rejoices under the patronage of his smiles -- this flies from his presence, or
shrinks at his approach with all the pusillanimity of conscious guilt. "When
the righteous man is exalted the people rejoice." In him virtue is personified
as their representative, and to him their interests, as far as this is
necessary, are cheerfully entrusted. The amiable excellence of his character
acquires their confidence, and his entegrity renders the deposit safe.

Surely the death of such a man is justly to be regretted as a great public
loss; and with affecting propriety has it been made the subject of the
Psalmist's lamentations in the passage before us. Such a man, my Brethren, was
the dear friend whom we have lost.

He was well tried: he was thoroughly proved by his country in a long and
variegated life. He always held himself ready to obey it is call on any
emergency, and he ever discharged his trust with the utmost fidelity. He
entered into it is service in the prime of his life, and he continued in it,
with but little intermission, to the day of his death.

In every station which this great man filled -- in every sphere of life in
which he was appointed to move, I might call upon our fellow citizens from one
end of the continent to the other, and with tears of gratitude they would all
bear testimony that he invariably exhibited the evidence, and maintained the
character of a "Godly and a faithful man."

As long as the people of America shall continue blessed with the enjoyment of
peace, of liberty and independence, it will not be forgotten that next to a
kind and gracious God, who always made this country his care, they are greatly
indebted for them, to the manly firmness, the unremitted exertions, and the
inviolable fidelity of GEORGE WASHINGTON*

Raised up by Divine Providence to defend the liberties and vindicate the
rights of his country, he nobly stepped forward in the day of her distress,
when oppressed by foreign domination, and bleeding from the wounds inflicted by
an invading army; and against a formidable host, led on her little band of
patriots. Then did his mighty soul, which never brooked oppression, exert its
energy. A sincere lover of liberty, and "early accustomed to appreciate its
value," he exchanged the ease of domestic retirement for the field of battle,
and fought valiantly for the people and for "the cities of his God." Nor from
this did he withdraw until liberty was effectually secured, and its triumphs
were proclaimed throughout our happy country.

Through many a wearisome and long campaign, and in all the vicissitudes of
war, sometimes prosperous, and often adverse, he was the uniform, the faithful,
and the steadfast friend.

In his highest prosperity he entertained no thoughts of ambition; and in the
darkest and most gloomy hour, when the hopes of many were beginning to fail,
and they were almost ready to give the struggle for liberty up, the steady soul
of WASHINGTON, firm and unmoved, animated with the purest patriotism; and
fixing his hopes on Heaven, was stable as a rock. He never for a moment
deserted the all important cause, nor suffered himself to despair of success.
At every hazard he resolved to defend the interests of his beloved country, or
that he would not survive its downfall, but perish rather in the general ruin.

If the united voice of America did not render it unnecessary, there are, I
perceive in this assembly not a few who would be ready to attest the justice of
the character which I have thus far drawn. There are those here who were with
him in the war, almost from the beginning to the end, who were witnesses of his
wisdom in the council and his valor in the field -- who were trained to arms in
his camp, who have often fought by his side, and whom I see alive this day to
the friendship which was contracted in adversity, and cemented by the precious
blood of many a fallen and many a surviving patriot. Ask these men -- ask all
of this description, to a man, who shall be convened throughout America, on
this mournful occasion, what the deceased WASHINGTON was -- whether he was
always at his post in the hour of danger -- whether he loved his country --
whether he was faithful to the important trust which she committed to his
hands? and read the answer in their eyes.

O! WASHINGTON! now that thou art gone, delicacy to thy feelings no longer
forbids strict justice to thy merits. To thy country thou ever wast a "good and
faithful servant.

When the storm of war was over, he took an affectionate leave of his brave
companions in arms, resigned his commission into the hands of Congress, and
returned to the quiet walks of private life. But there he was not long
permitted to enjoy repose. In him were concentered the valor of the soldier,
and the wisdom of the sage; and he was called upon by the unanimous voice of
his countrymen, to administer the government which they had ordained, to
"preserve domestic tranquillity," and perpetuate the liberty he had contributed
so much to acquire. The constiution of the United States was quite a new
experiment. It was the result not only of their united wisdom; but of their
mutual concessions also, and the administration of it must of necessity have
been an arduous task to which the greatest experience, prudence, and
intelligence alone were adequate. It was in our now deceased friend that these
qualities were in the highest degree combined, and on his shoulders was imposed
the mighty burden. In the capacity of Chief Magistrate, for eight years he
labored incessantly to promote the public good, which evidently appeared to be
the only object of his ambition.

On the subject of politics, I am but little instructed, and with it, it is
still less my inclination to intermeddle. To say nothing then, of the
acknowledged superiority of the beloved President's talents as a statesman,
suffice it to observe, that notwithstanding the contrariety of opinion that
soon appeared amongst our fellow-citizens respecting government as a science,
or the administration of it as an art: notwithstanding that upon this subject,
brother and brother, father and son, were often found divided against each
other; yet, not the smallest suspicion of GEORGE WASHINGTON's integrity ever
mingled itself with any disapprobation of public measures.

In March 1797, he resigned this honorable and important office, and retired
once more to his peaceful abode at Mount Vernon, which had long been the
favorite object of his wishes. His resignation was accompanied by an affecting
token of his love, in communicating to his fellow-citizens the result of his
experience, and in tendering to them his last fatherly advice respecting their
sentiments and conduct toward each other, and their true policy as a nation.
And then, with all the tenderness of parental fondness, he took an affectionate
leave.

If on this sorrowful occasion, a place could be found for any criticism on his
style and composition, I would just observe that the writings of WASHINGTON,
correct without study, elegant without art, resemble a native woodland flower*
which displays numberless undescribable beauties to the eye of every beholder,
itself alone unconscious of its charms. -- While his precious memory shall warm
and animate, these will please, instruct and edify the latest posterity.

He now flattered himself that he had bidden a final adue to all the troubles
and perplexities of public life, and that he should be permitted to spend the
little remainder of his days in peace. But, alas! the deceitfulness of all
earthly prospects! like the Patriarch Abraham, he had to encounter the severest
trial in the concluding scene.

His country, alarmed by the apprehension of foreign danger, cast her eyes once
more upon her well-tried, faithful general, for her defense, if the calamity
which seemed to impend should actually befall: I have called this the severest
trial, because he was now far advanced in years, and his arm was enfeebled by
age. But old as he was, though he heard with grief, he obeyed with promptitude
his country's call and prepared himself once more to take the field, whenever
necessity should require, and buckle the armor on his weary limbs.

In this juncture of affairs it pleased the God of Heaven, whose councils are
to us unknown, to take him from us, and release him from all his labors. He
called him to put the harness off, and enter into his rest. What fate awaits
our beloved country, it belongs to him alone who can pry into futurity, to
tell. We hope and trust in God that the olive branch of America will still be
regarded, and that our ambassadors abroad and envoys extraordinary, will, by
his blessing succeed, in accommodating on honorable terms, all existing
differences, and in perpetuating peace with all the nations of the earth.

But if not: if our ears are again to be assailed by the din of arms, and war
shall rage, we shall miss this valiant faithful man, and the anxious enquiry in
America, will be, where shall we find another WASHINGTON?

In drawing the character of the great and illustrious, it is not the only
object to pay that tribute to merit which justice demands, but especially to
exhibit their example for the imitation of others. With this view, permit me to
add, that our departed friend was not only a faithful, but a Godly man.
Fidelity to his country was an amiable and striking trait in his character; but
to render it complete, we add, piety to God. This, like the oil on Aaron's
robe, gives it a sweet perfume: or, like the mantle of Elijah, on the shoulders
of Elisha, it spreads majestic grace and glory around it. Such was WASHINGTON.
Virtue adorned his private life, and his first act of Providential duty was to
dedicate himself to God, and commend his country to his divine protection. This
act of piety made the hearts of all good men in America glad, and they rejoiced
under the auspices of a chief magistrate who thus paid homage to the Ruler of
the Universe.

But still more was the piety of their general the ground of their confidence
through the more perilous scenes of war. While his valor and fortitude
qualified him, above his fellows, for the command of a patriotic army, this not
only endeared him to all the wise and virtuous, but made him, as they rightly
supposed, the peculiar care of Heaven. They were not mistaken. This fortified
his integrity, and this secured his camp. The valiant chief, although he was
himself an host, and superior in courage and conduct to the opposite
commanders, yet knowing that "the battle was not always to the strong," with
his eyes directed to Heaven, commended himself and his army to the guidance of
infinite wisdom, and to the protection of our omnipotent shield. Thus qualified
he went forth under the banners of the Lord of hosts: he fought in his sear,
and conquered in his name.

"The first in peace, and the first in war," he was a singular example of
virtue, and piety ih both. In the humble sphere of private life, in the more
splendid chair of state, and amidst the confusion and licentiousness of war,
this great man "walked with God." His heart was impressed with the highest
reverence for his holy name, and in his presence the mouth of the profane was
shut.

Who of the heroes of antiquity shall compete for fame with the illustrious
chief? -- Alexander was vain glorious, and sometimes cruel -- Caesar was
ambitious -- and the life of Cato terminated in an act of suicide.

But WASHINGTON was not ambitious. Such was his modesty that but for the trump
of fame, the rising generation had not known that he was the "hero of liberty"
who rescued them from bondage. Guided by the wisdom, and protected by the
power, he was also resigned to the will of Heaven. Piety adorned his youth; it
rendered his "hoary head a crown of glory," and softened his dying bed. His
setting sun went down unclouded and serene, the happy presage of a bright
succeeding day.

Alas! "The Godly man has ceased, and the faithful has failed."

Heavy and afflictive is the loss which the people of America have sustained by
the death of this great man. It is only in some measure retrievable by the
improvement we shall make of it. Let us then, under this sore visitation* learn
in the first place, humbly to acknowledge and adore the hand of God. He is the
sovereign disposer of all events, and he has a right to do whatsoever he will
with his own. In his adorable, but to us misterious providence he has taken
away our WASHINGTON, and though we cannot but mourn his loss, yet, since it is
the will of Heaven, we will endeavor not to repine.

2. To subssimion to the divine will, let us add a grateful acknowledgement of
divine goodness. God who has taken our dear friend away, first gave him to us,
qualified for the most important purposes. The whole of his useful life was
devoted to the good of his country, and he lived to a good old age. He lived to
perform the important work of procuring and establishing the independence of
America, and proclaiming liberty to all her sons. Through all the perils and the
fatigues of war: amidst the dangers of the field of battle, and under the
pitched tent on the cold ground by night, the life and health of the
illustrious chief, and of his valiant army, were most graciously preserved.
Many a brave patriot fell; but the Genesis on whom so much depended was carefully
protected from the "pestilence that walked in darkness, and from the arrow
which flew by day." Nor was he taken hence until he saw his country smilling in
peace, and settled under the most excellent constitution that any nation on
earth ever enjoyed. For all these mercies "let the people praise thee, O God;
let all the people praise thee."

3 The character of the deceased, while it endears his memory, should also be
improved into a source of consolation to all who mourn his death. People of
America -- affectionate fellow-citizens of his native state, ye may weep for
yourselves; but weep not for WASHINGTON. He rests at length from all his
labors: and if a mansion be prepared in glory, for piety and virtue, thither I
trust he is gone, and there will he shine; as a star in the fermament, for ever
and ever. "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord."

4. Suffer me to recommend the example of our departed friend, to the imitation
of his countrymen. It is dignified and lovely, and shows to what perfection
human nature may arrive. In this, although he is dead, he still speaks to us.
Ye youth of America, the hope of your country -- ye rising patriots of
Virginia* learn that to be truly great, you must be sincerely good.

Who will now fill the place of the American chief? The expecting eyes of your
country are turned upon you. She will have need for you, in the cabinet, at
least, if not in the field. If you would be prepared to do her service, study
the character, cultivate the virtues, and follow the example of your WASHINGTON.

5. Finally, let us improve this solemn occasion, by serious reflections on our
own tendency to the dust. We have here no abiding city. "It is appointed to all
men once to die," and the temple of this body will soon be dissolved. Let us
apply to the redeemer of the world for pardon, and salvation. Let us implore
the assistance of divine grace that we may "so number our days as to apply our
hearts to wisdom." Let us cordially imbibe the principles of piety, and
steadily pursue the practice of virtue; so that when this "earthly house of our
tabernacle shall be dissolved, we may have a building of God, a house not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens." -- AMEN.


