A SERMON, DELIVERED AT NEWBURYPORT, ON THE 2nd FEBRUARY, 1800.

BY REV. JOHN BODDILY, Minister of the second Presbyterian society in said town.

(PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.)

Printed at Newburyport, by EDMUND M. BLUNT, 1800.

Sermon.
ACTS vii. 22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and
was mighty in words and in deeds.
FROM the beginning, the world has been favored in every age, with one or more
eminent characters, who have distinguished themselves, in a very remarkable
manner, by their virtues, in promoting the public good. -- The Great Governor
of the Universe, when about to confer any special favor upon any particular
nation or people, has permitted them to be brought into straits and
difficulties, that in raising up and inspiring some highly favored character
among them, with wisdom and courage to superintend the affairs of the body
politic, they might be convinced they owed their deliverance to HIM, who
sits upon the flood and rudeth King forever. In this chapter we have the
dying testimony of Stephen, relative to the deliverance of Israel, after four
hundred years bondage, by Moses, one of their own nation, whom the Lord had
chosen as their leader, whose life was preserved amidst innumerable dangers,
and who, under the direction of Providence, was brought up in the court of
Egypt and was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, who were then famed
for all manner of polite literature, particularly philosophy, astronomy and
hieroglyphics. Moses receiving his education at court, had opportunities of
improving himself by the best of authors, the best of tutors and the best of
conversation in all the arts and sciences and had a genius for them; by this
means, he detected and confuted the astrologers and magicians of Egypt and the
way was paved for his entering upon the difficult and arduous task of
delivering his own nation from their long captivity and bondage. -- Being
advanced to the office of prime minister of state, the favorite of heaven and
the friend of the friendless Jews then under the hand of the oppressor, he was
rendered conspicuous by his courage, conduct and success, and being prepared by
human helps and divine emulation, he became mighty in words and in deeds. After
the miracles he wrought and the deliverances he procured for Israel, as an
honest and faithful servant of God, He ascribed all the glory to Him in whose
cause he embarked and by whose power he had been sustained. Upon all occasions,
he consulted the Lord and proved by his exemplary conduct that he feared and
served the God of Israel.

BEING called together by the Executive and Legislative authority to celebrate
the auspicious birth of the illustrious GEORGE WASHINGTON, who was born
February 22d, 1732, whose name alone strikes earthly titles dead, and to mourn
his death, which took place December 14th, 1799, while authority commands and
duty supports that authority, gratitude and affection, which are the most
powerful constraints, lay us under the most pleasing, yet painful necessity of
complying with the wishes of our rulers and of uniting with millions of our
fellow-citizens in paying a small tribute to the memory and sublime virtues of
our deceased and beloved deliverer, guardian and father, and which humble
tribute will no doubt be annually paid, while the page of history continues to
hand down to posterity the peculiar Exploits and singular Virtues of one of the
greatest of Men that ever inhabited this lower world. Like Moses, he was
singularly eminent in the following respects: First, In wisdom -- Secondly, In
words -- Thirdly, In deeds.

FIRST, Eminent in wisdom. Though Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, yet the first and greatest mark of his wisdom appeared in his regard
to the divine authority, in choosing GOD for his portion, embracing the promise
of Christ expressed in Judah's blessing, Genesis xlix. 10, "The scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a law giver from between his feet, until SHILOH come:
and unto him shall the gathering of the people be." Thus proving like a wise
man, that the concerns of the Soul were of infinitely greater importance than
those of a temporal nature; he regulated his conduct accordingly, as one made
wise unto salvation. So our illustrious Father deceased, was a partaker of that
wisdom which is from above which is "Pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without
hypocrisy," therefore a man of prayer, a man of faith and a Man of God -- He
evidenced his religion by the strictness of his morals, the integrity of his
heart and his love to his country. No^ influenced by corrupt principles or
selfish motives, the happiness of mankind lay near his heart, and his affection
and zeal burst forth in liberating this extensive empire from the galling yoke
of European tyranny. Long had oppression reigned and deluged this land with
human blood. The mournful cries of widows, orphans and dismembered families had
long been heard; yet not heard in vain. May we not adopt the language of a
celebrated writer?

I hate that drum's discordant sound,
Parading round, and round, and round:
To thoughtless youth it pleasure yields,
And lures from cities and from fields,
To sell their liberty for charms
Of tawdry lace and glittering arms;
And when AMBITION's voice commands,
To march, and fight, and fall, in foreign lands.
I hate that drum's discordant sound,
Parading round, and round, and round;
To me it talks of ravaged plains,
And burning towns, and ruined swains,
And mangled limbs, and dying groans,
And widow's tears, and orphan's moans;
And all that misery's hand bestows,
To fill the catalogue of human woes.
England once free, the glory of the earth; now loaded with crimes, usurping
the right of universal empire, has stained her hands with human gore, and
become the land of despotism -- her rulers the most cruel of oppressors -- The
laws are hateful -- inhumanly severe --
For every trifle, blood. For sheep, or oxen,
Blood must flow. For a few paltry guineas -- Blood.
Through all the penal page, it is naught but blood.


Millions have lately fallen, as unpitied victims at ambition's shrine -- Dr.
PORTEUS, Bishop of London.
One murder made a villain,
Millions a hero -- Princes were privileged
To kill, and numbers sanctified the crime.
Ah! why will Kings forget that they are men?
And men that they are brethren? why delight
In human sacrifice? why burst the ties
Of nature, that should knit their souls together
In one soft bond of amity and love?
Yet still they breathe destruction, still go on
Inhumanly ingenious to find out
New pains for life, new terrors for the grave.
Artificers of death! still monarchs dream
Of universal empire growing up
From universal ruin. -- Blast the design,
GREAT GOD of hosts nor let thy creatures fall
Unpitied victims at AMBITION's shrine.


To rescue mankind from these dreadful woes, was the labor and toil of the late
illustrious character. For this he was raised up and qualified -- for this he
fought -- for this he prayed, and in the possession of this he rejoiced. In the
victories he obtained, and in the nation's quiet enjoyment of these invaluable
blessings, he sheathed his sword, retired to his shade and glorified his God.

SECONDLY, Eminent, or mighty in words. Few they were but weighty; as well
chosen, as the subjects which called for them were important. The gentleman,
the scholar, the statesman, the warrior and the christian shine forth in his
letters of correspondence, on all public lie as well as private occasions,
while his diction in his farewell address and last legacy to his dear
countrymen and fellow-citizens, discovers his genius and eloquence. His word
was a law -- not enforced by arbitrary authority, but by reason and argument,
and as cheerfully was he obeyed as he humbly commanded. His words were fitly
spoken, therefore, like apples of gold in pictures of silver.

THIRDLY. Eminent, or mighty in deeds. Read the history of the revolution --
Contemplate the blessings enjoyed as the fruit of his labors, and with me you
will join in ascribing the glory to God, as the author, while acknowledging the
merit and praise due to his wisdom, courage and prudence, as the instrument.
Eulogium upon eulogium and oration upon oration has been delivered and
circulated through the union to make the impression of his virtues upon our
minds more plain and clear, and to emulate our youth with becoming ardour to
imitate his bright example, that generations yet to come may see and be
astonished at the great things the Lord has done for this highly favored
nation, through the indefatigable labors of this great man. These American
shores are now become the grand assylum for the oppressed of every nation, and
here may be found the footsteps of an indulgent providence, while drops of
mercy are in many parts falling to cheer us with the delightful prospect of the
wilderness being turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field into the
garden of the Lord.

I should encroach upon the office of the historian and do injustice to the
character of the American Hero, were I to attempt to unfold his plans, to
describe his exploits, his battles, his victories and the fruits of all, in the
vast variety of blessed consequences which follow. While we admire the man, let
us admire that wisdom which directed his mind and conduct -- that power which
shielded him from every danger and that goodness which rendered him successful
in promoting and establishing the liberty, independence and prosperity of his
country; and let us bow with cheerful submission to the will of God in his
removal from us, fully persuaded that the God of America is at no loss to raise
up an Elisha to catch the falling mantle of our deceased Elijah. Amidst all
these prominent marks of wisdom and true excellency, Washington was but a man,
a moral man and a sinner, who needed the blood of the covenant to atone for his
guilt, the Christ to illuminate and renew his soul, as well as every other
branch of the earthly family. Could he now be an eye witness of our devotion,
and were it in his power to address us, instead of soliciting our homage and
adoration, he would check that promptitude for creature worship* and with the
angel say "See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants, worship God." He
would direct our attention to one infinitely more deserving our adoration, than
even the most useful and celebrated mortal, even to CHRIST JESUS, and to the
character of this glorious person I now call your attention, who was before
Abraham and who is a greater than Solomon, even God's fellow, and in whom
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily -- Who is both white and ^^ddy,
the chief among ten thousand and altogether lovely -- whose head is as the most
fine gold, and whose locks are bushy and black as a raven -- who came from
heaven upon the kind errand of peace, who fought our battles, gained our
victories and invites us to gather up the spoils -- Our situation, as sinners,
was deplorable in the extreme, hopeless and helpless as to any assistance we
could afford or had any reason to expect, left like the new born infant in the
open field to perish without any eye to pity or hand to save. An all-sufficient
Redeemer was provided -- What shall his name be called? IMMANUEL, "God with
us." God in our nature, God on our side: He stooped from heaven to earth, he
suffered the just for the unjust, fulfilled all righteousness, magnified the
law, died to atone our guilt, ascended on high as the mighty conqueror, and now
lives, ever lives to make intercession even for transgressors. Thus he fought
our battles, vanquished our foes, obtained a complete victory over sin, death
and hell; received the approbation of his Father in these words of inspiration,
"This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased," and opened the gates of
life and salvation, with the most pressing invitation, and sure promise of
acceptance, on our laying down the weapons of hostility, falling at the
footstool of mercy and pleading the promise of his grace.

HE was endued with wisdom. "In him were hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge;" for "In him dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead," that "out of his
fullness we might receive grace for grace."

HE was mighty in words -- O what gracious words dropped from his lips! well
might one say "His lips are like lilies dropping sweet smelling myrrh." The
gospel of salvation in all its variety, beauty and sweetness is as "Good news
from a far country."

HERE are warnings, reproofs, invitations and promises* Words of peace to his
friends, but terror to his foes. In some instances they have been words
conveying light and giving life; comforting, healing, supporting and
establishing. In others, they have been the savor of death unto death. "If our
gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost." While these words speak
comfort to the mourner, they speak terror to the impenitent sinner. -- Mighty
in words by making use of the weakest of instruments to accomplish his great
and glorious purposes, that the excellency of the power might be known to be of
God and not of man. Mighty in deeds as well as in words. What has he not done
to satisfy the demands of justice and make honorable the law which we have
broken? -- What has he not done to make known his word of truth, in spite of
all the opposition of earth and hell? What has he not done in order to bring
home with almighty power and efficacy the word of salvation to the hearts of
his people, and in guiding, guarding and comforting them, and enabling them to
persevere, that they might receive the end of their faith, even the salvation
of their souls, and in crowning all their efforts with glory, honor,
immortality and eternal life. -- While therefore, some make the fruitless
attempt, to deify the celebrated WASHINGTON, in whom was united such an
assemblage of natural, moral and divine excellencies, the greatest ornaments of
human nature, that in his countenance was portrayed the greatness of his soul
and the dignity of his character, so that vice before Him stood abashed, and
conscious guilt appal'd, shrunk back, while others have, in vain, attempted to
make him an advocate above, exalting him to the skies upon the foundation of
his virtues, thereby tarnishing his character as a Christian, dishonoring their
maker, and eclipsing the glory of the Savior of mankind -- While others,
again, considered his military, literary and personal accomplishments, as the
price of his future rewards, they fully his reputation, and little think, he
spoke, he wrote, he fought and conquered for the interest of others, and with
an eye to a state of futurity -- Vain, deluded mortals! The Christian Hero is
degraded by such romance. The nation is insulted, while religion disowns the
foundation on which such principles are built. Let us bow with reverence before
the great Arbiter of the universe, and celebrate the birth, mourn the death and
rejoice in the prospect of uniting with our beloved WASHINGTON in ascriptions
of praise to HIM who has conferred such inestimable favors on this happy land.

LET us not attempt to bring down the curse of Heaven by turning from the
worship of the Creator, to that of the creature. -- Ever may we improve the
blessings we enjoy, by acknowledging the hand which bestowed them with
thankfulness and humility, expressed by the cheerful obedience of our lives to
his will. As fallen sinners in bondage to sin and Satan, cry to this deliverer,
enlist under his banner, trust to his wisdom and soon the battle will be over,
the victory gained and salvation ascribed to him to whom alone it is due.


