CHEAP REPOSITORY. Number 13.]

THE CHEAPSIDE APPRENTICE; OR, THE HISTORY of Mr. FRANCIS H***.

Fully setting forth the Danger of Playing with Edge Tools. Showing also, how a
gay Life may prove a short one; and that a merry Evening may produce a
sorrowful Morning.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, No. 147 HIGH STREET.

1800.

[Price 4 Cents.]

THE CHEAPSIDE APPRENTICE, etc.
ATTEND, ye young men, who are about to enter into trade, for to you I write my
story. I was bound apprentice to a respectable tradesman in Cheapside. My
master, Mr. Vincent, had acquired a very fair character, whilst he was making a
comfortable fortune. His wife was a dressy, flashy woman, who liked visiting
and jaunting more than taking care of her family; whilst my master was plodding
late at night in the compting-house, Mrs. Vincent and her daughters were either
making parties abroad, or giving entertainments at home. As we kept no footman.
I was allowed, when shop was shut, to run from one public place to another to
call a coach, to bring Mrs. Vincent and her daughters home. To lounging about
the perleus of a Playhouse I owe my ruin. I was generally allowed to be a
handsome, well-made young man; this unfortunately drew upon me the notice of a
set of those wretched women, who nightly crowd the Theaters; I should have been
delighted with the notice they took of me, had not my vanity whispered me that
Miss Vincent was in love with me. This suspicion was fully confirmed to me by
one Potter, an elder apprentice, but for whose wicked advice, I might have
lived happily, and died virtuously.

The idea that Miss Vincent was in love with me, at once completed me for the
coxcomb; I now neglected my business, and to dress out my person became the
only object of my thoughts; I began to commit little frauds on my master, in
order to obtain money to dress out; for, ever since Potter had laughed me out
of my religion, every principle of moral honesty fat loosely upon me.

I am sorry to say, the holy Sabbath in our family was only distinguished from
other days by the shutting of the shop; my master spent the greater part of it
posting his books, and my mistress and her daughters were either dressing to go
abroad, or else to receive company at home. We young men, indeed, were sent to
church, but as we had no examples set us by the heads of the family going
thither themselves, Potter and I generally hired a gig, and dashed away from
one tea-drinking place to another; these scenes soon made me lose all respect
for Virtue and Religion. It was at the Dog and Duck I first saw the infamous
Miss West; she was many years older than myself, her person was as lovely as
her heart was wicked. She was no sooner informed that I was to come into
possession of 3000l. the day I came of age, than she made use of all her
deceitful arts to ensnare both my soul and body, as she often prompted me to
defraud my master to supply her extravagance. My attachment to Miss Vincent was
now on the decline, for Miss West had so far wrought upon my vanity, as to make
me believe that so handsome a young fellow as I was, should look higher than a
tradesman's daughter. From that moment I treated Miss Vincent with the most
marked neglect, although I saw my conduct cut her to the heart; yet, at the
same time I was base enough to borrow money of her, which I wantonly squandered
away on Miss West.

When Potter's apprenticeship expired, instead of improving his fortune by
throwing it into trade, he plunged at once into all the vices of the Town. He
possessed a plausible kind of prate, which caused him to be appointed Chairman
to our Club, which was chiefly composed of clerks and apprentice boys. Potter's
principal excellence consisted in singing a merry song, telling an indecent
story, and teaching his hearers to laugh at morality, and set all religion at
defiance, for religion he maintained, was only an old woman's tale, invented,
by cunning heads to keep children and fools in order.

There was an honest old Porter lived in our family, who for some time had set
himself to watch my conduct, and at length he made such a faithful report of it
to my master, that he gave up my indentures, and turned, me out of doors.

I was too much delighted with my liberty, to feel the least sense of shame at
the means by which I obtained it.

I was sorry, however, to break off entirely with Miss Vincent, for I still had
a lurking affection for her; I told Potter so; his inventive genius soon laid a
plan whereby I might get her into my power, and take a complete revenge on her
whole family at the same time. This was by writing her a letter, setting forth
the violence of my love, the unmerited disgrace I had received from her family,
and at the same time requesting her to grant me a private meeting, in order
that I might justify my conduct to her, as otherwise I feared the violence of
my passion would drive me to a fit of despair.

This poor imprudent girl met me at the time, and place appointed. I will not
here shock my readers with relating the vile stratagems I made use of to
complete the ruin of this young lady, nor the tremendous oaths I swore to
repair her wrongs by marriage, as soon as I came of age, which would be in a
very few months; this somewhat abated her sorrow for the the very indiscreet
step she had taken.

The day I became of age, I went down into the country. My friends having been
apprized of my profligate life, received me very coldly. I practiced the
deepest hypocricy on my good mother, to make her believe I was quite a reformed
man, in order to wheedle her out of a sum of money, telling her at the same
time, I had an immediate prospect of entering into a very profitable concern
with a partner of great responsibility, if I could but increase my capital.

"Frank," said she, with firmness, "there is no trusting to your promises; as
long as your conduct deserved my love, you ever found me an indulgent mother,
but you shall never have cause to say, I acted toward you like a weak woman,
by robbing my virtuous children, to supply the wanton extravagance of a
profligate son. Your wicked life, Frank, has nearly broken my heart, but it
shall not shake my justice." The well known steadiness of my mother's temper
convinced me at once she was not further to be imposed upon by the fallacy of
my arguments.

As soon as I had settled my business, I returned to London to Miss Vincent,
who had waited for me with the utmost patience, fully expecting I was come to
fulfill my promise of marriage to her "I can struggle with want, dear Frank,"
said she, "but I will never consent to live in shame."

Nothing I am certain hardens the heart like vice, for although this poor young
creature was brought into a very trying situation by the prospect of soon
becoming a mother, I swore I would never make her my wife, who had disgraced
herself by living with me as a mistress. On hearing this, in all the tender
agonies of grief, she urged me to repair the wrongs I had done her, reminding
me at the same time of the wicked arts I had made use of to beguile her of her
innocence, and then, with clasped hands and streaming eyes, she threw herself
on her knees before me, beseeching me to pity the agonies which rent her soul,
yet my hardened nature was untouched by her sorrow, again I solemnly swore I
never would marry her.

Through excess of grief she sainted away, in which pitiable state I left her
to the care of a servant, went out and spent the rest of the evening with Miss
West, whose flinty heart turned into ridicule the sorrowful tale I related to
her.

On returning to my lodgings the next morning, I was informed Miss Vincent had
left them without leaving behind her the least information where she was to be
found, and much did I rejoice when I heard it, that she had taken herself off
so quietly.

I now lavished my money as though it would never have an end. By all I was
esteemed the most noble spirited fellow in the world, and even little wits
would be silent in my presence, because I was sure to pay for the wine upon
which they were to riot. My cash at length beginning to run low, as I had been
all along drawing from the principal, I advised with Potter how to get
furnished with future supplies. He advised the gaming table as a never-^ailing
friend, saying it had long since been the only resource from whence he derived
his subsistence.

I took his advice, and for some months was so successful, that I began to dash
away in higher life at the West end of the Town. I bought an elegant phaeton
which I drove every Sunday in Hyde Park, with Miss West by my side. One day as
I was driving furiously through Temple Bar, I had the misfortune to overturn a
poor man with a heavy load on his back, and on his getting up I perceived him
to be Mr. Vincent's old porter, to whom I formerly owed my disgrace.

"Ah! ah! what is it you, young hopeful?" cried he, on seeing to whom he owed
his misfortune, "well, he must needs go whom the devil drives; thy prancing
nags may die a natural death, master Frank, but verily, I think it is more than
thou will, boy, for if thou die in thy shoes, the gallows will be robbed of
it is due. What is become of poor Patty Vincent, thou profligate dog, have thou
broken her heart, as thou have that of her poor afflicted parents?"

The sudden recollection of that unfortunate girl caused such a swimming in my
heed, that the reins dropped from my hands, my horses took fright, and it was
almost a miracle that I got home alive. The porter's words had made such an
impression on my mind, that I could not shake them off. Soon after Potter
calling in upon me, I told him of my interview with the old porter, and also
the effect it had on me. "Frank," said he, if a fellow of thy spirit can be
thus easily overcome by qualms of conscience, let us instantly adjourn to the
tavern, since good wine is the best remedy in the world to drown all uneasy
recollections in." I gladly accepted his proposal, we called a coach, and off
we went. He no sooner saw my spirits inflamed with wine, than he drew me to the
gaming table, where, before morning, I lost every shilling I had in the world;
I applied to Potter to lend me 50 guineas, as he had won more than 200 of me.

Laughing heartily he told me, it had ever been a maxim with him, never to lend
his money to a man who had not prudence to keep his own; "but harkee, Frank,"
said he, "I Will give thee my best advice gratis: such a noble spirited young
fellow as thou art, needs never be at a loss for money, while he can snap a
trigger, and the highway is lest open for him to practice upon. Men who follow
the same course of pleasure, are the last people in the world to help each
other in the hour of distress; virtuous men, Frank, only feel for the wants of
their friends, and they alone find pleasure in relieving them." He then
whistled himself off.

When I got home, I sat revolving in my mind how to get myself out of my
present difficulties, when in a fatal moment, Satan whispered in my ears the
word FORGERY. At first I started at the thought, but my poverty was clamorous,
my pride startled at disgrace, although my conscience did not shudder at the
crime. I knew I could copy Mr. Vincent's hand exactly, I snatched up the pen to
draw a bill upon him for 500l. but a cold shivering seizing me, it dropped from
my singers, a strong sense of my guilt now overtook me, I tore what I had
written to pieces, and exclaimed, I am a free man again; and for a moment felt
thankful that I had been enabled to resist the violence of temptation. I sat
pondering, however, how I should maintain myself, again I was assaulted with
the dread of poverty, and again I snatched up the pen, drew the fatal bill, and
instantly went out and got it accepted.

But the moment I sought to take rest at night on my pillow, I felt as if all
the horrors of Hell had seized me. I jumped out of bed in my sleep, and was
going to throw myself out of the window, having dreamt that I was apprehended,
the people of the house, awakened by my cries, ran into the room, concluding
some villains had broken in, and were going to murder me.

I never afterward went into the street but my fears told me I was the subject
of conversation of all the people I met. Once I happened to hear one man say to
another, pointing to a third, "that is he, that is he," I took to my heels,
concluding that I myself was meant, and ran from one street to another, without
knowing whither, till my sight failed me, and through loss of breath, I dropped
down in a fit. Some humane people, however recovered me, and put me into a
hackney coach which carried me home.

One day, a sudden gust of wind blew open my chamber door, again I concluded
the officers were coming to take me. Snatching up the poker to defend myself, I
swore I would not be taken alive, when turning about suddenly. I caught a
glimpse of myself in the glass, my eyes looked wild, my lips quivered, my jaws
dropped, my teeth shattered, and my body shook, as though the last agonies of
death were upon me. On finding I was once more become the dupe of my fears, my
spirits rallied again, I dressed and went to the play; there I met Sally West,
whom I had not seen for some weeks; for, to say the truth, I dreaded to meet an
old acquaintance from the time I committed the forgery; after the play, we went
off together to sup at a tavern, we had not been there a quarter of an hour
when she made an excuse for quitting the room in about ten minutes she returned
to me, expressing in the tenderest terms the satisfaction she had to see me
again.

We were, as I believed, just going to sit down to supper, when the waiters
came in followed by two of Sir John Fielding's men. Immediately, with the
greatest coolness, Miss West arose, and and laying her hand on my shoulder
exclaimed, 'the Philistines be upon thee, Samson.' "Gentlemen," continued she
to the officers, "this is my good friend Mr. Francis H**** of whom you have
been some time in search. Perhaps Frank, continued she, "you do not know that
your forgery is discovered, and that 100l. reward is offered for taking you,
when I left the room just now it was to write a note to these gentlemen,
signifying to them where you were to be found; I see you are terrified, but
hear me for the last time perhaps, and you will less wonder at my conduct.
Early in life, Frank, I was betrayed to ruin, by a base designing man; my
reputation once blasted, I was deserted by all the virtuous part of my own sex;
by having bad examples always before my eyes, I soon became hardened in sin and
abandoned to shame. I have lately contracted debts; if they are not immediately
discharged I shall be sent to a jail; this jail I know not how to avoid but by
sending you thither in my stead, as the reward offered for taking you will just
set me free from my creditors."

I was struck motionless with terror, and fainted away on the officers
approaching to tie my hands behind me; not had I the least recollection of what
passed, till I found myself safe locked in my prison. About a week after this,
the keeper came to tell me, there was a prisoner lately brought in who was very
desirous of seeing me, and as she appeared an object of great pity, he offered
to conduct me to her. On entering the chamber, I saw a young woman very
shabbily dressed, lying on a miserable bed, in a very weak condition.

"Do thou not know me, Frank?" said she in a hollow broken voice? "Have thou
lost all remembrance of Patty Vincent." I felt instantly as if struck with a
thunderbolt. "Merciful heaven?" cried I, falling on my knees by the bedside, "I
am unable to bear the punishment my crimes have brought upon me! O God of mercy
support my troubled soul." She kindly urged me to be comforted, said she wished
not to see me to reproach me for the evils I had brought upon her, but only to
tell me with her last breath that she forgave me. "It is not an hour since,
Frank," continued she, "that I heard you were my fellow prisoner, and what is
worse at my father's suit. I will not reproach you, Frank, I tell you again,
for all the miseries you have brought upon me, because you are a prisoner and
in chains. If my breath will hold out, I will endeavor to give you a short
history of myself since we parted. On your refusing to make me your lawful
wife, I quitted your lodgings, resolving by my labor to eat the bread of
industry rather than follow a course of vice for a wretched subsistence. I
hired a garret in Holborn, where I applied for needle work, and soon obtained
it. In about three months after our separation, my infant came into the world,
I sold my clothes for my support during my confinement, but that resource soon
failed me. My health and strength declined, I was seized with a constant fever
and cough, and quite unable to supply the scanty morsel of bread for the day,
yet resolved to die rather than afflict my dear parents with the knowledge of
my misery. At length being too weak to labor, I contracted several small
debts, for which I was seized and brought hither, I have however since been
prevailed upon to send my poor hal^ famished baby to my parents, hoping they
will afford her that bread which her dying mother dared not ask for herself."
Observing I was speechless with agony, poor Patty went on, "I did not wish to
see you, Frank, to afflict you, I wish only to warn you with my dying breath to
repent the evil of your ways, and humble your soul before God. Repentance for
sin, Frank, though bitter for the moment, yet I have found healthful to the
soul, and however the wicked who are at ease, may deride the God who made them,
yet the sighing and the sorrowing heart will flee unto him, as the only present
help in time of trouble; I shall very soon lay down my heavy burden of sickness
and sorrow, and escape from a darksome prison, as I humbly trust, to
everlasting rest. -- O Frank! Frank! it is far safer to die a penitent in a
jail, than to live in a palace, with a heart untouched with God's grace."

Here she was interrupted by the unexpected entrance of Mr. and Mrs. Vincent. O
ye, who shall hereafter read my story, drop a tear of pity at the agony I now
endured! They no sooner beheld their child, than each by turns tenderly
embraced her, assured her of their forgiveness, and gently child her, for
having concealed herself so long, adding, that as a penitent child they would
most gladly have received her, though they would have shunned her, if they
found her living in prosperous wickedness. She thanked them, and said.

"Mourn not my death, my dearest parents, but rather rejoice that I die
penitent for my transgression, and since I have received your blessing and
forgiveness, I have but one more favor to ask in life, which is, that you my
kind father, will extend your pity toward that young man," pointing to me. "O
save him, if possible from an ignominious death, and remember, that my child is
also his. My business in life is done, and now, O heavenly Father! receive my
spirit, and pardon my sin through Jesus Christ my Redeemer." Here her speech
failed her, and after a few convulsive struggles she expired.

Great Heaven! is there any punishment for me to suffer hereafter beyond what I
endured at the moment? A dead silence succeeded for some time, my groans only
were heard. As soon as Mr. Vincent had somewhat recovered the shock, he raised
himself from the body of his child, and spoke to me as follows:

"Behold, O young man, the calamities which thy crimes have brought on my
family! Behold, my departed child lying on the bosom of her fainting mother;
yet I am not insensible to the agonies which rend thy soul, and sorry am I to
add to them, by telling thee, thy excellent mother went out of her senses, on
hearing thou had committed a crime, by which thou had forfeited thy life
to the laws of thy country. O Frank! Frank! what deep distress can one
profligate child bring on whole families! Thy crimes, alas! have brought on thy
own destruction, for I fear it will not be in my power to befriend thee on thy
trial, much as I am disposed to do it in consideration of thy relations. Too
late, Frank, thou must now see, how fatal an excessive love of pleasure must
prove to a young tradesman. Honest industry is generally a sure road to wealth:
as a sober religious life is to happiness. To thy cost thou must already have
experienced, that the wicked can have no dependence upon each other, since thou
art betrayed, and brought to shame, by those very fr^^nds who first led thy
youth astray."

"O, Sir," cried I, "few and evil have been my days, but the great God above,
who knows the secrets of all hearts can alone judge of the sorrows of mine it
is not, Sir; the punishment of death which I fear, but the just vengeance of
offended Heaven which must follow it; for though a very young man, I am a very
old sinner. Alas! my dear, and honored mother, is it then true, that the
crimes of your own child have robbed you of your senses? And yet the merciful
hand of God has hitherto with held his vengeance from striking me dead. To whom
shall I fly for mercy and pity in my distress? from the law I cannot expect it,
and from the offended Majesty of high Heaven I dare not hope it, since my
present punishment is but the certain wages of my sin." Here I am told I fell
into strong convulsion fits, and in that condition was conveyed to my cell.

Written the Night before my Execution.
It is a month since I was put on my trial, and my guilt being fully proved by
the Court, I am condemned to hang by the neck till I am DEAD! DEAD! DEAD!

O, ye thoughtless young men, who have forsaken the God of Heaven to follow
after the enticing pleasures of this world, attend to my words, as to those of
a man speaking to you from the grave, since the dawn of that day is now
breaking on the world, in which I shall be numbered with the dead. Although, at
the time I write, I am in all the prime of youth, and all the vigor of health,
I shall this day die a just victim to the broken laws; and my precious soul may
be consigned over to everlasting torments, unless the great Judge of all things
will be graciously pleased to accept my sorrow for my sin, through a gracious
Redeemer.

My days are numberered, my hours are few, and the tolling bell will soon be
summoning me to meet my God in judgment. The convulsive struggles of death are
already upon me before I reach the gallows, whereon I must shortly hang as a
warning spectacle to gaping thousands, and from whence I must shoot through the
great gulf which parts

TIME from ETERNITY!

O, blessed Lord, have mercy on my soul!

The above story was found in the young man's pocket after his execution.

THE HYMN.
Father of light, O cleanse my stains,
Look on a sinner vile;
In dungeon dark, oppressed with chains,
Deign thou on me to smile.
Condemned to die by human laws,
I own my sentence just,
With mercy mild judge thou my cause,
Who art my only trust.
Though great my crime and short my race,
My FAITH and HOPE receive;
Since souls enriched with pard'ning grace,
With thee shall ever live.
Then farewell all beneath the skies,
The sting of death is over;
O may my trembling spirit rise,
Where sin shall be no more.
THE END.
TRUE EXAMPLES OF THE Interposition of Providence, IN THE DISCOVERY AND
PUNISHMENT OF MURDER, (By that famous Magistrate, Mr. Justice, Fielding.)
A Man was taken up on suspicion of Murder, but when brought to the Bar, the
evidence appeared not strong enough to convict him. He pretended to be quite
easy about the matter, and behaved with great boldness, because he knew there
was no witness to the fact, for he had really committed the Murder, and had
taken every caution to prevent a discovery; making use of all that care and
prudence which are always much sharpened by a sense of guilt, though they have
hardly ever been known to answer the end; some one circumstance being generally
overlooked, by the permission of Divine Providence, in order to lead to a sure,
though perhaps distant discovery. Sooner or later all sins come to light.

When he came upon his trial, the Judge observed in the Man's countenance an
uneasiness, terror, and confusion, which all his pretended boldness, and
protestations of innocence could not hide. This much increased his suspicion,
and he therefore kept his eye steadily fixed on his face during the whole time.
As soon as the last witness was dismissed, the Man asked, with pretended
coolness, if they had any more evidence to produce against him. The Judge fixed
his eyes sternly upon his face, and in a very solemen manner asked him this
question. Friend, do you not yourself know that one could appear against you,
whose evidence would put the matter out of all doubt? -- At this the Man
started, looked extremely terrified, and eagerly cried out -- "My Lord, he is
not a legal witness, no Man can speak in his own cause, nor was the wound I
gave him half so large as what he shows against me."

The Judge, who had a very deep knowledge of human nature, presently perceived
by the Man's starting, and the wildness and terror of his look, that he was the
real Murderer, and that in the distraction of a guilty conscience his
imagination had raised up to his mind the Ghost of the Murdered man. The Judge
therefore acting upon such a reasonable supposition, talked to the prisoner
accordingly. By his farther examination, he soon brought him to confess that he
had been guilty of the Murder for which he was now tried; though, as was said
above he had made sure of being acquitted, because he knew no human witness
could be brought to appear against him. But the justice of God made his own
conscience his accuser. After this full confession of the fact, he was
condemned, and hanged in chains at the very place where he declared the Murder
had been committed. At his death he confessed that his guilty conscience was so
haunted with the crime, that upon his trial he verily believed that the Ghost
of the Murdered Man had stood before him with a wound, twice as large as that
which he had given him,

Account of Another MURDER.
(Recorded by the same Author)
A Gentleman in good circumstances was so desperately wicked as ^o murder his
Friend, a Man in business near Bow-Church in Cheapside; and with such
aggravated circumstances of malice, revenge, and cruelty, as made it impossible
for him to expect any mercy, if his crime should ever be found out. He
therefore made his escape into France, where he lived for some years, and began
to fancy that he was quite safe; but GOD's thoughts are not as our thoughts,
and the voice of blood will be heard by Almighty vengeance sooner or later. But
from the horrors of his guilty conscience, which almost every night presented
before his Eyes, whether sleeping or waking, his murdered Friend, he felt
tenfold the punishment which by flight he had vainly hoped to escape.

After twenty years residence, or rather wandering abroad, through most parts
of Europe, (for his mind was not quiet enough to let him live long in the same
place) he resolved to return back into England. -- He changed his name, and as
time and change of climate had altered his person, he doubted not but he might
in some retired part of the Country, wear out the remainder of his days, and
perhaps recover that peace of mind which he had there left behind him.

But public Justice though slow at last overtook him; for the very evening that
he landed in a Wherry at Queen-Hithe Stairs, as he was walking up Cheapside in
order to get into a Coach, just in the dusk, and by the very door of his
Murdered Friend, he heard a voice cry "stop him, stop him, there he is." -- On
this he ran as fast as he was able, and soon found himself followed by a great
Mob. He was soon overtaken and seized: on which he cried out with extreme
terror -- "I confess the fact; I am the Man that did it."

The Mob hereupon said, as he had confessed the crime they would immedi^ately
proceed to execution, and after they had made him refund the stolen goods, they
would give him the discipline of pumping, dragging him through the kennel and
the like. On this he said he had stolen nothing, for though he had murdered Mr.
L. yet he had no intention of robbing his house.

By this unexpected answer the Mob found themselves mistaken; for they were
pursuing a pick-pocket* and seeing this man run hard, they concluded him to be
the pick-pocket: and now they were for letting him go as a person distracted
that knew not what he said. One man however who had long lived in that
neighborhood, and heard of the Murder of Mr. L. so long ago, desired the
strange Gentleman might be examined before a Magistrate. He was accordingly
carried before the Lord Mayor, who took his confession of the fact for which he
was soon after hanged. He declared at the Gallows that disgraceful as his
punishment was, yet the day of his execution was the happiest he had known
since he committed that horrid, treacherous, and inhuman act, the murder of a
Friend who loved him, and to whom he had the highest obligations.

Account of another MURDER.
(Recorded by the same Author.)
IN Leicestershire not far from Lutterworth, lived a Miller, who having a
grudge against a man, had murdered him in his Mill, and privately buried him in
his Garden. Not long after he had committed this horrid crime, the Miller found
means to change his place of abode, and settled in another country a great way
off. Here he lived a long time, believing that his villainy would never be
discovered; but this hardened wretch did not reflect, that though no
fellow creature saw him, GOD did, and that though God is patient and
long-suffering, he seldom fails to bring wicked actions to light in this world,
and never fails to punish them in the next. Twenty years had now passed over
his head in safety, and he thought he might without any danger venture to
return to visit some old friends in the village where he had formerly lived.
All is now safe thought he, and it is impossible the old story should be ever
brought to light.

Just at that very time while he was on this visit in his native village, by
the Providence of GOD, the Miller who had present possession of the Mill,
having occasion to dig uncommonly deep in his Garden, found the Body, or rather
the Bones of the Murdered Man. -- The neighbors then recollected that about
twenty years ago, a man had been missing in the Parish, and was never heard of
after. Some likewise recollected who was then owner of the Mill, and that very
Miller being now in the Parish, they all ran to the house where he was, and
surrounding it called on him as the Murderer of the Person whose bones had been
thus providentially discovered. The wretched Miller was so shocked and
confounded with the sudden and general accusation; and Conscience, which had
slept for twenty years, was now so horribly stung, that he soon confessed the
Fact, was tried, found guilty, and executed according to his just deserts.

The following observations of this wise and famous Magistrate, being
unhappily, just as well suited to the present time, as the time when that great
Man wrote them, I hope they may he useful to my Readers.

That the most dreadful crime of Murder, has of late years increased in a very
deplorable degree in this Kingdom, is a fact which every Man must confess, and
which every good Man must very bitterly lament. Till this age indeed, cruel and
bloody actions were so seldom heard of in England, that when they happened,
they appeared as prodigies, and raised not only the astonishment, but the
abhorrence of the People -- Murder is but very lately began to be common among
us.

For my part I sincerely declare I can discover no more than one cause of the
horrid evil of which I am complaining -- ONE indeed perfectly capable of
producing every mischief, and which has more than all other causes contributed
to produce, and to increase all the evils with which the public is at present
so extremely afflicted.

My sensible Reader will presently guess what I mean. -- I mean that general
NEGLECT. I fear I may say CONTEMPT OF RELIGION, which has within these few
years, so fatally overspread this whole Kingdom, till it has reached the very
lowest ranks of Men: -- It cannot be otherwise, for when we think of the solemn
threatenings of ALMIGHTY GOD against the crime of Murder, how is it possible to
think that a creature who believes that there is a GOD should, unless he be a
Fool, or a Madman, thus audaciously fly in the face of that AWFUL BEING, in
whose words we must be assured is all truth, and in whose right hand is all
power.

A Prayer to GOD, that our National CRIMES may not bring down National
PUNISHMENT.
WHERE Justice waves her vengeful hand
Tremendous over a guilty land,
Almighty GOD thy awful power,
With fear and trembling, we adore.
Where shall we fly, but to thy feet?
Our only refuge is thy seat;
Thy seat, where potent mercy pleads,
And hurls thy thunder from our heads.
While peace and plenty blessed our days,
Where was the tribute of thy praise?
Ungrateful race! how have we spent
The blessings which thy goodness lent.
But when distress and wasting war
With threatening frown thy wrath appear;
Still war and want are but thy slaves,
Nor can destroy when mercy saves.
Look down, O LORD, with pitying eye;
Though loud our crimes for vengeance cry;
Let mercy's louder voice prevail,
Nor thy long-suffering patience fail.
Encouraged by the sacred word,
May we not plead the blessed record,
That when a humbled nation mourns,
Thy rising wrath to pity turns;
O let thy sovereign grace impart
Contrition to each rocky heart,
And bid sincere repentance flow,
A general undissembled woe!
Fair smiling peace again restore,
With plenty bless the industrious poor
And may a happy thankful land
Obedient own thy guardian hand.
FINIS.
The following is a List of the REPOSITORY TRACTS already published by B. and
J. JOHNSON, and now for Sale at their Book-Store, No. 147. Market St.
PHILADELPHIA.
No. 1. Containing The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain, Part I. and the Lancashire
Collier Girl. No. 2. The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain, Part II. and The Sorrows
of Yamba. No. 3. The Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, The Horse race,
and the Plow Boy's dream. No. 4. The wonderful Advantages of Adventuring in the
Lottery, and the Happy Waterman. No. 5. The two Wealthy Farmers, Part I No. 6.
Ditto. Part II. No. 7. Ditto. Part III. No. 8. Ditto. Part IV. No. 9. Ditto.
Part V. and A New Christmas Hymn. No. 10. Sorrowful Sam, and An Account of a
pious Negro. No. 11. Tom White the postilion. Part I. No. 12. Ditto. Part II.
and The Grand Assizes. No. 13. The Cheapside Apprentice, True Examples of the
discovery of Murder, and A Prayer in Verse.
Next Week will be published Husbandry Moralized; and An Antidote for
Slandering and Backbiting.

