[CHEAP RESPOSITORY.] [No. IX]

THE Two Wealthy Farmers; Or, the History of Mr. BRAGWELL. PART V.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON. NO* 147 HIGH STREET.

1800. [Price 4 Cents Or 2^ 4 l. per. doz.]

THE Two Wealthy Farmers, etc. PART V.
O Mr. Worthy, said Bragwell, this blow is too heavy for me, I cannot survive
this shock. I do not desire it, I only desire to die. We are very apt to talk
most of dying when we are least fit for it, said Worthy. This is not the
language of that submission which makes us prepare for death, but of that
despair which makes us out of humor with life. O, Mr. Bragwell, you are indeed
disappointed of the grand ends which made life so delightful to you; but till
your heart is humbled, till you are brought to a serious conviction of sin,
till you are brought to see what is the true end of life, you can have no hope
in death. You think you have no business on earth, because those for whose sake
you too eagerly heaped up riches are no more. But is there not under the canopy
of heaven some afflicted being whom you may yet relieve, some modest merit
which you may bring forward, some helpless creature you may save by your
advice, some perishing christian you may sustain by your wealth? When you have
no sins of your own to repent of, no mercies of God to be thankful for, no
miseries of others to relieve, then, and not till then, I consent you should
sink down in despair, and call on death to relieve you.

Mr. Worthy attended his afflicted friend to the funeral of his unhappy
daughter and her babe. The solemn service, the committing his late gay and
beautiful daughter to darkness, to worms, and to corruption, the sight of the
dead infant, for whose sake he had resumed all his schemes of vanity and
covetousness, when he thought he had got the better of them, the melancholy
conviction that all human prosperity ends in ashes to ashes and dust to dust,
had brought down Mr. Bragwell's self-sufficient and haughty soul into something
of that humble frame in which Mr. Worthy had wished to see it. As soon as they
returned home he was beginning to seize the favorable moment for fixing these
serious impressions, when they were unseasonably interrupted by the parish
officer, who came to ask Mr. Bragwell what he was to do with a poor dying woman
who was traveling the ^ountry with her child, and was taken in a ^^t under the
churchyard wall? At first they thought she was dead, said the man, but finding
she still breathed, they have carried her into the workhouse till she could
give some account of herself. Mr. Bragwell was impatient at the interruption,
which was indeed unseasonable, and told the man he was at that time too much
overcome by sorrow to attend to business, but he would give him an answer
tomorrow. But my friend, said Mr. Worthy, the poor woman may die tonight;
your mind is indeed not in a frame for worldly business, but there is no sorrow
too great to forbid our attending on the calls of duty. An act of christian
charity will not disturb but improve the seriousness of your spirit, and though
you cannot dry your own tears, God may, in great mercy, permit you to dry those
of another. This may be one of those occasions for which I told you life was
worth keeping. Do let us see this woman. Bragwell was not in a state either to
consent or refuse, and his friend drew him to the workhouse, about the door of
which stood a crowd of people. She is not dead, said one, she moves her head.
But she wants air, said they all, while they all, according to custom, pushed
so close upon her that it was impossible she should get any. A fine boy of two
or three years old stood by her, crying, Mammy is dead, mammy is starved. Mr.
Worthy made up to the poor woman, holding his friend by the arm: in order to
give her air he untied a large black bonnet which hid her face, when Mr.
Bragwell, at that moment casting his eyes on her, saw in this poor stranger the
face of his own runaway daughter, Mrs. Incle. He groaned, but could not speak,
and as he was turning away to conceal his anguish, the little boy fondly caught
hold of his hand, lisping out -- O stay, and give mammy some bread. His heart
yearned toward the child, he grasped his little hand in his, while he
sorrowfully said to Mr. Worthy, it is too much, send away the people. It is my
dear naughty child, my punishment is greater than I can bear. Mr. Worthy
desired the people to go and leave the stranger to them; but by this time she
was no stranger to any of them. Pale and meagre as was her face, and poor and
shabby as was her dress, the proud and flaunting Miss Polly Bragwell was easily
known by every one present. They went away with the mean revenge of little
minds, they paid themselves by abuse, for all the airs and insolence they had
once endured from her. Pride must have a fall, said one. I remember when she
was too good to speak to a poor body, said another; where are her flounces and
her furbelows now? It is come home to her at last. Her child looks as if he
would be glad of the worst bit she formerly denied us.

In the mean time Mr, Bragwell had sunk in an old wicker chair which stood
behind, and groaned out, Lord forgive my hard heart! Lord subdue my proud
heart, "create a clean heart, O God and renew a right spirit within me." This
was perhaps the first word of genuine prayer he had ever offered up in his
whole life. Worthy overheard it, and his heart rejoiced, but this was not a
time for talking, but doing. He asked Bragwell what was to be done with the
unfortunate woman, who now seemed to recover fast, but she did not see them,
for they were behind. She embraced her boy, and faintly said, my child what
shall we do? I will arise and go to my father, and say unto him, father I have
sinned against heaven and before thee. This was a joyful found to Mr. Worthy,
who began to hope that her heart might be as much changed for the better as her
circumstances were altered for the worse, and he valued the goods of fortune so
little, and contrition of soul so much, that he began to think the change on
the whole might be a happy one. The boy then sprung from his mother and ran to
Bragwell, saying, Do be good to mammy. Mrs. Incle looking round, now perceived
her father; she fell at his feet, saying, O forgive your guilty child, and save
your innocent one from starving. Bragwell sunk down by her, and prayed God to
forgive both her and himself in terms of genuine sorrow. To hear words of real
penitence and heartfelt prayer from this once high-minded father and vain
daughter, was music to Worthy's ears, who thought this moment of outward misery
was the only joyful one he had ever spent in the Bragwell family. He was
resolved not to interfere, but let the father's own feelings work out the way
in which he was to act. Bragwell said nothing, but slowly led to his own house,
holding the little boy by the hand, and pointing to Worthy to assist the feeble
steps of his daughter, who once more entered her father's door's; but the dread
of seeing her mother quite overpowered her. Mrs. Bragwell's heart was not
changed, but sorrow had weakened her powers of resistance, and she rather
suffered her daughter to come in, than gave her a kind reception. She was more
astonished than pleased; and, even in this trying moment, was more disgusted
with the little boy's mean clothes, than delighted with his rosy face. As soon
as she was a little recovered, Mr. Bragwell desired his daughter to tell him
how she happened to be at that place just at that time.

In a weak voice she began, My tale, Sir, is short, but mournful.

I left your house, my dear father, said Mrs. Incle, with a heart full of vain
triumph. I had no doubt but my husband was a great man who had put on that
disguise to obtain my hand. Judge then what I felt to find that he was a needy
impostor, who wanted my money but did not care for me. This discovery, though
it mortified, did not humble me. I had neither affection to bear with the man
who had deceived me, nor religion to improve by the disappointment. I have
found that change of circumstances does not change the heart, till God is
pleased to do it. My misfortunes only taught me to rebel more against him. I
thought God unjust; I accused my father, I was envious of my sister, I hated my
husband; but never once did I blame myself. My husband picked up a wretched
subsistence by joining himself to any low scheme of idle pleasure that was
going on. He would follow a mountebank, carry a dice-box, or fiddle at a fair.
He was always taunting me for the gentility on which I so much valued myself.
If I had married a poor working girl, said he, she could now have got her
bread; but a fine lady without money, is a burden to her husband and a plague
to society. Every tria^ which affection might have made lighter, we doubled by
animosity; at length my husband was detected in using false dice; he fought
with his accuser, both were seized by a pr^ss-gang, and (...) to (...). I was
now left to the wide world, and miserable as I had thought myself before* I
soon found there were higher (...) misery. I was near my time, without bread
for myself, or hope for my child. I set out on foot in search of the village
where I had heard my husband say his friends lived. It was a severe trial to my
proud heart to stoop to those low people, but hunger is not delicate, and I was
near perishing. My husband's parents received me kindly, saying that though
they had nothing but what they earned by their labor, yet I was welcome to
share their hard fare, for they trusted that God who sent mouths would send
meat also. They gave me a small room in their cottage, and many necessaries,
which they denied themseves.

O, my child, interrupted Bragwell, every word cuts me to the heart. These poor
people gladly gave thee of their little, while thy rich parents left thee to
starve.

How shall I own, continued Mrs. Incle, that all this goodness could not soften
my heart, for God had not yet touched it. I received all their kindness as a
favor done to them. When my father brought me home any little dainty which he
could pick up, and my mother kindly dressed it for me, I would not condescend
to eat it with them, but devoured it sullenly in my little garret alone,
suffering them to fetch and carry every thing I wanted. As my haughty behavior
was not likely to gain their affection, it was plain they did not love me: and
as I had no notion that there were any other motives to good actions but
fondness, or self-interest, I was puzzled to know what could make them so kind
to me, for of the powerful and constrainnig law of christian charity I was
quite ignorant. To cheat the weary hours, I looked about for some books, and
found, among a few others of the same cast, Doddridge's Rise and Progress of
Religion in the Soul. But all those books were ^^dressed to sinners; now as I
knew I w^^ not a sinner I threw them away in d^^^^st. Indeed they were ill
suited to a tast^ ^^rmed by novels, to which reading I chiefly trace my ruin,
for, vain as I was, I should never have been guilty of so wild a step as to run
away, had not my heart been tainted, and my imagination inflamed, by those
pernicious books.

At length my little George was born. This added to the burden I had brought
on this poor family, but it did not diminish their kindness, and we continued
to share their scanty fare without any upbraiding on their part, or any
gratitude on mine. Even this poor baby did not soften my heart; I wept over him
indeed day and night, but they were tears of despair; I was always idle, and
wasted those hours in sinful murmurs at his fate, which I should have employed
in trying to maintain him. Hardship, grief, and impatience, at length brought
on a fever. Death seemed now at hand, and I felt a gloomy satisfaction in the
thought of being rid of my miseries, to which I fear was added, a sullen joy to
think that you, Sir, and my mother, would be plagued to hear of my death when
it would be too late, and (...) this your grief, I anticipated a gloomy sort of
revenge* But it pleased my merciful God not to let me thus perish in my sins.
My poor mother-in-law sent for a good clergyman, who pointed out to me the
danger of dying in that hard and unconverted state so forcibly, that I
shuddered to find on what a dreadful precipice I stood. He prayed with me, and
for me, so earnestly, that at length God, who is sometimes pleased to magnify
his own glory in awakening those who are dead in trespasses and sins, was
pleased, of his free grace to open my blind eyes, and soften my stony heart. I
saw myself a sinner, and prayed to be delivered ^^om the wrath of God, in
comparison of which the poverty and disgrace I now suffered appeared as
nothing. To a soul convinced of sin, the news of a Redeemer was a joyful sound.
Instead of reproaching Providence, or blaming my parents, or abusing my
husband, I now learnt to condemn myself, to adore that God who had not cut me
off in my ignorance, to pray for pardon for the past, and grace for the time to
come. I now desired to submit to penury and hunger in this world, so that I
might but live in the fear of God here, and enjoy his favor in the world to
come. I now learnt to compare my present light sufferings, the consequence of
my own sin, with those bitter sufferings of my Savior which he endured for my
sake, and I was ashamed of murmuring. But self-ignorance, conceit, and vanity,
were so rooted in me, that my progress was very gradual, and I had the sorrow
to feel, how much the power of long bad habits keeps down the growth of
religion in the heart, even after it has begun to take root. I was so ignorant
of divine things, that I hardly knew words to frame a prayer; but when I got
acquainted with the Psalms, I there learnt how to pour out the fullness of my
heart, while in the Gospel I rejoiced to see what great things God had done for
my soul.

I now took down once more from the shelf Doddridge's Rise and Progress, and,
oh! with what new eyes did I read it! I now saw clearly, that not only the
thief, and the drunkard, the murderer and the adulterer, are sinners, for that
I knew before; but I found that the unbeliever, the selfish, the proud, the
worldly-minded, all, in short, who live without God in the world are sinners. I
did not now apply the reproofs I met with to my husband, or my father, or other
people, as I used to do, but brought them home to myself. In this book I
traced, with strong emotions, and close self-application, the sinner through
all his course; his first awakening, his convictions, repentance, joys,
sorrows, backsliding, and recovery, despondency, and delight, to a triumphant
deathbed; and God was pleased to make it a chief instrument in bringing me to
himself. Here it is, continued Mrs. Incle, untying her little bundle, and
taking out a book, accept it, my dear father, and I will pray that God may
bless it to you as He has done to me.

When I was able to come down, I passed my time with these good old people, and
soon won their affection. I was surprised to find they had very good sense,
which I never had thought poor people could have; but, indeed, worldly persons
do not know how much religion, while it mends the heart, enlightens the
understanding also. I now regretted the evenings I had wasted in my solitary
garret, when I might have passed them in reading the Bible with these good
folks. This was their refreshing cordial after a weary day, which sweetened the
pains of want and age. I one day expressed my surprise that my unfortunate
husband, the son of such pious parents, should have turned out so ill: the poor
old man said with tears, I fear we have been guilty of the sin of Eli; our love
was of the wrong sort. Alas! like him, we honored our son more than God, and
God has smitten us for it. We showed him what was right, but through a false
indulgence, we did not correct him for what was wrong. We were blind to his
faults. He was a handsome boy, with sprightly parts; we took too much delight
in those outward things. He soon got above our management, and became vain,
idle, and extravagant, and when we sought to restrain him, it was then too
late. We humbled ourselves before God; but he was pleased to make our sin
become its own punishment. Timothy grew worse and worse; till he was forced to
abscond for a misdemeanor; after which we never saw him, but have heard of him
changing from one idle way of life to another, unstable as water: he has been a
footman, a soldier, a shopman, and a strolling actor. With deep sorrow we trace
back his vices to our ungoverned fondness; that lively and sharp wit, by which
he has been able to carry on such a variety of wild schemes, might, if we had
used him to reproof in his youth, have enabled him to have done great service
for God and his country. But our flattery made him wise in his own conceit and
there is more hope of a fool tha^ of him. We indulged our own vanity, and have
destroyed his soul.

Here Mr. Worthy stopped Mrs. Incle, saying, that whenever he heard i^ lamented
that the children of pio^^ parents often turned out so ill, (...) could not
help thinking that the^ must be frequently something of th^^ sort of error in
the bringing them u^ he knew, indeed, some instances (...) the contrary, in
which the best (...) had failed; but he believed, that (...) Eli the priest, to
Incle the labourer* more than half the failures of this sort might be traced to
some mistake, (...) vanity, or bad judgment, or sinful indulgence in the
parents.

I now looked about, continued Mrs. Incle, in order to see in what (...) I
could assist my poor mother ^^gretting more heartily than she (...) that I knew
no one thing that (...) of any use. I was so desirous of (...) bling myself
before God and her, that I offered even to try to wash. -- You wash! exclaimed
Bragwell, starting up with great emotion, Heaven forbid that with such a
fortune and education, Miss Bragwell should be seen at a washing-tub. This vain
father, who could bear to hear of her distresses and her sins, could not bear
to hear of her washing. Mr. Worthy stopped him, saying, As to her fortune, you
know, you refused to give her any; and, as to her education, you see it and not
taught her how to do any ^^^ng better. I am sorry you do not (...) in this
instance, the beauty of Christian humility. For my own part, (...) set a
greater value on such an active proof of it, than on a whole volume of
professions. Mr. Bragwell did not quite understand this, and Mrs. Incle went
on. What to do to get a penny I knew not. Making of fillagree, or card-purses,
or cutting out paper, or dancing and singing, was of no use in our village. The
shopkeeper, indeed, would have taken me, if I had known any thing of accounts;
and the ^^ergyman could have got me a nursery-maid's place, if I could have
done good plain-work. I made some awkward attempts to learn to spin and knit,
when my mother's wheel or knitting lay by, but I spoilt both through my
ignorance. At last I luckily thought upon the fine netting I used to make for
my trimmings, and it struck me that I might turn this to some little account. I
procured some twine, and worked early and late to make nets for fishermen, and
cabbage-nets. I was so pleased that I had at last found an opportunity to show
m^ good will by this mean work, that I regretted my little George was no^ big
enough to contribute his share to our support by traveling about to se^^ my
nets.

Cabbage-nets! exclaimed Bragwell; there is no bearing this. -- Cabbage-nets!
My grandson hawk cabbage-nets! How could you think of such a scandalous thing?
-- Sir, said Mrs. Incle mildly, I am now convinced that nothing is scandalous
which is not wicked. Besides, we were in want; and necessity, as well as piety,
would have reconciled me to this mean trade. Mr. Bragwell groaned, and bade her
go on.

In the mean time, my little George grew a fine boy; and I adored the goodness
of God, who, in the sweetness of maternal love, had given me a reward for many
sufferings. Instead of indulging a gloomy distrust about the fate of this
child, I now resigned him to the will of God. Instead of lamenting because he
was not likely to be rich, I was resolved to bring him up with such notions as
might make him contented to be poor. I thought, if I could subdue (...) vanity
and selfishness in him, I should make him a happier man than if I had thousands
to bestow on him; and I trusted, that I should be rewarded for every painful
act of present self-denial, by the future virtue and happiness of my child. Can
you believe it, my dear father, my days now past not unhappily? I worked hard
all day, and that alone is a source of happiness beyond what the idle can
guess. After my child was asleep at night, I ^^^d a chapter in the Bible to my
parents, whose eyes now began to fail them. We then thanked God over our frugal
supper of potatoes, and talked over the holy men of old, the saints, and the
martyrs, who would have thought our homely fare a luxury. We compared our
peace, and liberty, and safety, with their bonds, and imprisonment, and
tortures; and should have been ashamed of a murmur. We then joined in prayer,
in which my absent parents and my husband were never forgotten, and went to
rest in charity with the whole world, and at peace in our own souls.

Oh! my forgiving child! interrupted Mr. Bragwell, sobbing, and did thou
really pray for thy unnatural father, and lie down in rest and peace? Then let
me tell thee, thou wast better off than thy mother and I were. -- But no more
of this; go on.

Whether my father-in-law had worked beyond his strength, in order to support
me and my child, I know not, but he was taken dangerously ill, While he lay in
this state, we received an account that my husband was dead in the West Indies
of the yellow fever, which has carried off such numbers of our countrymen; we
all wept together, and prayed that his awful death might quicken us in
preparing for our own. This shock, joined to the fatigue of nursing her sick
husband, soon brought my poor mother to death's door. I nursed them both, and
felt a satisfaction in giving them all I had to bestow, my attendance, my
tears, and my prayers. I, who was once so nice and so proud, so disdainful in
the midst of plenty, and so impatient under the smallest inconvenience, was now
enabled to glorify God by my activity and my submission. Though the sorrows of
my heart were enlarged, I cast my burden on him who cares for the weary and
the heavy laden. After having watched by these poor people the whole night, I
sat down to breakfast on my dry crust and coarse dish of tea, without a murmur;
my greatest grief was, lest I should bring away the infection to my dear boy. I
prayed to know what it was my duty to do between my dying parents, and my
helpless child. To take care of the sick and aged, seemed to be my duty. So I
offered up my child to him who is the father of the fatherless, and he spared
him to me.

The cheerful piety with which these good people breathed their last, proved to
me, that the temper of mind with which the pious poor commonly meet death, is a
grand compensation made them by Providence for all the hardships of their
inferior condition. If they have had few joys and comforts in life already, and
have still fewer hopes in store, is not all fully made up to them by their
being enabled to leave this world with stronger desires of heaven, and without
those bitter regrets after the good things of this life, which add to the dying
tortures of the worldly rich? To the forlorn and destitute death is not
terible, as it is to him who sits at ease in his possessions, and who fears
that this night his soul shall be required of him.

Mr. Bragwell felt this remark more deeply than his daughter meant he should.
He wept and bade her proceed.

I followed my departed parents to the same grave, and wept over them, but not
as one who had no hope. They had neither houses nor lands to leave me, but they
left me their Bible, their blessing, and their example, of which I humbly trust
I shall feel the benefits when all the riches of this world shall have an end.
Their few effects, consisting of some poor household goods, and some
working-tools, hardly sufficed to pay their funeral expenses. I was soon
attacked with the same fever, and saw myself, as I thought, dying the second
time; my danger was the same, but my views were changed. I now saw eternity in
a more awful light than I had done before, when I wickedly thought death might
be gloomily called upon as a refuge from every common trouble. Though I had
still reason to be humbled on account of my sin, yet through the grace of God,
I saw Death stripped of his sting, and robbed of his terrors, through him, who
loved me, and had given himself for me; and in the extremity of pain, my soul
rejoiced in God my Savior.

I recovered, however, and was chiefly supported by the kind clergyman's
charity. When I felt myself nourished and cheered by a little tea or broth,
which he daily sent me from his own slender provision, my heart smote me, to
think how I had daily sat down at home to a plentiful dinner, without any sense
of thankfulness for my own abundance, or without enquiring whether my poor sick
neighbors we^^ starving; and I sorrowfully remembered, that what my poor
sister and used to waste through daintiness, would now have comfortably fed
myself a^ child. Believe me, my dear mothe^ a laboring man who h^^ been
broug^^ low by a fever, might often be restore to his work some weeks sooner,
if o^ his recovery he was nourished an^ strengthened by a good bit from
farmer's table. Less than is (...) thro^^^ to a favorite spaniel would
suffice, that the expense would be alm^^^ nothing to the giver, while to the
^^ceiver it would bring health, and strength, and comfort.

By the time I was tolerably recovered, I was forced to leave the house. I had
no human prospect of subsistence. I humbly asked of God to direct my steps, and
to give me entire obedience to his will. I then cast my eyes mournfully on my
child, and though prayer had relieved my heart of a load which without it would
have been intolerable; my tears flowed fast, while I cried out in the
bitterness of my soul, How many hired servants of my father have bread enough,
and to ^pare, and I perish with hunger. This ^ext appeared a kind of answer to
my prayer, and gave me courage to make me more attempt to soften you in my
^avour. I resolved to set out directly ^o find you, to confess my disobedience,
and to beg a scanty pittance, ^ith which I and my child might be ^eanly
supported in some distant ^^untry, where we should not disgrace ^ur more happy
relations. We set out ^^d traveled as fast as my weak ^^^lth and poor George's
little feet and ragged shoes would permit. I brought a little bundle of such
work and necessaries as I had left, by selling which we subsisted on the road.
-- I hope, interrupted Bragwell, there were no cabbage-nets in it? -- At least,
said her mother, I hope you did not sell them near home. -- No; I had none
left, said Mrs. Incle, or I should have done it. I got many a lift in a wagon
for my child and my bundle, which was a great relief to me. And here I cannot
help saying, I wish drivers would not be too hard in their demands, if they
help a poor sick traveller on a mile or two; it proves a great relief to weary
bodies and naked feet; and such little cheap charities may be considered as the
cup of cold water, which if given on right grounds, shall not lose its reward.
Here Bragwell sighed, to think that when mounted on his fine bay mare, or
driving his neat chaise, it had never once crossed his mind that the poor
way-worn foot traveller was not equally at his ease, or that shoes were a
necessary accommodation. Those who want nothing are apt to forget how many there
are who want every thing. -- Mrs. Incle went on: I got to this village about
seven this evening, and while I sat on the churchyard wall to rest and
meditate how I should make myself known at home, I saw a funeral; I enquired
whose it was and learnt it was my sister's. This was too much for me. I sunk
down in a fit, and knew nothing that happened to me from that moment, till I
found myself in the workhouse with my father and Mr. Worthy.

Here Mrs. Incle stopped. Grief, shame, pride, and remorse, had quite overcome
Mr. Bragwell, He wept like a child; and said, he hoped his daughter would pray
for him, for that he was not in a condition to pray for himself, though he
found nothing else could give him any comfort. His deep dejection brought on a
fit of sickness: O! said he, I now begin to feel an expression in the sacrament
which I used to repeat without thinking it had any meaning, the remembrance of
my sins is grievous, the burden of them is intolerable. O, it is awful to
think what a sinner a man may be, and yet retain a decent character! How many
thousands are in my condition, taking to themselves all the credit of their
prosperity, instead of giving God the glory! Heaping up riches to their hurt,
instead of dealing their bread to the hungry. O, let those who hear of the
Bragwell family, never say that vanity is a little sin. In me it has been the
fruitful parent of a thousand sins, selfishness, hardness of heart,
forgetfulness of God. In one of my sons vanity was the cause of rapine,
injustice, extravagance, ruin, self-murder. Both my daughters were undone by
vanity, though it only wore the more harmless shape of dress, idleness, and
dissipation. The husband of my daughter Incle it destroyed, by leading him to
live above his station, and to despise labor. Vanity ensnared the souls even
of his pious parents; for while it led them to wish to see their son in a
better condition, it led them to allow him such indulgencies as were unfit for
his own. O, you who hear of us, humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God;
resist high thoughts; let every imagination be brought into obedience to the
Son of God. If you set a value on finery look into that grave; behold the
mouldering body of my Betsey, who now says to Corruption, thou art my father,
and to the worm thou art my mother and my sister. Look at the bloody and
brainless head of her husband. O, Mr. Worthy, how does Providence mock at human
foresight! I have been greedy of gain, that the son of Mr. Squeeze might be a
great man; he is dead; while the child of Timothy Incle, whom I had doomed to
beggary will be my heir. Mr. Worthy, to you I commit this boy's education;
teach him to value his immortal soul more, and the good things of this life
less, than I have done. Bring him up in the fear of God, and in the government
of his passions. Teach him that unbelief and pride are at the root of all sin.
I have found this to my cost. I trusted in my riches; I said, tomorrow shall be
as this day and more abundant. I did not remember that for all these things God
would bring me to judgment. I am not sure that I believed in a judgment.

Bragwell at length grew better, but he never recovered his spirits. The
conduct of Mrs. Incle through life was that of an humble Christian. She sold
all her sister's finery, which her father had given her, and gave the money to
the poor, saying, it did not become one who professed penitence, to return to
the gaieties of life. Mr. Bragwell did not oppose this; not that he had fully
acquired a just notion of the self-denying spirit of religion, but having a
head not very clear at making distinctions, he was never able, after the sight
of Squeeze's mangled body, to think of gaiety and grandeur, without thinking at
the same time, of a pistol and bloody brains; for, as his first introduction
into gay life had presented him with all these objects at one view, he never
afterward could separate them in his mind. He even kept his fine beaufet of
p^^te always shut, because it brought to his mind the grand unpaid-for
sideboard that he had seen laid out for Mr. Squeeze's supper, to the
remembrance of which he could not help ^acking debts, prisons, executions, and
self-murder.

Mr. Bragwell's, heart had been so buried in the love of the world, and evil
habits were become so rooted in him that the progress he made in religion was
very slow; yet he earnestly prayed and struggled against vanity; and when his
unfeeling wife declared she could not love the boy unless he was called by
their name instead of Incle, Mr. Bragwell would never consent, saying, he stood
in need of every help against pride. He also got the letter which Squeeze wrote
just before he shot himself framed and glazed; this he hung up in his chamber,
and made it a rule to go and read it as often as he found his heart disposed to
VANITY. Z.

FINIS.
A NEW CHRISTMAS HYMN.
O how wondrous is the story
Of our blessed Redeemer's birth!
See the mighty Lord of Glory
Leaves his heaven to visit earth!
Hear with transport, every creature,
Hear the Gospel's joyful sound;
Christ appears in human nature,
In our sinful world is found;
Comes to pardon our transgressions,
Like a cloud our sins to blot*
^omes to his own favored nation,
But his own receive him not.
If the angels who attended
To declare the Savior's birth,
Who from heaven with songs descended
To proclaim good will on earth;
If in pity to our blindness,
They had brought the pardon needed,
Still Jehovah's wondrous kindness
Had our warmest hopes exceeded*
If some Prophet had been sent
With salvation's joyful news,
Who that heard the blessed event
Could their warmest love refuse?
But 'twas HE to whom in heaven
Hallalujah's never cease;
He, the mighty God, was given,
Given to us a Prince of Peace.
None but he who did create us
Could redeem from sin and hell;
None but he could re-instate us
In the rank from which we fell.
Had he come, the glorious stranger,
Decked with all the world calls great,
Had he lived in pomp and grandeur,
Crowned with more than royal state;
Still our tongues with praise overflowing,
On such boundless love would dwell,
Still our hearts with rapture glowing,
Speak what words could never tell.
But what wonder should it raise
Thus our lowest state to borrow!
O the high mysterious ways,
O (...) own Son a child of sorrow!
'Twas to bring us endless pleasure,
He our suffering nature bore,
'Twas to give us heavenly treasure
He was willing to be poor.
Come ye rich, survey the stable
Where your infant savior lies;
From your full overflowing table
Send the hungry good supplies.
Boast not your ennobled stations,
Boast not that you're highly fed;
Jesus, hear it all ye nations,
Had not where to lay his head.
Learn of me, thus cries the savior,
If my kingdom you would inherit
^^^ner, quit your proud behavior,
Learn my meek and lowly spirit.
Come ye servants see your station,
Freed from all reproach and shame
He who purchased your salvation,
Bore a servants humble name.
Come ye poor, some comfort gather,
Faint not in the race you run,
Hard the lot your gracious father
Gave his dear, his only Son.
Think that if your humble stations,
Less of worldly good bestow,
You escape those strong temptations
Which from wealth and grandeur flow.
See your Savior is ascended!
See he looks with pity down!
Trust him all will soon be mended
Bear his cross you will share his crown.

