[CHEAP RESPOSITORY.] [No. XI]

THE HISTORY OF TOM WHITE, THE POSTILION.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED (...) ^* and J. JOHNSON, NO. ^^^ HIGH STREET.

1800. [Pri^^ Cents Or 2s. 4d. p^^ do^.]

THE HISTORY OF TOM WHITE, THE POSTILLION.
TOM WHITE was one of the best drivers of a Post chaise on the Bath Road. --
Tom was the son of an honest labourer at a little village in Wiltshire: he was
an active industrious bay, and as soon as he was big enough he left his father,
who was burdened with a numerous family, and went to live with Farmer Hodges,
a sober worthy man in the same village. He drove the wagon all the week; and
on Sundays though he was now grown up, the farm^^ (...) him to attend the
Sunday School carried on under the inspection of Dr. Shepherd, the worthy
Vicar, and alw^^^ ^^de him read his Bible, in the evening (...) he had served
his beasts, and would have turned him out of his service if he had ever gone to
the alehouse for his own pleasure.

Tom by carrying some waggon-loads of faggots to the Bear-inn at Devizes, soon
made many acquaintances in the stable-yard. He compared his own Carter's frock,
and shoes thick set with nails, with the smart red jackets and tight boots of
the Post-boys, and grew ashamed of his own homely dress; he was resolved to
drive a chaise, to get money, and to see the world. Foolish fellow! he never
considered, that, though it is true, a waggoner works hard all day, yet he gets
a quiet evening, and undisturbed rest at night. However there must be
chaise-boys as well as plough-boys, there was no great harm in the change. The
evil company to which it exposed him, was the chief mischief. He left farmer
Hodges though not without sorrow at quitting so kind a master, and got himself
hired at the Black Bear.

Notwithstanding the temptations to which he was now exposed, Tom's good
education (...) by him for some time. At first he was frightened to hear the
oaths and wicked words which are too often uttered in a stable-yard. However,
though he thought it wrong, he had not the courage to reprove it, and the next
step to being easy at seeing others sin, is to sin ourselves. By degrees he
began to think it manly, and a ma^^ of spirit in others to swear; though the
force of good habits was so strong, that at first when he swore it was with
fear and in a low voice. But he was soon laughed out of his sheepishness, as
they called it; and though he never became so profane and blasphemous as some
of his companions, for he never swore in cool blood or in mirth as so many do,
yet he would too often use a dreadful bad word when he was in a passion with
his horses. And here I cannot but drop a hint on the great folly as well as
wickedness of being in a great rage with poor beasts, who not having the gift
of reason, cannot be moved like human creatures, with all the wicked words that
are said to them; but who, unhappily, having the gift of feeling, suffer as
much as human creatures can do, at the cruel and unnecessary beatings g^^e^
them. He had been bred up to (...) drunkenness was a great sin, for he never
saw farmer Hodges drunk in his life, and where a farmer is sober, his men are
less apt to drink, or if they do, the master can reprove them with the better
grace.

Tom was not naturally fond of drink, yet for the sake of being thought merry
company, and a hearty fellow, he often drank more than he ought. As he had been
used to go to church twice on a Sunday while he lived with the farmer, who
seldom used his horses on that day except to carry his wife to church behind
him, Tom felt a little ^^easy when he was sent the very first Sunday a long
journey with a great family; for I cannot conceal the truth that too many
gentle folks will travel when there is no necessity for it on a Sunday, and
when Monday would answer the end just as well. This is a great grief to all
good and sober people, both rich and poor. However he kept his thoughts to
himself, though he could not now and then help thinking how quietly things were
going on at the farmer's, whose waggoner on a sunday led as easy a life as if
he had been a gentleman. But he soon lost all thoughts of this kind, and did
not know a Sunday from a Monday. Tom went on prosperously, as it is called* for
three or four years, got plenty of money, but saved not a Shilling. As soon as
his horses were once in the stable, whoever would might see them fed for Tom.
-- He had other fish to fry. -- Fives, cards, cudgel-playing, laying wagers,
and keeping loose company, each of which he at first disliked, and then
practiced, ran away with all his money, and all his spare time; and though he
was generally in the way as soon as the horses were ready, (because if there
was no driving there was no pay,) yet he did not care whether the carriage was
clean or the horses looked well, if the harness was whole, or the horses were
shod. The certainty that the gains of tomorrow would make up for the
extravagance of today, made him quite thoughtless and happy, for he was young,
active, and healthy, and never foresaw that a rainy day might come, when he
would want what he now squandered.

One day being a little flustered with liquor as he was driving his return
chaise through Brentford, he saw just before him another empty carriage, driven
by one of his acquaintance; he whipped his horses, resolving to outstrip the
other, and swearing dreadfully that he would be at the Red Lion first -- for a
pint -- done, cried the other -- a wager. -- Both cut and spurred the poor
beasts with the usual fury, as if their credit had been really at stake, or
their lives had depended on this foollish contest. Tom's chaise had now got up
to that of his rival, and they drove along side of each other with great fury
and many imprecations. But in a narrow part, Tom's chaise being in the middle,
with his antagonist on one side, and a cart driving against him on the other,
the horses reared, the carriages got entangled, Tom roared out a great oath to
the other to stop, which he either could not, or would not do, but returned a
horrid imprecation that he would win the wager if he was alive. Tom's horses
took fright and he was thrown to the ground with great violence. As soon as he
could be got from under the wheels, he was taken up senseless; his leg was
broke in two places, and his body much bruised. Some people whom the noise had
brought together, put him into the post-chaise, in which the waggoner kindly
assisted, but the other driver seemed careless and indifferent, and drove off,
observing with a brutal coolness, "I am sorry I have lost my pint; I should
have beat him hollow, had it not been for this little accident." Some gentlemen
who came out of the Inn, after reprimanding this savage, inquired who he was,
wrote to inform his master, and got him discharged: resolving, that neither
they nor any of their friends would ever employ him, and he was long out of
place.

Tom was taken to one of those excellent hospitals with which London abounds.
His agonies were dreadful, his leg was set, and a high fever came on. As soon
as he was left alone to reflect on his condition, his first thought was that he
should die, and his horror was inconceivable. -- Alas!" said he "what will
become of my poor soul? I am cut off in the very commission of three great
sins: -- I was drunk, I was in a horrible passion, and I had oaths and
blasphemies in my mouth." -- He tried to pray, but he could not, his mind was
all distraction, and he thought he was so very wicked that God would not
forgive him: because, says he, "I have sinned against light and knowledge, and
a sober education, and good examples, and I deserve nothing but punishment." --
At length he grew lightheaded and there was little hopes of his life. Whenever
he came to his senses for a few minutes, he cried out, "O! that my old
companions could now see me, surely they would take warning by my sad fate, and
repent before it is too late."

By the blessing of God on the skill of the surgeon, and the care of the nurses
he however grew better in a few days. And here let me stop to remark, what a
mercy it is that we live in a christian country, where the poor, when sick, or
lame, or wounded, are taken as much care of as any gentry: nay in some respects
more, because in hospitals and infirmaries there are more doctors and surgeons
to attend, than most private gentlefolks can afford to have at their own houses
whereas there never was an hospital in the whole heathen world. Blessed be God
for this, among the thousand other excellent fruits of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION!

It was eight weeks before Tom could be taken out of bed. This was a happy
affliction; for this long sickness and solitude gave him time to reflect on his
past life. He began seriously to hate those darling sins which had brought him
to the brink of ruin. He could now pray heartily: he confessed and lamented his
iniquities with many tears, and began to hope that the mercies of God, through
the merits of a Redeemer, might yet be extended to him on his sincere
repentance. He resolved never more to return to the same evil courses, but he
did not trust in his own strength, but prayed that God would give him grace for
the future, as well as pardon for the past. He remembered, and he was humbled
at the thought that he used to have short fits of repentance, and to form
resolutions of amendment, in his wild and thoughtless days, and often when he
had a bad headache after a drinking bout, or had lost his money at all fours, he
vowed never to drink or play again. But as soon as his head was well, and his
pocket recruited, he forgot all his resolutions. And how should it be
otherwise? for he trusted in his own strength, he never prayed to God to
strengthen him, nor ever avoided the next temptation.

The case was now different. Tom began to find that his strength was perfect
weakness, and that he could do nothing without the Divine assistance, for which
he prayed heartily and constantly. He sent home for his Bible and Prayer Book,
which he had not opened for two years, and which had been given him when he
left the Sunday School. He spent the chief part of his time in reading them and
thus derived great comfort, as well as great knowledge. The study of the bible
filled his heart with gratitude to God who had not cut him off in the midst of
his sins, but given him space for repentance; and the agonies he had lately
suffered with his broken leg increased his thankfulness, that he had escaped
the more dreadful pain of eternal misery. And here let me remark what
encouragement this is for rich people to give away Bibles and good books, and
not lose all hope though for a time they see little or no good effect from it.
According to all appearance, Tom's were never likely to do him any good, and
yet his generous benefactor who had cast his bread upon the waters, sound it
after many days, for this bible which had lain untouched for years, was at last
made the means of his reformation. God will work in his own good time.

As soon as he got well, and was discharged from the hospital, Tom began to
think he must return to get his bread. At first he had some scruples about
going back to his old employ: but says he, sensibly enough, gentle folks must
travel, travelers must have chaises, and chaises must have drivers; it is a
very honest calling, and I don't know that goodness belongs to one sort of
business more than another; and he who can be good in a state of great
temptation, provided the calling be lawful, and the temptations are not of his
own seeking, and he be diligent in prayer, may be better than another man for
aught I know: and all that belongs to us is to do our duty in that state of
life in which it shall please God to call us. Tom had rubbed up his catechism
at the hospital and it is a pity that people don't look at their catechism
sometimes when they are grown up; for it is full as good for men and women as
it is for children: nay better, for though the answers contained in it are
intended for children to repeat, yet the duties enjoined in it are intended for
men and women to put in practice.

Tom now felt grieved that he was obliged to drive on Sundays. But people who
are in earnest, and have their hearts in a thing can find helps in all cases.
As soon as he had set down his company at their stage, and had seen his horses
fed, says Tom, "A man who takes care of his horses will generally think it
right to let them rest an hour or two at least. In every town it is a chance
but there may be a church open during part of that time. If the prayers should
be over, I Will try hard for the sermon; and if I dare not stay to the Sermon, it
is a chance but I may catch the prayers; it is worth trying for, however; and
as I used to make nothing of making a push, for the sake of getting an hour to
gamble, I need not grudge to take a little pains extraordinary to serve God. By
this watchfulness he soon got to know the hours of service at all the towns on
the road he traveled, and while the horses sed, Tom went to church; and it
became a favorite proverb with him that prayers and provender hinder no man's
journey.

At first his companions wanted to laugh and make sport of this -- but when
they saw that no lad on the road was up so early or worked so hard as Tom: when
they saw no chaise so neat, no glasses so bright, no harness so tight, no
driver so diligent, so clean, or so civil, they found he was no subject to make
sport at. Tom indeed was very careful in looking after the linch-pins, in never
giving his horses too much water when they were hot; nor, whatever was his
haste, would he ever gallop them up hill, strike them across the head, or when
tired, cut and flash them in driving on the stones, as soon as he got into a
town, as some foolish fellows do. What helped to cure Tom of these bad
practices, was that remark he met with in the Bible, that a good man is
merciful to his beast. He was much moved on reading the Prophet Jonah, to
observe what compassion the great God of heaven and earth had for poor beasts:
for one of the reasons there given, why the Almighty was unwilling to destroy
the great city of Nine^eh was, because there was much cattle in it. After this
Tom never could bear to see a wanton stroke inflicted.

Tom soon grew rich for one in his station, for every gentleman on the road
would be driven by no other lad if careful Tom was to be had. Being diligent,
he got a great deal of money; being frugal, he spent but little; and having no
vices, he wasted none. He soon found out that there was some meaning in that
text which says, that Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, as
well as of that which is to come: for the same principles which make a man
sober and honest, have also a natural tendency to make him healthy and rich;
while a drunkard and a spend-thrift can hardly escape being sick, and a beggar
in the end. Vice is the parent of misery here as well as hereafter.

After a few years Tom begged a holiday, and made a visit to his native
village; his good character had got thither before him. He found his father was
dead, but during his long illness Tom had supplied him with money, and by
allowing him a trifle every week, had had the honest satisfaction of keeping
him from the parish. Farmer Hodges was still living, but being grown old and
infirm, he was desirous to retire from business. He retained a great regard for
his old servant, Tom; and finding he was worth money, and knowing he knew
something of country business, he offered to let him have a small farm at an
easy rate, and promised his assistance in the management for the first year,
with the loan of a small sum of money, that he might set out with a pretty
stock. Tom thanked him with tears in his eyes, went back and took a handsome
leave of his master, who made him a present of a horse and cart, in
acknowledgement of his long and faithful services; for, says he, "I have saved
many horses by Tom's care and attention, and I could well afford to do the same
by every servant who did the same by me; and should be a richer man at the end
of every year by the same generosity, provided I could meet with just and
faithful servants who deserved the same rewards."

Tom was soon settled in his new farm, and in less than a year had got every
thing neat and decent about him. Farmer Hodges's long experience and friendly
advice, joined to his own industry and hard labor, soon brought the farm to
great perfection. The regularity, sobriety, peaceableness, and piety of his
daily life, his constant attendance at Church twice every sunday, and his
decent and devout behavior when there, soon recommended him to the notice of
Dr. Shepherd who was still living, a pattern of zeal, activity, and benevolence
to all parish priests. The Dr. soon began to hold up Tom, or as we must now
more properly term him, Mr. Thomas White, to the imitation of the whole parish,
and the frequent, and condescending conversation of this worthy clergyman,
contributed no less than his preaching to the improvement of his new
parishioner.

Farmer White soon found out that a dairy could not well be carried on without
a mistress, and began to think seriously of marrying; he prayed to God to
direct him in so important a business. He knew that a tawdry, vain, dressy
girl, was not likely to make good cheese and butter, and that a worldly and
ungodly woman would make a sad wife and mistress of a family. He soon heard of
a young woman of excellent character, who had been bred up by the vicar's lady,
and still lived in the family as upper maid. She was prudent, sober,
industrious and religious. Her neat, modest, and plain appearance at church,
(for she was seldom seen any where else out of her master's family,) was an
example to all persons in her station, and never failed to recommend her to
strangers, even before they had an opportunity of knowing the goodness of her
character. It was her character, however, which recommended her to farmer
White. He knew that favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised: "aye, and not only praised, but chosen
too," says farmer White, as he took down his hat from the nail on which it
hung, in order to go and wait on Dr. Shepherd, to break his mind and ask his
consent; for he thought it would be a very unhandsome return for all the
favors he was receiving from his Minister, to decoy away his faithful servant
from her place without his consent.

This worthy gentleman, though sorry to lose so valuable a member of his little
family, did not scruple a moment about parting with her, when he found it would
be so greatly to her advantage. Tom was agreeably surprised to hear she had
saved fifty pounds by her frugality. The Dr. married them himself, farmer
Hodges being present.

In the afternoon Dr. Shepherd condescended to call on farmer and Mrs. White,
to give a few words of advice on the new duties they had entered into; a common
custom with him on those occasions. He often took an opportunity to drop, in
the most kind and tender way, a hint on the great indecency of making
marriages, christenings, and above all funerals, days of riot and excess, as is
too often the case in country villages. The expectation that the vicar might
possibly drop in, in his walks, on these festivities, sometimes restrained
excessive drinking, and improper conversation, even among those farmers who
were not restrained by higher motives, as farmer and Mrs. White were.

What the Dr. said was always in such a cheerful, good humoured way, that it
was sure to increase the pleasure of that day, instead of damping it. Well,
farmer, said he, and you my faithful Sarah, any other friend might recommend
peace and agreement to you on your marriage; but I on the contrary recommend
cares and strifes. See Dodd's Sayings.
The company stared -- but Sarah, who knew that her old master was a facetious
gentleman, and always had some good meaning behind, looked serious, "Cares and
strifes, Sir, said the farmer, what do you mean? I mean said he, for the first,
that your cares shall be who shall please God most, and your strifes, who shall
serve him best, and do your duty most faithfully. Thus, all your cares and
strifes being employed to the highest purposes, all petty cares and worldly
strifes shall be at an end.

"Always remember both of you, that you "have still a better friend than each
other." -- The company sta^ed again, and thought no woman could have so good a
friend as her husband. "As you have chosen each other from the best motives,
continued the Doctor, you have every reasonable ground to hope for happiness;
but as this world is a soil, in which troubles and misfortunes will spring up;
troubles from which you cannot save one another: then remember, "'it is he best
wisdom to go to that friend wh^ is always near, always willing, and al^^ys able
to help you, and that friend is ^OD."

"Sir, said Farmer White, I humbly thank you for all your kind instructions, of
which I shall now stand more in need than ever, as I shall have more duties to
fulfill. I hope the remembrance of my past offenses will keep me humble, and the
sense of my remaining sin will keep me watchful. I set out in the world, Sir,
with what is called a good natural disposition, but I soon found to my cost
that without GOD's grace that will carry a man but a little way. A good temper
is a good thing, but nothing but the fear of GOD can enable one to bear up
against temptation, evil company, and evil passions. The misfortune of breaking
my leg, as I then thought it, has proved the greatest blessing of my life. It
showed me my own weakness, Sir, the value of the Bible, and the goodness of
GOD. How many of my brother drivers have I seen since that time, cut off in the
prime of life by drinking, or by some sudden accident, while I have not only
been spared, but blessed and prospered. O Sir! it would be the joy of my heart,
if some of my old comrades, good-natured, civil fellows, (whom I cannot help
loving) could see as I have done, the danger of evil courses before it is too
late. Though they may not hearken to you, Sir, or any other Minister, they may
believe me, because I have been one of them: and I can speak from experience,
of the great difference there is, even as to worldly comfort, between a life of
sobriety and a life of sin. I could tell them, Sir, not as a thing I have read
in a book, but as a truth I feel in my own heart, that to fear GOD and keep his
commandments, will not only "bring a man peace at the last," but will make him
happy now. And I will venture to say, Sir, that all the stocks, pillories,
prisons, and gibbets in the land, though so very needful to keep bad men in
order, yet will never restrain a good man from committing evil, half so much as
that single text, "how shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God?"
Dr. Shepherd condescended to approve of what the Farmer had said, kindly shook
him by the hand, and took leave.

Thomas White had always been fond of singing, but he had for many years
despised that vile trash which is too often sung in a stable-yard. One Sunday
evening he heard his mistress at the Bear read some fine verses out of a fine
book called the Spectator. He was so struck with the picture it contains of the
great mercies of God, of which he had himself partaken so largely, that he took
the liberty to ask her for these verses, and she being a very good-natured
woman, made her daughter write out for the postilion the following.

HYMN ON DIVINE PROVIDENCE^
WHEN all thy mercies, O my GOD,
My rising soul surveys,
Transported with the view, I Am lost
In wonder, love, and praise.
O how shall words with equal warmth
The gratitude declare,
That glows within my ravished heart?
But thou can read it there.
Thy PROVIDENCE my life sustained,
And all my wants redrest,
When in the silent womb I lay,
And hung upon the breast.
To all my weak complaints and cries,
Thy mercy lent an ear,
Ere yet my feeble thoughts had learnt
To form themselves in prayer.
Unnumber'd comforts to my soul
Thy tender care bestowed,
Before my infant heart conceived
From whom those comforts flowed.
When in the slippery path of YOUTH
With heedless steps I ran,
Thine arm, unseen, conveyed me safe,
And led me up to MAN.
Through hidden dangers, toils, and deaths,
It gently cleared my way,
And through the pleasing snares of vice,
More to be feared than they.
When worn with sickness, often have THOU
With health renewed my face;
And when in sins and sorrow sunk,
Revived my soul with grace.
THY bounteous hand, with worldly bliss,
Has made my cup run over;
And in a kind and faithful friend,
Has doubled all my store.
Ten thousand thousand precious gifts,
My daily thanks employ,
Nor is the least a thankful heart
That tastes those gifts with joy.
Through every period of my life
Thy goodness I Will pursue,
And after death, in distant worlds,
The glorious theme renew.
When nature fails, and day and night
Divide thy works no more,
My ever grateful heart, O LORD!
Thy mercy shall adore.
Through all ETERNITY to Thee
A joyful song I Will raise,
For O ETERNITY's too short
To utter all Thy Praise.
Tom White, as we have shown in the fore part of this history, from an idle
postboy was become a respectable farmer. GOD had blessed his industry, and he
had prospered in the world. He was sober and temperate, and, as was the natural
consequence, he was active and healthy. He was industrious and frugal, and
became prosperous in his circumstances. This is in the ordinary course of
Providence. But it is not a certain and necessary rule. GOD makes his sun to
shine on the just and the unjust. A man who uses every honest means of thrift
and industry, will, in most cases, find success attend his labors. But still
the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong. GOD is
sometimes pleased for wise ends, to disappoint all the worldly hopes of the
most upright man. His corn may be smitten by a blight. His barns may be
consumed by fire. His cattle may be carried off by distemper. And to these and
other misfortunes, he is as liable as the spendthrift or the knave. Success is
the common reward of industry, but if it were its constant reward, the
industrious would be tempted to look no further than the present state. They
would lose one strong ground of their faith. It would set aside the Scripture
scheme. This world would be looked on as a state of reward* instead of a state
of trial, and we should forget to look to a day of final retribution.

Farmer White never took it into his head, that because he paid his debts,
worked early and late, and ate the bread of carefulness, he was therefore to
come into no misfortune like other folk, but was to be free from the common
trials and troubles of life. He knew that prosperity was far from being a sure
mark of GOD's favor, and had read in good books, and especially in the bible,
of the great poverty and afflictions of the best of men. Though he was no great
scholar, he had sense enough to observe, that a time of public prosperity was
not always a time of public virtue; and he thought that what was true of a
whole nation might be true of one man. So the more he prospered the more he
prayed that prosperity might not corrupt his heart. And when he saw lately
signs of public distress coming on, he was not half so much frightened as some
others were, because he thought it might do us good in the long run; and he was
in hopes that a little poverty might bring on a little penitence. The great
grace he labored after was that of a cheerful submission. He used to say, that
if the Lord's Prayer had only contained those four little words THY WILL BE
DONE, it would be worth more than the biggest book in the world without them.

Dr. Shepherd the worthy vicar, (with whom the farmer's wife had formerly lived
as housekeeper) was very fond of taking a walk with him about his grounds, and
he used to say, that he learnt as much from the farmer as the farmer did from
him. If the Doctor happened to observe, I am afraid the long rains will spoil
this fine piece of oats, the farmer would answer, "but then, sir, think how
good it is for the grass." If the Doctor feared the wheat would be but
indifferent, the farmer was sure the rye would turn out well. When grass
sailed, he did not doubt but turnips would be plenty. Even for floods and
inundations he would find out some way to justify Providence. "'It Is better,"
said he, "to have our lands a little overflowed, than that the springs should
be dried up, and our cattle saint for lack of water." When the drought came, he
thanked GOD that the season would be healthy; and high winds, which frightened
others, he said served to clear the air. Whoever, or whatever was wrong, he was
always sure that PROVIDENCE was in the right. And he used to say, that a man
with ever so small an income if he had but frugality and temperance, and cast
off all vain desires, was richer than a lord who was tormented by vanity and
covetousness. When he saw others in the wrong, he did not however abuse them
for it, but took care to avoid the same fault. He had sense and spirit enough
to break through many old but very bad customs of his neighbors. "If a thing
is wrong in itself." (said he one day to farmer Hodges) "a whole parish doing
it cannot make it right. And as to it is being an old custom, why if it be a good
one I like it the better for being old, because it has had the stamp of ages,
and the sanction of experience on it is worth. But if it be old as well as bad,
that is another reason for my trying to put an end to it, that we may not
mislead our children as our fathers have misled us."

The ROOF-RAISING.
SOME years after he was settled, he built a large new barn. All the workmen
were looking forward to the usual holiday of roof-raising. On this occasion it
was a custom to give a dinner to the workmen, with so much liquor after it that
they got so drunk, that they not only lost the remaining half days work, but
they were not always able to work the next day.

Mrs. White provided a plentiful dinner for roof-raising, and gave each man his
mug of beer. After a hearty meal they began to grow clamourous for more drink.
The farmer said, "My lads, I don't grudge you a few gallons of ale merely for
the sake of saving my liquor, though that is some consideration; but I never
will, knowingly, help any man to make a beast of himself. I am resolved to
break through a bad custom. You are now well refreshed. If you will go
cheerfully to your work, you will have half a day's pay to take on Saturday
night more than you would if this afternoon were wasted in drunkenness. For
this your families will be the better; whereas, were I to give you more liquor
when you have already had enough, I should help to rob them of their bread. But
I wish to show you, that I have your good at heart full as much as my own
profit. If you will now go to work, I will give you all another mug at night
when you leave off. Thus your time will be saved, your families helped, and my
ale will not go to make reasonable creatures worse than brute beasts."

Here he stopped. "You are in the right on it, Master," said Tom the thatcher;
"You are a hearty man, Farmer," said John Plane the carpenter. "Come along
boys," said Tim Brick the mason; so they all went merrily to work, fortified
with a good dinner. There was only one drunken surly fellow who refused, that
was Dick Guzzle the Smith. Dick never works above two or three days in the
week, and spends the others at the Red Lion. He swore that if the farmer did
not let him have as much liquor as he liked at Roof-Raising, he would not
strike another stroke, but he would leave the job unfinished, and he might get
hands where he could. Farmer White took him at his word, and paid him off
directly: glad enough to get rid of such a sot, whom he had only employed from
pity to a large and almost starving family. When the men came for their mug in
the evening, the farmer brought out the remains of the cold gammon: they made a
hearty supper, and thanked him for having broke through a foolish custom, which
was afterward much left off in that parish, though Dick would not come into it
and lost most of his work.

Farmer White's laborers were often complaining, that things were so dear that
they could not buy a bit of meat. He knew it was partly true, but not entirely,
for it was before these very hard times. One morning he stepped out to see how an
outhouse which he was thatching went on. He was surprised to find the work at a
stand. He walked over to the thatcher's house. "Tom," said he, "I desire that
piece of work may be finished directly. If a shower comes my grain will be
spoiled." "Indeed, Master I shall not work today, nor tomorrow, neither," said
Tom. "You forget that it is Easter Monday, and tomorrow is Easter Tuesday. And
so on Wednesday I shall thatch away master. But it is hard if a poor man who
works all the year may not enjoy these few holidays."

"Tom," said the farmer, "when these days where first put into our prayer book,
the good men who did it, little thought that the time would come when holyday
should mean drunken-day. How much do think now I shall pay thee for this
piece of thatch?" "Why you know master you have let it to me by the great. I
think between this and tomorrow night, as the weather is so fine, I could clear
about four shillings, after I have paid my boy. But thatching does not come
often, and other work is not so profitable." "Very well, Tom; and how much now
do you think you may spend in these two holidays?" "Why master, if the ale is
pleasant, and the company merry, I do not expect to get off for less than three
shillings." "Tom can you do pounds, shillings, and pence?" "I can make a little
score master behind the kitchen door with a bit of chalk, which is as much as I
want." "Well, Tom, add the four shillings you would have earned to the three
you intend to spend, what does that make?" "Let me see! three and four make
seven. Seven shillings master." "Tom, you often tell me the times are so bad
that you can never buy a bit of meat. Now here is the cost of two joints at
once; to say nothing of the sin of wasting time and getting drunk." I never
once thought of that," said Tom. "Now Tom," said the farmer, "if I were you, I
would step over to Butcher Jobbins's, buy a shoulder of mutton, which being
left from saturday's market you will get a little cheaper. This I would make my
wife bake in a deep dish full of potatoes. I would then go to work, and when
the dinner was ready I would go and enjoy it with my wife and children; you
need not give the mutton to the children; the potatoes will have all the gravy,
and be very favory for them." "Aye, but I Have got no beer master, the times are
so hard that a poor man cannot afford to brew a drop of drink now as we used to
do."

"Times are bad, and malt is very dear Tom, and yet both don't prevent your
throwing away seven shillings in keeping holiday. Now send for a quart of ale,
as it is to be a feast; and you will even then be four shillings richer than if
you had gone to the public house. I would put by these four shillings, till I
could add a couple to them; with this I could get a bushel of malt, and my wife
should brew it, and you may take a pint at home of a night, which will do you
more good than a gallon at the Red Lion." "I have a great mind to take your
advice, master, but I shall be made such fun of at the Lion; they will so laugh
at me if I don't go." "Let those laugh that win, Tom." "But master, I have got
a friend to meet me there." "Then ask your friend to come and eat a bit of your
cold mutton at night, and here is sixpence for another pot, if you will
promise to brew a small cask of your own." "Thank you, master, and so I will;
and I will not go to the Lion. Come boy, bring the helm, and fetch the ladder."
And so Tom was upon the roof in a twinkling.

The SHEEP SHEARING.
Dr. Shepherd happened to say to Farmer white one day, "that there was nothing
he disliked more than the manner in which sheep-shearing and harvest-home were
kept by some in his parish. What, said the good Doctor, just when we are blessed
with these natural riches of our land, the fleece of our flocks; when our barns
are crowned with plenty, and we have reaped the fruits of the earth in due
season; is that very time to be set apart for ribaldry, and riot, and
drunkenness? Do we thank GOD for his mercies by making ourselves unworthy and
unfit to enjoy them?

TO BE CONTINUED.

