THE PLEASURES OF HOPE; WITH OTHER POEMS. BY THOMAS CAMPBELL.

EDINBURGH, PRINTED: NEW YORK, REPRINTED BY JOHN FURMAN, OPPOSITE THE
CITY-HALL, FOR JONES BULL. 1800.

TO ROBERT ANDERSON, M. D. THE FOLLOWING POEMS ARE RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY
HIS SINCERE FRIEND, THE AUTHOR.

CONTENTS.
Pleasures of Hope, Part I. Page 9 Part II. Page 51 Notes to Part I. Page 71
Part II. Page 85 Specimens of a New Translation of the Medea of Euripides, Page
93 Love and Madness, an Elegy, Page 105
SONGS.
The Wounded Hussar, Page 113 Gilderoy, Page 115 The Harper, Page 119
THE Pleasures of Hope. PART FIRST.

Pleasures of Hope. PART I.
AT summer eve, when Heaven's aerial bow
Spans with bright arch the glittering hills below,
Why to yon mountain turns the musing eye,
Whose sunbright summit mingles with the sky?
Why do these cliffs of shadowy tint appear
More sweet than all the landscape smiling near?
It Is Distance lends enchantment to the view,
And robes the mountain in its azure hue.
Thus, with delight, we linger to survey
The promised joys of life's unmeasured way;
Thus, from afar, each dim-discover'd scene
More pleasing seems than all the past has been;
And every form that fancy can repair
From dark oblivion, glows divinely there.
What potent spirit guides the raptured eye
To pierce the shades of dim futurity?
Can Wisdom lend, with all her heavenly power,
The pledge of Joy's anticipated hour?
Ah, no! she darkly sees the fate of man --
Her dim horizon bounded to a span;
Or, if she hold an image to the view,
It Is Nature pictured too severely true.
With thee, sweet Hope! resides the heavenly light,
That pours remotest rapture on the sight;
Thine is the charm of life's bewildered way,
That calls each slumbering passion into play.
Waked by thy touch, I see the sister band,
On tiptoe watching, start at thy command,
And fly wherever thy mandate bids them steer,
To Pleasure's path, or glory's bright career.
Primeval Hope, the Aonian Muses say,
When Man and Nature mourned their first decay;
When every form of death, and every woe,
Shot from malignant stars to earth below;
When Murder bared his arm, and rampant War
Yoked the red dragons of her iron car;
When Peace and Mercy, banished from the plain,
Sprung on the viewless winds to Heaven again;
All all forsook the friendless guilty mind,
But Hope, the charmer, lingered still behind.
Thus, while Elijah's burning wheels prepare,
From Carmel's height to sweep the fields of air,
The prophet's mantle, ere his flight began,
Dropped on the world -- a sacred gift to man.
Auspicious Hope! in thy sweet garden grow
Wreaths for each toil, a charm for every woe:
Won by their sweets, in Nature's languid hour,
The way-worn pilgrim seeks thy summer bower;
There, as the wild be murmurs on the wing,
What peaceful dreams thy handmaid spirits bring;
What viewless forms the Aeolian organ play,
And sweep the furrowed lines of anxious thought away!
Angel of life! thy glittering wings explore
Earth's loneliest bounds, and Ocean's wildest shore.
Lo! to the wint'ry winds the pilot yields
His bark careering over unfathomed fields;
Now on Atlantic waves he rides afar,
Where Andes, giant of the western star,
With meteor-standard to the winds unfurled,
Looks from his throne of clouds over half the world.
Now far he sweeps, where scarce a summer smiles,
On Behrring's rocks, or Greenland's naked isles;
Cold on his midnight watch the breezes blow,
From wastes that slumber in eternal snow;
And waft, across the wave's tumultuous roar,
The wolf's long howl from Oonalaska's shore.
Poor child of danger, nursling of the storm,
Sad are the woes that wreck thy manly form!
Rocks, waves, and winds, the shattered bark delay;
Thy heart is sad, thy home is far away.
But Hope can here her moonlight vigils keep,
And sing to charm the spirit of the deep:
Swift as yon streamer lights the starry pole,
Her visions warm the watchman's pensive soul.
His native hills that rise in happier climes,
The grot that heard his song of other times,
His cottage home, his bark of slender sail,
His glassy lake, and broomwood blossomed vale,
Rush on his thought; he sweeps before the wind,
Treads the loved shore he sighed to leave behind;
Meets at each step a friend's familiar face,
And flies at last to Helen's long embrace;
Wipes from her cheek the rapture-speaking tear,
And clasps, with many a sigh, his children dear!
While, long neglected, but at length caressed,
His faithful dog salutes the smiling guest,
Points to the master's eyes (wherever they roam)
His wistful face, and whines a welcome home.
Friend of the brave! in peril's darkest hour,
Intrepid Virtue looks to thee for power;
To thee the heart its trembling homage yields,
On stormy floods, and carnage-cover'd fields,
When front to front the banner'd hosts combine,
Halt ere they close, and form the dreadful line.
When all is still on Death's devoted soil,
The march-worn soldier mingles for the toil;
As rings his glittering tube, he lifts on high
The dauntless brow, and spirit-speaking eye.
Hails in his heart the triumph yet to come,
And hears thy stormy music in the drum!
And such thy strength-inspiring aid that bore
The hardy Byron to his native shore -- 1
In horrid climes, where Chiloe's tempests sweep
Tumultuous murmurs over the troubled deep,
'Twas his to mourn misfortune's rudest shock,
Scourged by the winds, and cradled on the rock,
To wake each joyless morn, and search again
The famished haunts of solitary men;
Whose race, unyielding as their native storm,
Knows not a trace of Nature but the form;
Yet, at thy call, the hardy tar pursued,
Pale but intrepid, sad but unsubdued,
Pierced the deep woods, and, hailing from afar,
The moon's pale planet, and the northern star;
Paused at each dreary cry, unheard before,
Hyaenas in the wild, and mermaids on the shore;
Till, led by thee over many a cliff sublime,
He found a warmer world, a milder clime,
A home to rest, a shelter to defend,
Peace and repose, a Briton and a friend! 2
Congenial Hope! thy passion-kindling power
How bright, how strong, in youth's untroubled hour!
On yon proud height, with Genius hand in hand,
I see thee light, and wave thy golden wand.
"Go, Child of Heaven (thy winged words proclaim)
It Is thine to search the boundless fields of fame!
Lo! Newton, Priest of Nature, shines afar,
Scans the wide world, and numbers every star!
Will thou, with him, mysterious rites apply,
And watch the shrine with wonder-beaming eye?
Yes, thou shall mark, with magic art profound,
The speed of light, the circling march of sound;
With Franklin grasp the light'ning's fiery wing,
Or yield the lyre of Heaven another string. 3
"The Swedish sage admires, in yonder bowers, 4
His winged insects, and his rosy flowers;
Calls from their woodland haunts the savage train
With sounding horn, and counts them on the plain --
So once, at Heaven's command, the wand'rers came
To Eden's shade, and heard their various name.
"Far from the world, in yon sequestered clime,
Slow pass the sons of Wisdom, more sublime;
Calm as the fields of Heaven, his sapient eye
The loved Athenian lifts to realms on high,
Admiring Plato on his spotless page,
Stamps the bright dictates of the Father sage:
'Shall Nature bound to Earth's diurnal span
The fire of God, the immortal soul of man?"
"Turn, Child of Heaven, thy rapture-lighten'd eye
To Wisdom's walks, the sacred Nine are nigh:
Hark! from bright spires that gild the Delphian height,
From streams that wander in eternal light,
Ranged on their hill, Harmonia's daughters swell
The mingling tones of horn, and harp, and shell;
Deep from his vaults, the Loxian murmurs flow, 5
And Pythia's awful organ peals below.
"Beloved of Heaven! the smiling muse shall shed
Her moonlight halo on thy beauteous head;
Shall swell thy heart to rapture unconfined,
And breathe a holy madness over thy mind.
I see thee roam her guardian power beneath,
And talk with spirits on the midnight heath;
Inquire of guilty wand'rers whence they came,
And ask each blood-stained form his earthly name;
Then weave in rapid verse the deeds they tell,
And read the trembling world the tales of hell.
"When Venus, throned in clouds of rosy hue,
Flings from her golden urn the vesper dew;
And bids fond man her glimmering noon employ,
Sacred to love, and walks of tender joy;
A milder mood the goddess shall recall,
And soft as dew thy tones of music fall;
While Beauty's deeply-pictur'd smiles impart,
A pang more dear than pleasure to the heart --
Warm as thy sighs shall flow the Lesbian strain,
And plead in Beauty's ear, nor plead in vain.
"Or will thou Orphean hymns more sacred deem,
And steep thy song in Mercy's mellow stream;
To pensive drops the radiant eye beguile --
For Beauty's tears are lovelier than her smile; --
On Nature's throbbing anguish pour relief,
And teach impassioned souls the Joy of Grief?
"Yes; to thy tongue shall seraph words be given,
And power on earth to plead the cause of Heaven;
The proud, the cold untroubled heart of stone,
That never mused on sorrow but its own,
Unlocks a generous store at thy command,
Like Horeb's rocks beneath the prophet's hand. 6
The living lumber of his kindred earth,
Charmed into soul, receives a second birth;
Feels thy dread power another heart afford,
Whose passion-touch'd harmonious strings accord
True as the circling spheres to Nature's plan;
And man, the brother, lives the friend of man!
"Bright as the pillar rose at Heaven's command,
When Israel marched along the desert land,
Blazed through the night on lonely wilds afar,
And told the path -- a never-setting star:
So! heavenly Genius, in thy course divine,
Hope is thy star, her light is ever thine."
Propitious Power! when rankling cares annoy
The sacred home of Hymenean joy;
When doomed to Poverty's sequestered dell,
The wedded pair of love and virtue dwell,
Unpitied by the world, unknown to fame,
Their woes, their wishes, and their hearts the same --
Oh there, prophetic Hope! thy smile bestow,
And chase the pangs that worth should never know --
There, as the parent deals his scanty store
To friendless babes, and weeps to give no more;
Tell that his manly race shall yet assuage
Their father's wrongs, and shield his later age.
What though for him no Hybla sweets distill,
Nor bloomy vines wave radiant on the hill;
Tell, that when silent years have passed away,
That when his eye grows dim, his tresses gray,
These busy hands a lovelier cot shall build,
And deck with fairer flowers his little field;
And call from Heaven propitious dews to breathe
Arcadian beauty on the barren heath:
Tell, that while Love's spontaneous smile endears
The days of peace, the sabbath of his years,
Health shall prolong to many a festive hour
The social pleasures of his humble bower.
Lo! at the couch where infant beauty sleeps,
Her silent watch the mournful mother keeps;
She, while the lovely babe unconscious lies,
Smiles on her little son with pensive eyes,
And weaves a song of melancholy joy --
"Sleep, image of thy father, sleep my boy:
No lingering hour of sorrow shall be thine;
No sigh that rends thy father's heart and mine;
Bright as his manly sire, the son shall be
In form and soul; but, ah! more blessed than he!
Thy fame, thy worth, thy filial love at last,
Shall soothe this aching heart for all the past --
With many a smile my solitude repay,
And chase the world's ungenerous scorn away.
"And say, when summoned from the world and thee,
I lay my head beneath the willow tree;
Will thou, sweet mourner! at my stone appear,
And soothe my parted spirit lingering near?
Oh, will thou come! at evening hour, to shed
The tears of Memory over my narrow bed;
With aching temples on thy hand reclined,
Muse on the last farewell I leave behind,
Breathe a deep sigh to winds that murmur low,
And think on all my love, and all my woe?"
So speaks affection, ere the infant eye
Can look regard, or brighten in reply;
But when the cherub lip has learnt to claim
A mother's ear by that endearing name;
Soon as the playful innocent can prove
A' tear of pity, or a smile of love,
Or cons his murmuring task beneath her care,
Or lisps with holy look his evening prayer,
Or gazing, mutely pensive, sits to hear
The mournful ballad warbled in his ear;
How fondly looks admiring Hope the while,
At every artless tear, and every smile;
How glows the joyous parent to descry
A guileless bosom, true to sympathy!
Where is the troubled heart consigned to share
Tumultuous toils, or solitary care,
Unblest by visionary thoughts that stray
To count the joys of Fortune's better day!
Lo, nature, life, and liberty relume
The dim-ey'd tenant of the dungeon gloom,
A long lost friend, or hapless child restored,
Smile at his blazing hearth and social board;
Warm from his heart the tears of rapture flow,
And virtue triumphs over remembered woe.
Chide not his peace, proud Reason! nor destroy
The shadowy forms of uncreated joy,
That urge the lingering tide of life, and pour
Spontaneous slumber on his midnight hour.
Hark! the wild maniac sings to chide the gale
That wafts so slow her lover's distant sail;
She, sad spectatress, on the wint'ry shore
Watched the rude surge his shroudless corse that bore,
Knew the pale form, and, shreaking in amaze,
Claspt her cold hands, and fixed her maddening gaze:
Poor widowed wretch! 'twas there she wept in vain
Till memory fled her agonizing brain; --
But Mercy gave, to charm the sense of woe,
Ideal peace, that Truth could never bestow: --
Warm on her heart the joys of Fancy beam,
And aimless Hope delights her darkest dream.
Often when yon moon has climbed the midnight sky,
And the lone sea-bird wakes its wildest cry,
Pil'd on the steep her blazing faggots burn
To hail the bark that never can return;
And still she waits, but scarce forbears to weep
That constant love can linger on the deep.
And, mark the wretch, whose wand'rings never knew
The world's regard, that soothes, though half untrue,
Whose erring heart the lash of sorrow bore,
But found not pity when it erred no more.
Yon friendless man, at whose dejected eye
The unfeeling proud one looks -- and passes by,
Condemned on Penury's barren path to roam,
Scorned by the world, and left without a home --
Even he, at evening, should he chance to stray
Down by the hamlet's hawthorn-scented way,
Where round the cot's romantic glade, are seen
The blossomed bean-field, and the sloping green,
Leans over its humble gate, and thinks the while --
Oh! that for me some home like this would smile,
Some hamlet shade, to yield my sickly form,
Health in the breeze, and shelter in the storm;
There should my hand no stinted boon assign
To wretched hearts with sorrows such as mine; --
That generous wish can soothe unpitied care,
And Hope half mingles with the poor man's prayer.
Hope! when I mourn, with sympathizing mind,
The wrongs of fate, the woes of human kind,
Thy blissful omens bid my spirit see
The boundless fields of rapture yet to be;
I watch the wheels of Nature's mazy plan,
N="320"And learn the future by the past of man.
Come, bright Improvement! on the car of Time,
And rule the spacious world from clime to clime:
Thy handmaid arts shall every wild explore,
Trace every wave, and culture every shore.
On Erie's banks, where tigers steal along,
And the dread Indian chaunts a dismal song,
Where human fiends on midnight errands walk,
And bathe in brains the murderous tomahawk;
There shall the flocks on thymy pasture stray,
And shepherds dance at Summer's opening day;
Each wandering genius of the lonely glen
Shall start to view the glittering haunts of men;
And silence watch, on woodland heights around,
The village curfew, as it tolls profound.
In Lybian groves, where damned rites are done
That bathe the rocks in blood, and veil the sun,
Truth shall arrest the murderous arm profane,
Wild Obi flies7 -- the veil is rent in twain.
Where barbarous hordes on Scythian mountains roam,
Truth, Mercy, Freedom, yet shall find a home;
Wherever degraded Nature bleeds and pines,
From Guinea's coast to Sibir's dreary mines,8
Truth shall pervade the unfathomed darkness there,
And light the dreadful features of despair: --
Hark! the stern captive spurns his heavy load,
And asks the image back that Heaven bestowed!
Fierce in his eye the fire of valor burns,
And, as the slave departs, the man returns!
Oh! sacred Truth! thy triumph ceased awhile,
And Hope, thy sister, ceased with thee to smile,
When leagued Oppression poured to Northern wars
Her whisker'd pandoors and her fierce hussars,
Waved her dread standard to the breeze of morn,
Peal'd her loud drum, and twang'd her trumpet horn;
Tumultuous horror brooded over her van,
Presaging wrath to Poland -- and to man!9
Warsaw's last champion from her height surveyed,
Wide over the fields, a waste of ruin laid, --
Oh! Heaven! he cried, my bleeding country save! --
Is there no hand on high to shield the brave!
Yet, though destruction sweep these lovely plains,
Rise, fellow men! our country yet remains!
By that dread name we wave the sword on high,
And swear for her to live! -- with her to die!
He said, and, on the rampart-heights, arrayed
His trusty warriors, few, but undismayed;
Firm-pac'd and slow, a horrid front they form,
Still as the breeze, but dreadful as the storm;
Low murmuring sounds along their banners fly,
Revenge, or death, -- the watchword and reply;
Then peal'd the notes, omnipotent to charm,
And the loud tocsin tolled their last alarm! --
In vain, alas! in vain, the gallant few!
From rank to rank your volley'd thunder flew: --
Oh! bloodiest picture in the book of Time,
Sarmatia fell, unwept, without a crime;
Found not a generous friend, a pitying foe!
Strength in her arms, nor mercy in her woe!
Dropped from her nerveless grasp the shattered speer,
Closed her bright eye, and curbed her high career; --
Hope, for a season, bade the world farewell,
And Freedom shrieked -- as KOSCIUSKO fell!
The sun went down, nor ceased the carnage there,
Tumultuous murder shook the midnight air --
On Prague's proud arch the fires of ruin glow,
His blood-dy'd waters murmuring far below; --
The storm prevails, the rampart yields a way,
Bursts the wild cry of horror and dismay!
Hark! as the smouldering piles with thunder fall,
A thousand shrieks for hopeless mercy call!
Earth shook -- red meteors flashed along the sky,
And conscious Nature shudder'd at the cry!
Oh! Righteous Heaven! ere Freedom found a grave,
Why slept the sword, omnipotent to save?
Where was thine arm, O vengeance! where thy rod,
That smote the foes of Zion and of God,
That crushed proud Ammon, when his iron car
Was yoked in wrath, and thundered from afar?
Where was the storm that slumber'd till the host
Of blood-stained Pharaoh left their trembling coast,
Then bade the deep in wild commotion flow,
And heaved an ocean on their march below?
Departed spirits of the mighty dead!
Ye that at Marathon and Leuctra bled!
Friends of the world! restore your swords to man,
Fight in his sacred cause, and lead the van!
Yet for Sarmatia's tears of blood atone,
And make her arm puissant as your own: --
Oh! once again to Freedom's cause return
The patriot Tell -- the BRUCE OF BANNOCKBURN!
Yes! thy proud lords, unpitied land! shall see
That man has yet a soul -- and dare be free!
A little while, along thy saddening plains,
The starless night of desolation reigns;
Truth shall restore the light by Nature given,
And, like Prometheus, bring the fire of Heaven!
Prone to the dust Oppression shall be hurled,
Her name, her nature, withered from the world!
Ye that the rising morn invidious mark,
And hate the light -- because your deeds are dark;
Ye that expanding truth invidious view,
And think, or wish the song of Hope untrue;
Perhaps your little hands presume to span
The march of Genius, and the powers of man;
Perhaps ye watch, at Pride's unhallowed shrine,
Her victims, newly slain, and thus divine:
"Here shall thy triumph, Genius, ease, and here
Truth, Science, Virtue, close your short career."
Tyrants! in vain ye trace the wizard ring;
In vain ye limit mind's unwearied spring;
What! can ye lull the winged winds asleep,
Arrest the rolling world, or chain the deep?
No: -- the wild wave contemns your sceptered hand; --
It rolled not back when Canute gave command!
Man! can thy doom no brighter soul allow?
Still must thou live a blot on Nature's brow?
Shall War's polluted banner never be furled?
Shall crimes and tyrants cease but with the world?
What! are thy triumphs, sacred Truth, belied?
Why then has Plato lived -- or Sydney died?
Ye fond adorers of departed fame,
Who warm at Scipio's worth, or Tully's name!
Ye that, in fancied vision, can admire
The sword of Brutus, and the Theban lyre!
Wrapped in historic ardour, who adore
Each classic haunt and well-remember'd shore,
Where valor tuned, amid her chosen throng,
The Thracian trumpet and the Spartan song;
Or, wandering thence, behold the later charms
Of England's glory, and Helvetia's arms!
See Roman fire in Hampden's bosom swell,
And fate and freedom in the shaft of Tell!
Say, ye fond zealots to the worth of yore,
Has valor left the world -- to live no more?
No more shall Brutus bid a tyrant die,
And sternly smile with vengeance in his eye?
Hampden no more, when suffering Freedom calls,
Encounter fate, and triumph as he (...)?
Nor Tell disclose, through peril and alarm,
The might that slumbers in a peasant's arm?
Yes! in that generous cause, for ever strong,
The patriot's virtue and the poet's song
Still, as the tide of ages rolls away,
Shall charm the world, unconscious of decay!
Yes! there are hearts, prophetic Hope may trust,
That slumber yet in uncreated dust,
Ordained to fire the adoring sons of earth
With every charm of wisdom and of worth;
Ordained to light with intellectual day,
The mazy wheels of Nature as they play,
Or warm with Fancy's energy, to glow,
And rival all but Shakspeare's name below!
And say, supernal Powers! who deeply scan
Heaven's dark decrees, unfathomed yet by man,
When shall the world call down, to cleanse her shame,
That embryo spirit, yet without a name, --
That Friend of Nature, whose avenging hands
Shall burst the Lybian's adamantine bands?
Who, sternly marking on his native soil,
The blood, the tears, the anguish, and the toil,
Shall bid each righteous heart exult to see
Peace to the slave, and vengeance on the free!
Yet, yet, degraded men! the expected day
That breaks your bitter cup, is far away;
Trade, wealth, and fashion, ask you still to bleed,
And holy men give scripture for the deed;
Scourged and debased, no Briton stoops to save
A wretch, a coward; yes, because a slave! --
Eternal Nature! when thy giant hand
Had heaved the floods, and fixed the trembling land,
When life sprung startling at thy plastic call,
Endless her forms, and man the lord of all!
Say, was that lordly form inspired by thee,
To wear eternal chains, and bow the knee?
Was man ordained the slave of man to toil,
Yoked with the brutes, and fettered to the soil;
Weighed in a tyrant's balance with his gold?
No! -- Nature stamped us in a heavenly mould!
She bade no wretch his thankless labor urge,
Nor, trembling, take the pittance and the scourge!
No homeless Lybian, on the stormy deep,
To call upon his country's name and weep! --
Lo! Once in triumph, on his boundless plain,
The quiver'd chief of Congo loved to reign;
With fires proportioned to his native sky,
Strength in his arm, and lightning in his eye;
Scoured with wild feet his sun-illumin'd zone,
The spear, the lion, and the woods his own;
Or led the combat, bold without a plan,
An artless savage, but a fearless man!
The plunderer came: -- alas! no glory smiles
For Congo's chief on yonder Indian isles;
For ever fallen! no son of Nature now,
With Freedom charter'd on his manly brow!
Faint, bleeding, bound, he weeps the night away,
And, when the sea-wind wafts the dewless day,
Starts, with a bursting heart, for evermore
To curse the sun that lights their guilty shore!
The shrill horn blew 10; at that alarm knell
His guardian angel took a last farewell!
That funeral dirge to darkness has resigned
The fiery grandeur of a generous mind! --
Poor fettered man! I hear thee whispering low
Unhallowed vows to Guilt, the child of Woe!
Friendless thy heart; and, can thou harbor there
A wish but death -- a passion but despair?
The widowed Indian, when her lord expires,
Mounts the dread pile, and braves the funeral fires!
So falls the heart at Thraldom's bitter sigh!
So Virtue dies, the spouse of Liberty!
But not to Lybia's barren climes alone,
To Chili, or the wild Siberian zone,
Belong the wretched heart and haggard eye,
Degraded worth, and poor misfortune's sigh! --
Ye orient realms, where Ganges' waters run!
Prolific fields! dominions of the sun!
How long your tribes have trembled and obeyed!
How long was Timur's iron scepter swayed! 11
Whose marshalled hosts, the lions of the plain,
From Scythia's northern mountains to the main,
Raged over your plundered shrines and alters bare,
With blazing torch and gory scymitar, --
Stunned with the cries of death each gentle gale,
And bathed in blood the verdure of the vale!
Yet could no pangs the immortal spirit tame,
When Brama's children perished for his name;
The martyr smiled beneath avenging power,
And braved the tyrant in his torturing hour!
When Europe sought your subject realms to gain,
And stretched her giant scepter over the main,
Taught her proud barks their winding way to shape,
And braved the stormy spirit of the Cape; 12
Children of Brama! then was mercy nigh
To wash the stain of blood's eternal dye?
Did Peace descend, to triumph and to save,
When freeborn Britons crossed the Indian wave?
Ah, no! to more than Rome's ambition true,
The Nurse of Freedom gave it not to you!
She the bold route of Europe's guilt began,
And, in the march of nations, led the van!
Rich in the gems of India's gaudy zone,
And plunder pil'd from kingdoms not their own,
Degenerate Trade! thy minions could despise
The heart-born anguish of a thousand cries;
Could lock, with impious hands, their teeming store,
While furnished nations died along the shore; 13
Could mock the groans of fellow men, and bear,
The curse of kingdoms peopled with despair;
Could stamp disgrace on Nature's hollow name,
And barter, with their gold, eternal shame!
But, hark! as bowed to earth the Bramin kneels,
From heavenly climes propitious thunder peals!
Of India's fate her guardian spirits tell,
Prophetic murmurs breathing on the shell,
And solemn sounds, that awe the listening mind,
Roll on the azure paths of every wind.
"Foes of mankind! (her guardian spirits say),
Revolving ages bring the bitter day,
When Heaven's unerring arm shall fall on you,
And blood for blood these Indian plains bedew;
Nine times have Brama's wheels of lightning hurled
His awful presence over the prostrate world;
Nine times has Guilt, through all his giant frame,
Convulsive trembled, as the Mighty came;
Nine times has suffering Mercy spared in vain -- 14
But Heaven shall burst her starry gates again!
He comes! dread Brama shakes the sunless sky
With murmuring wrath, and thunders from on high!
Heaven's fiery horse, beneath his warrior form,
Paws the light clouds, and gallops on the storm!
Wide waves his flickering sword, his bright arms glow
Like summer suns, and light the world below!
Earth, and her trembling isles in Ocean's bed
Are shook; and Nature rocks beneath his tread!
To pour redress on India's injured realm
The oppressor to dethrone, the proud to whelm;
To chase destruction from her plundered shore
With arts and arms that triumphed once before,
The tenth Avater comes! at Heaven's command
Shall Seriswattee 15 wave her hallowed wand!
And Camdeo bright, and Ganesa sublime,
Shall bless with joy their own propitious clime! --
Come, Heavenly Powers! primeval peace restore!
Love! -- Mercy! -- Wisdom! -- rule for evermore!
END OF PART FIRST.
THE Pleasures of Hope. PART SECOND.

Pleasures of Hope. PART II.
IN joyous youth, what soul has never known
Thought, feeling, taste, harmonious to its own?
Who has not paused, while Beauty's pensive eye
Asked from his heart the homage of a sigh?
Who has not owned, with rapture-smitten frame,
The power of grace, the magic of a name!
There be, perhaps, who barren hearts avow,
Cold as the rocks on Torneo's hoary brow;
There be, whose loveless wisdom never failed,
In self-adoring pride securely mail'd; --
But, triumph not, ye peace-enamour'd few!
Fire, Nature, Genius, never dwelt with you!
For you no fancy consecrates the scene
Where rapture uttered vows, and wept between;
It Is yours, unmoved, to sever and to meet;
No pledge is sacred, and no home is sweet!
Who that would ask a heart to dullness wed,
The waveless calm, the slumber of the dead?
No; the wild bliss of Nature needs alloy,
And fear and sorrow fan the fire of joy!
And say, without our hopes, without our fears,
Without the home that plighted love endears,
Without the smile from partial beauty won,
Oh! what were man? -- a world without a sun!
Till Hymen brought his love-delighted hour,
There dwelt no joy in Eden's rosy bower!
In vain the viewless seraph lingering there,
At starry midnight, charmed the silent air;
In vain the wild-bird carol'd on the steep,
To hail the sun, slow-wheeling from the deep;
In vain, to sooth the solitary shade,
Aerial notes in mingling measure played;
The summer wind that shook the spangled tree,
The whispering wave, the murmur of the be --
Still slowly passed the melancholy day,
And still the stanger wist not where to stray, --
The world was sad! -- the garden was a wild! --
And Man, the hermit, sighed -- till Woman smiled!
True! the sad power to generous hearts may bring
Delirious anguish on his fiery wing!
Barred from delight by Fate's untimely hand,
By wealthless lot, or pitiless command;
Or doomed to gaze on beauties that adorn
The smile of triumph, or the frown of scorn;
While Memory watches over the sad review
Of joys that faded like the morning dew;
Peace may depart -- and life and nature seem
A barren path -- a wildness, and a dream!
But, can the noble mind for ever brood,
The willing victim of a weary mood,
On heartless cares that squander life away,
And cloud young Genius bright'ning into day! --
Shame to the coward thought that ever betrayed
The noon of manhood to a myrtle shade! -- 1
If Hope's creative spirit cannot raise
One trophy sacred to thy future days,
Scorn the dull crowd that haunt the gloomy shrine
Of hopeless love, to murmur and repine!
But, should a sigh of milder mood express
Thy heart-warm wishes true to happiness,
Should Heaven's fair harbinger delight to pour
Her blissful visions on thy pensive hour,
No tear to blot thy memory's pictured page,
No fears but such as Fancy can assuage;
Though thy wild heart some hapless hour may miss
The peaceful tenor of unvaried bliss,
(For love pursues an ever devious race,
True to the winding lineaments of grace);
Yet still may Hope her talisman employ
To snatch from Heaven anticipated joy,
And all her kindred energies impart
That burn the brightest in the purest heart!
When first the Rhodian's mimic art arrayed
The queen of Beauty in her Cyprian shade,
The happy master mingled on his piece
Each look that charmed him in the fair of Greece;
To faultless Nature true, he stole a grace
From every finer form and sweeter face;
And, as he sojourned on the Aegean isles,
Wooed all their love, and treasured all their smiles;
Then glowed the tints, pure, precious, and refined,
And mortal charms seemed heavenly when combined!
Love on the picture smiled! Expression poured
Her mingling spirit there -- and Greece adored!
So thy fair hand, enamored Fancy! gleans
The treasured pictures of a thousand scenes!
Thy pencil traces on the Lover's thought
Some cottage-home, from towns and toil remote,
Where Love and Lore may claim alternate hours,
With Peace embosom'd in Idalian bowers!
Remote from busy Life's bewildered way,
Over all his heart shall Taste and Beauty sway!
Free on the sunny slope, or winding shore,
With hermit steps to wander and adore!
There shall he love, when genial morn appears,
Like pensive Beauty smiling in her tears,
To watch the bright'ning roses of the sky,
And muse on Nature with a poet's eye! --
And, when the sun's last splendor lights the deep,
The woods, and waves, and murmuring winds asleep;
When fairy harps the Hesperian planet hail,
And the lone cuckoo sighs along the vale,
His path shall be where streamy mountains swell
Their shadowy grandeur over the narrow dell,
Where mouldering piles and forests intervene,
Mingling with darker tints the living green;
No circling hills his ravished eye to bound,
Heaven, Earth, and Ocean, blazing all around!
The moon is up -- the watch-tow'r dimly burns --
And down the vale his sober step returns;
But pauses often, as winding rocks convey
The still sweet fall of Music far away;
And often he lingers from his home awhile
To watch the dying notes! -- and start, and smile!
Let Winter come! Let polar spirits sweep
The dark'ning world, and tempest-troubled deep!
Though boundless snows the withered heath deform,
And the dim sun scarce wanders through the storm;
Yet shall the smile of social love repay,
With mental light, the melancholy day!
And, when its short and sullen noon is over,
The ice-chain'd waters slumbering on the shore,
How bright the faggots in his little hall
Blaze on the hearth, and warm the pictured wall!
How blessed he names, in Love's familiar tone,
The kind fair friend, by Nature marked his own;
And, in the waveless mirror of his mind,
Views the fleet years of pleasure left behind,
Since Anna's empire over his heart began!
Since first he called her his before the holy man!
Trim the gay taper in his rustic dome,
And light the wint'ry paradise of home;
And let the half-uncurtain'd window hail
Some way-worn man benighted in the vale!
Now, while the moaning night-wind rages high,
As sweep the shot-stars down the troubled sky,
While fiery hosts in Heaven's wide circle play,
And bathe in livid light the milky way,
Safe from the storm, the meteor, and the shower,
Some pleasing page shall charm the solemn hour --
With pathos shall command, with wit beguile,
A generous tear of anguish, or a smile --
Thy woes, Arion! and thy simple tale,2
Over all the heart shall triumph and prevail!
Charmed as they read the verse too sadly true,
How gallant Albert, and his weary crew,
Heaved all their guns, their foundering bark to save,
And toiled -- and shrieked -- and perished on the wave!
Yes, at the dead of night, by Lonna's steep,
The seaman's cry was heard along the deep:
There, on his funeral waters dark and wild,
The dying father blessed his darling child!
Oh! Mercy, shield her innocence, he cried,
Spent on the prayer his bursting heart, and died!
Or will they learn how generous worth sublimes
The robber Moor 3, and pleads for all his crimes!
How poor Amelia kissed, with many a tear
His hand, bloodstain'd, but ever ever dear!
Hung on the tortured bosom of her lord,
And wept, and prayed perdition from his sword!
Nor sought in vain! at that heart-piercing cry
The strings of nature cracked with agony!
He, with delirious laugh, the dagger hurled,
And burst the ties that bound him to the world!
Turn from his dying words, that smite with steel,
The shuddering thoughts, or wind them on the wheel --
Turn to the gentler melodies that suit
Thalia's harp, or Pan's Arcadian lute;
Or, down the stream of Truth's historic page,
From clime to clime descend, from age to age!
Yet there, perhaps, may darker scenes obtrude
Than Fancy fashions in her wildest mood;
There shall he pause, with horrent brow, to rate
What millions died -- that Caesar might be great! 4
Or learn the fate that bleeding thousands bore, 5
Marched by their Charles to Dneiper's swampy shore,
Faint in his wounds, and shivering in the blast,
The Swedish soldier sunk -- and groaned his last!
File after file, the stormy showers benumb,
Freeze every standard-sheet, and hush the drum!
Horseman and horse confessed the bitter pang,
And arms and warriors fell with hollow clang!
Yet, ere he sunk in Nature's last repose,
Ere life's warm torrent to the fountain froze,
The dying man to Sweden turned his eye,
Thought of his home, and closed it with a sigh!
Imperial Pride looked sullen on his plight,
And Charles beheld -- nor shudder'd at the sight!
Oh! vainly wise, the moral Muse has sung
That suasive Hope has but a Siren tongue!
True; she may sport with life's untutored day,
Nor heed the solace of its last decay,
The guileless heart her happy mansion spurn,
And part like Ajut6 -- never to return!
But yet, methinks, when Wisdom shall assuage
The griefs and passions of our greener age,
Though dull the close of life, and far away
Each flower that hailed the dawning of the day;
Yet over her lovely hopes, that once were dear,
The time-taught spirit, pensive, not severe,
With milder griefs her aged eye shall fill,
And weep their falsehood, though she love them still!
Thus, with forgiving tears, and reconciled,
The king of Judah mourned his rebel child!
Musing on days when yet the guiltless boy
Smiled on his sire and filled his heart with joy!
My Absalom! the voice of Nature cried!
Oh! that for thee thy father could have died!
For bloody was the deed, and rashly done,
That slew my Absalom! -- my son! -- my son!
Unfading Hope! when life's last embers burn,
When soul to soul, and dust to dust return!
Heaven to thy charge resigns the awful hour!
Oh! then, thy kingdom comes! Immortal Power!
What though each spark of earth-born rapture fly
The quivering lip, pale cheek, and closing eye!
Bright to the soul thy seraph hands convey
The morning dream of life's eternal day --
Then, then, the triumph and the trance begin!
And all the Phoenix spirit burns within!
Cease, every joy, to glimmer on my mind,
But leave -- oh! leave -- the light of hope behind!
What though my winged hours of bliss have been,
Like angel visits, few and far between;
Her musing mood shall every pang appeas,
And charm -- when pleasures loose the power to please!
Yes! let each rapture, dear to Nature, flee;
Close not the light of Fortune's stormy sea --
Mirth, music, friendship, Love's propitious smile,
Chase every care, and charm a little while,
Ecstatic throbs the fluttering heart employ,
And all her strings are harmoniz'd to Joy! --
But why so short is love's delighted hour?
Why fades the dew on Beautie's sweeter flower?
Why can no hymned charm of music heal
The sleepless woes (...) feel?
Can fancy's fairy hands (...),
To hide the sad realities of (...)! --
No! not the quaint remark, the sapient rule,
Nor all the pride of Wisdom's worldly school,
Have power to sooth, unaided and alone,
The heart that vibrates to a feeling tone!
When stepdame Nature every bliss recals,
Fleet as the meteor over the desert falls;
When, reft of all, yon widowed sire appears
A lonely hermit in the vale of years;
Say, can the world one joyous thought bestow
To friendship, weeping at the couch of Woe?
No! but a brighter soothes the last adieu, --
Souls of impassioned mould, she speaks to you!
Weep not, she says, at Nature's transient pain,
Congenial spirits part to meet again! --
What plaintive sobs thy filial bosom drew,
What sorrow chok'd thy long and last adieu!
Daughter of Conrad! when he heard his knell,
And bade his country and his child farewell!
Doomed the lone isles of Sydney Cove to see,
The martyr of his crimes, but true to thee.
Thrice the sad father tore thee from his heart,
And thrice returned to bless thee, and to part;
Thrice from his trembling lips he murmured low
The plaint that owned unutterable woe;
Till Faith, prevailing over his sullen doom,
As bursts the morn on night's unfathomed gloom,
Lured his dim eye to deathless hopes sublime,
Beyond the realms of Nature and of Time!
"And weep not thus," he cried, "young Ellenor,
My bosom bleeds, but soon shall bleed no more!
Short shall this half-extinguish'd spirit burn,
And soon these limbs to kindred dust return!
But not, my child! with life's precarious fire,
The immortal ties of Nature shall expire;
These shall resist the triumph of decay,
When times is over, and worlds have passed away,
Cold in the dust this perished heart may lie,
But that which warmed it once shall never die!
That spark unburied in its mortal frame,
With living light, eternal, and the same,
Shall beam on Joy's interminable years,
Unveiled by darkness -- unassuag'd by tears!
"Yet, on the barren shore and stormy deep,
One tedious watch is Conrad doomed to weep;
But when I gain the home without a friend,
And press the uneasy couch where none attend,
This last embrace, still cherished in my heart,
Shall calm the struggling spirit ere it part!
Thy darling form shall seem to hover nigh
And hush the groan of life's last agony!
"Farewell! when strangers lift thy father's bier,
And place my nameless stone without a tear;
When each returning pledge has told my child
That Conrad's tomb is on the desert pil'd;
And when the dream of troubled Fancy sees
Its lonely rank-grass waving in the breeze;
Who then will soothe thy grief, when mine is over?
Who will protect thee, helpless Ellenor?
Shall secret scenes thy filial sorrows hide,
Scorned by the world, to factious guilt allied!
Ah! no! methinks the generous and the good
Will woo thee from the shades of solitude!
Over friendless grief compassion shall awake,
And smile on Innocence, for Mercy's sake!"
Inspiring thought of rapture yet to be,
The tears of love were hopeless but for thee!
If in that frame no deathless spirit dwell,
If that faint murmur be the last farewell;
If fate unite the faithful but to part,
Why is their memory sacred to the heart?
Why does the Brother of my childhood seem
Restored awhile in every pleasing dream?
Why do I joy the lonely spot to view,
By artless friendship blessed when life was new?
Eternal Hope! when yonder spheres sublime
Peal'd their first notes to sound the march of Time!
Thy joyous youth began -- but not to fade. --
When all the sister planets have decayed;
When wrapped in fire the realms of either glow,
And Heaven's last thunder shakes the world below;
Thou, undismayed, shall over the ruin smile,
And light thy torch at Nature's funeral pile!
END OF THE SECOND PART.
NOTES ON PART I.
Note 1. And such thy strength-inspiring aid that bore The hardy Byron to his
native shore.

The following picture of his own distress, given by Byron in his simple and
interesting Narrative, justifies the description in p. 10. After relating the
barbarity of the Indian Cacique to his child, he proceeds thus: -- "A day or
two after, we put to sea again, and crossed the great bay I mentioned we had
been at the bottom of, when we first hawled away to the westward. The land here
was very low and sandy, and something like the mouth of a river which
discharged itself into the sea, and which had been taken no notice of by us
before, as it was so shallow that the Indians were obliged to take every thing
out of their canoes and carry it over land. We rowed up the river four or five
leagues, and then took into a branch of it that ran first to the eastward and
then to the northward: here it became much narrower, and the stream excessively
rapid, so that we gained but little way, though we wrought very hard. At night
we landed upon its banks, and had a most uncomfortable lodging, it being a
perfect swamp; and we had nothing to cover us, though it rained excessively.
The Indians were little better off than we, as there was no wood here to make
their wigwams; so that all they could do was to prop up the bark, which they
carry in the bottom of their canoes, and shelter themselves as well as they
could to the leeward of it. Knowing the difficulties they had to encounter
here, they had provided themselves with some seal; but we had not a morsel to
eat, after the heavy fatigues of the day, excepting a sort of root we saw the
Indians make use of, which was very disagreeable to the taste. We labored all
next day against the stream, and fared as we had done the day before. The next
day brought us to the carrying place. Here was plenty of wood, but nothing to
be got for sustenance. We passed this night as we had frequently done under a
tree; but what we suffered at this time is not easy to be expressed. I had been
three days at the oar without any kind of nourishment except the wretched root
above mentioned. I had no shirt, for it had rotted off by bits. All my clothes
consisted, of a short grieko (something like a bear-skin), a piece of red cloth
which had once been a waistcoat, and a ragged pair of trowsers, without shoes
or stockings."

Note 2. A Briton and a friend.] Don Patricio Gedd, a Scotch physician in one
of the Spanish settlements, hospitably relieved Byron and his wretched
associates, of which the Commodore speaks in the warmest terms of gratitude.

Note 3. Or yield the Lyre of Heaven another string.

The seven strings of Apollo's harp were the symbolical representations of the
seven planets. Herschel, by discovering an eighth, might be said to add another
string to the instrument.

Note 4. The Swedish sage.] Linnaeus.

Note 5. -- Deep from his vaults the Loxian murmurs flow.

Loxius is a name frequently given to Apollo by Greek writers: it is met with
more than once in the Chaoephorae of Aeschylus.

Note 6. -- Unlocks a generous store at thy command.

Like Horeb's rocks beneath the prophet's hand.

See Exodus, chap. xvii. 3, 5, 6.

Note 7. Wild Obi flies.] Among the negroes of the West Indies, Obi, or Obiah,
is the name of a magical power, which is believed by them to affect the object
of its malignity with dismal calamities Such a belief must undoubtedly have
been deduced from the superstitious mythology of their kinsmen on the coast of
Africa. I have therefore personified Obi as the evil spirit of the African,
although the history of the African tribes mentions the evil spirit of their
religious creed by a different appellation.

Note 8. Sibir's dreary mines.] Mr. Bell of Antermony, in his travels through
Siberia, informs us that the name of the country is universally pronounced
Sibir by the Russians.

Note 9. -- Presaging wrath to Poland -- and to man!

"On the 10th of October 1794, a dreadful engagement took place between the
Russians under General Fersen and the troops under Kosciusko. The Russians
advanced twice to the attack, but were repulsed by the Poles, who however,
unfortunately, not contented with the advantages they had gained, abandoned
their favorable position on the heights, and pressed on to the attack in their
turn. This movement threw the troops into some confusion; and the Russians,
forming themselves anew, the route soon became general. The battle, which began
at seven in the morning, did not end till noon. Kosciusko flew from rank to
rank, and was continually in the hottest part of the engagement, in the course
of which he had three horses killed under him. At length he fell; and a
Cossack, who did not know him in the peasants dress, which he constantly wore,
wounded him from behind with a lance. He recovered, and advanced a few steps,
but was again knocked down by another Cossack, who was preparing to give him a
mortal blow, when his arm was stopped by a Russian officer, who is said to have
been General Chronzazow, to whose wife Kosciusko had a short time before
politely given leave of departure from Warsaw to join her husband. The
unfortunate Kosciusko implored the officer, if he wished to render him a
service, to allow the soldier to put an end to his existence; but the latter
chose rather to make him a prisoner. The Polish infantry defended themselves
with bravery proportioned to that of their general, and fought with a degree of
valor almost approaching to fury.

The Russians under General Fersen soon afterward summoned Warsaw to
surrender; and on being refused, after the junction of the different corpse
under Fersen, Dernfeld, Denisow, and Suwarrow, they proceeded, on the 4th of
November, to attack the suburb of Prague. In the mean time the generals
Madalinski and Dambrowski threw themselves into Warsaw, and prepared for
resistance. The suburb of Prague, separated from Warsaw by the Vistula, was
defended by more than a hundred pieces of cannon, disposed upon thirty-three
batteries. Little intimidated, however, by so formidable a force, the ferocious
Suwarrow commanded his soldiers to mount to the assault in the same manner they
had done at Ismael, where the Russians entered by climbing over the dead and
wounded bodies of their comrades, as well as of their enemies. His further
orders were, that they should fight only with the sabre and bayonet. The
Russians sprung to the charge with almost inconceivable impetuosity. They
eagerly began to climb the works, and the six Russian columns, by singular good
fortune, presented themselves at the same moment before the lines at Prague.
Thus surrounded, the Polish generals found themselves unable to oppose, with
10,000 soldiers, which was the whole of their force, the united attack of
50,000 men; and, to add to their distress, the fire which they immediately
commenced, from the darkness of the night, was so ill directed as to pass over
the heads of the assailants. The cry raised by the successful columns
penetrated to the entrenchments on the other side the Vistula, and added to the
consternation of the Poles engaged with the other part of the Russian force;
and they endeavored to find safety by retiring into Warsaw, over a bridge. In
their retreat they were met by another body of Russians, and a dreadful carnage
ensued, in which a great part of the garrison of Prague was miserably
slaughtered. After a severe conflict of eight hours, the resistance on the part
of the Poles ceased; but the massacre by the detestable Suwarrow, who, from his
habitual cruelty, was selected for this service, continued for two hours
longer; and the pillage lasted till noon on the following day. Five thousand
Poles were computed to have been slain in the assault; the remainder were
either imprisoned or dispersed. The citizens were compelled to lay down their
arms, and their houses were plundered by the merciless Russians, who, after the
battle had ceased nearly ten hours, about nine o'clock at night set fire to the
town, and again began to massacre the inhabitants; nine thousand persons,
unarmed men, defenceles women, and harmless infants, perished either in the
flames or by the sword, and nearly the whole of the suburb was reduced to
ashes. In the whole of this siege it is computed that not less than 30,000 of
the Poles were inhumanly put to death. In this exigence, Count Potocki, the
chief of the insurrection, proposed to treat with the Russians, and repaired to
their head quarters with propositions of peace (...) name of the republic. He
was received with extreme haughtiness by the infamous Suwarrow, who observed
that the Empress was not at war with the republic; that his only object in
coming to Warsaw was to reduce the refractory subjects of Poland to obedience;
and he intimated that he should not treat with any insurgent, but only with
such as, invested with legitimate authority, should come to speak in the name,
and on the part of his Polish majesty: Deputies were dispatched from the
magistracy of Warsaw to the Russian commander, who returned, after having been
constrained to surrender the city at discretion, under the single condition of
securing to the citizens their lives and property. The general insolently
observed, that there was another article which, without doubt, they had
forgotten to ask, but which he would accede to them, which was pardon for the
past.

In consequence of this arrangement, the firing which had been kept up in the
suburb of Prague ceased, and all the inhabitants were requested to surrender
their arms. This was refused by the soldiers in the city, and their chief
Wawrzecki, with many others of the supreme council, refused to take part in the
capitulation. This impeded the close of the negotiation; but the military, who
refused to lay down their arms, were allowed to leave Warsaw, not however
without a declaration from Suwarrow that they might be sure of not escaping,
and that, when taken, no quarter would be granted. On the morning of the 7th,
the supreme council, with the generalissimo Wawrzecki, remitted into the hands
of the king the authority they had exercised. On the 9th the Russian general
made his triumphal entry into Warsaw, in which the streets were lined with his
troops, and the inhabitants, shut up in their houses, observed a melancholy
silence. The chief magistrate delivered him the keys at the bridge of Prague;
after which he received the compliments of the king; and on the 10th, went with
much pomp to the castle to pay his respects to his majesty. To complete the
whole of this execrable scene, ostentatious and solemn blasphemy was called in;
and the 1st of December was set apart for a day of solemn thanksgiving, and Te
Deum was sung for the triumph of powerful oppression over persecuted virtue, to
the God of all mercies, whose altars had been stained by the blood of the
innocent and helpless; and whose praises were chanted by the voice of
murderers, amidst the shrieks and groans of the victims.

New Annual Register, 1794. Note 10. "The shrill horn blew."] -- The negroes in
the West Indies are summoned to their morning work by a (...)

Note 11 How long was Timur's iron scepter swayed? -- To elucidate this
passage, I shall subjoin a quotation from the preface to Letters from a Hindoo
Rajah, a work of elegance and celebrity.

"The impostor of Mecca had established, as one of the principles of his
doctrine, the merit of extending it, either by persuasion, or the sword, to all
parts of the earth. How steadily this injunction was adhered to by his
followers, and with what success it was pursued, is well known to all who are
in the least conversant in history.

"The same overwhelming torrent, which had inundated the greater part of
Africa, burst its way into the very heart of Europe, and covered many kingdoms
of Asia with unbounded desolation; directed its baleful course to the
flourishing provinces of Hindostan. Here these fierce and hardy adventurers,
whose only improvement had been in the science of destruction, who added the
fury of fanaticism to the ravages of war, found the great end of their
conquests opposed, by objects which neither the ardour of their persevering
zeal, nor savage barbarity, could surmount. Multitudes were sacrificed by the
cruel hand of religious persecution, and whole countries were deluged in blood,
in the vain hope, that by the destruction of a part, the remainder might be
persuaded, or terrified into the profession of Mahomedism: but all these
sanguinary efforts were ineffectual; and at length being fully convinced, that
though they might extirpate, they could never hope to convert any number of the
Hindoos, they relinquished the impracticable idea, with which they had entered
upon their career of conquest, and contented themselves with the acquirement of
the civil dominion and almost universal empire of Hindostan."

Letters from a Hindoo Rajah, by Eliza Hamilton. Note 12. And braved the stormy
spirit of the Cape.] See the description of the Cape of Good Hope, translated
from Camoens, by Mickle.

Note 13. While famished nations died along the shore.

The following account of British conduct, and its consequences in Bengal, will
afford a sufficient idea of the fact alluded to in this passage. After
describing the monopoly of salt, betel nut, and tobacco, the historian proceeds
thus: "Money in this current came but by drops; it could not quench the thirst
of those who waited in India to receive it. An expedient, such as it was
remained to quicken its pace. The natives could live with little salt, but
could not want food. Some of the agents saw themselves well situated for
collecting the rice into stores; they did so. They knew the Gentoos would
rather die than violate the principles of their religion by eating flesh. The
alternative would therefore be between giving what they had, or dying. The
inhabitants sunk; -- they that cultivated the land, and saw the harvest at the
disposal of others, planted in doubt, scarcity ensued. Then the monopoly was
easier managed -- sickness ensued. In some districts the languid living left
the bodies of their numerous dead unburied.

Short History of the English Transactions, in the East Indies, page 145. Note
14. Nine times has Brama's wheel's of lightning hurled, His awful presence
over the prostrate world!

Among the sublime fictions of the Hindoo mythology, it is one article of
belief, that the Deity Brama has descended nine times upon the world in various
forms, and that he is yet to appear a tenth time in the figure of a warrior
upon a white horse to out off all incorrigible offenders. Avator is the word
used to express his descent.

Note 15: And Camdeo bright, and Ganesa sublime.] Camdeo is the God of Love in
the mythology of the Hindoos. Ganesa and Seraswatee correspond to the Pagan
deities, Janus and Minerva.

NOTES ON PART II.
Note 1. The noon of manhood to a myrtle shade!

Sacred to Venus is the myrtle shade. Dryden.

Note 2. Thy woes, Arion!] Falconer, in his poem, The Shipwreck, speaks of
himself by the name of Arion. The passage at the conculsion of the last Canto,
to which I have alluded, may be quoted.

Next, oh, unhappy chief! the eternal doom
Of Heaven decreed thee to the briny tomb!
What scenes of misery torment thy view?
What painful struggles of thy dying crew,
Thy perished hopes all buried in the flood,
Overspread with corses red with human blood?
So pierced with anguish hoary Priam gazed,
While Troy's imperial domes in ruin blazed,
While he severest sorrow doomed to feel
Expired beneath the victor's murdering steel;
Thus, with his hapless partners, till the last
Sad refuge, Albert hugs the floating mast;
His soul could yet sustain the mortal blow,
But droops, alas, beneath superior woe!
For now soft Nature's sympathetic chain,
Tugs at his yearning heart with powerful strain;
His faithful wife, forever doomed to mourn
For him, alas, who never shall return!
To black Adversity's reproach exposed,
With want and hardships unforeseen enclosed;
Her youth and indigence set forth a prey
To lawless guilt that flatters to betray! --
While these reflections rack his feeling mind,
Rodmond, who clung behind, his grasp resigned,
And, as the tumbling waters over him rolled,
His outstretch'd arms the master's legs enfold;
Sad Albert feels the dissolution near,
And strives in vain his fettered limbs to clear;
For death bids every clenching joint adhere.
All faint to Heaven he throws his dying eyes,
And, oh, protect my wife and child he cries!
The gushing streams roll back the unfinished sound --
He gasps -- he dies -- and tumbles to the ground!
Falconer's Shipwreck, Canto III. Note 3. The Robber Moor

From Schiller's Tragedy of the Robbers I quote the following dialogue in one
of the concluding scenes, to illustrate the lines that relate to Amelia's death.

MOOR. (With a contemptuous smile.) Poor, impotent, and weak! ( He places
Amelia, who is almost insensible, on a stone.) Look up, my bride! No priest
shall bless our union -- no hallowed prayer be said! -- I know what is better. (
Takes the handkerchief from Amelia's neck, and discovers her bosom.) Gaze on
this beauteous sight! if ye be men! Felons! have ye hearts of stone? -- Behold
me here! I Am young -- I Have felt the power of love! I was beloved! betrothed! --
I had reached the gate of paradise! (In a tone of tender supplication), and
shall my brothers force me thence? (The Robbers smile.) -- It is enough! (With
firmness.) Thus far has Nature spoke! -- Now the Man's part begins! -- I am a
murderer, like you! -- a robber, and incendiary! -- I am -- (advancing to the
band with an air of inexpressible majesty) -- your Captain! and will ye thus,
ye felons! sword in hand, thus treat, thus parley with your Captain? Down with
your arms! it is your master who commands! (They lay down their arms.) There!
what are you now but children, and I -- am free! -- Moor must be free, in order
to be great! Now, I would not exchange this triumph for an elysium of love! (He
draws his sword.) Poor wretches! your mean souls reach not this height. -- What
ever is great seems frenzy in your eyes. -- The spirit of despair outstrips
your snail-paced wisdom. On deeds like these we pause not till they are done!
-- I Will think on this -- hereafter!

(He stabs Amelia.)
THE ROBBERS. (Clapping their hands.) Bravo! most worthy Captain! Thy honor is
discharged! -- Thou Prince of Robbers!


MOOR. Now she is mine! She Is mine! -- Or that hereafter is but the dream of
fools! -- I have foiled my destiny! -- In spite of fate, I have brought home my
bride: -- And with this sword have sealed our wedding vows -- Thousands of
years shall pass, and seasons roll, ever the bright sun shall witness such a
deed. -- ( To Amelia with tenderness.) Was it not sweet, my Emily, to die thus
by thy bridegroom's hand?


AMELIA. (Stretching out her hand to him.) Oh most sweet! She dies.

Robbers, Scene V.
Note 4. What millions died that Caesar might be great.

The carnage occasioned by the wars of Julius Caesar have been usually
estimated as two millions of men.

Note 5. Or learn the fate that bleeding thousands bore Marched by their
Charles to Dneiper's swampy shore.

In this extremity (says the Biographer of Charles XII. of Sweden, speaking of
his military exploits before the battle of Pultowa), the memorable winter of
1709, which was still more remarkable in that part of Europe than in France,
destroyed numbers of his troops: for Charles resolved to brave the seasons
(...) he had done his enemies, and ventured to make long marches during this
mortal cold. It was in one of these marches that two thousand men fell down
dead with cold before his (...).

Note 6. And part like Ajut, never to return!] See the history of Ajut and
Anningait in the Rambler.

SPECIMENS OF TRANSLATION FROM MEDEA.

SPECIMENS OF TRANSLATION FROM MEDEA.
(...)
(...).
Medea, v. 194, p. 33. Glasg. Edit.
TELL me ye bards, whose skill sublime
First charmed the ear of youthful Time
With numbers wrapped in heavn'ly fire,
Who bade delighted echo swell
The trembling transports of the lyre,
The murmur of the shell, --
Why to the burst of Joy alone
Accords sweet music's soothing tone?
Why can no bard, with magic strain,
In slumbers steep the heart of pain?
While varied tones obey your sweep,
The mild, the plaintive, and the deep,
Bends not despairing Grief to hear
Your golden lute with ravished ear?
Oh! has your sweetest shell no power to bind
The fiercer pangs that shake the mind,
And lull the wrath at whose command
Murder bares her gory ^and?
When flushed with joy, the rosy throng
Weave the light dance, ye swell the song!
Cease, ye vain warblers! cease to charm
The breast with other raptures warm!
Cease! till your hand with magic strain
In slumbers steep the heart of pain!
SPEECH OF THE CHORUS, In the same Tragedy, to dissuade Medea from her purpose
of putting her children to death, and flying for protection to Athens.
O HAGGARD queen! to Athens do thou guide
Thy glowing chariot, steeped in kindred gore;
Or seek to hide thy damned parracide
Where Peace and Mercy dwell for evermore?
The land where Truth, pure, precious, and sublime,
Woos the deep silence of sequestered bowers,
And warriors, matchless since the first of Time,
Rear their bright banners over unconquered towers!
Where joyous youth, to Music's mellow strain,
Twines in the dance with Nymphs for ever fair,
While Spring eternal, on the lilied plain,
Waves amber radiance through the fields of air?
The tuneful Nine, so sacred legends tell,
First waked their heavenly lyre these scenes among;
Still in your greenwood bowers they love to dwell;
Still in your vales they swell the choral song!
For there the tuneful, chaste, Pierian fair,
The guardian nymphs of green Parnassus, now
Sprung from Harmonia, while her graceful hair
Waved in bright auburn over her polished brow!
ANTISTROPHE I.
Where silent vales, and glades of green array,
The murmuring wreaths of cool Cephisus lave,
There, as the Muse has sung, at noon of day,
The Queen of Beauty bowed to taste the wave!
And blessed the stream, and breathed across the land,
The soft sweet gale that fans yon summer bowers;
And there the sister Loves, a smiling band,
Crowned with the fragrant wreaths of rosy flowers!
"And go," she cries, "in yonder valleys rove,
With Beauty's torch the solemn scenes illume;
Wake in each eye the radiant light of love,
Breathe on each cheek young Passion's tender bloom!
Entwine, with myrtle chains, your soft control,
To sway the hearts of Freedom's darling kind!
With glowing charms enrapture Wisdom's soul,
And mould to grace ethereal Virtue's mind."
STROPHE II.
The land where Heaven's own hallowed waters play,
Where Friendship binds the generous and the good,
Say, shall it hail thee from thy frantic way,
Unholy woman! with thy hands embrued
In thine own children's gore? -- oh! ere they bleed,
Let Nature's voice thy ruthless heart appal!
Pause at the bold, irrevocable deed --
The mother strikes -- the guiltless babes shall fall!
Think what remorse thy maddening thoughts shall sting,
When dying pangs their gentle bosoms tear,
Where shall thou sink, when lingering echoes ring
The screams of horror in thy tortured ear?
No! let thy bosom melt to Pity's cry, --
In dust we kneel -- by sacred Heaven implore --
O! stop thy lifted arm, ere yet they die,
Nor dip thy horrid hands in infant gore! --
ANTISTROPHE II.
Say, how shall thou that barbarous soul assume?
Undamp'd by horror at the daring plan,
Have thou a heart to work thy children's doom?
Or hands to finish what thy wrath began?
When over each babe you look a last adieu,
And gaze on Innocence that smiles asleep,
Shall no fond feeling beat, to Nature true,
Charm thee to pensive thought -- and bid thee weep?
When the young suppliants clasp their Parent dear,
Heave the deep sob, and pour the artless prayer, --
Ay! thou shall melt; -- and many a heart-shed tear
Gush over the hardened features of despair!
Nature shall throb in every tender string, --
Thy trembling heart the ruffian's task deny; --
Thy horror-smitten hands afar shall fling
The blade, undrench'd in blood's eternal dye!
CHORUS.
Hallowed Earth! with indignation
Mark oh, mark the murderous deed!
Radiant eye of wide Creation
Watch the damned parracide!
Yet, ere Colchia's rugged daughter
Perpetrate the dire design,
And consign to kindred slaughter
Children of thy golden line!
Shall the hand with murder gory
Cause immortal blood to flow?
Sun of Heaven! -- arrayed in glory! --
Rise, -- forbid, -- avert the blow! --
In these vales of placid gladness*
Let no rueful maniac range;
Chase afar the fiend of madness,
Wrest the dagger from Revenge!
Say, have thou, with fond affection,
Reared thy smiling race in vain;
Fost'ring Nature's fond affection,
Tender cares, and pleasing pain?
Have thou, on the troubled ocean,
Braved the tempest loud and strong,
Where the waves, with wild commotion,
Roar Cyanean rocks among?
Did thou roam the paths of danger
Hymenean joys to prove?
Spare, O sanguinary stranger,
Pledges of thy sacred love!
Shall not Heaven, with indignation,
Watch thee over the barbarous deed?
Shall thou cleanse, with expiation,
Monstrous, murderous, parracide?
LOVE AND MADNESS; AN ELEGY.

LOVE AND MADNESS; AN ELEGY WRITTEN IN 1795.
HARK! from the battlements of yonder tower Warwick Castle.

The solemn bell has tolled the midnight hour!
Roused from drear visions of distempered sleep,
Poor B -- k wakes -- in solitude to weep!
"Cease, Memory, cease (the friendless mourner cried),
To probe the bosom top severely tried!
Oh! ever cease, my pensive thoughts, to stray
Through the bright fields of Fortune's better day;
When youthful Hope, the music of the mind,
Tuned all its charms, and E -- n was kind!
"Yet, can I cease, while glows this trembling frame,
In sighs to speak thy melancholy name!
I hear thy spirit wail in every storm!
In midnight shades I view thy passing form!
Pale as in that sad hour, when doomed to feel,
Deep in thy perjured heart, the bloody steel!
"Demons of Vengeance! ye at whose command
I grasped the sword with more than woman's hand,
Say ye, did Pity's trembling voice control,
Or horror damp the purpose of my soul?
No! my wild heart sat smiling over the plan,
Till Hate fulfilled what baffled Love began!
"Yes; let the clay-cold breast, that never knew
One tender pang, to generous Nature true,
Half mingling pity with the gall of scorn,
Condemn this heart, that bled in love forlorn!
"And ye, proud fair, whose souls no gladness warms,
Save Rapture's homage to your conscious charms!
Delighted idols of a gaudy train!
Ill can your blunter feelings guess the pain,
When the fond faithful heart, inspired to prove
Friendship refined, the calm delight of love,
Feels all its tender strings with anguish torn,
And bleeds at perjured Pride's inhuman scorn!
"Say, then, did pitying Heaven condemn the deed,
When vengeance bade thee, faithless lover! bleed?
Long had I watched thy dark foreboding brow,
What time thy bosom scorned its dearest vow!
Sad, though I wept the friend, the lover changed,
Still thy cold look was scornful, and estranged,
Till from thy pity, love, and shelter thrown,
I wandered, hopeless, friendless, and alone!
"Oh! righteous Heaven! 'twas then my tortured soul
First gave to wrath unlimited control!
Adieu the silent look! the streaming eye!
The murmured plaint! the deep heart-heaving sigh!
Long slumbering Vengeance wakes to better deeds;
He shrieks, he falls, the perjured Lover bleeds!
Now the last laugh of agony is over,
And pale in blood he sleeps, to wake no more!
"'It Is done! the flame of hate no longer burns;
Nature relents; but, ah! too late returns!
Why does my soul this gush of anguish feel?
Trembling and faint, I drop the guilty steel!
Cold on my heart the hand of terror lies;
And shades of horror close my languid eyes! --
"Oh! 'twas a deed of Murder's deepest grain!
Could B -- k's soul so true to wrath remain?
A friend long true, a once fond lover fell! --
Where Love was fostered, could not Pity dwell?
"Unhappy youth! while yon pale crescent lows
To watch on silent Nature's deep repose,
Thy sleepless spirit, breathing from the tomb,
Foretells my fate, and summons me to come!
Once more I see thy sheeted spectre stand,
Roll the dim eye, and wave the paly hand!
"Soon may this fluttering spark of vital flame
Forsake its languid melancholy frame!
Soon may these eyes their trembling luster close,
Welcome the dreamless night of long repose!
Soon may this woe-worn spirit seek the bourne
Where, lulled to slumber, Grief forgets to mourn!"
SONGS.

THE WOUNDED HUSSAR.
ALONE to the banks of the dark-rolling Danube
Fair Adelaide hied when the battle was over:
Oh whither, she cried, have thou wandered, my lover;
Or here do thou welter, and bleed on the shore?
What voice have I heard? 'twas my Henry that sighed;
All mournful she hastened, nor wandered she far,
When bleeding, and low, on the heath she descried,
By the light of the moon, her poor wounded Hussar!
From his bosom that heaved, the last torrent was streaming,
And pale was his visage, deep marked with a scar;
And dim was that eye, once expressively beaming,
That melted in love, and that kindled in war!
How smit was fair Adelaide's heart at the sight!
How bitter she wept over the victim of war?
Have thou come, my fond Love, this last sorrowful night,
To cheer the lone heart of your wounded Hussar?
Thou shall live, she replied, Heaven's mercy relieving,
Each anguishing wound shall forbid me to mourn!
Ah, no! the last pang in my bosom is heaving;
No light of the morn shall to Henry return!
Thou charmer of life, ever tender and true!
Ye babes of my love that await me afar!
His faultering tongue scarce could murmur adieu,
When he sunk in her arms -- the poor wounded Hussar?
GILDEROY.
THE last, the fatal hour is come
That bears my love from me;
I bear the dead note of the drum,
I mark the gallows tree!
The bell has tolled; it shakes my heart;
The trumpet speaks thy name;
And must my Gilderoy depart
To bear a death of shame!
No bosom trembles for thy doom;
No mourner wipes a tear;
The gallows' foot is all thy tomb,
The sledge is all thy bier!
Oh, Gilderoy! bethought we then
So soon, so sad, to part,
When first in Roslin's lovely glen
You triumphed over my heart!
Your locks they glittered to the sheen,
Your hunter garb was trim;
And graceful was the ribbon green
That bound your manly limb!
Ah! little thought I to deplore
These limbs in fetters bound;
Or hear, upon thy scaffold floor,
The midnight hammer sound.
Ye cruel, cruel, that combined
The guiltless to pursue;
My Guilderoy was ever kind,
He could not injure you!
A long adieu! but where shall fly
Thy widow all forlorn;
When every mean and cruel eye
Regards my woe with scorn.
Yes! they will mock thy widow's tears,
And hate thine orphan boy:
Alas! his infant beauty wears
The form of Gilderoy!
Then will I seek the dreary mound,
Where sleeps thy mouldering clay;
And weep and linger on the ground,
And sigh my heart away!
THE HARPER.
ON the green banks of Shannon, when Sheelah was nigh,
No blithe Irish lad was so happy as I;
No harp like my own could so cheerily play,
And wherever I went, was my poor dog Tray.
When at last I was forced from my Sheelah to part,
She said (while the sorrow was big at her heart),
Oh! remember your Sheelah when far far away;
And be kind, my dear Pat, to our poor dog Tray.
Poor dog! he was faithful and kind to be sure,
And he constantly loved me although I was poor;
When the sour-looking folks sent me heartless away,
I had always a friend in my poor dog Tray.
When the road was so dark, and the night was so cold,
And Pat and his dog were grown weary and old,
How snugly we slept in my old coat of gray,
And he licked me for kindness -- my poor dog Tray.
Though my wallet was scant, I remembered his case,
Nor refused my last crust to his pitiful face;
But he died at my feet on a cold winter day,
And I played a sad lament for my poor dog Tray.
Where now shall I go, poor, forsaken and blind?
Can I find one to guide me, so faithful and kind,
To my sweet native village, so far, far away?
I can never more return with my poor dog Tray.
THE END.

