[CHEAP REPOSITORY. Number 21.]

THE History of the TWO SHOEMAKERS. PART IV.



PHILADELPHIA PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON NO. 147 HIGH STREET. 1800. [Price 4
Cents.]

THE TWO SHOEMAKERS.
"YOUR condition, as to this world is indeed very low," replied the good
Divine. "But what are mines, dungeons or galleys, to that eternal hopeless
prison to which your unrepented sin must soon have consigned you. Even in this
gloomy prison, on this bed of straw, worn down by pain, poverty, and want,
forsaken by your worldly friends, an object of scorn to those with whom you
used to carouse and riot; yet here, I say, brought thus low, if you have at
last found out your own vileness; and your utterly undone state by sin, you may
still be more an object of (...) in the sight of GOD, than when you thought
(...) prosperous and happy; when the world smiled upon you, and you passed your
days and nights in envied gaiety and unchristian riot. If you will but improve
the present awful visitation; if you do but heartily renounce and abhor your
present evil courses; if you even now turn to the Lord your Savior with lively
faith, deep repentance, and unfeigned obedience, I shall have more hope of you
than of many who are going on quite happy, because quite insensible. The heavy
laden sinner, who has discovered the iniquity of his own heart, and his utter
inability to help himself, may be still restored to GOD's savor, and become
happy, though in a dungeon. And be assured, that he who from deep and humble
contrition dares not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, when with a hearty
faith he sighs out, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, shall in no wise be cast
out. These are the words of him who cannot lie."

It is impossible to describe the self-abasement, the grief, the joy, the
shame, the hope, and the fear, which filled the mind of this poor man. A dawn
of comfort at length shone on his benighted mind. His humility and fear of
falling back into his former sins, if he should ever recover, Mr. Thomas
thought were good symptoms of a sound repentance. He improved and cherished
every good disposition he saw arising in his heart, and particularly warned him
against self-deceit, self-confidence and hypocrisy.

One day, when Mr. Thomas and Mr. Stock came to see him, they found him more
than commonly affected. His face was more ghastly pale than usual, and his eyes
were red with crying. "Oh, Sir," said he, "what a sight have I just seen! Jolly
George, as we used to call him, the ringleader of all our mirth, who was at
the bottom of all the fun, and tricks, and wickedness that are carried on
within these walls, Jolly George is just dead of the jail distemper! He taken,
and I left! I would be carried into his room to speak to him, to beg him to
take warning by me, and that I might take warning by him. But what did I see!
what did I hear! not one sign of repentance; not one dawn of hope, Agony of
body, blasphemies on his tongue, despair in his soul, while I am spared and
comforted with hopes of mercy and acceptance. Oh, if all my old friends at the
Greyhound could but then have seen Jolly George! A hundred Sermons about Death,
Sir, don't speak so home, and cut so deep, as the sight of one dying sinner."

Brown grew gradually better in his health, that is, the fever mended, but the
distemper settled in his limbs, so that he seemed likely to be a poor weakly
cripple the rest of his life. But as he spent much of his time in prayer, and
in reading such parts of the Bible as Mr. Thomas directed, he improved every
day in knowledge and piety, and of course grew more resigned to pain and
infirmity.

Some months after this, his hardhearted father, who had never been prevailed
upon to see him, or offer him the least relief, was taken off suddenly by a fit
of apoplexy; and, after all his threatenings, he died without a will. He was
one of those silly, superstitious men, who fancy they shall die the sooner for
having made one; and who love the world and the things that are in the world so
dearly, that they dread to set about any business which may put them in mind
that they are not always to live in it. As, by this neglect, his father had not
fulfilled his threat of cutting him off with a shilling, Jack, of course, went
shares with his brother in what their father left. What fell to him proved to
be just enough to discharge him from prison, and to pay all his debts, but he
had nothing left. His joy at being thus enabled to make restitution was so
great, that he thought little of his own wants. He did not desire to conceal
the most trifling debt, nor to keep a shilling for himself.

Mr. Stock undertook to (...) all his affairs. There did not remain money
enough, after every creditor was satisfied, even to pay for his removal to his
own town. Mr. Stock kindly sent his cart for him with a bed in it, made as
comfortable as possible, for he was too weak and lame to be removed any other
way, and Mr. Stock gave the driver a particular charge to be tender and careful
of him, and not to drive hard nor to leave the cart a moment.

Mr. Stock would fain have taken him into his own house, at least for a time,
so convinced was he of his sincere reformation both of heart and life; But
Brown could not be prevailed on to be further burdensome to this generous
friend. He insisted on being carried to the parish workhouse, which he said
was a far better place than he deserved. In this house Mr. Stock furnished a
small room for him, and sent him every day a morsel of meat from his own
dinner. Tommy Williams begged that he might always be allowed to carry it, as
some atonement for his having for a moment so far forgotten his duty, as rather
to rejoice than sympathize in Brown's misfortunes. He never thought of this
fault without sorrow, and often thanked his master for the wholesome lesson he
then gave him, and he was the better for it all his life.

Mrs. Stock often carried poor Brown a bit of tea or a basin of good broth
herself. He was quite a cripple, and never able to walk out as long as he
lived. Mr. Stock, Will Simpson, and Tommy Williams laid their heads together,
and contrived a sort of barrow on which he was often carried to church by some
of his poor neighbors, of which Tommy was always one; and he requited their
kindness, by reading a good book to them whenever they would call in, or
teaching their children to sing Psalms or say the catechism.

It was no small joy to him thus to be enabled to go to church. Whenever he was
carried by the Greyhound he was much moved, and used to put up a prayer full of
repentance for the pass, and praise for the present.

A Dialogue between James Stock and Will Simpson, as they sat at their Work.
James Stock, and his journeyman Will Simpson, as I informed my readers in the
second part of the Two Shoemaker's, had resolved to work together one hour
every evening in order to pay for Tommy Williams's schooling. This circumstance
brought them to be a good deal together when the rest of the men where gone
home. Now it happened that Mr. Stock had a mighty way of endeavoring to turn
all common events to some use; and he thought it right on the present occasion
to make the only return in his power to Will Simpson for his great kindness.
For, said he, if Will gives up so much of his time to help me to provide for
this poor boy, it is the least I can do to try to turn part of that time to the
purpose of promoting Will's spiritual good. Now as the b^^t of Stock's own mind
was religious, it was easy to him to lead their talk to something profitable.
He always took especial care however, that the subject should be introduced
properly, cheerfully, and without constraint. As he well knew that great good
may be sometimes done by a prudent attention in seizing proper opportunities,
so he knew that the cause of piety had been sometimes hurt by forcing serious
subjects where there was clearly no disposition to receive them. I say he had
found out that two things were necessary to the promoting religion among his
friends; a warm zeal to be always on the watch for occasions, and a cool
judgment to distinguish which was the right time and place to make use of them.
To know how to do good is a great matter, but to know when to do it is no small
one.

Simpson was an honest good-natured fellow; he was now become sober, and rather
religiously disposed. But he was ignorant, he did not know much of the grounds
of religion, or of the corruption of his own nature; he was regular at church,
but was first drawn thither rather by his skill in psalm-singing than by any
great devotion. He had left off going to the Greyhound, and often read the
Bible or some other good book on the Sunday evening. This he thought was quite
enough; he thought the Bible was the prettiest history book in the world, and
that religion was a very good thing for Sundays. But he did not much understand
what business people had with it on working days. He had left off drinking
because it had brought Williams to the grave, and his wife to dirt and rags;
but not because he himself had seen the evil of sin. He now considered swearing
and sabbath breaking as scandalous and indecent, but he had not found out that
both were to be left off because they are highly offensive to God, and grieve
his Holy Spirit. As Simpson was less self-conceited than most ignorant people
are, Stock had always a good hope that when he should come to be better
acquainted with the word of God, and with the evil of his own heart, he would
become one day a good Christian. The great hindrance to this was, that he
fancied himself so already.

One evening Simpson had been calling to Stock's mind how disorderly the house
and shop, where they were now sitting quietly at work, had formerly been, and
he went on thus;

Will. How comfortably we live now, master, to what we used to do in Williams's
time! I used then never to be happy but when we were keeping it up all night,
but now I am as merry as the day is long. I find I am twice as happy since I am
grown good and sober.


Stock. I am glad you are happy, Will, and I rejoice that you are sober; but I
would not have you take too much pride in your own goodne^^ for fear it should
become a sin, almost as great as some of those you have left off. Besides I
would not have you make quite so sure that you are good.


Will. Not good, master! why don't you find me regular and orderly at work?


Stock. Very much so, and accordingly I have a great respect for you.


Will. I pay every one his own, seldom miss church, have not been drunk since
Williams died, have handsome clothes for Sundays, and save a trifle every week.


Stock. Very true and very laudable it is; and to all this you may add that you
very generously work an hour, for poor Tommy's education, every evening without
fee or reward.


Will. Well, master what can man do more? I fall this is not being good, I
don't know what it is.


Stock. Will these things are very right as far as they go, and you could not
well be a Christian without doing them. But I shall make you stare perhaps when
I tell you, you may do all these things and many more, and yet be no Christian.


Will. No Christian! surely, master, I do hope that after all I have done, you
will not be so unkind as to say I am no Christian.


Stock. God forbid that I should say so, Will. I hope better things of you. But
come now, what do you think it is to be a Christian?


Will. What! why to be christened when one is a child, to learn the Catechism
when one can read, to be confirmed when one is a youth, and to go to church
when one is a man.


Stock. These are all very proper things, and quite necessary. They make a part
of a Christian (...)* But for all that, a man may be exact in them all, and yet
not be a Christian.


Will. Not be a Christian! ha! ha! ha! you are very comical, master.


Stock. No indeed, I am very serious, Will. At this rate it would be a very
easy thing to be a Christian, and every man who went through certain forms
would be a good man; and one man who observed these forms would be as good as
another. Whereas, if we come to examine ourselves by the word of GOD, I am
afraid there are but few comparatively whom our Savior would allow to be real
Christians. What is your notion of a Christian's practice?


Will. Why, he must not rob nor murder, nor get drunk. He must avoid scandalous
things, and do as other decent orderly people do.


Stock. It is easy enough to be what the world calls a Christian, but not to be
what the (...) calls so.


Will. Why master we working men are not expected to be saints, and martyrs,
and apostles and ministers.


Stock. We are not. And yet, Will, there are not two sorts of christianity; we
are called to practice the same religion which they practiced, and something of
the same spirit is expected in us which we reverence in them. It was not saints
and martyrs only to whom our Savior said that they must "crucify the world
with its affections and lusts." We are called to "be holy" in our measure and
degree, "as he who has called us is holy." It was not only saints and martyrs
who were told that they must be "like-minded with Christ" -- That "they must do
all to the glory of God" -- That they must renounce the spirit of the world,
and deny themselves." It was not to apostles only that Christ said, "they must
have their conversation in Heaven. It was not to a few holy men set apart for
the altar, that he said, "they must set their affections on things above" --
That they "must not be conformed to the world." No, it was to Fishermen, to
Publicans, to Farmers, to Day-labourers, to poor Tradesmen, that he spoke when
he told them, they must "love not the world, nor the things of the world" --
"That they must renounce the hidden things of dishonesty, grow in grace, lay up
for themselves treasures in Heaven."


Will. All this might be very proper for them to be taught, because they had
not been bred up Christians, but Heathens or Jews: and Christ wanted to make
them his followers, that is, Christians. But thank God we do not want to be
taught all this, for we are Christians, born in a Christian country, of
Christian parents.


Stock. I suppose then you fancy that Christianity comes to people in a
Christian country by nature?


Will. I think it comes by a good education or a good example. When a fellow
who has got any sense sees a man cut off in his prime by drinking, I think he
will begin to leave it off. When he sees another man respected, like you,
master, for honesty and sobriety, and going to church, why he will grow honest
and sober and go to church; that is he will see it is his advantage to be a
Christian.


Stock. Will, what you say is the truth, but it is not the whole truth. You are
right as far as you go, but you do not go far enough. The worldly advantages of
piety, are, as you suppose, in general great. Credit, prosperity, and health,
almost naturally attend on a religious life, both because a religious life
supposes a sober and industrious life; and because a man who lives in a course
of duty puts himself in the way of God's blessing. But a (...) Christian has a
still higher aim in (...) and (...) follow Religion even under (...), when it
may hurt his credit (...) his prosperity, if it should ever happen to be the
will of God that he should be brought into such a trying state.


Will. Well, master, to speak the truth, if I go to Church on Sundays, and
follow my work in the week, I must say I think that is being good.


Stock. I agree with you, that he who does both gives the best outward signs
that he is good as you call it. But our going to Church, and even reading the
Bible, are no proofs that we are as good as we need be, but rather that we do
both these in order to make us better than we are. We do both on Sundays, as
means, by God's blessing, to make us better all the week. We are to bring the
fruits of that Chapter or of that Sermon into our daily life, and try to get
our inmost heart and secret thoughts, as well as our daily conduct, amended by
them.


Will. Why, sure master, you will not be so unreasonable as to want a body to be
religious always? I cannot do that neither. I Am not such a hypocrite as to
pretend to it.


Stock. Yes, you can be so in every action of your life!


Will. What, master, always to be thinking about Religion?


Stock. No, far from it Will; much less to be always talking about it. But you
must always be acting under it is power and spirit.


Will. But surely it is pretty well if I do this when I go to Church; or while I
am saying my prayers. Even you, master, as strict as you are, would not have me
always on my knees, nor always at Church, I suppose; for then how would your
work be carried on, and how would our town be supplied with shoes?


Stock. Very true, Will. Twould be no proof of our religion to let our
customers go barefoot; but 'twould be a proof of our laziness, and we should
starve as we ought to do. The business of the world must not only be carried
on, but carried on with spirit and activity. We have the same authority for not
being slothful in business as we have for being fervent in spirit. Religion has
put godliness and laziness as wide asunder as any two things in the world; and
what God has separated, let no man pretend to join. Indeed, the spirit of
religion can have no fellowship with sloth, indolence, and self-indulgence. But
still, a christian does not carry on his common trade quite like another man
neither; for something of the spirit which he labors to attain at church, he
carries with him into his worldly concerns. While there are some who set up for
Sunday christians, who have no notion that that they are bound to be weekday
christians too.


Will. Why, master, I do think, if God Almighty is contented with one day in
seven, he will not thank you for throwing him the other six into the bargain. I
thought he gave us them for our own use; and I am sure nobody works harder all
the week than you do.


Stock. God, it is true, sets apart one day in seven for actual rest from
labor, and for more immediate devotion to his service. But show me the text,
wherein he says, thou shall love the Lord thy God on Sundays -- Thou shall keep
my commandments on the Sabbath day -- To be carnally minded on Sundays is death
-- Cease to do evil and learn to do well one day in seven -- Grow in grace on
the Lord's day -- Is there any such text?


Will. No, to be sure there is not; for that would be encouraging sin in all
the other days.


Stock. Yes, just as you do when you make religion a thing for the church and
not for the world. There is no one lawful calling in pursuing which we may not
serve God acceptably. You and I may serve him while we are stitching this pair
of boots. Farmer Furrow, while he is plowing yonder field. Betsy West, over the
way, whilst she is nursing her sick mother. Neighbor Inckle, in measuring out
his tapes and ribbons. I say, all these may serve God just as acceptably in
those employments as at church, I had almost said more so.


Will. Aye, indeed -- how can that be? Now you're too much on the other side.


Stock. Because a man's trials in trade being often greater, they give him
fresh means of glorifying God, and proving the sincerity of religion. A man who
mixes in business, is naturally brought into continual temptations and
difficulties. These will lead him, if he be a good man, to look more to God,
than he perhaps would otherwise do. He sees temptations on the right hand and
on the left he knows that there are snares (...), this makes him watchful* he
feels that the enemy within is too (...) to betray him, this makes him humble
himself; while a sense of his own difficulties makes him tender to the failings
of others.


Will. Then you would make one believe, after all, that trade and business must
be sinful in itself, since it brings a man into all these snares and scrapes.


Stock. No, no, Will; trade and business don't create evil passions -- they
were in the heart before -- Only now and then they seem to lie snug a little --
our concerns with the world bring them out into action a little more, and thus
show both others and ourselves what we really are. But then as the world offers
more trials on the one hand, so on the other it holds out more duties. If we
are called to battle oftener, we have more opportunities of victory. Every
temptation resisted, is an enemy subdued; and "he that rules his own spirit,
is better than he that (...) a city."


Will. I don't quite understand you, master.


Stock. I will try to explain myself. There is no passion more called out by
the transactions of trade than covetousness. Now, it is impossible to withstand
such a master sin as that, without carrying a good deal of the spirit of
religion into one's trade.


Will. Well, I own I don't yet see how I am to be religious when I Am hard at
work, or busy settling an account. I cannot do two things at once; it is as if I
were to pretend to make a shoe and cut out a boot at the same moment.


Stock. I tell you both must subsist together. Nay the one must be the motive
to the other. God commands us to be industrious, and if we love him, the desire
of pleasing him should be the main spring of our industry.


Will. I (...) how I can always be thinking about pleasing God.


Stock. Suppose, now, a man had a wife and children whom he loved, and wished
to serve, would not he be often thinking about them while he was at work? and
though he would not be always thinking about them, yet would not the very love
he bore them be a constant spur to his industry? He would always be pursuing
the same course from the same motive, though his words and even his thoughts
must often be taken up in the common transactions of life.


Will. Well, I say first one, then the other; now for labor, now for religion.


Stock. I will show that both must go together. I will suppose you were going
to buy so many skins of our currier -- that is quite a worldly transaction --
you cant see what a spirit of religion has to do with buying a few calves'
skins. Now, I tell you it has a great deal to do with it. Covetousness, a
desire to make a good bargain, may rise up in your heart. Selfishness, a spirit
of monopoly, a wish to get all, in order to distress others; these are evil
desires, and must be subdued. Some opportunity of unfair gain offers, in which
there may be much sin, and yet little scandal. Here a Christian will stop
short, he will recollect, "that he who makes haste to be rich shall hardly be
innocent." Perhaps the sin may be on the side of your dealer -- he may want to
overreach you -- this is provoking -- you are tempted to violent anger, perhaps
to swear, -- here is a fresh demand on you for a spirit of patience and
moderation, as there was before for a spirit of justice and self-denial. If, by
God's grace, you get the victory over these temptations, you are the better man
for having been called out to them; always provided, that the temptations be
not of your own seeking. If you give way, and sink under these temptations,
don't go and say that trade and business have made you covetous, passionate,
and profane. No, no; depend upon it, you were so before; you would have had
all these evil seeds lurking in your heart, if you had been loitering about at
home and doing nothing, with the additional sin of idleness into the bargain.
When you are busy, the devil often tempts you; when you are idle, you tempt the
devil. If business and the world call these evil tempers into action, business
and the world call that religion into action too which teaches us to resist
them. And in this you see the Weekday fruit of the Sunday's piety. It Is trade
and business in the week which call us to put our Sunday readings, praying, and
church-going into practice.


Will. Well, master, you have a comical way, some how, of coming over one. I
never should have thought there would have been any religion wanted in buying
and selling a few calves' skins. But, I begin to see there is a good deal in
what you say. -- And, whenever I am doing a common action, I will try to
remember that it must be done after a godly sort.


Stock. I hear the clock strike nine -- let us leave off our work. I will only
observe further, that one good end of our bringing religion into our business
is, to put us in mind not to undertake more business than we can carry on
consistently with our religion. I shall never commend that man's diligence,
though it is often commended by the world, who is not diligent about the
salvation of his soul. We are as much forbidden to be overcharged with the
cares of life as with it is pleasures. I only wish to prove to you, that a
discreet Christian may be wise for both worlds; that he may employ his hands
without entangling his soul, and labor for the meat that perishes without
neglecting that which endures unto eternal life; that he may be prudent for
time, while he is wise for eternity.


Z.

THE HYMN.
O That the Lord would guide my ways,
To keep his statutes still!
O that my God would give me grace
To know and do his will!
Lord, send thy spirit down to write
Thy love upon my heart,
Nor let my tongue indulge deceit,
Nor act a liar's part.
From vanity, Lord, turn mine eyes,
Let no corrupt design,
No covetous desires arise
Within this soul of mine.
Order my footsteps by thy word,
And make my heart sincere;
Let sin have no dominion, Lord,
But keep my conscience clear.
My soul has gone too far astray,
My feet too often slip;
I would not, Lord, forget thy way,
Bring back thy wandering sheep.
Make me to walk in thy commands,
It Is a delightful road;
Nor let my head, or heart, or hands,
Offend against my God.
THE PRODIGAL SON.
This HYMN was frequently sung by JACK BROWN in the WORKHOUSE.

I.
BEHOLD the wretch whose lust and wine
Have wasted his estate;
He begs a share among the swine,
To taste the husks they eat.
II.
I die with hunger here he cries,
I starve in foreign lands;
My father's house has large supplies,
And bounteous are his hands.
III.
I Will go, and with a mournful tongue,
Fall down before his face,
Father I Have done thy justice wrong,
Nor can deserve thy grace,
IV.
He said and hastened to his home,
To seek his father's love;
The father saw the rebel come,
And all his bowels move.
V.
He ran, and fell upon his neck,
Embraced and kissed his son;
The rebel's heart with sorrow breaks
For sins which he had done.
VI.
"Take off his clothes of shame and sin,
"(The father gives command,)
"Dress him in garments white and clean,
"With rings adorn his hand.
VII.
"A day of feasting I ordain,
"Let mirth and joy abound,
"My son was dead and lives again,
"Was lost and now is found.
THE END. Next week will be published The Harvest Home.
EXTRACT From a late AUTHOR, on Detraction.
SUSURRUS is a pious, temperate, good man remarkable for abundance of excellent
qualities; no one more constant at the service of the church, or whose heart is
more affected with it; his charity is so great, that he almost starves himself,
to be able to give greater alms to the poor.

Yet Susurrus had a prodigious failing along with these great virtues.

He had a mighty inclination to hear and discover all the defects and
infirmities of all about him. You was welcome to tell him any thing of any
body, provided that you did not do it in the style of an enemy. He never
disliked an evil-speaker, but when his language was rough and passionate. If
you would but whisper any thing gently, though it was ever so bad in itself,
Susurrus was ready to receive it.

When he visits, you generally hear him relating how sorry he is for the
desects and failings of such a neighbor. He is always letting you know how
tender he is of the reputation of his neighbor; how loath to say that which he
is forced to say; and how gladly he would conceal it, if it could be concealed.

Susurrus had such a tender, compassionate manner of relating things the most
prejudicial to his neighbor, that he even seemed, both to himself and others
to be exercising a christian charity, at the same time that he was indulging a
whispering, evil-speaking temper.

Susurrus once whispered to a particular friend in great secrecy, something too
bad to be spoke of publicly. He ended with saying, how glad he was that it had
not yet took wind, and that he had some hopes it might not be true, though the
suspicions were very strong. His friend made him this reply:

You say, Susurrus, that you are glad it has not yet taken wind; and that you
have some hopes it may not prove true. Go home therefore to your closet, and
pray to God for this man, in such a manner, and with such earnestness, as you
would pray for yourself on the like occasion.

Beseech God to interpose in his favor, to save him from false accusers, and
bring all those to shame, who by uncharitable whispers, and secret stories
wound him, like those that stab in the dark. And when you have made this
prayer, then you may, if you please, go tell the same secret to some other
friend, that you have told to me.

Susurrus was exceedingly affected with this rebuke, and felt the force of it
upon his conscience, in as lively a manner, as if he had seen the books opened
at the day of judgment.

All other arguments might have been resisted; but it was impossible for
Susurrus either to reject, or to follow this advice, without being equally
self-condemned in the highest degree.

From that time to this, he has constantly used himself to this method of
intercession; and his heart is so entirely changed by it, that he can now no
more privately whisper any thing to the prejudice of another, than he can
openly pray to God to do people hurt.

FINIS.

