[CHEAP REPOSITORY. Number 35.]

THE HUBBUB; OR, THE HISTORY OF FARMER RUSSEL, THE HARD-HEARTED OVERSEER.



PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY B. and J. JOHNSON, NO. 147, HIGH STREET.

1800.

THE HUBBUB, etc.
THE oldest man living at Compton-Ashby, cannot call to mind such another
Hubbub as that which happened there some months ago, on the common, just before
the poorhouse door. A number of men, women, and children, had formed a ring
round one farmer Russel, a sullen, down looking fellow, whom no one loved, and
every one feared: for his love of money had led him to be hardhearted, and his
power over the poor had made him insolent. Never was there such a hissing and
hooting, and hallooing heard. Many of these people had been grievously
oppressed by the farmer, and now they had him in their power, they seemed
resolved to show him little mercy.

Betty Jobbins beat the drying pan with the key of the door, Sally Gore pounded
the pestle and mortar, Nelly Shepston rung the warming pan, Dick Devonshire
blew the Ram's-horn, whilst Nick Stafford and others gingled the sheep's bells.

It so happened that one Mr. Britton rode up at the instant to enquire what was
the matter, of two poor women who were (...) in the porch of the poor-house.
One of them, Amy Talbot, seemed to be about sixty years of age, but time had
not cured Amy of gossiping, or taught her to mend her clothes. As she had no
turn for industry in her youth, she soon eat, and drank up the little property
left her by her parents, which might now have afforded her a comfortable
maintenance* but no, Amy's tongue was always abusive and always busy, whilst
her fingers were seldom employed. Wherever there was a gossiping in the parish,
thither ran Amy with her rags flying about her, like a scarecrow in a cherry
tree. Her skin, which was quite tawny, was never washed; her hair had worked
itself through the holes of her mob, half the border of which was lost, and the
flaps of it were always flying behind her; the pigs had one day eaten a hole
through her hat as it lay on the ground, and a piece of it now hung over her
eye like a black patch, her petticoats were all tatters, and her gown reached
but little below her knees; it had been torn away bit by bit, till it was
ravelled out to the above dimensions; her stockings had no feet, and her feet
were slipped into a miserable pair of shoes, which she had not taken the
trouble to draw up at he^^, even when they were new; in one hand she clenched
her rags together, whilst with the other, she held a short pipe in her mouth
resting her elbow on her knee, as she sat cross legged.

The other poor woman whose name was Apsley, was of a very different cast from
Amy; she was the picture of cleanliness, and good housewifery; she was mending
her apron, which though very coarse, was as white as the driven snow; this good
woman never sat at the door to take the air, but she was doing something; "it
is a duty," she would say, "to turn our time to the best account we can," and
when her other employment was over she would read a chapter in her Bible. Mr.
Britton asked her what occasioned the uproar, and at the same time slipped half
a crown into her hand, giving afterward a few halfpence to Amy, which he
thought was more than such a dirty woman deserved.

"Why, sir," cried Amy pocketing her pence, "I Will tell you all how and about
it; don't you see that sulky ill-looking fellow of a farmer so hooted at by the
people? he is a fine rare crusty old blade, and has hectored over the parish at
a fine rate; he is always at law with the Parson about tithes, and with his
neighbors upon the slightest provocation; besides, Sir, he is Overseer of the
poor, and a poor time we have had on it, but thanks be praised, it is come home
to the wretch at last," then she fell to hooting and hissing, till she foamed
at the mouth again; which having wiped off with the corner of her gown, she
said, "now, Sir, I Will tell you: that fellow's stomach has been well filled with
every thing of the best, whilst he has starved poor we almost to death, but
it is likely to come home to him at last, and he may chance to swing for it, and
then we shall all be revenged of him," and again she fell to clapping her hands.

"Prithee Amy;" replied dame Apsley very calmly, "don't give way to such evil
tempers; we have been hardly used by the farmer to be sure, but if we are
christians, we must learn to forget and forgive," "If ever I forgive the
villain," cried Amy, knocking the dust out of her pipe, "may I never get
another quartern of tobacco; revenge is sweet, Sir, revenge is sweet."

"To an unchristian temper I grant it is," said Mr. Britton, "but revenge is
the worst passion that can enter the human breast, it is the very spirit of
Satan."

"It is a very fine remark truly, Sir," said dame Apsley, "for to my thinking,
a man who is always nursing up an evil passion in his bosom, is as if he
cherished a serpent there, which must sting him to death at last; yet, Sir, I
must be bold to say, much as I want money, I would not accept of farmer
Russel's fortune if I must take up the heavy burden of his crimes into the
bargain." Ah! dame, dame," interrupted Amy, "preach as you please, I am glad at
heart it is come home to the villain at last, things cannot go on worse with us."

'Nor perhaps much better," answ'red dame Apsley, "for, after all, it is a very
unthankful office to have much to do with poor people, especially if they have
not the fear of God before their eyes; because then they are abusive and
ungrateful to those who are guardians over them; for the m^^ter of that, Amy,
have we not several old people in this poor house, who have been drunken, idle,
blaspheming people all their lives: and though we live so near to the church,
not one of them has seen the inside of it for many years past, unless when
there has been Christmas gifts, or money to be given away; but I think if I
were the parson, Amy, every Lord's day I would drive the whole posse into
church before me, if they were able to set one foot before another." "My good
woman," said Mr. Britton, "I am mightily pleased to see how usefully you employ
your time, for you have continued your work ever since we have been chatting
together." "Time, Sir, is the gift of God, and I must account to him for it;
besides, Sir, often when I am busily employed at my needle, I can ponder on
some text of Scripture; and I can say with King David, "As for me, when I am
poor and in heaviness, thy help, O God, shall lift me up." Now, Sir, although I
am very poor, that is no reason why I should not be very clean; if my clothing
be coarse, that is no excuse for its being ragged, and if I am lame in my feet,
that is no cause for my fingers being idle; besides, Sir, a stitch in time
saves nine, and I frequently get a shilling by mending stays, or quilting of
servants' petticoats, when my health will permit."

"Ah! well," interrupted Amy, "I never had the heart to work, unless less I
were better paid for it. But I say dame; I will say, that I am glad at heart
farmer Russel is in hold at last; "live, and let live," is my notion of the
thing; but no, he went on from day to day, cribbing and scraping something out
of every body; and no sooner did he get a little uppish in the world, than he
took no more account of poor we, than if we had been so many hedge-hogs, for
all he was born and bred amongst us; but for the matter of that, he has not been
much kinder to his own family, for you must know, Sir, his bitter temper caused
his only son to run away from him, nor has any tale or tidings ever been heard
of him." Here again Amy began hissing and hooting the farmer, insomuch, that
Mr. Britton began to think he should never get at the end of the story.

"Now, Sir," cried Amy at last, whilst she filled her pipe, "now I have got
breath again, I Will tell you all how and about it. You must know last hard
winter, Sir, when bread was so dear, and coals were so scarce, farmer Russel
would not let the parish be at the expense of mending the thatch on our house,
so that when the snow melted, it ran in streams down on dame's bed, by which
she lost the use of her limbs, and she has hobbled with crutches ever since:
yet she, foolish woman, seldom complains; but off she goes to her Bible for
comfort, as another body would to a glass of gin, or a pot of beer, when things
go amiss."

"The troubles of life," said Dame Apsley, "are but as shadows which pass away;
but the christian's rest will be eternal; and certain I am, Sir, my weak nature
would often have given way to sinful murmurings, but for the gracious promise,
of better things in the life to come." O! Sir," continued she, "I have found it
much more for my soul's good to bless Heaven for what I have, than to murmur
for what I have not; though, to be sure, I have seen better days," wiping her
eyes with the corner of her apron.

"Indeed has she, Sir," cried Amy, "for dame's husband was a man well to pass
in the world; he rented a small farm, and was accounted one of the most
industrious men in the country; and as to dame herself, up early and down late
was her maxim when all of a sudden comes that knavish scoundrel there, farmer
Russel, and takes farmer Apsley's estate over his head, who was soon after
obliged to take up with day-labouring to maintain his family: by-and-by
sickness came on, want followed next, farmer Russel seized farmer Apsley's
goods for a little debt, and at the end of a long fit of sickness, he and his
whole family were brought here to the poor-house, where the man soon after died
of a broken heart; and yet, Sir, dame is for forgiving the farmer all this."

"That I do," replied she, "since my blessed Savior not only forgave his
enemies; but prayed to his Heavenly Father to forgive them also; and I should
read my Bible to little profit, Amy, if I learnt nothing from so bright an
example; but, good Sir," said she, turning to Mr. Britton, "your patience must
be quite tired, not to be yet made acquainted with all the Hubbub yonder; but
most folks are so fond of telling their own stories, that they do not think of
other people. There is, Sir, a poor soldier found dead this morning in the next
parish, and it is thought that farmer Russel has had some concern in the
matter, so the people are now going to carry him before a justice to be
examined."

"And I hope he will be hanged, I hope he will be hanged," cried Amy, clapping
her hands," -- "and I hope he will live to repent," cried dame Apsley, wiping
her eyes. Mr. Britton's curiosity was now raised, and he attended the mob to
the justice's.

Justice Carter was an upright gentleman, just such a man as a justice of the
peace ought to be. Before he administered an oath to an ignorant person; "Think
a moment, my friend," he would say, "before you kiss this book, whether you can
stand to the truth of what you are going to swear, when you are called to be
judged for it, before the God of Heaven and earth." No temptation could ever
prevail on his worship unjustly to favor any man: the laws, he said, must take
their course; if they were found severe, he did not make them: it was his duty
to administer them.

"And, please your worship," cried one Jones, who seemed to be the ringleader
of the mob," "we all hope that you will now take revenge for us on the farmer,
for all the spiteful tricks he has played us."

"I should make but an ill use of power, Jones" replied the justice, "if I were
to do any thing from heat or passion; if the law acquits farmer Russel, I shall
readily dismiss him."

"Well, to be sure," cried the people all in a breath, "your Worship must be a
very fine Christian to forget and forgive at this rate, for to our certain
knowledge the farmer has been a plague to you yourself these ten years,
sneering at you many times, and saying, that neither you nor the law could take
hold of him." "Now, do not you see," "replied the justice," "that all that has
nothing to do with the present matter?"

Then turning over a great book as big as a church bible, the witness was
called, who deposed upon oath, that the last evening just between light and
dark, he saw farmer Russel dragging a poor soldier-like looking man over
Compton bridge, clear out of his own parish into the next, that he there laid
him down by the side of the ditch; that at first he the witness, believed the
man to be dead; but that in a short time he found the poor fellow had only
fainted through weakness; that the witness had lent the poor soldier all the
assistance in his power; but that he was obliged soon after to follow his
cattle.

Here the witness's evidence closed. "And could you," said the justice to
farmer Russel, "drag a poor dying traveller out of your parish in this
barbarous manner? In order to save your own parish a trifling expense, you did
not scruple to risk the life of this poor traveller. You thought indeed, that
the darkness concealed you; but remember, though it seemed dark, yet the broad
eye of the Almighty was upon you.

The farmer then in a surly tone ^eplied, that the man had no business in his
parish, and that as for himself, no one could say he was unkind to the poor,
for he paid three times as much to the poor-rates as any man in the parish,
(the lord of the manor only excepted) "And reason good," cried ragged Amy," who
had followed the mob; "because you are the greatest renter in it; for by
dishonest practices you have got all the small farms into your own hands; but
farmer; no one has heard you ever gave a penny out of your own pocket to the
poor when the laws did not compel you, so no thanks for your charity. And
please your Worship, evevery one here knows, that whenever a kind gentleman and
lady sent a few shillings to be divided amongst us, if the farmer heard of it
he would stop our pay till it was gone."

Both the Justice and Mr. Britton quite shuddered at this act of cruelty, and
every one present hoped his Worship would not fail to take ample revenge on the
farmer.

"My friends," said the Justice again, "if my breast harbored revenge against
any man, I should be unfit for a magistrate; did you never see the picture of
Justice painted in my great hall? she is there represented as holding a pair of
scales with the balance quite even."

The Justice wishing to know some more circumstances about the man's death, the
whole posse now moved off to the place where the corpse lay, attended by Mr.
Britton; by the way they accused the farmer of every crime; some of which he
had not, and others which he had committed. "Ah!" said one, "who sold cider for
the very best, when it was proved it had been half filled up with water?"
"Who," said another, "sold his hay-ricks, all warranted good, and when they
were cut open they were found crammed with musty stuff, fit only for littering
cattle?" "And who," cried a third, "carried the best samples of wheat to the
market, and afterward fobbed the buyer off with the very worst?" "And who,"
bawled out a fourth, "turned his own child out of doors, and mayhap murdered
him, for no tidings have been heard of him since?"

Much after this manner they went on, and soon after the coroner pronounced a
verdict of natural death, no marks of violence being found upon the body. The
farmer now brightened up at once, and, sticking his hands in his waistcoat
pockets, he cast a malignant grin of triumph on all around him; "Now touch me
if you dare," cried he, "but if my name be Russel, I Will have my revenge of
every man and woman's child of you; and I Will lay an action against you, John
Hoskins, for defamation; you have accused me with the murder of my own child;
now prove your words if you can." Poor Hoskins turned as pale as death, well
knowing the farmer's unforgiving temper.

Here some one searching the pockets of the deceased, was surprised to find in
them a letter not sealed, directed to farmer Russel, of Compton Ashby. The
letter was offered to the farmer, but he refused to take it, having always
thought it unlucky to touch any thing belonging to the dead. For the cruel are
naturally superstitious. The people then requested Mr. Britton to read it
aloud, which he at length consented to do.

LETTER.
Honored Father,
THIS comes to you, from your ever dutiful, but unfortunate son, JAMES RUSSEL.


Here the shouts of the people were so clamorous, that Mr. Britton could not go
on reading; every one pressed round the body, and after examining the face for
a moment, they one and all cried out in a breath, "'It Is Jemmy Russel, it is
Jemmy Russel, as sure as eggs are eggs; we cannot be mistaken by the cut across
his right eye. O, you hard hearted wretch!" said Hoskins, shaking his clenched
fist at the farmer, (who gave a deep groan, and turned as white as a sheet,)
"will you have the law of me now, because I said you killed your son, you cruel
monster?" Mr. Britton here interfered, and said, let me advise you good folks
to hear the letter read through and stop your tongues a moment."

"My dear father,
I have faithfully served his Majesty King George in his wars for many years;
but falling into the same disorder of which my poor mother died, the
consumption; my commanding officer who has behaved like a father to me, has
kindly granted me a furlow, to try what my native air will do for me, giving me
at the same time a golden guinea out of his own pocket to bear my expenses on
the road, he having always taken a great fancy to me, seeing as how, I ever
made it my delight to obey him. So I began my match homeward, although with
great fear and trembling, pondering in my mind the last words I ever heard you
speak; which were, 'That you wished I might drop down dead if I ever dared to
darken your doors again;' and calling down heavy curses on yourself if ever you
forgave me; and now, as my offense, dear father, was but a slight, one, and
much have I repented of it, and much shall we all have to be forgiven when we
shall appear before God in judgment, so I humbly trust you will receive me
kindly when you see how sick, and how very weak I am. I have fallen down once
or twice on the road, and having spent all my money, have been for two days
living by charity. I therefore write these few lines from the Swan at
Bridgewater, where I have stopped, in order that they may, in case I should not
be able to reach home alive, be sent to you after my death. Oh, my dear father!
my hour glass is almost run, and death will now be welcome to me, for my life
has been little else than pain and sorrow. O! father, nothing becomes a
christian-man like sorrow for sin, even when he is found in health, and his
worldly concerns flourishing round him. Pray, dear father, think of these
things. Although this life is nearly over with me, yet I have a comfortable
hope and trust in my Savior that the joys of the next will soon open upon me.

"Farewell, for ever, my dear and honored father: should we meet no more in
this world, I humbly pray we may meet in the next. I beg pardon for all my
faults, and with my dying breath subscribe myself, your ever dutiful son,

JAMES RUSSEL."


Many tears were shed whilst Mr. Britton read the letter. "My good friends,"
said he, when he had finished it. "let me now give you a word of advice:
Whenever a sick and poor traveller, (and especially when a brave soldier or
sailor, who has shed his blood in fighting for you in foreign parts, and is
perhaps escaped from an enemy's prison,) knocks at your door to ask for
charity, do not refuse him a cup of beer, or a plentiful slice of bread and
cheese: to you who abound it is little, to him it may be much; and henceforward
let us all learn to look upon every man in distress as a child or a brother;
and let us do by him as we would wish to be done by, if we were in his
condition. As for you, farmer Russel," continued he, "no reproof from me is
wanting, for the event that has happened is of itself the most bitter of all
reproofs."

"O my son! my son!" at length cried the farmer, wringing his hands, and
tearing his hair with grief, "my own curses have brought on my own destruction!
Wretch! wretch that I am," here attempting to rise, he sunk down by the body of
his son, and then fell into such strong convulsion fits, that six of the
stoutest men present could not hold him* his limbs were distorted, his face
turned black, his eyes looked as if they were bursting out of his head; so
dreadful indeed was his situation, that those who but a moment before hated and
reviled him, were now ready to pity him. "What an affecting sight," said Mr.
Britton "have we now before us! God grant that it may prove a lesson to us all.
It was but a few moments ago that this miserable man, who now lies struggling
in the toils of death before you, was proudly rejoicing that he had escaped the
lash of the law."

The farmer's wagon now arrived to carry him home, and it was a most moving
sight, to see it followed by the corpse of his son. A doctor was sent for, who
the moment he saw the farmer, said he feared he could do nothing for him. Mr.
Britton watched by him all night, and when the fits went off for a few minutes,
he was heard thus to mutter to himself.

"Of what use to me are all the riches in the world, now the afflicting hand of
Heaven is upon me? My punishment is great, great also has been my crime. -- I
suffered my own child to perish for want, whilst I was in plenty, and now my
own hand has helped to kill him; how hard have I been to the poor; the Lord has
smitten me for it! The curses I have often uttered against them are now come
upon myself. I must die! The jaws of Hell seem opening to devour me!"

After this the farmer uttered nothing to be understood, though he languished
near three weeks in a state of misery which excited the pity of all who saw
him, and then expired, a dreadful instance of the just judgment of God.

THE LADY AND THE PIE.
A WORTHY Squire of sober life,
Had a conceited boasting wife;
Of him she daily made complaint;
Herself she thought a very saint.
She loved to load mankind with blame,
And on their errors build her fame.
Her favorite subject of dispute
Was Eve and the forbidden fruit.
"Had I been Eve," she often cried,
"Man had not fallen, nor woman died;
I still had kept the orders given,
Nor for an apple lost my heaven;
To gratify my curious mind
I never had ruined all mankind;
Nor from a vain desire to know,
Entailed on all my race such woe."
The Squire replied, "I fear it is true,
The same ill spirit lives in you;
Tempted alike, I dare believe,
You would have disobeyed like Eve*"
The lady stormed and still denied
Both curiosity and pride.
The Squire some future day at dinner,
Resolved to try this boastful sinner;
He grieved such vanity possessed her,
And thus in serious terms addressed her:
"Madam, the usual splendid feast
With which our wedding day is graced,
With you I must not share today,
For business summons me away.
Of all the dainties I Have prepared,
I beg not any may be spared;
Indulge in every costly dish;
Enjoy, it is what I really wish*
Only observe one prohibition*
Nor think it a severe condition;
On one small dish which covered stands,
You must not dare to lay your hands;
Go -- disobey not on your life,
Or henceforth you're no more my wife."
The treat was served, the Squire was gone,
The murmuring lady dined alone:
She saw what'er could grace a feast,
Or charm the eye, or please the taste;
But while she ranged from this to that,
From ven'son haunch to turtle fat;
On one small dish she chanced to light,
By a deep cover hid from sight:
"O! here it is -- yet not for me!
I must not taste, nay dare not see;
Why place it there? or why forbid
That I so much as lift the lid?
Prohibited of this to eat,
I care not for the sumptuous treat;
I wonder if it is fowl or fish,
To know what is there I merely wish.
I Will look O no, I lose for ever,
If I Am betrayed my husband's favor.
I own I think it vastly hard,
Nay, tyranny, to be debarred.
John you may go -- the wine's decanted,
I Will ring or call you when you're wanted."
Now left alone, she waits no longer,
Temptation presses more and stronger.
"I Will peep -- the harm can never be much*
For though I peep, I will not touch;
Why I Am forbid to lift this cover
One glance will tell, and then it is over.
My husband's absent, so is John,
My peeping never can be known."
Trembling she yielded to her wish,
And raised the cover from the dish:
She starts -- for lo! an open pie
From which six living sparrows fly.
She calls, she screams, with wild surprise,
"Haste John and catch these birds," she cries;
John hears not, but to crown her shame,
In at her call her husband came.
Sternly he frowned as thus he spoke,
"Thus is your vowed allegiance broke!
Self-ign'rance led you to believe
You did not share the sin of Eve.
Like here is how blessed was your condition!
How small my gentle prohibition!
Yet you, though fed with every dainty,
Sat pining in the midst of plenty;
This dish thus singled from the rest,
Of your obedience was the test;
Your mind, unbroke by self-denial.
Could not sustain this slender trial.
Humility from hence be taught,
(...) candor to another's fault;
Go know, like Eve, from this sad dinner,
You're both a vain and curious sinner."
Z.

Next week will be published the Valley of Tears a vision.

