THREE LETTERS TO Abraham Bishop, Esquire, CONTAINING SOME STRICTURES ON HIS
ORATION, PRONOUNCED, IN THE WHITE MEETING HOUSE, ON THE EVENING PRECEDING THE
PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT, SEPTEMBER 1800, WITH SOME REMARKS ON HIS CONDUCT AT THE
LATE ELECTION.

BY CONNECTICUTENSIS.

"Likewise also these filthy dreamers, despise dominion and speak evil of
dignities,
Paging waves of the sea foaming out their own shame,
And their mouth speaks great swelling words."
JUDE, part of 8th, 13th and 16th verses. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND
GOODWIN. 1800.

LETTER I.
SIR,
YOU have lately written, pronounced and published an oration, which you
denominate "Connecticut Republicanism." How well it deserves this title, will
be clearly seen in the following pages.

Perhaps you may feel flattered, (if Mr. Bishop be susceptible of flattery)
that this oration has been the subject of so much notoriety; but you will
please to recollect that great and good productions frequently excite less
attention than those which are mischievous and monstrous. This is true in the
natural, as well as the moral and political world. A rattle-snake, or an
African tiger would doubtless be an object of as much curiosity, in the city of
New Haven, as the most beautiful bird, or an elegant Arabian horse; and an
ourang-outang would draw together more spectators, than the most finished of
our race.

Nor ought you to take much pride from the consideration that you have already
felt one "rod for the fool's back," from a distinguished citizen of New Haven,
and that others will probably succeed to open the wounds afresh. Remember, Sir,
that the learned Bishop Watson addressed several letters to your
fellow laborer, Thomas Pain; and if those who attack you may not equal that
pious divine, yet they do not fall farther below him, than you do, in talents,
below that strolling preacher of Jacobinism -- that blasphemer against religion
and its divine author.

If a Bedlamite loosed from his fetters should attempt to fire our buildings by
night, he need take no consolation to himself that wise and great men were
engaged to stop his career of madness, and to chain him to a spot where his
capacity of doing mischief, might be ended.

With these views I beg you to feel as little elevation of spirit at the notice
taken of you as the case will warrant; and I apprehend you will find no more
just cause of boasting, than your brother Holt has for being publicly noticed,
tried, fined and imprisoned for libelling the government of his country.

One great object of your Oration appears to be to effectuate a thorough change
of men and measures in our general and particular governments; and to produce a
total reformation among the people of this peaceful and happy state, in
managing their important political concerns. I am then to consider you, Abraham
Bishop, Esquire as setting yourself up as a reformer -- a reformer of the manners
of Connecticut. -- I am indeed smitten with the thought: but A. Bishop, Esquire has
indeed assumed this great and arduous duty. He has indeed kindly offered
himself as the guide of the deluded citizens of Connecticut: And this is
offered gratis too; no fee is demanded. You instruct, advise, counsel, and
exhort gratis. -- Never before, I believe, was you found laboring for the good
of your neighbors, without reward or expectation of reward: whether you are
now so found, I will hereafter enquire.

But, Mr. Republican, I wish to know what premtensions you have to commence a
reformer? You do not prefess to be the agent of others -- you appear in your
proper person, and hold up Abraham Bishop, Esquire of New Haven, as a REFORMER.
This being the case I am constrained to tell you that several qualities will be
certainly useful, which you certainly do not possess, unless you have received
them since I last saw you.

First. A reformer should possess good talenis. Men will not be induced to
relinquish all their ancient habits and remove their confidence from all those
in power, except from pressing necessity, or unless, swayed and diverted by
superior skill. Now, sir, no person ever deemed you a man of solid, useful good
sense. You, sometimes amuse with flashes of wit and brilliancy; but they are
transient, and answer the purpose of a "dim taper in a dismal cavern, viz. to
increase the horrors of the darkness." Such a man never will be sought as a
guide. -- Sober people will never leave old and tried counselors and adhere to
such visionaries. As well might you expect that the traveller would reject the
plain and beaten road, enlightened by the sun, and enter a dismal swamp to
follow a Jack-with-a-lantern.

Secondly. Stability and uniformity are essential characteristics of a wise man
-- a man to be confided in as a reformer. Your instability and destitution of
uniformity, except in one or two particulars which I will directly mention,
have, long since, been proverbial. About twenty years since you began to exhibt
yourself on the theater of life as a writer in a public office. From that
period to this, you have assumed and attempted to perform all the characters of
a lawyer -- a traveller -- a pedagogue -- a lecturer on morality -- an
instructor in oratory -- a church Priest This was only an attempt for you could
not get orders.
-- a clerk of courts -- a county furveyor -- a speculator in various kinds of
land -- a gardner, and now a preacher of sedition. Nor have your political
opinions been more fixed. About ten years since you wrote, published, and
preached wherever you could get hearers, against the new constitution. For this
Wm. Hillhouse, jun. Esquire administered to you a public chastisement, which, I
fancy, you yet feel. For several succeeding years, you was constantly whining
and murmuring against government in all its departments. In 1798, being in
quest of an office, you explicitly and publicly changed your sentiments; and
thus became clerk of the Superior Court.

The exceptions to this part of your character are, that for ten or twelve
years past, you have been unceasingly employed in pouring all manner of abuse
on the Clergy and on the leading doctrines of Christianity. For this purpose,
about ten years since, you appeared several times on public stages, exhibiting
the mountebank tricks of a juggler, and propagating sentiments tending to
destroy the confidence of the people in the ministers of the gospel.

You have also been uniform in your abuse of all men in power -- all lawyers --
all merchants, and all the clergy, with the exception of one, to whom you have
too often given the fraternal embrace for his own honor, and for the peace and
harmony of his society.

What instance can be produced of your applause of an individual? Of whom have
you spoken, at any time, except to tarnish his fame with your calumniating and
pestilential breath? What neighbor -- what fellow-citizen have you not
attempted to ridicule and blackguard? And it is a remmarkable fact that in an
oration of 64 pages, with a preface, notes and an appendix, you should have
charged the grossest crimes on our merchants -- our men of property -- our
lawyers -- our officers from the highest to the lowest -- our Clergy with all
who adhere to them; and that in this vast collection of slanderous things, not
one word of applause -- nay not one word of excuse or palliation for their
conduct or motives, should have escaped your lips, except that you have
selected about ten democrats with Mr. Jefferson at their head, and paid them a
small compliment in a note.

Thirdly. To be a successful reformer you ought to possess the confidence of
the people. To this you have no claim. Never have you holden any office by the
suffrages of your fellow citizens -- never did you receive any appointment
except in consequence of the character and station of your father, as I will
demonstrate in another place.

Thus situated, Mr. Bishop, how could you expect to make one proselyte by your
Oration? With this weight on your character, and without any weight of
character, you might rationally have anticipated that chagrin which now unfits
you for business; but could hope for no other elevation than to make you "a
fixed figure for the hand of scorn to point his slow and moving finger at."

The manner, Sir, in which this Oration was ushered upon the public, demands
consideration. A society of Yale-College, instituted for the promotion of
friendship and science, elected you their anniversary orator. They were
entirely ignorant that when you was President of that society, a committee was
appointed to solicit you to resign the office, on account of your profanity;
and that you yielded to the solicitation, rather than hazard an expulsion. They
were also without a suspicion, that you were so faithless as to pronounce an
Oration at their request, directly attacking all the venerable institutions of
Connecticut, and in pointed opposition to principles which they deemed sacred.
Much less could they have conjectured that you could have caused it to be
printed without their sanction. Perceiving that your effrontery had over-leaped
all the bounds of decency, they met and voted to dispense with the Oration.
Still you persisted in declaiming: and thus you palmed on the world this
heterogeneous production.

Reflect also, Sir, that for several years past the students of Yale-College
have occupied the evening preceding the commencement, by public speaking in the
brick meeting house. -- That on this occasion the members and officers of that
university -- the literary gentlemen -- the friends and connections of the
scholars with a brilliant and respectable audience, assemble. All this you
knew. How extremely uncivil -- how ungentlemanly was it then for you to attempt
to interrupt those stated and beneficial exercises by your rant and nonsense?
Suppose, Sir, when an audience is assembled to celebrate the 4th of July -- to
lament the death of Genesis Washington, or to commemorate any other great event, a
quack in medicine, should erect a stage contiguous to such a congregation, and
there deal out his nostrums and prescriptions, with the vain glory, common to
Empirics -- what would decent and sober men say of such a Quack? How would they
spurn at his ribaldry? How would they despise such a low, ill-bred, indecorous
mountebank? And yet where lies the difference between a Quack in medicine and a
Quack in politics -- between a juggling pretender to cure all diseases of the
human body, and a juggling projector of cures for the body politic.

I proceed now to the Oration. -- It is extremely obvious that all your
assertions and comments on facts, with your various rhapsodical prophecies,
ejaculations and lamentations, are idle and senseless, unless that political
delusion exists on which you have professedly built. Now, Sir, what proof have
you offered of this delusion? The good people of the United States, and
particularly of Connecticut, are earnesty solicited to believe (and threatened
with heavy curses in case of their unbelief) that all those who acquiesce in
the administration of our government are poor, misguided, deluded wretches,
rapidly approaching to a state of idiocy or distraction: and the testimony
adduced in support of the idea is, that A. Bishop, Esquire a restless, chagrined
and ambitious declaimer, assures them that this is their condition. The people,
Sir, will requite more evidence. The force of tropes and figures -- of rant and
railing, will be insufficient to unsettle the public mind, and to destroy that
state of things which rests on experience, reflection and conviction. As well
might you expect to compel a Christian to exchange his ideas of the pure joys
of heaven for the gross impurities of a Mohammedan paradise, as that an open
opposer of principles supported by the sanction of ages, should produce assent
to his wild reveries in politics -- his motley and mongrel systems of
government. Instead, Sir, of writing, speakhig and dispersing this oration, you
might have arrayed yourself in the Harlequin dress of an ancient trusader in
religion, or a modern Quixotte in chivalry, and at midnight, have gone through
the streets of New Haven, with lighted matches in your hands, attempting to set
on fire the houses of the citizens lest they should fall and bury in ruins the
families which inhabit them. -- Methinks, I see you thus equipped, enter the
dwelling of your neighbor, and I hear you thus address the family, "I am come
as your friend, to set on fire this building. -- I know that it appears strong,
neat and elegant, but I have discovered, by my own genius and the aid of other
incendiaries, that this appearance is all delusion, and that it will soon fall
and crush every individual to death. -- Know ye not, ye children and domestics,
that one Alexander Hamilton, a chief architect in erecting this house, designed
it for a prison. -- Know ye not that he with all your great, wise and rich
neighbors, have been constantly contriving schemes, since the foundation stone
was first laid in 1777, The time of the adoption of the New Constitution.
to destroy your liver and liberties -- to overthrow the house, or else to
chain you to the timbers in the garret? -- I am come therefore to burn this
building and free you from these mighty evils. -- Think not that the house will
be plundered while it is on fire -- no -- Your liberty is all that is aimed
at." -- The father replies, " Why, Mr. Bishop, this strange attack on my peace
and happiness? Does not this house shelter me from inclement seasons and render
me and my family comfortable? Am I not contented -- nay delighted with my
situation? -- My children are all cheerful, virtuous and happy. My sons and
daughters are receiving their educations; they obey, with peasure, the orders
of us their parents; we indulge them in dress suited to their rank; and they
resort to places of innocent amusement. On very sabbath they follow u to
church, and we verily believe that we are becoming wiser and better. No
complaint has yet been heard within these walls, we are restrained of no
rational liberty and we fear no mischief. Pray, Mr. Bishop leave us to
ourselves, -- if we are indeed deluded, we are happy in the delusion." -- You,
with an inflamed countenance, go on, "Children and servants, "these are
delution's handy works." -- I am bound by the love and fraternity I bear you,
to declare that this your father and master, who has just now spoken, is one of
this combination to destroy you. Know ye not that when he purchased this place
he became indebted to the amount of nearly a one hundredth part of its value --
that it is now "surveyed and mortgaged" for this money and See Preface.
that for part, he is paying 6 per cent. for part 3 per cent. and that though
the rest is deferred, yet it must be paid, and do you not see in this debt the
foundation of slavery? -- Nay, my dear creatures, already has your father begun
to plan this house for a prison -- already is he looking out for a King-post
for the pretended security of the timbers, but in reality, to convert it into a
cruel bastile. What young sapling in the "arms" of yonder nodding, waving
forest, is to he this King post, no democrat can tell; but rely on it, that
soon it will be fixed, and then you will be chained here to all eternity, or
this house, timbers, stone, bricks and planks, will fall with a tremendous
crash, on your dear -- dear heads -- And then -- Oh! and then! "Thundering See
page 18.
noises must drown the cries of your brethren and children in the agonies of
death. -- No father to watch the symptoms of decaying life! No mother to drop a
tear over a dying son! No sifter to stretch out the hand of faithful affection
and to soften the pillow in the moment of dissolving nature!" And now, my dear
creatures, after such amazing pathos, let me touch my match to a bunch of
swingling me and burn up your house, and you will be freed from these dreadful
calamities."

LETTER II.
BUT, Sir, I will not deal with you simply in general observations. I will
survey your beloved, though miss-shapen and ill-begotten child, in all its
features and point out You will observe I treat it as masculine, not from its
strength but because I would not insult the ladies by calling it feminine.
his predominant characteristics.

In your preface you assert, in paragraph 4th, that it is well known that, in
1787, a number of our leading men were holding meetings to establish a
confederated monarchy. -- That the speech of Genesis Hamilton in the convention,
favored the same object. -- That our leading men avow that this country can
never be governed without an hereditary monarch. -- That appropriate plans, of
monarchy are adopted by administration. That our federal papers are filled with
reflections on liberty and republicanism, and that Fenno is the mouth piece of
federalism. -- Now, sir, these are naked assections. I, in reply, say that each
of them is false. It belongs to you to prove them; and if truth had been your
aim you would have furnished that proof, or have omitted them. One of your
assertions, viz. that, respecting federal papers, I agree, is to stand or fall,
by recurring to those papers. And here, sir, I challenge you to produce a
newspaper published in New England or to the southward of New England,
excepting Fenno's and Porcupine's, (which you know have not been for years
either read or patronized by federalists generally) which contains a reflection
on liberty or republicanism, or a syllable in favor of monarchy. I assert that
no such paper can be found.

In the 2d, page of this preface, after having said that a monarchy is
decidedly before us, and having mentioned the reasons for the assertion, you
have the following observation, "The men now in place, have been the contrivers
or advocates of these measures." This is a plain declaration that all men now
holding offices in the national or state governments, are either the contrivers
or advocates of monarchy. You know; you knew, when you penned that sentence,
that it was not only false, but an infamous falsehood. These men have all sworn
so support a republican government -- you then charge them with perjury -- with
treason! with contriving to destroy that constitution under which they live and
to which they have bound themselves by an appeal to heaven. Think, sir, what it
is for A. Bishop, to charge all the men in office in the United States, with
these flagitious crimes!

In the 6th paragraph of this preface you tell us of the wonder with which our
southern brethren view the aristocracy of Connecticut and ascribe this
aristocracy to what you term "federal policy" and refer us to your appendix See
7th page of appendix.
for the proof.

On this paragraph I remark, first that your proposition respectiong your
southern brethren is not quite accurately steted. It should read thus, "Our
fellow laborers in the great business of destroying order and religion, behold
with fear and anger that happy state of society which prevails in Connecticut,
and which has erected such impregnable bulwarks against our attacks on all the
venerable institutions in the United States." Such a reading is much more
consonant to the real state of things; and is conformable to they ideas of all
sober people.

I remark secondly, How could your evil genius lead you to ascribe the
uniformity and stability of our elections to "federal policy?" Know you not,
that the practice of placing counselors on the nomination list, according to
seniority and without regard to the number of votes, provided they are of the
first twenty, has been uniformly adhered to, ever since the first settlement of
the state? And do you not also know that this rule is never applied to the
nomination for Congress? Why then term it " federal policy?" Why but to
mislead, confuse and ensnare; which appears to be the great business of your
life?

In the 8th paragraph of this preface you say, "For eleven years freedom of the
press and of opinion have been restrained?" What do you mean? Within this
period you and others have been permitted to speak, write, and publish all the
abusive things which malignant hearts could invent, or noisy tongues utter, on
every subject which you and they chose to discuss; and hitherto there has been
but one prosecution in this state, though I confess there ought to have been
many. Nay is not the promulgation of your Oration, irresistible proof that, not
only liberty, but alarming licentiousuess of speech and of the press, exists?
What farther indulgence does a good man wish than to speak the truth -- what
greater do you wish than to charge every great and good man with the most base
and detestible crimes? If you would have more slander abound, you must have a
second apostasy, at least as great as the first, and a new dictionary of
abusive words.

In your redoubtable attack on our commercial system, you appear to have two
objects in view, viz. first to destroy the reputation of merchants; and
secondly to beggar them and all those immediately connected with them.

To effect the first object you say pages 3d, and 9th, that commerce cannot
support itself -- that it is not worth what it costs -- that our merchants know
this, but that they are lending their aid to the propagation and belief of a
forged story, because it is beneficial to them; and that this their aid is
afforded upon the same principle that a gang of counterfeiters give currency to
a "well counterfeited bill 'till by accident the deceit is discovered, by which
time the counterfeiter has gained all his ends." -- You had before charged "men
in place" with perjury and treason: Here you charge merchants, "every well
informed merchant," with giving that species of aid to a false and forged
story, "because it is beneficial to him," which forgers and counterfeiters give
to a false and forged bank note. And is it indeed true that gentlemen who have
sustained irreproachable characters through life -- gentlemen, who have never
before been suspected of want of integrity -- gentlemen who retain an elevated
rank in society for their fairness, punctuality, and honor, should be
arraigned, in a body, before the tribunal of the public, and there charged with
such infamous conduct? Merchants are indeed attached to the government of their
country; but are they, on this account, to suller such calumny?

Another object with you is to beggar these merchants and all those dependent
on commerce. And why? Because you think commerce useless and destructive. On
this part of the subject you have been sufficiently answered by the Pamphlet to
which I have already alluded. -- I will add that it has been an object with
these states, for more than a century, to encourage and protect commerce.
Great, wise, and good men, of all parties, with few exceptions, have concurred
in opinion on this subject, and it is rather too late, for a fool or a madman
to persuade the United States to abandon this source of greatness, wealth, and
respectability. But your system of opposition to commerce is built on the
proposition that foreign nations will come to our ports, bring us their produce
and take ours, on equally good terms with those now afforded by our merchants.
And are you indeed so stupid as not to see that those nations either in their
purchases of us, or sales to us, will make us pay for protecting this trade?
And may we not pay our own farmers, mechanics, seament and merchants as well as
those of other nations? Mr. Bishop pray attend to those things with which you
are conversant. -- The people of New Haven will certainly prefer the opinion of
such men as Isaac Beers and Elias Shipman on this subject to yours, although
they may allow you, as County Surveyor, to measure their Wad with your "four
rod chain."

Again, you say, in pages 6th, and 7th, extensive commerce makes a great bustle
of wealth -- some large fortunes -- many bankruptcies -- and you add with a
view to inflame the public mind, that farmers loose their debts by these
bankruptcies -- that mortgages abound more on our records -- and that the
people, "including public and private indebtedness," are more deeply involved,
than at any season before.

Respecting "public indebtedness" to the United States, if Mr. Secretary
Wolcott is to be credited before Albert Gallatin and his puffer A. Bishop, Esquire
and I fancy that those who know the characters will judge accurately, the debt
is reduced, in eleven years, almost four millions of dollars: and this too,
notwithstanding, millions have been expended in suppressing an insurrection
which Mr. Gallatin contributed to produce, and in protecting our commerce from
the ravages of that nation, whose praises, you and he, are incessantly
chaunting.

It may be further remarked that Connecticut was then indebted to an amount of
nearly two millions of dollars, from which she is now discharged, excepting
about twelve thousand dollars; and has, in her treasury, almost two millions:
and this mighty change has been effected by certain "operations of federal
policy," such as the funding system, the assumption of state debts, etc. etc.
-- Thus far of your "public indebtedness."

Respecting "private indebtedness" you have made several shameless assertions.
-- Do our farmers suffer by the bankruptcies of merchants? You know that the
farmers, either give short credit or receive the cash. -- They will justify me
in saying, that at no former period could they obtain suck advantageous sales
of their produce, and receive such satisfactory payments.

But you say "mortgages abound." -- If, I here admit that you speak the truth,
what follows? If in consequence of the immense speculations, a degree of
distrust is created and mete are therefore more cautious in taking security, is
it certain that there is more indebtedness? Or if more indebtedness, are the
people impoverishing? Do you think New York, Hartford and New Haven are more
oppulent now than at the beginning of this century? You must say, yes -- but
mortgages more abound, and there is far more indebtedness. -- Industry,
enterprise and exertion will produce great commercial operations --
indebtedness, to a certain extent, will be the consequence, but this is no
argument of poverty, or a decline in wealth. -- Ask the lawyers and judges of
courts and look at your own records and say, if you can do it without a blush,
what is the difference in the number of suits now instituted for debt in one
year, and in the years 1786 and 1787. -- You know that the comparison will show
that you "have erred and loved to err." -- Then, the people could not pay --
officers could not collect -- consequently suits were multiplied to an alarming
degree. In 1786 more suits were instituted for debt in the counties of Hartford
and New Haven, and I presume in the other counties, than in the three last
years.

Again. Our farmers are now full of money -- their produce every where commands
cash. The face of the country -- public and private buildings -- the dress of
the citizens -- roads and bridges and every other object presents marks of
growing wealth and prosperity.

But here I must meet your logical reasoning. You seem to admit in page 6th
that there is this thrift -- these evidences of wealth; but then you say
"Individuals appear to the world most thrifty when they are most thriftily
expending their mortgaged estates." What does this reasoning prove? The
inference is clear, if a country exhibits every possible proof of riches,
depend on it that country is rapidly declining. If the eye of the benevolent
traveller meets, in every village, spacious fields well fenced, good houses --
elegant public buildings, handsome carriages and well dressed inhabitants, he
heaves a deep sigh, drops a tear and exclaims, "Oh what marks of poverty and
wretchedness! Poor deluded people -- rapidly going to destruction! OH DELUSION!
-- DELUSION OH"!! This same traveller, in another country, beholds a race of
people houseless, or in log-huts -- pennyless and in rags, shivering with the
cold and presenting meagre faces, and sings "Oh my country -- MY country. --
This is indeed Boon -- Boon -- Oh the Sea page 6th and 4th line from the top.
length and depth of Mr. Bishop's oration"!!

This is your logic, Sir, and I only wish to enquire whether you learned it in
your travels through France?

I omit here to notice the gross charges which you bring against all bank
directors in the note to your 5th page, because to designate particularly the
objects of your abuse, would be to speak of every man and character which you
notice, democrats, jacobins and infidels excepted.

In your remarks on the commercial system, you have with an air of malicious
triumph mentioned the tribute which the United States pay to the Dey of
Algiers. Did you not know, Sir, that this is the only method by which any
nation can procure peace with those lawless pirates? -- Did you not know that
your brother democrats constantly poured contempt on the government, 'till this
tribute was paid: and that appeals, through every Jacobin paper, were made to
the compassion of our citizens, in favor of fathers, husbands and sons,
suffering cruel bondage in that country? Do you, Sir, now insult your nation
for rescuing from chains of enduring servitude, Americans in Algiers?

You also clamor greatly, because our houses and lands are mortgaged to pay
our debts. Were not our houses and lands always thus mortgaged? Is not every
man's property sacredly pledged, by laws paramount to those which govern
mortgages, for the payment of what he owes? And will any but rogues ever
complain that their property is thus pledged?

Your attack on the naval and military systems, contains nothing but what has
been repeatedly saild (and much better said too) by your brothers Calender,
Holt, Duane, and Sam. Morse. I cannot say how your attempt at the pathos, in
the 18th, page, succeeded; but I presume one little vegetable, An Onion.
would have produced more tears with fair less noise.

Your tragi-commic scene of the "Kings being shot at" in pages 24 and 25,
sounds well, and contains a good share of humor and satire: -- but it really
appeared better in the London paper from which you borrowed it. And here I
would just hint whether you have been quite civil in using the language of
others so repeatedly, without giving credit?

In the 21st page you commence an attack on the gentlemen of the law, and
pursue it, for a considetable time, with great anger. In this excursion of
abuse, there is some palliation for your conduct. You doubtless recollect
having read law -- having taken the oath and having attempted to obtain a
subsistane by the practice of it. You also recollect that you did not succceed.
-- That industry, perseverance and talents were quite convenient accompaniments
to a lawyer, you discovered; and relinquished the profession without having a
sight at the " Page 21 at bottom.
keys of St. Peter." In this situation it is no matter of surprise that you
feel a little chagrin, and much envy. You have seen those of your age, and
those much younger, rise to eminence in the profession and have

Eyed them askance with jealous (...)
Malign: and to yourself (...)
Sight hateful! sight tormenting!" Milton's Paradise Lost.

You positively assert page 22d, that "lawyers are found ascending and
descending the ladder of promotion like the angels of God in Jacob's vision."
Now, I presume, no one will dispute the fact with you, for your situntion has
been admirably good to ascertain the truth, having always stood exactly at the
bottom of the ladder, looking earnestly up, and never being able to mount a
single round.

You then call lawyers "excellent stuff for transportation to foreign courts."
Here, Sir, I doubt your capacity of knowing, for you will not be deemed a
competent judge of what lawyers will suit in foreign countries from an
experiment made on the sample, which the ship carried, which transported A.
Bishop, Esquire

In page 25th you attempt to point out the agents in this delusion, by which
the people are duped. On this part of the subject, Sir, you have showed a
spirit of slander and wickedness, which is without a parallel in any
publication which has fallen under my eye. You have alleged that all our
officers -- all our lawyers -- all our merchants and the whole body of the
clergy, are combined to deceive, enslave and destroy their fellow-citizens.
Your have written thus, "A question is often proposed how is it possible that
our greatest and most pious men should betray us?" And you have answered it
thus "I answer because you have every thing to loose and they have every thing
to gain." -- You have told mankind that "greatness, wisdom and riches" are the
means of propagating this delusion. You have explicitly accused our clergy Page
4 line 10th, from top.
with thanking God for war -- a war produced to gratify the pride, avarice, and
ambition of these great men. You have said that "great political arrangements
are like so many armaments against religion" and yet you charge the clergy with
aiding in these arrangements. And, not to pain the refined and delicate ear
with more particulars of your blackguardism, you have used every artifice to
convince your hearers and readers that they should withdraw all confidence from
the clergy -- from men of wealth, wisdom and greatness, and treat them as
corrupt, depraved, and vicious tyrants. In page 21st, in a note (not written by
you) there is a faint attempt to rescue those few clergymen who are democrats,
or who express no anxiety to resist Jacobinism, from that odium, with which you
attempt to cover, a large and respectable majority of them.

The language of your oration is analogus to that which the infamous
Robertspierre adopted, in the national convention years ago, viz. that it was
the duty of the poor to arm against the rich and destroy them -- nay you go
farther -- you attempt to arm vice, contempt and infamy against virtue,
greatness, and worth. -- To be born of respectable parents -- to be learned in
the law, or in theology -- to possess the confidence of men -- to acquire by
honesty, industry, and labor, an ample estate, and to be elevated to the first
stations in importance and dignity are with you vices of great magnitude. Well
earned fame should be signalized only with superior abuse and contempt, and a
wreath of honor should be converted into a halter.

In page 29th, pursuing the same train of ideas, you rank among the selfish and
debased, all directors of banks, judges of courts, generals of armies and
captains of ships.

Now, Mr. Bishop, why this rout about base-born and noblemen? Is there any such
distinction known in Connecticut? Look through the state and say if men are
promoted to offices, or acquire peculiar respect, on account of their
parentage? The only idea, which offers any support to this opinion, is, that
you once alleged, as a reason why you should obtain the office of clerk of the
county court at New Haven, that you was town born.

Again. -- Is a man despised for his poverty? You know that virtue and worth
are respected wherever found. -- You also know that in Connecticut there is as
fair a chance for talents to meet all that reward which Connecticut can bestow,
as in any place on earth. -- You also know that among these merchants and
civilians whom you have basely attempted to revile, are many men of great
candor, probity, integrity, and virtue -- that their intercourse with society
is kind and benevolent, and that they are justly esteemed valuable members of
community. It is also well known that our clergy as a body, are dscreet,
amiable, pious men, faithfully and steadily pursuing the great duties of their
profession, and diffusing peace and happiness among the people. While preparing
your envenomed shafts for their vitals, you should have asked these questions
-- Did not the clergy of Connecticut unite cordially in producing the American
revolution? Have they not uniformly attempted to promote good order in society?
Have not their prayers, sermons, and example, had some influence in restraining
the licentious and unprincipled? Do not many individuals rejoice in their
fervor and piety? And is it kind, in me, to represent them as entirely unworthy
of confidence? Shall I promote the felicity of my fellow citizens by attempting
to destroy their affection for the clergy? If I should convert our churches
into temples of reason, and guillotine the ministers of religion, should I
render any essential good to mankind, or commend myself to the favor of God? If
the sabbath were abolished and the people of Connecticut, instead of
assembling, once in seven days to worship their Creator, should celebrate the
decade, and prostrate themselves before the goddess of liberty, would they be
better husbands -- better wives -- better parents -- -- better children --
better neighbors -- better citizens or better rulers? Should I render any
benefit to the old man of eighty, were I to convince him that the belief in
"twenty Gods -- no God -- or one living and true God" is perfectly immaterial?
Should I do him no injury by unsettling his faith, and driving him from that
considence in christianity which has been to him "an anchor to the soul," into
that doubt and perplexity which presents nothing but the gloomy valley of the
shadow of death?

If you had made some such enquiries, with the least candor, you might have
saved yourself from some portion of that infamy which now assuredly awaits you.

I will now reply to some of your observations as they occur with as little
regard to order, if possible, as you have shown in making them.

In a note in page 31st. you say "The Republican" (meaning the Democratic)
"interest is firmly atached to the constitution." This, Sir, comes with an ill
grace indeed from you. -- You who preached on all occasions and in all
companies, and with all manner of abuse, against that constitution -- you, who
explicitly decry all commerce, an object of immense importance in that
constitution. -- You, who have cursed every measure of the administration
(except when seeking an office) you now faintly applaud it in a cowardly note.
Do you apprehend that you can delude any body by such a snare? The truth is,
you now hate and always have hated that constitution, and this pretended
affection of yours is like the perfidious kiss of Judas.

In page 36, you say you are "willing to be governed by men greater, wiser, and
richer than yourself." This is the first sentiment, on which I have had
occasion to congratulate you. It is fortunate that you have come to this
conclusion; for if there should ever be a time when you were not willing to be
governed by men "greater and wiser" than yourself, you would find your
inclinations cruelly thwarted. Indeed, so highly does your prejudice against
great and wise men, rise, that you say, in the same page, that "we have already
a number of men too great for a Republic:" and, like an honest and good
subject, you are determined never to add to their number, and therefore are
assiduously laboring to belittle yourself: but I assure you that your exertions
have already been successful, and you have attained your object, beyond the
possibility of a defeat.

In page 42 you rage vehemently against the aristocracy of Connecticut, in
appointments of office. The pamphlet, to which I have once and again alluded,
has pointed out the absurdity of your whining on this subject. You hold four
offices -- one of those your father gave you -- two of the others, you received
from the Court in which he presides -- the fourth was procured by the
recommendation of his friends. And do you really believe that if you had rested
on the suffrages of the freemen of Connecticut, that you could have obtained
either of them? I leave this question with you and your acquaintance; and thus
dismiss your rant about aristocracy.

In a note to page 42, you aim a compliment to President Adams. It is rather
singular that your applause should all come in notes, but it is prefectly
characteristic of you and your Oration. It is still more singular that you
should utter a syllable in favor of Mr. Adams; for it has ever appeared to
your acquaintance, that if there were any degrees in your malevolence toward
great and good men, the President was the object of your most deliberate hatred.

In page 46 you have unluckily hit upon the simile of the "Box of Glass" with a
"Keep this side up." -- Do you remember your recantation of your sentiments
when you solicited the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court? See Rod for
fool's back.
Do you recollect what you then said and did, and wrote? Where Mr. Changling,
is that COCKADE which you wore in 1798, as a badge of federalism? "Keep this
side up" -- Your "box of glass" is marked on every side with a "keep this side
up;" and it will therefore probably be broken as all good men wish it may be.

In page 48, you pay a compliment, in a note again, to a number of democrats.
But this is an expensive compliment to your party in New England. Is there no
democrat, north of New York, worthy to be mentioned with those chosen few,
except Mr. Samuel Adams? What, no pious Priestly in New England to disseminate
his pure and useful truths among this deluded people? No Monroe to negotiate
treaties with great Republics? No Gallatin, directly from Geneva, to teach our
citizens how to make an insurrection against the government of their Country?
Oh ill-fated New England! -- And now Mr. Bishop, what do you think "Paul of
Tarsus" would say to these chosen few, if lie knew their characters as well as
you and I do? I mean not here to include either Maddison, Dickinson or Adams.
The first I respect -- the others I do not know.


In pages 49 and 50 you have endeavored to amuse your audience with several
federal toasts. Perhaps those drank at Mr. Jefferson's dinner, on Sunday, at
Fredericksburgh in Virginia, in May 1798, would have been more congenial to
your feelings. On that day and on that occasion, your "distinguished citizen,"
joined in a set of toasts calculated to contemn, in the severest manner, the
President and the government of the United States.

In page 60, you say "it may be well for you (addressing your audience) to know
that the support of your government costs you 42,000 dollars a day," -- and I
say, it may be well for them and you, to know that here you have made a slight
error of 14,000 dollars; and it may be very well for them and you to know that
in your appendix, to which you here refer, you have made a blunder of five
millions of dollars in the estimate of 15,000,000 for expenditures for the year
1800. Now a reformer should certainly be more correct -- a financier should
understand the four firtst rules in Arithmetic.

In page 36, there is quite a novel doctrine advanced. Your words are "but
never let it be forgotten that the argument drawn from the coincidence of
great, and wise and holy politicians in public measures is, of all others the
most alarming. These are the only men whom you have to fear. If some are
apparently more holy than their neighbors, then if they meddle with your
politics, they are most capable of deceiving you: their holiness may recommend
them to heaven, but is no GUARANTEE FOR THEIR POLITICAL RECTITUDE." Here is a
species of reasoning which I think will unfold your true character, and will
display the design and tendency of your oration. Here, Sir, is a solemn caution
against appointing "great and wise and holy" men to manage political concerns:
and a plain inference is, that little and foolish and unholy men are to be
substituted in their stead. Were not the subject too serious, I should say this
is electioneering for yourself, with great address. Here you avow that
"holiness" is no "guarantee for political rectitude." What security then have
we for "political rectitude?" It would have been extremely kind for you to have
told your "listening audience" what characters are suited to govern mankind: Or
did you avoid it least you should be charged with speaking of yourself?

But, Mr. Bishop, to be more serious with you, Do you not mean, by the
sentiments just quoted, to deny that a principle of holiness does exist? Do you
not represent that the distinctions between wisdom and folly, virtue and vice,
piety and impiety, are idle and useless, mere creatures of the imagination and
rest on no solid foundation? -- You mean this precisely, or you mean that which
is still more horrid, viz. That vice, folly and impiety are more excellent
qualities than virtue, wisdom and holiness, especially in a ruler. -- Ask
Christians what they think of such sentiments? Ask all who possess any remains
of morality, if the prevalence of such opinions would not soon convert this
world into a dreary waste of wretchedness and woe? Ask these questions, and
then read that solemn declaration of the living God contained in 2d Samuel
xxiii. chap. 3d verse. "The God of Israel said -- the Rock of Israel spoke to
me, He that rules over men must be just ruling in the fear of God."

The passages which I have just quoted are introductory to your unqualified
praise of Mr. Jefferson, to subserve whose election to the Presidency, you have
labored, with a zeal which deserved a better cause, and in a manner which
would disgrace any cause.

Of this gentleman, you have indeed spoken favorably, and to prove him worthy
of the confidence of the people of Connecticut, you have discanted on his
learning, greatness and goodness. But is he not too "great a man for a
Republic?" Must you not take his "altitude See page 36.
with a quadrant?" You have through a tedious oration of 64 pages, labored to
convince your readers, that wisdom and grantness were noxious qualities in a
ruler: -- Here your favorite is exalted to the heavens by the profusion of
them! -- Strange contradictions! You have forgotten "Keep this side up."

But, Sir, I agree with you Mr. Jefferson is a learned man -- an ingenious man
-- a Philosopher. -- I know not but that he is honest in his intercourse with
society and amiable in private life; there is however strong reason to believe
that he is an obstinate infidel. -- Adam Smith, the celebrated author of the
Wealth of Nations, characterising David Hume, observed that he approached
nearer to divinity than any man he ever knew. -- Yet how bitter an enemy to
Christianity was David Hume?

You say Mr. J. supports a minister of the gospel at his own expense. -- If
this be true, I think it would be honorable to religion and its minister if he
would attend his ministrations and not confine them to his servants. But, Sir,
it is a well established fact that Mr. J. never has attended public worship
during a residence of several years in New York and Philadelphia. Why not? His
friends pretend that it was because the clergy abused him for his political
sentiments. -- This is untrue -- but if true, is it an answer? Would a lover of
the worship of God neglect it for such a reason? Would Daniel -- would "Paul of
Tarsus" have thus conducted?

Again. You say in your last page and confirm it in your last note, that he
spoke "reverently of God." So has Thomas Pain, Godwin, Rousseau, Hume,
Bollingbroke and Gibbon with almost every other avowed enemy of Christianity.
The greatest and most malignant scoffers at religion, frequantly speak, in the
most exalted terms, of the Supreme Being; but when they define his attributes
or speak of his moral government, then, their impiety and monstrous
absurdities, rise into view.

These champions in the cause of infidelity, without a single exception, and
your oration is a signal proof of the proposition, level their artillery
against the ministers and professors of religion, and thus aim the "dagger of
death" at its vitals. If any person will read Paine's Age of Reason and compare
his abuse of ministers and Christians with your jeers and ridicule at the same
objects, he will perceive as near a coincidence, as situation and climate will
permit.

Let me now examine the passage from Jefferson's notes quoted in your appendix,
to vindicate him from the charge of infidelity, first remarking that the
introduction to that quotation is borrowed.

The sentiment so often commented upon, is in these words, "But it does me no
injury for my neighbor to say there are twenty Gods or no God. It neither
picks my pocket nor breaks my leg." Here Mr. J. is attempting to show the
impropriety of legislative interference in matters of religion. If he had said
that faith was not a subject of legislation I would subscribe to the opinion;
but he unquestionably means that it is not injurious to individuals or society
for a man to declare that there are twenty Gods, or that there is no God, and
consequently that there should be no law against blasphemy and therefore
clearly, none against profanity of any kind, because those vices do neither
"pick pockets nor break legs." But wise legislators have thought different on
this subject. In this state there is a statute against blasphemy, sanctioned
with severe penalties -- there is also a law against profane swearing. This is
the case in the country whence we emigrated and I believe in all the states of
New England, perhaps in many others. -- Nay, all well regulated communities
punish men for slandering individuals, and for reviling the government of their
country. This is not complained of here or in Virginia. On what principle do
these laws rest? Doubtless on this; that the peace of society shall not be
disturbed nor the confidence of people in their rulers, be destroyed by
falsehood and calumny. -- But alas! the religion of the bible -- the Savior of
sinners -- the God of the universe, may be profaned, derided or blasphemed,
with impunity!

And is it indeed no injury to me, as an individual, or as a member of society,
that our streets should resound with oaths and cursings? -- That children
should hear, in every lane and alley, the name and attributes of God contemned?
Will not the prevalence of such practices, efface the fear and reverence of God
from the young and tender mind, and produce that contempt for every thing
sacred, which leaves the heart a prey to every corrupt propensity? Parents and
Christians will think of these things and regret that Mr. Jefferson should have
been the author of such sentiments; and that our temples should be theaters to
recommend them.

In another part of this quotation Mr. J. speaking of New York and
Pennsylvania, says, " religion is well supported, of various kinds indeed; but
ALL GOOD ENOUGH; all sufficient to preserve peace and order." Two things are
inferable from this passage; first that the only benefit resulting from
religion, is the preservation of the peace and order of society, and secondly
that, for this purpose, all the various religions in those states were equally
good. A strange sentiment for a Christian! for a Christian did I say? No
Christian, unless deluded, could utter it. We are here taught that religion is
confined in its benefits to this world -- that it is simply designed to make
men peaceable and orderly, and that any kind of religion is good enough for the
attainment of this end. And now, Sir, let me ask whether if the "Bishop of
Ephesus" had been in the pulpit of that house, which you profaned, he would
have addrressed his "listening audience" thus? "Men and brethren. -- It is of
no consequence whether men say there are twenty Gods or no God -- all the
various kinds of religion, Jewish and Roman catholic, and all others are good
enough for the purposes of society, and beyond that they are of no importance.
-- Greatness, wisdom and holiness are injurious qualities in a ruler. --
Ministers of religion and professors, should be shunned and avoided as the
pests of society. Holiness of heart is no guarantee for political rectitude:
and wisdom and virtue are combined to destroy you; and finally, let me exhort
you to use all means to elect Mr. Jefferson President of the United States."

Or if "Paul of Tarsus" had been one of your "listening audience," do you think
he would have thought it proper, as a preacher of righteousness, to have
applauded your oration with smiles and gestures of peculiar approbation? It is
much more probable to me that he would have rose and, with that Christian
intrepidity, for which he was celebrated, have addressed you, as he formerly
did Elymas the sorcerer, who sought to turn away Sergius Paulus from the faith,
and as Bishop Watson did Thomas Pain, "O full of all subtilty and all
mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou
not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?"

LETTER III.
I WILL now examine your conduct in attempting to influence the election which
took place on the Monday after the oration was spoken, and contrast it with
some sentiments which you have there uttered.

In the town of Hamden your efforts were conspicuous. You went there several
times in the dead of night -- distributed nominations for assistants, and
directed the men to be voted for in the delegation to Congress; and to aid and
promote the changes which you desired to effect, you propagated the most
palpable falsehoods: and, to finish your infamy, on your return to New Haven,
you boasted that you had revolutionized Hamden.

With the same views and, by the same base and foul means, you intrigued in
East-Haven, West-Haven, and North-Haven.

On the Friday night before freemen's meeting, you went to Wallingford --
disseminated your orations -- repeated, to a collection of people some of the
most inflamatory passages, and wrote and dispersed a great number of
nominations, leaving no artifice untried to effect your vile purposes.

By your own confessions your labors in New Haven are known. You have
confessed, Sir, that New Haven was divided by the Democrats into districts --
that men were appointed to operate in these districts, and to enlighten the
freemen and influence their votes -- that lists were made out, containing the
names of the Federalists, the doubtful, and the Democrats, and that established
Democrats were appointed to convince and confirm the wavering. You have pointed
out the boundaries of the district over which you presided -- acknowledged that
you rose early, on the morning of the election, went toward Dragon bridge,
found nine of your men on the spot, dispatched those nine to others, and
finally that you collected all your men except one, and had them all in town,
by nine in the morning, you yourself "bringing up the rear." And to exhibit the
extent of your iniquity, you confessed to respectable people, the night after
the election, "that the object of the Democrats was to get into office." I omit
here to mention the vigilance with which, for weeks, you sought every
opportunity to inflame the passions of the people, by all the slander of which
you were master, against men whose talents and virtue will forever look you
into contempt. I omit to mention that this nomination was, by you, given to
many who knew nothing of the characters -- who did not know Roswell Judson, Esquire
from George Penrose or Henry H. Child's. See appendix page 7.
-- I omit to enumerate the acts of your party -- that Hezekiah Bissell, Esquire
whose name was on that nomination, carried it to Windham and there attempted to
give it currency -- that this same Roswell Judson promoted it in Stratford
while his father was engaged in the same business in Huntington and Trumbull.
-- But I cannot omit to ask you, what you now think of "unbiassed elections,"
of a new election's opening to republicans a new and most desirable prospect?"
-- of "federal policy?" "of opportunities to express opinions, on federal men
and measures?" What do you think "of the people's BEING LEFT to exercise FREE
AND UNBIASSED ELECTIONS?" Of the "delusions which have attended past
elections?" Of the "trump of a new election?" What do you think of a new
election's having " exactly all the influence" of men in places? What say you
to the "Election Ball" at which " republicans bleed at every pore?" -- What
think you, now, of, "ladies and gentlemen this is Republicanism?" What do you
think of the people's being "hauled about by a federal windlass?" Of "
considence in the people, the only basis, on which a republic can rest?" Of the
" outs and ins and that the outs wish to be in?" What say you, to "rational
freedom's being turned into slavery unchangeable, by delusive measures?" Of the
"Sovereignty of the people WHICH ALWAYS RESTS ON UNBIASSED ELECTIONS!!!" What
say you to "ANOTHER ELECTIONEERING DELUSION"?!!! See preface -- also pages 37
-- 38 -- 42 -- 43 -- 44 -- 46 -- 50 -- 52 -- 53 -- 54.
Oh thou pure difinterested lover of liberty! thou preacher against imfluence
-- thou orator of the people -- thou REFORMER of elections in Connecticut!!!
Thou essence of CONNECTICUT REPUBLICANISM!!! How amiable -- how great -- how
wise are your "HANDY WORKS?"

When, Sir, I reflect on your conduct as it respects the peace of society --
when I view you exerting every "Lilliputian power" of your soul, to corrupt the
morals of the citizens, and destroy all purity of elections -- When I view you
boasting that you revolutionized Hamden -- that you drove the freemen of
New Haven before you as your creatures -- When I see you in North-Haven,
East-Haven and Wallingford attempting every base art of electioneering -- When
I hear sober people in those towns exclaim that they were peaceable till A.
Bishop came among them -- When I reflect on these things, I feel, alternately,
the emotions of pity and contempt -- of anger and indignation -- I feel that
society should arm against such a deadly foe to the dearest interests of
freemen.

But these feelings are speedily converted into those of an opposite character,
when I reflect how little you can effect -- how little you have effected -- how
uniformly your schemes, through life, have proved abortive. Then I am ready to
smile at your folly and insignificance -- to view you, on these electioneering
excursions, and on the stage, as the harmless successor of Dr. Willoughby, A
noted quack in medicine who has traveled through Litchf Hartford and New Haven
counties, peddling out for all diseases, his golden gout ointment.
when returning from peddling out his golden gout ointment as a specific for
all diseases. Indeed so striking is the resemblance that it is possible you may
hereafter obtain the name of Dr. Willoughby, on the same principle that we call
any great Philosopher a Newton: and that every company which you enter, will
say "there is Dr. Willoughby" -- and that his golden gout ointment, and your
oration on political delusion, will, hereafter mutually bring each other to the
mind.

And when my mind is thus quiet, I am really disposed that you should receive
some honorable marks of notice, as a compensation for your unwearied labors;
and for this purpose I submit the following project to you and the public. --
If the "American palace and dark vault" See Preface.
which you mention, in your preface, should, instead of being the "tomb of
American liberties," become a democratic hall, I propose, as a splendid
decoration, that should be ornamented with the portraits of Bartholomew Burges;
A quack in astronomy who predicted a comet in 1789.
Abraham Bishop an Thomas Pain. And, in future times, strangers will enter
this hall, and be conducted from one curiosity to another, till at length, they
will arrive to this venerable group of characters. -- Their guide will then
stop, and with a phiz and a voice not unlike those lately seen and heard on the
subject of freedom of elections, he will thus begin, "There, ladies and
gentlemen, is A. Bishop, Esquire county surveyor of New Haven county, and author of
an oration on political delusion, entitled "Connecticut Republicanism." -- That
is Bartholomew Burges, who in 1789 projected a new system for the revolution of
the heavenly bodies and predicted an approaching comet. -- The other, the
superior of both in talents, is Thomas Pain, who boldly published his "age of
reason," and thus attacked ancient systems of divinity. These three worthies
were cotemporaries at the close of the 18th century: and because the one
discovered an approaching monarchy and informed the people of their delusion in
defiance of all the great and good men of his day -- the other proclaimed the
appearance of a comet in 1789 -- the third, about the same period, discovered
that the bible was a forgery, and that the "age of reason" was at hand,
therefore these venerable men are thus honorably distinguished, and their names
and virtues transmitted to posterity, with a particular request that all who
handle there portraits, would remember to "KEEP THIS SIDE UP."

Oct. 1, 1800.

