ORATION, DELIVERED IN ST. PAUL's CHURCH, ON The Fourth of July, 1800: BEING
THE TWENTY-FOURTH ANNIVERSARY OF OUR INDEPENDENCE, BEFORE THE GENERAL SOCIETY
OF MECHANICS and TRADESMEN, TAMMANY SOCIETY OR COLUMBIAN ORDER, AND OTHER
ASSOCIATIONS AND CITIZENS

By M. L. DAVIS, Of the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY W. A. DAVIS, GREENWICH-STREET, 1800

Matthew L. Davis, Citizen,
We are a Committee, appointed in behalf of the different Societies, to return
you their thanks for your excellent Oration, delivered before them on the 4 th
inst. and to request of you a Copy thereof for publication.

Gen Soc'y of Mech's and Tradesmen. P. H. WENDOVER, C. CRYGIER.
Tammany Society. G. J. WARNER, J. MERCEREAU.


New York, 8th July, 1800.
AN ORATION.
Friends and Fellow Citizens!
THE commemoration of great events is an interesting and instructive
employment. Most nations have set apart particular days for the celebration of
such achievements as are considered productive of national prosperity and
glory. We have met to congratulate each other upon the most important and
distinguished occasion which occurs in the annals of our country. On me has
devolved the pleasing, though arduous task, of speaking the sentiments and
feelings of America.

WHEN these fair and extensive domains were rude and inhospitable wilds; when
the towering oaks, and lofty pines, and impenetrable forests cast around a
gloomy shade; when wild and ferocious animals divided the empire of this
continent with human savages, still more barbarous and untractable than
themselves, our fathers, persecuted and oppressed at home, in these far distant
regions sought for freedom and repose -- braving the inclement skies and
boisterous ocean -- struggling against the hardships, and encountering the
numerous perils of a new and untried situation, and perpetually contending with
the fury of a jealous, exasperated, and unforgiving foe. Vanquishing every
danger, and encountering every difficulty, by exemplary constancy, fortitude
and perseverance, they established the charms and enjoyments of civilized
society in these remote dominions of the West. Possessed of industry and
Knowledge, and inspired with ardent and manly virtues, their wisdom and their
labors introduced the various blessings which proceed from agriculture and the
arts.

AN unremitted series of misfortune and persecution, and an experience of the
calamities resulting from misrule, had furnished our ancestors with a correct
and comprehensive view of the natural and social rights of men. Hence it was
that the principles of moral and political rectitude became cherished from the
origin of our empire, and a love of liberty and attachment to civil order, were
happily blended together from the earliest commencement of our institutions.
Detestation of tyrants and an affectionate obedience toward the government of
their choice, were the original sentiments of Americans, which uniformly
possessed an equal influence in their minds.

UNSHACKLED with baronial tyranny and pride; delivered from all hereditary
aristocracy; strangers to those unnatural and anti-social distinctions, so
pernicious and destructive in their consequences, our manners, our laws, our
policy, commenced, progressed and ripened in obedience to the dictates of
justice and wisdom. Though subjects of a monarchy, the waves of the wide and
impetuous Atlantic rolled between us and the imperial person of our prince. The
splendour of his scepter and the halo of glory which encircled his throne, like
the concerns of foreign empires, or the tales of ancient times, amused our
imaginations, and might sometimes graify our vanity, but as we felt not, we did
not dread the ascendancy of his power. Our domestic habits were republican; our
immediate governments were principally representative. Thus humble, happy and
obsure, we then enjoyed tranquillity, and many a season of serenity, in soft
succession, glided over the American Colonies. -- We then retained an
enthusiastic affection toward the inhabitants of Britain; we boasted of our
common ancestry, and while remoteness of space could neither lessen nor destroy
the powerful claims of consanguinity -- generously forgetting the wrongs which
impelled the migration of our fathers, we cherished the most ardent solicitude
for the welfare, and the most loyal veneration for the person of the common
sovereign.

HITHERTO an obscurity only constituted our protection; as yet we were not
supposed to present allurements, or furnish temptations for the attack of
ambition: But from the moment our prosperity became apparent, and our situation
less humble, the eye of tyranny became fastened upon us. Those haughty and
imperious islanders no longer recognized us as their friends and their
brothers, but viewed us with the hateful jealousy of rivals. Then it was that
the ministry and parliament of England, inflamed with resentment, and
intoxicated with power, with deadly grasp endeavored to deprive us of our
privileges. They pursued us with merciless tyranny, and with unrelenting
cruelty exerted all the fury of oppression. In vain we expostulated: No
language however calm or conciliatory could divert them from their vengeance,
for their system was premeditated and determined, and their hearts were
steeled. At this solemn crisis we wielded the sword of defense: Upon the sacred
altars of Truth, and in the awful presence of the Almighty, we swore fidelity
to our country and to Liberty. -- The event is known; happy America, thou art
free! O my beloved country, how transporting is the theme, thou art
independent! Favored land of Heaven; nurse of exalted sentiments and heroic
sons, at the mention of thy name, the thrill of sensibility extatic rushes
through our frames. Well do thou deserve the enthusiastic attachment of thy
children. Inspired with thy virtues, and partaking of thy common happiness, in
the hours of difficulty and danger they will never forsake thy banners.

YES, our beloved country is now free and independent; no longer the submissive
vassals of a haughty and imperious power, we have acquired an honorable and
elevated rank among nations. -- Four and twenty annual seasons of prosperity
have passed away, and demand the effusions of gratitude to Heaven, for the many
blessings we have enjoyed.

FELICITY uninterrupted, and unalloyed, belongs not to man. Our day of life is
marked by a perpetual succession of vicissitudes. By turns it presents the
cheerful sunshine of prosperity, and exhibits the gloomy appearances of
adversity: Just so with nations. -- Empires, as well as individuals, are
perpetually exposed to the evils which arise from the errors, imperfections and
vices of humanity.

THE hostility and depredations of foreign states, the rivalship and jealousy
of contending parties, and the effects of aspiring ambition, are sure at one
period or at another, to present a front of danger which can only be
encountered by a happy combination of fortitude and wisdom.

THIS is the Anniversary of our existence as a people. -- It constitutes an era
calculated to inspire us with sublime and enthusiastic emotions. -- It is a day
which should ever animate our hearts with gladness, and swell our bosoms with
expanded and patriotic feelings. On each annual recurrence of this memorable
period, we should call to our remembrance those scenes of peril and of glory
which conducted us to freedom: We should recount to our friends and our
children, the repeated injuries we suffered, the numerous hardships we endured,
and the invincible constancy with which our soldiers conquered in their
country's cause: We should tell them how our little band of heroes, unprovided
with the conveniences, and scarcely supplied with the necessaries of war,
braved the summer's scorching heat, and winter's freezing cold* and vanquished
armies numerous, organized, and disciplined: We should remind them of the
arrogant pretensions of our implacable foe, and the inveterate resentment with
which they endeavored to subjugate America: We should unfold their cruelty,
and record how pestilence, fire and famine, were united with the sword, with
the intent to accomplish our destruction. And while we kindle in their breasts
the pious flame of patriotic sentiment, we should teach them to dwell with
fervent rapture upon the virtues of our illustrious generals and statesmen, who
in the season of adversity stood foremost in the glorious rank of saviors of
their country.

IN the moments of safety and tranquillity we are too prone to forget the perils
and difficulties which are past. How different is our situation at present,
from our condition at the commencement of the late war. Servile and dependent
colonies, we had drank the dregs of humiliation. Petitioners for clemency and
supplicants for justice, at the footsteps of thy throne, O proud and infatuated
Prince! was the majesty of a brave and too loyal people repeatedly insulted.

THE inflexible and obdurate perseverance in cruelty which marked the British
councils, taught America that her safety and happiness demanded an instant
dissolution of her foreign yoke. A conviction of danger united us in effecting
a separation from the government of Britain, and by impressing us with the
important truth, that independence was essential to our prosperity, hastened
the brilliant destinies of this western republic.

MANLY and energetic was our declaration of independence. Solemn and impressive
was the sound. It was the voice of a free, united and indignant people. It
displayed a spirit of firmness and magnanimity which no consideration could
divert, no danger dismay, and no human power could subdue. Speaking a language
more powerful than the eloquence of Demosthenes, more energetic than the pen of
Tacitus, it at once enlisted the hearts, the understandings and the generous
passions of the people -- inspired them with heroism and resolution, armed them
with invincible courage, and animated them to contend with undaunted prowess in
defense of freedom. Even after the lapse of time; when the tempestuous passions
have subsided, who can hear the recital of this interesting model of manly
eloquence, without feeling his mind and bosom wormed with the most elevated
sentiments and enthusiastic emotions? It was the capacious mind and nervous pen
of Jefferson, which thus pourtrayed his country's injuries and rights.
Excellent and enlightened citizen! Thou art superior to the voice of adulation!
Yet on this day thou shall receive the tribute of feeble, though well deserved
praise: United with the names of Washington, Montgomery and Mercer; surrounded
by a glorious constellation of fellow statesmen and patriots, thy fame shall
descend unsullied to posterity, and millions of freemen yet unborn shall bless
and strive to imitate thy virtues.

I perceive the momentuous events of this arduous contest passing before me in
a rapid, though interesting succession. Gloomy and hopeless at first: Black and
menacing was the cloud which overshadowed us. Surcharged with fury, the heavy
thunders roared, the sorked lightnings flashed. Calm and collected the Guardian
Genius of America, viewed the impending tempest. -- Though not insensible of
her danger, she viewed it undismayed. She knew the resources of her proud
invaders, and eyed their preparations for the combat. She saw their numerous
armies, their mercenary bands of foreigners, enforced by powerful fleets.
Appealing to the protection of an overruling Providence, she trusted to the
justice of her cause, and to the superior gallantry of her sons. Between
slavery and battle could there be room to hesitate? For submission was worse
than death and desolation, it was servility, degradation, and perpetual
unlimited subjugation.

'Twas then the battle raged --
" For mad Ambition forged the galling chains,
" Which Freedom loathes and man disdains;
" Then Cruelty, fell murderer, stood,
" Thirsting, panting for our blood,
" And carnage strewn the ensanguin'd plains;
" Then cursed Oppression, with gigantic stride,
" Spread desolation far and wide;
" Then harvests perished, cities blazed,
" And lawless Power advanced with arm uprais'd,
" To crush the hallowed fane which Freedom reared,
'Twas then --
" Our shield, our strength, our best resource,
" The mighty WASHINGTON appeared,
" And turned aside its vengeful force:
" When Perseverance shrunk aghast,
" And Hope's bright rays were overcast;
" When, paraliz'd and weak, our little band
" Of suffering heroes mourned, that soon their land
" Would groan beneath a foreign yoke,
" Their gallant leader, in that trying hour,
" (...) more than mortal power:
" He roused Columbia's energies once more; --
" Columbia from her lethargy awoke;
" Himself a host, the champion rose,
" He hurled War's thunder on our foes;
" The embattled foe astonished fled; --
" Immortal laurels graced the victor's head!"
SAM. LOW'S POEMS, V. I. P. 12. CAN this day ever be forgotten? Or what is
worse, be solemnized with stoic apathy and coldness? Immortal spirits of our
departed worthies, your bones are mouldering in the silent tomb, can it be
possible that your toils, your sufferings, and your virtues are forgotten? O
Washington, thy country's faithful, best of friends, the tear of sorrow for thy
loss still trickles down our cheeks, and can thy venerated name be uttered with
indifference? Or can the sentiments of liberty and justice, which thou have
cherished and enforced, have ceased to influence our minds? -- And O
illustrious band of sages, ye who planned and pronounced our independence, can
we insult your consecrated graves, by a criminal supineness toward our
country's interest and rights? To a degradation so unworthy of freemen, we are
incapable of submitting. On each return of this memorable day we will pledge
ourselves to Heaven, that we will preserve the liberty and independence which
we received from you, safe in our hands, and transmit them pure, unsullied, and
undiminished, to the latest posterity.

AT the conclusion of the late war, we were indeed emancipated from foreign
bondage, but we were threatened by a calamity still more perilous and
formidable. The imbecility of the confederation, which had been hastily framed
in a moment of difficulty and danger, now became manifest. A spirit of
jealousy, disunion, and selfish policy, already began to distract our
councils. The bonds of political fidelity, originally feeble, became more
slender and relaxed, and public credit and confidence were rapidly declining.

No sooner did the danger appear, than the Guardian Genius of America
interposed her protecting power. Again we behold a sage assembly of venerable
patriots; by them we are presented with a civil constitution more pure, more
perfect and excellent, than any which human policy has hitherto devised. Happy
were the effects it instantly produced; mutual confidence was revived; public
credit restored, jealousy, doubts, and fears were dissipated, and Columbia
again beheld her children firmly united by the endearing ties of political
consanguinity. This glorious event completed the establishment of our freedom.
By affording security to our revolution, it consummated and enforced it. It
secured our liberties by the solemnity of an organized social code. From this
auspicious period, we became free and united as well as independent.

HARK! the shrill clarion sounds! Listen to the warlike trumpet from afar: Be
firm and collected, my countrymen! We shall indeed feel somewhat affected by
the conflict, but the dreadful tempest shall not reach our peaceful shores.
Europe is convulsed to the center; her sons are destined to suffer and to
bleed. It is France, that with the strength of Hercules, and the inflexible
perseverance of the fabled Antaeus, is combatting with the oppressors of
mankind. She had not yet been guilty of those enormities which afterward
disgraced a revolution so exalted and noble in its origin. Could our
sensibility then withhold the effusions of sympathy toward a people struggling
for the attainment of liberty? Could we feel wholly indifferent toward a
contest in its commencement so congenial with our own? -- No: The love of
freedom so ardent in our breasts animated us with enthusiastic emotions. If our
feelings were mistaken, they sprung from a pure, exalted and amiable source.
Our attachment to the French was sentimental and not national; it was directed
toward the principles of justice, and did not arise from a servile partiality
toward that people. Friendship and affection are sentiments wholly individual,
and cannot, should not exist in the intercourse between nations. Upon this
subject let us profit by the lessons of experience. The depredations upon our
commerce may not be unproductive of benefit: They may serve as a beacon to
guide us in our future connection with foreign nations. We are not again to be
reminded of the fate of Switzerland and of Venice. But let me pass over these
disgraceful acts, and turn to a prospect more pleasing. -- We will indulge a
hope that negotiation will forbid the sanguinary streams to flow; and be it
hereafter our universal practice, to treat all mankind as enemies in war -- in
peace as friends.

SEPARATED from Europe by the vast and extensive boundary of the Atlantic, why
should we join in her disputes, or participate in her quarrels? With almost
equal propriety might we engage in the wandering excursions of the Arabs, or
unite in some rash crusade against the infidels at Mecca or at Palestine. True
to justice and to ourselves: Firm and united -- we are invincible* In contests
for supremacy, in imaginary balances of power, we have no interest and no
share. To us it is indifferent whether France or Germany becomes the posessor
of the Netherlands: whether the Rhine or Danube; the Alps or the Appenines are
marked as the boundaries of national territory: whether the Crescent or the
Imperial Eagle waves proudly triumphant over the walls of Malta or of Belgrade.
Separated from the infatuated folly and mad ambition which perpetually
distracts and convulses the empires of Europe, let us rise superior to the
dazzling and meretricious attractions of false glory, and pursue felicity in
the aimable paths of equity and freedom.

WE are free, prosperous and independent, but let us not slumber in security. A
vigilant attention to our interests is essential to the preservation of our
happiness, and it is necessary that we should always be prepared to avert the
dangers which surround us.

INDEPENDENCE, union, and a constitution combining sufficient energy, with the
spirit and principle of freedom -- these, my countrymen, are our cardinal,
political blessings. Let us not vainly imagine that the preservation of
privileges, so inestimable, require no care, deliberation and exertion. Be
assured that they impose upon us all the most sacred and important duties. It
should be our firm and steady determination to continue independent, not only
in name, but in reality.

FOREIGN influence is the most dangerous and irreconcilable foe to our
independence. Let us beware how we form connections with any of the powers of
Europe. Europeans are not our friends. They are jealous of our liberty and
rising greatness: They consider themselves as our superiors in every physical
and intellectual endowment. Even their philosophers -- their Raynals and their
Buffons have asserted; that not only the inferior animals and plants, but even
the men of the old world, have degenerated upon their introduction into the
new. Haughty and imperious Europeans! From us shall ye receive the sacred
rights of hospitality, but the day has come, in which you shall no longer
interfere in our concerns. Approach not with hostile intention! Our hearts beat
high with a love of freedom and our country; and we will drive each rash
invader with ignominy from our shores. Then tell us no longer of the party of
Fance or of England! Where are the wretched miscreants? If the accursed sin has
existed among us, remove the fatal stain! wipe off the foul disgrace! From
henceforward let the sacred fountain of representation be relieved from the
polluted poison of European infection. Upon this solemn day, O citizens of
America, let us resolve to cultivate and cherish a national character, worthy
of our country and peculiar to ourselves. Let our manners be domestic, and none
but rightful citizens be permitted to unite in our measures, or influence our
debates. Delivered from the influence of foreign factions, we shall enjoy the
sweets of repose, afford an honorable character to our country, and perpetuate
our liberty, prosperity and independence.

WHILE we are jealous of the intrigues of Europeans, let us cultivate harmony,
friendship and affection among ourselves. These United States constitute one
country, and one republic. Beware of local parties, interests and divisions.
Beware of geographical distinctions. The extremities of Georgia, and of
New Hampshire, are equally component parts of our extensive empire. Connected
by the most endearing ties, let us cherish a constant intercourse of love, and
regarding each other as the faithful members of one happy family, let our union
be co-existent with our independence.

UNITE a love of liberty, with a love of social order and representative
government. Our civil constitution confers immortal honor upon the discernment
of its founders. Cherish and preserve it, for it is truly worthy of our most
ardent solicitude and attachment. Cultivate sound political maxims, and blend
them with an unconquerable spirit of rational freedom. 'Liberty can never
flourish, unless ascertained and protected by just and equitable laws:
Profiting by the lessons of experience, may we never sacrifice our felicity to
splendor, or deviate from virtue, in pursuit of the alluring follies of
ambition. Let us be true to ourselves, and let affection to our country be the
most active emotion of our hearts. So shall that independence which we this day
celebrate, continue the blessing of millions yet unborn. The name of America,
rising superior to the tarnished fame and fading luster of Rome or Athens, will
stand foremost in the annals of history, and the mild glories of an empire,
shining with celestial splendor, shall continue the inheritance of an
enlightened and happy people, while the loud sounding cataracts of Niagara are
heard to roar, and the mighty waters of the Mississippi and St. Laurence, roll
in opposite directions, to encompass the land of the free.

FINIS
ODE FOR The Fourth of July, 1800.
BY SAMUEL LOW.
[Sung after the delivery of the preceding Oration]

AGAIN the signal day,
To freemen ever dear,
Whose advent prompts our lay,
Whose dawn our hearts can cheer,
Returns to keep the flame alive
Which warms the patriot's breast,
The love of freedom to revive,
And greet Columbia blessed
CHORUS.
Columbia see thy day star rise.
Thy shores to re-illume,
To cheer the captive's eyes,
And scatter slav'ry's gloom!
Hail, memorable day!
Which saw a nation born:
Oh, may the orient ray
Which ushers in thy morn;
Our fair horizon never see,
With clouds and storms overcast;
But greet Columbia great and free,
While time and freedom last!
CHORUS, etc.

Once war's infernal yell
Resounded through our shore,
Then Freedom's champions fell,
An drenched the soil in gore:
Then Tyranny's remorseless band
Our birthright strove to wrest,
And Horror, over a groaning land,
Waved high his gorgon crest.
CHORUS, etc.

Her bolt Medusa hurled;
Tisiphone her brand;
And over half a world
Bellona stretched her hand;
The Hydra Tyranny uprear'd
His many-headed form*
His banners died in blood appeared,
Amid the raging storm!
CHORUS, etc.

But WASHINGTON arose,
Invincible in fight;
His sanguinary foes
Soon withered at his sight;
He knew on Danger's neck to ride,
(...) he took the field;
For Liberty was at his side,
And Justice was his shield.
CHORUS, etc.

Oh, dear departed chief!
Whose name a world reveres,
Our hearts are pierced with grief,
Our eyes overflow with tears,
That on this glorious day's return
Thy presence, never more
Shall make these patriot bosoms burn
Which now thy death deplore.
CHORUS, etc.

Illustrious, honored name!
Admired, beloved, adored!
Whose nobly purchased fame
Has so sublimely soared:
Oh, if thy country's blessings prove
Secure as thy renown,
The power alone who reigns above
Can cast those blessings down!
CHORUS, etc.

Columbians! hail the day
Which made those blessings yours,
And glad thanksgivings pay,
That freedom still endures,
That no ambitious, vengeful band,
Now makes the battle roar,
No spoiler's desolating hand
Afflicts your country more.
CHORUS, etc.

The trumpets clangors cease,
The fiends of war are dumb,
The gentle reign of peace
And happiness has come;
Beneath our vine and fig tree's shade,
Unawed by foreign foes,
Of no terrestrial power afraid,
Columbia's sons repose.
CHORUS, etc.

Oh, speed the halcyon reign
Of Liberty and love,
Just Heaven! let man again,
The bliss of Eden prove;
When swords to ploughshares shall be beat,
When pruners wield the spear,
And lambs with softened lions meet,
Insensible to fear.
CHORUS, etc.

When Virtue's sacred voice
Again shall be revered,
And Mercy shall rejoice
The wretch who Justice feared;
Shall, with a smile cherubic, tell
The prisoner he is free,
Bid slavery seek its native bell,
And Tyrants bow the knee!
CHORUS, etc.

When manacles no more
Shall human limbs corrode*
Or stripes they long have bore
Our fellow beings goad;
Or cruelty the bosom rend,
Which bleeds at every pore,
But man shall be of man the friend,
And give oppression over.
CHORUS, etc.

Hall, Freedom, heavenly fair!
Without thee life is pain,
And men the image bear
Of Deity, in vain:
Soon may thy piercing ray explore
The horrors of the mine,
And break the galley captive's our
With energy divine!
CHORUS, etc.

This day Columbia's race
Enjoy thy genial light;
Ah, never may thy face
Look less serenely bright!
On Error's night more lucid shine,
While time rolls on his stream,
'Till worlds acknowledge how divine
Is this delightful theme!
CHORUS.
Columbia! see thy day star rise,
Thy shores to re-illume,
To cheer the captive's eyes,
And scatter slav'ry's gloom!

