The FARMER OF NEW JERSEY; OR, A Picture of Domestic Life. A TALE. By the
Translator of Buonaparte's Campaign, author of Ferdinand and Elizabeth, etc.
etc.

-- Such tales as these
Hold to the world a picture of itself;
The sympathies of love, and friendship dear,
With all the social offspring of the heart.
THOMSON. NEW YORK: FURMAN AND LOUDON'S TYPE. 1800

District of New York, ss.
L.S.
BE IT REMEMBERED, That on the seventeenth day of December, in the twenty-fifth
year of the Independence of the United States of America, Furman and Loudon, of
the said District, have deposited in this office the title of a book, the right
whereof they claim as proprietors, in the words following, to wit: The Farmer
of New Jersey; or, A Picture of Domestic Life. A Tale. By the translator of
Buonaparte's Campaign, author of Ferdinand and Elizabeth, etc. etc. IN
CONFORMITY to the act of the Congress of the United States, entitled "An act
for the encouragement of learning by securing the copies of Maps, Charts and
Books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times therein
mentioned."

EDWARD DUNSCOMB,
Clerk of the District of New York.
Advertisement.
In this little tale the reader must not look for haunted forests, or enchanted
castles, but the exhibition of such scenes as bring before the heart the images
of its own feelings. Its sentiments have been enforced by nature, and not
supplied by meditation.

JOHN DAVIS.
New York, Dec. 7, 1800.
THE FARMER OF NEW JERSEY; OR, A Picture of Domestic Life.
AFTER a youth spent in contributing to establish the Independence of my
country, I retired with my family to a little farm in New Jersey, that had
descended to me from my forefathers. It was a pleasant spot of twenty-five
acres, situated on the Hudson, and having a range of salt meadows behind, on
which I fed my cattle.

My wife was a thrifty, notable woman, who baked her own bread, and was so
often in the kitchen, that it might be said, she cooked her own dinner; but,
otherwise, much the lady, without having had the originality of her character
smoothed into insipidity by modern refinement. If she had any failing, it was a
headstrong attachment to the French Nation and its government. Deborah was a
politician, and in her wisdom declared that America would never flourish till
she entered into a treaty offensive and defensive with France.

My children were healthy, comely and dutiful. Of my two daughters -- Eliza,
now seventeen, possessed every beauty and elegance of form, while Serena, about
two years younger, was obviously rising into symmetry and grace.

In their tempers, Eliza was lofty and often impetuous; Serena of a mild and
placid equability. Eliza could not restrain the emotions of passion; Serena
repressed them with a tear. Both were formed for tenderness, and loved one
another sincerely.

My son, a promising lad, was ingenuous to a fault. If not distinguished by the
brilliancy of his talents or seize, he was eminent for the warmth and
sympathy of his heart; and my ambition was not to behold him a great but
virtuous character in life. Yet his mind was susceptible of literary culture.
He carried his dinner with him to school before he was breeched, and took
delight in disputing with his sisters on the intricacies of the English Grammar.

My oldest neighbors, were Parson Bartholomew, and Farmer Haystack. The Parson
was a worthy man, who enjoyed the reputation of rearing the best pork in the
parish. It was rumoured, but I know not with what truth, that he took less care
of his flock than his swine, but I think it is a justice I owe his memory to
affirm that, when his pigs did not employ his mind, he made an excellent Sermon.

Farmer Haystack and his family were good, sleek headed folks who slept well of
nights. No cares disturbed the old man's sensibility, but a shower of rain when
his hay was making, or some quadruped breaking through his fence.

As he lived within a stone's-throw of our house, we necessarily became
acquainted, and the state of the weather, the price of horseflesh, together
with the health of the village, and the changing of its schoolmaster, furnished
my guest with a source of inexhaustible conversation. This new schoolmaster, he
would say, makes a dozen that we have had since last Michaelmas was two years.
I would send my little boy Jack to him when he gets out of his coats, for I
hear for certain sure he is a man of larning. But it hurts a boy's genus to
have so many masters, and Bill has now almost got through his letters.

Such was the tenor of Farmer Haystack's discourse, and his eldest son was
scarcely superior in seize to his father. Yet as he was a loquacious kind
of fellow, and would fight any man that spoke disrespectfully of the French
government; my wife was not only blind to his defects, but admitted his
addresses to the soft and sensible Serena. For my part, I could never listen
with any temper to the inunity of his discourse, or behold, without disgust the
distorted muscles of his vulgar countenance; but I was awed into submission by
Dorothy, who, when politics came uppermost in her mind, was like one possessed.

As Farmer Haystack was scarcely rational, and Parson Bartholomew ever
delighting his fancy with visions of spare-ribs and hind-quarters, I should
have been badly off for neighbors, had not Colonel Brandywine, the friend and
fellow soldier of my youth, come to settle with his family on a neck of land
near my dwelling.

My daughters congratulated themselves on this event, as it brought them a
polite acquaintance in the two Miss Brandywines, who with their mother, and a
brother at sea, constituted the family of the Colonel.

The young ladies had visited the Southern States, and resided some years at
Philadelphia; but notwithstanding these advantages, I could not discern that
they were superior in knowledge to my daughters, who, though they had received
only a domestic education, were well acquainted with history and geography, and
had read the best English poets. Nay, Eliza was, or affected to be, enamoured
of poetry, and had gone through the Iliad, with part of the Odyssey.

CHAPTER II.
MY old friend and neighbor Colonel Brandywine, kept his Christmas with his
wife and daughters at my house. It was evening -- We had drawn round a
sparkling fire of turf, and were amusing ourselves with a hundred innocent
pastimes, when my wife proposed we should tell stories, and my son Harry was
unanimously called upon to begin. Why, then, said Harry, I will tell you a
story about Pocahuntas, an Indian queen. Bravo! cried the colonel, lighting his
pipe a second time, -- the story, I guess of a squaw. No colonel, said the boy,
an Indian queen I assure you. -- Once upon a time there was a captain Smith
traded to Virginia, and bartered his goods with the Indians. He had learnt
their language, and was often an umpire in the quarrels between them and the
whites. He was, however, once betrayed into an ambuscade of hostile Indians,
and carried in triumph to Powhatan, their king. The king was so proud of having
captain Smith in his power, that he summoned the tributary princes to attend
his triumph. At length the prisoner was brought to the slake, and wood prepared
to burn him. -- But just as the fire was kindled, Pocahuntas, the youngest and
darling daughter of the king, threw her arms around the prisoner, and declared,
that unless he was pardoned she would be burnt with him. The tears of innocence
will prevail when the voice of humanity is unheard. Powhatan could not resist
the tears and entreaties of his child. His savage breast relented, and he
revoked the sentence of captain Smith.

Bravissimo! cried colonel Brandywine. Here is a health to the descendants of
the tender Pocahuntas.

The boy had scarcely finished his story, and received the thanks of the
company, when our dog was heard to bark, and presently a voice to exclaim, Why,
holloa here! you give your dog too great a scope of cable. There Is no coming
within hail of the house. Whoa, hoa, hoa! heave out there, heave out!

My son's voice, cried the colonel, as I am a living being! William! William,
repeated Mrs. Brandywine and her daughters, with emotions of pleasure and
surprise; nor were the words uttered when a youth of nineteen, clad in a jacket
and trowsers, and having a stick over his shoulder with a bundle depending from
it, stood at the door. His mother received him in her arms, his sisters wept
for joy, and the old man seizing his son's hand, said, William, dear boy, thou
art welcome home.

A good joke father, faith, to welcome me home in another person's house. It
was with much difficulty I found out your cottage, and when I got to it, there
was nobody within but an old negro woman, singing the Virginia jig, and two
children dancing to the tune. But old Sue soon knew me and directed me hither.

And blessed, William, be thy coming. But why this humble dress, and wherefore
this bundle? Yes, reiterated Miss Brandywine, how comes it, Billy, that you who
were formerly as spruce as sir Simon Snuff Box, should now be degraded to the
dress of a tarpaulin.

Why, Nancy, you shall hear. From a castaway sailor you cannot reasonably
expect much elegance of dress --

Cast away!

Yes, assuredly, cast away -- but before I trouble you with a detail of my
adventures, let me desire you to introduce me to this gentleman and his family.

I will do that myself, said the colonel. This gentleman is Mr. Cheeseman, my
most particular friend -- That lady is his wife, and these young women are his
daughters. Cheeseman, let us celebrate my son's coming with a military bowl of
punch -- let us draw our chairs round the fire, and, William, let us have the
faithful recital of your adventures. But I say, my cunning traveller, let there
be no hyperboles, no embellishments of your own, no mountains of sugar and
rivers of rum: you have not been twice round the Cape of Good Hope for nothing.
Come, my boy, begin your travel's history.

William now drew his chair toward the fire, and bowing to my wife and
daughters, began his narration as follows:

In our outward bound passage from Philadelphia to Joanna, we had much
boisterous weather, and the horrors of every gale were aggravated by the
timidity of our captain. He was an original being in person and mind. He was so
excessively sat that Jack Haulyard, our second mate, used to say the ship would
never be in trim if he staid so much abaft, for the old fellow was continually
in his cabin. We however got safe to the coast Malabar; but just as we came
within sight of the high land of Chaul, our ship fell in with five sail of
Angria's Pirates, a snow, a ketch, and a schooner. It was night -- the moon was
rising over the shore. 'Twould be difficult to describe the consternation of
our captain. Mr. Brandywine, said he, do you see those bloody pirates? What
shall we do? Fight them sir, said I. No! No! Mr. Brandywine, rejoined the
captain, let us make all the sail we can; there is no occasion to fight when we
have in our power to run.

This proposal was executed. We (...) up the helm, and ^ouded every stitch of
canvass to the breeze. But the pirates, assisted by their oars, came up with
us, hand over hand, and we had no alternative left but that of engaging them.
Our captain however was of a different opinion. When he saw the point a gun at
the headmost vessel, he tremblingly exclaimed, Mr. Brandywine, Mr. Brandywine,
I entreat you not to fire, or perhaps they will return (...) do us a mischief.
I answered this magnanimous hero as he deserved, by knocking him down on the
deck, and took the command of the ship into my own hands. I furled my
top-gallant sails, hauled up the foresail, and hove my mainyard aback, to wait
for the pirates. But they thought better of it, and after exchanging a few
shot, hauled up to the westward. I now gave the ship back to the Captain, who
during the action had put his head into a tar-barrel, and the next morning we
came to an anchor in Bombay harbor. Here the Captain, by his artful
representation of my conduct, procured me, not a crown of laurel, but a
dismissal from the ship. I was paid my wages, bound over to give security for
my good conduct, and severely reprimanded by the American Agent. But I told
them both to go to the devil, and as long as my money lasted, lived like a
Nabob* I hired a Palamquin, kept my Bibee and Huckabadar, and when the standing
part of my last guinea was gone, entered myself mate of a small ship that was
bound to Philadephia. We coasted it to Cape Comorin, and then made the best of
our passage homewards. But I soon found I belonged to a vessel, that I ought
not to have trusted my old shoes on board of. She appeared to be fitted out by
the parish. There was not a rope on board strong enough to hang a cat with -- I
never saw such a miserable tub. Yet, our Captain, loved her more than his wife,
calling her his dear Virginia.

As we approached the American coast, a strong gale blew us upon the Jerseys,
and it was not till the night, that we found ourselves upon a lee-shore. About
three in the morning, our ship struck, and as our boat was stove, there was no
way to save ourselves, but by swimming. The Captain was a good swimmer; but the
whole time he was in the water, he did nothing but exclaim, My poor, dear
Virginia! He reached the shore in safety, but like another Orpheus, looking
round at his Eurydice' a huge wave struck him in the breast, and nearly cast
off his life-lines. Three seamen and a boy were drowned, but the rest of the
crew escaped by swimming. As to the Captain, I left him in bed at a Cottage,
where he lay raving mad, calling out to those around him, to restore him his
Virginia. For my part, I made the best of my way homeward, and now forget my
sufferings in the joy of beholding my family.

We all listened with much attention to the recital of William, who sat between
his sisters, holding a hand of each in his own. His countenance was animated,
and his person, though disfigured by the uncouthness of his dress, graceful and
manly.

My chief regret in being wrecked, resumed William, was the losing half a dozen
Camel-hair shawls, which I had designed as presents for my family and friends.

A fig for the shawls, said Mrs. Brandywine, we have got you, and can dispense
with every thing else.

As the young sailor had undergone much fatigue, we had an early supper, and I
will venture to affirm, that a sweeter meal was never eaten since New Jersey
had been colonized. Good humor without coarseness, presided at our board, and
every countenance reflected an hilarity of heart. As to the Colonel, he could
not restrain his joy, and an unconscious sigh stole from the bosoms of my
daughters, while William related his sufferings. After offering a prayer to the
Omnipotent for his mercies, the Colonel with his children withdrew to their
house, and our own family to rest.

CHAPTER III.
THE next morning William called at our house, and politely hoped my wife and
daughters felt no indisposition from sitting up so late to hear his story. His
appearance was much improved by a change of dress, and I do not remember to
have seen a handsomer or better bred youth. It Is true that he sometimes
affected the phraseology of a seaman, but his conversation otherwise was not
without elegance, and I found him conversant with the branches of polite
erudition. He had been educated at Columbia College, and was designed for the
gown, but from some caprice had disobeyed the wishes of his father, to embark
for the Indies, whither he had been three voyages.

He found me sitting with my son and daughters at their studies. Serena was
studying Geography, and in the innocence of her heart entreated William to show
her the places he had visited on the map. I am peculiarly fond of Geography,
said Serena; but I never behold a map without reflecting that the countries
before me may contain dispositions I should like to be acquainted with, and
sighing that this will never be in my power. A beautiful sentiment, said
William, and to gratify it you had better go a voyage with me; the ocean would
be soothed into a calm at the smiles of Serena. Then, indeed, rejoined Serena,
you ascribe to me more than moral power. And more than (...) you are, said
William; but go on my fair pupil with your studies, and, in the mean time, I
will address you with a little poem on the subject. Serena smiled, and William
snatching up a pen, wrote hastily as follows -- his eye, the whole time, in a
fine phrenzy rolling:

ODE TO SERENA, looking over a Map.
Powerful as the magic wand,
Displaying far each distant land,
Is that angel hand to me,
When it points each realm and sea.
Placed in Geographic mood,
Smiling, show the pictured flood,
Where, along the red sea coast,
Waves over whelmed the Egyptian host.
Again the imag'd scene survey,
The rolling Hellespontic sea,
Whence the Persian from the shore,
Proudly passed his millions day.
See! that little isle afar
Of Salamis, renowned in war,
Swelling high the trump of fame,
With glory and eternal shame!
And behold to nearer view,
Here, thy own loved country too;
New-Jerfey! which produced to me,
Se pure, so bright a gem as thee.
Serena was much flattered by this poetical effusion, which called a blush into
her cheek; nor could I refuse it my praise. Eliza declared it was the sweetest
thing she had ever read, and my wife protested it deserved to be published in
the New York Magazine. William could not refrain from smiling at the last
compliment, which, however, was said with too grave a face to be ironical.

Upon my word, Sir, said my son, one would suppose that you had come from the
shade of academic bowers, rather than the lap of Thetis. You possess what falls
to the lot of few, felicity in writing an Ode -- which, in my opinion, cannot
be had from purchase, but gift -- and a gift per se. Why, Sir, rejoined
William, it is found that the efforts of the heart will always succeed beyond
those of fiction, aswe can always feel more than we can imagine. To say that I
derived a sensible pleasure from studying the maps with your sister, will be
readily believed; and my ode on the subject is not a cold production of the
head, but a warm effusion from the heart.

A happy method, said Henry, of disguising the passion of love in the language
of philosophy. I have heard Fanny often say she should like a poet for her
husband, but I never yet knew that Serena was a votary of Apollo.

Fanny smiled triumphantly, but Serena, with more than usual emotion, resorted,
You will do well, brother, to keep your opinions to yourself, and not pretend
to determine that I have no relish for poetry. I am sure I could read
Goldsmith's Edwin and Angelina for ever.

What elegant language, cried Henry, keep your opinions to yourself.

And no fault that I know of, cried William, can be found with it. A source of
pleasure is derived from the idioms of every language, to destroy which would
be to take away its greatest charm. Simplicity in conversation is to me its
most captivating beauty, and, therefore, in my judgment, the ladies of
New Jersey talk better than those of New York. As to Miss Serena's taste for
poetry, there cannot be a more convincing proof of it than her fondness for the
ballad of Edwin and Angelina; and Goldsmith, while she expressed her
approbation of it, might have seen his apotheosis in her eyes.

I know not whether Serena comprehended this elegance of adulation in its (...)
force, but the mention of her eyes was (...) by her into a compliment, and she
held (...) down with bashful lovliness. Henry (...) ^^^posed to show William
our farm, and they went out of the room together.

When they were gone, my wife took off her spectacles, and looking round at me
triumphantly, called out, A conquest! Eliza, I plainly see has won the hea^^ of
the young sailor.

Mama, answered Eliza, poutingly, say rather Serena. I am sure all his
compliments were lavished upon her.

Simpleton, cried my wife, where is your penetration. Did you not distinguish
that the compliments paid to Serena were levelled at you. It was in this manner
your father first made love to me. Yes, I clearly discerned that while he
commended the head-dress of your aunt, it was my face he was in love with.

Here my wife chuckled, nor could I refrain from laughter. Soon after my son
returned with William; who proposed to take him to New York. I have a horse and
chair in view to purchase, said he, and I wish your son's opinion of the
former. We will call at my fathers' and then proceed on our excursion. Though I
wanted my (...) assistance to repair the (...) in the backside of the farm, I
could not refuse so polite and entreaty. Besides I knew he was an excellent
judge of horse flesh, and not to be imposed upon even by a Virginian. I,
therefore, signified my acquiesence, and went to work by myself, while my wife
prepared our dinner, and my daughters dressed to pay a visit to their
neighbors, the miss Brandywines.

CHAPTER IV.
THE following afternoon my son returned in a chair with William Brandywine,
accompanied by a gentleman of about thirty, very fashionably dressed and
handsomely mounted. They had called at my house, but finding the family gone to
visit the colonel, they followed our footsteps. The girls ran to the window at
their approach, and in a few minutes. William entered with my son and the
stranger. Give me leave, ladies, said he, to introduce Doctor Lovell to your
acquaintance. He is one of my particular friends, who once was surgeon to a
ship of which I was an officer. The doctor was an excellent seaman below in a
gale of wind.

The doctor bowed, and soon by his easy, unaffected manners, made himself
agreeable to us all. His person was dignified, and his manners perfectly those
of a man of the world.

Your son, Mr. Cheeseman, cried William, would, I am persuaded, make a fortune
in speculations upon horseflesh. The most expert jockey that ever nicked a
horse would never be able to lay an anchor out to windward of him. What do you
think, doctor, of that horse of mine? Why, I think, answered the doctor that he
will run away with you. To appropriate your own language, he just now nearly
pitched you over his bows.

Pshaw, cried William, the best seaman in the world cannot hinder his ship from
pitching or rolling; and it is a bad navigation from the Kilm^s to this house.
At one time, I thought myself in the straits of Bassleman. But now I think of
it, young Ladies, I have some pleasant news to impart --

Oh, hang your news, said Miss Brandywine; Ladies are not politicians. They
never read the papers, but for the deaths or marriages.

It is neither, replied William, about politics, weddings or burials -- Coming
along, we overtook an old blind negro, with a fiddle under his arm, led by a
little boy. Old fellow, said I, can you play a country dance? Yes Mosser,
answered the old boy, a dozen of them, and immediately struck up the White
Cockade. Then you are the very man I want, said I, and proposed to him to take
a seat in the chair. But the negro, though he could not see me, said I was too
great a gentleman for him to ride with, and offered to call at my house; so I
threw the boy half a dollar to give him, and enjoined him not to fail calling
at Colonel Brandywine's: -- We may expect him soon, and, Ladies, we can form a
little dance.

The girls, at this information, appeared much rejoiced -- The tea was
hastened, and a trusty messenger dispatched, to bring the blind fiddler to the
house. He soon after was announced, and entered, led by a negro boy, who, he
told us, was his grandson. I remarked that the old man reeled a little in
walking, but this I ascribed to his blindness; and the young people, cleared
the parlour for a dance.

When the chairs and tables were removed, William led up the dance with my
youngest daughter Serena, who, though she had never received but three lessons
from an itinerant dancing master, exceeded both the Miss Brandywines, in the
unaffected ease of her carriage, and the graceful negligence of her steps. My
other child was taken out by Doctor Lovell, and my Son composed the third
couple, with the eldest daughter of the Colonel: of the young Ladies her sister
alone, was without a partner, and, to make up the deficiency, I took her hand
myself. It is true, I was not dressed for the Ball-room, and had not shaken a
foot at the fiddle for at least a dozen years. But I was resolved to do my
best, and waited with some impatience for my turn to begin. My wife nodded her
head in token of approbation, and whispered to Mrs. Brandywine, loud enough to
be heard, that if it was not for the nails in my shoes, I should dance as spry
as any.

At length the dance was called, and the old negro in a corner, began to scrape
his cat-gut. But never was there such discord; it was the mere rubbing of his
stick against the bridge of his fiddle, without the least regard to notes. It
was in vain that William remonstrated with the blind fiddler, and told him he
had played divinely on the road. The fellow was so drunk, that he could not sit
upright, and his face was distended with the most frightful contorsions.

Why, confound the fellow, cried William, he is drunk! -- drunk as ten hundred
top-fail sheet blocks; tell me little (...), the reason your Dady don't play?

Oh Mosser, cried the boy, Old Dady never play when he drink a little too much;
we stop at halfway house, and old Dady spend Mosser's half dollar in rum.

A sad disaster, said William, what, Ladies can we do?

'Oh! take the monster away, exclaimed Miss Brandywine -- I declare I am ready
to faint; the man is so intoxicated, he cannot sit.

Never mind me, Missee, said the old fellow; Me sit very well -- you Missee
dance -- why nobody dance? Orpheus play his fingers off, but nobody dance;
there good tune Missee, old Orpheus play well for true.

Orpheus! cried Miss Brandywine; never was the name so profaned; do brother
take the old wretch away.

But if I take him away, said William, what shall we do for a fiddler? The old
boy, when he gets his hand in, will, I make no doubt, play very well; however,
if you all insist upon banishing him your presence, here he goes -- Yoa! hoa!
up! -- So saying, he took the old negro fiddler by the shoulder, and pushed him
toward the door, but not with more reluctance did the first Orpheus leave the
shades, than this modern one the room. He resisted the efforts of the young
Sailor, calling out, Missee, me play well for true; while the crying of the
boy, at the violence offered to his grandfather, formed a Serio-Comic scene.

The Colonel, who had played in his youth on the violin, now proposed to take
the instrument, rather than the dance should be spoiled; and we contrived to
foot it away with much hilarity, notwithstanding our second fiddler was little
better than the first. For my part, what I wanted in graceful agility, I made
up by muscular exertion; and comforted myself with the reflection, that though
I was no great dancer myself, I had a son and two daughters in the room, who
could do the (...) for me.

The evening passed away much to our satisfaction, and it was a later hour than
usual when we repaired to our home.

CHAPTER V.
THE marked attention which the Son of my friend the Colonel paid my daughter
Serena, did not escape the observation of Deborah and myself; but, one
circumstance interfered to make us view it with sorrow. The Son of farmer
Haystack, from his long attention to Serena, had a claim to her hand; and, to
his father, who once proposed their being joined in wedlock, I had signified my
assent. Serena, who was ever happy when she made me so, testified no repugnance
to the match, and, as neighbor Haystack was a violent Democrat, my wife could
have no objection. As to the Lover, he was not remarkable for his
accomplishments, unless (...) My secret disinclination to the marriage arose
from the reflection, that he was not enlightened enough to be the yoke fellow
of the tender Serena.

It was, however, time to determine something, and, after a morning in which
William had behaved to my daughter with distinguished attention, I took the
opportunity in his absence, thus, to accost her before my wife.

It is, perhaps, Serena, not improper to remind you of the promise you have
made young Haystack to become his partner for life. I have too favorable an
opinion of you, my child, to think you can act the coquette, and encourage one
man with those smiles that belong to another; therefore, the pleasure you
manifest at the attention of William creates suspicions in my breast, that he
is not wholly indifferent to you. Tell your father heartily, Serena, did he
ever avow a passion for you?

To be candid, Papa, he has! It was only yesterday William repeated, that no
earthly power should hinder me from becoming his wife. It was in vain that I
expostulated, and told him another had a claim to me. He swore vehemently he
would mount his horse, and cut his rival Haystack's throat. To pacify him for
the moment, I --

What? did you promise him marriage!

I did, Papa, indeed! for alas -- I can never love, or think of another --

Then, cried I, with indignation, may you meet the reward of your
disingenuousness. Was it for this baseness that I undertook myself the care of
your education, and guided your steps into the paths of virtue and truth. How
sharper than the serpent's tooth, to a father, is the ingratitude of a
daughter. But --

I was going on, when a noise was heard without, and in a few minutes entered
young Haystack with a pipe in his mouth. He accosted Serena, who was weeping,
with the following address:

Yes, yes, Miss Cheeseman, this crying comes now I suppose from your treatment
of me. I told father how 'twould be. He told me not be imposed upon, but I
says, father, I Will just have the curiosity to see to what lengths the sailor
and Senny will go, and my filly foal against your old horse that is got the
bots, but the girl comes back to Jack Haystack. He! he! he! Come sweetheart say
you repent.

Oh, leave me I intrest you!

Leave you! No, let me alone for not leaving you. Jack Cheeseman will not look
quietly over the hedge while another man steals his mare. I say, Sen^y, thou
art mine. Thou art more dear to me than my house, my barn, or my new team; and
I would as soon think of shooting my best pointer bitch as giving thee up to a
Jack Tar.

I was about to interpose, when William Brandywine entered the room,
accompanied by my son. On perceiving the distress of my daughter, he flew like
lightning toward her and snatched the girl in his arms -- who, all dissolved
in tears looked up at him with tenderness and sunk her head upon his breast. It
was an affecting scene. We were all moved to sympathy except Haystack, who thus
continued:

I say, Mr. Captain, I don't half like that there custom of taking another
man's bride in your arms. We farmers are plain up and down folks and never want
the help of another to broach our new eider barrel --

I tell you, sir, cried William, that whatever be your calling, you are a
gross, impudent fellow --

Fellow, answered Haystack, I call upon every person in this room to remember
that this gentleman has accused me of sheep-stealing -- and that --

Begone, blockhead, rejoined William, it would be doing you too much honor to
chastise you.

Chastise! said Haystack, that is I guess as much as to say as how you would flog
me. Look ye now, Mr. Captain, though I am below your pitch, I Will fight, wrestle
or gouge with you for a paper of tobacco; or I Will fight you with a pitch-fork,
and my filly-foal against your broken-winded chair-horse, but I bang you like a
sack.

At the close of this speech, William endeavored the disengage himself from
Serena that he might spring at young Haystack; but, the afflicted girl,
anticipating his design, clung fondly around him. My son now stepped up to the
Farmer, and clinching his fist addressed him as follows:

Mr. Haystack, the horse which you are pleased to call broken-winded was
purchased by me, and therefore this last insult I must take to myself. I have
flogged many a better fellow than you, in my time, and I will let you see that
you cannot always bully with impunity. The boy, on saying this, raised his arm,
and would have dealt a (...) young farmer Haystack, had I not interposed my
authority. Children, cried I, restrain the impetuosity of your passion. Convert
not my house into a scene of tumult and strife. Mr. Haystack I will speak with
you in private, and Serena go thou and take a chair next thy mother.

Haystack now prepared to follow me, putting himself in a boxing attitude near
the door, and menacing both William and my son with his fist. You're a couple
of knaves, cried he, and as for you, miss Deceitful, you are an arrant strumpet.

Hold, wretch, cried I, this obloquy dissolves a contract which nothing else
could make me infringe. Begone, base calumniator, begone form my sight, and
know that thy vileness alone can shield thee from my wrath. He made no reply,
but walked out of the house, whistling some vulgar tune, and I returned to the
(...). A silence for some minutes prevailed, when William thus addressed me:

Mr. Cheeseman, since the late scene you have witnessed, there is no need for
me to say I am devoted to your daughter, and not indifferent to her heart. I
know not that you can have any objection to our union. My fortune is ample and
my integrity unblemished. I may have some youthful eccentricities -- but these
will vanish at the presence of Serena, like a mist before the sun. Your amiable
lady will I hope have no objection to me for a son-in-law, and as to your
gallant Henry, we are brothers already. -- So saying he once more approached
Serena, and fondly taking her hand, resumed his discourse in the following
words: -- But it is not impossible that my dear Serena may feel her former
passion revived at the appearance of Squire Haystack, who has so eloquently
expressed his love, by swearing he would sooner think of (...) his (...)
pointer, than relinquishing her hand. Say, therefore, my angel, will you take
Squire Haystack to your arms, or faithful Will Brandywine?

I will have only you, if Papa will consent.

Then by this kiss, a thousand times more sweet than the honey of Mount Hybla,
I hail you my wife elect -- and now we have only to send for the Parson to
splice us fast together. Zounds! I could dance a hornpipe upon the head of a
scupper-nail.

Hold, Sir, cried I. The consent of my daughter can be of little consequence,
without the concurrence of her parents' approbation; and, Sir, you have a
father yourself --

Ah! truly, Sir, I have, and an alliance with your charming family will be both
a comfort and an honor to him. Of his acquiescence I can have no doubt, and as
that is the only thing wanting, I am the happiest fellow on earth. But adieu
for the present, I will go to my father and acquaint him with my happiness.

CHAPTER VI.
WHEN William was gone, my wife haranged me from her chair. It would be surely
folly, my dear, to interpose our authority, where our sanction is demanded. I
now perceive clearly that William loves Serena, and is beloved himself by her.
Let us, therefore, promote a marriage, which promises so much happiness to our
child. Haystack has forfeited that claim to her hand, which was at first
granted to him precipitately. Serena, dry up your tears, for nobody will be a
restraint upon you.

I was going to reply, when I saw through the window, the Colonel approach with
his son.

Well, here, said William, is Dady, who gives his hearty consent to the match.
So, my dear Serena, let us send for the Parson, and get spliced shipshape. When
I take you onboard my ship, there shall be an accommodation-ladder got over the
side, and a carpet spread from the gangway to the door of the great cabin.
Sea-Nymphys shall guide the vessel, and wait upon their Goddess. But, holloa!
brother Harry, let us now splice the main-brace; do bring out a little of that
Nectar called Grog. Father Cheeseman your good health --

Cheeseman, cried the Colonel, this marriage between our children, will be the
cement of our friendship. A sly young dog! he never before told me of his
passion. But I approve it most cordially, and so does my wife. Let us,
therefore, smile on their proposed union, that we may put Hymen in a good
humor. I have known what it is to love myself -- this heart, amidst the tumult
and carnage of war, was not insensible to the tender passion --

Ha! ha! laughed William -- and this heart will be consoled on the bosom of the
ocean. when I think there is another, that beats not less for my return.
Serena! when the waves run high around your Cottage, will you ever think of
your William?

I will, William, indeed! Every time the wind blows, I shall sigh for my absent
sailor.

Come, don't talk sentimental, said the Colonel, but look to your marriage. On
Valentine's day, you shall be paired, and when your nuptials, Bill, are
consummated, I will present you with a ship to make your fortune. Come,
Cheeseman, bring your family to dine with me, and let us beguile the hours in
projecting schemes of future happiness.

The Colonel was scarcely gone, when the beating of a horse's hoofs was heard,
and we ran to the window to see who was coming. It was Doctor Lovell, who
dismounting from his steed, came into the house. The usual salutations over, he
addressed William with saying, Upon my word, Brandywine, thou art a happy
fellow, for I always find you in the midst of loveliness and grace. But, young
Ladies, the motive of my visit is to invite you to a Batchelor's ball, and to
solicit Miss Eliza, to do me the honor to become my partner. I hope the
Musicians will be better than they were at our last assembly.

If your Ball, said William, be a batchelor's Ball, I shall haul my wind away
from you -- I despise heartily the whole fraternity --

What are you going so soon, then, to be married?

I am, Doctor, you may depend --

But to whom, Sir, if I may take the liberty?

To no other, Doctor, than Miss Cheeseman* I am my dearest fellow without a
competitor in happiness, I --

To Miss Cheeseman, cried the Doctor, with visible emotion -- Is it possible,
that in so short a time -- that in only a few evenings -- that -- Yes, Sir, to
Miss Cheeseman -- the amiable and bewitching Serena Cheeseman -- the little
queen of my heart -- the rudder of my affections -- the --

To Miss Serena! exclaimed the Doctor, recovering from his consternation. Sir,
I congratulate you, and Madam, I make you my respects.

During this conversation, I could not but remark the emotion of the Doctor,
and the blushes of my eldest daughter, at the confusion he bad betrayed. I
began to suspect that Eliza had made an impression on his affections, and would
have kept her away from the Ball, had I not been overruled by my wife. The
Doctor accompanied us to the Colonel, and was scarcely less attentive, though
more refined toward Eliza, than William was to her sister. My Son Henry, also,
never quitted the side of Miss Brandywine, so that the scene wore the semblance
of innocent courtship. Time seemed to take another pair of wings, and the pipe
of the Colonel did not once go out from sunset till midnight.

CHAPTER VII.
ON Valentine's day my daughter's nuptials were privately consummated, and only
our old party celebrated the wedding. But never was there a more perfect scene
of sublunary bliss. William was almost giddy in the possession of Serena, whose
azure eyes never languished with more unaffected expression. She had scarcely
reached her sixteenth year, and might have sat to a painter for the youngest
sister of the Graces.

As William intended to embark soon on another voyage, he did not take a house,
but carried his bride home to his father, who presented her on the wedding day
with notes for five thousand dollars, and promised to William a vessel of three
hundred tons.

But five months elapsed, before the Colonel could find a ship to his liking,
when the confirmed pregnancy of Serena made him defer his voyage till the next
year. But with the coming spring, he began to make active preparations for a
voyage, though I believe he would willingly have procrastinated his departure.
Serena had brought him a boy* and was in a fair way of producing another.

However at length the day arrived, when he was to proceed on his voyage, being
bound up the straits. The wind was favorable, and we all accompanied him to
Paulus-Hook. The scene was too affecting for me to pretend to depict it. Serena
hung round her husband's neck, which she bathed with her tears, then gave him
the child, while sobs broke her utterance. William turned himself aside, to
conceal the falling tear, and the words of the Colonel faultered on his tongue,
while he grasped his Son by the hand. At length he stepped into the boat,
holding his hands up to his face, and it was in this attitude that we viewed
him recede from the shore. My wife and Eliza, strove to console the afflicted
Serena, but she only answered with the exclamation of My heart forebodes me
evil -- Oh! God! I shall never see him more!

In a dejected manner we proceeded homewards, and got to my dwelling; but the
departure of William threw a gloom on every face. Once or twice, the Colonel
attempted to relate a story, but grief lopped his utterance, and he could not
go on. Our party, therefore, soon broke up, for the cup of our life was filled
with the bitterness of woe. It is to no purpose the face puts on gladness, when
the heart is wrong with anguish.

CHAPTER VIII.
WILLIAM had been gone but a few months when Doctor Lovell suggested to me the
passion he cherished for Eliza, and begged my approbation of his suit.

As he was a man of fortune, talents, and inexceptionable character, I could
have no objection to him for a Son-in-law, and I knew that he had long been
acceptable to the heart of my daughter. Their marriage was celebrated with much
festivity, except that grief, like a worm in the bud, preyed on the cheek of
Serena, who would not mingle in the dance. The doctor hired a small farm within
a mile of our habitation, and, by his accommodating temper and conciliating
manners, was a great accession to our society.

My happiness would now have been complete, but for the dejection of Serena,
whose cheerfulness forsook her from the moment she parted with William. Her
only consolation was in her boy, who reflected the image of his father, and a
little girl at her breast.

In this state of affairs, the father of doctor Lovell, who was one of the
greatest planters in Georgia, died suddenly intestate, and every possession
descended to his son* The Doctor well knew the extent of his plantations, and
conscious that he should never be enabled to superintend the whole, offered to
loan part at an easy price to the Colonel and myself. It would be a great pity,
said he, were our three families to separate. Acquiesce, therefore, in my
proposal. In removing to Georgia, you will carry every connection in yourselves.
My plantations are on the Atlantic. The summer is rendered agreeable by a
refreshing sea-breeze, and the air of the winter is remarkably soft. Besides,
change of climate, and external objects, may relieve the mind of Serena.

The Colonel and myself agreed to wait three months longer for the arrival of
William, and if he did not return at that period to undertake with our families
the migration. In the meanwhile we found purchasers for our farms, and the
chief of our cattle.

Nearly four months rolled on without bringing any tidings of William. He had
now been gone nearly a year, and we had reason to expect him in half that time.
The dejection of Serena, affected us all; she never told her grief, but her wan
eye, and faded cheek, disclosed it to every beholder.

We therefore prepared to go. Yet it was not without excess of sorrow that I
left the habitation in which I had lived so long, so innocently, and so
peaceably! My feet clung to the threshold, and I looked with wildness at the
locust tree, under whose shade I had so often sat with my wife and children.
Oh! if these are prejudices, let me hug them to my breast, and far away be that
philosophy that would deprive me of my feelings! My wife hung down her head,
and Serena bedewed with tears the child that slept on her bosom.

Nothing remarkable distinguished our journey, unless it was the procession our
families made. As the Doctor had some business to transact at Philadelphia, we
proceeded thither in three carriages, and at that city embarked for Savannah,
where we arrived in ten days.

We did not stay long at Savannah, but went without delay to our plantations.
The levelness of the country before us, where not the gentlest acclivity blessed
the sight, made us sigh for our hills to the northward; and the gloominess of
the road, through one continued tract of pine barren, operated to increase the
melancholy of Serena.

The axe of the negro felling trees was heard from the woods, and conspired
with the note of the whipper-will to throw a horror upon the scene.

The sun went down upon our melancholy, and it was dark when we reached the
plantation of my son-in-law.

CHAPTER IX.
WE found our serenity partly restored in the morning, when I accompanied the
Colonel and Doctor Lovel to take a survey of the plantation. To form an idea of
our habitations, let the reader picture to himself three houses within a
quarter of a mile of each other, bounded by the Atlantic ocean on the east, and
lofty trees of pine and hickory on the west.

In the vicinity of our dwellings were extensive grounds of cotton and of rice,
on which at least an hundred and seventy negroes were employed. My heart bled
at the toils of the poor African before me, for I had laid it down as an axiom,
that the property of a master in his slave was an usurpation and not a right;
but I quieted my conscience with the determination to soften the rigours of his
bondage.

The country in the neighborhood exhibited a new and enchanting prospect. The
borders of the woods were covered with the branches of the dog-wood, whose
white flowers intermixed with the purple and luxuriant blossoms of the red-bud
tree, caught the eye from every part; while shrubs of jessamine, blended with
the honey-suckle, lined the road on either side. -- The feathered choir began
to warble their strains, and from every tree was heard the song of the
red-bird, of which the pauses were filled by the mocking-bird, who either
imitated the note with the utmost precision, or poured forth a ravishing melody
of its own.

Our first care was to cultivate our respective fields of cotton, which,
exposed to (...)-breeze, was not exceeded in its staple by any of the state. As
we composed three families living in the bosom of the same extensive wood, we
sought but little acquaintance with the other planters; nor did their
ostentatious manners suit the primoeval simplicity of our own.

But the absence of William was an insuperable obstacle to our tranquillity. The
only construction we could put on his not returning, was his being made
prisoner by the Algerines. This was the suggestion of the heart of Serena,
whose grief visibly augmented to the sorrow of her family. We did every thing
in our power to console her, by observing that such incidents were not rare;
and the accidental perusal of the History of Donna Mencia in Le Sage, confirmed
her in the probability of what we suggested. But her chief refuge was in the
composition of elegiac strains, and the following effusion of her sorrows,
though irregular, I have ever considered tender.

Address to the Mocking-Bird.
SWEET bird! Whose imitative strain,
Of all thy tribe can personate the note,
And with a burdened heart complain,
Or to the song of joy attune thy throat.
To thee I touch the string!
While at my casement, from the neighboring tree,
Thou hail'st the coming spring,
And plaintive pour'st thy voice, or mock'st with merry glee!
Thou bring to my mind
The characters we find,
Amid the motley scenes of human life;
How very few appear
The garb of truth to wear,
But with a borrowed voice, conceal a heart of strife.
Sure, then, with wisdom fraught,
Thou art by nature taught,
Dissembled joy in others to deride;
And when the mournful heart,
Assumes a sprightly part,
To note the cheat, and with thy mocking chide.
But when, with midnight song,
Thou sing'st the woods among,
And softer feelings in the breast awake; Put for awak'st.

Sure, then, thy rolling note
Does sympathy denote,
And shows thou can of others grief partake.
Pour out they lengthened strain,
With woe and grief complain,
And blend thy sorrows in the mournful lay;
Thy moving tale reveal,
Make me soft pity feel,
I love in silent woe to pass the day!
But every condition of life has its proportion of good and evil, and if the
sorrow of Serena afflicted, the tranquillity of her sister gave me reason to
rejoice. She was the mother of a blooming boy, and doated on by her husband.

Winter came on, but no tidings of William. It was, therefore, concluded on
that he was taken by the Moors, and Doctor Lovel proposed going to
Philadelphia, that he might make every enquiry of his mercantile friends, and
should our conjectures be right, adopt means to effect his ransom.

He departed with our pious wishes, and my son Henry undertook to manage his
plantation while he was gone.

CHAPTER X.
IT was a custom every Saturday-night, to assemble our three families at my
house, where we amused ourselves in telling stories, or playing at blind-man's
buff. The grief of Serena was respected, and we never asked her to join in our
pastimes, but the colonel was the life of our party, and at the age of three
score, taught us how to be young.

It was early in the winter, when we were one evening sitting round a cheerful
fire of wood, that the colonel proposed we should respectively tell a story of
some diverting tendency. I will be sorrowful, said he, no longer. Hope bids me
console myself that William will return, and his absence is a dispensation from
Heaven, at which to murmur is profane. Come, my life, Serena, cheer up your
drooping courage. That little rogue, Bill, knows not the grief of his mother.
He is ever putting coals into the bowl of my pipe, or unravelling his
grandmother's ball of worsted. My life for it, Serena, but he will make a
thorough bred Sailor.

I hope, Sir. Heaven will avert that such will be his fate. His father -- here
her rising sobs stopped her voice.

My child, cried I, be comforted. Billy shall stay at home and find contentment
with his mother. Assuage your sorrows with the hope that William will soon
embrace his boy, and that a prosperous gale is now wafting him home. We are not
alone burdened with grief. How many thousands are there, at the moment,
without a ray of hope to illumine the horizon of life. -- Think of the mother
deprived, by death, of her late so smiling offspring, the widow weeping over
the grave of the object of her affections. How many at this moment sinking in
the wretched hut of indigence, would envy us this fireside, and the comforts
yet within our power. The blast, that now rages round our dwelling, expires on
the trees, and creates no other solicitude but for the sailor on the ocean. Let
us, therefore, no longer nurse the canker grief. Lovell will soon return, and
we may look for happy tidings.

I think, cried my son, that we were wise to come hither. Our situation is
charming. -- Three familes confederated in the bosom of a secluded wood,
constitute a fine picture of domestic life. It is such a patriarchal one as I
have always sighed for, and at last obtained.

But Harry, rejoined the colonel, you do not much resemble a patriarch, who
lead a single life. Why, zounds! before I was twenty, I became a sober, married
man. That spare house of Lovell's reproaches you every time you pass the door,
for not bringing into it a wife. I believe Cheeseman and I must put our heads
together, and make up a match between you and my eldest daughter.

The girl blushed, and Henry's face was undergoing a suffusion, when the gale,
which had been rising from the time the sun sunk below the horizon, now raged
with a violence, that made the house shake from the foundation. It was on the
verge of midnight, but no one thought of going to bed. On the contrary, we drew
closer to the fire, as the impetuosity of the (...) increased, and the face of
Serena became pale as a ghost.

In the midst of an awful silence that prevailed throughout our party, Serena,
with distraction in her looks, suddenly shrieked from her chair, Oh God! oh
God! I hear the cries of distress! It is William! Oh God! it is William!

I snatched her in my arms. Serena be comforted. -- My dearest child, let not
the illusions of a disturbed imagination raise such terror in your breast. Be
pacisied --

Oh God! cried Serena, let me go to the beach! It Is William! oh it is William!
and she ran toward the door, nor did we think of restraining, but followed her
steps.

On coming to the beach, we saw the sea rising into mountains, and rolling,
with a dreadful roar, its waves toward the shore. But the stoutest heart would
have been appalled, to behold the sea breaking into foam over a long roof of
rocks, that extended in a line from where we stood. -- The moon was veiled from
our eyes by clouds of the deepest black, and what light she afforded, served
only to increase the horror of the scene.

Serena, with her hair loose and floating in the wind, was looking toward the
rocks, and with her hands clasped together, exclaiming, O! God! It is he!

We looked in the same direction, and as the moon became for two or three
moments disengaged from clouds, could distinguish a ship (...) upon the rock
over which the billows were breaking.

Some voices were faintly heard, but it was only Serena who assimilated any
particular one to that of William.

At length we could perceive a small boat making toward the shore, which at
intervals was lost to our sight between the hollow of the waves.

And now our minds were wound up to the highest pitch of hope, and Serena was
kneeling on the sand, with averted eyes and hands lifted toward heaven, when,
on a sudden, as the boat rose to our sight, a huge wave rolled over it, and
sunk the frail bark in the abyss of the deep.

Serena uttered a shriek, and fell on the ground.

We ran to her aid, and had searcely raised her up, when the wave that had
snatched the boat from her sight rolled a body to the shore.

She ran to the place -- It was the corse of her husband!

She slung herself on the body, and clasped it to her breast. She pressed her
cheek to William's -- she put her lips to his mouth -- but the vital functions
had ceased -- she embraced a breathless corse -- and fell upon his breast.

For myself, I stood fixed to the ground in speechless astonishment and woe;
but, my Son more collected, advanced to tear Serena from an object that stirred
up such emotions in her soul --

He lifted her without resistance in his arms from the body of William, for she
was become passive to his efforts; her pulse had ceased to beat: Serena was no
more!

My own heart was convulsed with anguish. To see the body of my child carried
lifeless to the house. Oh! 'twas past a father's bearing. I wept aloud.

My wife and remaining daughter, with piercing lamentations, followed Henry to
the house, who returned to perform the last office of friendship to William.

The Colonel was sitting, with his wife and daughters, near the body of
William. He read the kind intention of Henry in his eyes, and both made an
effort to lift the corse from the ground -- but it was ineffectual -- their
feelings overcame them -- they both burst into tears.

I went into the house. The grief of my wife approached to frenzy. She was
hanging over Serena, whose body, wet with the surge, was laid on a bed. Her
eldest child sat unconcernedly on one side; Mamma, said the child, is fast
asleep.

The passionate wailings of my wife, aroused me from my torpor. I feared the
consequence of her excess of grief.

To suffer, said I, is the lot of human nature, and though sorrow cannot be
represt, yet to temper it is our duty. The dispensations of the Almighty appear
often cruel to weak mortals, but there is unerring wisdom in his decrees, and
to repine is to (...) them. Let us, therefore, compose our minds in prayer, and
bow before the throne of that God, who knows when to give, and when to take
away.

CHAPTER XI.
THERE now only remained to be performed the melancholy interment of our
children. -- About a hundred yards from my house were two cypress trees,
forming a kind of arch, under which we proposed to bury their remains. It was
on a gentle eminence that commanded a view of the ocean, and hither Serena
would often repair with no other companions but her children, to indulge under
their gloom in the luxury of sorrow.

As there was no Clergyman in the neighborhood, I undertook to read the burial
service over the grave myself, and, indeed, I thought my connection of father
made me a very proper person. The coffins were followed to the grave by our
families and a few of our neighbors, whom, when I had read the service, I
addressed in nearly the following words:

"Though my heart and eyes are yet full from the mournful scene you have
witnessed, I submit with pious resignation to the event that deprives me of a
beloved child; for in what terms could I address that Omnipotent Being, whose
decrees my complaints should accuse of injustice. The object of my discourse is
to remind you of the instability of worldly things, and to admonish you of the
lesson afforded us by the premature decease of those we have just interred. Not
only every year, but every day, every hour, every moment may be our last.
Meditate, therefore, over the tomb of your departed friends, and in the
presence of their ashes, on the chance, vanity and vexation of life. What now,
in these dark habitations of death, remains to them of all their pleasures,
endearments and projects of happiness?

Closed are those eyes, that once sparkled with gaiety, and pallid the cheek
that glowed with the bloom of health.

My sufferings are great. With eyes turned to the fatal rock, my daughter
complained, nor could her father console her. I stood all night on the shore.
-- The moon lent its beam to discover only sights of woe, for the wave that
rolled to the shore, overwhelmed her husband in its rage. She ran to the spot,
and breathed her last upon the corse. Gone is my child, but it was God who
called her away.

"When the storm lifts the waves, I shall sit by the shore, and look on the
fatal rock. -- Often shall I think of my child, and often drop the tear; but it
will be the tear of resignation, and not of reproach, at the great Dispenser of
all things."

When I had finished my address, our families returned in slow procession to
the house, more composed I thought in their minds from my admonition over the
grave. For a considerable time they lamented the decease of William and Serena,
but at length the memory of them gave way to the succession of new objects, to
the growth of their children, and the marriage of my son with the eldest
daughter of the colonel.

The loss of my child was a severe blow to the feelings of my wife, but I
soothed her with my counsel, and endeavored, by my own example, to teach her
patience under suffering.

FINIS
ERRATA.
Page 8, line 10, for Jack, read Bill. 9, line 3, for Dorothy, read Deborah.
23, lines 12 and 15, for Fanny, read Eliza* 26, line 14, for Cheeseman, read
Haystack.

