A SHORT VIEW, etc.

A SHORT VIEW OF THE IMPORTANCE AND RESPECTABILITY OF THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE.

Read before the Philadelphia Medical Society, on the 7th of February, 1800.

PURSUANT TO APPOINTMENT.

BY JOHN REDMAN COXE, M. D. An Honorary Member of the Society.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, No. 118, Market-street.

February, -- 1800.

Philadelphia, February 8th, 1800. In meeting of the Medical Society of
Philadelphia;
Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to wait on Dr. Coxe, with the thanks
of this Society, for his eloquent and interesting Oration; and that a Copy be
requested for immediate publication.

Extract from the Minutes; NATHANIEL CHAPMAN* Sec.

To the Members of the Medical Society.
GENTLEMEN,
IN allowing this Oration to be made public, I am actuated more, from a wish to
comply with your request, than from any idea, that it is deserving of this high
mark of your esteem.

Many pieces of composition, may answer well enough for the hasty manner, in
which they generally are recited; but which, however, are by no means proper to
be committed to the press: because their faults are thus rendered permanent;
which, in the former instance, were generally forgotten as soon as made public.

As various writers have expressly treated on many of the subjects contained in
the following pages; it is obvious, that it is not to be regarded as altogether
new; and hence, another reason for not desiring to acquiesce in a measure,
which was by no means anticipated.

I however, offer these pages to your protection, under a full conviction, that
the above considerations will induce you to overlook the many errors they
contain.

I am, Gentlemen, with respect and esteem, your much obliged friend and
fellow-member, JOHN REDMAN COXE.
PHILADELPHIA, Feb. 16th, 1800.
A SHORT VIEW, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
THE unexpected honor you have conferred upon me, in appointing me to deliver
your annual oration, could not fail of being highly grateful to my feelings,
and would naturally impel me to the strongest acknowledgments, for this
distinguished mark of your approbation and esteem. But, whilst I avow those
feelings which your conduct has awakened; permit me also to say, I cannot
contemplate this respected assembly without regret, when I consider how many
gentlemen, better qualified to do justice to the appointment, are now before
me. I can, however, confidently assert, that there is no one present, whose
wishes for the prosperity of our institution exceed my own. Its present
flourishing state, cannot fail of giving pleasure to all who have its welfare
at heart; whilst the industry and application of its members, are the surest
pledges of its continuation and increase.

The difficulty of choosing a subject for an oration, did not occur, at the time
of my acceptance of the charge committed to me. Had I been equally sensible of
it then, as I am at present; nothing would have induced me to accede to your
wishes, but a thorough conviction, that each member owes it to our society, to
comply with every resolve in which he may be concerned, to the extent of his
abilities. This difficulty in the choice of a subject, arises from the
necessity of its being general in its nature; and yet, at the same time, so
connected with the science of Medicine, as to render it in some measure
tributary thereto. From this cause it mostly happens, that a deficiency of
matter is made up by a luxuriance of style, and fertility of imagination;
which, although they do not tend to the instruction of the audience; yet they
gratify the mind, by affording a temporary amusement. Under this impression,
and without expecting to add much, either to your instruction or amusement; I
must beg your indulgence, whilst I take a short view, of the importance and
respectability of the SCIENCE OF MEDICINE, as demonstrated by the extent of its
researches; and by the universal homage which has ever been paid to it, by all
ranks and conditions of men; even by those who, in health, affect to ridicule
and despise it.

This ridicule, the offspring generally of little minds, although highly unjust
and illiberal, we are not to be surprised at, when we consider, how great an
opening is given to it by the unfortunate disputes and dissentions of the
Faculty themselves. The interests of the profession are lost, in the
disgraceful employment of personal invective, or of malicious and slanderous
hints. The errors of individuals are rancorously rendered conspicuous to the
public eye; and this is often done without any attention to the voice of truth.
The unkind constructions, and ill-timed remarks, of fellow-practitioners,
cannot fail of being a great source of that degrading light in which Medicine
is often held by mankind. These unhappy jealousies and animosities, frequently
prove of the worst consequences to patients. We have seen them carried to their
highest pitch amongst ourselves; and, I fear with the most fatal issue to our
fellow citizens: for, as these quarrels do not stop here, but extend themselves
to the public; a diversity of opinion prevails, which ultimately undermines all
confidence in the profession; and prevents any application for advice, until
that period has elapsed, in which alone, the powers of medicine might have
proved efficacious. By this disunion, physicians lose the advantages arising
from mutual communication, and from the confidence which is acquired in their
opinions, by the concurrence of each other. Opinions, however, unfortunately,
are not regarded according to their intrinsic m^rit; but according to the
person from whom they proceed; and proposals, delivered with openness, are
often whispered abroad, and misrepresented to the public, without any regard to
honor and secresy. These quarrels, sometimes ending in appeals to the public,
tend still further to heighten the animosity, and widen the breach; and
generally injure the contending parties, by making them objects of ridicule to
the world: Added to this, they discredit the profession, and expose the whole
Faculty to contempt. They also may be regarded as one powerful cause of the
introduction of emperics; who diminish the practice of the regular physician.
When so little respect for each other, appears to exist amongst members of the
same profession; it is scarcely a subject of wonder, if the public should also
divest themselves of it; unacquainted as they are, with the many difficulties
attendant upon the practice of physic.

In all ages, much wit has been displayed upon our profession: A slight
attention, however, will show, that the ridicule has been employed against
physicians, rather than against the art itself. Various mean and unworthy arts
have been employed to raise importance, by persons impelled by necessity,
excited by vanity, or anxious to conceal their conscious ignorance. An
affectation of profound knowledge, or of mystery in every thing relative to the
profession; an air of confidence in their own skill and abilities; or a solemn
and stately demeanor; are some of the arts, which have been used to give
celebrity to persons, who could not otherwise have attained it. Such are the
arts, which have not escaped the penetration of the more judicious; nor eluded
the shafts of ridicule and humor. Hence, in most dramatic exhibitions, in
which the physician is introduced, he is treated as a pedant and a fool. But it
is evident, that here, the manners of particular persons are aimed at; not the
profession itself; which, from time immemorial, has been regarded as one of the
most useful and beneficial to mankind.

The great Hippocrates has told us, that The art of Physic is the most
excellent of all arts; and has also observed, that it is the business of a
physician to make new discoveries in science, or to perfect such as are already
made; rather than to spend his time in censuring or depreciating others.
Hippocrat. de Art.
This dictate, the result of wisdom, justice, and experience, the most
illiberal of the profession will not attempt to controvert. The dissentions of
physicians are, indeed, the greatest objection which is made to the profession
of physic; and may be regarded as the foundation of every other objection. It
is that which the illustrious Bacon advances; and even Hippocrates himself, who
says, When physicians are so much at variance amongst themselves, about the
method of treating acute diseases, that the same method shall be highly
extolled by one, and run down by others; physic itself, must of necessity fall
into contempt amongst the vulgar; who will conclude from thence, that
physicians themselves have no certain method to pursue, or that there is no
such art as that of Medicine. Hippocrat. de Ratione Victus in Morb. acutis.
This objection has been thus answered by the same great man; That this very
disagreement is a proof of the reality of the art; for if there was no such
thing as an Art of Medicine, no system of precepts, or rule of practice for the
artist to be directed by; there would not be good and bad physicians, as there
are now, but all of them would be alike ignorant and unskilful; and the cure of
the sick would depend upon chance alone. But as long as physic remains an art,
so long will one artist continue to excel another, as well in the goodness of
his hand as head. Hippocrat. de prisea Medicina.


But, in truth, the utility of Medicine ha^ never been seriously denied; for
every person who suffers pain or sickness* will gratefully acknowledge, (in
words, at least, which cost nothing) the usefulness of an art from which he
obtains relief.

Life, when oppressed with disease, is but a compound of woes. Health adds
delight to every enjoyment; and, as the end of medical science is to restore
and preserve health, every person is concerned in its improvement. Medicine is
as important in its object, as it is difficult in its attainment. -- It is
extensive in its researches; and presupposes an acquaintance with many other
sciences: and it demands of those who engage in its pursuit, an enlarged and
benevolent mind.

A desire of knowledge, and a spirit of enquiry, are natural to man. These,
therefore, should be directed to worthy objects. And what can be more so, than
the study and preservation of that most simple, yet most compound and
surprising work of an Omnipotent Creator! Or, what can tend more effectually to
raise our thoughts, to the Divine Author of its existence!

In a subsequent part of this Oration, I shall attempt to demonstrate, still
further, the utility of the science of Medicine, by a short view of some of
those virtues, which the practice of physic either does, or ought to inspire,
in the breast of every member of the profession.

If we take a view of the antiquity of the science of Medicine, it would
necessarily appear, to have been coeval with the origin of man; or at least,
with the period of his expulsion from that state of felicity, which he is
represented to have enjoyed in the garden of Eden. For, as by the curse, which
was inflicted on our first parents at the Fall, they were doomed to feel the
arrows of affliction, and the infirmities of human nature; from that period,
attempts must have been made for the cure of diseases, and the relief of
accidents, which devolved upon them by such a curse. These rude, but well-meant
attempts of each person, to relieve the distress of his neighbor, must however
have ceased, when some were supposed to have acquired greater skill than
others: to these of course, the sick would apply for assistance; -- and this,
in fact, we must esteem as the origin of the art: A knowledge of a few simples,
probably formed its utmost extent. I have said above, that the science of
Medicine must have necessarily been coeval with the origin of man: -- I should
rather have said, that those fundamental principles, on which the science is
founded, existed at that early period of the world, in as full force as at
present. We only excel our ancestors by the developement of facts; and by a
judicious exclusion of principles, founded in error, and in the belief of
preternatural agents and causes; which existed only in the heated imaginations
of their authors and their followers. Succeeding generations, it is to be
hoped, will improve upon the present; until the highest degree of knowledge
shall be acquired, which is compatible with the imperfect state in which we
live.

Medicine seems to have attained to greater perfection, amongst the Greeks than
amongst any other nation of antiquity; if we may judge from those writings
which have come to hand. We are not, however, absolutely to draw such a
conclusion; as, from the great difficulty at that period, of transmitting
knowledge to posterity, or even of diffusing it amongst cotemporaries; from the
want of some method of rendering that knowledge permanent; which, fortunately
we possess in the art of printing; when also we recollect, that a great portion
of ancient knowledge was, by the use of hieroglyphics, almost entirely confined
in the hands of their priests; we may be allowed to suppose that Greece alone
did not bear away the palm of science. This supposition is strengthened by the
probability that the Greeks derived their literary and scientific knowledge
from the Egyptians; and that they only extended it by the aid of letters.
Before the invention of letters, mankind may be said to have been perpetually
in their infancy; as the arts of one age or country generally died with their
inventors. Botanic Garden; note on Papyra.
Be this however as it may, the Greeks certainly have the merit of having
conveyed to the nations of Europe, the rudiments of Medicine, and of every
other art or science, at that time known -- Hippocrates, who has been called
the great father of Physic, is the first, whose writings have been transmitted
to the present day; and we cannot withhold our esteem from him, whether we
consider the morality and liberality of his works, or his numerous and acute
observations, together with the great order in which they are conveyed. But
(adds Dr. Denman) if there be any progressive power in the human mind, if there
be any advantage obtained in the practice of Medicine, by the knowledge of the
circulation of the blood; or of a more correct anatomy and physiology at large;
by the application of chemistry; by a more copious Materia Medica; by the
records of experience, or by many collateral arts which Medicine calls in to
its aid, we may be allowed to say, that Hippocrates ought not to be considered
as the guide of physicians at the present time, or as having limited the
perfection or extent of the art; but as an illustrious specimen of ancient
medical knowledge and practice: And if this observation holds good with respect
to Hippocrates, it will have more force when applied to all his transcribers
and commentators. Introduction to Midwifery.


Of the dignity of the profession of Physic, I shall say but little. It has
stood the test of time; and cannot receive any addition from my praise. It has
always ranked amongst the most liberal of the professions; and on the justest
grounds. To excel in it, requires a larger compass of knowledge than is
necessary in any other science. Mathematics, natural history and philosophy,
are nearly allied to it: whilst the extensive studies of anatomy, chemistry and
botany, are its immediate branches. A knowledge of the dead and living
languages, is by many thought indispensable: and to this we may add, that
knowledge of the world, of men and manners, which are highly useful to the
medical character; and which is naturally acquired, from an extensive
intercourse with all ranks of people. Medicine, notwithstanding the extent of
knowledge which it presupposes, is a science, concerning which every one
undertakes to reason most, and yet of which they possess the least information.
Who, that has not made mathematics his study, will presume to argue on the
abstruse and difficult calculations of algebra? Yet the more difficult and
abstruse science of Medicine is apparently obtained by intuition; as a previous
education seems unnecessary to qualify a person to embrace it at once, in its
fullest extent!

The science of Medicine is an ample field for the exercise and display of
genius. No profession requires a more comprehensive mind. In the other learned
professions, certain laws and statutes exist, to which every question must be
referred, and by which it must be determined; -- a steady application, and a
good memory, are here the chief requisites. Little room is left for the display
of genius, where invention cannot add, nor judgment improve; because
established laws, whether right or wrong, must be submitted to. In Medicine,
where no established laws exist, the case is different -- Every man must rest
on his own judgment; and it is his business to make a selection of facts, from
those theories with which his memory has been loaded in the course of a liberal
education. To effect this, the prejudices of youth are to be overcome. This
will prove a task of the greatest difficulty; as much candor and patience are
essential, to divest our minds of what, in general, takes such forcible
possession.

Were I here to take a view of the many virtues, which the profession of Physic
enforces on its adherents, I should extend this piece far beyond the usual
limits, and encroach too greatly on that time, upon which, I fear, you already
think I have too much trespassed. I shall therefore detain you but a few
minutes on this part of my subject.

An extensive field is presented by Medicine, for the exercise of HUMANITY. The
numerous opportunities of relieving distress, which a physician enjoys, must,
to a benevolent mind, be one of its greatest pleasures. The Faculty have often*
been reproached with hardness of heart^ occasioned, it is said, by being so
conversant with human misery. I most firmly believe (...) charge to be unjust;
not only from an acquaintance with many members of the profession, whose
enlarged and philanthropic minds are exerted in the daily pursuits of
benevolence and virtue; but also from the writings of the most celebrated
physicians of all ages; which are, of themselves, sufficient to exonerate their
authors from such a reproach. Who, after reading the works of Sydenham, a
Haller, Boerhaave, and others; will be hardy enough to charge them with such a
failing? A failing, indeed, one of the greatest of which a physician can be
guilty! Humanity may in fact be regarded, as the greatest moral qualification
of a medical man. It is the original foundation of the profession; acted upon,
long before it was regarded as a distinct science. Doubtless, there are many
unworthy members of our profession, (as is the case with every other) to whom
such a charge will apply. -- The loss, however, of one of the greatest
incitements for the relief of the sick, is the proper punishment it brings with
it. -- Habit, it is true, may insure a command of temper, which may be mistaken
for insensibility; but too great a share of sensibility, often renders a
physician incapable of that steadiness and vigor of action, on which perhaps
the life of his patient may greatly depend. Men of the most compassionate
tempers, by daily viewing scenes of distress, acquire a firmness of mind, which
is absolutely requisite in the practice of Physic. They can feel both pity and
compassion, without allowing themselves to be enervated and unmanned. Those who
are callous to every sentiment of humanity, affect to treat this sympathy with
ridicule; by representing it, either as hypocrisy, or as a proof of a weak
mind. There can be no doubt that it may be, and often is assumed: But it is
easily seen through. Real sympathy, will not permit a physician to act
differently, to persons in different ranks of life. It is even more careful of
showing itself toward those in better circumstances; lest an unworthy
construction should be put upon it. It is equally unfounded, to suppose a
compassionate and feeling heart, to be the effect of a weak mind. Universal
experience proves the reverse of the proposition; and that rough and blustering
manners, are more generally concomitants of a weak understanding; and
frequently are assumed to conceal from the world those very infirmities which
their possessors blame in others.

HUMANITY is that sensibility of heart, which makes us feel for the distresses
of our fellow creatures; and of consequence, incites us most powerfully to
their relief. Sympathy produces attention to an hundred circumstances, which
may tend to relieve a patient; an attention, beyond the power of wealth to
purchase. It engages the confidence and affection of a patient; which often is
of the utmost consequence to his recovery. A patient feels the approach of a
physician who possesses a compassionate heart, a softness of manners, and, what
Shakespeare has emphatically called, "the milk of human kindness," like that of
an angel ministering to his relief: Whilst the visit of a man of harsh and
brutal manners, makes his heart sink, as at the presence of one who is about to
pronounce his sentence of death.

CHARITY, the offspring of Humanity, is another important virtue, strongly
enforced upon its votaries, by the science of Medicine. The physician, more
than any other description of men, is most conversant with misery and
affliction. Happy the man who improves from this view of suffering humanity! --
True Charity does not limit her bounty to one class or description of men; She
regards the whole human race as relatives; and the world as her abode. At the
bedside of poverty and sickness, she is most at home; and here, her claims are
strongest upon the profession of Physic: From such a claim, none of its
votaries are exempt. They here possess the power of stripping death of half his
terrors; and of smoothing the avenues to another world. How high enrolled above
the common class of men, does the great, the illustrious HOWARD appear, when
visiting the gloomy mansions of disease and death; and, like a guardian angel,
snatching from destruction the miserable wretch, whose feeble lamp of life,
scarce glimmered in its socket; or, when restoring to the caresses of an
affectionate family, a hapless parent, whose anxious care and steady industry,
could not avert the iron hands of ruthless poverty! Let us view this
extraordinary man, (who lived not for himself, but for mankind) with active
benevolence, exposing himself to the most contagious diseases; unappalled by
the rapid strides of death; cheering, by his affability and mildness, the bed
of sickness or distress; and, like a good Samaritan, administering the balm
which should ameliorate the sufferings of the afflicted! Let us view him
ranging through the earth, to offer his devotions at the shrine of humanity;
and ultimately snatched from an admiring world, by that inexorable tyrant,
whose regions he had so often succesfully invaded; to be a companion of those
heavenly beings, whose actions he had strove to imitate in his terrestrial
abode. Where, in that anxious, awful moment of expiring life, was the
sympathising friend, to assuage the agony of corporeal sufferings, or close the
eyelids of this dying saint. Alas! no friend was there! Of the numbers, to
whom he had so often ministered, not one was present, to receive his parting
breath. That God, however, in whose service he closed his well-spent life, did
not forsake him in the hour of distress, when the mind's eye is fixed upon
"that undiscovered country, from whose bourne no traveller returns." The
pleasing retrospect of a well-spent life, upheld him in the conflict, and
enabled him to raise his hopes with confidence to heaven, whose gates were wide
extended to receive him.

I am certain you will pardon me, for occupying a few moments of your time, in
reading the following beautiful lines, on thi^ illustrious character; from the
sublime and harmonious pen of Dr. Darwin.

SO when contagion, with mephitic breath,
And withered famine urged the work of death;
Marseilles' good Bishop, London's generous Mayor,
With food and faith, with medicine and with prayer,
Raised the weak head, and stayed the parting sigh;
Or with new life relumed the swimming eye.
-- And now, Philanthrophy! thy rays divine
Dart round the globe, from Zembla to the Line;
Over each dark prison plays the cheering light,
Like northern lustres over the vault of night.
From realm to realm, with cross or crescent crowned;
Wherever mankind and misery are found;
Over burning sands, deep waves, or wilds of snow,
Thy HOWARD, journeying, seeks the house of woe*
Down many a winding step, to dungeons dank,
Where anguish wails aloud, and fetters clank;
To caves bestrew'd with many a mouldering bone,
And cells, whose echoes only learn to groan;
Where no kind bars a whispering friend disclose,
No sunbeam enters, and no zephyr blows,
He treads, inemulous of fame or wealth,
Profuse of toil, and prodigal of health:
With soft assuasive eloquence expands,
Power's rigid heart, and opes his clinching hands;
Leads stern-ey'd justice to the dark domains,
If not to sever, to relax the chains.
Or guides awakened mercy through the gloom,
And shows the prison, sister to the tomb!
Gives to her babes the self-devoted wife,
To her fond husband liberty and life!
-- The spirits of the good, who bend from high,
Wide over these earthly scenes their partial eye,
When first arrayed in virtue's purest robe,
They saw her Howard traversing the globe;
Saw round his brows her sun-like glory blaze,
In arrowy circles of unwearied rays;
Mistook a mortal for an angel-guest,
And asked, what seraph-foot the earth impressed? --
-- Onward he moves! Disease and death retire,
And murmuring demons hate him -- and admire."
Loves of the Plants. Cant. 2d. 1. 433, and seq. PATIENCE next to the above
mentioned virtues, is of the greatest necessity to the medical man. It might,
indeed, in some points of view, be regarded as a branch of humanity. The
necessity for the exercise of this virtue, arises from many and various
sources. I have already noticed a very considerable one, in the dissentions of
the Faculty, and the illiberality, which sometimes prevails amongst them. I
shall therefore here, only mention that, arising from the conduct of patients
themselves; together, with the contradictions and disappointments, to which, in
the course of his practice, the physician is subjected. The last, more
frequently arises, from too great strictness in his directions; which, if not
absolutely essential to the welfare of the patient, had better be avoided; as
the almost invariable noncompliance with them, necessarily leads to a
concealment of such a deviation. Hence, he is ignorant of the true state of the
sick; and ascribes to the disease, what is probably owing to irregularity in
diet; or attributes effects to medicines, which were daily thrown into the
fire, or out of a window. A physician should certainly be absolute in his
government over his patients: To this, however, few will submit; and indeed, a
physician has no just title of complaint, if his advice is not followed; as he
has no right to prevent any one from going out of the world in his own way.

Those afflicted with nervous diseases, contribute not a little, to call forth
the patience of a physician. Though their fears are groundless, for the most
part; yet their sufferings are real; and hence, to treat them with neglect, or
indifference, is equally cruel and absurd. The disorders of the mind demand the
tenderest sympathy; and the greatest skill is required to avoid neglect and
ridicule on the one hand; and too anxious a solicitude on the other.

As you must all be sensible how much the characters of individuals, as well as
the peace and happiness of families; may sometimes depend upon the exercise of
the virtues of discretion, honor and secrecy; I shall not enlarge upon their
necessity to a physician. From his profession, many opportunities must occur,
of knowing the private transactions, and characters of families -- He views
mankind under the most disadvantageous circumstances: Oppressed by pain and
sickness; leading to peevishness, and impatience; in place of their usual
cheerfulness and vigor of mind.

Temperance and sobriety, are essential to the character of the medical man.
You will at once accede to the proposition, on my merely stating it. Judgment,
discernment, and every requisite qualification to the physician; are totally
incompatible with a want of these virtues.

The high importance of medical science is obvious, not merely from what has
been said; but also, from considering its improvement as in some degree
dependant, on the progress of all the other numerous arts and sciences. From
these, it borrows many lights; and acquires new aid by their augmentation.

The science of Medicine is so extensive; and so limited are our faculties, in
attempting to explore the recesses of nature; that our knowledge on this
subject must ever be exceedingly confined. Perfection in this science is not to
be hoped for; the labor of ages will enlarge our stock of knowledge; but we
shall be forced to confess, that perfection is yet far from our reach.
Improvement is, however, undoubtedly in our power. Industry and abilities will
never want subjects for employment; nor fail to reward those who exert them.
Medical and Chirurgical Review.
In our new, and almost unexplored country; very much remains to do, in every
department of knowledge. The ample volume of the works of nature is open to our
view, and each votary to science, is loudly invited, to a participation of the
luxuriant banquet, which its pages afford. Your industry, and perseverance,
Gentlemen, will go far to raise our country, to an equal eminence with the most
favored parts of the globe. New and certain avenues to the temples of honor
and of fame, will here be lighted up, by the radiant torch of truth: Let me
hope, that many whom I now address; are destined to attain an eminence, as
great as Newton, Bacon, Boil, and all those other illustrious characters, who
rank so high in the annals of science.

It is a subject of regret, that the knowledge of medical science, is so
diffused, through vast numbers of volumes, and in different languages, as to
preclude a complete view of all its improvements, except it be acquired at a
great expense, and with great labor. In Europe indeed, this is in a great
measure obviated, by the numerous periodical publications, of the highest
importance; which monthly, nay weekly, and almost daily issue from the press.
Such works are peculiarly acceptable to persons engaged in extensive practice;
or who are remote from the center of publication. As yet, our country has been
backward in adding to the general stock, by similar attempts. One laudable
example has been set, and the important work is still continued with
undiminished ardour; and I trust will add, not only to the reputation, but also
to the emolument of its proprietors. The Medical Repository of New York.


Permit me, Gentlemen, to extend for a few minutes, this view of a subject so
highly interesting to us, as fellow members of the same institution. How
grateful must be the recollection of its rapid increase! Scarcely have ten
years elapsed, since it first sprung into existence, by the active and
well-directed endeavors of a few individuals; and already do we reckon amongst
its members, most of the respectable and eminent of the profession, throughout
the United States. By its junction also with the American Medical Society; it
has added the respectability of that institution, to the youthful vigor which
animates itself.

I confidently trust, that the zeal which has heretofore been evinced in the
advancement of its reputation; will still exist, to carry it yet further on the
road to perfection; when you are settled in your professional pursuits at a
distance from us.

I must remind you, Gentlemen, that the objects of this society, are more
extensive, than I believe is generally imagined. We are not to be limited to
the reception, or discussion, of medical facts or papers. We must consider,
that the republic of Medicine, which extends its influence throughout the
universe; and of which, we are fellow members; has a just claim upon our
exertions. The publication of Transactions and Memoirs, is, if I mistake not,
an important part of the intentions of this institution. The carrying into
execution this important measure, (in which unfortunately, we have been too
neglectful) will evince to the world that science is not confined to the shores
of Europe. Hitherto, our exertions have been very limited. Let us now endeavor
to render ourselves conspicuous, as a literary and scientific Body. Let each
member think that on his individual exertions, depends the honor of the whole;
and we soon shall see it rise to an unexampled pitch of celebrity and
reputation. Each member has it in his power to enrich the society, by favoring
it with accurate details, of facts and observations; together with the
histories of diseases, remarkable either in themselves or treatment; with
dissections of such morbid bodies as may come under their notice; and the
remarks and inferences, occasioned thereby. A judicious selection from these,
for publication, could not fail of soon rendering us known, abroad and at home.
Such a work would doubtless meet with a ready reception; especially, as each
member would wish to possess a publication, in the honor of which he found
himself so closely interested.

I trust I am not singular, in thus wishing to advance the reputation of our
hitherto flourishing Body. How honorable such a step would be, I shall not
pause to determine. I sincerely hope, due attention will be given to a subject,
from which we may anticipate such beneficial effects. We want only those
materials, of which each member is possessed; to erect a structure, whose
duration shall extend to the end of time; and whose beneficial influence, shall
pervade the universe.

The Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh, which now ranks high as a scientific
institution; arose from a beginning, small as our own. Its celebrity may in
part be ascribed to having pursued to a certain degree, the measure above
recommended; by publishing a judicious selection of the most meritorious
theses, which have made their appearance in that University. And shall an
institution, founded under the auspices of a school, where a candidate for
medical honors, dare not publish any thing, which strikes at the doctrines
there promulgated: Shall, I repeat it, such an institution surpass our own?
where, under the extended wings of our beloved Alma Matter; freedom of opinion
in Medical science, is not only tolerated, but even encouraged! Most of the
experimental theses here made public, I will venture to assert, are not
surpassed, either in merit or information, by those which are brought forward
in the trans-Atlantic seminaries. A selection of the most meritorious, for
publication, under your auspices, would not only extend the credit of our
society; but would also tend to double the diligence of the students; by the
pleasing expectation of such honorable attention being paid to their
investigations. Gentlemen, who come to pursue their medical studies in this
place; will be ashamed to leave it, without having it in their power to say,
they are members of so valuable an institution; whilst the difficulty of
obtaining a membership; will make them exert all their diligence and
application* to attain a seat so honorable to themselves.

My wish to see our society on a footing, equally eminent with similar
institutions of Europe; induces me trespass on your time, by recommending such
objects to your attention, as to me appear best calculated, to promote so
desirable an end. Seminaries of learning, like governments, have their rise;
their acme; their decline, and fall. The schools of Italy gave place to those
of Holland, and they in turn have been eclipsed by the superior brilliancy of
the Scottish schools. In the death of a Cullen, and the retirement of a Black,
a shock has been sustained by the medical school of Edinburgh; from which, it
will not soon recover. I may be allowed to hope, that the time is not far
distant; when the goddess Hygeia, in conjunction with the genius of Philosophy,
shall extend the same of our medical schools; and, continuing to illumine our
Professors, with the unerring torch of truth and wisdom; shall render America
the grand emporium of science, and the arts; from which the never-cloying
streams of knowledge shall proceed; to augment the mass of human happiness; and
to communicate their cheering influence to every quarter of the globe.

To extend still further, the reputation of our society; allow me to call to
your serious consideration, the propriety, of establishing a Library* To
expatiate on its utility, is unnecessary; as you must all be convinced of it.
-- It is true, the Medical students who resort to this place, possess
extraordinary advantages, in having access to the excellent library belonging
to the Pennsylvania Hospital; and to the public library of our city. -- But, as
I conceive the augmentation of the means of information, is the surest mode of
increasing, and extending science; I anxiously trust, that such a measure will
not be long neglected. The medical institution The Royal Medical Society of
Edinburgh.
which I have already noticed; derives not a little of its celebrity, from the
extensive library which it possesses. Such praiseworthy examples, will
doubtless meet with that regard, to which they are so justly entitled. It may
be objected, that the establishment of a library requires considerable time and
expense. From these very causes there is no time like the present, for carrying
it into effect; as we shall the sooner have to boast of its existence. By small
beginnings, great ends are frequently accomplished. We cannot walk before we
creep; neither can we, without a commencement, hope to attain, what each of you
will admit, is highly to be wished for. I am certain that all of you feel
disposed, as much as is in your power, to add to the reputation of an
institution, from which, I doubt not, you have derived both pleasure and
instruction: In no way can this be more likely to occur, than by increasing its
sources of information and improvement. Let me urge you then, Gentlemen, to
carry into effect, a measure long contemplated; that you may be enabled to say,
Our Library was instituted, under your immediate exertions: and, I hope it will
rapidly increase; as a testimony of your zeal and desire, of promoting the
interests of science and humanity.

I have thus, Gentlemen, brought to a conclusion, those pages, which I have
prepared in compliance with your appointment. If they have failed in affording
you either instruction or amusement; I trust you will nevertheless receive them
with indulgence, in consideration of your having made so bad an election. --
With every wish for your uninterrupted health and prosperity; I now bid you an
affectionate adieu.

THE END.

