A SERMON, PREACHED DECEMBER 29, 1799, IN St. PETER's CHURCH, Salem, THE SUNDAY
AFTER THE MELANCHOLY TIDINGS WERE RECEIVED, OF THE DEATH OF General Washington.

By NATHANIEL FISHER, A. M.

PUBLISHED BY DESIRE OF THE TOWN.

SALEM: Printed by THOMAS C. CUSHING, at the Bible and Heart.

A SERMON.
PSALM cxii. 6. THE RIGHTEOUS SHALL BE IN EVERLASTING REMEMBRANCE.


THERE is no passion more deeply and universally implanted in human nature,
than that of transmitting our names to posterity, and living, though dead, in
the affections of the wise and the virtuous. And great is the wisdom and
goodness of God in thus constituting such beings as we are; for this principle
acts as a spur and a most powerful motive to great and generous actions. It
keeps all the wheels of society in perpetual motion, pressing millions of
intelligent creatures forward, and constantly soliciting them to attend to
their various duties, and to excel in their several professions. It is so
closely interwoven with the love of our being, that it proves the source of our
noblest pleasures and of our keenest pains. But, like all other passions, it
has sometimes been perverted, and its influence disregarded. Characters have
appeared so extremely degraded, and so totally lost to every thing
praiseworthy, as to prefer, if we may judge of their feelings from their
behavior, an infamous to an honorable distinction. But, however depraved
human nature may be in the opinion of some, to excel in wickedness, and with
the view of being transmitted to posterity as singularly profligate, has not
been the ambition of many. Few have appeared so stupidly insensible to the
judgment of the public, as not to be moved, either by its praises, or censures.
It is the wish of the peasant, as well as the desire of those who "devise
liberal things," and who "by liberal things shall stand," to have a name and a
place among the living, though numbered with the dead. And although many of the
richest charities, and the most beautiful monuments of piety, have originated
from the purest principles of christian love; yet, shall we be charged with
ingratitude and want of candor, when we suggest, that others, equally
ornamental and beneficial to society, have arisen from the natural and pleasing
expectation of being remembered here, as well as rewarded hereafter?

To this grand source of life and enterprise we are indebted for most of the
conveniences and elegances of life, and for many of the most useful and shining
characters that have appeared in the world. The statesman, the sage, the hero,
and even the holy man of God, have experienced its efficacy. Indeed, this love
of pre-eminence, this vying with each other in the race of perfection, has
unfolded the most brilliant talents, and matured the sublimest virtues. It has
frequently checked the career of the wicked, when nothing else could have done
it, and made those, who would otherwise have been the severest scourges, the
most substantial blessings to society.

But, if this principle be so very powerful and beneficial, as it respects
things temporal, how much more efficacious must it be, when it embraces things
spiritual and eternal! We see that the objects of all our present pursuits are
short-lived, precarious, and perishing. All the agreeable and pleasing
prospects laid open to us by affluence, ambition, and sense, are but for a
moment in comparison with those of eternity. If, therefore, it be a laudable
desire to aim at transmitting our memories to posterity with honor, (and
certainly it is,) it must be infinitely more worthy of our most strenuous
exertions, to secure a title to those things, which "eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man; -- the things which God has
prepared for them that love him."

But it is not certain, that this future reward of the righteous, however
familiar the doctrine may be to us, is the reward promised in our text. For, as
the promises annexed to a virtuous life in the Old Testament are chiefly, if
not wholly, temporal, it is more than probable, that the Psalmist did not
extend his views so far, but that they were confined to the present life only.
However, as he saw that the character of a righteous man was so worthy and
truly respectable, as to command the esteem and reverence of all around him, by
"everlasting remembrance," he undoubtedly intended the most honorable and
permanent rewards, of which he had any conception.

By the "righteous," the scriptures often mean no more than a just man; one,
who is scrupulously exact; who gives to every man his just weight and measure;
and who pays the most religious respect to all his engagements. But the
character before us is much more lovely and excellent; it is that, which may
emphatically be called the GOOD MAN. In the verse immediately preceding the
text we read, "A good man shows favor, and lends; he will guide his
affairs with discretion. Surely he shall not be moved forever." "The
righteous," it follows, "shall be in everlasting remembrance." The gratitude of
individuals, and the applause of the public, shall transmit the name and the
merits of the person endowed with this most "excellent spirit" to the latest
posterity.

There is a great difference between these two characters, the just and the
good man, though they are often considered as the same. The former is esteemed
a safe and a respectable character. But what has the man fallen among thieves,
stripped, wounded, and lying in the highway half dead, to expect from it? Not
that he will pour wine and oil into his wounds, set him on his own beast, carry
him to an inn, and see him taken care of at his own expense; for mercy is no
constituent part of this character. Such a man, though just, may be austere; as
he pays, so he may exact, the uttermost farthing; he may withhold his bounty,
live to himself, and have no "bowels of compassion" for his fellow creatures.
But the good man is not only a righteous man and possessed of all his merits,
however respectable they may be, but of many more, even an assemblage of all
the most generous and amiable virtues.

But, to return to the rewards of the righteous. Our blessed Lord, through whom
"life and immortality are brought to light," has given all his faithful
followers the fullest assurances, that they shall live forever; not only in the
remembrance of their fellow creatures, but in the esteem of all the holy
angels, and even in the friendship of God himself, by whose example and moral
perfections they have formed their tempers. This is an "everlasting
remembrance" indeed, beyond which, as it includes everlasting happiness, we
cannot extend our desires.

And to animate us all to aspire after these highest and unfading honors,
though as social creatures we cannot wholly suspend our desires after others, I
shall lay before you the character of the righteous, or good man; on whom they
will all, eventually, be publicly and solemnly bestowed.

And here we may observe, that the first and great object of a good man's
attention, is the glory of God, and the establishment of his kingdom in the
hearts of men. Convinced of the intimate connection between vice and misery, and
of the beneficial effects of virtue in families, in states, and in the whole
conduct of human life; he considers it as his indispensable duty, and as the
greatest benefit he can possibly confer on his fellow creatures, to encourage
and extend its influence among all orders and ranks of men. Every favorable
opportunity he stands ready, and is most heartily disposed, to embrace, to
promote the love and practice of truth and righteousness. His desire is, to
enrich the minds of all his neighbors and acquaintance with the purest
principles of love to God and benevolence to man, and to engage their hearts in
the pursuit of every virtue. His time and his talents are all employed in doing
good, and all the good he can. Thus he co-operates with the dispensations of
Divine Providence, and conforms to the example of God himself, who has done
every thing, consistent with the freedom of moral agents, to arrest the
progress of vice and wickedness; to banish sin and misery from the world; and
to establish a kingdom of righteousness, peace and joy upon their ruins. And,
by a careful cultivation of this heavenly temper, he goes on "from strength to
strength," until he arrives at perfection; when virtue becomes familiar, and
its practice easy. And here we may observe, that, although the heart of the
good man is thus consecrated to God, and to the service of his fellow
creatures, we discover no symptoms of that rash and intemperate zeal by which
some have been guided, and which would annihilate the rights of conscience, and
stifle the tenderest charities of the gospel. For, although fixed in his faith
and mode of worship, and immovable in his sentiments of religion, he considers
the right of private judgment as sacred and unalienable; and, both by his
precepts and example, discovers his entire disapprobation of all those
unfriendly and mistaken principles, which limit the grace of God, in favor of
the chosen few, to the exclusion of numerous sects and parties. With Saint
Peter he perceives, "that God is no respecter of persons; but, in every nation,
he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him." His
love, therefore, abounds toward his fellow creatures, until it overcomes the
force of all "idle and nominal distinctions" whatever. The man of an upright
life, and whose conversation is agreeable to the grace of God in the gospel, is
cheerfully admitted to all the privileges of a christian brother. It matters
not where he was born, how he was educated, nor in what form and mode he
worships God; for such is the effect of christian charity, that it withholds
its affections from no sect nor nation, and from no individual, whose life and
conversation are agreeable to the gospel.

Another branch of this great and excellent character is, firmness of mind,
fortitude superior to the most flattering prospects, and to the most powerful
oppositions, and which can support itself, in the pursuit and execution of all
wise and righteous measures, against the imprudent solicitations of friends,
the insidious arts of hypocrisy, and even the menaces of tyranny. No change of
times, of fortune, or of men, can prevail over his integrity, or lead him to
give up his sentiments, and to deviate from what he conceives to be the line of
his duty. In none of his views is he governed either by the praises or censures
of the public opinion; and therefore he is always disposed to adopt those
measures, which from a cool and dispassionate examination, he is fully
convinced are prudent, just, and ultimately beneficial. He will not be
discouraged by the venality of those, who have not the resolution to
countenance and approve of his virtuous exertions for fear of disgrace, and who
dare not contradict the general opinion, however apparently mistaken, and
prejudicial to the public welfare. He can read disapprobation in the faces of
individuals, and meet the frowns of a misguided multitude, with a countenance
undismayed, and an heart that fears no evil. The testimony of a good
conscience, accompanied with the hopes of futurity, is more than a compensation
for all these terrors. Not that he pays no deference to the judgment of others,
and is insensible to public esteem; but that he is resolved to prefer his duty
to all other considerations; and that he never will embrace and recommend a
measure repugnant to his reason and conscience, not even for a moment, for all
the most flattering prospects of riches and power.

Again: A good man, however extensive his merits, will be cautious how he
mentions them. Knowing the imperfections of our common nature, though favored
with all the superior advantages of birth, titles and fortune, and placed in
the most elevated stations of life, he cannot "glory;" -- can neither insult
nor triumph over the mistakes and errors of his brethren. And if he is obliged
to censure their ignorance and follies, it will be with compassion, and not
with severity. However excellent his abilities and accomplishments may be, he
can discover the merits of those, who move in more humble stations, and can
"condescend to men of low estate." He leaves it to others to estimate his
worth, and to proportion the measure of his fame. As he would not give pain, he
avoids breaking in upon the claims of others, and prefers none in his own
behalf. Without any degree of resentment he can bear with ingratitude itself,
when appreciating his merits, and pardon the man, who endeavors to lessen his
glory. Self-preference has so little influence upon a mind thus elevated, that
it can look down upon the multitude contending for perfection, with the highest
degree of complacency. When he beholds a genuine virtue, no matter how humble
the mind and condition in which it was matured, he can select it for his own
imitation, and, without pride or envy, acknowledge the merits, and praise the
efforts, of all who endeavor to equal or surpass him in reputation. The most
lavish encomiums bestowed on the real deserts of others betray in him no
symptoms of resentment. The piety and candor of his heart are so generous and
pure, that he can "rejoice with them that do rejoice," and give "honor to whom
honor is due." And without any invidious comparisons he is disposed most
humbly to acknowledge, that "promotion comes neither from the east, nor from
the west, nor from the south;" but that "God is the judge; he puts down one
and sets up another."

Further: The good man is strongly opposed to every kind of dissimulation. He
knows not how to flatter. In no part of his behavior can we discover so much
as the shadow of duplicity. The example of the "double minded" man strikes his
righteous soul with abhorrence. And indeed, take it "all in all," it is one of
the most contemptible, if not one of the most dangerous, characters in society.
The good man's faith, piety, and morals, are all sincere. The affections of his
heart, whence every thing belonging to true religion derives its value, are all
pure and undefiled. Convinced that neither rites nor ceremonies, nor yet all
the externals of piety, can be accepted of God as a substitute for that
righteousness, which he requires, he considers all the duties of religion as
designed to promote moral rectitude; -- to enrich our hearts with the sublimest
virtues; -- and that nothing which does not contribute to this most excellent
end is worth contending for; and therefore all his claims to the character of a
christian are built upon that faith in Christ which is unfeigned, and "which
works by love." And this same open and liberal principle prevails in all his
transactions with mankind. He is a stranger to those pitiful shifts, to which
even the most subtle hypocrite is sometimes obliged to have recourse, in order
to justify or apologize for his conduct. When self-interest is the prevailing
principle in a man, and that to which all others give place, there is no
calculating upon the deceptions and mischiefs to which the incautious are
exposed in all their commerce and connexions with him. The kindest expressions,
the strongest professions of friendship, and the most flattering expectations,
are all in their favor. But these are soon forgotten, and nothing can be
realized, but shame and mortification. But as the good man has no interests
unconnected with the interests of others, and which may not fairly and openly
be promoted, he can have no temptation, either to dissemble or flatter. If he
professes himself your friend, his profession will prove sacred and inviolable.
You will find him an "Israelite indeed," and shall never suffer through a
misplaced confidence. Let his station and office be what they may, he will
"keep the faith," and hold fast his integrity till he dies.

Again: The good man endeavors to be perfect, or merciful, as his "Father
which is in heaven is perfect." This is a duty of so delightful a nature, and
accompanied with so many sweet fruits in the performance of it, that one would
imagine nothing need be said to enforce the practice of it. However, we may
observe, that the common happiness of our fellow creatures is by no means a
common concern. Thousands are so lost to this godlike propensity, as to live to
themselves only: they discover no sentiments of pity and compassion, and do not
appear to have any interest in the general welfare of mankind. They never
reflect upon the sufferings of those, who have long struggled with the
calamities of life, and who are ready to sink under the weight of their
burdens; and therefore they have no wine and no oil for their consolation. And
yet we can have no doubts, when we attend to "the words of our Lord Jesus," who
says, "It is more blessed to give than to receive;" whether he who delights in
acts of mercy, and performs them from the purest motives, or he who receives
the benefits which flow from this heavenly temper, enjoys the greatest
happiness. But, however influenced by these interesting sensations -- these
tender vibrations of a good heart -- the merciful man may be, (and no doubt
they are the strongest propensities of our nature,) yet the state of society,
and the duties of his office, may sometimes be such, as to compel him to cut
off those who are opposed to the common safety and happiness; but not without
bringing home to his own heart a strong sense of their sufferings. Such is the
force of this principle, that he is always disposed, when it can be done
without injury to others, to pity, to spare, and to save, even the evil and
unthankful. He considers the frailty and weakness of human nature, and knows
that we all stand in need of favorable allowances and interpositions of mercy.
For, however fortunate and independent, no man can say to his brother, any more
than the hand can say to the foot, "I have no need of thee." As the indulgence
of each cruel and malevolent passion increases the measure of human misery, so
the effusions of mercy and compassion lessen the weight of our sufferings. And
besides, the good man perceives, that the habit and practice of these precious
virtues perfect our nature, and make us like God.

Finally: The good man has the sincerest affection for his country, and thinks
no sacrifice that he can offer too great for the promotion of its prosperity
and glory. He sees that all are not qualified for places of confidence and
distinction, and that his happiness does not depend so much on the station in
which Providence has placed him, as on a proper improvement of the talents
committed to his care. If, therefore, he is poor, he will be an example of
industry and economy; and if rich, of sobriety and charity. Instead of coveting
the abundance, or envying the merits, of those whom fortune and the public
esteem have rendered more conspicuous than himself, he will "study to be quiet,
and to do his own business." He knows it to be his duty, his interest, and his
honor, so long as he enjoys the benefit of "mild and equal laws," and is in
possession of all the rights of man, to guard and protect the fountain from
whence they flow. He feels the worth and influence of a good reputation in
himself too much to lead him to "speak evil of dignities," or to listen to the
calumnies of those who do. When he meets those who are not ashamed to glory in
their vices, and to oppose the righteous and those who are laboring to
establish the public welfare, undaunted by their censures, he will speak, and
not keep silence, but rebuke sharply. Neither hopes nor fears can extinguish or
lessen the ardour of this glowing and patriotic principle. Even sufferings and
the deepest ingratitude cannot overcome it, for he looks upon himself as born
for the good of the community; and therefore his time, his talents, his ease,
and even his life, should necessity require the sacrifice, he is ready to
devote to the safety of his country.

Such would be the character of the good man, as far as circumstances ^^^mit,
even in the humbler walks of life; and if we admire the utility and dignity of
it in the private citizen, how much more illustrious and extensively useful
must it appear when clothed with the authority, and placed at the head, of a
great nation!

Here we behold power and goodness united; from which union the righteous have
nothing to fear, but every thing to hope. This will be evident, when we attend
to his wise and upright administration. For he will "rule in the fear of God,"
and make it his principal object to promote the interests of his kingdom; and
thereby he becomes "a terror to evil doers," as well as "a praise to them that
do well." His integrity and firmness are not to be shaken by the voice of the
multitude. Superior to all influences of friends and parties, his great and
independent mind will not suffer him to patronise any but the meritorious and
those who are worthy of public confidence. Amidst all the intrigues and
contending passions of the envious, the disappointed, and ambitious, he
maintains his dignity, and increases his glory. Friends, family, dependents,
and every consideration of private interest, are wholly absorbed in the love of
his country. Anxious for the happiness of those over whom he presides, he
reverences the laws, which he has engaged to support, maintains their spirit,
and enforces their authority, against all opposition. In the duties peculiar to
each branch of his public character, he is governed by reason, and not by
passion; therefore he is not rash and precipitate, but cool and deliberate, in
all his measures. In one word, in the good man, thus clothed with national
authority, and moving in the elevated sphere of its first magistrate, we behold
the genuine patron of unadulterated liberty, supported by the unlimited
confidence of a watchful and discerning public; vindicating the cause of the
oppressed, restraining the insolence of pride and the wantonness of power, and
filled with the most godlike sentiments; the friend, the guardian* and the
father, of his country; dispensing justice and judgment, with an equal hand,
and copying the example of God himself, in his lenity, beneficence, mercy and
love.

But you may be ready to inquire, whether such a character, merely human, has
ever appeared on earth. Shall we meet with it in the annals of Athens or of
Rome? In what history is it to be found? and in what country has it been
displayed? In answer to these anxious and very natural inquiries I shall only
observe, that the melancholy tidings of this day, which are no less affecting
than true, and which have drawn forth the copious tears of a grateful empire,
and display the most expressive tokens of solemn mourning, must convince the
world, that such a noble, generous and disinterested character has existed, and
has just finished its unexampled race of usefulness and glory.

It is almost needless to observe, that the speaker was led to these
reflections from our common loss in the death of that truly great and good man,
who, under God, effected the independence of these United States, and lately
presided at the helm of our general government; whose distinguished talents and
illustrious virtues long since engaged the warmest affections of this
enlightened nation, and whose resplendent merits excited the admiration, and
extorted the praise, of all Europe. And not only so, but "their sound went into
all the earth, and unto the ends of the world."

When we reflect on his goodness, his piety, his firmness, wisdom and prudence;
-- on his modesty, benevolence and candor; -- on his incessant exertions in
the field of glory, his unremitting assiduity in the service of his country,
and on the rich and invaluable laurels with which, under God, he crowned her,
shall we be charged with enthusiasm, when we affirm, that a more virtuous
patriot, a wiser statesman, and a greater general, than GEORGE WASHINGTON,
never died. Though dead, he yet speaks; See his FAREWELL ADDRESS to his
Country.
and while either private or public gratitude remain, his name "shall be in
everlasting remembrance."

And may his superior abilities, clear judgment, and illustrious virtues, like
the mantle of Elijah, long rest upon the head of our greatest living
benefactor, his worthy successor.

Now unto GOD, who said unto his anointed servant, Cyrus, "He is my shepherd,
and shall perform all my pleasure," be ascribed everlasting praises, through
JESUS CHRIST our LORD.


