

Say shall we kiss and toy, I goes to sea no more,
O I Am the SAILOR BOY for capering ashore.
THE FESTIVAL OF MIRTH, AND American Tar's Delight: A FUND OF THE NEWEST
HUMOROUS, PATRIOTIC, HUNTING, AND SEA SONGS. WITH A VARIETY OF CURIOUS JESTS,
BON MOTS, ENTERTAINING AND WITTY ANECDOTES, etc.

NEW YORK; PRINTED FOR THOMAS B. JANSEN and Co. No. 248 PEARL-STREET. 1800.

BOOKS and STATIONARY OF ALL KINDS, For Sale at THOMAS B. JANSEN and Cos.
Book-Store. No. 248 Pearl-Street. CONSISTING OF HISTORY, DIVINITY, MORALITY,
NOVELS AND ROMANCES. A LARGE COLLECTION OF THE NEWEST SONG BOOKS.

-- ALSO -- A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF BLANK BOOKS, OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.

A GENERAL ASSORTMENT OF BLANKS, CONSISTING OF Sea^an's Journals, Seaman's
Articles, etc.

PLAYING-CARDS, Wafers, Quills, etc.

THE Festival of Mirth, etc.
THE TRUE AMERICAN.
WHEN our enemies rise and defiance proclaim,
Undaunted to battle we fly;
Forget the soft ties that enervate the frame,
And fight 'till we conquer or die:
Our sweethearts we leave, nay our children and wives,
And brave all the danger of wars,
We fight that the rest may live peaceable lives,
And stand 'till the last in their cause.
In the heat of the battle, when loud cannons roar.
And the wounded our vengeance excite,
We muster our men, more enraged than before,
And with double the fury we fight.
When the tumule is (...), and the unfortunate slain
Are decently laid in the ground,
To our friends and our homes we return once again,
With honor and victory crowned.
THE WAVES WEAR HUSHED
THE waves were hushed -- the slay serene,
When sailing on the main,
Ben from the main-top viewed the scene,
And sung in tender strain:
Dear Sall, this picture round my neck,
Which bears thy likeness (...),
Shall ever my faithful bosom deck,
Which throbs for only you.
Still was the night when last on shore,
We took a parting kiss,
And warm the vows each other swore,
To meet again in bliss:
A token then my Sally gave,
It Is this which now I view --
And in my heart shall ever live,
Which throbs for only you.
Sweet Sall wherever you may rove,
Ah kindly think on me,
And this dear semblance of my love,
Shall prove I dote on thee:
Wherever bound by night or day,
Still as the needle true,
My constant heart shall never stray,
Which throbs for only you.
A SEA SONG.
LET the (...) be Love and Beauty,
While we quaff the generous wine;
Bacchus calls us to our duty,
Where Is the wretch that dare repine?
Life we know's a scene of trouble,
Jolly messmates never despair;
We can prove the world a bubble,
Sailing on the seas of care.
While to windward we are plying,
Strictly here "Life's compasss view;
And the shivering topsails flying,
Did you craggy shore adieu."
Pleasing gales around us veering,
While on board the "Good Intent;"
Like true seamen, wisely steering,
To the "Harbor of content."
Gaily sailing on the ocean,
Fill brave boys the flowing cann;
Trim the sails, observe their motion,
Fame and honor lead the van.
Let your pilot be discretion,
While the raging billows roar;
Providence by intercession,
Lands us safely on the shore.
THE HOBBIES.
ATTENTION pray give while of hobbies I sing;
For each has his hobby, from cobbler to King:
On some favorite hobby we all get astride,
And when we are once mounted full gallop we ride.
All on hobbies,
All on hobbies,
All on hobbies,
Gee up, gee O.
Some hobbies are restive and hard for to govern,
Even just like our wives, they are so cursedly stubborn;
The hobbies of Scolds are their husbands to teaze,
And the hobbies of Lawyers are plenty of fees.
The Beaux, those sweet gentlemen's hobbies, good lack.!
Is to wear great large poultices tied round the neck
And think in the ton and the tippy they are dressed,
If they have breeches that reach from the ancle to chest.
The hobbies of Sailors, when safe moored in port;
With their wives and their sweethearts to toy and to sport,
When our navy's completed, their hobby shall be
To show the whole world that America's free.
The hobbies of Soldiers, in time of great wars,
Are breaches and battles, with blood wounds and scars;
But in peace you will observe that quite different their trade is --.
The hobbies of Soldiers in peace, are the ladies.
The Ladies, sweet creatures, yes, they now and then
Get astride of their hobbies, ay, just like the men;
With smiles and with simpers beguile us with ease,
And we gollop, trot, ^umble, even just as they please.
The American's hobby has long since been known;
No tyrant or king shall from them have a throne;
Their States are united, and let it be said
Their hobby is WASHINGTON, Peace, and free Trade.
THE TINKER's SONG.
MY daddy was a tinker's son,
And I Am his boy, it is ten to one,
Here Is pots to mend! was still his cry,
Here Is pots to mend! aloud bawl I --
Have ye any tin pots, kettles, or cans,
Coppers to solder, or brass pans.
Of wives my dad had near a score,
And I have twice as many more --
And what is as wonderful as true,
My daddy was the lord (upon my soul he was) the lord knows who!
It Is a hard matter for a child to know its own father -- besides, my mother
was a queen! -- O! yes, she was Queen of the Gypsies, and perhaps I was born a
Prince! though now, like other tinkers, I mend out hole and make two, with my --

Ran, tan, tan, ran, tan, tan,
For pots or can, oh I Am your man,
With my ran tan, etc.
Once I in budget snug had got
A barn-door capon, and what not --
Here Is pots to mend! I cried along,
Here Is pots to mend! was still my song.
At village wake -- oh, curse his throat!
The cock crow'd out so loud a note,
The folks in clusters flocked around,
They sei^'d my budget, in it found
The cock, a gammon, pease and beans,
Besides a jolly tinker (yes by the lord) a tinker's ways and means.
Oh! they took my (...), left me nothing but my paternal estate, which
consisted of my --

Ran, tan, tan, etc.
Like dad, when I to quarters come,
For want of cash the folks I hum --
Here Is pots to mend! bring me some beer
The landlord cries 'you'll get none here,
'You tink'ring dog, your tricks I know,
'More beer indeed! pay what you owe
In rage I squeeze him against the door,
And with his back rub off my score:
At his expense I drown all strife,
For which I praise the landlord (could not do no less than praise) the
landlord's wife.
Because she was pretty. What a lovely shape and beautiful eyes! Ma'am (says I)
one pot more, and score it up to the tinker -- and if you should want any thing
in my way, you may always command, me, and my --

Ran, tan, tan, etc.

THE SAILOR's JOURNAL.
'TWAS post meridian, half past four,
By signal I from Nancy parted,
At six she lingered on the shore,
With uplift hands and broken hearted;
At seven while taught'ning the fore stay.
I saw her faint, or else it was fancy;
At eight we all got under way,
And bid a long adieu to Nancy.
Night came, and now eight bells had rung,
While careless sailors over cheery,
On the mid watch so jovial sung,
With tempers, labor, cannot weary (...),
I little to their mirth inclined,
While tender thoughts rushed on my fancy,
And my warm sighs increased the wind,
Looked on the moon, and thought of Nancy.
And now arrived that jovial night,
When every true bred tar carouses,
When over the grog all hands delight,
To toast their sweethearts and their spouses
Round went the cann, the jest, the glee,
While tender wishes filled each fancy,
And when in turn it came to me,
I heaved a sigh, and toasted Nancy.
Next morn a storm came on at four,
At six the elements in motion;
Plunged me and three poor sailors more,
Headlong within the foaming ocean:
Poor wretches they soon found their graves,
For me it may be only fancy,
But love seemed to forbid the waves,
To snatch me from the arms of Nancy.
Scarce the foul hurricane was cleared,
And winds and waves had ceased to rattle,
When a bold enemy appeared,
And, dauntless, we prepared for battle;
And now, while some loved friend or wife,
Like lightning rushed on every fancy,
To Providence I trusted life,
Put up a prayer, and thought of Nancy.
At last, 'twas in the month of May,
The crew, it being lovely weather,
At three A. M. discovered day,
And England's chalky cliffs together;
At seven, up Channel, how we bore,
While hopes and fears rushed on my fancy;
At twelve I gaily jumpt on shore,
And to my throbbing heart pressed Nancy.
FLY YE TRAITORS;
FLY ye traitors from our hand,
Fly ye jacobinic band,
Who join the French and aid their cause;
Who join the French and aid their cause;
And should the storm of war come on,
No doubt you would to their standard run.
The independance which we boast,
By your vile arts was nearly lost;
Each true Columbian will despise
The traitors who the Frenchmen prize.
All their arts employed we see
To destroy our liberty,
Like a band of rascals joined
May they be to hell consigned.
Ye Democrats who strove once more
To make rude foes attack our shore,
Invited over the impious band,
Invited over the impious band,
Encouraged by your artful lies
To wrest from us the rights we prize;
While ye oppose each measure just,
The French in you place ^ll their trust,
That through your influence they will prevail,
But all their wicked schemes shall fail.
All their arts etc.

May public infamy and shams
Forever brand the traitor's name,
Who boasted he should not oppose
The French, should they come here as foes,
While they protect his interest dear
He turns to them a joyful ear.
With matchless skill he makes his power
Assist his interest every hour;
For while he gains, his heart's at ease;
Though he destroys his country's peace.
All his arts, etc.

While those who league with Tall^yrand,
Once more to cheat our country stand;
Ye Democrats on you they call,
Ye Democrats on you they call,
For all the Jacobinic crew
Their hopes are fixed on hell and you;
But now overwhelmed with dire dismay,
Their schemes exposed in open day,
From vile French influence we'll be free,
Nor dread destructive anarchy.
Though all their arts employed should be
To introduce vile anarchy,
The band of rascals soon shall find
Their names to infamy consigned.
LULLABY.
PEACEFUL slumbering on the ocean,
Seamen fear no danger nigh,
The winds and waves in gentle motion,
Sooth them with their Lullaby.
Lullaby, Lullaby.

Is the wind tempestuous blowing?
Still no danger they descry,
The guileless heart its boon bestowing,
Sooth^ them with its lullaby.
Lullaby, lullaby,

HYMEN's EVENING POST.
GREAT news! great news! great news! great news!
Great news! great news! I Am hither sent
Among mortals to declare,
What passed in Hymen's parliament,
Where Cupid took the chair;
They made the wisest, best decree
You Have known in all your lives;
Old Maids shall blessed with husbands be,
And Bachelors with wives!
To Bachelors, what rare good news,
And all your Tabby host,
Who may the tidings glad peruse
In Hymen's Evening Post.
Great news! great news! etc.

By every Bachelor for life,
A duty must be paid,
Refusing now to take for wife
An antiquated maid;
Poor soul! how great must be her joy,
Who such a lot escapes!
No more with Pug and Puss to toy,
And freed from leading Apes.
What wonderful surprising news
For all your Tabby host!
Who may the tidings glad peruse,
In Hymen's Evening, Post.
Great news! great news! etc.

A Bachelor moreover is
A poor unhappy elf,
Who vold of all domestic bliss,
Lies snoring by himself;
He need not now, to cheer his mind,
In search of gossop roam,
For sure as fate he will always find
Enough of that at home;
For Bachelors what pleasing news,
And all your Tabby host!
Who may the tidings glad peruse,
In Hymen's Evening Post.
Great news! great news! etc.

CAPERING ASHORE.
POLL dang it how do you do, Nan will not ye gi's a buss,
Why what is to do wi' you, why here is a pretty fuss.
Say shall we kiss and toy, I goes to sea no more,
O I Am the sailor boy for capering ashore.
Father he apprentic'd me to a coasting ship,
I being resolved dy'e see to give em all the slip;
I got to Yarmouth fair, where I had been before,
So father found me there a capering ashore.
Next out to India I went a Guinea-pig,
We got to Table-bay, but mind a pretty rig,
The ship drove out to sea, left me and many more
Amongst the Hottentots, capering ashore.
I love a bit of hop life's never the worse for it,
I f^in my wake should drop a fiddle that is your sort,
Thrice tumble up a hoy, once get the labor over,
Then see the sailor boy a capering ashore.
THE SUMMUM BONUM.
GIVE me wine, rosy wine, that foe to despair,
Whose magical power can banish all care;
Of firendship the parent, composer of strife,
The soother of sorrow, and blessing of life:
The schools about happiness warmly dispute,
And, weary the sense in the phantom pursuit,
In spite of their maxims, I dare to define
The grand Summum Bonum's a bumper of wine.
To the coward a warmsh it never fails to impart,
And opens the lock of the miserly heart.
While thus we carouse it, the wheels of the soul,
Over life's rugged highway agreeably roll,
Each thinks of his charmer, who never can cloy,
And fancy rides post to the regions of joy.
In spite of dull maxims, I dare to define
The grand Summum Bonum's a bumper of wine.
It Is the balsam specific that heals every sore,
The oftener we taste it we love it the more;
Then he who true happiness seeks to attain
With spirit, the full-flowing bumper must drain;
And he who the court of f^ir Venus would know,
Undaunted, through Bacchus's vineyard must go,
In spite of dull maxims, I dare to define
The grand Summum Bonum's a bumper of wine.
JOLLY mortals, fill your glasses,
Noble deeds are done by wine;
Scorn the nymph, and all her graces,
Who'd for love or beauty pine?
Look within the bowl that is flowing,
And a thousand charms you will find,
More than Phillis has, though going,
In a moment to be kind.
Alexander hated thinking,
Drank about at council board;
He subdued the world by drinking
More than by his conquering sword.
METALLIC POINTS.
LET men elate, of Doctors prate,
That know to spread the plaster;
And make a rout to care the gout
Or any sad disaster.
Not GALEN, or HIPOCRATES,
Nor any learned sage, Sir;
Could boast such worth, as has its birth,
In this enlightened age, Sir.
For sting of be, or bite of flee,
Or stiffness, cold, or wound, Sir,
Metallic points will ease the joints,
And leave you safe and sound, Sir.
Rheumatic pain, or bruise, or strain,
Or pimple, wart, or freckle,
But rub enough, they take it off,
And never leave a speckle.
Then fear no more, or pain, or sore,
Or shaking sits, or jerkings,
For each disease; he will cure with ease,
Huzza for Doctor PERKINS.
ALLOWANCE OF GROG.
WHEN on board the Hector I first went to set.
How the boatswain did grumble and slog,
I swore then no longer a sailor I Would be,
'Till they served my allowance of grog.
It was then rough or fair, safe moored or at se^,
Going large from the land or close under the lee,
For to reef or to steer, or to wear,
Up the hatchway I Would merrily jog,
While to moisten my eye, Mister Purser, says I,
Pray where is my allowance of grog?
Once sick of a fever, a whole week I lay,
From my hammock I hardly could jog,
Just like some old junk they had stowed me away,
And stopped my allowance of grog;
Keep her full says I boy, or you're taken a back,
And the sharks will be making a meal of poor Jack,
For the doctor's mate said he was sure I was dead,
'Till I called him an impudent dog!
Hard a starboard, says I, you lubber, you lie,
All I want is my quantum of grog.
PHELIM's COURTSHIP.
Tune -- Banks of the Dee.
ONE moon-shiny night, about two in the morning,
I wandered myself all alone in the dark;
Not a creature was with me but Chlors, whose scorning
On my poor little heart made a visible mark:
Then list to my dirty,
So dismal and pretty;
O thunder! if ever a fiction was true,
You Will he after declaring
My case is past bearing,
So grating to me -- though diverting to you.
My name, I must tell you is Phelim O'Blarney,
Just come all the way from the town of Tralee;
My father was born by the Lake of Killarney,
And faith you must know he was older than m^^;
Nor need you to wonder,
It Is not the first blunder
That nature has made in a comical whim;
For sense might have told her,
Dad never had been older,
If Phelim his son had been born before him.
I Have got a fine house on the banks of the Liffey,
That only wants building to make it complete;
So faith we'll set off for the same in a jiffey,
And build a rare house for our ancestors' seat:
Than come, my dear jewel,
No longer be cruel,
But let us scamper off without making a din;
Like gem's in a casket,
We'll ride in a basket,
If the coach be set off ere we get to the inn.
By Jasus; you will never find me fibbing and swelling,
No, bother my shoul I but I hate such a plan;
Let upstarts and vapouring puppies be telling
How long their mean race before Adam's began
Before the creation,
My famed generation,
Without ever a soul by themselves all alone,
Invented potatoes,
Who Is worth now so great is,
We Irishmen call 'em roast beef without bone.
Then let us be jogging along to our mansion,
You shall walk by my side, whose I follow before,
My heart's so contracted by Cupid's expansion,
Though F've said all I can, yet I Will tell thee some more,
As a hot burning cinder
Turns cloth into tinder,
The flame of your conduct so frigidly glows,
That it has, pretty creature,
From Phelim's good nature,
Extracted a secret that every one knows.
Arrah faith, and the force of my passion so great is,
No mother's son dares to tell Phelim he lies,
When he solemnly swears to Shebeen and potatoes,
He prefers a good seat on his Chlora's bright eyes,
Both sleeping and woking,
Still trembling and quaking,
Nor noon, night or morning, from dreaming can keep,
By my shoul and it is vexing,
And cursed perplexing,
So often to be waked ere a body's asleep!
Then come, my sweet angel, be after complying,
By St. Patrick I swear on the word of a man,
I Will try to adore thee until that I Am dying,
Aye faith, and much longer than that if I can.
So sweet little devil,
No more be uncivil,
Ooh! prithee, my jewel, with Phelim agree;
But if after this tender,
You do not surrender,
Then, bother my nob! if I ever have thee.
THE INTRIGUING IRISHMAN.
THE first of my pranks was at little Ratshane,
Where love, faith, like whisky, popt into my brain,
For Ally Mc Gulloch, a sweet little soul,
As tall and as strait as a shaver-man's pole;
Och, she was a sweet creature! with a bloom on her face like a Munster potatoe
-- I met her going to market one morning with a basket under one of her arms,
-- Where do you come from my dear? says I. From Clanterduffy Sir, says she --
And what is your name, my dear? Ally M'Gulloch, Sir, says she -- Och, what a
soft beautiful name!

To be sure then I told her a piece of my mind,
Till she left her old dad and the basket behind.
But soon I was dying for Molly Mc Gree.
A sweet tender shoot just come up from Tralee;
O sweet Molly, says I, do pray ease my pain,
By St. Patrick, says she, Sir, pray what do you mane?
Mane! says I, -- Why to marry you to be sure, my dear. -- But do you though?
says she -- To be sure I do -- What do you think of me? Oh, there is no
resisting ye, says she. -- So we were to be married next day --

But as the devil would have it a thick fog came on,
When I looked for the church, oh I found it was gone.
But morning and night she was always my plague,
Faith it is time then, says I, for to leave off intrigue;
So from Cork I set sail, in a d -- d open boat,
With some cash in my pock, two shirts, and a coat;
We s^^ted so plagued slow, that a big storm overtook us -- To be sure I didn't
swallow a little of the sea broth -- but the worst of my misfortunes was, when
I landed there was Molly Mc Gree! and she put into my arms a grate ugly
squalling brat, with a head as big as a bushel of potatoes -- what is this? says
I -- It Is your own Teddy, says she, and as like ye as two peace. -- Teddy be d
-- d, says I, take it away, woman; I tell ye I don't know any thing at all of
the matter.

Then to end my intriguing, I went off to sea,
And bid a good morning to Molly Mc Gree.
THE SLEEPING MARINERS.
To the tune of Lullaby.
PEACEFUL snoozing on the ocean,
Seamen fear no dangers nigh,
Though the world is in commotion,
We are rocked to Lullaby!
Lullaby! Lullaby! etc.
In Torbay secure at anchor,
Top-masts struck, and calm the sky;
Safe from storm, or gallic rancour,
We enjoy our Lullaby!
Lullaby! Lullaby! etc.
Give Monsiers who are so curious,
Double watches -- wet or dry:
But give us, who are not furious,
Double spells of Lullaby!
Lullaby! Lullaby! etc.
Let night come with billows roaring,
'Twixt two Hammocks snug we lie;
Full allowance take to snoring,
To the tune of Lullaby!
Lullaby! Lullaby! etc.
HENRY and SALLY.
THE sails unfurled, the ship unmoor'd
Her course to steer -- all hands on board,
Propitious every gale;
Fair Sally on the beach deplores
Her sailor bound to distant shores.
But naught her tears avail.
"Oh! cruel fate -- ye powers above,
"Why thus bereft of him I love!
"Who on the restless deep,
"The boisterous tide must ceaseless brave,
"And meet, per chance, a watery grave,
While I but live to weep."
Twelve months elapsed when he returned,
Her constant heart with rapture burned,
'Twas freed from every care;
And Henry's love, his heart, his soul,
Were true, as needle to the pole,
When absent from his fair,
In wedded bliss they taste delight,
No winds disturb, nor storms affright
The lovely Sally's breast;
For now he makes a firm decree,
No more to trust the raging sea --
With her completely blessed,
HEAVING OF THE LEAD.
FOR England, when with f^v'ring gale,
Our gallant ship up channel sheer'd,
And scudding under cosy sail,
The high blue western land appeared;
To heave the lead the seaman sprung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
By the deep nine!
And bearing up to gain the port;
Some well-known object kept in view;
An abbey tower, an harbour-fort,
Or beacon, to the vessel true.
While often the lead the seaman flung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
By the mark seven!
And as the much loved shore we are near --
With transport we behold the roof,
Where dwelt a friend, or partner dear,
Of faith and love a matchless proof!
The lead once more the seaman flung,
And to the watchful pilot sung,
Quarter less five!
Now, to her birth the ship draws nigh,
We take in sail, she feels the tide:
Stand clear the cable! -- is the cry:
The anchor's gone -- we safely ride.
The watch is set, and through the night
We hear the seaman with delight
Proclaim all is well!
WHEN MY MONEY WAS GONE.
WHEN my money was gone that I gained in the wars,
And the world it did from at my fate,
What mattered my zeal, or my honored scars,
When indifference stood at each gate.
The face that would smile when my purse was well lined,
Showed a different aspect to me,
And when I could naught but ingratitude find,
I hied me again to the sea.
I thought 'twas unjust to repine at my lot,
Or bear with cold looks on the shore,
So I packed up the trifling remnants I Would got,
And a trifle, alas! was-my-store.
A handkerchief held all the treasure I had,
Which over my shoulder I threw,
A way then I trudged with a heart rather sad,
To join with some jolly ship's crew.
The sea was less troubled by far than my mind,
And when the wide main I surveyed,
I could not help thinking the world was unkind,
And fortune a slippery jade.
I swear if once more I can take her in tow,
I Will let the ungrateful ones see,
That the turbulent winds and the billows could show.
More kindness than they did to me.
THE SEAMAN.
THE man whose life is on the seas,
No harping cares molest,
His hopes still freshen with the breeze,
His thoughts in Nancy blessed;
The hardest fortune he can bear,
Since love his labor charms,
It Is Nancy's image sooths his care,
Though absent from her arms.
His happy bosom knows no ill,
He sings his cheerful song,
While, round, the flip his messmates fill,
Nor think the mid-watch long.
The helm's-man now he ready stands,
With love's sweet hope impressed;
The wheel still governed by his hands,
The compass in his breast.
EASY JOHN.
I AM a blade both free and easy,
Not a vulgar country clown;
I will do my best to please ye,
And my name is easy John.
Let the world go as it will
I am free and easy still.
Free and easy,
Free and easy,
I am free and easy still.
Ladies, view my person over,
If my lesson right I con;
Search Newcastle, London, Dover,
You Will not find an easier John.
Let the world go, etc.

Now a lady I could fancy,
Aye, but could she fancy me!
I would marry lovely Nancy,
She Is so easy and so free.
Let the world go, etc.

Gentlemen, a brother greets ye,
Happy may you ever be;
And whenever a brother meets you,
May you easy be and free.
Let the world go, etc.

Worthy friends, this blessed occasion
Fills my panting heart with gleo;
To possess your approbation,
Makes me happy, easy, free.
Let the world go, etc.

'TWAS at the break of day we spied
The signal to unmoor,
Which sleepless Caroline descried,
Sweet maid, from Gosport shore.
The fresh'ning gale at length arose,
Her heart began to swell,
Nor could cold fear the thought oppose,
Of bidding me farewell!
In open boat, the maid of worth
Soon reached our vessel's side,
Soon too she found her William's birth,
But sought me not to chide: --
Go, she exclaimed -- for fame's a cause
A female should approve;
For who, that is true to honor's laws,
Is ever false to love.
My heart is loyal, scorns to fear,
Nor will it even fail,
Though war's unequal wild career,
Should William's life assail:
Though death against thee exert his sway,
Oh! trust me, but the dart
That wounds thee will find its way
To Caroline's true heart.
Should conquest, in fair form arrayed,
Thy loyal efforts crown,
In Gosport will be found a maid,
That lives for thee alone. --
May girls, with hearts so firm and true
To love and glory's cause,
Meet the reward they have in view,
The meed of free applause.
HARK! Echo! sweet Echo repeats the loud strain,
The shouting and hooting of chaste Dlan's train;
Aurora smiles sweetly, and comes on apace,
The hounds and the horn call us forth to the chase.
Blind Cupid is banished from these happy fields,
His quiver to Dian the wanton now yields;
She blunts all his arrows, his power destroys,
While the virgins all follow her innocent joys.
COLUMBIA's Bald Eagle displays in his claws,
The arrows of Jove, to confound her proud foes;
While the artful French Bear, with his wide spreading paws,
Would ensnare us by hugs far more fatal than blows:
But his hugs and his blows, we will meet them like men,
And the Eagle shall drive the beast back to his den,
The terrible bear, not yet fated with blood
Growls around his huge den over the bones of his prey;
Though now gorged to the full, he still howls for more food,
And would lure by his tricks fair Columbia away:
But his tricks and his howls we despise them like men,
And the Eagle shall drive the beast back to his den.
Not a Frog ever shall bribe him to stay his rude shocks,
For the Eagle disdains to retreat from his ire:
We will marshal ear columns as solid as rocks,
And receive the proud Frenchmen in vollies of fire;
Like true sons of Columbia, we will act still like men,
And her Eagle shall drive the Bear back to his den.
SPANKING Jack was so comely, so pleasant, so jolly,
Though wind blew great guns still he would whistle and sing.
Jack loved his friend and was true to his Molly,
And if honor gives greatness was great as a king.
One night as we drove with two reefs in the main-sail,
And the scud came on lowering upon a leo shore,
Jack went up aloft for to hand the top ga'en-sail,
A spray washed him off, and we never saw him more:
But grieving's a folly,
Come let us be jolly;
If we have troubles at sea, boys,
We Have pleasures ashore.
Whistling Tom still of mischief or fun in the middle,
Through life in all weathers at random would jog,
He Would dance and he would sing, and he would play on the fiddle,
And swig with an air his allowance of grog:
Long side of a don in the Terrible Frigate
As yard arm and yard arm we lay off the shor^
In and out whistling Tom did so caper and jig it,
That his head was shot off, and we never saw him more!
But, etc.

Bonny Ben was to each jolly messmate a brother,
He was manly, and honest, good natured, and free,
If ever one ^ar was more true than another
To his friend and his duty, that sailor was he;
One day with the David to heave the kedge anchor,
Ben went in a boat on a bold craggy ^^ore,
He overboard tipped, when a sl^^^^ and a spanker,
Soon nipt him in two, and we never saw him more!
But, etc.

But what of it all, lads, shall we be down hearted
Because that mayhap we now take our last sup?
Life's cable must one day or other be parted,
And death in fast mooring will bring us all up:
But it is always the way on it, one scarce finds a brother
Fond as pitch, honest, hearty and true to the core,
But by battle, or storm, or some bad thing or other,
He Is popp'd off the hooks, and we never see him more!
But, etc.

AVAST! AVAST!
THOUGH the lawyer comes to woo,
Vainly he attempts to sue,
Or with his soft nonsense teaze;
In the seaman's sort of phrase,
Thus I answer all he says,
Avast, avast, Sir, if you please;
For better I like to be aboard a good ship,
When the sails are all loosed, and the anchor's a-trip;
To hear the right boatswain pipe, hoist and belay,
While the merry, merry sailors all foot it away.
But should he yet the cause pursue,
Still his brief will never do;
For when all his pleading's done,
In the seaman's sort of phrase,
Thus I answer all he says,
Avast, avast, Sir if you please,
For better I like, etc.
A PRIZE.
SCARCELY had the blushing morning,
Wooed the waves with tender light;
When the bright'ning plain adorning,
A distant vessel rose in sight.
Aloft, the crouding sailors viewing
Her misty sails with straining eye,
In fancy now the foe subduing,
A prize! a prize^ exulting cry.
The boatswain's whistle loud and shrill,
Shames the tardy sleeping wind:
In vain our chase gun fires -- for still
She crowds her sail -- we are left behind.
At length the breeze affords assistance:
Right-afore the wind's our course;
We clear our decks -- she threats resistance,
And proudly boasts superior force.
Amid her thunder boldly steering,
Our battered ship almost a wreck,
With steady courage persevering,
They board, they storn her gory deck.
Her wounded Captain -- life disdaining,
Yet mourning over his gallant crew;
Casts a last look on those remaining;
Then strikes to save the valiant few.
THE TOKEN.
THE breeze was fresh, the ship is stayed
Each breaker hushed, the shore a haze,
When Jack, no more on duty called,
His true love's Tokens overhaul'd:
The broken gold, the braided hair,
The tender motto writ -- so fair;
Upon his Bacco Box he views
Nancy, the poets love the muse --
"If you loves I, as I loves you,
"No pair so happy as we two."
The storm that, like a shapeless wreck,
Had strewn with rigging all the deck;
That jaws for sharks had given a feast,
And left the ship a hull, had ceased;
When Jack, as with his messmates dear,
He shared the grog, their hearts to cheer,
Took from his Bacco Box a quid,
And spelled for comfort on the lid,
If you, etc.

The battle, that with horror grim,
Had madly ravished life and limb,
Had scuppers drenched with human gore
And widowed many a wife, was over,
When Jack, to his companions dear,
First gave the tribute of a tear;
Then as the Bacco Box he held
Restored his comfort while he spelled,
If you, etc.

The voyage that had been long and hard,
But that had yielded full reward;
Had brought each sailor to his friend
Happy and rich, was at an end:
When Jack, his toils and perila over,
Beheld his Nancy on the shore;
He then the Bacco Box displayed,
And cried and seized the lovely maid,
If you, etc.

DRINKING SONG.
WHAT argufies pride and ambition?
Soon or late death must take us in tow:
Each bullet has got its commission,
And when our time's come we must go:
Then drink and sing, hang pain and forrow,
The halter was made for the neck,
He that is now 'live and lusty -- to morrow
Perhaps may be stretched on the deck.
There was little Tom Linstock, of Dover,
Got killed, and left Polly in pain,
Poll cried, but her grief was soon over,
And then she got married again.
Then drink, etc.

Jack Junk was ill usued by Bet Crocher.
And so took to guzzling the stuff,
'Till he tumbled in old Davy's locker,
And there he got liquor enough,
Then drink, etc.

For our prize momey then to the proctor,
Take of joy while it is going our freak;
For what argufies calling the doctor,
When she anchor of life is apeak.
Then drink, etc.

GUARDIAN of our nation, stand firm in your station,
While Europe is all in commotion;
We'll let the world see that America's free;
Our flag shall ride safe on the ocean.
Since France does aspire to set us on fire,
And fill our Grand Court with distraction,
Then firm let us be, united and free,
In spite of proud France and of faction.
We'll never have a king, though of ADAMS we'll sing,
And chaunt to our children his story;
We'll let the world set Columbia is free,
And fight for our country and glory.
Our Navy shall ride on the ocean so wide,
With all the proud billows in motion,
No tyrant shall dare his ensigns to rear,
And pirates shall fly from the ocean.
These pirates of France have eared to advance
To our seas, and the mouths of our harbors;
But Frenchmen shall see our states will be free,
We'll clear all our coasts of such robbers.
Now let us unite ^o stand for our right,
And protect our commerce from plunder;
These rovers at sea, shall begin now to flee,
When Truxton discharges his thunder.
AS passing by a shady grove,
I heard a linnet sing,
Whose sweetly plaintive voice of love
Proclaimed the cheorful spring.
His pretty accents seemed to flow
As if he knew no pain;
His downy throat he turned so sweet,
It echoed over the plain.
Ah! happy warbler (I replied)
Contented thus to be;
It Is only harmony and love,
Can be compared to thee.
Thus perched upon the spray you stand,
The monarch of the shade;
And even sip ambrosial sweets
That glow from every glade.
Did man possess but half thy bliss,
How joyful might he be!
But man was never formed for this,
It Is only joy for thee.
Then farewell, pretty bird (I said)
Pursue thy plaintive tale,
And let thy tuneful accents spread
All over the fragrant vale.
THE TEMPEST.
CEASE, rude Boreas, blustering railer!
List ye lands-men, all to me;
Messmates, here a brother sailor
Sing the dangers of the sea.
From boundless billows, first in motion,
When the distant whirlwinds rise,
To the tempest troubled ocean,
Where the seas contend with skies.
Hark! the boatswain hoarsely bawling --
By topsail sheets and haulyards stand!
Down top gallants, quick be hauling;
Down your stay sails, hand, boys, hand!
Now it freshens, set the braces;
Quick the top-sail sheets let go;
Luff, boys, luff, don't make wry faces!
Up your topsails nimbly clew!
Now all you on down beds sporting,
Fondly locked in beauty's arms,
Fresh enjoyments, wanton courting,
Free from all but love's alarms --
Round us roars the tempest louder;
Think what fears our minds enthral!
Harder yet, it yet blows harder!
Now again the boatswain calls:
The topsail yards point to the wind, boys:
See all clear to reef each course:
Let the fore-sheets go; don't mind, boys,
Though the weather should be worse.
Fore and aft the sprit-sail yard get;
Reef the mizen; see all-clear;
Hands up -- each preventer brace set;
Man the fore-yards; cheer, lads, cheer!
Now the dreadful thunder's roaring!
Peals on peals contending clash!
On our heads fierce rain falls pouring!
In our eyes blue lightnings flash!
One wide water all around us!
All above us, one black sky!
Different deaths at once surround us!
Hark! what means that dreadrul cry?
The fore-mast's gone! cries every tongue out,
Over the lee, twelve feet 'bove deck,
A leak beneath the chest tree's sprung out:
Call all hands to clear the wreck,
Quick the land-yards cut to pieces:
Come, my hearts, be stout and bold!
Plumb the well; -- the leak increases!
Four feet water's in the hold!
While over the ship wild waves are beating,
We for wives or children mourn:
Alas! from hence there is no retreating;
Alas! to them there is no return.
Still the leak is gaining on us;
Both chain pumps are chok'd below:
Heaven have mercy here upon us!
For only that can save us now!
Over the lee beam is the land, boys,
Let the guns over board be thrown;
To the pump come every hand, boys;
See, our mizen mast is gone.
The leak we have found; it cannot pour fast;
We Have lightened her a foot or more;
Up, and rig a jury foremast;
She rights, she rights, boys? we are off shore.
Now once more on joys we are thinking,
Since kind Fortune's spared our lives,
Come, the can, boys, let us be drinking
To our sweet-hearts, and our wives.
Fill it up, about ship wheel it;
Close the lips a brimmer join.
Where Is the tempest now? who feels it?
None! our danger's drowned in wine!
CEASE a while, ye winds to blow,
Cease, a while, ye streams to flow,
Hushed be every ruder noise,
Methinks, I hear my lover's voice.
There Is the rock, the hill, the tree,
Hark, a voice, methinks it is he;
It Is not he, still night comes on,
O where is my wanderer gone?
Thick, my doubts and fears arise,
Loud for him, I raise my cries;
Why has he so long delayed?
Where Is my lovely Wanderer strayed?
Loud I call: I Will make him hear,
It Is my voice, my love, my dear;
The time is past, why this delay?
My lovely Wand'rer's lost his way.
HARK FORWARD! TANTIVY, HUZZA.
TO pleasure let us raise the heart-cheering song,
While echo repeats the sweet sound,
In the prime of our life, whether man, maid, or wife,
It Is gay pleasure we hunt through the throng,
And sweet the reward when she is found.
When bright pleasure's in view, we all briskly pursue,
Hark forward! hark forward! huzza!
Tantivy, hark forward, away!
All ages and states will join in the song,
While echo repeats the sweet sound;
Some in riches delight, some few love to fight,
Some the bottle will hunt the night long,
Some seek her in study profound.
When bright pleasure's in view, we all briskly pursue, etc.
Then all will delight in the heart-cheering song
While echo repeats the sweet sound;
We diff'rently aim, our plan still's the same,
While winding our pleasures prolong,
Contentment by pleasure is crowned
When bright pleasure's in view, we all briskly pursue, etc.
DUET -- LA GLOIRE AND MADELON.
MADELON. COULD you to the battle march away,
And leave me here complaining?
I Am sure 'twould break my heart to stay,
When you where gone campaigning:
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Could never quit her rover!
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Would go with you all the world over!

LA GLOIRE. And can you to battle go,
To woman's fear a stranger?
MADELON.
No fear my breast shall ever know,
But when my love's in danger,
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Fears only for her rover!
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Will go with you all the world over!

BOTH. Then let the world jog as it will,
Let hollow friends forsake us;
We both shall be as happy still,
As war and love can make us.
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Shall never quit her rover!
Ah! non, non, non,
Pauvre Madelon
Shall go with you-[me] all the world over!

SOMEBODY.
WERE I obliged to beg my bread,
And had not where to lay my head;
I Would creep where yonder herds are fed,
And steal a look at -- Somebody,
My own dear -- Somebody,
My constant -- Somebody;
I Would creep where yonder herds are fed,
And steal a look at -- Somebody.
When I Am laid low, and am at rest,
And may be numbered with the blessed,
Oh! may thy artless feeling breast
Throb with regard for -- Somebody:
Ah! will you drop the pitying tear,
And sigh for the lost -- Somebody?
But should I ever live to see
That form so much adored by me,
Then thou wilt reward my constancy,
And I Will be blessed with -- Somebody:
Then shall my tears be dried by thee,
And I Will be blessed with -- Somebody.
Tune -- Rule Britania.

WHEN Britain with despotic sway,
Would at her feet our freedom lay,
Would at, etc.
We raised the Standard -- to arms, to arms, we cried,
Our patriots fought -- they bled, they di'd.
Independent Columbians they would be,
Resolved to perish, or be free.
Great WASHINGTON did then command;
He led the bold heroic band,
He led, etc.
They fought and conquered -- Columbia's sons were free,
Resolved on death or liberty.
Independent Columbians they would be,
Resolved to perish, or be free.
When France her struggle first began
For liberty, the rights of man,
For liberty, etc.
Glowing with ardor -- with ardor in her cause,
We scorned that Kings should give her laws.
Independent -- may Gallia still be free,
They fought at first for liberty.
But France, you now forget your friend,
Our amity is at an end,
Our amity, etc.
You rob our commerce, insult us on our coast,
Divide and conquer, is your boast.
Know proud Frenchmen, united we will be,
Resolved to perish or be free.
Shall we to France a tribute pay,
Or at her feet our freedom lay?
Or at, etc.
Forbid it Heaven Columbia's free men cry,
We will be free or nobly die.
Know proud Frenchmen, united we will be,
Resolved on death or liberty.
United then with heart and hand,
Our constitution firm shall stand,
Our constitution, etc.
Then raise the standard, let this your motto be,
Our father's fought, and so will we.
Hail Columbians, united we will be,
Like them we'll conquer and be free.
FAIR Kate of Portsmouth loved a tar,
Ben Surf, as kind a soul
As ever braved the hottest war,
Or slung the flowing bowl,
Yet, often he would heave a figh, since fate
Had borne him far from lovely Kate.
For Ben in vain had often strove,
(Would parents but agree)
To wed fair Kate, his only love,
'Ere that he went to sea;
But, ah! in vain, fond hope was over,
He sighed, then left his native shore.
One night as the mid-watch he kept,
A loose to love he gave,
For while his ship mates careless slept,
Plunged in a watery grave --
"The conflict's over, sweet Kate," he cried,
Then sunk in peace, alas! and died.
Thus hope is like the summer gale,
That Is transient as the wind,
Which reefs too soon soft pleasures' sail,
'Ere the wished port we find:
The tidings to fair Kate was brought,
Whose bosom was with anguish fraught.
"And is my love no more?" she cried,
'Then peace adieu, farewell,
This heart to his was ever allied,
And still it shall be true --
I feel my spirit wing its flight -- "
She spoke, and sunk in endless night.
WHEN the hollow drum has beat to bed;
When the little fifer hangs his head;
Still and mute,
The moorish flute,
And nodding guards watch wearily;
Then will we,
From prison free,
March out by moonlight cheerily.
When the Moorish cymbals clash by day,
When the brazen trumpets shrilly bray,
The slave in vain,
Must then complain
Of tyranny and knavery:
Would he know,
His time to go,
And slily slip from slavery:
It Is when the hollow drum has beat to bed;
When the little fifer hangs his head;
Still and mute,
The moorish flute,
And nodding guards watch wearily;
Oh then must he,
From prison free,
March out by moonlight cheerily.
DISTRESS me with those tears no more,
One kiss, my love, and then adieu;
The last boat destined for the shore
Waits, dearest girl, alone for you.
Soon, soon, before the light winds borne,
Shall I be severed from your sight;
You, left the lonely hours to mourn,
And weep through many a stormy night.
When far along the restless deep,
In trim array the ship shall steer;
Your form remembrance still shall keep,
Your worth, affection still revere:
And with the distance from your eyes,
My love for you shall be increased,
As to the pole the needle lies,
And, farthest off, still varies least.
While round the bowl the cheerful crew
Shall sing of triumphs on the main,
My thought shall fondly turn to you,
Of you alone shall be my strain:
And when we have bowed the leaguing foe,
Revengeful of my country's wrong,
Returning home my heart shall show,
No fiction graced my artless long.
A SAILOR's life's a life of woe,
He works now late, now early;
Now up and down, now to and fro,
What then? he takes it cheerly.
Blessed with a smiling can of grog,
If duty call,
Stand, rise or fall,
To fate's last verge he will jog;
The cadge to weigh,
The sheets belay,
He does it with a wish;
To heave the led,
Or to cat head
The ponderous anchor-fish.
For while the grog goes round,
All sense of danger's drowned,
We despise it to a man;
We sing a little, and laugh a little,
And work a little, and swear a little,
And fiddle a little, and foot it a little,
And swig the flowing can.
If howling winds and roaring seas,
Give proof of coming danger,
We view the storm, our hearts at case,
For Jack's to fear a stranger.
Blessed with the smiling grog we fly
Where now below
We headlong go,
Now rife on mountains high;
Spite of the gale,
We hand the sail,
Or take the needful reef;
Or man the deck,
Or clear some wreck,
To give the ship relief:
Though perils threat around,
All sense of danger's drowned,
We despise it to a man:
We sing a little, etc.
But yet think not our case is hard,
Though storms at sea thus treat us;
For coming home, (a sweet reward!)
With smiles our sweethearts gree^ us.
Now too the friendly grog we quaff,
Our amorous toast,
Her we love most,
And gaily sing and laugh;
The sails we furl,
Then for each girl,
The petticoat display;
The deck we clear,
Then three times cheer,
As we their charms survey;
And then the grog goes round,
All sense of danger's drowned,
We despise it to a man.
We sing a little, etc.
A SEA SONG.
Tune -- Dibdin's Chelsea Pensioner.
ON board the good ship Molly
I sailed from Portsmouth sound,
And left behind my Polly
To trace the world around.
To fear I am no stranger,
But jovial, bold and free;
And for to brave all danger
Resolved to go to sea.
And now on board so cheerly
I drink my flip and grog;
My messmates love me dearly,
And call me jolly dog.
To reef, or luff, or mount the shrouds
So merrily am I,
Or on the main-top face the clouds,
Drunk, sober, wet, or dry.
To America then, with pleasure,
I bid a long farewell,
In hopes to gain some treasure,
And poverty repel.
But if on board the Molly
A fatal cannon ball
Should rob me of my Polly,
Why then adieu to all.
THE bright God of day, drew westward away,
And the evening was charming and clear;
The swallow remains, nimbly sailing over the plains,
And the shadows like grants appear.
In a gay summer bower, when the violet's in the flower,
And zephyrs breathe odors, around,
Loved Celia she sat playing on her spinnet,
And she charmed all the grove with the sound.
The gay God of love flew over the grove,
By zephyrs conducted along,
As she touched on the string, he beat time with his wing,
And the echo repeated the song.
Rosy bowers, she sung, while the harmony rung,
And the birds they all fluttering arrive;
The industrious bees, from the flowers on the trees,
Gently humm'd, with their sweets, to the hive.
Ye mortals beware how ye venture too near,
Love doubly is armed to wound,
Your fate you may shun, but you're surely undone.
If you rashly approach near the sound.
WHENEVER I ask a brisk girl for a kiss,
She looks plaguey frumpish and takes it am^ss,
But when this Eneas once offers to b^^l,
She cocks up her chin, and cries -- Kiss if you will.
The man has most certainly got a rare knack,
O^ giving a ki^s with an excellent smack;
And ^o ^ooner's alone with a wench, but he whips
His arms round her neck, and then smack goes he^ ^ips.
I AM a brisk and sprightly lad,
But just come home from ^ea, Sir,
Of all the lives I ever led,
A sailor's life for me, Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo,! yeo, yeo, yeo!
Whilst the boatswain pipes all hands,
With a yeo, yeo, yeo, Sir,
What girl but loves the merry ^ar,
We over the ocean roam, Sir,
In every clime we find a port,
In every port a home. Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo, etc.

But when our country's foes are nigh
Each hastens to his gun. Sir,
We make the boasting Frenchmen fly,
And bang the haughty Don, Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo, etc.

Our foes subdued, once more on shore,
We spend our cash with glee, Sir,
And when all is gone, we drown our care,
And out again to sea, Sir.
Yeo, yeo, yeo! yeo, yeo, yeo!
And when all is gone, again to sea,
With a yeo, yeo, yeo, Sir.
THE SAILOR.
IF round the world poor sailors roam,
And bravely do their duty,
When danger's past they find a home,
With each his favorite beauty.
For Nan, and Sue, and Moll, and Bess,
And fifty more delight them,
And when their honied lips they press,
Who says it don't requite them.
If rich he comes, what pleasure then,
If Nancy does not share it?
If poor, he scorns then to complain,
For Nancy too will bear it.
What lubber then like him so gay,
His grog drowns all his sorrow,
For dam'me, if it is foul today,
It Is sure to right tomorrow.
He springs on shore, assured to meet
The partner loved most dearly,
In merry dance, with nimble feet,
To pipe and tabor chea^ly.
POOR JACK.
GO patter to lubbers and swabs, do you see,
'Bout danger, and sear, and the like;
A tight water boat, and good sea-room give me,
And it e'n't to a little i will strike.
Though the tempest top-gallant-mast smack smooth should sinite.
And shiver each splinter of wood,
Clear the wreck, stow the yards, and bowse every thing tight,
And under reef'd foresail we'll scud. --
Avast! nor don't think me a milk sop so soft,
To be taken for trifles a back;
For they say there is a Providence sits up a-loft --
To keep watch for -- the life of Poor Jack.
Why I heard our good Chaplain palaver one day
About souls, heaven, mercy and such --
And, my timbers! what ling^ he would coil and belay!
Why 't was all just as one as high Dutch;
But he said, how a sparrow cannot founder, do you see;
Without orders that come down below,
And many fine things that proved clearly to me
That providence takes us in tow;
For says he, do you mind me, let storms ever so often
Take the top^ails of sailors aback,
There Is a sweet little cherub that sits up aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
I said to ou^ Poll, for do you see she would cry,
When last we weighed anchor for sea,
What argufies sniv'ling and piping your eye?
Why what a great fool you must be!
Cannot you see the world's wide and there is room for us all,
Both for seamen and lubbers a shore;
And if to old Davy I should go, dear my Poll,
Why you never will hear of me more:
What then, all is a hazard, come don't be so soft,
Perhaps I may laughing come back;
For, do you see there is a cherub sits smiling aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poo^ Jack.
Do You mind me, a sailor should be every inch,
All as one as a p^ece of ^he ship,
And with her brave the world without offering to flinch,
From the moment the auchor's a trip;
As for me, in all weathers, all times, sides, and ends,
Nought's the trouble on duty that waits,
For my heart is my Poll's, and my rhino my friend's,
And as for my life it is the State's:
Even when my time comes, never believe me so soft,
As with grief to be taken aback;
That same little cherub that sits up aloft,
Will look out a good birth for poor Jack.
WE CONQUER, DEAR GIRLS.
COME, sailors, be filling the can
The wind is beginning to blow:
We Have time to drink round to a man,
And then to weigh anchor must go.
What thousands repair to the strand,
To give us a cheering adieu;
It Is plain they believe on the land,
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
When on the main-top-sail yard
The sailor is swung to and fro,
Let the tempest blow ever so hard,
He whistles defiance to woe.
The gale can but last for a while,
Is always the boast of the crew;
And then they reflect with a smile,
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
Though battle tremendous appears,
When blood stains the face of the main;
The' thunder resounds in his ears,
The sailor's a stranger to pain;
The thought with what rapture and pride
Each girl will her hero review,
It Is this makes him danger deride,
We conquer, dear girls, but for you.
HE STOLE MY HEART AWAY.
WHEN rural lads and lasses gay
Proclaimed the birth of rosy May,
When round the maypole on the green,
The rustic dancers all are seen;
'Twas there young Jocky met my view,
His like before I never knew,
He pip'd so sweet, and danced so gay,
Alas! he danced my heart away.
At eve' when cakes and ale went round,
He placed him nex^ me on the ground;
With harmless misrth and pleasing jest,
He shone more bright than all the rest;
He talked of love, and pressed my hand,
Ah! who could such a youth withstand?
Well pleased I heard what he could say,
His charms have stole my heart away.
He often heaved a tender sigh,
While rapture sparkled in his eye;
So winning was his grace and air,
He might the coldest heart ensnare;
But when he asked me for his bride,
I promised soon, and soon complied.
What nymph on earth could say him nay?
Alas! he stole my heart away.
HAD NEPTUNE.
HAD Neptune, when first he took charge of the sea,
Been as wise, or at least been as merry as we,
He Would have thought better on it, and instead of the brine,
Would have filled the vast ocean with generous wine.
What trafficking then would have been on the main,
For the sake of good liquor, as well as for gain,
No fear then of tempest, or danger of sinking,
The fishes never drown that are always a-drinking.
The hot thirsty sun then would drive with more haste,
Secure in the evening of such a repast;
And when he would got tipsey, would have taken his nap,
With double the pleasure in Thetis's lap.
By the force of his ravs' and thus heated with wine,
Consider how gloriously Phoebus would shine,
What vast exhalations he would draw up on high,
To relieve the poor earth as it wanted supply.
How happy us mortals, when blessed with such rain,
To fill all our vessels, and fill 'em again,
Nay even the beggar that has never a dish,
Might jump in the river and drink like a fish.
What mirth and contentment, on every one's brow,
Hob as great as a prince, dancing after his plough;
The birds in the air as they play on the wing,
Although they but sip would eternally sing.
The stars, who I think, don't to drinking incline,
Would frisk and rejoice at the fume of the wine;
And merrily twinkling would soon let us know,
That they were as happy as mortals below.
Had this been the case, what had we enjoyed,
Our spirits still rising our fancy never cloyed;
A pox then on Neptune, when 'twas in his power,
To slip like a fool, fuch a fortunate hour.
THE MAID OF THE MILL.
WILLIAM. I HAVE kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maids,
And changed 'em as often do you see;
But of all the fair maidens that dance on the green,
The maid of the mill for me.

PHOEBE. There Is fifty young men have told me fine tales,
And called me the fairest she;
But of all the gay wrestlers that sport on the green,
Young Harry's the lad for me.

WILLIAM. Her eyes are as black as the shoe in the hedge,
Her face like the blossoms in May;
Her teeth are as white as the new-shorn flock,
Her breath like the new-made hay.

PHOEBE. He Is tall, and he is strait as the poplar tree,
His cheeks are as fresh as the rose;
He looks like a 'squire of high degree
When dressed in his Sunday clothes.

DASH-ALONG.
Tune -- Collin's Coach-box.
'TWAS about ten o'clock when we first set out,
And through London and St. George's Fields made a rout;
There was no need to bawl out -- Greenwich, a-hoy!
For inside and out was well crammed, my boy.
Ay ay, we had them of all sorts and sizes, milliners and mantua-makers.
shopmen and 'prentices; ay, and two or three tailors, with their customers
clothes on. all crammed in my Wip away, dash-along, heigh gee ho! etc.

My silk handkerchief gives all the girls delight,
Which is tied in a bow round my squeezer so tight;
And then at these times I sports every thing new;
From the hat on my head, damme, down to my shoe.
And then I Am the clev'rest whip going: 'twas but the other day turning sharp
round the corner I upset an old woman and her apple stall; I loves fun, and
blow me tight into a gin-shop if I wa'nt off before the old woman could say --
Hollo I stop that fellow there with his

Whip away, and.

Now I Have got to my journey's end sound as a roach,
I Will just run you over the contents of my coach:
The first was a prude, with a visage quite tart,
With her back to the horses, like a thief in a cart.
And it was -- Lord! only look at that impud'nt creature, I dare be bound she
a'nt seventeen, and yet she is ogling and leering at every fellow she meets:
oh! sye, for shame; ^ye, for shame; what will this world come to. Come, come,
Dina, says her brother, you forget when I found you b^hind the ^arlour door
with the Captain -- 'Pshaw! brother, accidents will h^ppen sometimes, with my.

Whip away, etc.

A sailor, good natur^d and brisk as a be,
M^king pleasant remarks on each object the sea;
A Welshman, a Scot, and ^ vast number moro,
And a Paddy from cork, with his back against the door.
Och! blood and oons, says he, how cool it is now; I Have pulled up the windows
to keep out the heat. Arrah! fait, honey, and then we'er surrounded o'three
sides with a cloud of dust, just like a party of foot soldiers on horseback,
och I to be sure and it is very pretty fetching a walk in these

Whip away, etc.

But just as we got within sight of the town,
As the devil would have it, the coach it broke down;
At this sad mishap all my guests looked queer,
But none more than Tender, a pretty little dear.
Damn ye, ye scoundrel, says he, why didn't you look to your coach before you
came out? So I did, says I, you little pin-sticking son of a --. You lie,
damme. says he. Don't give me the lie, says I, or I shall be ap^ to give you a
taste of my

Whip away, etc.

SWEET SUGAR CANDY.
DEAR Judy my granny, was fond of the sweets,
And she knew all the virtues of sugar so well;
That for puddings or pies, sour trout, or sweet meats,
Aye, and choice apple-dumplings she bore off the bell:
And then for preserving she would got such a name,
And at tossing a pancak^ was always so handy,
That my grand-daddy took her to better his fame,
And she used to call him her sweet sugar candy.
And faith sure enough she had need to be sweet upon him, for his breath smelt
as agreeable as the stench of a gin barrel -- with his

Whack fall lal lal, de ral la ral lal, lal de ral.

For granny never thought grand-daddy was wrong,
So she called him her sugar-plumb sweet, and what not,
Then she patted his cheek and sung him a long.
And bade him not make quite so free with the pot.
But grand-daddy some how forgot what she said,
And in lifting the pot to his mouth was so handy,
That by some means or other he drank himself dead,
And so there was an end of her sweet sugar candy.
Och, Murphy, says she, and are you dead now? What a pity it was that you made
so free with the pot, when we were living together so comfortably --

With our whack fall lal lal, etc.

Poor Judy my granny, was now left alone,
And the boys in K^^k^nny all pitied her case;
'Till she cast a sheep's-^ye on on^ Paddy Machone,
So he led her to church, and the parson said grace;
And Judy and Paddy so well now agree;
For granny's a housewife so loving and handy,
That he swears, och, she is all barley sugar to me,
And she christened him, och, her dear sweet sugar candy,
With a whack fall lal, etc.
O'WHACK!
O LOVE! what the duce do you want in my bosom,
Get out of my sight and my heart let alone?
For had I a score I should certainly loose 'em,
As that I possess is no longer my own;
What means all this thumping, this fluttering and beating,
O good Master Cupid pray be easy now!
I long every Morn for the next Village meeting,
Though it adds to my pain but I cannot tell how.
Sing lara la, lara, la, lara,
Lara la, lara la, lara;
I cannot for the life of me make out the reason,
Why Love is the only thing never out of season.
Och when on the green we were all of us dancing,
'Twas there I first felt the effect of her eyes,
Each moment she would seize to be privately glancing
Fond looks at a heart she had caught by surp^ize;
She shot through and through like a loud clap of thunder,
My heart a large hole in my bosom did burn,
And sled to her arms, then pray where is the wonder,
That her own the dear crater should send in return?
O Cupid! you're surely of Irish extraction,
O help your poor countryman now at a pinch,
If you will stand my friend in the heat of the action,
May I never see Kilkenny again, if I flinch;
I Am not one of those who are given to lying,
I promise no more than I Am able to give,
I hate all your nonsense your kneeling and dying,
But I Will love her as long as she chooses to live.
MY TEMPLES WITH CLUSTERS.
MY temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine,
And barter all Joys for a goblet of wine,
In search of a Venus no longer I Will run,
But stop and forget her at Bacchu's tun.
Yet why thus resolve to relinquish the fair?
It Is a folly with spirits like mine to despair,
For what mighty charms can be found in a glass,
If not filled to the health of some favorite lass?
It Is woman whose charms every rapture impart,
And lends a new spring to the pulse of the heart;
The miser himself, so supreme is her sway,
Grows a convert to love and resigns her the key.
At the sound of her voice sorrow lifts up her head
And poverty listens, well pleased, from her shed;
While age, in an e^stacy, hob'ling along,
Beats time, with his crutch, to the tune of her song.
Then bring me a goblet from Bacchus's hoard,
The largest and deepest that stands on his board;
I Will fill up a brimmer, and drink to the fair;
It Is the thirst of a lover -- and pledge me who dare.
SONGS, In Inkle and Yarico.
INKLE. O SAY simple maid have you formed any notion,
Of all the rude dangers in crossing the ocean?
When winds whistle shrilly, ah will not they remind you,
To sigh with regret for the grot left behind you?

YARICO. Ah! no, I could follow and sail the world over,
Nor think of my grot when I look at my lover!
The winds which blow round us your arms for my pillow,
Will lull us to sleep whilst we are rocked by each billow.

INKLE. Then say lovely lass what if happily espying,
A rich gallant vessel with gay colors flying?

YARICO. I Will journey with thee, love, to where the land narrows,
And fling all my cares at my back with my arrows.

BOTH. O say then my true love we never will sunder,
Nor shrink from the tempest nor dread the big thunder,
Whilst constant, we'll laugh at all changes of weather,
And journey all over the world both together.

A VOYAGE over seas had not entered my head,
Had I known but on which side to butter my bread.
Heigho! sure I for hunger must die!
I Have sailed like a booby; come here in a squall,
Where, alas! there is no bread to be buttered at all,
Oho! I Am a terrible booby!
Oh, what a sad booby am I?
In London, what gay chop-house sings in the street,
But the only sing here is of nothing to eat.
Heigho! that I, for hunger should die!
My mutton's all lost, I Am a poor starving elf,
And for all the world a lost mutton myself;
Oho! I shall die a lost mutton!
Oh, what a lost mutton am I?
For a neat slice of beef, I could roar like a bull;
And my stomack's so empty, my heart is quite full.
Heigho! that I for hunger should die!
But grave without meat, I must here m^^t my grave,
For my bacon, I fancy, I never shall save;
Oho! I shall never save my bacon!
I cannot save my bacon not I!
PADDY O'BRIAN.
Tune -- Corporal Casey.
WHEN first I was kitten'd, it was in Kilkenny,
Such a brat sure as me, oh! there never was any;
Nay, the truth is, my father suspected my mother,
For the devil a-bit I was like one or the other.
Sing rub-a-dub, row-de-dow, Paddy O'Brian.
Sing rub-a-dub, etc
To be sure I Am by nature as tame as a lion;
Och! the world never saw such a Paddy O'Brian.
That my father was kind and my mother was tender,
By my shoul I Have more reasons than one to remember;
For to sharpen my stomach, and brighten my wit Sir,
Sure they left me to live upon what I could get, Sir
Och! rub-a-dub, etc.
Och! my daddy's a god and my mammy's a lion;
Ay, and I am the devil, old Paddy O'Brian.
That my parents were given to living genteely,
By my shoul is no lie, so I tell you it freely,
That if one daddy dies I have still got another,
And so I Am the Paddy of one or the the other.
Och! rub-a-dub, etc.
To be sure and my mother was rather a sly one,
When she got such a chicken as Paddy O'Brian.
THE PRETTY COTTAGER.
AS on a pleasant hill I stood,
A cottage in the vale I viewed,
Whereat I Would never been;
I thither went, as lost from town,
'Twas growing late, the sun was down,
I called to be let in.
A young and pretty Cottager,
Came tripping, singing to the door
And looked a soul's delight;
While blushes heightened every grace,
I silence broke, and told my case,
And begged to stay all night.
With trembling accent came reply,
You I Am sorry to deny,
But I am quite alone.
I urged distress and innocence,
While she replied, on no pretense
You must not, pray, be gone.
'Twas overcast, a lowering sky,
It rained, the whistling winds blew high,
And I to wander went.
When kind compassion seized her soul,
She could not bear me thus to stroll,
She called and gave consent.
Me she enjoined, to give a proof
Of honor, while be neath her roof;
(For virtue she could bo^st)
I vowed to act a noble part;
Her would have thanks with all my heart
But found my heart was lost.
Her modest air, her pretty face,
Her -- gods! her every grace,
I to the world prefer.
And if she learns to love like me,
My glory night and day shall be,
The pretty Cottager.
TALLY HO.
AT the sound of the horn,
We rise in the morn,
And waken the woods as woe thunder along;
Yoix, yoix, Tally ho!
After Reynard we go,
While echo on echo redoubles the song,
We waken the woods as we thunder along,
Tally ho! tally ho!
After Reynard we go,
While echo on echo redoubles the song.
Not the steeds of the sun,
Our brave courses outrun,
Over the mound horse and hound see us bound in full, cry,
Like Phoebus we rise,
To the heights of the skies,
And, careless of danger five bars we defy.
We waken the woods, etc.

At eve, Sir, we rush,
And are close to his brush;
Already he dies see him panting for breath:
Each feat and defeat,
We renew and repeat,
Regardless of life, so we are in at the death.
We waken the woods, etc.

With a bottle at night,
We prolong the delight.
Much Trimbush we praise, and the deeds that were done;
And yoix, Tally ho!
The next morning we go
With Phoebus, to end as we mount with the sun.
We waken the woods, etc.

ALONE BY THE LIGHT OF THE MOON.
THE day is departed, and round from the cloud,
The moon in her beauty appears;
The voice of the nightingale warbles aloud,
The music of love in our ears.
Maria appears! now the season so sweet,
With the beat of the heart is in tune;
The time is so tender for lovers to meet,
Alone by the light of the moon.
I cannot, when present, unfold what I feel,
I sigh -- can a lover do more;
Her name to the shepherds I never reveal,
Yet I think of her all the day over.
Maria, my love, do you long for the grove,
Do you sigh for an interview soon?
Does ever a kind thought run on me as you rove,
Alone by the light of the moon?
Your name from the shepherds whenever I hear,
My bosom is all in a glow;
Your voice when it vibrates so sweet through mine ear,
My heart thrills, mine eyes overflow.
Ye powers of the sky, will your bounty divine,
Indulge a fond lover his boon?
Shall heart spring to heart, and Maria be mine,
Alone by the light of the moon!
ROGER AND KATE.
YOUNG Roger the ploughman, who wanted a mate,
Went along with his daddy a courting to Kate;
With nosegay so large, in his holiday clothes,
(His hands in his pockets) away Roger goes.
Now he was bashful as bashful could be,
And Kitty, poor girl, was as bashful as he;
So he bowed, and he star'd, and he let his hat fall;
Then he grinn'd, scratched his head, and said nothing at all.
If awkward the swain, no less auk ward the maid;
She simper'd and blushed, with her apron strings played,
Till the old folks impatient to have the thing done,
Agreed that young Roger and Kate should be one.
In silence the young ones both nodded assent;
Their hands being joined, to be married they went.
Where they answered the Parson with voices so small,
You Would have sworn that they both had said nothing at all.
But mark what a change -- in the course of a week,
Kate quite left off blushing -- Roger boldly could speak,
Could joke with his deary; laugh loud at the jest;
She could coax too and fondle as well as the best:
And ashamed of past folly they have often declared,
To encourage young folks who at courtship are scared.
If at first to your aid some assurance yo^'ll call,
When once you are used to it it is nothing at all.
MAY I NEVER BE MARRIED.
THE kiss that he gave when he left me behind,
Sealed the promise of Patrick's love,
And when to my sailor I Am false or unkind,
Such falsehood expect from the dove.
For the promise of lovers should never be forgot,
And I promised the lad, when behind him I tarried,
That I never would forsake him though humble his lot,
Oh! honey, if I do may I never get married.
Now the winds and the waves bear him over the sea,
The young Squire would give me fine things,
But what are his riches or grandeur to me,
His baubles, his ribbons and rings.
For the promise, etc.

His cabin is low, content dwells within,
And snug is the thatch over the door,
For riches without him I care not a pin,
For my sailor's the lad I adore.
For the promise, etc.

The promise of lovers should never be forgot,
Yet sometimes, we all know, such hopes have miscarried;
I trust he will prove true, but I Will fit him if not,
Oh! honey, If I don't may I never be married.
For the promise, etc.

WHEN I WAS A YOUNKER.
WHEN I was a younker, and lived with my dad,
The neighbors all thought me a smart little lad,
My mammy, she called me a white headed boy,
Because with the girls I liked for to toy.
There was Liss, Priss, Letty, and Betty, and Doll,
With Meg, Peg, Winny, Tenny, and Moll.
I flattered their chatter so sprightly and gay,
I rumble them, tumble them, that is my way.
One fine frosty morning a-going to school,
Young Maggy I met, and she called me a fool;
From her as my primmer a lesson I took,
I swore it was pretty, and then kissed the book,
But school, fool, primmer, and trimmer, and birch,
And boys for the girls, I Have left in the lunch.
I flattered, etc.

It Is very well known I can dance a good jig,
And, at cudgels, from Robin I won a fat pig;
I wrestle a fall, and a bar I can fling,
And when over a fl^ggon, most sweetly can sing.
But pig, jig, w^eket, and cricket and ball,
I Would give up to wrestle with Meggy of all.
For I flattered, etc.

THE ECHOING HORN.
THE echoing horn calls the sportsmen abroad,
To home, my brave boys, and away;
The morning is up, and the cry of the hounds
Upbraids our too tedious delay.
What pleasure we feel in pur^uing the fox,
Over hills and over valleys he fl^es.
Then follow, we'll soon overtake him, huzza!
The traitor is se^z'd on and dies.
Triumphant returning at night with the spoil,
L^ke Bach^^als s^outing and gay;
How ^wee^ with a bo^^le, and lass to refresh,
And loo^e the fatigues of the day.
With ^pot^, love and wine, fick^e fortune defy,
D^ll wisdom our happiness ^ours;
Since ^^fe is no more than a passage at best,
Let Us strew the way over with flowers.
THE SAILOR BOY.
THE sea was calm, the sky serene,
And gently blew the Eastern gale,
When Anna, seated on a rock,
Watched the Lovenia's les'ning sails
To heaven she thus her prayer addressed;
"Thou who can save or can destroy!
"From each surrounding danger guard
"My much loved little Sailor Boy.
"When tempests over the ocean howl,
"And even Sailors shrink with dread,
"Be some protecting Angel near,
"To hover over my William's head:
"He was beloved by all the plain;
"His father's pride, his mother's joy:
"Then safely to their arms restore
"Their much loved little Sailor Boy.
"May no rude foe his course impede,
"Conduct him safely over the waves:
"O may he never be compelled
"To fight for power or mix with slaves:
"May smiling peace his steps attend,
"Each rising hour be crowned with joy;
As blessed as that when I again
"Shall meet my much loved Sailor Boy!"
GENTLE MARY OF THE TWEED.
THE gentle maid of whom I sing,
Once lived where Tweed's blue waters wave,
But now the modest flower of spring
Hangs weeping over her dewy grave.
Fond nymphs! of Mary's fate beware,
Of perjured William's vows take heed.
Lest you should love, and then despair,
Like gentle Mary of the Tweed.
Though long he wooed the lovely maid,
And she was faithful in return,
To every sense of honor dead,
He fled, and left the fair to mourn!
Alarmed at her false lover's flight,
Her fair companions sought the mead,
To sink the hopes, in endless night,
For gentle Mary of the Tweed.
She heard -- but scorning to upbraid,
She breathed alone the secret sigh,
For graceful pride induced the maid
To hide her wrongs from every eye.
Here, in these shades, a prey to grief,
She tuned to plaintive strains the reed;
'Till death, from woe a blessed relief,
Smote gentle Mary of the Tweed.
Now, in her turf-bound grave, at rest,
Where yonder willow droops its head,
With hopeless care no more oppressed,
She sleeps beneath the waving shade.
The cruel wrongs are all forgot
Which forced her virgin heart to bleed:
Fond nymphs! be yours a milder lot
Than gentle Mary's of the Tweed.
THE WEDDING DAY.
WHAT virgin or shepherd, in valley or grove,
Will annoy my innocent lays;
The song of the heart, or the offspring of love,
When sung to my Corydon's praise,
Over brook and over brake, as he hies to the bower,
So lightly the shepherd can trip;
And sure, when of love he describes the soft power,
The honey dew drops from his lip.
How sweet is the primrose, the vi'let how sweet,
And sweet is the eglautine breeze;
But Corydon's kiss when by moonlight we meet,
To me are far sweeter than these.
I blush at his raptures, I hear all his vows,
I sigh, when I offer to speak,
And, O! what delight my fond bosom over flows,
When I feel the loft touch of his cheek.
Responsive and shrill be the notes from the spray,
Let the pipe through the village resound,
Be smiles on each face, O! ye shepherds, today,
And ring the bells merrily round.
Your favors prepare, my companions, with speed,
Assist me my blushes to hide;
A twelve month agone, this day I agreed,
For to be my love Corydon's bride.
END OF THE SONGS.
THE TREASURY OF WIT.
A KICK FOR A BITE.
IN the course of a very severe engagement between an English privateer and a
French one, the English boatswain had both his legs taken off by a shot; and as
he lay in that plight, called out to his Captain, to request that he would ram
both his legs into a cannon, and fire them off at the French, that he might
have the satisfaction of one kick at them before he died.

THE RETORT.
MR. COLT, superintendent of the canal at Fort Stanwix, being provoked at an
Irishman, gave him a sturdy kick. -- "By St. Patrick," retorted the Hibernian,
"if you kick so, while you are a Colt, what will you do, when you came to be a
Horse."

LAST WORDS OF DON FRANCIS.
PERICO de Aya^a, the buffoon of the Marquis de Villena, came to see Don
Francis, the buffoon of Charles the Fifth, when he lay on his deathbed.
Perico, seeing him in so bad a way, said, "Brother Don Francis, I request you
by the great friendship, which has always subsided between us, that when you go
to Heaven (which I believe must be very soon, since you have always lived such
a pious life) you w^^l beseech God to have mercy on my soul." Francis answered
-- "Tie a thread on this finger that I may not forget it." These were his last
words; and he instantly expired.

A MILITARY ANECDOTE.
A GERMAN peasant, newly enlisted in the army, was scarcely arrived at the
regiment, when he was sent with others upon a skirmishing party; and
approaching a wood in which a party of the French were posted, who immediately
fired upon the Germans, and while the muskut balls were flying very thick, the
honest peasant stepped out of the ranks, making a sign to the enemy to desist,
at the same time bawled out -- "Why what the devil are you firing for, don't
you see there are people a coming?"

PREACHING WELL APPLIED.
A CERTAIN Bishop had a servant, whom he ordered one festival day to go to a
butcher, who was called David, for a piece of meat; and then to come to church,
where the Bishop was to preach. The Bishop, in his sermon, bringing
authorities, from the scriptures, to prove his discourse in this manner,
"ISAIAH says thus, JEREMIAH says thus, EZEK^^L says thus;" at last, happening
to turn toward the door, just as his servant come in, went on, "and what says
DAVID?" Upon which the servant roared out, "DAVID swears that if you do not pay
what you owe him, you never need send to his stall again."

DEAD ALIVE.
CAPTAIN Christie, an Irish officer, who served with considerable credit in
America, had the misfortune to be dreadfully wounded in one of the battles
there. As he lay on the ground, an unfortunate soldier, who was near him, and
was also severely woundded, made a terrible howling, at which Christie
exclaimed,: "D-mn your eyes, what do you make such a noise for, do you think no
body is killed but yourself?"

STORY OF AN ASS, WHO CONTRADICTED HIS MASTER.
A MAN went to borrow an ass of a neighbor, who said the ass was not home. --
Meanwhile the animal happened to bray: upon which the borrower exclaimed, "How!
did you not tell me the ass was not at home? you certainly meant to deceive,
for I hear him bray." The other replied, in a great passion, "Why neighbor,
will you take the ass's word before mine?"

THE MAN OF FEELING.
A SWISS Captain, burying pell-mell in the field of battle both the dead and
the wounded, it was represented to him, that some of those, whom he thus
buried, were not quite dead, and with care might perhaps recover. 'Poh! poh!'
said he, "if you take their word for it, there is not a man of them will own
himself dead."

A DOUBTFUL CASE.
A SCHOLAR, meeting a man, said to him, with great seeming surprise, "Bless me,
Sir, I heard you was dead." To which the other answered, "Oh! no; it is not
true; you see I am still alive." The scholar replied, "Perhaps you are; but,
upon my word. I don't know how to believe you, for he, who told me you were
dead, is a man of much more credit than you are."

A REMARKABLE CASE.
A SCHOLAR, wanting money, sold his books, and wrote to his father in the
following manner: "Rejoice with me, my dear father, for now my books maintain
me."

TIT FOR TAT.
A COUNTRY fellow was just come to London, gaping about in every shop he came
to, at last he came to a lottery office, where seeing only one man sitting at a
desk, he could not imagine what commodity was sold there; but calling to the
clerk, "Pray Sir," said he, "what do you keep to sell here?" "Loggerheads,"
cried the clerk. "Do you," answered the countryman: "by the living jingo, then,
you have a special good trade, for I see you have but one loggerhead left."

HORSEMANSHIP.
AN Irish sailor, as he was riding, made a stop for a few minutes -- The horse
in beating off the flies, caught his hind foot in the stirrup; the sailor
observing it, said, "How now dobbin, if you are going to get on. I Will get off,
for dam-me if I Will ride double with you.

PRAYER AT SEA.
AN atheistical fellow, in a storm at sea, began to use this rhetoric to God
for his life: "O Lord, I beseech thee to hear my praver at this time, for thou
know I trouble thee but seldom."

SIGNS OF CIVILIZATION.
THE writer of a modern book of Travels relating the particulars of his being
cast away on an unknown shore, thus concludes:

"After having walked eleven hours without tracing the print of a human foot,
to my great comfort and delight, I saw a man hanging upon a gibbet, my pleasure
at seeing this cheering prospect was inexpressible, for it convinced me, that I
was in a civilized country."

SUM TOTAL OF A LORD MAYOR's TALENTS.
KING James the Second passing through Colchester, it was resolved, that the
Mayor should compliment him on his arrival. It so happened, that this chief
magistrate was eminently stupid (which is looked upon as no strange thing in
England). The town clerk was appointed to attend him at his back, and whisper
what he was to say to the King. When they came into his Majesty's presence, the
clerk, designing to encourage the mayor, whispered, "Hold up your head and look
like a man." "Hold up your head and look like a man!" did the mayor bawl to the
King. The clerk, astonished, whispered, "What the devil do you mean?" The mayor
bawled out, "What the devil do you mean?" The clerk, sweating with fear and
vexation, whispered, "By Heaven! you will ruin us all." The mayor immediately
repeated, "By Heaven! you will ruin us all." The clerk, in a violent rage,
said, "Oh! you blundering puppy, I wish you had never come here." The mayor
again bawled, "Oh! you blundering puppy, I wish you had never come here." The
clerk, on this, immediately took to his heels, and the mayor followed him,
leaving the King in a violent fit of laughter, though not without rage.

ORATORY.
WHEN Sir Richard Steel was fitting up his great-room in York buildings, which
he intended for public orations, he happened at a time to be pretty much
behindhand with his workmen: and coming one day amongst them, to see how they
went forward, he ordered one of them to get into the rostrum and make a speech,
that he might observe, how it could be heard. The fellow mounting, and
scratching his pate, told him he knew not what to say, for in truth he was no
orator. "Oh!" said Sir Richard, "no matter for that; speak any thing that comes
uppermost." "Why here, Sir Richard," says the fellow, "we have been working for
you these six weeks, and cannot get one penny of money; pray, sir when do you
intend to pay us?" "Very well, very well," said Sir Richard "Pray, come down I
have heard enough; I must own you speak very distinctly, but I cannot say I
like (...) subject."

COUNT DE GRANCE.
THE Count de Grance being wounded in the knee with a musket ball, the surgeons
made many incisions in the flesh to find it. The Count losing patience at last,
asked them, why they cut and carved him so cruelly? "We are seeking the ball;
"said they. "Why the devil did you not speak before", said the Count, "I took
it out myself and have it in my pocket."

TOASTS and SENTIMENTS.
THE President of the United States -- whose Spirit animates his Country --
whose Wisdom foils the intrigues of Corruption, and whose Fortitude leads
Anarchy in triumph.

The American Flag -- may every nation respect its bearers -- may the radiance
of its stars shed a luster over its friends, but its stripes lacerate the backs
of its enemies.

The American Eagle -- may the plots of disorganizers be pierced by his eye,
and their oppofition fall under his tallons.

The Congress of the United States -- while genius, eloquence and judgment
preside, as they have done over our national councils, we may with justice
speer at the bombastic threats of our enemies.

The Patriots of America, whose blood was shed at the altar of Liberty. May the
sons never lose the fire of their fathers to preserve those blessings
transmitted to them.

The Officers and Soldiers of the United States -- may they never want spirit
to resent the injuries done, or insults offered their country, ardor to pursue
to victory, nor mercy to adorn their conquests.

The American Eagle. -- Under the protecting influence of its fostering wing we
trust our fate to Heaven -- but, when its offered olive branch is spurned by
the haughty mandate of imperious villains, quickly may the thunderbolts of its
vengea^^^, be hurled on their devoted heads.

The gallant Youth of America -- may they justly appreciate the fair
inheritance transmitted to them by their ancestors.

The Fair Sex -- may their arms prove on sweetest refuge in adversity, and
their smiles the truest antidote to care.

The sentiments of the day -- " Millions for defense, but not a cent for
tribute."

May the volume of beauty never be stained by contaminating fingers.

May the cheerful heart never want agreeable companions.

May virtue shine when every other light is out.

May the smiles of the fair reward the efforts of the brave.

The voyage of life, may it end in the heaven of happiness.

Reason in our actions, religion in our thoughts, and reflection in our
expressions.

Serenity to every breast that beats with philanthropy.

Absalom's end to the somenters of public mischief.

Community of goods, unity of hearts, nobility of sentiments, and truth of
feelings, to the real lovers of the fair sex.

Envy in an air-pump, without a passage to breathe through.

Goodness in our thoughts, gentleness in our words, and generosity in our
actions.

All we wish and all we want.

The sweets of sensibility without the bitters.

The pleasure (...), imagination realised.

Taste to our pleasure, and pleasure to our taste,

CONTENTS.
ATTENTION pray give while of hobbies I sing, PAGE 7 As passing by a shady
grove, PAGE 35 A failor's life's a life of woe, PAGE 46 A voyage over seas had
not entered my head, PAGE 62 As on a pleasant hill I stood, PAGE 63 At the
sound of the horn, PAGE 65 Columbia's Bald Eagle displays in his claws, PAGE 29
Cease, ^ude Boreas, blust^ring railer, PAGE 36 Cease a while, ye winds to blow,
PAGE 38 Could you to the battle march away, PAGE 40 Come sailors, be filling
the can, PAGE 53 Distress me with those-tears no more, PAGE 45 Dear Judy my
granny, was fond of the sweets, PAGE 58 Fly ye traitors from our land, PAGE 12
For England, when with favoring gale, PAGE 24 Fair Kate of Portsmouth loved a
tar, PAGE 43 Great news! great news! great news! great news, PAGE 14 Give me
wine, rosy wine, that foe to despair, PAGE 16 Guardian of our nation, stand
firm in your station, PAGE 34 Go patter to lubbers and swabs, do you see, PAGE 51
Hark! Echo! sweet Echo repeats the loud strain, PAGE 28 Had Neptune, when first
he took charge of the sea, PAGE 54 I am a blade both free and easy, PAGE 26 I
am a brisk and sprightly lad, PAGE 50 If round the world poor sailors roam,
PAGE ibid. I Have kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maid, PAGE 56 Jolly
morta's, fill your glasses, PAGE 16 Let the toast be Love and Beauty, PAGE 6
Let men elate, of Doctors prate, PAGE 17 My daddy was a tinker's son, PAGE 8 My
temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine, PAGE 60 One moon-shiny night,
about two in the morning, PAGE 18 On board the good ship Molly, PAGE 48 O love!
what the duce do you want in my bosom, PAGE 59 O say simple maid have you
formed any notion, PAGE 61

