DARANZEL; OR, THE PERSIAN PATRIOT. AN ORIGINAL DRAMA. IN FIVE ACTS.

As performed at the Theater in Boston.

BY David Everett. Corrected and improved by a Literary Friend.

BOSTON, PRINTED BY JOHN RUSSELL. 1800.

PROLOGUE.
YE rightful sovereigns of a fertile soil,
Where copious plenty pays the laborer's toil;
Where growing commerce freights each flowing tide.
With CERES' bounty, and with NEPTUNE'S pride:
Since your brave fires their savage inmates crushed,
The tocsin silenced, and the war-whoop hushed;
The hostile canvass lessening from your shore,
The last remains of cursed invasion bore;
Dead be the memory of a noble foe;
Where bled the hero, let the olive grow.
Let dove-eyed peace succeed to war's alarms,
Bid savage rancor rust on useless arms;
Her amplest boon to modest merit give,
And guard those arts by which your glories live.
Your approbation's smiles let genius share;
From chilling frosts its budding blossoms spare.
Let not the panders of your taste oppose
The foreign bramble, to the native rose.
With nothing higher than a noble aim,
Your CANDOR'S all the author dares to claim.
Untaught by rules, he makes his guide the heart,
And modest nature deems the pride of art.
No tragic tale from history forms his plan;
His facts are passions, and their history, man.
While in the court the supple pander shines,
And cheerless virtue in the dungeon pines;
The elder world's disasters rise to view,
To foil the stubborn virtues of the new:
While these in contrast on the stage appear;
There the proud despot -- the firm patriot here;
That robbed in power -- this, armed with nature's laws; --
From scenes like these, the bard his moral draws. --
O, learn, Columbia's sons, to prize your land,
Where no bold tyrant dares to lift his hand;
Where rules a chief, whose power is all your own,
Virtue, his scepter -- and the laws, his throne;
Where, to obey -- is every freeman's pride,
And, to rebel -- were worse than suicide!
To captious critics, versed in scenic laws,
He dares not trust the merits of his cause.
View then, ye liberal, with a candid eye,
Kill not the bird, that first attempts to fly,
But aid his efforts with parental care,
'Till his weak pinions learn to ply the air,
'Till the young pupil dare aloft to rise,
And soar, with bolder flights, his native skies.
Persons of the Drama.
MEN.
Daranzel, Mr. BARRETT. Calledon, Mr. BAKER. Orcasto, Mr. S. POWELL. Bartour,
Mr. MUNTO. Arlem, Mr. USHER. Casmir, Mr. KENNY. Orontes, Mr. COLE. Asaph, Mr.
LATHY. Osmyn, Mr. HARPER. Officers, Guards, Prisoners, etc.
WOMEN.
Indamord, Mrs. S. POWELL. Zara, Mrs. BAKER. Zaphira, Mrs. BARRETT.
Daranzel.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Daranzel's Camp. A distant view of the City, Casstle, Harbor and
Fleet.
Enter OSMYN, as from a march. OSMYN. WHAT awe profound the arms of freedom
show!
When justice calls, it is glorious to direct
The avenging sword -- O! War, thou pride, and shame
Of man! thy awful pomp swells the warm tide
Of youthful blood, and half absorbs my grief.
-- But lo, Orcasto comes -- a true bred soldier!
To bid me welcome in my country's cause.
To him shall friendship, schooled in earliest youth,
Devote one social hour; -- then War! Revenge!
And Death! I dedicate myself to you!
Enter ORCASTO. Hail great Daranzel's son! let me but find
A place among Orcasto's friends -- I ask
No higher rank, no greater blessing: --

Orcasto. The man who draws his sword in freedom's cause
Needs not to ask the friendship of Orcasto;
He is my brother, and compels my love.
The faithful zeal thou show'st for Persia's rights,
Enrols thy name among her noblest friends.
To thy whole race is liberty indebted;
Scarce had the morning gilt the spires of Ormus,
When thy brave father joined Daranzel's army;
And now the son with equal ardor fired,
Asserts his kindred to the blood of heroes.

Osm. Thanks, good Orcasto -- be it our mutual aim,
To value glory, only as it gives
To injured man a bulwark against oppression.

Orc. Such Roman sentiments of patriot virtue
Are not ill suited to the time's emergence.
The number of our foes is now increased
By hireling troops of Calledon's allies,
Whose fleets now anchor in the bay of Ormus. --
But say, my Osmyn, when thy mind surveys
This massy edifice of regal power --
Oppression's toil -- propp'd up by long consent;
Does not some thought, revolting from our purpose,
Stir up thy doubts, and bid thy arm decline
The blow that strikes the vast colossus down?

Osm. Had the proud fabric justice for its base,
Time's latest hour might witness its duration;
But when it is founded on our pillaged rights,
And with the blood of innocence cemented,
Its enemy is champion of our race; --
In such a cause, a doubtful thought were traitor,
And mercy were but treason, falsely named.

Orc. True my good Osmyn. -- But to spare one gem,
One precious gem, from ruined royalty,
Would be more worth than worlds to this fond heart,
That glows with love, and bleeds for thee, Zaphira. ( Aside.

Osm. What says my friend? I know thou love the Princess,
And speed the time, when liberty secured,
Shall bless your mutual hopes in splendid peace. --
On me, Orcasto, never will dawn that day!
The sharpest arrow from misfortune's bow,
Has pierced this heart, and half unmanned its vigor.
Thou often have heard the treacherous tale rehearsed,
And wept with me the loss of many a friend,
The victims of our foes -- to make themselves
The first in crimes, pre-eminent in baseness,
They Have closed the tragic scene with female blood,
And wreak'd their brutal vengeance on my wife.

Orc. Whose sword has wounded thus the soldiers honor,
And fixed upon its owner's name the mark
Of infamy?

Osm. The cursed Belleferon's.

Orc. Fit deed for one, who heads the foes of freedom.

Osm. Four days ago he went, herald of peace,
And clemency! to murder all,
Who dared to advocate Daranzel's cause.
Like the guant wolf who seeks the unguarded flock,
He, in my absence, found his prey -- Silena
Fell by his hand, greatly disdaining life,
On his base terms. -- What unexpected fate
Awaits mankind! secure of bliss, I found
Silena gash'd with wounds, and pale in death!
Struck with the sight, it chilled my blood,
And stamped a gloom on every object round.

Orc. I know from feeling, how to pity sorrow;
And what it is to burn with indignation.
Long time agone, those veterans in fraud,
Who only war with women and with babes,
Seized from my mother's arms her infant child,
The darling object of Daranzel's love; --
Whether she lives, sequestered from her friends,
Or lies among the martyrs of our cause,
No diligence can learn. My mother too,
Still languishes, imprisoned by the king,
Who holds her life at his imperious will.

Osm. How can you bear with equal mind such ills?
Had I thy steady soul, I might ride safely
Through war's rough storm, and wish to enjoy the calm
Of peace; but, spite of all my fortitude,
Alternate grief and rage invade my breast,
And urge to just revenge, to glorious death,
An infant son, my only solace left,
May still survive to bear his father's name,
And taste the sweets of freedom and of peace,
Bought with the blood of all his ancestors.

Orc. We both are brothers in misfortune's lineage!

Osm. Then let this hour be sacred to our friendship

Orc. I give my heart and hand in mutual league.
My father and myself may fall in battle;
If my imprisoned mother should survive
Our death; be thou her son; avenge her wrongs;
And if my sister live, whatever her fate
May be, protect her for Orcasto's sake,
And be to her a brother?

Osm. This if I live,
Shall be my care; but should I fall, and you
Outlive your friends; when you shall hear my son,
With flowing eyes, cry, "where is my father?"
Be thou to him a father and a friend;
Imprint thy virtues on his tender mind,
And form his soul for all that is great and good;
The thought will banish every wish to live,
And soften all the pangs that death can give.
( Exeunt.
SCENE II. The Palace. ZAPHIRA and ARLEM.
Arl. Princess, obedient to thy orders,
I approach thy presence.

Zaph. Arlem, I know thee generous and brave;
My confidence in thee has been well proved;
This hour demands thy steadiest honor,
And thy surest friendship.

Arl. Whatever fate awaits thy royal father,
Thou art secure in all his subject's love.

Zaph. Thou do not fathom all my sorrow's depth;
My mind no longer can support their weight;
Thou must be partner in my secret anguish.
I am prepared to meet Daranzel's sword;
Or bear the stern reproaches of my father;
But can no more endure the dead'ning silence,
The cold indifference of Orcasto.

Arl. Often have I seen the courtier's color change,
When, at the mention of Orcasto's name,
The imprisoned sigh has risen from thy heart,
Which, while it spoke their rival's triumph there,
Blasted their fondest hopes -- their hopes in thee.

Zaph. Hope and despair too long have carried on
Their wasteful war within my tortured soul.
This hour must end the conflict -- yes, Orcasto!
If thou have love, here is its certain test --
( holding a letter. Here, Arlem, take this letter, it is the clue
To unwind the secret to Orcasto's heart,
Reveal my destiny, and change, perhaps,
The fate of Calledon. I know thy will
Joins with my father's foes; but thou would spare
His life, and ease a daughter's anguish.

Arl. Whatever Zaphira wills commands my service,

Zaph. Bear to Orcasto's tent the flag of truce;
And with thee take this ring, the sacred pledge,
To him well known; it shall be thy protection.
Deliver him this letter; -- as he reads it,
Read thou his looks; note every word, and bring
Me back with diligence his answer.

Arl. My life shall be devoted to thy charge.
[Exit.
Zaph. [solus.] And if success attend thy faithful zeal,
(And heaven I Will importune with prayers to speed thee,)
If on the tablet of Orcasto's heart
One fond remembrance of Zaphira live,
My father yet may reign in peaceful Persia,
Blessed with Daranzel's and the people's love.
[Exit.
SCENE III. Daranzel's Tent. DARANZEL meeting OSMYN.
Dar. Osymn! our country's genius hails thee welcome,
And to our hands commits the fate of Persia.

Osm. Toolong Daranzel have we brook'd oppression;
Freedom, in exile, mourns our nation's wrongs,
And calls on us to reassert its rights.

Enter ASAPH. Asap. From Calledon a herald has arrived,
And asks a secret audience with Daranzel.
( Exit Osmyn.
Enter CASMIR. Cas. Before I speak my embassy, let me
Avow my loyalty to Persia's king.

Dar. Thou may enjoy thy king, and he thy loyalty.

Cas. Are you still enemy to Calledon?

Dar. So far as he is enemy to man.

Cas. Our king is man's protector, not his foe;
His subjects pay their homage to him still,
And own him for their lord, and heaven's vicegerent!

Dar. The smiles of tyrants, and the praise of slaves,
May barter equal in your master's court.

Cas. Your haughty spirit, and your thirst for power,
May make you wish the place of Calledon;
And you may varnish your licentious deeds,
With the fair guise of justice, freedom, and
The rights of man! but proud --

Dar. No more!
I never drew my sword to fight the cause,
Which I would not lay down my life to gain,
And had I now as many lives to offer,
As Calledon inhumanly has taken
From those, in whom he found no crime but virtue,
I Would sooner lose them all than live like him!

Cas. The gall of fell rebellion taints your soul,
That mental jaundice has deceived your reason;
Else would you view in all its grandeur,
The lofty pyramid of kingly power,
Whose towering fabric braves the storms of time,
Admired by man, and consecrate by heaven.

Dar. Casmir, too long the splendor of a court
Has dazzled on thine eyes, and made them blind
To the meek page of unassuming truth; --
Else had thou known, that spite of swords and mitres,
Common consent's a living law; which looks
On former times, and mends the follies of
The ancient world: -- It Is voice is God's; and kings
Themselves must stand or fall, as this directs.

Cas. This poisonous doctrine, from your tongue, has been
The bane of Persia; but Daranzel, still
It Is in your power to save your forfeit life,
And reconcile yourself to Calledon;
Though by our laws you are condemned to die,
His gracious hand still holds out life and pardon,
On these mild terms, that you dismiss your troops
And yield obedience to his sovereign will.

Dar. Go, tell your king that I disdain his terms.
I have in humble style upon my knees,
Explained to him the justice of our cause;
I have implored him to redress our wrongs:
By him I was condemned to banishment --
But tell him, Casmir, while Daranzel lives,
That he will live in Persia; and although,
When young he fought for him in foreign climes,
He now will fight his country's cause at home
And loose those chains his ruthless hand has bound.

Cas. 'Twere well for you to look around, and see
What it is you have to cope withal. Behold
The castle's and the city's walls, strong armed
With veteran troops. The fleets of kings, allied
To Calledon, this day have filled the port,
All ready to pour forth their warlike hosts. --
Consider well, Daranzel, what must be
Your fate, when joined with these in battle.

Dar. Deluded mortal, did thou never learn
The impartial hand of justice weighs the fate
Of war -- I might have thronged the field with numbers;
All Persia stands prepared to pour her legions
Upon your servile hosts; I Have only led
The few whose courage discipline has tutored,
And we have sworn by him, who made us free,
To break our country's chains, or greatly fall,
A sacrifice at freedom's holy altar.

Cas. Presumptuous boaster; base, vain glorious man!
Thy proud ambition and imperious pride,
Which prompt thee thus, with most disloyal outrage,
To erect against thy lawful sovereign's throne
The fickle tumult of the mob, that page
Thy heels -- are their own chastisement! --
Mark me, pretender! have thou not forgot,
Some tissue of thy fate, whose certain clue
Our monarch holds -- some secret avenue
To reach thy heart, and pierce it to the core
With every malady, that anguish knows?
Do not remember (if thou'st feeling left,
'Twill void more poison than the scorpion's tooth,)
Do not remember, that our royal master,
To avenge thy crimes on all thy rebel race,
Still holds in durance strong, thy captive wife,
Whose very life its forfeiture incurs,
Upon the beck and pleasure of his will?

Dar. Do I remember? --
Can I forget thee, Zara? no never --
So judge me heaven when thou rememb'rest me! [ aside.

Yes, supple pander, to thy master's shame,
I do remember, since our nation's wrongs
Have roused its manly spirit into arms;
Your brave, your royal legions, not daring
To attack my army, have, with coward theft,
Waylaid and took by treachery my wife
Unguarded by a soldier's arm -- these are
Your boasted deeds -- women by rapine seized,
And murdered or immured in prison -- husbands
Torn from their wives and helpless babes, and racked
In torment on the wheel, or lingering out
A life, or rather a whole age of death,
In all the dreary horrors of a dungeon!

Cas. Thou know, Daranzel, by our sacred laws,
The life of every subject is the king's;
And he has by his royal scepter sworn,
If you his proffered mercy spurn, the life
Of you and your vile mob, shall sat his vengeance,
And that your wife, on my return, shall live,
Or die, as you are loyal, or disloyal
To your sovereign.

Dar. Egregious parasite!
She is protected by that king who guards
The just, and will avenge the crimes of despots.
Go, prince of courtiers, tell your haughty lord,
That if he dares to shed another drop
Of guiltless freemen's blood, Daranzel,
Whom he does threat with death, and his brave troops
Shall ever the sun has blushed upon his crimes,
Avenge his wrongs, and sit his vassals free!

Cas. I have no more to say -- you're fully bent
Upon your own destruction. Go on proud man,
And let the wrath of an offended king
Decide your fate! --

Dar. Nay; let the sire of heaven
Decide the fate of an offended king,
And punish, or reward, us both, as we
Regard or violate his sacred laws.
[Exit Casmir.
Re-enter OSMYN. Osm. What terms, Daranzel, does the monarch offer?

Dar. The price of freedom must be paid with blood,
Slavery, or death, are all the terms he offers.

Osm. Then give us death, if war decide it thus.
Those foreign slaves in whom the king confides,
Strike not a terror in the field of battle.
Our troops are emulous to meet the foe,
And count the useless moments long, that hold
The promised wreaths of victory from their brows.

Dar. Be it our care to lead them on to glory,
Direct by discipline their manly zeal,
Inspire its ardor for the public weal,
Till its full tide, on some auspicious day,
Burst over the throne, and sweep its wrecks away.
[Exeunt.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Field near the city. Moonlight. ZAPHIRA and ARLEM, in the habits of
Persian Soldiers.
Zaph. Be on your guard, my faithful Arlem;
Uncommon trembling seizes on my frame.
Has no patrole observed our wandering steps.
Or glanced upon my face?

Arl. Fear not, my princess!
Your helmet, and the veil of night, have hid
You from suspicion's eye. We Are safe beyond
The guards.

Zaph. At yonder grove, and at this hour,
You say was his appointment?

Arl. The time and place. --

Zaph. Ah! who walks yonder?

Arl. If, by the moon's dim light,
I see aright, it is his majestic form --
Orcasto's self, approaching to the grove.

Zaph. It Is he. -- oh! tell me Arlem, once again,
How did he look, when he received the pledge;
And with what words reply!

Arl. When he received the ring, a silent sadness
His visage marked; and, as he read your letter,
Often changed his color; thrice he kissed the token;
Then paused and sighed and to himself exclaimed
"Die, every other passion of my soul,
My country's love shall breathe, with every breath."

Zaph. Hope-killing words! why not declared before?

Arl. I saw, in all the movements of his soul,
Deep-rooted love remained but half concealed.

Zaph. I dread his presence; yet I long to meet him.
This hour I am resolved to know his purpose. --
Wait near, good Arlem, see that none approach us.
Now to prepare me, lest this woman's valor
Should sink beneath my trembling heart's probation.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II. A Grove. Moonlight.
ORCASTO, solus. To climb the enchanted height of airy greatness,
Regardless of the summit's dizzy danger,
And, like the sullen eagle in his flight,
To soar beyond society and law,
Is the proud lot of man's fatuity:
Thy lot ambition! glittering evanescence!
Farewell delusive dreams, youth's phantom pleasures!
The victor's laurel and the world's applause;
Farewell sweet blandishments of pride and fame!
All but the princess I can bid farewell!
Thee, too, Zaphira! -- yet this aching sense
Could never resign thee but with life's pulsation.
Often has this grove been witness to our vows. --
O, cruel memory, cease thy painful office?
This grove, now destined to behold my heart
Widowed of every hope its fondness cherished.

Enter ZAPHIRA. Zaph. Art thou Daranzel's son?

Orc. I bear that honor, sir, my name's Orcasto.

Zaph. I have a message (...) demands thy audience,
And challenges an answer from thy heart.

Orc. From whom?

Zaph. The Princess.

Orc. I wait the presence of Zaphira's self.

Zaph. I am her friend and confidante, and come
To make her presence welcome -- thou know
Before the sword of civil war cut off
All friendship from the throne of Persia,
Daranzel was the friend of Calledon;
And shared the highest honors of his court.

Orc. But now he claims a more exalted rank;
And stands confessed the foe of Calledon.

Zaph. And must Orcasto be Zaphira's foe,
Because Daranzel wars with Calledon?

Orc. It Is not a time to talk of private plaints;
It is a nation's wrongs we must redress.

Zaph. Must all thy former vows, and youthful love,
Be prized, but as illusions past, by her
Who built (...) them all hopes of earthly bliss?

Orc. My faith is plighted to my country's cause.
And it would ill become Daranzel's son,
To listen to the siren song of love,
When Persia's glory's calls him to the field.

Zaph. Shall I relate this answer to the Princess;
She whose affections, when her father's court,
Shone uneclips'd, and dimmed the east in glory,
Spurned offered sceptres to reward thy love!
And now when fortune's clouded cresant wanes,
And ruin like the hair-suspended sword,
Hangs over the roof of crumbling monarchy; --
Must the sad story of thy hearts defection
Destroy the only relict of her hopes,
Which fate, more merciful than thee, has spared?
Is this thy solace for a bleeding heart? --
Pause well, consider thou unfeeling patriot!

Orc. Unfeeling! nay, the conflict of my soul
Denies the guilt of cold ingratitude.
Oh! could Zaphira read this tortured heart,
Even she, the fair enchantress of my reason,
Would weep to triumph over my mind's allegiance. --
This be my answer, then, to fair Zaphira. --
My life is not my own till Persia's free,
Hereafter, if I live, I live for her.

Zaph. Oh generous Orcasto! heaven preserve thee*
Live for Zaphira! it is Zaphira hears thee!
[ Runs to embrace him, but faints in his arms; (...) she falls, her helmet
drops off, and discovers her face.]

Orc. Zaphira hears! oh, my fond heart's first idol!
Sweet angel maid, forgive my cold reserve,
'Twas but the stern restraint of stoic pride!
Look up Zaphira! thine Orcasto loves thee,
As the pure object of his soul's devotion,
Warm as his hopes, and sacred as his country!

Zaph. [ Recovering] My mind overcast with clouds of black despair,
Could not endure so bright a ray of hope.

Orc. Thou have surpised the passion from my soul,
O leave me, master of myself, Zaphira.
The voice of Persia calls me from thy arms;
Let not thy charms entice me from her cause.

Zaph. I would not lure thee from the post of honor*
But if I have interest in thy heart,
Grant me this one request -- thy sword is drawn
Against my father's life -- thou know the strength
Of filial love -- pity a daughter's tears.

Orc. If ever I forget my love for thee,
May he who hears my vows desert Orcasto.
Ask not for more, lest I should grant too much.
In war I must remember Calledon: --
This is an hour of peace -- if ought could buy.
Me from the cause in which I am engaged.
A mother's threatened life might sheathe my sword.

Zaph. If thou art bent on war, grant me this favor,
The most a daughter asks; the least a son
Can give -- should victory smile upon your arms,
Save thou my father from his empire's ruin; --
And if my tears can supplicate her life,
Zara shall yet survive to bless thy triumph!

Orc. O, virtuous maid, worthy of better fate,
Orcasto prays for victory, not revenge,
And should your father 'scape the chance of war,
I swear to save his life, nay, for thy sake,
Zaphira, I would almost spare his throne -- [ Trumpet heard.
Hark! it is the trumpet's note that breathes alarm --
So near us too! thou can not here remain;
I will conduct thee safely to the walls.

Zaph. Arlem, who led me hither, waits without.
His honest zeal is ample to protect me,
Without the risk of thy more valued life!

Orc. I know his well tried valor, and to him
Can trust with confidence my hearts best treasure.
Heaven's guardian angels wait upon thy steps!

Zaph. And crown with happiness thy virtues triumph!
[Exeunt together.
SCENE III. The open Field. Drums beating, trumpets, etc. etc. without.
Enter OSMYN. It Is sure the signal of assault, and here
The tumult led -- and now it is silence all!
An hour scarce past, Orcasto left the camp,
And this way wandered -- sad he seemed and thoughtful,
Perhaps the Princess? no it cannot be!
Suspicion cannot taint a soul so noble.
Though soft as sympathy, to woman's tears,
In virtue's armor clad, invincible,
Not even Zaphira's beauty could seduce
The lover's passions from the patriot's duty. [ retires up.
Enter ARLEM and ZAPHIRA, Tumult without. Zaph. Oh, Arlem, whether shall
Zaphira fly?

Osm. The princess! [ Aside.]

Zaph. The tumult thickens, and draws nearer to us.

Arl. Fear not, my royal mistress, Arlem's sword
Shall guard the safe though millions should surround.
His loyalty to thee shall nerve his arm
With triple strength. -- Fear not and let us on.

Zaph. Know thou the secret of this midnight war?
Or does the love, thou bear my falling fortunes,
Protect Zaphira, at thy life's adventure?

Arl. No danger can betide. -- We Are near the walls!
When you to meet Orcasto, parted from me,
On the adjacent hill I kept my watch;
Thence by the moon's pale light I saw a troop
Sallying in silence from the city gates.
Daranzel's sentinels were bribed or murdered;
For, under covert of the friendly shade,
Projected by the battlements, they marched
Without observance, toward the eastern camp,
In which Orcasto holds his station: --
If suspicion err not, Calledon incensed
Has traced the secret of your mind's affection;
And to prevent collusion with the foe.
Who, by an union with the Royal house,
Might hope to place the crown upon Daranzel,
Has planned this treach'ry against Orcasto's life.

Zaph. May heaven, in justice, still remember mercy,
Forgive my father, and preserve Orcasto!

Arl. Our road of safety is to the northern tower,
Which lies far distant from the scene of slaughter.
The stern Belliferon commands the assault;
For he alone of Persia's warlike sons,
Could meanly stoop to treachery and murder.

Zaph. Then strike him, Gods, with some swift lightning down.
Never may he live, to see his crimes exalt him!
Raise to display your everlasting justice,
Some heroes arm to pierce the fell destroyer!
Oh! may he perish, in the field inglorious,
This miscreant victim of his own ambition,
By whose insatiate, and abhorred lust,
A kingdom sinks, a nation weeps in blood!
[ Exeunt ZAPHIRA and ARLEM. OSMYN comes forward. Belliferon heads the attack!
-- I thank ye Gods,
The hour of retribution comes at last. --
Yes, sweet Zaphira! well have thou deserved
A kinder father, and a juster cause!
Thy prayer is heard too -- let Belliferon tremble!
Mid the thick war, the arm of justice waits him.
Silena's wrongs no more shall cry for vengeance.
Forgive, dear saint! forgive this tardy zeal;
Each recreant wound that gored thy mangled corse,
Calls me aloud to expiate thy fate;
And here I swear, the sword which now I draw,
Shall never again its peaceful mansion seek,
'Till vengeance, winged by Persia's angry Gods,
Level the fierce barbarian with the dust;
Or death, descending from the tyrants arm,
Cleave the warm heart, that beats but for Silena!
[Exit.
SCENE IV. The Palace.
CALLEDON, solus. Hence, bubble greatness! since thy phantom power
Has lost the imposing charm of sanctity,
Thy robust hardihood and sinewy arm,
Which, ages long betide, had awed mankind,
Have withered into base decrepitude;
And royal power, unsprinkled by the church,
Is but a ghost to stalk and to be gazed at!
Should Casmir's specious promises ensnare
Daranzels faith, he then is in my power;
And let him note it that I use it well!
Spoiled of their leader, his revolting rabble
Shall satin vultures, 'till they loath at carnage,
Wide havoc whelm them 'till their slaughter swell
The flood, that bears the fleets of my allies,
Which thence may learn to dread the fate of those
Who rear the impious standard of rebellion!

Enter CASMIR. What tidings bear thou from Daranzel, Casmir?
Is he still bent on war?
Cas. Immoveably. --

Call. Does he despise my offered pardon?

Cas. He mocks your offers and defies your power.

Call. Does he not fear the strength of my allies?

Cas. His pride contemns the whole.

Call. Vain man! knows not that Zara's in my power?
That I can writhe and goad his heart at pleasure?

Cas. I Have pointed out his danger all in vain.
He stands unmoved, in arrogance intrepid,
Smiles with complacence at your royal menace,
Braves all the fury of the gathering storm,
And holds its threat'n'd thunder in derision.

Call. Where does this desperado place his hopes?

Cas. In the pretended justice of his cause,
And ill-tried valor of his troops -- poor man!

Call. What are those troops, that thus elate his pride?

Cas. A rabble, resolute and fierce, as lawless.
Revenge! death! liberty! is all their cry.
Their zeal scarce curbed by discipline, they scorn
Repose, and seem impatient for the fight.

Call. Are they in possture of defense?

Cas. Alcanders's army just has joined Daranzel's;
They Have pitched their tents along the spacious plain,
And spread their numerous guards on every side.
The adjacent hills reflect their kindled fires,
And show their flag high wavering in the air,
As though they meant to court the stars to join them.
The river, castle and the fleet extend
Upon their right within a cannon's shot;
The city walls look down upon their front,
And bid defiance to their arms; the ocean
lies on their rear, forbidding a retreat.
Belliferon, if it is your royal pleasure,
Shall hem them in with walls invincible,
With hosts of loyal veterans on the left.

Call. See that the gates are armed against assault,
Order the fleets to hold themselves prepared,
And let tomorrow's sun, when first he shines,
Behold his face reflected from the blood
Of rebels. -- Bid Belliferon here.
His sword has never rusted in its scabbard;
And should this night's adventure prove it trusty,
More glorious perils, with tomorrow's dawn,
Await its bold experiment. Destruction
Shall pour her deluge in on every side;
And should Daranzel, whose proud contumely
Spurns offered pardon, stem the torrents course;
His saucy head shall on a pike be carried,
To pay its homage to the king he scorned

Cas. Were I t'advise, my liege, I Would plot his death
By other means: He is well skilled in fight;
And many war proved veterans fill his ranks --
His army hang upon his tongue, and act
As with one soul, a timely blow should make
His ruin certain, and thy conquest sure.

Call. How, Casmir?

Cas. Bartour would best perform the deed;
Long taught in all the policy of war,
He knows full well to turn his hand to fraud:
When young he was Daranzel's brother-hero.
Let him forthwith go to the rebel's camp,
And feign himself an enemy to thee,
Daranzel will receive him as a friend --
A secret poignard may complete the rest.
Then let the royal army be prepared
To rush upon the foe, and the whole fleet
Pour forth their men at once, they will be confused
Without their chief, and make but small resistance.

Call. your counsel I approve -- it shall be done.

Cas. My liege, I would not suffer a delay;
He has already grown too insolent;
In the imperial conqueror's style, he spurns
Your clemency and menaces your life.

Call. Time was when mercy wooed him to her arms;
He might have touched her scepter and have lived;
But mercy never more shall interpose.
Fly quick with orders to Belliferon!
Have every soldier ready for the fight,
Hew down the first who turns his back to death.
But stay -- command a message to the fleet,
Let them on signal instant join the slaughter.
[Exit Casmir.
I Will stimulate Bartour's slow treacherous hand,
And aim the poignard at Daranzel's heart --
Then let the cannon speak my laws in thunder,
'Till death's long list contain each rebel's name,
And war's decisive voice assert my claim!
[Exit. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. A private Apartment in the Palace. CALLEDON and Attendant.
Call. Quick, summon here Bartour!
Tell him I Have secret business of import;
Let no delay attend his lingering steps.
[Exit Attendant.
Vile swarm! dare ye, with insect sting, provoke
My wrath? flock round my throne -- raised high
Above your impotence, it stands secure --
Your leader gone, I spurn your feeble efforts -- [ pause:
What fearful thought whispers Daranzel safe!
If safe then I am on the rack; my throne
Afloat on fortune's treacherous wave -- so (...) --
If it must sink, it sinks in blood?
Enter ZAPHIRA. Zaph. My sire!
I beg you hear a suppliant daughters prayer,
Whose dearest object is her father's safety.

Call. Let not your fond complaints abuse my patience;
The insults offered to my crown, inflame
My soul -- it is not a time to hear entreaties.

Zaph. Frown not thus sternly on your child, who feels
Her life and happiness bound up in yours:
You see the threatening dangers that await you --
Behold your realm all rising up to arms:
Might not the impending storm be hushed to peace,
And you still sit securely on your throne
By timely listening to the voice of mercy?

Call. Peace! safety! and the voice of mercy!
Go, trait'ress from my sight, nor dare offend
Mine ears with terms, that ill become thy tongue;
Let puling babes lisp them to their fond mothers --
War, torture, and revenge, my voice shall echo,
'Till from the earth I extirpate my foes.

Zaph. Look on your child; behold her swollen with grief,
And laden with a thousand cares for him,
Who sternly chides, and calls her trait'ress. Peruse
Each period of my life, and if you find
One disobedient act, then spurn my tears,
And banish me forever from your sight.

Call. How has submission to my will been shown?
Have you endeavored to suppress rebellion,
And check the daring spirit of my foes? --
No, like a feeble-hearted girl, unfit
To claim relationship to crowns, you have stood
Between the traitor and my sword, and saved
The lives of those, whom justice doomed to death: --
But you have done -- your tears have lost their power;
My heart is barred to woman's weak entreaty.

Zaph. On heaven's high throne, mercy with justice rules;
Let her mild voice be heard by you on earth:
Her scepter will protect thy crown, and bind
Your subject's hearts --

Call. Plebian vileness! --
Go, fawn to fools and traitors. -- It Is Orcasto,
The son of my inveterate foe, who moves
Thy tongue, dissembler -- love, that spurns all law,
That levels royalty with turpitude,
And prates of filial duty, while it points
A poisoned dagger to a parent's heart. --
It Is this, Zaphira, steals you from yourself,
And makes you alien to your father's throne.

Zaph. Alas my father! did thou know but half
The anxious love, that glows within my bosom,
With warm solicitude to guard thy safety,
Thou would not heap reproaches on Zaphira;
Nor with the stings of undeserved suspicion,
Consign thy daughter to her mother's fate,
Who died in anguish of a broken heart;
The unmurmuring pang of melancholy grief!
Like her inspired with pure affection's zeal,
My hopes have been to make thy subjects happy;
And should thy stern unkindness wear this frame,
To the pale precincts of its destined bourne,
Like her, I Would pray thy throne might be secured,
By equal justice and thy people's love --

Call. No more;
Away! I know thee not,
Thou child of treason; I renounce thy kindred!
And if the idle fantasies of love
Still rule thy woman's weakness, -- sweet Zaphira!
Go, weep for traitors, at thy mothers tomb; [ with irony.
[Exit.
ZAPHIRA, solus. Down swelling heart! thy malady is cureless! [ pause.
Yet must my father perish? Oh! could I
With life's oblation sooth his foe's resentment,
This willing bosom, (cruel as he is!)
Should sheath my poniard and their swords at once --
But no! it would not be -- Daranzel's hate
Is singly pointed at the king's oppression,
Which to his nature is so near affianc'd,
No casuist, but death, can sever them!
And is there then no reconcilement left,
To mediate between his pride and ruin? [ pause.
None, lost Zaphira, none! [ is going.

Enter INDAMORA. Oh Indamora!
Ind. What new misfortune thus o'erwhelms with grief?
Impart to me my share of all your woes,
And ease your heart of its o'er-bearing burden,

Zaph. You, since my royal mother's death, have been
My sole companion, and my only solace.
The pitying tear flows not from Calledon;
Nor does the father's smile illume his face.
The dangers, that surround him, vex his soul,
And banish all that is tender from his breast.

Ind. The tumults of the realm may for a while,
Make Calledon neglectful of his daughter;
But even his most inveterate foes behold
Zaphira's virtues with acknowledged friendship --

Zaph. Friendship is not allied to royal blood;
To rocks and deserts with indignant scorn,
She flies from courts -- O, my Indamora!
Do not thou see Daranzel bearing terror
Even to the palace-gates; -- he now no longer falls
A humble suppliant at my father's feet;
But, at the head of the whole realm, he points
A nation's vengeance to the throne of Persia.

Ind. Though victory may crown Daranzel's arms,
Yet will he be a generous foe; -- the brave
Are kind. One filial tear from thee, Zaphira,
Would sooth his vengeance, and preserve thy father!

Zaph. Daranzel well deserves the praise of valor,
Nor is his heart less generous than brave.
But a whole nation's wrongs -- the insults offered
To all his friends, can never be forgiven.
No sacrifice, that Calledon can make,
Except his life, will calm a people's rage,
Or expiate his injuries to their leader.

Ind. Nay, let not fancy's hydra woe's distress thee;
They mock the brain, and tempt to desperation!
Let us retire, 'till this dire storm be past.
To some frequentless place of refuge in
Remotest Persia, where aloof from war,
And persecuting foes, thy friend may cheer thee,
Divide thy solitude and share thy fate!

Zaph. Oh! Indamora! how much you have promised
As yet you know not! but when you shall see
My father fallen, and his foes demand
My life, or sentence me to banishment,
Shall not you blush to call Zaphira friend? --
The orphan daughter of a vanquished king,
Is the last child in woe's wide family,
To escape outlawry from the world's compassion;
For the rude cavils of unfeeling malice
Are all the boon man's pity can bestow,
The only dowry of her shattered fortunes!

Ind. No fate shall ever part me from Zaphira;
I am yours by all the ties of gratitude.

Zaph. You wound my heart -- You owe no gratitude
To me. My friendship's mingled with a crime;
Nor had we known this interchange of loves
Had not your parents, ignorant of your fate,
Long time believed, that you had early fallen,
A guiltless victim to the king's revenge.

Ind. Alas! I never knew, who gave me birth;
Nor can I claim one drop of kindred blood.
But thee I Have found the sister and the friend.
And trust me princess, though thy fortune's ebb,
My life's best joys shall be involved in thine.

Zaph. Kind Indamora! I must undeceive you.
Come to my chamber, I will there divulge
The important tale -- the secret of thy birth,
Which nothing, but the mandates of my father,
Had kept thus long secluded in my heart.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II. Daranzel's Camp, Stage partly light. Enter DARANZEL, Meeting
ORCASTO, ASAPH, and OFFICERS.
Dar. Veterans, our safety bids us watch the foe,
And hold ourselves in readiness for battle.

Asaph. Throughout our sleeping ranks, each soldiers heart
Is wedded to his arms; -- Sound the alarm
And every man is martiall'd for the fight.

Dar. See that our guards are strongly reinforced;
Ere morning dawns, we must expect assault.
[Exit Asaph,
Why sits dejection on Orcasto's brow?
Orc. I hoped to find Alcander with my father;
To him I come a most unwilling herald*
Of sad disaster -- Of his Osmyn's death!

Dar. Of Osmyn's death! (with agitation) How fell the noble youth?

Orc. Last night's eruption by the royal guards
Upon our eastern camp, was checked without
Much blood's effusion. -- To pursue the foe
Back to their battlements, a chosen troop
Instant with gallant Osmyn were dispatched.
Hard by the eastern wall they made a stand.
At once a host came rushing from the gates;
Belliferon rode proudly at their head.
Osmyn no sooner saw the exulting chief,
Than on he spurred to meet his well known foe.
He bade Silena look from heaven and see
Her death revenged. The giant leader stood;
Like some tall rock that spurns the assailing wave,
And with a sneer exclaimed -- "What boy is this,
"Who from his mother's arms, thus eager flies
"To death?" then bade the gazing multitude
Look on, and see how rebels fell before him,
Scarce had he spoke, ere Osmyn plunged his sword
Deep in his breast. The foe on every side
Closed in, and aimed their fury at the victor.

Dar. Was he deserted thus?

Orc. Orcasto never left his friend in danger!
When I beheld him thus besieged with numbers,
Resolved to save his life or share his fate,
I marched my whole detachment to relieve him;
Soon as our horse arrived, the foe retired;
But ere my tardy hand could give him aid,
Already covered over with wounds he fell;
Nor can the field's most diligent research
Discover where his body is disposed.
Thus with the choicest blood, that ever ran
In freeman's veins, was vengeance dearly bought.

Dar. Oh, war, this is thy chanceful destiny!
Well, since it is thus, give us the boon we seek;
And if but one sad hundred should survive,
To taste the sweets of law-protected freedom,
Persia, though desolate, would still be happier,
Than if'twere peopled by a million slaves.
[Exeunt.
SCENE III. ZAPHIRA'S Chamber.
ZAPHIRA, discovered. O, dreadful night! war, treachery, revenge,
Stalk through thy shades, and give to darkness, horror!
It Is past the hour of our assignment; -- where
Can Indamora stay beyond her promise?
If soon she comes not, Arlem's waiting at
The palace gates will be suspected, and
Alone, disguised 'mid this intestine uproar,
Our visit to the prison will be dangerous,

Enter INDAMORA. Ind. Your pardon, sweet Zaphira! my delay
Was held in conference with our faithful guide:
The palace front was so beset with guards,
He for our safety had obtained the key
Of the west postern gate; where, one hour hence,
He Will wait to give us conduct to the prison. --
Mean time he hastens to Daranzel's camp,
Whose friends, within the walls, are doomed to feel
The direst weight of Calledon's revenge.

Zaph. What new disaster thus inflames his vengeance?

Ind. The spirit of revolt spreads through the city,
And menances the throne. The king appriz'd,
Has ordered all his guards to scour the streets,
And check sedition by promiscuous death. --
I feel a thousand cares for Zara's sake,
More than a daughter's transports swell my soul;
The anxious fears that hover round her fate,
Convert my bliss to exstacy of woe!
Brought up an orphan, mid my father's foes,
Of birth unknowing, by my friends unknown,
A solitary branch, by adverse storms
Torn from its parent tree, and carried with
The tempest, far from clime and culture;
Oh! my Zaphira, in one little story,
To know within a prison's cheerless walls,
A mother still exists; -- of whom alas!
Strained memory's ball can trace no lineament.
And when I Am told the author of my being
Lives in his country's love, its friend and hero,
To hear this very night, is doomed to end
His life and glory by a murderer's poniard!
To pass in one brief hour such fierce extremes
Of bliss and agony, o'erpower my senses --

Zaph. Nay droop thee not. Daranzel still may live
Thy heart is put to too severe a proof.
The fault was mine; and yet I erred from love!
When Arlem first came breathless from the tower,
With ardent zeal and ominous report,
That brave Cassander, captain of the guards,
Had seen Bartour, with passport from the king,
In rustic habit, pass the gate, that faced
Daranzel's tent; -- Suspicious of his errand,
The occasion's speed forbade a moment's lapse;
Nor could we hesitate to make the means,
To guard Daranzel against the traitor's wiles,
A living witness of his child's recovery.
Full well I knew, the tale must wring your heart,
But thought the endurance of one aching night,
An evil, less acute and terrible,
When 'twas inflicted to preserve a father.

Ind. O, cease, Zaphira, I deserve thy censure:
This anxious bleeding heart will plead atonement.
Thy kind affection loves my very sorrows;
I cannot now repay thee but with tears.
Hereafter should the happy power be mine
My gratitude shall show a nobler comment.

Zaph. A tedious, melancholy, restless hour,
Must yet revolve ere Arlem can return.
Protecting angels! aid his embassy,
And punish treachery with the death it merits.
Come, Indamora, let our hopes sustain
The lagging time's dull equipage of cares --
These painful moments but prelude the joys
That wait thee in the prison, where thy mother
Already told the story of thy life,
With throbbing expectation now awaits thee.
Oh! could I share a parents sweet embrace
Like thee transported, gaze upon her face;
With magic charm would one maternal smile
This fluttering heart of all its fears beguile!
[Exeunt.
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. Daranzel's Camp. Stage dark. BARTOUR, in disguise, at a small
distance from DARANZEL'S tent.
Thanks to hypocrisy! the deed's half done --
How have I practiced on these simple soldiers!
Integrity, thou art the fool of fortune!
The piteous boon of humble penury. --
An honest heart's the play-thing of the courtier,
Wound up, unwound, and fingered at his will.
Fair words are sure companions of foul deeds;
My task demands one versed in both, [ pause] I would
'Twere done! this busy nestling of the heart
Bespeaks at once abhorrence of its purpose,
And sad misdoubting of its chanceful issue. --
Yonder, unmoved, that mighty chieftain stands,
Whose fame so much disturbs the sleep of kings --
Alone! Alcander then has left his tent --
An hour I Have waited his departure -- now,
One well aimed blow shall strike rebellion down,
And fix the throne of Calledon secure.
Bartour, thou wilt thrive for this, be honored too --
Nay sainted in the calender of this
World's honesty -- so very wise is man! [ Is going.
[ARLEM crosses the stage hastily with ASAPH. Hah! interrupted! Arlem here! I
doubt
Some mystery is brooding ( in agitation) If I Am foiled,
Then, Calledon, as mariners desert
Their sinking ships, I Will leave thee to the storm,
And shelter in the offing. It Is the creed
Of statesmen; aye, and graver crafts-men too!
That smiling friend, smooth-tongued hypocrisy,
That household God of half proud fortune's favorites,
Has wrought more miracles on simple man,
Than a whole charnel-house of martyr's bones!
Here then I Will wait concealed, and watch my prey; --
When young Daranzel saved my life! -- I thank him!
And to reward him, must I be his murderer? [ starts.
Remorse I bid thee sleep!
[Exit. SCENE II. Daranzel's tent. DARANZEL discovered.
Enter ARLEM and ASAPH. Asa. I bring a man detected on our lines;
Who when discovered, anxiously desired
A soldier might conduct him to your tent,
To bring intelligence of highest moment.

Arl. This letter for Daranzel, will unfold
To him the purport of my secret message. [ gives Daranzel a letter.

Dar. ( Reads) " The royalists are mustering in the streets,
" And marching to your camp. -- Bartour,
" Disguised, has past the gates; you know his wiles. --
" Be on your guard, and heaven preserve your life!"
What friendly hand directs this timely caution?
" Your long lost daughter, called by thee, Florilla;
" Now Indamora."
Is then my dear Florilla yet alive,
Whom for these fifteen melancholy years,
Through many a sad vicissitude of fate,
These eyes have wept with unavailing tears,
A victim of our cause! is this illusion?
Or can you, generous friend, explain to me
This mystery of fortune?

Arl. All I know,
Is little more, than that your daughter lives;
And has, from earliest youth, been bred at court;
'Till now, unconscious of her parentage --
Zaphira has this hour revealed to her
The secret of her birth, and of your danger:
Solicitous to save a father's life,
Her filial love commissioned this adventure.

Dar. Receive my heart felt thanks -- Zaphira too!
I did not hope for friends so near the king!

Arl. You Have many advocates within our walls,
Ripe for revolt, and ready to attack
The guards; to them in haste I must return.
Sedition's breath now fans the spreading flame,
That soon will rage in terror round the throne.

Dar. Conduct as worthy of the prize we seek;
Remember that the sword of war is drawn,
Not to dispense unnecessary carnage;
But for the cause of justice and of man. --
Asaph, conduct him safely through our camp.
[Exit Arlem.
Enter BARTOUR, as ARLEM goes off, on the opposite side, coming forward
cautiously. Dar. Some power divine still vindicates our cause --
Freedom, for thee, no price can be too dear;
T'insure thy blessings on his injured land,
The patriot freely spills his richest blood!
Then what reproach of man, or curse from heaven,
Too great for him who fights t'inslave his race!
[ A trumpet sounds without -- draws his sword.
The eve of battle comes -- eventful crisis!

Bar. ( approaching) Why do I tremble?
A woman's heart has seized this coward breast. [ aside.

Dar. ( after a pause kneels.)
Thou king of heaven, whose perfect eye looks through
The heart, to thee I make my last appeal!

Bar. O shame, Bartour!
A coward when thy courage is most needed. [ aside.

Dar. If false ambition prompt me to the field,
Lodge in this breast each weapon of my foe.
[ Bartour attempts to strike, but seems intimidated.
But if I draw this sword for justice only,
Then give me life; and by thy name I swear,
It never shall be sheathed 'till Persia's free.
[ Bartour raises his hand to make the blow, Daranzel rises, and discovers him
attempting to conceal his poniard.

Bar. I come, Daranzel! to implore thy pardon!
You must with pitying eye behold the man,
Who weeps his late apostasy from freedom,
And flies the vengeance of an incensed king,
To seek his safety under your protection!

Dar. My love of justice will protect the just;
But let ignoble traitors, tools of power,
Smart with the rod of your offended king,
Cringe to his spleen, and fawn to his caprices.

Bar. And can that justice, which you boast so loudly,
Condemn unheard, in such opprobious terms?
In early life I once enjoyed your friendship,
But by defection from the cause you led,
I own, with shame, I merited to lose it.
Time now has wrought conviction; and inspired
With freedom's flame, I brave the despot's frowns,
And join the banner of his hated foe.

Dar. When liberty unfriended, wandering mourned,
An exile from the realm, thy hand, Bartour,
More cruel than the tyger's paw, was first
To murder all, who dared espouse her cause; --
Now, she assumes a sterner look, and strikes
A terror on her foes, you think it safe
To court her smiles, and seek Daranzel's friendship!

Bar. If I have been too loyal to my king,
Impute it to my weakness, not my guilt.
I here renounce my 'legiance to the crown,
And offer up my life a sacrifice,
To avenge the injuries of my much wronged friend!

Dar. My soul disdains thy hypocritic arts.
Go, fall upon thy knees before the youth,
By thee made orphans; wash with repenting tears,
Thy murderous hands, so often stained with blood,
Then may thou claim protection from Daranzel;
'Till then, go seek thy safety with his foes.

Bar. Honor might justify the bold attempt,
To check thy pride, and punish this disgrace;
But innocence demands no vindication,
And laughs thy feeble malice into scorn!

Dar. Honor! and innocence!
Those words but ill become a traitor's tongue.
Ungrateful man! is this the sole reward,
Thou can repay my life's exposure for thee!
Was it for this, when in our Caspian war
I saw thee overwhelmed in battle's heat,
And instant on the wing, to save my friend,
I hewed my passage through the exulting foe,
And snatched thee, miscreant, from a brave man's sword!
Judge, by that act, how much I fear thy rage;
And measure by this deed, thy guilt.
Behold my breast, scarr'd with the wounds received
In your defense. -- If guilt ever harbor'd there,
Disclose the poniard you conceal, and shed
The tainted stream. -- Silence becomes thee well,
And conscious shame unman's thy once brave heart.
Go then, thou ingrate! say to Calledon,
The shield of heaven protects Daranzel's life.
Tell him you found me, as you wished -- alone;
And when I offered you my naked breast,
You durst not strike, but trembled like himself,
A guilty coward! Well thou know, taken here,
Thy life is in my power; but tell your master,
So much Daranzel scorns his minister,
He pities and forgives the wretch who sent him.

Bar. Since then you spurn my friendship's proffered zeal,
Take from my slighted pride, my hate's resentment.
[Daranzel smiles with contempt. Nay vaunt thee not! Touch thee, and thou will
feel.
Adders have stings, and lions are but mortal!
[Exit.
DARANZEL solus. Bartour! I weep thy glory's sad declension!
Is there in nature a more abject being,
Than the poor tenant of a prince's favors!
Whose fickle humor, insolent and pampered,
Shows, in one day, more phases than the moon,
And is more dangerous than the tide she governs! --
Alas! it is pitiful in this world's madness,
That simple flesh and blood, -- itself so frail
And perishable -- if you but call it king --
(A thing, that sleeps, and eats, and walks, as I do,)
Should by the knitting of its vacant brows,
So cheat man's senses, and debauch his reason,
That, with a wand, no bigger than a ferule,
It turns his heart's humanity to steel!
[Exit.
SCENE III. A dungeon in the Royal Prison. OSMYN discovered in chains --
leaning against the wall.
[Cannon heard. What means that din, whose distant tumults wake
The slumbering echo of these vaults of death,
Where like the owlet in her ivied tower,
Silence sits brooding in congenial gloom!
This dreary cave, I ween'd was so remote
From the proud sun, who lights the abodes of man,
I had not hoped to hear its walls resound,
But with the clank of chains, and groans of death!
Oh, had I perished when Belliferon fell!
I then had died with honor, nor, had mute
Oblivion been the burier of my fortune!
But when enclosed by host of foes, I fought,
'Till valor's nerve was palsied with the conflict,
Faint with these bleeding trophies -- whelmed beneath
A grove of swords -- to sink upon my shield,
And in the sleep of life's suspended sense,
Borne from the field, unconscious to be here
Immured -- to linger and to die by famine --
Mads the thrall'd vigor of these mangled limbs.
And rouses phrenzy even to desperation! [ Retires up.
Enter ORONTES. Cannon heard. Oron. Again! I cannot be deceived! it is battle's
note!

Osm. My generous benefactor! who, though tomb'd,
For many a year, beneath this dripping cell,
Has suffered not its dampness to incrust
The feelings of his heart; -- but from his own
Mere morsel, has supplied my nature's craving. [ aside,
If I could win him to our cause -- I Will try it -- [ comes down to him.
What do thy thoughts so gaze upon, Orontes?
I Have watched thee by the light of yon dim taper, --
On thy sunk eyes, and furrowed brows I see,
Thy mind's quick sentinel has taken alarm!

Oron. It has!
That busy, wakeful creature of the brain
Has found no food to feed upon so long,
That, like my body, it had almost sunk
Into eternal sleep. -- But with a zest,
More keen, than what anticipates our meals,
It craves the information of the day;
Or rather of the night; for by the journal
Of our scant fare, and my last broken nap,
I judge the night half gone. --

Osm. One might conjecture by the sounds we hear,
The day and night had joined themselves in combat.

Oron. Those sounds stir up the small remains of life.
Or do I sleep and dream of battles fought in youth?

Osm. I do believe thou art awake,
And all the world beside.

Oron. For twelve long years,
Confinement in this dreary cave of night.
The memory of those martial scenes has crossed
My mind, on the light pinions of a dream;
And left no trace behind, but the dark shade
Of recollected honors; -- now, alas!
Fancy with memory wakes and brings to view,
All the inspiring pomp of war, that lifts
The veteran's soul, and elevates his valor. [ shouts heard.
Hark, in the mixed variety of sounds
"The king" and "Freedom" swell from rival tongues.

Osm. Fit words to be in competition; --
Never were pointed swords more opposite.
What do thou think the cause of all this tumult?

Oron. My mind forbodes some great event -- perhaps,
The voice of liberty, which Calledon
Thought safely silenced in this dungeon's glooms;
Has roused the nations up to arms again.
O! would 'twere so. -- Heaven grant the generous cause,
That failed with us, may rule the tented field,
'Till Persia, and ourselves once more are free. [ shouts.

Osm. Still louder shouts, triumphant shouts of freemen!
My heart is in the battle's front -- O, were
These chains a sword, my hand should be there too!

Enter ARLEM. Arl. Hail, veterans! Do ye remember Arlem?

Oron. The man, whose treachery confined me here?

Arl. The man whose loyalty confined you here. --

Oron. Thy loyalty!
Thou slave to infamy and Calledon --
My miseries here for twelve benighted years,
Have brought thee, as their author, to my mind. --
Yes! I with curses do remember thee!

Arl. It Is as I wish -- their spirits yet unbroken. [ Aside.
Stout-hearted men, I come to change your state.

Oron. Welcome. Ye cannot change it for the worse.

Arl. Then you are prepared. -- The king demands your lives.

Osm. What cherub moves his flinty heart to mercy!

Arl. Mercy! then do thou deem thy death a kindness?

Osm. From the base heart of Calledon, with vice
So deeply stained, it seems a cordial drop,
More rare, more welcome, than the scanty moisture
The pilgrim finds upon the desert rock!

Arl. This is his will; -- it is ours to execute;
But, tell me, which ye choose -- to live or die?

Oron. Unloose our chains, and give us arms once more;
Then we are content to live, or die, like men!

Arl. Ye have your wish -- here are two swords,
As good as ever were clasped by veteran hands.
(Unlosing their chains, and offering swords.)
Now you are free -- say, will you fight for freedom?

Osm. Let him, who dares oppose, come on and prove us.

Arl. Our foes are yet to seek; brave men be trusty!

Oron. Keep us no longer in suspense. Make known
The terms on which we are released!

Arl. Then hear. --
This night is destined to decide the strife
Between the oppressor and the oppressed. -- Both sides
Have called their legions to the field. -- Daranzel,
At the whole nation's head assails our walls.
Within rebellion menaces the throne.
The king, distrustful of success, still breathes
Revenge. By his command, I am sent to end
Each prisoner's life. -- Bound by humanity,
The weaker ties of loyalty I break!
It Is Arlem gives you freedom for your chains,
And life, instead of ignominious death.
Let this reverse your curses, and atone
For what you term my treachery; but know,
That I am not the first, who, with a heart
Averse to tyranny, have been the dupe,
The blinded dupe, of tyrants.

Osm. Let our resentment rust upon the chains
We leave. -- Heaven shower its blessing on thy head!

Arl. Quick let us execute what we design. --
Free every prisoner that is worthy freedom;
Then join the standard of our gallant friend;
His wife is yet confined within these walls,
And should he, (as I greatly fear) reject
Our monarch's terms, this night will be her last.

Osm. Oh! could this sword guar'd her defenseless life,
And safe restore her to Daranzel's arms;
How gladly all the wounds I bore in battle,
Ere sated vengeance leaped upon her prey;
Nay all the tortures, ignominious pangs,
Of those vile shackles that disgraced my manhood;
Would this weak frame, though half of life exhausted,
Again endure and triumph in its suffrance!
[Exit.
Oron. The cause is worth the patriot's noblest blood;
We follow thee to freedom, or to death!
[Exeunt.
SCENE IV. Daranzel's tent.
Enter DARANZEL and ORCASTO, meeting. Orc. Without delay, the army needs your
presence;
The enemy are sallying from their gates,
And marching to our front. Araxes fills
Belliferon's place, and heads the royal troops,
Who seem to move reluctantly to battle.
The allies are debarking from their ships,
And form their ranks upon the adjacent shore.

Dar. We have no time to spare.
The castle, which o'erlooks the foreign fleets,
Must be the object of our first attack;
There centres all their strength; when this is ours,
The fleet and city lie at our command.
Alcander must conduct our motions here;
Orcasto, with the horse, proceed against
The foreign troops, and stop their junction with
The king's: -- meantime I Will make attempt to gain
The castle unperceived, and conquer it
By storm --

Orc. Let me entreat you hear a son's advice.
Decline the dangerous duty you have chosen.
Nor with incaution rush on certain death.
The castle is strong armed by desperate men;
And he who first ascends its walls, must fall.
Should this be you, our cause is lost indeed:
Each soldier's arm would be unnerv'd in battle.
Let then, my sire, this arduous task be mine;
My anxious heart glows with the patriot's fire;
And I can freely, proudly, die to gain
My country's cause; but cannot live to see
A widowed mother, weeping for my father,
Whose life a son's, less worthy, might have saved.

Dar. Ingenuous youth! thine be the glorious lot!
May never fading laurels deck thy brow. [ trumpet heard.
The trumpet speaks the enemy at hand.
We must betake ourselves, each to his post. --
The important hour, before we thought is come,
That must decide the fate of Calledon.
Our friends, our country, and ourselves.
Fortune and fame suspend, with equal hand,
The scale of war. Be it our care to turn
The mighty beam in favor of the world;
And give their long lost rights to injured man;
Or with expiring freedom greatly fall:
Leave earth to kings, oppression, vice and shame,
And crown the generous strife with endless fame!
[Exeunt.
SCENE V. Pantomime. A viw of the Castle, Bay, and the Fleet. BATTLE OF THE
PERSIAN ARMIES, ASSAULT AND CAPTURE OF THE CASTLE, AND THE CONFLAGRATION OF THE
FLEET.
( Represented in Action.) END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. A gothic chamber in the Prison. A door in the back scene. Stage dark.
Enter OSMYN. How dismal echo the loud blasts of war,
Through the dark windings of this nether mansion,
This monumental pile of man's oppression!
The key, which Arlem to my trust confided,
When he returned to escort the princess hither,
Has opened every subterraneous vault,
Whose patriot tenants by the king confined,
E're this, had slumber'd in inglorious death. --
This by description, should be Zara's prison
Grief's sad domain drear tenement of horror!
[ clattering of swords without.
The tread of tumult 'mid these solemn cells,
Where grief itself is speechless, bodes discovery --
This door precludes pursuit: should aught betide
To threaten Zara's life, this privacy
May prove the only refuge could protect her. -- Tumult without.]
Exit through the door forced open with [ difficulty. CASMIR without. Arlem's a
traitor! seize him guards, and drag
Him to the palace!
[Enters. This knave's detection has suspicion in it.
His life shall pay the forfeit of his trust. --
I had not traced him, but his mode of late
Has marked him guilty of humanity.
And well I noted when the king did charge him
To scratch, at night, a few old rebel's veins,
His baby conscience startled at the dagger!
Two women masked were with him -- chance the princess,
With some confederate in the stratagem,
To rescue Zara from her father's vengeance!
Arlem secured, the king will soon have news on it
And blame my lagging purpose -- now to business!
[Exit.
Enter ZAPHIRA and INDAMORA, ( agitated) Zaph. Lost and undone! we have no time
to lose,
Before my father's wrath will bring him hither --
And much I fear this hapless night's adventure
Will rouse his rage, and speed thy mother's fate. --

Ind. Alas! that I was born in hour so luckless,
That not one kindly star can smile upon me!
Doomed by my wayward fate to suffer grief's
Acutest thorns, that root and fester here;
Yet had this breast been destined to endure
The sad monopoly of life's disaster,
The pressure of thy woes indeed were lightsome;
But to exist to know myself most wretched,
And that my miseries hold such rank contagion,
That all my friends must be infected by them --
Resines essential grief to mute despair!
Fortune has placed me in so deep a vortex,
So perilous and rapid, that who ever
Dares to extend a friendly hand to save me,
Slips from the brink into the whirling gulf,
And finks to meet inevitable ruin!

Zaph. My dearest friend, your sorrows rave most wildly!
Indeed, thou know not with how proud a zeal;
My heart, my life, are both devoted to thee --
And whatever hap betide the warring world,
No power shall part us, and no fate divide.
But come, the occasion stirs -- there yet is time,
If Zara still be here, to trace her out,
And warn her of her danger; nay, perhaps
Amid the moment's bustle, chance may offer
To elude the guards and favor her escape.

Ind. By different routs we'll search her, and return
Here instantly, should either be successful.
[Exeunt at opposite sides:
Enter ZARA. -- Upper wing. Arlem detected! hope is then extinguished!
For he alone of all the tyrant's slaves
Had feeling left to sympathise with woe,
Or manhood to protect an injured woman!
The keen endurances I here have borne,
Since first these arms were widowed of their lord
Would far exceed my hours in computation;
But melancholy cannot count her sighs,
And sorrow keeps no calender but tears. -- [ Pause.
A conflict, how severe this night has witnessed!
Cheered with a mother's hope -- my only bliss --
To fold a long lost daughter to my heart;
Three watchful weary hours I Have paced the aisle,
Whose windows front the bay, from thence to learn
Ought could occasion Arlem's painful absence;
But now alas the mystery is develop'd,
And with it all my hopes forever buried!
Enter INDAMORA, behind. Never shall these eyes, so long inured to scenes
Of gloomiest horror and of dark despair,
Again revisit the abodes of day.
Or gazing on my dear, deserted orphan,
Melt with a transport, which can find no utterance.
Oh, my lost child! forever lost Florilla!
INDAMORA comes forward. Ind. It is, it must be, for I feel thou art
My mother! Nature is most absolute! [ embracing.
Now have we met never to part again.

Zara. Does my wild fancy feed on airy dreams,
And with illusions mock me? No! it is real.
I see each feature -- Oh! My dear daughter!
Do I once more embrace thee in my arms?
All gracious heaven! how bounteous is thy care.
When most we murmur at thy dark decrees,
Then most thou art preparing blessings for us!

Re-enter CASMIR, behind. Cas. This woman has escaped me. [ starts seeing them.

Ind. But oh! to meet thee thus is agony.
The king breathes naught but vengeance* and this night
Designs thy life a victim to atone
His pardon's proud rejection by Daranzel.

Zara. His wrath I fear not -- I Am prepared to meet it.
In this one moment have I rifled all
The bloom of life's best joys, and should I sink
Beneath the edge of his resentment now,
I leave not one untasted bliss behind me.

Cas. (seizing her with one hand, and holding a dagger in the other.)
Take then thy wish; -- the king has signed thy death:
And I am here to execute his purpose!

Zara. Russian beware! thy life atones thy rashness.

Ind. Oh! stay your hand! if ever mercy thou Will need, forbear as thou expectest mercy.

Cas. Babbler stand off -- Mercy's a culprit's virtue.

Ind. Then plunge thy weapon here, let me receive
The blow, and save a mother's life.

Cas. A mother! then there is treason here a plotting --
That word has fixed her doom.

Ind. Oh, horror! horror! ( loudly) [ faints and falls.

Cas. This moment is thy last. -- [ to Zara.

[ Zaphira enters and seizes Casmir's arm as he is going to [ strike. Zaph.
Stop, vile assassin! -- if thy dagger's point,
Though dipped in aconite, still thirsts for blood,
Then in thy heart's more poisoned core dispose it;
But if, (for much I doubt thee rank in crimes,)
Thou still inhibit'st thy accursed design;
If thou can basely stoop to soil man's honor,
A woman may outstrip her nature's laws,
And seize thy lost prerogative -- to tell thee,
In the face of thy most valiant daring --
Coward! that prisoner shall not die by thee!

Cas. I did not know Zaphira interposed: --
I came to execute your father's will,
And can his child protect a rebel's life?
But if such clemency Orcasto teach thee,
Know that the mandates of a king outweigh
The feeble (...) of shallow woman!
( Osmyn bursts open the door in the back scene, and comes forward with a drawn
sword)
Osm. Nay then, since woman cannot touch thy pity,
A soldier shall demand thy valor's proof.

Cas. Who art thou, intruder, that dares to doubt it?

Osm. A man! thou could not answer thus.

Cas. In wordy warfare braggarts baffle heroes,
For brave men only argue with their swords. [ they fight off the stage.

Zara. Revive my child -- Heaven never will desert
The prayers of virtue at its latest need!

Ind. ( Recovering.) And art thou safe my mother? oh, Zaphira,
Thou art indeed misfortune's guardian cherub!

OSMYN Returns. Osm. Cursed chance! these vaults are so perplexed with mazes,
In the dark lab'rynth he escaped my vengeance.

Zara. Oh, generous, brave preserver! noblest friend!
Accept the warmest thanks, that heart ever offered!
But say, by what yet unaccounted fate,
And durance here, thou have acquired the means
Of thy deliverance and of our protection?

Osm. The tale were long and irksome -- much too sad,
To give thee pleasure; but, suffice it now,
To render up my gratitude to heaven,
That mid the woes which cloud my checkered life
This happy hour which brings me to your aid,
More than repays for all my miseries past.

Zaph. Now let us hasten from these drear domains:
Casmir's escape portends our instant danger.

Osm. That door through which I issued, chance discovered --
Its hinges, by the dews of time corroded,
Bespeak it now disused, perhaps unknown; --
Driven by pursuit to force its bolts for shelter,
I found it opened on a winding vault
Closed by a narrow staircase, which ascends,
Crossing the ancient armory of the castle,
Up to the turrets on its battlements.
In that retreat you may elude research,
Through this tumultuous and eventful night;
'Till orient freedom dawning with the sun,
Light your departure from its walls forever!

Zara. Exalted worth! our lives can never return
A tribute worthy of thy heart's deserving. [ noise without

Zaph. Haste, we are surprised! fly, fly! or all is lost!

[ As they are going enter CALLEDON and Guards. Call. Ah, base conspirators!
Now have I traced you to your secret haunts!
Well may you join yourselves to the vile dregs
Of cringing poverty and plotting treason,
Guests, that the prison walls might blush to own!

Osm. If, to protect defenseless innocence,
Incense thy merciless, unfeeling heart,
I here implore thy pardon for these women;
But, for myself, I hold in equal scorn,
Thy indignation, or thy clemency!

Call. Caitiff! what demon let thee loose from hell,
To feel thy torments doubled here on earth?

Osm. Torments! the pangs of death were ecstasy,
If borne to punish infamy like thine!

Call. Then feeble shade! vile refuse of sedition!
I Will teach thee to revere the power of kings!
[ They fight furiously -- Osmyn is disarmed and bound by the guards --
Calledon stands with his sword uplifted.]
I will not strike thee; instant death were mercy;
But lingering agonies shall be thy doom!

Osm. Writhe, if thou dare each fiber of my heart,
And, as its life-stream flows, count drop by drop!
Even to my latest pang I Would smile, to show thee
How much a patriot soul is thy superior!

Call. Great as thy arrogance, shall be thy torment.
Prepare the rack. -- Bartour shall see thee tortured,
'Till thy nerves crack, and my revenge is fated.
And since his cowardice has spared Daranzel,
The wife's disposal shall be made more certain! [ half aside.

Zara. Quick let him execute his king's commands.
Already have I drained the cup of sorrow;
Naught but the bitter dregs of life remain.
And when thou'st shed the blood of all our race,
And murdered husband, daughter, son and wife,
Then may thou boast thy victory complete.

Call. Begone, and speak not or my swelling wrath,
Will tempt me to forget my pride, and stain
A monarch's sabre with plebeian blood!

Zara. Strike, then, thou tyrant! I defy thy wrath!
Death will but land me on that peaceful shore,
Beyond the stormy sea of life's disaster,
Where, placed above thy brief authority,
'Twould be my pleasure, great as heaven could give,
To see proud victory burnish with her smiles
The godlike splendour of Daranzel's arms;
To see him hurling, with the tempest's might,
Thy power to dust, thy palaces to ruins;
And to complete the triumph of his glory,
Giving his country happiness and peace!
[ As Calledon is drawing his sword, Indamora kneels between him and Zara.]

Ind. O, spare her! see her child, whom thou have reared,
In fervent duty kneeling at thy feet!
Hear then what pitying heaven delights to hear,
The humble wretch's supplicating prayer!

Call. Unhand me, viper! I will hear no more!

Zaph. Indeed, my father! thee alone she pleads for;
Thy fate depends on Zara's. -- Do not blindly
Rush on destruction which thou might escape!

Call. Call me not father; rather blush with guilt;
And tremble, while you learn the fate
Of your colleagues in parricidal treason!

Osm. Oh, justice! since thou have forsook the earth;
Speak from thy natal heaven in peals of thunder,
And blast the fiend who tramples on thy laws!
[ Cannon heard, and loud shouts.

Enter BARTOUR, in haste. Bar. My lord, thy safety calls thy instant care.

Call. What tumult (...) our prison's walls.

Bar. Your guards have been attacked, and Arlem rescued.

Call. Aye, there is another thorn! how wears the sight?

Bar. Confusion worse than I can paint* our foes
Have gained the castle by a furious storm,
From whence, with well directed fire, they have raked
The fleet; all that can sail have left the port,
And drove for safety to the open main.

Call. Perdition sink them! how has gone the field?

Bar. When from the light of many a ship in flames,
The rebels saw the fleet with plying oars;
And sails expanded, flying* from the port;
Forthwith three loud huzzas rung through their ranks;
Then on they rushed as with one soul: -- Dismayed,
Our army have in wild disorder fled.
Their leaders strove to rally them in vain!
The scattered troops, except a veteran few,
Still loyal to their king, have joined the foe*

Call. Traitors! the scourge of kings, and scorn of men! [ cannon and shouts.

Bar. Thou have, my liege, no moment's time to spare,
Ere this Daranzel storms the city's gates.

Call. Quick summon all my soldiers to the palace! [ going.
Stay! guards remain! Bartour, the only terms,
On which thou can retrieve thy blemished honor,
Are that you execute without delay,
That traitor Osmyn, and Daranzel's wife!
Bring me your sword bathed with their heart's warm gore?
Though vanquished, I will triumph over my foes!
[Exit Calledon and part of the Guards.
Bar. Guards, seize that prisoner -- bind him to the wheel!
And, as for thee --
[ He approaches to lay hold of Zara, the prisoners who have been released,
enter at the door in the back with Arlem at their head, who run to protect her
-- Osmyn is unbound and receives a sword.
Arl. ( To the women) Be not alarmed retire in safety.
[The women go out at the door in the back.
Bar. What magic hand has conjured up these ghosts.
Avaunt! base herd! or if your ghastly forms
Have blood, our swords shall try its temper.

Arl. Our hearts have courage, and our arms have nerves.

Osm. Come on and see whose lot it is to bleed!
Guards and prisoners fight off the stage.

OSMYN and BARTOUR return fighting; BARTOUR falls. Bar. It Is done! and I alas!
am doomed to fall,
The victim of those crimes, which raised my glory!
Thy better sword has pierced a treacherous heart,
Polluted with misdeeds of deeper die,
Than is this crimson tide of ebbing life.
Osmyn! I know thee well; and that thou have
Been loaded heavily with sharpest sorrows.
Forgive me: -- I in part have been their cause; --
But all thy miseries would I gladly bear,
To live one hour, one guitless hour, like thee --
Night closes round me -- Heaven reward thy sufferings --
I dare not -- ask -- its blessings -- for myself! [ Dies.

Osm. Is this Bartour, companion of my youth,
Whose breast once glowed with sentiments of honor!
If royal favors have debased thee thus,
Happy the man, whom dungeons bar from courts!
[Exit at the door in the back scene.
SCENE II. Front of the Palace. Cannon, tumults, shouts, etc. CALLEDON, GUARDS,
etc.
Call. Stand to your posts! for shame! resume your valor!
Is fear an ague, that it shakes you thus?
Who first retreats from danger, first meets death.
Soon as Daranzel enters here, receive him,
As should become a Persian soldier's fame!
Deal him the fate a rebel well deserves.

Enter DARANZEL, ASAPH, Officers and Soldiers. ( A flourish without.) Dar. Who
are those trembling slaves, who dare oppose
The triumph of those arms that make them free!

Call. Hinds! base born minions! stand ye thus aghast!

Dar. If ye respect, or fear, your king -- stand forth
Like men in his defense! if not, resign
Those arms you dare not use, and sue for pardon! [ Guards lay down their arms.

Call. Oh, heaven and earth! Is this the fate of kings?
To be debased by cursed conspirators,
And mingle with the dust of peasants' feet!

Dar. To this sad state thy unexampled crimes --
Schem'd to enslave thy people, have reduced thee!
Those cringing parasites, who barred thy throne
Against all access to the friends who loved thee;
Whom thou, so credulous of courtier's praise,
Did like the nursling pelican, support
Even with the vital stream, that nourished thee!
Have with such thrifty zeal so fleeced thee of
Thy subjects' loyalty, that those devices,
Forged with so nice a cunning, to enrich
Their own promotion, have recoiled upon them;
And crushed beneath the ruins of thy throne,
The subtle ferrets, that had sap'd its base!
-- But I have done: my sword shall never be stained
With so dispis'd a triumph, as revenge;
And if that this severe experiment
Has now convinced thee, that, to govern well,
A king should rule with clemency and justice;
Then live, and reign; be happy with thy people!
I fought for freedom only; and I Would rather
The sanction of the established powers should give it,
Than throw for it with the die of anarchy!

Call. Prate on, pretender; legislate for slaves!
And the loud clan of slander-preaching patriots!
But royalty disdains the prostitution!
My life, or death, I scorn alike from thee;
And to receive a kingdom from thy gift
Would prove a curse, so prodigal in misery,
That even the scepter, like the levite's rod,
Would turn a serpent to destroy the wretch,
Whose abject baseness bribed him to accept it!

Dar. Thy arrogance I Will humble with thy power.
[ They fight desparately -- Calledon is wounded several times, and at last is
disarmed.]
Now haughty prisoner, hear thy destiny!
Since mercy thou have spurned, I give thee justice!
Shut from the light of heaven 'till death release thee.
In shameful durance shall thou wear those chains,
So often bound by thee on better hands;
And hear, what well may make the tyrant's life
A curse -- the songs of liberty and peace,
Sung by the people whom thou have enslaved!

Call. Nay! Calledon shall live, and die, a king. [ Stabs himself, and falls*
Oh! cursed fate! distraction seize my soul --
Ye powers above, I ask no help of you;
Demons infernal have usurped your place --
Oh! for a grave in the dark womb of chaos!
That I might raise the elements to war,
And thunder desolation through the world! [ Dies.

Dar. Thus perish ever that imperious pride,
That gorges on the miseries of man!

Asap. The foe is vanquished -- and the victor's mood
Shall be immortal in his country's blessings!

Dar. Now, onward to the prison; there Orcasto
Ere this has reached; and if our fortunes flag not
Has rescued Zara from the threatened blow
Of tyrannous revenge.

Enter ARLEM. Arl. More than success has crowned thy arms, Daranzel;
Thy wife, protected by the gallant Osmyn,
Safe lodged within the palace, waits to hail thee!

Dar. Osmyn alive! and Zara too recovered!
But say -- my Indamora -- my lost child --

Ar. She too awaits thee, and with filial tears,
That bless with speechless thanks her brave preserver,
Enhances all the pledges of thy triumph.

Dar. The arm of providence is moral justice!
I loved my king; but he did prove a tyrant --
I loved my country, and I slew her foe.
That I loved Zara, all could freely witness;
But that I would not purchase her release,
And sell my freedom, is most true; and now,
The blessings of my God reward my labors!

Enter OSMYN, ORONTES, ZARA, INDAMORA, and Prisoners. Dar. Zara, thrice welcome
to my arms again; [ Embracing.

Zara. Unlooked for bliss! transporting change of fortune!
To 'scape from dungeons, whose benighted walls,
Dark as my hopes, did yield no gleam of light --
To owe my safety to a stranger's valor --
Hear my brave son victorious -- find a daughter,
My long lost child recovered -- and embrace,
My country's savior, in my bosom's lord! [ embrace.

Dar. Is this -- my child -- my dear, my lost Florilla.

Ind. (kneeling) It is my father -- oh! bestow thy blessing!

Dar. Come to my heart -- divide thy father's love? ( embraces.

My conquest and my joy are now complete!
Osmyn! thy veteran virtues well deserve
The gratitude and friendship of a soldier.
Thy valor merits better fate, than what thy brow,
That register of ills, bears recond of!

Osm. The journal of my life has ever been blotted,
With sad successive sorrows; -- till, thank heaven
This night has writ fair lines, unbound my chains,
And armed me once again in freedom's cause!

Dar. The choicest blessings, peace and freedom give,
Reward thy worth, brave man!

Oron. Shut out from friendship and from fame, entombed
In prison, I have been dead to all the world;
Till this blessed hour, to me the first of life,
Restores me to my country and my friends!

Ind. I feel the general joy; but yet there is
A melancholy gloom, that clouds my bliss --
Zaphira's sorrow wounds me to the heart.
Virtue like here is claims all our sympathy.
When told of her unhappy father's fate,
She swoon'd with terror, and the blight of grief,
Nipp'd her young beauties, like the untimely frost
That feeds upon the lilly's cheek, till all the tears,
Which fall from sorrow's lids, cannot recall
Its blossomed fragrance to the withering stalk!

Dar. My sword was drawn to guard the just, and set
My country free. -- It Is time Zaphira knows,
The tears of innocence can melt the heart,
That never trembled in the field of battle!

Enter ORCASTO and ZAPHIRA. Orc. If I deserve a father's approbation,
Permit me from a heart, that would have bled
To spare, what fate denied -- the royal person --
To ask, for an unhappy orphan daughter,
The friendship and protection of Daranzel!

Dar. I know her virtue, and thy love, Orcasto!
And when the memory of this night is lost,
In brighter days; let them reward each other,
For know, Zaphira, while Daranzel lives,
Whatever the father, or the friend can do,
Shall crown thy life with every boon of fortune!

Zaph. Exalted virtue! I did know thee brave!
But thou have added to thy wreath of valor,
A pearl of rarest worth -- benign humanity!
I must indulge the sorrows of this night;
It Is nature's debt -- a parent claims these tears!
A happier day shall show my gratitude!

Dar. Veterans! the harvest of your toils is ripened,
Now let this war of bleeding brothers cease;
To battle's trump, succeed the lute of peace!
But ah! our victory is but half obtained,
If faction governs, where a tyrant reigned;
Then, on the ruins of the despot's throne,
Let law's firm temple rear its sacred zone,
Where equal justice shall dispense her sway,
And every patriot's creed shall be -- Obey!

END OF THE TRAGEDY.
EPILOGUE.
BY A GENTLEMAN OF BOSTON.
I TOLD the tearing author of the play,
I knew not what in his behalf to say;
But, fearful of his fate, he begged so hard,
That I could not refuse the piteous (...).
I speak extempore, and should I wander,
Far from the road of sense; I trust your candor*
What shall I say? -- why do not swear and scoff,
And, by your leaves, I Will try to take you off.
If Pope is right, that prince of rhyming elves,
That all our knowledge is to know ourselves,
How can we better, pray, employ our time?
I Will speak the truth, -- so help me king of rhyme?
A playhouse is an ample field for satire;
Let Us use it freely, though without ill nature.
But stop -- to look around me, will be right; --
Upon my word, a very pretty sight!
Where young, and old, in motley mixture sit,
And grave, and gay, in Gallery, Box, and Pit;
Where well dressed lads display the frizeur's power,
And wigs, far whiter than the cauliflower!
What youth is that, so talkative and loud,
That thrusts his pretty face from out the crowd?
From Julien's are you, Sir? -- I know your forte;
Eat soup -- play high -- cry "that is your sort!"
To prove your courage, swear away, like thunder,
While friends admire and strangers stare with wonder!
Ride out to Bird's, and play at bowls of Sunday,
And swear it is not worse than on a Monday.
Most freely I acknowledge, Sir, your merit,
And when you have drank your grog, I grant you don't want spirit!
Say, who are you, far graver than physician?
I know you, now, Sir; -- you're a -- politician! --
" Great news" -- O, what? -- The French have not received
" Our Envoys; is the story, Sir, believed --
" O, sir, it is true; as friends, they will never greet ye,
" Unless you break that cursed British Treaty!
" Allowed to arm, too! sir, the administration,
" Unless resisted, will undo the nation! --
I see, sir, you're a Jacobin -- "No, in reality
I Am a true friend to Liberty and Equality!
" And though of French Directors, it is the creed;
" That we, poor Yankees are of spaniel breed;
" Yet, will our masters kindly loose our collars,
" If paid the "dog tax" of twelve million dollars!"
Take my advise, Sirs, and this nonsense drop;
Resume your yard-stick, and attend your shop! --
In yonder box, I see a charming maid; --
Not you, Miss Pert, who toss so high your head:
Whilst manners, taste, and sense, and sweetness vie,
To aid the keen destruction of her eye,
What pity she should unstring Cupid's fell-bow,
By showing the bare bones of either elbow.
Hide then, O, bide the far too naked arm,
For modest beauty gives a double charm!
Such are the trivial faults, absorbed and lost,
Amid the blaze of virtues, that you boast;
If then you will receive this slight essay,
By way of Epilogue, to this our Play;
If what I Have said will pass instead of wit,
Your hands applaud me, and your hearts acquit!

