A PRACTICAL TREATISE UPON THE BANKRUPT LAW OF THE UNITED STATES.

BY R. FIELDS. ATTORNEY AT LAW.

COPY RIGHT SECURED.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY B. EDES and SON. 1800.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Legislature of the UNITED STATES, by the act lately passed for an Uniform
System of, Bankruptcy, having adopted the Principles of the Bankrupt Laws of
England, the Author of this Publication, conceived that a set of Precedents
adapted to the Practice, would be acceptable to the Gentlemen of the
Profession, and others who may be concerned in prosecuting Commissions under
the said Act. -- The following are therefore offered to the Public, which have
been selected chiefly from those now in use in England; but where circumstances
vary he has endeavored to form others, which it is presumed will answer the
purposes or which they are designed. -- The English forms of legal Proceedings,
being generally considered too redundant for the Practice of this Country, the
Author has aimed at brevity, as much as appeared to him consistent with
necessary explanation. -- A few Observations are interspersed with a view to
facilitate a regular mode of Practice, and it is expected the work will be
found of some utility.

Union Street, No. 29, BOSTON, May 31, 1800.
A PRACTICAL TREATISE UPON THE BANKRUPT LAW.
BEFORE a Commission is applied for, it will be proper to consider whether the
person against whom it is intended, is of such a Business that a Commission may
be taken out against him, and that he has been guilty of an act of Bankruptcy,
also that the person petitioning is, by himself or in partnership a Creditor
for 1000 Dollars, two 1500 Dollars, or more than two 2000 Dollars. -- If a
Creditor sues out a Commission and fails in either of these points, the Debtor
will be entitled to recover such damages as mentioned in the 2d Section of the
Act.

In order to obtain a Commission of Bankrupt, the Creditor must first make an
affidavit, or (being a Quaker) an affirmation, of his Debt before the Judge of
the District Court of the United States, for the District where the Debtor
resides or usually resided at the time of committing the act of Bankruptcy,
which affidavit may be in the following form.

Affidavit of Debt to obtain a Commission.
A. B. of, etc. makes oath that G. H. of, etc. is justly and truly indebted
unto him this deponent in the sum of 1000 dollars, for goods sold and delivered
by this deponent to and for the use of the said G. H.

Affidavit of several petitioning Creditors.
A. B. of, and c. C. D. of, and c. E. F. of, etc. severally make oath and say,
and first this deponent A. B. for himself faith, that G. H. of, etc. is justly
indebted unto him this deponent in the sum of 1200 dollars, for, etc. And this
deponent C. D. for himself faith, that the said G. H. is justly indebted unto
him this deponent in the sum of 500 dollars. And this deponent E. F. for
himself faith, that the said G. H. is justly indebted unto him this deponent in
the sum of 300 dollars, for, etc.

When the affidavit is sworn, the party suing for the commission must cause a
petition to be preferred to the Judge of the District Court as follows.

To the Honorable J. L Esquire. Judge of the District Court for the Massachusetts
District.
The humble Petition of A. B. of etc.

Shows,

That as well for himself as for all other creditors of C. D. of (...) etc. and
whereas the said C. D. using and exercising the trade of merchandise, became
indebted unto your petitioner in the sum of one thousand dollars, and in or
about the month of (...) last past did become Bankrupt within the statute
lately made, and entitled, "An Act to establish an uniform system of Bankruptcy
throughout the United States," to the intent to defraud and hinder your
petitioner and other his creditors of their just debts and duties to them due
and owing. In consideration whereof, may it please your Honor to grant unto
your petitioner a commission, to be directed to three such good and substantial
persons as your Honor shall deem proper to be commissioners of the said
Bankrupt, for the purpose of executing the several powers and authorities given
by the said act.

The act provides, that no person shall be liable to a commission, unless the
petition is preferred within six months after the act of bankruptcy committed.

Form of the Bond.
Know all men by these presents, that we A. B. of, etc. in the county of (...)
and commonwealth of Massachusetts, merchant, as principal, and C. D. of, etc.
in the said county of (...) and commonwealth of Massachusetts, as surety, are
holden and stand firmly bound, and obliged unto E. F. of (...) in the said
county of in the full and just sum of (...) dollars, to be paid unto the said
E. F. his executors, administrators or assigns, for the which payment well and
truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, and administrators,
jointly and severally, firmly by these presents, sealed with our seals, dated
the (...) day of (...) in the year of our LORD, 1800

The condition of this obligation is such, that if the above bounden A. B.
shall prove, as well before the commissioners to be appointed in and by a
commission of bankrupt against the said E. F. as upon a trial at law, in case
the due issuing forth of the said commission shall be contested, that the said
E. F. is justly and truly indebted unto the said A. B. in the sum of 1000
dollars, and is become bankrupt within the true intent and meaning of the
statute made and now in force concerning bankrupts. And if the said A. B. shall
cause the said commission to be executed in the manner prescribed by the said
act: Then the above written obligation to be void, or else to remain in full
force and effect.

Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of A. B. (L. S.) C. D. (L. S.)


A Commission of Bankrupt.
Massachusetts District. ss. To A. B. C. D. and E. F.
Greeting. Whereas it has been duly represented to me (...) Judge of the
District Court for the said Massachusetts District, that G. H. of (...) using
the trade of merchandise, by buying and selling about (...) since, did become
bankrupt within the statute entitled, "An act to establish an Uniform System of
Bankruptcy throughout the United States," to the intent to defraud and hinder
A. B. of (...), and other his creditors, of their just debts and duties to them
due and owing. Now, therefore, I the said (...) by virtue of the power granted
me in and by the said act, Do by these presents name, assign, constitute and
appoint you the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. commissioners of the said bankrupt,
for the purpose of executing the several powers and authorities given by the
said act. IN TESTIMONY whereof, I the said (...) have hereunto set my hand and
seal at Boston, the (...) day of (...) 1800.

J. L. (L. S.)

Any commission which shall be taken out as aforesaid, and not proceeded in
within thirty days, may be superseded by the judge upon the application of the
party charged as a bankrupt; or of any creditor, unless the delay shall have
been unavoidable, or upon a just occasion.

When the commissioners have received the commission, they may require from the
creditor prosecuting the same, a bond for the payment of costs of prosecuting
the commission and afterward they must qualify themselves to act, by taking
and subscribing the oath set forth in the 3d section of the statute, which is
to be administered by the judge issuing the commission, or by any of the judges
of the supreme court of the United States, or any judge, justice or chancellor
of any State Court, and filed in the office of the clerk of the District Court.

Form of the Bond for Costs.
KNOW all Men by these Presents, That we A. B. of (...) in the county of (...)
in the commonwealth of Massachusetts, merchant, as principal, and C. D. of
(...) in the said county of (...) as surety, are holden and stand firmly bound
and obliged unto A. B. C. D. and E. F. commissioners named and appointed in and
by a commission of Bankrupt, issued under the hand and seal of the the
honorable John Lowell, Esquire judge of the district court for the Massachusetts
district, against (...) of (...) in the full and just sum of 1000 dollars, to
be paid unto the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. their successors or assigns, for
the which payment well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs,
executors and administrators, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents.
Sealed with our seals. Dated the (...) day of in the year of our Lord, 1800.

The condition of this obligation is such. That if the above-bounden A. B.
shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said A. B. C. D. and E.
F. their executors, administrators, successors or assigns, all such costs,
charges and expenses which shall arise and accrue upon the prosecution of the
said commission; then the above-written obligation to be void, or else to
remain in full force and effect.

Signed, sealed and delivered, in the presence of A. B. (L. S.) C. D. (L. S.)


The commissioners will then appoint the time and place of their meeting, to
execute the commission, and declare the party a Bankrupt, of which reasonable
notice in writing must be given him or her, or if not found at his or her usual
place of abode, to some person of the family, above the age of 12 years, or if
no such person appear, shall be fixed at the front or other public door of the
house in which he or she usually resides.

Form of the Notice.
To G. H. of (...)

Whereas a commission of bankrupt has been issued against you under the hand
and seal of the honorable (...), Esquire. Judge of the District Court for the
Massachusetts District, directed to us the undersigned, to be executed in due
form of law. You are therefore hereby notified that we intend to meet at (...)
on (...) the day of (...) at of the clock, (...), in order to proceed to
execute the said commission; at which time and place you may attend if you
think proper. Dated the (...) day of (...) 1800.

Commissioners. A. B. C. D. E. F.



At this meeting the person charged as bankrupt may demand, before any
examination takes place, that a jury be impannelled to inquire into the facts
alleged against him as the causes for issuing the commission, and on such
demand, the inquiry must be had before the judge granting the commission, at
such time as he may direct; and in that case such person shall not be declared
bankrupt, unless so sound by the verdict of the jury.

(As the proceedings are to be deposited once a year in the clerk's office, of
the District court, it will be proper for the Commissioners to file every
memorandum and paper, from time to time, to prevent their being lost or
mislaid.)

Preamble to the Proceedings under the Commission.
At (...) the (...) day of (...) 1800.

Depositions, and Examinations and other Proceedings had, awarded and taken
under a Commission of Bankrupt issued against G. H. of (...) etc.

Oath to be administered by the Commissioners to the Witnesses upon their
Examination.
You shall true answer make to all such questions as shall be put to you, by
virtue of this commission, against G. H.

Proof of the Petitioning Creditor's Debt.
T. A. of (...) etc. being sworn and examined the day and year, and at the
place above written, upon his oath says, That G. H. the person against whom
this commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued forth, was before the date
and suing forth of the said commission, and still is justly and truly indebted
unto him this deponent, in the sum of (...) for goods sold and delivered to the
said G. H.

T. A.

After the petitioning creditor has proved his debt, you proceed to prove the
trading, which, as well as the act of bankruptcy, must be established by
witnesses who are not creditors.

At (...) the (...) Day of (...) 1800.

A. B. of, A. B.
etc. being sworn and examined the day and year, and at the place above
mentioned, before the commissioners named and authorized in and by a commission
of bankrupt, awarded and issued, and now in prosecution against G. H. of (...)
upon his oath says, that he has known the said G. H. for the space of (...)
last past, C. D.
during which time, he did carry on the trace of a merchant, and did trade from
the state of Massachusetts, E. F.
to(...), and diverse other parts beyond the seas, as other merchants usually do.

A. B.

At, etc.

A. B. of, A. B.
etc. being sworn and examined the day and year, and at the place above
mentioned, before the commissioners named and authorized in and by a commission
of bankrupt awarded and issued, and now in prosecution against G. H. of (...)
upon his oath says, C. D.
that he has known the said G. H. for the space of (...) years now last past,
during which time the said G. H. did use and exercise the trade and business of
a banker, and as such was entrusted with the money, goods and effects belonging
to other persons, E. F.
and merchandized therewith, as others of the same trade and business usually
do.

A. D.

At, etc.

A. B. of, etc. being sworn and examined the day and year, and at the place
above mentioned, A. B.
before the commissioners named and authorized in and by a commission of
bankrupt awarded and issued, and now in prosecution against G. H. of, C. D.
etc. upon his oath says, That he has known the said G. H. for the space of
(...) last past, during which time he carried on and exercised the trade and
business of a Broker, E. F.
in buying and selling stock by commission, and procuring, insurances on ships
and cargoes, for lucre and gain, as others of the same trade and business are
used to do.

A. B.

At, etc.

A. B. of, etc. being sworn and examined the day and year, A. B.
and at the place above mentioned, before the commissioners named and
authorized in and by a commission of bankrupt awarded and issued, and now in
prosecution against G. H. of, C. D.
etc. upon his oath says, That he has known the said G. H. for the space of
(...) last past, during which time he used and exercised the trade of a Factor,
E. F.
by buying and selling goods by commission, as others of the same trade usually
do.

A. B.

After the petitioning creditors debt, and the trading are established, the
party must proceed to prove the act of bankruptcy.

At, etc.

J. K. clerk to G. H. of (...) etc. the person against whom the commission of
bankrupt now in prosecution is awarded and issued, A. B.
being sworn and examined on the day and year, and at the place above
mentioned, before the commissioners in and by the said commission named and
authorized, upon his oath faith, That on (...) last, the said G. H. gave order
to this examinant to deny his being at home, in case any of his creditors
should come to his house to enquire for him; C. D.
and that after this examinant had received such directions from the said G. H.
one L. M. about (...) of the clock of the same day came to the dwelling house
of the said G. H. and enquired of this examinant for the said G. H. But this
examinant denied his being at home, and refused to let the said L. M. see the
said G. H. (who was then above stairs in his chambers as this examinant
believes) pursuant to the order and direction by him, E. F.
this examinant received from the said G. H. This examinant at the same time
knowing that the said L. M. was a creditor of the said G. H.

J. K.

At, etc.

J. K. of, etc. being sworn, etc. upon his oath says, A. B.
That G. H. on the (...) day of (...) departed from and left his dwelling
house, [or his lodgings in this examinant's house, and usual place of
habitation] and has not since returned to the same. And as this examinant
verily believes, he is gone out of the state of Massachusetts C. D.
in which he has usually resided for some time past, and that he remains
absent therefrom, and conceals himself from his creditors, E. F.
so that he cannot be taken or served with legal process, to compel payment of
his just debts.

J. K.

At, etc.

Oliver Hartshorn, of Boston, in the county of Suffolk, A. B.
Gentleman, (one of the deputy-sheriffs of the said county, and keeper of the
goal in Boston, in and for the said county, being sworn and examined, etc. upon
his oath says, That on the (...) day of (...) last, C. D.
he this examinant arrested the said G. H. by virtue of a writ of attachment,
issued against him, at the suit of (...) and that he took and detained the said
G. H. in custody, in the said goal, where he has remained ever since, for want
of bail, in the said suit, which said G. H. is, E. F.
as this examinant is informed and believes, the same person against whom the
aforesaid commission is awarded.

Where the same witness deposes both to the trading and act of bankruptcy, one
affidavit will be sufficient.

If from the evidence produced, the commissioners are satisfied the party is a
bankrupt, they will make the following declaration.

At, etc.

MEMORANDUM. We the subscribers, commissioners named and authorized in and by a
commission of bankrupt, awarded and issued against G. H. late of, etc. (as
described in the commission) having begun to execute the said commission, upon
good proof upon oath before us this day had and taken, Do find that the said G.
H. became a bankrupt within the true intent and meaning of the statute lately
made and now in force concerning bankrupts, before the date and suing forth of
the said commission; and we do therefore declare and adjudge him bankrupt
accordingly.

A. B. C. D. E. F.


At this meeting it will be proper to appoint the three public meetings for the
bankrupt to surrender, and notice in writing must be given to him, or left at
his usual place of abode; but if in prison, personal notice is required -- And
notice must also be given in some Gazette, and such other public notice as the
commissioners may think necessary.

Form of Notice to the Bankrupt.
To G. H. of, etc.

Take notice that by virtue of a commission of bankrupt issued against you,
directed to us the undersigned commissioners, and of which you have before been
notified, We have declared you a bankrupt; and you are hereby required to
surrender yourself to us on the (...) and (...) days of instant, and on the
(...) day of next, at (...) o'clock in the forenoon on each day, at (...) and
make a full discovery and disclosure of all your estate and effects as by law
required. Dated the (...) day of (...) 1800.

Commissioners. A B. C. D. E. F.



Form of the Public Notice to be given in some Gazette.
Whereas a commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued sorth against G. H.
late of (...) merchant, and he being declared a bankrupt, is hereby required to
surrender himself to us the undersigned commissioners, on the (...) and (...)
days of (...) instant, and on the (...) day of (...) next, at (...) of the
clock in the forenoon on each day, at (...) and make a full discovery and
disclosure of his estate and effects; when and where the creditors are to come
prepared to prove their debts, and at the first meeting to choose assignees,
and at the last meeting the said bankrupt is required to finish his
examination; and the creditors are to assent to, or dissent from, the allowance
of his certificate. -- All persons indebted to the said bankrupt, or that have
any of his effects, are not to pay or deliver the same, but to whom the said
commissioners shall appoint.

Commissioners. A. B. C D. E. F.



Immediately upon the commissioners declaring the party a bankrupt, they issue
their warrant for seizure of his effects. -- And the person executing the same,
will keep possession, 'till the commissioners have executed an assignment to
the assignees -- In case they think the bankrupt will abscond, or conceal
himself, they may issue a warrant to apprehend him.

Warrant of Seizure.
Whereas a commission under the hand and seal of J. L. Esquire judge of the
district court for the Massachusetts district, bearing date the (...) day of
(...) grounded upon the statute lately made, and now in force, concerning
bankrupts, has been awarded and issued against G. H. of, etc. directed unto us
the undersigned, and we having begun to put the said commission in execution;
upon due examination of witnesses, and other good proof, upon oath before us
taken, have found that the said G. H. did, before the date and suing forth of
the said commission, become bankrupt within the true intent and meaning of the
said statute, and we have adjudged him bankrupt accordingly. These are
therefore, by virtue of the said commission, and the statute therein mentioned,
to will and require, authorize and empower you, and each of you to whom this
warrant is directed, to enter into, and open the houses, chambers, shops,
warehouses, doors, and also to enter into all other place and places belonging
to him the said G. H. where any of his goods or estate, deeds, books of account
or writings shall be, and there take possession of the goods, money, and other
estate, deeds, books of account or writings of him the said G. H. And such
things as you shall so seize, you shall cause to be inventoried and appraised
to the best value, and the same you shall return to us with all convenient
speed. And what you shall so seize, you shall safely detain and keep in your
possession, until we shall give other order therein; and in case of resistance,
or the not having the key or keys of any door or locks belonging to any place
or places of him the said G. H. where any of his goods are, or are suspected to
be, you shall break open, in the day time, or cause the same to be broke open,
in the day time, for the better execution of this our warrant.

Given under our hands and seals the (...) day of (...) in the year of our
Lord, 1800. Commissioners.
A. B. C. D. E. F.


To (...)
First Public Meeting.
This meeting is for the proof of debts, choice of assignees, and to take the
bankrupts surrender; from which time he will be protected, if he attends, and
procures the commissioners certificate: the form of which see hereafter.

If any of the creditors live remote from the place where the commission is
executed, they may make an affidavit of their debt before some competent
authority, to be duly certified, and send it to their agent, who must attend
the commissioners at one of the public meetings, with the same, when it must be
exhibited, and filed among the proceedings.

Form of an Exhibit.
At, etc.

Exhibited to us under the commission against G. H. -- This is signed by the
commissioners.

In drawing affidavits to be sworn in the country, care should be taken fully
to explain the consideration on which the debt arose, and also to specify the
securities in the hands of the creditors, the same as in depositions where the
party is present; for if any doubt arises, the party not being present to
explain it, his debt can only be admitted as a claim, by which means country
creditors will lose the opportunity of voting in the choice of assignees.

Country creditors may by letter of attorney authorize another person to vote
for them in the choice of assignees, to sign the certificate, and to receive
dividends: the form of which see hereafter.

And the affidavit and letter of attorney must be exhibited to the
commissioners, and filed among the proceedings. If a creditor is not prepared
to prove, he, or some person for him, may attend and make a claim.

Form of a Claim By a Creditor.
A. B. of, etc. merchant, claims a debt of (...) due to the said A. B. from G.
H. the bankrupt, for goods sold and delivered.

A. B.

By a Clerk.
A. B. clerk to R. F. of, etc. claims a debt of (...) due to the said R. F.
from G. H. the bankrupt, for goods sold and delivered.

A. B.

Deposition of Creditors, for Goods sold and delivered.
At, etc.

A. B. of (...) being sworn and examined, A. B.
the day and year and at the place above mentioned, upon his oath says, That
G. H. the person against whom the commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued
forth, C. D.
was at and before the date and issuing forth of the said commission, and still
is, justly and truly indebted unto this deponent, E. F.
in the sum of (...) for goods sold and delivered; for which said sum of (...)
or any part thereof, he, this deponent, has not, nor has any other person, to
his knowledge or belief, received any security or satisfaction whatsoever.

A. B.

On a Note of Hand.
A. B. of, etc. being sworn, etc. -- That G. H. the person, A. B.
etc. was at and before the date and issuing forth of the said commission, and
still is, justly and truly indebted unto this deponent, in the sum of (...) and
upwards, C. D.
for money lent by this deponent to the said G. H. before he became bankrupt;
for which said sum of (...) or any part thereof, he, this deponent, has not,
nor has any person to his use, received any security or satisfaction
whatsoever save and except a promissory note, E. F.
dated the (...) under the hand of the said G. H. whereby he promises to pay
this deponent or order (...) after date, the sum of (...)

A. B.

This is the mode of drawing the deposition where the creditor himself gave
value to the bankrupt for the note or bill. Where the creditor gave value to a
third person the form will be different. See the next precedent. -- All notes,
bills and other securities, must be exhibited to and signed by the
commissioners, to identify the same, as in some cases they may be proved under
several commissions.

On a Note of Hand made by the Bankrupt, and endorsed to Deponent by a third
Person.
A. B. of, etc. being sworn, A. B.
etc. That the said G. H. was at and before the date and suing forth of the
said commission, and still is, justly and truly indebted unto this deponent, in
the sum of (...) upon a promissory note under his hand, C. D.
dated the (...) day of (...) given by the said bankrupt to one R. G. for (...)
payable to him or order (...) after date: which note the said R. G. indorsed to
M. M. who indorsed the same to this deponent, for goods sold and delivered by
this deponent to the said M. M. E. F.
and money paid by him on account of the said note to that account; and for
which said sum of (...) or any part thereof, this deponent has not, nor has
any person, to his use, received any security or satisfaction whatsoever, save
and except the said note.

On a Bill of Exchange.
W. B. of, etc. being sworn, etc. says, A. B.
That G. H. the person, etc. was at and before the date and issuing forth of
the said commission, and still is justly and truly indebted unto this deponent
in the sum of (...) and upwards, C. D.
for money lent by this deponent to the said G. H. before he became bankrupt;
for which said sum, or any part thereof, he, this deponent has not, nor has
any person to his use, received any security or satisfaction whatsoever, save
and except a bill of exchange, E. F.
dated the (...) day of (...) and drawn by the said G. H. upon, and accepted by
and by the said G. H. endorsed and delivered to this deponent.

W. B.

On a Bill of Exchange endorsed to Creditor by a third Person.
W. R. of (...) being sworn, etc. That G. H. the person against whom the
commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued, was at and before the date and
issuing forth of the said commission, and still is, justly and truly indebted
to this deponent, in the sum of (...) upon two bills of exchange, both drawn by
the said bankrupt, on (...) and accepted by them, and both payable in (...)
days after date, to J. T. and Co. or order; one of them for the sum of (...)
and the other for the sum of (...) for value received in account, both of which
said bills of exchange are dated the (...) day of (...) and respectively
endorsed by the said Mess'rs. J. T. and Co. and by them delivered to this
deponent for goods sold and delivered by this deponent to the said Mess'rs. J.
T. and Co. and money paid to them on account of the said bills of exchange, to
the full amount of the said bills of exchange, deducting the legal discount,
and for which said sum, or any part thereof, this deponent has not, nor any
person to his use, received any security or satisfaction whatsoever, except the
said bills of exchange.

W. B.

For Money lent.
W. B. of, etc. being sworn, etc. That G. H. the person against whom the
commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued, was at and before the date and
issuing forth of the said commission, and still is justly and truly indebted to
this deponent, in the sum of (...) for money lent and advanced by this deponent
to and for the use of the said bankrupt; for which said sum of (...) or any
part thereof, he, this deponent, has not, nor has any person to his use,
received any security or satisfaction whatsoever.

W. B.

Deposition of an Insurance Broker.
G. D. of, etc. Insurance-broker, being sworn, etc. -- That G. H. the person
against whom this commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued forth, was at
and before the date and suing forth of the said commission, and still is justly
and truly indebted unto this deponent, in the sum of(...) on the balance of
accounts, for money paid, laid out and expended by this deponent; for which
said sum, or any part thereof, he, this deponent, has not, nor has any person
to his use, to his knowledge or belief, received any security or satisfaction
whatsoever.

G. D.

For Money lent, and Premiums of Insurances.
S. W. of, etc. being sworn, etc. says, A. B.
That G. H. the person against whom this commission of bankrupt is awarded and
issued forth, was at and before the date and issuing forth of the said
commission, and still is justly and truly indebted unto this deponent in the
sum of (...) on the balance of accounts, C. D.
and for premiums or insurances; for which said sum of (...) or any part
thereof, he, this deponent, has not, nor has any person for his use, received
any security or satisfaction whatsoever, (save and except a promissory note, E.
F.
under the hand of the said G. H. for (...) payable (...) after date to (...)
and by them indorsed to this deponent; which said note is dated the (...) day
of (...))

S. W.

Upon a Policy of Insurance.
S. W. of Boston, in the county of Suffolk, A. B.
in the state of Massachusetts, being sworn, etc. says, That G. H. the person
against whom this commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued forth, was at
and before the date and suing forth of the said commission, and still is justly
and truly indebted unto this deponent, C. D.
in the sum of (...) by virtue of a policy of insurance, made out in the names
of (...) and subscribed by the said G. H. on or about the (...) day of (...)
before he became bankrupt, for the sum of (...) upon goods laden, etc. (State
the substance of the policy and the loss, adjustment, etc.) And this deponent
further says, that the said G. H. is indebted to the examinant in the sum of
(...) in respect to the loss so adjusted and settled, E. F.
at (...) per cent. as aforesaid; for which said sum of or any part thereof,
this deponent has not, nor has any person to his use, had or received any
security or satisfaction whatsoever, save and except the said policy.

S. W.

Deposition of a Country Creditor, in the Matter of G. H. Bankrupt.
H. L. of (...) in the county of (...) in the commonwealth of Massachusetts,
merchant, makes oath, That G. H. of (...) merchant, against whom a commission
of bankrupt has been lately awarded, was at and before the date and suing
forth of the said commission, and still is justly and truly indebted to this
deponent, in the sum of (...) for principal money lent by this deponent before
that time, to the said G. H. and in the sum of (...) for interest for the same.
And this deponent says, that he has not, nor has any person to his use, had
or received any security or satisfaction whatsoever, for all or any part of the
said (...) and interest, other than and except one bond or obligation, The bond
or note, etc. must be sent with the affidavit, to be exhibited under the
commission, otherwise the debt should not be proved.
bearing date the (...) day of (...) given and entered (...) the said G. H.
unto this deponent, in the penal sum of (...)

H. L.

On a Judgment.
W. B. of, etc. being sworn, etc. says, That G. H. the person, etc. was at and
before the (...) and issuing forth of the said commission, and still is justly
and truly indebted unto him this deponent, in the sum of (...) before he became
a bankrupt, for damages and costs, recovered by this deponent, in the court of
common pleas held at Boston, in and for the county of Suffolk, in the
commonwealth of Massachusetts, about (...) last against the said bankrupt, in a
plea of the case; for which said sum of (...) or any part thereof, this
deponent has not, nor has any person to his use, received any satisfaction or
security whatsoever, (save and except the said judgment, recorded in the office
(...) Book (...) fol. (...))

W. B.

Deposition on a Mortgage.
J. W. of, etc. being sworn, etc. says, That G. H. the person, etc. was at and
before the date and issuing forth of the said commission, and still is justly
and truly indebted unto this deponent, in the sum of (...) for money lent and
advanced by this deponent to the said bankrupt; for which said sum of (...) or
any part thereof, he, this deponent, has not, nor has any person to his use,
received any security or satisfaction whatsoever, save and except a certain
deed of mortgage, bearing date the (...) day of (...) for the payment of (...)
on the (...) which said mortgage, this examinant does hereby surrender and give
up for the benefit of the creditors claiming or seeking relief under the said
commission.

J. W.

Conditional estates granted by the bankrupt, may be redeemed on tendering the
money due. If the creditor does not choose to give up his mortgage or pledge,
he must apply to the commissioners to have the premises or things pledged sold,
and to be permitted to prove for the residue.

Deposition by a Bankrupt and his Assignees.
W. B. late of, etc. against whom a commission of bankrupt is awarded and
issued, and now in prosecution, and T. A. of, etc. and S. T. of, etc. joint
assignees of the estate and effects of the said bankrupt, being severally sworn
and examined, the day and year and at the place aforesaid, upon their
respective oaths say -- and first this deponent W. B. for himself says, That
G. H. the person against whom this commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued
forth, is justly and truly indebted to the said T. A. and S. T. as assignees of
the estate and effects of this deponent, and to the said estate and effects in
the sum of (...) for money lent and advanced by this deponent, to and for the
use of the said G. H. before he became bankrupt; which said sum of (...) or any
part thereof, he, this deponent, has not received, nor have or has the said
other deponents, or either of them nor any other person, to his knowledge or
belief, received the said sum of money, or any security or satisfaction for the
same. And these deponents, T. A. and S. T. upon their several oaths, each
speaking for himself, severally say, That they have not, nor has either of
them, nor has any person for their or either of their use, received the said
sum of (...) or any part thereof, nor any satisfaction or security for the
same, to their respective knowledge or belief.

W. B. T. A. S. T.


Deposition of an Administrator.
A. W. of, etc. administrator of all and singular the goods and chattels,
rights and credits, which were of (...) at the time of his death, being sworn,
etc. says, That G. H. the person against whom this commission of bankrupt is
awarded and issued forth, was at and before the issuing forth of the said
commission, and still is indebted unto this deponent, in his said capacity, in
the sum of (...) for goods sold and delivered by the said (...) in his
lifetime to the said G. H. before he became bankrupt; for which said sum of or
any part thereof, this deponent has not received, nor did the said (...) in
his lifetime, to his knowledge or belief, nor any other person to the use of
the said intestate, or of this deponent, receive any security or satisfaction.

A. W.

The letters of administration must be produced to the commissioners.

Interest, on notes and other securities bearing interest, is usually allowed
to the date of the commission.

Memorandum of the Bankrupt's Surrender.
At, etc.

G. H. late of (...) against whom a commission of bankrupt has been lately
awarded and issued, A. B.
did on the day and year, and at the place abovesaid, pursuant to notice in the
(...) gazette for that purpose, surrender himself to us the commissioners, in
and by the said commission named and authorized, C. D.
and submitted himself to be from time to time examined, touching the discovery
of his estate and effects, and in all things to conform himself according to
the directions of the statute lately made and now in force concerning
bankrupts, and to have the benefit thereof.

G. H.

The said G. H. being sworn and examined the day and year, and at the place
aforesaid, upon his oath says, that he is not at present prepared to make a
full disclosure and discovery of his estate and effects, E. F.
and craves further time for the doing thereof till the next day appointed in
the (...) for that purpose.

G. H.

After the bankrupt has surrendered himself, the commissioners indorse a
memorandum thereof on his summons, by which he will be protected.

At, etc.

The within named G. H. the day and year and at the place above mentioned,
surrendered to us the undersigned commissioners, named and authorized in and by
a commission of bankrupt, awarded and issued, and now in prosecution, against
the said G. H. and submitted himself, to be from time to time examined,
touching the discovery of his estate and effects, and in all things to conform
himself according to the directions of the statute lately made, and now in
force concerning bankrupts, and declared upon his oath, that he was not
prepared to make a full disclosure and discovery of his estate and effects, and
craved further time for the doing thereof, which was granted to him accordingly.

A. B. C. D. E. F.


Memorandum in Case the Bankrupt does not surrender at the first Meeting,
At, etc.

MEMORANDUM. That we the commissioners named and authorized in and by a
commission of bankrupt awarded and issued, and now in prosecution, against G.
H. of, etc. met the day and year, and at the place above mentioned, pursuant to
notice duly given for that purpose; but the said G. H. did not surrender
himself to us, or make any disclosure or discovery of his estate or effects, or
send any excuse why he did not.

A. B. C. D. E. F.


All creditors who have proved debts of 200 dollars, are entitled to vote in
the choice of assignees, which is to be determined by the majority in value of
those who vote at this meeting.

Letter of Attorney to vote in the Choice of Assignees.
Know all men by these presents, That I, (...) of (...), one of the creditors
of G. H. against whom a commission of bankrupt has been awarded and issued, Do
make, ordain, constitute and appoint (...) of (...) my true and lawful
attorney, for me and in my name, place and stead, to appear before the
commissioners in and by the said commission named and authorized, at the days
and times appointed for the choice of assignees of the estate and effects of
the said (...) and then and there, for me, and in my name, to consent with whom
the moneys to be received from time to time, amounting to 300 dollars, or
upwards, out of the said bankrupt's estate and effects shall remain, until the
same be provided. And also for me and in my name to vote in the choice of one
or more assignee or assignees of the said bankrupt's estate and effects. And
also in case that I the said (...) should happen to be chosen assignee under
the said commission, then as my said attorney, and for me and in my name to
accept the appointment, and to execute a counterpart of the assignment to the
commissioners; and further to act and perform all and whatsoever shall be
needful and requisite to be done in, about, or concerning the premises. I
hereby agreeing to ratify, confirm and allow all and whatsoever my said
attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done for me, by virtue of these
presents, and of the power and authority hereby to him given. In witness
whereof, I the said (...) have hereunto set my hand and seal, this (...) day of
(...) in the year of our Lord, 1800.

(L. S.) Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of (...)

If the party chooses, he can add a power to consent to the commissioners
certifying to the judge, that the bankrupt has conformed, and to consent that
the assignees may commence suits, etc. and to receive dividends.

Memorandum of the Choice of Assignees.
At, etc.

MEMORANDUM. This being the day appointed in the (...) Gazette, A. B.
for the choice of assignees of the estate and effects of G. H. the person
against whom this commission of bankrupt is awarded, We, the undersigned, being
the major part of the creditors of the said G. H. present at this meeting, C. D.
and who have proved our respective debts to be 200 dollars, have chosen, and
do hereby nominate and choose (...) and (...) to be assignees of the estate and
effects of the said G. H. E. F.
And we do hereby desire the commissioners to make an assignment thereof to
them accordingly.

R. F. for self and Co. W. H.

We accept of the appointment, and promise to execute a counterpart of the said
assignment. (...)(...)

Be it remembered, That before the above creditors of the said bankrupt
proceeded to the choice of the above assignees, the major part in value of the
creditors present at such meeting, did direct, that when the moneys arising by,
and to be received from time to time out of the said bankrupt's estate, shall
amount to 300 dollars, the same should from time to time be paid into the (...)
bank, and remain there (...) in the name of the said assignees, until the same
should be divided among the creditors.



Memorandum of the Adjournment of the Choice of Assignees.
At, etc.

MEMORANDUM. That this being the day appointed, pursuant to notice in (...)
gazette, for the choice of assignees, under the commission of bankrupt, awarded
and issued against G. H. We whose names are hereunto subscribed, being the
commissioners in and by the said commission named and authorized, met the day
and year and at the place above mentioned, pursuant to such notice, to take the
proof of debts, and for the choice of assignees under the said commission; but
the creditors present being desirous that the said choice of assignees should
be adjourned, We do adjourn the same until (...) at this place, at (...)
o'clock of the same day.

Commissioners. A. B. C. D. E. F.



Assignment of the Bankrupt's Estate and Effects from the Commissioners to the
Assignees.
This Indenture made the (...) day of (...) in the year of our Lord 1800,
between A. B. C. D. and E. F. the commissioners named, authorized and appointed
in and by a certain commission of bankrupt, awarded and issued against G. H.
late of (...) of the one part, and (...) of (...) of the other part. Whereas a
commission, bearing date the (...) day of (...) under the hand and seal of John
Lowell, Esquire judge of the district court for the Massachusetts district,
grounded upon the statute lately made and now in force concerning bankrupts,
has been awarded and issued against the said G. H. directed to the said A. B.
C. D. and E. F. thereby giving them full power and authority to execute the
same, as by the said commission, on reference thereto, may more fully appear:
-- And whereas the said commissioners having duly qualified themselves to act
in the said commission, and begun to put the same into execution, upon due
examination of witnesses, and on good proof upon oath before them taken, have
found and declared the said G. H. a bankrupt, within the true intent and
meaning of the said statute: -- And whereas the said (...) and (...) according
to the directions of the said statute for the choice of assignees, have been
duly chosen assignees of the estate and effects of the said G. H. Now this
indenture witnesses, That the said commissioners, by virtue of the said
statute, and in consideration of one dollar to them in hand paid, by the said
(...) and (...) (the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged) Do bargain, sell,
assign, transfer and set over unto the said (...) and (...) their executors,
administrators and assigns, All and singular the goods, chattels, wares and
merchandises, effects, debts, sum and sums of money, and all other estate
whatsover, whereof the said G. H. was possessed, interested in, or entitled
unto, at the time he became a bankrupt, or at any time since: and all the
estate, right, title, interest, equity of redemption, property, claim and
demand whatsoever of him the said G. H. of, in, or to the premises, or any part
thereof. To have and to hold, receive and take all and singular the said
premises unto the said and their executors, administrators and assigns from
henceforth, as his and their own proper goods and chattels for ever. To the
intent and purpose nevertheless, and to and for the use, benefit and advantage
of the said (...) and (...) and all such other of the creditors of the said G.
H. as have already sought, or shall hereafter in due time come in as creditors,
and seek relief by virtue of the said commission. And the said (...) and (...)
for themselves, their executors and administrators, do covenant with the said
commissioners, that they the said (...) and (...) will forthwith use their
utmost endeavor to recover and collect all and singular the estate* property
and effects whatsoever, and wheresoever, of, or belonging to the said G. H. and
make sale and disposition of the same to the best advantage; and also use their
utmost endeavor to recover and receive all debts, sum and sums of money, due
and owing to the said G. H. or his estate. And further, that they the said
(...) and (...) their executors and administrators, shall and will at all
times, upon reasonable request and notice in writing to them, or either of
them, given for that purpose by the said commissioners, render a just and true
account in writing, of all and every sum and sums of money, or other
satisfaction as they the said (...) and (...) their executors or administrators
shall have then received out of the estate of the said G. H. and pay the same
to the said commissioners by the said commission named and authorized, or in
any renewed commission to be named and authorized, or to such person or persons
as they shall direct, to the end that the same may be divided amongst all the
creditors of the said G. H. who shall or may be entitled to relief under the
said commission. And in the mean time, until such dividend or dividends shall
be made as aforesaid, that they the said (...) and (...) shall from time to
time, when the money to be received by them as aforesaid, amounts to the sum of
300 dollars, pay the same in the joint names of the said assignees into the
(...) bank, for safe custody, there to remain for the benefit of the said
creditors, and subject to the order of the commissioners. And the said (...)
and (...) do further covenant with the said commissioners, their executors and
administrators, that they will well and sufficiently save, defend and keep
harmless all the said commissioners, and every of them, their heirs, executors
and administrators, clerks and agents, from all actions, suits, costs and
damages whatsoever, which shall or may in anywise arise or happen by reason of
this assignment, or any act or thing whatsoever by them lawfully done by virtue
of the said commission. In witness, etc.

The commissioners have power to make a provisional assignment, when they may
see cause for the better preserving the bankrupt's estate; but as assignees are
to be chosen at the first public meeting, the necessity for this, can but
seldom happen.

Memorandum of the Commissioners executing an Assignment.
At, etc.

MEMORANDUM. That we the undersigned commissioners, named and authorized in and
by a commission of bankrupt, awarded and issued against G. H. of (...) met at
the place and time above mentioned, and executed an assignment of the said
bankrupt's estate and effects, to (...) and (...) the assignees, appointed and
chosen by the creditors of the said bankrupt.

Second Public Meeting.
This meeting will be for the proof of debts, and to take the bankrupt's
surrender, if he chooses to attend. -- For the form of depositions, see the
proceedings of the first public meeting.

Memorandum of the Bankrupt's Appearance at the second meeting, after having
surrendered at the first.
At (...) the (...) Day of (...) 1800.

MEMORANDUM. That G. H. late of, A. B.
etc. the person against whom this commission of bankrupt has been awarded and
issued, appeared again before us the undersigned commissioners the day and year
and at the place above written, C. D.
and submitted himself to be sworn and examined by us; but not being prepared
to make a full disclosure and discovery of his estate and effects, E. F.
desires further time for the doing thereof, which is granted him accordingly.

A. B. C. D. E. F.


Third Public Meeting.
AT this meeting, debts may be proved and claimed, and the bankrupt must pass
his last examination; unless an order has been obtained to enlarge the time.

The Bankrupt's last Examination.
At (...) the (...) day of (...) 1800.

G. H. late of, etc. merchant, the person against whom the commission of
bankrupt now in prosecution is awarded and issued, being come before us the
commissioners in and by the said commission named and authorized, in order to
make a full discovery and disclosure of his estate and effects, pursuant to
notice in the (...) gazette for that purpose given, and being sworn and
examined the day and year and at the place abovesaid, upon his oath says, That
the several books following (that is to say) etc. severally marked with the
letters A, B, C, etc. and which are now produced and delivered up by this
examinant, together with the goods and things seized by and under the said
commission; and the books, papers and writings, securities for money, goods and
effects, delivered up by this examinant to the assignees chosen under the said
commission, together with a gold watch and (...) in money, do contain and are a
full and true disclosure and discovery of all this examinant's estate and
effects, both real and personal, whereby this examinant or his family has or
may have or expect any profit, possibility of profit, benefit or advantage
whatsoever, (except only such part of his estate and effects as have been
really and bona fide before sold and disposed of in the way of his trade and
dealings, and except such sums of money as have been laid out in the ordinary
expense of himself and family.) And this examinant further says, That at the
time of this his examination, he has delivered up to the said commissioners, or
unto the assignees chosen under the said commission, all such part of his
goods, wares, merchandises, money, estate and effects, and all books, papers
and writings relating thereto, as are now in his custody, possession or power
(his necessary wearing apparel, and the necessary wearing apparel of his wife
and children, and necessary beds and bedding only excepted.) -- And this
examinant says, That he has not removed, concealed or embezzled any part of
his estate, nor any books of account, papers or writings, relating thereto,
with an intent to defraud his creditors.

G. H.
The above mentioned gold watch, and (...) in money, were by consent of the
creditors present, returned to the bankrupt.



N. B. The bankrupt's watch, ring, and what little money he may have about him,
are tendered to the commissioners, but usually returned.

If the bankrupt happens to be a foreigner, and does not understand English, it
will be necessary that he should have the English examination interpreted and
read to him, by a person versed in both languages, who must be first sworn to
interpret truly; of which oath and interpretation, there must be a memorandum
made and annexed to the bankrupt's examination. This deposition may be in the
following form.

At, (...) the (...) day of (...) 1800.

I. K. of, etc. being sworn and examined on the day and year, and at the place
above mentioned, before the commissioners named and authorized in and by a
commission of bankrupt awarded and issued, and now in prosecution against G. H.
of, etc. upon his oath says, That he has faithfully and truly, according to
the best of this examinant's skill and knowledge, interpreted the oath
administered by the said commissioners to the said bankrupt. And this examinant
further says, That he has, faithfully and truly, according to the best of
this examinant's skill and knowledge, interpreted to the said bankrupt his last
examination hereunto annexed.

If the bankrupt happens to be a prisoner in execution, then the commissioners
must adjourn to the prison, and the following memorandum will be necessary.

At (...) the (...) day of (...) 1800.

MEMORANDUM. That we the undersigned commissioners, named and authorized in and
by a commission of bankrupt, awarded and issued against G. H. of, etc. met here
the day and year, and at the place above mentioned, pursuant to notice in the
(...) gazette, in order to finish the said bankrupt's last examination, under
the said commission; but the said bankrupt being a prisoner in the goal or
prison in execution, We do therefore adjourn to take the said bankrupt's
examination.

Commissioners. A. B. C. D. E. F.



To the Hon. John Lowell, Esquire, Judge of the District Court for the
Massachusetts District.
The humble Petition of G. H. bankrupt, Shows,

That a commission of bankrupt, under the hand and seal of your Honor, bearing
date the (...) day of (...) having been duly awarded and issued against your
petitioner, directed to certain commissioners therein named, to execute the
same; And they having declared your petitioner a bankrupt, and required him to
surrender himself to them, to be examined touching his estate and effects, on
the (...) day of (...) and on the (...) day of (...) to surrender himself, and
finish his examination under the said commission, your petitioner did surrender
himself, and submit to be examined touching the disclosure of his estate and
effects at the two first meetings; and is now preparing and settling his
accounts, in order to make a full disclosure thereof; but they being long and
intricate, your petitioner cannot finish the same in the time limited by the
commissioners for that purpose. He therefore prays your honor, to order that
the time for surrendering himself to the said commissioners, for fully
disclosing and discovering his estate and effects, and finishing his
examination under the said commission, be enlarged, for the space of fifty
days, to be computed from the said (...) day of (...) 1800.

G. H.

The judge may write his fiat upon the petition: Notice whereof should be duly
given to the commissioners; and the following advertisement, inserted in some
public paper. The order must be obtained six days before the expiration of the
42d day.

Advertisement for enlargement of the Time for surrendering.
Pursuant to an order made by the honorable John Lowell, Esquire judge of the
district court for the Massachusetts district, for enlarging the time for G. H.
of (...) merchant, a bankrupt, to surrender himself, and make a full discovery
and disclosure of his estate and effects, for 50 days, to be computed from the
(...) day of (...) instant. This is to give notice, That we the undersigned
commissioners, intend to meet on the (...) day of (...) at (...) of the clock,
at (...) where the said bankrupt is required to surrender himself, between the
hours of (...) and (...) of the same day, and make a full discovery and
disclosure of his estate and effects, and finish his examination; and the
creditors who have not already proved their debts, may then and there come and
prove the same, and assent to, or dissent from, the allowance of his
certificate.

Commissioners. A. B. C. D. E. F.



Of the Adjournment of last Examination.
The commissioners in a commission of bankrupt, awarded and issued forth
against G. H. of, etc. intend to meet on the (...) day of (...) instant, at
(...) o'clock, (...) at the (...) (by adjournment) from the instant, in order
to take the last examination of the said bankrupt, when and where he is
required to surrender himself, and make a full discovery and disclosure of his
estate and effects, and finish his examination; and the creditors who have not
already proved their debts are to come prepared to prove the same; and with
those who have proved their debts, are to assent to, or dissent from the
allowance of his certificate.

Memorandum of the bankrupt's having enlarged his time for surrendering and
making a full disclosure and discovery of his estate and effects.
At (...) the (...) day of (...) 1800.

Be it remembered, That this being the day appointed, pursuant to notice in the
(...) gazette, for G. H. of, etc. the person against whom the commission of
bankrupt, now in prosecution, is awarded and issued, to surrender himself, and
to make a full disclosure and discovery of his estate and effects, and to
finish his examination under the said commission, We, the undersigned
commissioners, met the day and year and at the place abovementioned, pursuant
to such notice* when the said bankrupt produced an order of the honorable John
Lowell, Esquire judge of the district court for the Massachusetts district, whereby
it is ordered that the bankrupt's time for surrendering himself, and making a
full disclosure and discovery of his estate and effects, and to finish his
examination, should be enlarged for the space of (...) days, to be computed
from this (...) day of (...) instant. We the said commissioners do therefore
defer taking such examination 'till the (...) day of (...) next; and we hereby
accordingly adjourn to that day, at this place, at (...) o'clock of the same
day, for that purpose.

A. B. C. D. E. F.


Memorandum of the Adjournment of the Bankrupt's last Examination.
At (...) the (...) day of (...) 1800.

MEMORANDUM. That this being the day appointed pursuant to notice in the (...)
gazette, for G. H of, etc. the person against whom the commission of bankrupt
now in prosecution is awarded and issued, to surrender himself, and to make a
full disclosure and discovery of his estate and effects, and to finish his
examination under the said commission, We the undersigned commissioners, met
the day and year and at the place above mentioned, pursuant to such notice; at
which time the said bankrupt appeared and submitted himself, and was examined
by us touching his estate and effects; but the said bankrupt not being able
satisfactorily to answer all such questions as we have put to him touching his
estate and effects, without a further investigation of his books and papers, We
do therefore adjourn the said bankrupt's examination until the (...) day of
(...) at this place, at (...) o'clock of the same day.

A. B. C. D. E F.


Form of a Bankrupt's Certificate.
To the honorable John Lowell, Esquire judge of the District Court for the
Massachusetts District.
We whose names and seals are hereunto subscribed and set, commissioners named
and authorized in and by a commission of bankrupt awarded and issued against G.
H. of, etc. (as described in the Commission,) bearing date the (...) day of
(...) Do hereby certify to your honor, that having begun to put the said
commission into execution, we found that the said G. H. became a bankrupt since
the first day of June, 1800, and before the due and suing forth of the said
commission, within the true intent and meaning of the statute made and now in
force, entitled, An Act to establish an uniform system of bankruptcy throughout
the United States. And we did adjudge him bankrupt accordingly. And we further
certify to your honor, that the said G H. being so declared a bankrupt, we
caused notice to be given and published in the gazette, of such commission
being issued, and of the times and place of three several meetings of us the
said commissions, within 42 days next after such notice, (the last of which
meetings was appointed to be on the forty-second day,) at which time the said
G. H. was required to surrender himself to us the said commissioners, and to
make a full disclosure and discovery of his estate and effects; and the
creditors of the said G. H. were desired to come prepared to prove their debts,
and to assent to, or dissent from, the making this certificate. And we further
certify to your honor, that such three several meetings of us the said
commissioners were had, pursuant to such notice, and at one of those meetings
the said G. H. did surrender himself to us, and did sign and subscribe such
surrender, and did submit to be examined from time to time, upon oath, by and
before us, and in all things to conform to the said statute. And we do further
certify to your honor, that at the last of the said three meetings, the said G.
H. finished his examination before us, according to the directions of the said
act, and upon such his examination, made a full disclosure and discovery of his
estate and effects, and in all things conformed himself to the said act. And
there does not appear to us any reason to doubt of the truth of such discovery,
or that the same is not a full discovery of all the estate and effects of the
said G. H. And we further certify to your honor, that the creditors whose names
are subscribed to this certificate, are full two thirds in number and value of
the creditors for not less than fifty dollars respectively, and who have duly
proved their debts under the said commission; and that it does appear to us by
due proof by affidavit in writing, that such several subscribing creditors, or
some person by them respectively, duly authorized thereto, did before our
signing hereof, sign his certificate, and testify their consent to our signing
the same, and to the said G. H. having such allowance and benefit, as by the
said act are allowed to bankrupts, and to the said G. H. being discharged from
his debts in pursuance of the same act. In witness whereof, we have hereunto
set our hands and seals, this (...) day of (...) in the year of our Lord 1800.

A. B. A. B. C. D. E. F.

We the creditors of the abovenamed G. H. whose names are hereunder
subscribed, do hereby testify and declare our consent, that the commissioners
abovenamed may sign and seal the certificate above written. And that the said
G. H. may have such allowance and benefit as are given to bankrupts, by the act
of Congress made and entitled, "An Act to establish an uniform system of
Bankruptcy throughout the United States." And be discharged from his debts, in
pursuance of the same act.


(The Creditors Names.) K. L. M. N.



Certificate where the Bankrupt surrenders under order for time.
As in the last, "to be on the forty-second day" inclusive, then continue thus,
(But by your honor's order, bearing date the (...) day of (...) last, the time
for the said bankrupt's surrendering and finishing his examination, was
enlarged for fifty days,) at which meeting the said G. H. was required to
surrender himself to us the commissioners, and to make a full disclosure and
discovery of his estate and effects: And the creditors of the said G. H. were
desired to come prepared to prove their debts, and to assent to, or dissent
from, our making this certificate. And we further certify to your honor, that
such several meetings of us the said commissioners were had pursuant to such
notice, and the order of your honor. And that the said G. H. on the (...) day
of (...) last, (being the fiftieth day of the enlarged time, under your honor's
order, as aforesaid) did surrender, etc. and so go on, and conclude from the
form of the other certificate set out above.

Affidavit of seeing Creditors sign a Bankrupt's Certificate.
In the Matter of G. H. a Bankrupt.

I. K. of, etc. gentleman, makes oath, that he, this deponent, was present,
and did see T. C. for himself, C. R. C. D. etc. (put in all you saw sign) ten
of the creditors of the said bankrupt, severally subscribe their names at the
foot of a certain instrument in writing, purporting to be a certificate under
the hands and seals of the commissioners, named and authorized in and by a
commission of bankrupt, awarded and issued against the said G. H. That the said
G. H. the bankrupt, had in all things conformed himself to the statute made,
and now in force, entitled, "An Act to establish an uniform system of
brankruptcy throughout the United States," whereby they testify and declare their
consent to the said commissioners signing the said certificate, and that the
said bankrupt may have such allowance and benefit as are given to bankrupts by
the said act, and be discharged from his debts in pursuance thereof.

If any person sign the bankrupt's certificate by virtue of a letter of
attorney, -- it should be left with the commissioners.

Affidavit to be made by the Bankrupt that his Certificate was fairly obtained.
G. H. of, etc. against whom a commission of bankrupt has been awarded and
issued, makes oath, That the certificate, bearing date, etc. under the hands
and seals of, etc. the commissioners therein named, whereby they have certified
to the honorable John Lowell, Esquire judge of the district court for the
Massachusetts district, that he, this deponent, has in all things conformed
himself to the statute made, and now in force, entitled, "An Act to establish
an uniform system of bankruptcy throughout the United States," and the consent
of all this deponent's creditors who have signed their names at the foot of the
said certificate, that the said commissioners might sign the same. And that
this deponent might have such allowance and benefit as are given to bankrupts
by the said act, and be discharged from his debts, in pursuance of the same
act, were obtained fairly and without fraud.

At (...) the (...) Day of (...) 1800.

MEMORANDUM. We the undersigned commissioners, named and authorized in and by a
commission of bankrupt, awarded and issued against G. H. of, etc. met at the
time and place above mentioned, and examined the proceedings under the said
commission, and finding thereby, and by affidavit exhibited before us, that
full two thirds in number and value of all the creditors who have proved their
debts under the said commission, amounting respectively to fifty dollars and
upwards, have signed their consent that the commissioners should execute a
certificate to the horable John Lowell, Esquire. judge of the district court for
the Massachusetts district, for the said bankrupt's discharge, according to the
statute entitled, "An Act to establish an uniform system of bankruptcy
throughout the United States," We the said commissioners accordingly executed
the said certificate.

A. B. C. D. E. F.


The certificate, together with the affidavits, and letters of attorney (if
any) must be left with the district judge. As any of the creditors are allowed
by the act to be heard against the allowance of the certificate, it is presumed
a time will be limited by the judge for that purpose, of which public notice
should be given, signifying that the commissioners have certified to the judge,
that the bankrupt has conformed, and that the certificate will be allowed and
confirmed, unless cause shown to the contrary within days from the date of the
advertisement.

If no cause is shown in the time limited, against the allowance of the
certificate, the judge will sign his allowance thereon.

It is presumed, upon a liberal construction of the act, that the bankrupt has
until twelve o'clock at night on the forty-second day to surrender himself to
the commissioners, but if he does not appear within that time, he will subject
himself to the penalties of the law, which are, that he be adjudged a
fraudulent bankrupt, and suffer imprisonment for a term not less than twelve
months, nor exceeding ten years, and shall not at any time after be entitled to
the benefit of the act.

Memorandum when the Bankrupt does not appear at all.
At (...) the (...) day of (...) 1800.

Be it remembered, That we the undersigned commissioners, named and authorized
in and by a commission of bankrupt awarded and issued and now in prosecution
against G. H. of etc. met together the day and year and at the place
abovementioned, pursuant to notice in the (...) gazette, for the said bankrupt
to surrender himself to us, and to make a full disclosure and discovery of all
his estate and effects; at which time and place the said G. H. did not
surrender himself according to the statute entitled, "An Act to establish an
uniform system of bankruptcy throughout the United States," although we
attended in expectation of such surrender 'till past twelve o'clock at night.

Commissioners. A. B. C. D. E. F.



Causes for disallowing Certificate.
Bankrupt permitting false demands to the prejudice of real creditors, or if he
has lost at any one time fifty dollars, or in the whole three hundred dollars,
after the passing the act, and within twelve months before bankruptcy, by any
manner of gaming or wagering, he loses all benefit under the act.

Bankrupt's Allowance.
Commissioners before appointment of assignees, and the assignees after such
appointment, may allow necessary support to bankrupt and his family, until his
final discharge. Estate paying 50 per cent. on debts proved, the bankrupt to be
entitled to 5 per cent. so as the sum does not exceed in the whole 500 dollars.
If 75 per cent. then 10 per cent. not exceeding 800 dollars. Estate not paying
50 per cent. then bankrupt to be paid so much as commissioners may think fit to
allow, not exceeding 300 dollars, nor 3 per cent. on the nett produce.

Dividend.
The first dividend of the nett produce of the bankrupt's estate, must be made
at some time after four and within twelve months from the time of the issuing
the commission^; and thirty days public notice must be given of the time and
place of the commissioners and assignees meeting, to make such dividend.

The second dividend (in case the whole property is not divided on the first)
is to be made in eighteen months; of which due notice must be given. -- This
dividend to be final, unless any suit at law, or equity be depending, or any
part of the estate standing out, that could not have been disposed of, or other
causes render another dividend necessary.



FINIS.

