MR. HOLMES's SERMON, ON THE Death of General Washington.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT CAMBRIDGE, ON THE LORD'S DAY, DECEMBER 29, 1799,
OCCASIONED BY THE Death OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE
AMERICAN ARMIES, AND LATE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY ABIEL HOLMES, A. M.

PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN CAMBRIDGE.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON.

1800.

ISAIAH iii. 1, 2, 3. BEHOLD! the LORD, the LORD of hosts, does take away the
mighty man, and the man of war -- the prudent, and the ancient -- the
honorable man, and the counselor.
UNHAPPY the nation, destined to experience so great a calamity! Unhappy our
nation; for such, alas, is its own destiny! The characters, drawn by the
prophet, if distributed among many members of a community, constitute its glory
and defense: but if, what rarely occurs, they are concentrated in ONE MAN, who
can estimate his importance? By his might, by his military skill and bravery,
by his prudence, by his age and experience, by the weight of his character, and
by his counsels; his influence toward the security and happiness of a nation is
incalculable. To be deprived, then, of such a man -- how great the judgment!
how affecting the calamity!

No event, less melancholy than this, could have caused the solemn stillness,
and the sorrowful aspect, of this assembly. Yes: This day is this scripture
fulfilled in your ears: -- for, behold! in the removal of WASHINGTON, the LORD,
the LORD of hosts, does take away the mighty man, and the man of war -- the
prudent, and the ancient -- the honorable man, and the counselor.

Will it be superfluous, on this affecting occasion, to exhibit the union of
all these characters in the great and beloved Man, whose loss we are now called
to deplore? New information, indeed, cannot be given you concerning him; for
not a few of you have personally witnessed his talents and his virtues; and
those, whose years admit not this testimony, have been taught from the cradle
to lisp his name, and to revere his character. Nor can the panegyric of the
Preacher add aught to his transcendent fame. A summary review of his character,
however, and of the services which he has rendered to his country, is what
Gratitude demands; and it may be happily conducive to our moral and religious
improvement.

WASHINGTON was the mighty man. Lofty in stature, robust and vigorous in
constitution, he was formed for active enterprises, and heroic achievements. At
the present day, indeed, corporeal strength and agility are far less material
to the warrior, than they were in ancient times, when the battle was fought in
personal combats, and when the chief weapons in use were the javelin and the
spear. They have always, however, their importance; nor, without them, could
the American Hero have been uniformly energetic for action, or have sustained
the complicated cares, and oppressive fatigues, of the camp.

He, too, was the man of war. Endowed, by na^^re, with singular capacities for
the formation of a military character, he became, by the aids of art and
experience, a warrior of the first distinction. At the early age of twenty two
years, he so highly signalized himself, At Fort du Quesne, in 1754; and at
Braddock's defeat, 1755.
at a very critical juncture, for his military skill and bravery, as to excite
great expectations of his future eminence; and it was, even then, predicted, By
the Rev. Mr. Davies, then in Virginia, afterward President of Princeton
College.
that he was raised up to be the Savior of his country. At length, the
important crisis arrived, when the prediction received its accomplishment.
When, in the contest with the Parent State, it became necessary to resist unto
blood; an army of citizen soldiers spontaneously sprung into existence, and
rushed into the field, in defense of their invaded liberties. Collected,
however, from the various colonies; diverse in their habits and manners;
unaccustomed to discipline; unskilled in war; and unsupplied with arms and
ammunition; they composed a body, which seemed to promise nothing more
propitious than early disquietude, obstinate insubordination, frequent
desertion, and speedy dissolution. At this interesting and hazardous moment,
the eyes of the people were directed to GEORGE WASHINGTON, at Mount Vernon, in
the distant colony of Virginia. No sooner did he receive a commission from the
American Congress, to take the command of the army, my than he exchanged his
tranquil home for the confused noise of the warrior, and for the perils and
hardships of the camp. Though he accepted his commission with unaffected
diffidence, he commenced its execution with the steady zeal of enlightened
patriotism. Believing the American cause to be just, he relied on the
concurrent support of his fellow-citizens, and committed himself to the
auspicious guidance and benediction of ALMIGHTY GOD. From (...) very temple, we
can behold the spot of the first ^^^mpment, to which he repaired to execute
"the (...) behest" with which he was entrusted. He was unanimously elected
commander in chief of the American forces, by Congress, June 16, 1775; and
arrived at Cambridge, and took command of the army July 2, following.
And how did he execute it? With what diligence and success did he organize the
heterogeneous troops? How soon did he acquire the unlimited confidence of the
army; and, by a fascinating influence, establish subordination; inspire a
spirit of patriotism; and so firmly attach the soldiers to their General, and
to the cause of their country, as to render them determined to conquer, or to
die?

To trace the series of events, during a war of seven years, and to point out
the influence of this great Commander, in giving, under Providence, a
propitious course to those events, and in bringing the war to a happy
conclusion, would swell a Discourse into a Volume. Let the Historian record
those events, and point out that influence. Let the Poet make them the theme of
his heroic verse. Let the marble monument preserve them in legible characters,
for the perusal of distant posterity. We need only say, That the events of this
revolutionary war astonished Europe, astonished the world: That, under the
auspices of WASHINGTON, the ablest generals of Britain were baffled, and her
veteran troops repelled: That, in addition to repeated victories, two of her
armies, with her most experienced commanders at their head, were made prisoners
of war: That her Parliament was constrained to acknowledge the Independence of
America: and, That, by the Treaty of Peace, which terminated the contest, the
liberties of our Nation were placed on the most respectable and permanent basis.

In WASHINGTON, then, we behold the man of war: not an Alexander, The British
Poets have delighted in celebrating the praises of WASHINGTON. The following
compliment to him is as just, as it is elegant: -- "not such
As rise in causeless war, troubling the world
By their mad quarrel, and in fields of blood
Hailed victors, thence renowned, and called on earth
Kings, heroes, demigods, but in high Heaven
Thieves, ruffians, murderers; these find no repose:
Thee rather, patriot Conqueror! to thee
Belongs such rest; who in the Western world,
Thine own delivered country, for thyself
Have planted an immortal grove, and there
Upon the glorious mount of Liberty
Reposing, sit'st beneath the palmy shade."
Lewesdon Hill: A Poem by the Rev. Mr. Crow, Public Orator of the University
of Oxford, published in 1788.


grasping at empire by the conquest of foreign nations; but a Camillus, flying
to defend the Capitol, and to save his own nation from servitude: not a Caesar,
plotting to establish his own power on the ruins of the Republic; but a Cato,
ready to devote his fortune and his life to the salvation of his country: not a
Sylla, terminating his military career by the usurpation of the civil
authority; but a Cincinnatus, voluntarily relinquishing the sword for the
plough, and retiring from the camp to the farm: not, in fine, a mere warrior,
but a Man, blending the feelings of the citizen with those of the soldier, and
tempering the ambition of the conqueror with the humility of the Christian.

Uniting quick perception with deep discernment, he formed and executed his own
schemes with profound judgment; while, with wonderful facility, he penetrated
and defeated those of his enemy. Fertile in resources, he was never at a loss
for an expedient, in cases the most critical, in junctures the most hazardous.
He was deliberate, without perplexity; calm, without apathy; animated, without
enthusiasm; decisive, without pertinacity; and bold, without temerity.
Dignified in his person, he commanded respect; amiable in his manners, he
conciliated affection; successful in his enterprises, he inspired confidence.
In camp, he maintained economy, without parsimony; order, without restraint;
and discipline, without severity. In action, he was ardent, yet collected;
intrepid, yet cautious; confident, yet unpresuming. -- By so rare an assemblage
of talents and virtues, he was admirably formed for the command of armies; and
the series of his successes, during a long and unequal contest, with the final
triumph of the American arms, demonstrates, that, as the man of war, he is
entitled to primary distinction in the annals of military fame.

He, also, combined in his character, the prudent, and the ancient. All his
measures were the result of serious thought, and deep reflection. Every avenue
to danger seemed disclosed to his piercing eye; and no one of those avenues was
left unguarded. See Washington's Letters.
Vigilantly attentive to seize an advantage, or to ward off an evil, he
seasonably secured every attainable benefit, and cautiously guarded against the
surprise of his enemy. Though never reluctant, when justified by the occasion,
to jeopard his own life and the lives of his brave soldiers, on the high places
of the field; yet, as became a prudent general, he studiously shunned
unnecessary danger, and was more anxious for the safety of his country, than
ambitious for the honor of a victory. Like the Roman Fabius, he chose rather
to exhaust the enemy, by studied delays, than to put the liberties of a whole
nation to the hazard of a single battle. In the peculiar situation of our
infant country, the Wisdom of WASHINGTON was better than weapons of war.

When called to a political station, he discovered the same prudence in the
cabinet, for which he had signalized himself in the field. Justly appreciating
those invaluable blessings, which had been earned with blood, he watched over
them with paternal vigilance, and adopted the wisest methods to insure their
perpetuity. What ruler could have more prudently exerted his authority to
prevent the evils of foreign influence, and of domestic faction; and to
maintain inviolably the Peace and Independence of America?

Both in the civil and military departments, he derived great advantages from
age and experience; for he was the ancient. Employed for nearly fifty years To
the years of public service, mentioned in his Valedictory Address, it is
incumbent on us to annex that portion of time, which, in the very evening of
his days, he magnanimously held pledged to the call of his country. Having been
appointed, by the PRESIDENT, "Lieutenant General and Commander in Chief of all
the armies raised or to be raised for the service of the United States;" he
accepted the appointment July 13, 1798, and retained his commission till his
death.
in public offices; possessing, at the same time, a capacious mind; and
habituated to an attentive observation of men and things, of causes and
effects; great were his improvements in useful knowledge, and eminent his
qualifications for guiding the affairs of our infant Republic with discretion.

He was, also, the honorable man. If the union of distinguished personal
virtues with great military and political talents, and a long series of
patriotic services, entitle a man to honor; let honor be affixed to the name
of WASHINGTON. Habituated to the government of his appetites, he was exemplary
for his temperance; and equally habituated to the government of his passions,
he set a noble example of equanimity. Accustomed to order and method, he did
every thing by rule, without the pedantry of exactness; and, by his nice
arrangements and precision, he found time for the accomplishment of every
interesting purpose, however complex in its nature, however laborious in its
execution. He united benevolence with justice, and piety with morality. --
Unlike the impious philosophists of the present day, he aimed not to separate
the duties which man owes to GOD, from those which he owes to Society. He was
not too wise, to be above the instructions of divine wisdom; nor too
unconscious of guilt, to despise the redemption of the cross. He received the
Holy Scriptures as the oracles of God; and treated with reverence the
institutions of JESUS CHRIST.

But who will attempt a complete delineation of his many virtues? Like stars,
composing a fair constellation, they reflected a mild and steady radiance, on
which the eye delighted to dwell, and from which its steadfast gaze could not,
without regret, be averted.

Whatever were his virtues, whatever were his talents, they were consecrated to
God, and to his country. His patriotism was too disinterested, to admit
impeachment, or suspicion. It is well known, that he refused to receive any
pecuniary compensation for his public services.
In relinquishing his calm and favorite abode, for the tempestuous sea of
public life, he uniformly sacrificed his personal ease and interest, comfort
and tranquillity. What more was needful to give him the fairest claim to the
title of the honorable man? -- Nor were his fellow-citizens insensible to his
claims on their gratitude and praise. He was THE MAN whom they delighted to
honor. -- Greater proofs, than those which they gave, of their just estimation
of his merits and services, could not have been exhibited. The deep and
affecting interest, taken by all classes of citizens in the melancholy tidings
of his death, does infinitely more honor to his name than the storied urn, or
the monumental marble. -- "Illustrious Man! deriving honor less from the
splendour of his situation, than from the dignity of his mind; before whom all
borrowed greatness sinks into insignificance." So said an illustrious Member of
the British House of Commons, Charles J. Fox.
when speaking of our great and beloved WASHINGTON. Yes: His praises have
resounded through the empire of Britain; they have been echoed through the
world.

It need only be added, that he was the counselor. In critical emergencies, he
was often called to assist his fellow-countrymen with his counsels, as well as
by his arms. What reliance was placed on his judgment appears from the uniform
deference paid to it, both in the cabinet and in the field. During the
revolutionary war, how greatly were the measures of the American Congress
influenced by his seasonable advices! When that war was closed, and it became
expedient to devise a new and improved form of government for the United
States; we behold him placed in the presidential Chair of the National
Convention, In 1787.
and essentially aiding, by his advice and influence, the formation of that
admirable Constitution, which is the grand palladium of our liberty.

Here, again, his counsels and authority were deemed essential to the union, to
the interests and happiness, of America. By the unanimous suffrages of the
people, he was invited to take a part in the administration of that government,
which he had assisted to form; and solicited to accept the Presidency of the
United States. With his usual diffidence he accepted the important trust. Twice
four years did he continue to act in the Presidential office. He was elected
President in 1789; re-elected in 1793; and left the Presidency in 1797.
How much, in that interesting period, he contributed, by his judicious and
enlightened Administration, to the peace, to the prosperity, to the glory, of
our Nation, the public Records will show, and a grateful People will carefully
transmit to generations yet unborn.

While his fellow-citizens could perceive no diminution of his corporeal or
mental energies, the "increasing weight of years admonishing him to retire,"
and his love of rural and domestic retirement, heightened by the contrasted
cares of public life, alluring him back to the shades of Mount Vernon; he
declined to be considered as a candidate for the future suffrages of his
countrymen. But he resigns not his charge, before he has given the American
People his last and best advice. Here the Counselor appears in his greatest
glory. The Address, which he delivered on this occasion, contains the result of
much observation, and deep experience; and admirably points out the true
interests of United America. It is the Address of a father to his children,
while deeply impressed with an apprehension of their dangers; and tenderly
solicitous to guide them to security and happiness.

America was loud in the applauses of his Administration. His own remarks, on a
retrospective view of it, are worthy of a mind superior to the inflations of
vanity; and they furnish a model of humility and philanthropy, which it would
be the glory of kings to resemble: "Though in reviewing the incidents of my
administration I am unconscious of intentional error; I am, nevertheless, too
sensible of my defects, not to think it probable, that I have committed many
errors. Whatever they may be, I fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or
mitigate the evils to which they may tend. I shall also carry with me the hope
that my country will never cease to view them with indulgence; and that, after
forty-five years of my life dedicated to its service, with an upright zeal, the
faults of incompetent abilities will be consigned to oblivion, as myself must
soon be to the mansions of rest."

Words, alas, too prophetic! To those mansions, revered and beloved Man! art
thou already consigned: For, behold! the Lord, the Lord of hosts, does take
away the mighty man, and the man of war -- the prudent, and the ancient -- the
honorable man, and the counselor* WASHINGTON is no more! On Friday night,
December 13, he was seized with an inflammatory sore throat, [Cynache
Trachealis] which terminated his life at half after eleven on Saturday night,
after an illness of about twenty-four hours. He retained, to the last, a full
possession of his reason, and expressed an entire resignation to the event,
which, from the very commencement of the disorder, he fully expected. "He
closed his mouth and eyes with his own hands, and expired without a sigh or a
groan." "During the short period of his illness, he economized his time in the
arrangement of such few concerns, as required his attention, with the utmost
serenity; and anticipated his approaching dissolution with every demonstration
of that equanimity, for which his whole life was uniformly and singularly
conspicuous." -- He was born in West-moreland county, in Virginia, February 22,
1732, and died December 14, 1799, AEtat. LXVIII.
We are reminded, by the prophet, of the divine AGENT, by whom his removal is
effected. It is JEHOVAH. The great, the mighty GOD, the Lord of hosts is his
name. He does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What
do thou. He changes the countenance of the MAN GREATLY BELOVED, and sends
him away. Strength and agility, military skill and fortitude, prudence and
penetration, avail him nothing. There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor
counsel, against the LORD. To his control the most potent and formidable
commanders of armies are equally subjected with the common soldiery under their
command. His orders are absolute, and must be instantly and universally obeyed:
for there is no discharge in that war. -- What man is he that lives --
whatever are his talents and his virtues, however he is endeared to Society,
and however ever important his life and services to the world -- what man is he
that lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand
of the grave? No: let no man expect it; for WASHINGTON is dead.

WASHINGTON is dead! Here, then, let us unite in paying that tribute to his
memory, which his eminent talents, virtues, and services, demand. Know ye not
that there is a prince and a great man sallen, this day, in Israel? Yes: These
sable hangings, that awful silence, those tributary tears, testify that ye know
too well the sad event, which has overwhelmed our nation with unutterable
sorrows. Well may ye, who have witnessed the military skill, the patriotism,
and the many virtues, of WASHINGTON, during his residence in this very place,
unite, this day, to lament his fall. Well may ye, who once worshipped with him
in this house of prayer, pour forth your tears at the recollection of that
exemplary piety, which shone conspicuously amidst the confusions of war, and
the vices of the camp. Well may this Temple, which has often witnessed the
sincerity and the solemnity of his devotions, appear clothed in sackcloth. What
object around us can forbear to assume a sober sadness, and to participate in
the universal gloom? Ye circumjacent hills, that witnessed the mighty
operations of this great Commander, whose summits still show the vestiges of
war, and whose soil has been wet with the blood of our citizens! let there be
no dew, neither let there be rain upon you.

Where, now, are those veteran Generals, who, on yonder heights, accompanied
the man of war, and aided him in the glorious contest? Come, mingle your tears
with our's. Alas! Ye yourselves have departed. The Lord of hosts has taken you
away; and we have already wept over you. But do none of these mighty men, these
hoary chiefs survive? Yes: LINCOLN, with a little band, remains. Brave and
patriotic man! come, gray with years and with the toils of war, covered as thou
art with wounds, and lead the funereal procession to the tomb of WASHINGTON. Ye
war-worn Soldiers, who once fought under his banners! come, join the solemn
train, and pay the last military honors to the memory of your much loved
General. Ye venerable Sages! who co-operated in council, with his exertions in
the field, for the establishment of our Independence, come -- Alas! ye too are
gone. Illustrious ADAMS! thou live -- live to weep over the remains of thy
beloved Co-patriot, who was very pleasant unto thee. Come, then, venerable
Sire, and bring with thee the few remaining Fathers of our country, to pay this
last sad tribute. -- Ye Daughters of America! come, weep over WASHINGTON, who
clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon
your apparel. -- How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!

But let not the deluge of our grief obliterate our gratitude to GOD, for
raising up such a Man to be the Savior of his country. The LORD of hosts, who
has now taken him away, originally formed him for the high purpose of our
national salvation. He endowed him with those great talents, which qualified
him to command in our armies, and to preside in our councils, with such wisdom
and skill, and with such admirable success. The inspiration of the Almighty
gave him understanding. The LORD of hosts himself taught his hands to war, and
his fingers to fight. If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, vain had
been his wisdom, and impotent his strength, The LORD of hosts was with him;
therefore he was valiant in fight, prudent in council, and successful in the
defense of our liberties. With our tears, therefore, let us intermingle our
grateful acknowledgments to Almighty GOD, for so rich and invaluable a
blessing. Let us praise his holy name, for protracting the life of this great
and good Man, till our national Liberty was completely vindicated, and our
Peace and Independence effectually established. Now, Lord, let thou thy
servant depart in peace; for his eyes have seen the salvation of his country.

Humble, however, it becomes us to be, under the chastisement of Heaven. The
stay and the staff, the pride and the glory, of our Nation are removed. -- My
father! my father! the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof! In the
death of One, whose life was so interesting to America, and to the world, and
whose fame resounded through both hemispheres, we see the insignificancy of
human power, and the vanity of earthly greatness. The Lord of hosts has
purposed it to stain the pride of all glory. Let us hear the rod, and Him who
has appointed it. How strikingly are we here admonished to put not our trust
in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom is no help! for his breath goes
forth, he returns to the earth; in that very day his thoughts perish. Such is
the monitory use, which the prophet himself makes of the melancholy truth, this
day illustrated: Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for
wherein is he to be accounted of? For, behold! the Lord, the Lord of hosts does
take away the mighty man, and the man of war -- the prudent, and the ancient --
the honorable man, and the counselor.

Transferring, then, our confidence from mortal man to the living GOD, who is
the same yesterday, today, and forever, let us seek from Him that aid, which He
only can furnish; and that solace, which He only can bestow. GOD is our refuge
and strength, a very present help in trouble. Guided by his counsel, and
protected by his power, we shall still dwell in perfect safety. With Him is
wisdom and strength, He has counsel and understanding. He can always furnish
the instruments, and prosper the means, of our national defense and happiness.
Sanctify, therefore, the LORD of hosts himself, and let Him be your fear, and
let Him be your dread. -- Trust in Him, at all times, ye people, pour out your
hearts before Him.

But, with your pious confidence in GOD, neglect not the means of security and
prosperity. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for
consider how great things he has done for you. Practice righteousness, which
exalts a nation. Follow the counsels, and obey the laws, of the excellent
rulers, who proceed from ourselves, and who are the constituted ministers of
God to us for good. Under a mild and equitable administration of government,
lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty. -- But why does
the Preacher offer his humble advice? The prudent Man, the ancient, and the
counselor, has pointed us the way to national happiness. Would we, at once,
ensure our highest prosperity, and pay the most honorable tribute to the
memory of our revered and beloved WASHINGTON; let us follow his parting advice.
He designed, that, after his decease, we might be able to have it always in
remembrance. His VALEDICTORY ADDRESS, then, let every one study; its principles
let every one adopt; its counsels let every one regard; and we shall yet be a
happy people, saved of the Lord, and made high among the nations in praise, and
in name, and in honor. -- Hear this, ye old men! and give ear, all ye
inhabitants of the land! Tell ye your children of it, and let your children
tell their children, and their children another generation.

AMEN.
A Hymn, Composed and sung at CAMBRIDGE, on the occasion of the death of
General WASHINGTON.
GREAT GOD of hosts! we own thy sway,
Nor dare thy will explore;
But, when thy judgments we survey,
We tremble and adore.
Thy potent hand has far removed
The Man of war, and might:
The Prudent, Ancient, and Beloved,
Sinks to the shades of night.
To Thee we lift our sorrowing eyes,
To Thee for aid repair:
Have pity on a Nation's sighs,
And listen to its prayer.
O GOD of hosts! while we bemoan
The Great, the Good, the Brave;
Look down from thy celestial throne,
To solace, and to save.
Be Thou our GOD, and Guardian still;
For us thy power display;
Thy vast designs begun fulfill,
And wipe our tears away.

