OR POETICAL MISCELLANY.

BY MRS. J. JACKSON.

NEW-BRUNSWICK: PRINTED BY ABRAHAM BLAUVELT.

1800.

[ COPY RIGHT SECURED.]

CONTENTS.
Address to the Critic 3 Emblem of the life of man, 5 A Pindaric acrostic, 9
Song, 10 Invocation to music, with a cursory reference to General Washington,
11 Enigma, 14 Fable of the draught oxen and fatted ox, 15 Enigma, 17 Le
Cupidon, 17 Enigma, 18 Fable. The queen and the slave, 19 Acrostic. -- Address
to the sun, 22 Enigma, 23 The hermit. -- A tale, 24 Song, 31 Enigma, 32 Enigma,
32 Charade, 33 An epistle, on sending a card purse to a young lady, 34 A touch
of the times, or the illustrious scandal club, 35 Rebus on a lady's name, 40
Enigma, 41 Acrostic, 42 Paraphrase on beauty, 43 Enigma, 45 Stanzas occasioned
by a transient view of Garrick's funera^* 47 Soliloquy, 49 Paradox, 5^ Paradox,
51 Enigma, 51 Rebus, 52 Pastorale a la Francoise, 53 Rebus addressed to a
gentleman, 54 Enigma, 55
ADDRESS TO THE CRITICS.
THOSE who can write, may justly merit praise,
By criticizing on my simple lays;
But if they cannot, their modest silence keep;
And let me here, my youthful laurels reap.
Juvenile the work, -- blossoms swell the page;
Expect the fruit, when more matur'd by age.
A blooming tree, has life at least we know;
When barren trunks, are doubtful, yes, or no.
Then live my friends, your thriving blossoms send;
Each small defect, as critics, nicely mend.
Miscellaneous writings shall be ours;
As gardens blow, with different kinds of flowers:
However grateful the perfume may be,
To please, it wants a sweet variety.
As youth in trifles often take delight;
Perhaps the work will some, to read invite;
Though emanations from a trifling pen,
The novelty may please, full nine in ten.
Jingling, thus we ring our many changes;
The eye impatient, over the medley ranges.
If fault finders, then, we will not mind 'em;
One to mend, is worth a crowd to find 'em.
EMBLEM OF THE LIFE OF MAN.
HOW sweet the rosy blush of spring,
With health and beauty on its wing;
Embryo'd blessings still in store,
Till summer makes the cup run over.
Behold the tender verdant sod,
Just rising from the lifeless clod;
The mounting sap ascend the tree,
And pregnant all with bud by thee.
AEriel minstrels strain their throats,
To warble out their lovesick notes:
The sportive lamb and frisking fawn*
Playful spot the daisied lawn;
All the watery naiades sing,
Of life and health returning spring;
Whose swelling bosoms heave to pour,
Their murmuring songs along the shore;
And Philomel is coming soon;
Sweet jug proclaims the rose in June.
The nymphs and swains in chaplets gay,
Dancing on the new mown hay:
While cupid slily wings his dart,
And wounds, unseen, the youthful heart;
The dog star rages! ah, beware!
To tempt the bower, for love is there;
Sweet scented roses clust'ring round,
In showers of sweetness paint the ground.
The mounting lark shall cleave the air,
And singing as he mounts, declare,
Approaching harvest: see the grain,
In golden pride wave over the plain:
And laughing Ceres fills her horn,
With choicest fruits and ears of corn;
'Till sober autumn tints the scene,
With yellow, brown, and olive green:
The robin-red-breast whistles now,
His autumn song from yonder bough;
Chill, and more chill, the breezes blow,
And rippling loud the rivers flow;
To bring in winter, snow, and frost;
Majestic still in tempest tossed.
The howling north winds sweep the plains,
And bind the world in icy chains.
APPLICATION.
LAY up for winter in your prime,
Stores that outlive sense and time;
Behold life's dawn the spring pourtrays,
When every view a charm conveys.
In summer, full perfection reigns,
But autumn, all our beauty wains,
And winter, with vindictive rage,
Chills our life, to frozen age.
A PINDARIC ACROSTIC.
GO breathe the sweets of yon fair bower,
Each fragrant breeze and balmy flower;
Or there avoid the dripping shower:
Retired within its circling arms,
Graceful trees whose native charms
Erect a green recluse.
In softest accent tuneful birds,
Amidst the boughs in plaintive words,
Chaunt their songs profuse.
Kind and gentle down the hill,
Slowly drops the purling rill;
Only here are rural sweets,
No vice surrounds their verdant seats.
SONG.
I.
SOFT pleasing sighs are love's delight,
To breathe his amorous tale;
Where song and dance the fair invite
To pleasure in the dale.
II.
The purple grapes from shady leaves,
In glowing bunches fall;
To join the dance each bosom heaves,
While love and beauty call.
III.
No sound so sweet as song of love,
When sung in Sylvan bower;
The blessed retreat has charms to prove,
That cheat the lingering hour.
IV.
Enamored swains, and captive maids;
Who sigh in cupid's train:
With love and music cheer the shades,
And pleasure fill the plain.
INVOCATION TO MUSIC. WITH A CURSORY REFERENCE TO GENERAL WASHINGTON.
IMMORTAL gift from heaven sent,
To foster thee, is heavens intent,
To shield thy innocence from ill,
Columbia be thy guardian still.
An infant whose celestial birth,
Knows not maturity on earth.
Extend abroad thy mistic power,
To harmonize each fleeting hour,
And rule with universal sway,
Till nations all thy call obey.
As Orpheus charmed the listening woods,
With sounds more sweet attune the floods;
While beasts enraptured cease to graze,
Or hushed in wonder, muse thy praise.
The savage Moor with awkward joy,
Will revel in thy chaste employ,
Majestic when in voice of war,
The brazen trumpets sound afar.
All pensive too for love's alarms,
The soldier leaves his clashing arms;
How direful when in accent slow,
The solemn dirge is taught to flow.
Mourn, mourn, ye winds, and weep ye floods,
And bow your heads ye towering woods;
He Is gone! GENERAL WASHINGTON.
-- his soul has fought it is way,
To regions of eternal day;
The object of the people's choice,
Whose mem'ry's blessed by general voice,
Is tasting now immortal joys,
Where no ill breath his peace destroys.
Come soothing music, come and cheer,
To brighter scenes the rising year,
Let joy and peace revive again,
And commerce plough the rolling main;
Let sister arts join hand in hand,
To tread Columbia's mazy land.
Descend ye nine, our bards inspire,
With music and poetic fire,
Till sounds extatic ring the spheres,
The glory of succeeding years.
ENIGMA.
A TALE once told that is never heard again,
And much amended by a shower of rain;
Sometimes it is legendary, and not true,
At others, short, and faithful told to you.
A fearful thing to every culprit's ear,
The earnest wish of some when joy is near
Somewhat cheerful, somewhat melancholy
Secret lash of sinful vice and folly.
FABLE OF THE DRAUGHT OXEN AND FATTED OX.
TWO oxen harnessed in a sledge,
Both weary, lean and weak,
Beheld across a verdant hedge,
A brother fat and sleek.
Ah, John, cried one, severe our fate!
No higher can we soar,
Than serving man both soon and late,
Till time shall be no more.
The pampered beast with scornful look,
Their shackled bodies eyed;
His graceful mein, a limpid brook
Reflected, he replied.
Would I be dragging thus in chains,
Behold my godlike brow;
From morn till night I range the plains,
And all my course allow.
But lo! there is a time we find,
When beasts of burden boast;
For soon they heard a warrant signed,
His fat surloins to roast.
Into the sledge the butcher threw,
The godlike hero dead;
His ponderous carcass, home they drew,
So rich and dainty fed.
What think you now? said murmuring John,
This lesson let us learn;
Contented to be plodding on,
And eat the bread we earn.
MORAL.
IN wishing for another's lot,
You covet then you know not what.
ENIGMA.
I AM a liquor, trade, and name,
An active verb, in French, the same.
LE CUPIDON.
I.
IN yonder grove the linnets sing,
Love is thither waiting;
Come gentle fair, your favors bring,
Joys alone creating.
II.
On rosy bed, fond love reclines,
With sweetest slumber blessed;
Each youth for him a laurel twines,
Of every charm possessed.
III.
No whispering wind but tells his tale,
In echos to the heart;
From every flower his sweets exhale,
And all delight impart.
IV.
The babbling stream that binds the wood,
A voice of love conveys;
Each tender bird that skims the flood,
His softest power displays.
ENIGMA.
THE coxcomb's pride, when smartly made,
A term often used in sale and trade;
The name of him, whose easy air,
Enchants, a most engaging fair.
FABLE. THE QUEEN AND THE SLAVE.
A QUEEN in rich and gay attire,
With jewels fine arrayed:
An abject slave, in rags and mire,
Implored her kindly aid.
She spurned her suit, and loathed the task:
So mean to help distress;
Although but small, the blessing asked;
She would not give redress.
At length discordant feuds arise,
To rebel, all agree;
This haughty queen becomes their prize;
While every slave is free.
Straight to a prison, sad and proud,
Her majesty was sent;
When all the rabble, shouted loud,
To hear the great event.
One day, as pensively she sat,
Reflecting on her fate;
She saw a dirty ragged hat,
With alms, lie at the grate.
Eager, she took the gift, though mean,
Which did her being save;
Ah! little did she think, unseen,
The giver was the slave.
As time rolls on, and peace returns,
The queen, more humble grew;
Now to reward the deed, she burns,
With clothes and money too.
At length, the guards unbar the gate;
Green olive in their hands;
And fetch the queen in royal state,
To take her new commands.
No more she scorns the helpless poor;
But is the orphan's friend;
Her palace keeps an open door,
The wretched to defend.
MORAL.
However dark to human sight;
The ways of heaven are always right.
ACROSTIC. ADDRESS TO THE SUN.
GLORIOUS orb, thou source of day,
Effulgent may thy sun beams play;
Onward circling in thy sphere,
Return and bless the rising year:
Great wonder, in a daily round;
Eternally on duty bound.
I Will hail thy face at early dawn,
Ascending slowly over the lawn;
Call every plant and worm I see,
Kindled into life by thee.
Seated majestic then behold:
Orient gem, thy burnished gold,
Nightly, to other regions rolled.
ENIGMA.
AMONG the wonders of the day,
Permit some friends to make their way,
Who humble are, yet time has been,
A favored tenant they were seen;
Whose arms extended far, to save,
And furnished many a warrior brave.
But cruel fate, ah! strange to tell,
Against my living sat her spell;
To blast my honors soon began,
And for my ruin laid the plan:
Then carried down into the grave
By many a man, and servile slave;
Once more to rise, an earthly guest,
Not sink into eternal rest;
But hoarded up a pale faced crew --
It Is time to bid you all adieu.
THE HERMIT. A TALE.
A HERMIT poor, with many cares oppressed*
A heedless youth with fault'ring tongue addressed,
Ah! little do the hours of pastime know,
How many ills, in life's great current flow.
Pity the poor, a wretched man behold!
Who weeping thus, feels hungry, dry, and cold;
Have you no sire, whose hospitable door
Will open freely to the wretched poor?
The careless youth no longer could refrain,
But laughed aloud to hear the man complain*
Dejected, up he cast his weeping eyes
And said, Almighty God! so just and wise,
Shall I no more find favor in thy sight,
But every boy my grief and sorrow slight.
When lo! in call a well known gate he saw,
To which with eager steps he tried to draw.
A decent servant at the portal stood,
Who kindly asked him in, to tidings good.
The wayworn stranger to his master brought,
And said, his face described a man long sought --
The Lord attentive, told him, much surprised,
Some time ago he had been advertised,
To take his property, he knew not what,
'Till better known, he should not quit the spo^^
But eat and drink, and rest his weary head,
While time the prosperous sails of fortune spread.
Refreshed with food, at length the forlorn man,
To tell his grievous story, thus began:
"Unguarded youth, with ease and plenty crowned,
How many ills thy froward age surround;
So wise in folly, life without a plan,
A headstrong brain when scarce arrived to man --
I gambol'd, trifled, wasted thus my prime,
In idle riot, spent my precious time;
'Till one more cunning, formed the deep laid scheme,
To win my all at once, yet honest seem*
And beggard me, alas! no house, no home,
Upon a pilgrimage I wished to roam --
Left father, friends, and bade the world adieu
For many years, 'till time worked something new.
One evening, standing at my wicket gate,
I saw a sail, in which I tried my fate;
Some herbs and fossils, all my worldly store,
To pay my passage; thus I left the shore
Unknown to all, myself I did conceal,
Afraid misfortune should my name reveal."
While painting thus, his life's past motley scene,
A youth was introduced of graceful mein,
Whose humble manners seemed for him to plead,
His eyes looked round impatient to succeed;
And when recognized, proved the very one,
Who just before had made the man his fun.
The youth broke silence by a strong desire,
That he would straight attend him to his sire.
They both agreed, and cheerfully withdrew,
Walked on their way, and more conversant grew;
'Till by degrees his former dwelling rose
Burst on his view and more familiar grows.
Wild with amaze, his rapid thoughts ran over
His youthful days, so gaily spent before;
And thinks, could time his course roll over again,
How easy he should all his vice restrain.
Thus lost in thought, some minutes winged their flight
And would have held him till approaching night;
Had not the noisy door, with hinges strong,
Opened wide to hasten them along:
When, suddenly, the anxious servant spoke,
Who thus aloud his pensive silence broke:
Walk in my friend, you are welcome here,
My master greets you with a heart sincere --
Upstairs they went, the sick man heard their feet,
And raised his head, their eager eyes to meet:
He cried, "if in this world a taste of heaven we know,
It does indeed from all good actions flow;
Majestic innocence is pleasure still,
And actual good, will always conquer ill.
'Twas I, alas! who laid the wicked plan,
To cheat you of your right, as honest man;
I turned the fatal die, and won the game,
While honor pressed you to give up the same:
Despair and sorrow seized your frenzi'd mind,
And wandering, sought in wilds a home to find --
Just Heaven exacting penance, sickness sent,
And torments, direful too, I underwent.
If aught for evil done can ever requite,
In remnant life, I Will do the thing that is right --
Into your care these writings back I give,
And do resign the place on which I live;
I ask your pardon, and when health permit
Will for my own, this spacious mansion quit."
The man in tears, received his heritage;
And each contented, lived to good old age.
SONG.
I.
YE myrtle wreaths, from fragrant bowers,
The nymph's fair brows adorn;
More lovely than the dancing hours,
Or sweetest breath of morn.
Compared with Sylvia, charming maid,
No flower, such beauty knows;
Opening blossoms, envious fade,
And dies, the trembling rose.
II.
Fair snow drops bend their lily heads,
And woodbines sweet decay;
Blue violets quit their lowly beds,
With pinks no longer gay.
Each fanning breeze and murmuring fount,
Her praise in echos bring;
Ask them who warble as they mount:
It Is Sylvia's charms they sing.
ENIGMA.
Where value is, I Am mostly seen;
A secret keeper, I have been;
While thus, your treasures I conceal,
As often, do I them reveal.
ENIGMA.
ADMIT a fair stranger to knock at your door,
Both naked and verily friendless and poor;
Unless you receive me, must perish indeed,
No generous friend, will for me intercede.
Misterious no doubt, the case must appear,
'Till opened to you, by the eye or the ear:
Like other wise beings, I Have always concealed
Those things which with prudence could not be revealed.
But carefully now, to my ditty attend:
With you it remains, to bring life to its end;
Whatever my fault, I Have been faithful and just,
Nor can be accused of betraying my trust.
CHARADE.
FOR my first, a boy's plaything prepare;
Of my second, let each one beware,
While my whole, is a friend to the fair.
AN EPISTLE, ON SENDING A CARD PURSE TO A YOUNG LADY.
ACCEPT dear friend, an empty purse*
For riches often prove a curse;
No guineas here unless you wi^^
There Is gold without, but none within.
Excuse the trash, it is no more,
A pleasing toy, a shining ore;
And always changing wo^^h and face,
But seldom finds a resting place;
And proves so treacherous in the end,
It will betray its warmest friend.
With prudence then should gold be used,
Not by extravagance abused;
Though still, we cannot alter fate;
Its made for changing, soon or late.
Then treat it like a slippery guest;
Alluring, yet deceitful dressed;
As fashion mostly bears the belle,
A game at cards is very well.
This vacant bag may be employed,
And innocently, thus enjoyed;
Though empty from the sordid pelf,
It Is full of friendship for yourself.
A TOUCH OF THE TIMES, OR THE ILLUSTRIOUS SCANDAL CLUB.
LET me, before industry's awful shrine,
Present some very active friends in rhyme;
Whose busy turn deserves immortal praise,
Working in a thousand different ways.
When an industrious fit comes on 'em,
All their neighbors get a rub upon 'em;
They work, they talk, and give us all our due,
And sometimes, nicely make a little too.
With, "pray walk in, what is doing? do they say;
"I Have been so busy, what a charming day!"
Thus, one by one, drop in the well known flock,
Each longing to exhaust their separate stock
Of news and mischief, which they are bringing,
Who, like spiteful wasps, are always stinging.
Good lady Sneerwell, takes her turn at length,
And in some sister's service spends her strength.
Into the spirit, they cannot enter,
Nor o^ new born falsehoods boldly venture;
Till ^ea appears, then the disease grows worse,
And each finds something wondrous to rehearse.
Sir John Snake, so smooth, now shows his merit,
And a clever story, gains him credit;
Ancient maidens draw their knowing faces,
Listening widows, quaintly make grimmaces.
Secret winks, with nods of approbation,
Dignify all round the learned oration:
Then a subject by the females started,
And well discussed before they are parted.
"Miss Ramble, left the town, I heard to day,
"In short, it was for something odd they say:
Here, all young ladies, meet due attention,
With a -- "what is said, be sure, don't mention;
"I only think so, things look very strange;
"Last night the captain walked with pert Miss Grange;
"Then I hear, that Sir Walter Grey's young wife
"Made a fauxpas, and dressed his head for life;
"John the footman, passed her the other day,
"Looked very hard, then bowed and walked away:
"Aye, we'll make Gray have her up for crim con,
"He only wants some clever setters on;
"Then Doctor Bolus, when Miss Pine was ill,
"Fairly choked her with a monstrous pill.
"Mad col'nel Rattle, means to give a treat,
"Oh! what an uproar when the monsters meet:
"I would not pass the house alone, would you?
"For who knows what temptation might not do.
"Illustrious sisters of the scandal club,
"Your neighbor Careful wants a little rub;
"She keeps her cordials in the house I hear;
"Indeed I Have often thought her very queer;
"Besides, her maid, in listening at the door,
"Heard her mistress, say, do pour out some more.
Though bold assertions, they never fear 'em,
Sipping round the merry glass to cheer 'em.
Convention over, they adjourn the court,
And in some other business show their fort;
For each at sales, a busy, prying guest,
And of such wondrous bargains all protest,
As would no decent profit leave to those,
Who sold the bartered goods, you may suppose;
Here married ladies exercise their tongues,
And in their husbands praises, try their lungs;
Wise men post their wives to show their good sense,
And girls get husbands at their own expense.
Now, if the cap fits, be sure don't show it,
For you're all here, if you did but know it:
Old Pegasus, grown weary of his trot,
Stops here, and leaves you, whether pleased or not.
REBUS ON A LADY'S NAME.
WHAT you in public never should relate,
What is described to be the lover's fate;
The wretch that often meets deserved death;
What children practice from their drawing breath.
The good man's thoughts, what men to ladies s^nd;
The tyrant's wish, and every writer's friend:
When Phoebus rises, what the world awakes,
The bait of nations, with foundation shakes;
Add pale Cy^^hia, and the source of woe,
What we of each one ask, if we don't know.
ENIGMA.
LIKE other substance, I claim mother earth;
Rude is my figure, and (...) my birth;
What is most strange, if the truth may be said:
I am of no use, till knocked on the head.
ACROSTIC.
RESOUND ye woods with songs of vocal praise,
Omnipotence, all hail in powerful lays;
Both seas and rocks conspire to bear a part;
Enlightened man, of you's required the heart.
Reptiles and insects, worlds and starry maze,
Throw in your mites toward your Maker's praise.
With admiration struck, behold his power,
In every opening bud and fragrant flower;
Let mountain's brows, with hollow depths profound;
Let heroes, kings, for famous wars renowned:
Alike in dust, obey his sovereign will;
Nature's father, and the Almighty still.
PARAPHRASE ON BEAUTY.
TO beauty's standard all repair,
Even gods themselves pay tribute there;
Pleasing Siren, all delighting;
Power attractive, gods inviting;
More sweet than breeze from fragrant bower,
When watered by a silver shower:
Narcissus fair, as poets say,
For his shadow pined away;
Old Vulcan too, its power could know,
Who for Venus, turned a beau.
Beauty caused a Trojan war,
When lovely Paris, Helen saw:
Great Jupiter his pride o'ercame,
And crept an ant, to wed his dame;
Adonis does his favors share,
By being more than passing fair.
How many heroes, fought and bled,
To sacrifice, by beauty led;
And warlike kings, both young and old,
Were slaves to slaves, by beauty sold;
Lost Anthony, forsook his bride,
For Cleopatra, madly sighed.
Chaste Dian, and her virgin train,
With dazzling beauty fill the plain;
Juno, the gaudy peacock's show,
By doves, we amorous Venus know;
Andromeda in beauty's pride,
With Juga and the Nereides vied:
To be devoured, the maid they threw,
And Perseus, the monster slew;
By Polypheme, with envy fired,
Happy Acis, crushed, expired:
For Thais, Alexander sighs,
And drinks his nectar from her eyes.
Hail beauty's goddess, soft and fair,
Come brace your doves in yielding air;
Bring harmless pleasures from afar,
And beauty be their leading star.
ENIGMA.
LIKE ebb of life, or setting sun,
My time is short, and course is run;
I trembling quit my native seat,
And into airy regions fleet.
ENIGMA.
I AM an eye servant, with truth I confess,
Permit me thus freely, the fair to address;
The case would be hard, was my service denied;
Through me, is both fashion and grandeur supplied.
My form is completed by some of each sex;
But children, I often am known to perplex*
Though I Have no foresight in matches or weather,
Opposite couples, I still bring together:
With stabs in the back and hard usage to boot,
But what is very odd, it is my friends drive me to it.
A long tail I have, and indeed it is true,
The color depends on the pleasure of you:
I Am fatal to flesh, when I miss my fixed aim --
Pray find me this author of blood, wounds and pain.
My youth is made useful, but age is desired,
Which if I attain to, am greatly admired.
I have a relation, but ladies adieu,
Which should, or else does find a shelter with you.
STANZAS, OCCASIONED BY A TRANSIENT VIEW OF GARRICK'S FUNERAL.
THE hollow drums with dismal sound,
Proclaim the approach of death around;
The costly plume, in solemn state,
Points to the monumental gate.
The eschutcheon'd hearse comes nodding on,
Whose pampered horses eye the throng,
And pages walk with footsteps slow,
To guard the dead in pompous show.
Black coaches follow, m^urners weep,
While mutes their silent vigils keep;
Dressed with rich hat-bands and long scarves;
New favors, gloves, and ensign staves.
Grave undertakers moving by,
Who watch the hearse with downcast eye;
Like specter stalk their mournful way;
While crowds from windows high survey
The funeral pomp: dread silence reigns!
Behold great Garrick's sad remains:
The last black coach, their eyes pursue,
Lament the sight, and bid adieu.
But hark! I hear the Abbey bell,
Is tolling loud, his passing knell;
Alas! for ever gone! farewell!
SOLILOQUY.
AH, where alas! is man's pre-eminence,
This mass of error with a boast of sense;
A something, nothing, ere his frame began,
Who cannot see through life one future plan.
Fatal knowledge, never wiser growing,
Than himself, an ignoramus knowing.
What his being, or why so long sustained,
From youth to age, in so much error trained.
For some great end was formed the vast design,
Which still sets value on this life of thine;
Let Plato reason, all these wise men err,
Fell suicide must heaven's just wrath incur.
There is a path to tread, for all men made,
Where God is truly served, and man repaid;
Whose great ascent to blissful heights shall rise,
Where all false reasoning like a phantom flies --
Cease wondering then, let thy researches fall,
To know was wrong, or thou had known it all.
PARADOX.
WITH sighs and sorrows I always appear,
To grave solidity ever am near;
I neither with mirth or gaity dwell,
Centered in pleasure, the truth if I tell;
Feasting and singing I Am sure to be in;
Live in destruction, and foremost in sin.
PARADOX.
WITH eyes and ears I Am always found,
Yet cannot see, nor hear a sound;
Am always in the midst of meat,
But never drink, nor ever eat;
I live in ease, and dwell in fear,
And constant coming every year.
ENIGMA.
NO lady will blush when I Am placed by her side,
But often with a sash, to adorn me takes pride;
No head, arms, or legs can I boast of, it is true,
And backs I possess to the number of two.
My entrails are many, and what is more strange,
Their number and quality frequently change;
By working too often, I grow very lean,
'Till bowel nor entrail have I to be seen.
Pray do not imagine my service pretense,
When man is amended much at my expense.
Adieu to you all, for your wits will devise
The name of this strange enigmatical prize,
That often cements the most distant of friends,
Nor leaves the pursuit till he is come to his ends.
REBUS.
THE finest of onions first seek if you please,
A fruit which is said to have robbed us of ease;
A harmless forewarner of danger to man,
The boon we all wish for to find if we can.
Collect these initials with short of an ell,
Will show you a name very easy to spell.
PASTORALE a la FRANCOISE.
OISEAUX charmans tes voix et chansons doux
Le Cupidon appellent de loin plus pres de vous:
Un Ruisselet s'ecoule tres clair en bas,
Encore on voit tes jolies images la.
Pour fair des gambades sur les bordes de nuit,
Les Fees s'assemblent et silvain il rit,
Grand dieu des bois d'en haut pret ton oreille,
Et tous ces plaisirs qui arrive de nuit sur veille:
Les Rosignols en sons melodieux,
Leur compagnons au clair de lune ameusent:
Jusqu'au point du jour quand le Fermier,
S'eleve au chant du Co^ pour travailler:
En sifflant il commence a faucher l'Herbe,
Le soleil reluise d'une clarte superbe.
Les nymphs tous gaies en compagnie joyeuse
Viennent pour faner l'Herbe des coeurs heureux
La dance au soir et de tours enjoues
Pass le tems et tous les jours renoues.
REBUS ADDRESSED TO A GENTLEMAN.
A WORD which too often possesses your sex,
The subject of that so well known to perplex;
An adverb of time you take for the other,
A personal pronoun, in French, another.
To part must come next, oh, how cutting the sound,
A French interjection comes then in the round;
A feature expressive, or French for to be
A little wild flower that fishermen see.
ENIGMA.
HOW many joys to me belong,
By me is practiced dance and song;
I Am the guide to many a way,
And close the scene of every day.
By me the gamester cheats his friends,
By me the actor lowly bends;
I am a much desired thing,
And good support to many bring;
No substance I, but hold my friends;
There is a time my glory ends.
A CONGRATULATION ON MARRIAGE.
TO give you joy is compliment,
Sincerer wishes I present;
All happiness while here below,
May gracious heaven on you bestow;
And marriage prove a silken band,
While love and time go hand in hand:
Should you receive such chains as these,
The gift can never fail to please.
A friend and lover, gentle name,
Far sweeter than the breath of ^ame;
Delightful thought the power conceive --
When Adam first beheld fair Eve.
Milton paints the lovely creature,
Graces smile in every feature;
Behold her native charms arise,
And gentle love, her soul apprize.
All conquering still, soft power divine,
Exhaling sweets enrich thy shrine;
Heroes will beat to love's alarms,
And shelter in his snowy arms.
May peace and plenty crown your years,
Uncheck'd by rising doubts or fears;
As blooming Hebe gay and young,
And artless as the lisping tongue.
Let sister graces dance around,
While Orpheus plays with magic sound --
Of sweetest flowers the nuptial wreath,
By laughing cupids held beneath;
And fruitful hymen's crown the ring,
While love and beauty favors bring;
All hail to celebrate the day,
When Emma gave herself away.
Then joyful each succeeding year,
The happy hour in thought revere;
No jealousies to rack the mind,
But each the other faithful find.
REBUS ON A GENTLEMAN'S NAME.
FIRST take a bird that hails the pleasant opening morn,
A land that many luxurious pomps adorn;
With an adverb of place, a pronoun and a verb,
Italian for to morrow, in French an herb:
The fifth vowel, with latin for the pronoun, our,
The Scot's church, with O, and letter the French devour;
That canopy above, where Phoebus gilds the day,
A consonant and semi vowel close my lay;
All these initials, doubtless will discover,
A youth over seas to sail, has been a lover.
SONG.
HASTE Daphne, to the sweet retreat,
Where blooms the scented rose,
And violets salute your feet
With every flower that blows.
II.
In rapture gaze on yonder fields,
In native sweetness dressed;
Whose richest verdure freshness yields,
To each admiring breast.
III.
The woods your next attention calls,
Where birds harmonious rove;
And whispering gales by lulling falls,
In echo fills the grove.
IV.
There take a seat beneath the shade,
The scorching rays to shun;
And should the god of sleep invade,
Secluded from the sun.
V.
Until the sky enwrapt with night,
In awful gloom appears;
All shrinks and mourns departed light,
Just emblem of the years.
VI.
But soon Aurora gay returns,
And bids my Daphne rise;
To welcome fresh reviving day,
And view the new born prize.
GLEE.
Welcome every sprightly guest,
Let us the hand of time arrest;
With each harmonic aid,
Let no discordant sounds arise;
To drive Cecilia to the skies,
But shield your sainted maid.
II.
Listen to the inviting strains
Of charming maids and dying swains
'Till love shall lead astray,
Our soldiers breathing soft desires,
Instead of war and martial fires,
While Orpheus tunes his lay.
ACROSTIC.
DIRECTED may you be, by heaven, which way to choose,
Instructed from above to plan your distant views;
Untaught by earth-born falsehood, and unskil'd in vice;
Not rigid in opinion, more than wisely nice;
Kind in all your judgments, and yet not favor ill;
Open to conviction, to reason bending still:
Weigh each worldly view, with care in your choice of friends;
Slow to anger, seek their many various ends:
Kindly give support to unrewarded merit;
Yield when justice calls, yet guard your own with spirit.
ENIGMA.
'TWAS man indeed that gave me birth,
Though first produced by mother earth;
My task through life is hard enough,
Condemned to treatment truly rough.
Over me presides with haughty sway,
A tyrant whom I must obey;
To his commands and sovereign will,
I Am doomed to blind obedience still.
To tell the truth, this cruel god,
He makes me tremble at his nod;
With mighty power and heavy blows,
Obliged to hack through ranks and rows.
Like sons of war, entrenched I stand,
Until removed by fresh command;
And when I Have cleared my way of all,
The scattering fragments round me fall*
But hold, I Have said enough to you;
Think on this and bid adieu.
THE SEASONS. A POEM.
ON leafless trees, ye stormy north winds blow,
Dread winter reigns in darkness, frost and snow;
Primeval gloom, her sable mantle's spread,
Mourns the lost day, and vegetation dead.
By winter thus, in wild confusion thrown,
Life and light to other regions flown;
The hoary fields in palid moisture lie,
While trembling nature heaves a general sigh;
And naked forests shake their ruthful heads,
With fettered streams, fast in their watery beds.
The tempest howls, a driving snow succeeds,
Which the poor traveller, benumbed, misleads;
And smothered over by the flaky ^ave,
There, frozen, meets a cold untimely grave.
The little robin, drooping, hangs his head,
And at your window begs the crumbs of bread;
Grown tame by hunger, all the farm yard brood,
From careful hands receive their daily food.
But spring returns, in sweetest verdure dressed;
Serener skies invite the world to rest:
Rude Boreas called to some distant land,
Leaves love and happiness joined hand in hand;
The feathered choir, now makes the valleys ring,
And gaily fluttering, as they mount, they sing;
Suspend your wings, ye airy songsters stay,
Ephignia sings, your notes delay.
Let softest music sooth my ravished soul,
And thus to gentle love each thought control;
'Till every dying sound shall melting say,
That charming music leads the heart astray.
No ruder noise, with love shall interfere,
While listening Cupid, waiting, hovers near;
Behold heaven's canopy, now arched in blue,
And tip'd with gold the distant clouds we view.
Warm summer comes, full fraught with all its joys;
Sweet flowers, fruit, and love's fantastic toys:
Your chaplets weave, of rose and myrtle leaves,
Each fair, the gift, a magic wreathe believes.
The sky overcast, loud thunders rend the air,
When beasts for flight and safety all prepare;
Under trees and pailings, skreen each fearful head,
To shield the storm, least lightning strke them dead.
The heavy rain, in torrents pouring round,
See drinking plants, rise from the thirsty ground;
Such great concussions life and fragranceb ring,
And give to languid air, elastic spring:
Set autumn fruit, and fill the golden ear,
The pleasing prospect of a thriving year;
For jolly Bacchus, now your laurels twine,
With ripe and clust'ring grapes, from mantling vine.
Let merry Momus fill the flowing bowl,
'Till sparkling wine expands the generous soul;
With coupled hounds, and horse at pleasant dawn,
Early huntsmen wind the echoing horn.
Puss makes the copse, hark forward rings the sky,
Delighted sportsmen over hedges fly;
And rustling down, the leaves begin to drop;
Before your feet the little robins hop.
The trees disrobed, the sun no longer bright,
And fading nature sickens at the sight;
Domestic mirth, the cooler evening spends,
In song and graceful dance, with social friends:
Chirping crickets by the fire side call,
When merry Christmas decks the festive hall.
GENERAL SOLUTION TO THE ENIGMAS, REBUSES, PARADOXES AND CHARADES.
CHARADE, Page 33, Topknot. Enigma, Page 14, Church clock striking the hour.
Do. Page 17, Porter. Do. Page 18, Boot. Do. Page 23, Wood-ashes Do. Page 32, A
key. Do. Page 32, A letter. Do. Page 41, A nail. Do. Page 45, Expiring snuff of
a candle. Do. Page 46, A needle. Do. Page 51, Thread papers. Do. Page 55,
Candle light. Do. Page 64, Pinking irons. Paradox, Page 50, The letter S. Do.
Page 51, The letter E. Rebus, Page 40, Sarah Bridgeman. Do. Page 52, Sally. Do.
Page 54, Fleisher. Do. Page 63, Lewis Djunkowsky.


