VIEW OF THE RISE AND INCREASE OF THE CHURCHES, COMPOSING THE Otsego Baptist
Association.

By A. HOSMER AND J. LAWTON.

Combined in love, the new born churches stand,
In growing order, in this western land:
In principle, and practice uniform,
Built on the Rock, they boldly brave the storm.
BOSWICK. WHITESTOWN: Printed by WARREN BARNARD -- 1800 --

ADVERTISEMENT.
If this book should meet with acceptance, the authors propose to proceed in
their collections of materials for publishing an account of the remainder of
the Baptist churches in this western country, with other matters now
necessarily omitted. We do earnestly request all those that feel disposed to
grant us their assistance, to communicate such materials as they shall conceive
necessary.

BUTTERNUTS CHURCH.
IN the month of June, A. D. 1773. Ebenezer King and Incr^^^ Thurstin, removed
with their families and settled the Butternut Creek This Creek is so called
from the circumstance of three Pat^^^s cor^ering on the bank thereof, at which
place grew three Butternut t^ees, which were marked.
about fourteen miles from its mouth whe^^ it empties into the Un^^illa river,
about twenty miles nearly south w^^ from the head of Susquehannah river. At
this time there was no English settlement to the westward of them nearer than
Niagara, in the ^rovi^^e of Upper Canada, which is upwards of two hundred miles
^^^istance, the int^^^diate space was filled with several tribes of the
ab^^^gin^s, nor any inhabitant in any direction within sixteen miles. A fe^
more person^ came on the same summer; and made some improvemen^^, but (...) the
winter they returned (excepting Benjamin Lull, jun. wh^ had married Elizabeth
the daughter of Ebenezer Knap and lived in the family with him) and those two
families lived alone through the winter. Ebenezer Knap and his wife were
members of the Baptist church in Warwick under the care of Elder ^ames
Benedict. T^^^e persons notwithstanding their local situation, and their
distance from civilized people, were not unmindful of the duties of religion^
b^^t upon their arrival in this inhospitable wild they set up a religious
meeting, which was held at the house of Ebenezer Knap, in which* they attended
to singing, exhorting and praying. But without any visible effect on the minds
of their children until the February following, when on one Friday evening
Elizabeth Lull, wife of Benjamin Lull, jun. arose from her bed in great
distress of mind, and coming down stairs she repeated the following words:

"Shall Simon bear thy cross alone,
"And other saints go free;
"Each saint of thine shall find his own,
"And there is one for me."
"I have lived ^^^teen years; and never had a good thought, sp^^e a good word*
or did a good deed." This made an impression on the mind of her sister Martha,
and likewise upon her husband. Thus the work of the Lord began. Ebenezer Knap
was gone from home He went away from home in December, and returned in (...)
and they had no earthly instructor than their mother. They continued in this
exercise of mind until April, when Mrs. Lull and her sister Martha were brought
into liberty. In the course of the ensuing summer seven more families moved
into the settlement and united with them in their religious meetings. This
summer was a comfortable time with them, in the former part of which Increase
Thurstin's wife was brought to rejoice in the Lord, together with C^leb Lull*
son of Benjamin Lull, senior, and many others appeared under deep exercises of
mind on account of their souls. It continued a comfortable season with them
until the summer following.

In June 1775, one Jackson was killed by an Indi^^ on the Butternut Creek about
two miles from the settlement; it was supposed the Indian murd^^ed him for his
money.

In A. D. 1776, the inhabitants began to be distressed by the war, and had ^^e
more peace until they were deprived of most of their effects and forced to
break up their settlement and retire to the interior of the country.

In the course of this year a party of men were sent by the authority of the
state, who obliged the inhabitants to take the oath of neutr^^ity and disarmed
them.

In A. D. 1777, a party of the British came into the settlement, and obliged
the inhabitants to swear not to take up arms against the King of Britain.

In 1778, in consequence of a suspicion that the inhabitants had viola^^d their
oath, and supplied the enemy with provision. Two companies were sent from the
garrison at Cherry. Valley, who took the principal men prisoners, and drove
away all the cattle they could find: The prisoners were carried to
Cherry-Valley and examined, then sent to Albany and confined. In September the
same year a party of the Oneida Indians came and took away all the men that
were left except one who was absent; and carried them to Fort Stanwix, and
delivered them as prisoners to the garrison under pretense that they took them
on their way to Niagara. The women and children were now left alone surrounded
by hostile savages and howling beast of prey.

In a few days after the Indians were gone, Elizabeth, the wife Benjamin Lull,
senior being deprived of her family (which consisted of her husband and five
sons, who were all taken prisoners) formed the resolution of leaving the place;
accordingly she set out (accompanied with another woman, who carried with her
two small children) through the wood for Cherry-Valley, where they arrived
after two days travel, in which they endured great distress, on account of the
ruggedness of the way, continual fears of the enemy, and the inclemency of the
weather, for a great part of the time it rained exceeding hard, and at night
they took up their lodging in an old hut and made their bed of some oat-straw.
The distance they traveled was about thirty-two miles. Mrs. Lull was at this
time about 57 years of age, and carried a pack that was judged to weigh about
thirty weight.

In a short time after this the prisoners were released, as there was nothing
found against them. They immediately removed their families back into the old
settlements. Thus were these people driven from their habitations after passing
through scenes of anxiety and distress, which must affect the feeling heart
with exquisite sensations.

But through all their distress and danger, kind providence protected them, so
that no lives were lost except Jackson's aforesaid. In 1783 Benjamin Lull with
his wife and one son returned to the settlement and lived alone through the
winter.

In 1784, four more families returned. In 1785 they again set up religious
meetings. About the year 1787, they had preaching part of the time and some
were baptized by Elder Comstock who had collected a small church in Cooper's
patent, but he dying soon 'after, his church became extinct.

In A. D. 1792, Elder Craw from Greenfield visited them, preached and baptized
two persons; May 16, 1793 a number of Baptist professors met at the house of
Mr. Joseph Lull, in Unadilla for conferences after an agreeable interview in
which they found a union of sentiment respecting doctrine and discipline, they
adjourned their meeting.

June 1793, they again met and after further conversation they read and adopted
a covenant, and agreed to call a council.

August 28th, 1793 a council consisting of the Elder and delegates from
Greefield church met, and after inspecting their doings, gave them fellowship
as a church in sister relation: Their number was five males, and five females.
This church lies southwesterly from Springfield about thirty five miles.

Ebenezer Knap and his wife are yet members of the church and they have the
pleasure of seeing their two daughters (their only surviving children) one of
their sons in law, and six of their grand children) in the same church with
them.

SPRINGFIELD.
IN 1787 there was a collection of nine Babtist professors in the town of
Springfield, but were not regularly organized as a church: they continued in
this situation until 1789, when Elder Furman removed to that place, whose labor
in the Gospel (by the divine blessing) proved successful. In February the same
year the work of the Lord began, and on the 13th day of March following Elder
Furman, with twenty more, united with them in Covenant, and now considered
themselves a gospel church, and in the words of Elder Furman, "this was a
beautiful sight, a glorious day in the wilderness." They were now thirty in
number walking together in union and harmony: This was the first Baptist Church
erected in this once howling desert. The work of God still continued and before
the end of January following, thirty-six more were added to the church.

In 1793 God again visited them with a small revival, and seven were added to
the church.

In 1796 the Lord was pleased to pour out his spirit among them again, and
fourteen were added to the church. This church from the beginning has been in a
flourishing condition, and favored with additions yearly. Elder Furman still
continues his labors among them, and we have received information that God is
again visiting them, and a work of reformation is going on in that place.

FIRST CHURCH BURLINGTON.
ON the 27th of November A. D. 1793, a number of Baptist professors This
settlement, with the adjacent country was then knows by the name of Enadilla,
but is since divided into four towns.
(...) the house of Brother E. Leonard in the easterly part of Burlington for
conference. Part of these were members of churches in the old^^^ towns, others
had been members of a church which arose here under the auspices of an Elder
Comstock, but he dying, they lost their ^^^bility. From this time they
continued their conferences* and h^^rd the relations of those who were
unbaptized, until the 4th of January, 1794, when they voted to send for a
council. March 28th, 1794 the council consisting only of the Elder and
messengers from the church in Springfield, convened, and after examining their
articles and covenant, gave them fellowship as a sister church. Their numbers
were ten. This church lies southwesterly from Springfield, distant about 24
miles. This church has never been in very flourishing circumstances, owing as
we conceive, to some injudicious conduct in the person who had the lead at the
time of its formation.


FAIRFIELD AND PALATINE.
IN March 1793 Elder Butler removed his family to the Royal Grant. In April
following set up conferences to see if they could be agreed to come together as
a gospel church, they continued until July 1794, when they entered into
covenant and were fellowsh^pt by Elder Cornell. Their number was 14. Lies north
from Springfield 21 miles.

NORWICH FIRST CHURCH.
ON the 9th of June, A. D. 1792, a number of Baptist professors living on the
Governor's purchase upon the west side of Unadilla river, met in conference
chose a moderator and clerk, proceeded to give a relation of their Christian
experience; and made other inquiries necessary to the gaining an acquaintance
and obtaining fellowship with each other. These conferences were continued; and
such fellowship obtained, that on the 27th of November 1793, they agreed to
send for a council to meet at the house of Simeon Camp on the Unadilla river,
on the 20th of January 1794; on said day Elder Joseph Craw and one Brother from
Greenfield church This church belongs to the Shaftsbury Association, and is
distant from this place ab^^t 100 miles.
attended the other churches f^^led) where after inquiring into their doings,
gave them fellowship as a church in gospel order, which is now known by the
name of the First Church in Norwich. Their numbers were eleven. This church
lies southwesterly from the church in Springfield about forty-two miles.

SECOND CHURCH IN BURLINGTON.
IN the beginning of the year 1794, the inhabitants on Wharton creek, in the
town of Burlington, generally attended a meeting of the ^ethodist order. About
the first of March 1794. Deacon Martin ^^ther removed into this place, when he
and Brother J. Vaughn had conversation on the propriety of setting up a meeting
of the Baptist de^omination, and agreed to appoint a conference at Brother
Vaughn's on the 13th day of March 1794. Accordingly a number of the inhabitants
met at the time and place appointed; when after duly considering of the matter,
those of the Baptist sentiment agreed to set up a meeting, which was cordially
acceded to by the Methodists. -- At the next conference which was held soon
after a number of persons gave a relation of their experiences which was very
satisfactory; and was a very comfortable time, for it appeared evident that the
Lord was present by the gracious influence of his holy spirit, and pleasing
symptoms of an approaching reformation were discoverable.

On the 29th of March 1794, a number of the Brethren and Sisters covenanted
together as a church of Christ.

April 20th 1794 they voted for a council, in order to obtain their fellowship
as a sister church.

May 16th 1794, a council consisting of the following churches, viz.
Springfield, First in Burlington, and Unadilla, convened at the house of Paul
Gardner, where after proper inquiries respecting their says and practice,
proceeded to give them the right hand of fellowship. -- Their number was nine.
From the 5th of April to the 18th of May, meetings were frequently held, and at
every meeting there were some who gave a relation of their experience, so that
on the said 18th day Elder Furman visited them, preached, baptized 23 persons
and brake bread to the church. From this time there was an increasing attention
among the people. At almost every meeting some gave a relation of their
experience, until the 29th of June, when Elder Caleb Nichols from the
Shaftsbury association visited them, preached, baptized 28 persons, and brake
bread to 116, a number of whom were members of the churches in this vicinity.
The work was carried on with power until the October following when their
number increased to ninety-eight. This church lies southwesterly from
Springfield, distant 28 (...).

THIRD CHURCH IN BURLINGTON.
IN March 1793, Jonathan Pettit and Stephen Tailor set up a religious meeting
on the Lord's day, in the northwest part of Burlington, and continued the same
until December following, when Elder Furman visited them, baptized two persons,
and advised them to attend religious conferences for the purpose of obtaining
acquaintance and union in order for coming into church order; accordingly, on
the 8th of March 1794, they met in conference and eleven persons related their
experience, gave mutual satisfaction and union was obtained. They kept up their
conferences until May 11th 1794, when they voted to call a council, having
before covenanted together. A council consisting of messengers from the
following churches, viz. Springfield, First and Second in Burlington, convened
at Brother Timothy Taylor's in Burlington, where after examining their articles
and covenant, the council unanimously gave them fellowship as a church in
gospel order. Their numbers were eleven. This Church lies southwesterly from
Springfield distant about 30 miles.

RICHFIELD alias EXETER.
A NUMBER of Baptist professors from different places, having moved into that
part of Richfield now called Exeter, did on the 28th of December 1793, agree to
set up a meeting on the Lord's day for religious worship. On the 24th of April
1794, they met at Brother Thomas Hedge's to confer on the propriety of forming
a church in gospel order; but many of them, not having as yet received letters
of dismission from the churches to which they belonged, they concluded to
adjourn until the 14th of June 1794, to meet at the same place. -- Accordingly
on said day they met, and finding an agreement, they voted to consider
themselves as a church in gospel order. The church in Springfield and the first
church in Burlington, having been previously invited, met, by their delegates
and formed a council for the purpose of inspecting their doings; when, after a
candid examination, they gave them fellowship as a church in gospel order.
Their number nine. This church lies west from Springfield, distant about
seventeen miles. Fifteen members were added within fifteen months from this
time.

STEWART's PATENT, alias FIRST OTSEGO.
A NUMBER of persons living on Stewart's patent, in the town of Otsego. did on
the 12th of March, 1794, set up a religious meeting. On the 10th of April the
same year, they met in conference and began to tell their experiences to each
other, and entered into a covenant together to keep up the public worship of
God, and family prayer. July 18th 1794, they proceeded to receive others into
their society upon their giving a relation of a work of Grace upon their souls.
-- November 30th 1794, Elder Furman preached and baptized five persons. In
conference on the 10th of December 1794, they proceeded to examine the articles
and covenant which had previously been drawn up, when finding a good agreement,
they voted to send to Springfield church to come and inquire into their faith
and order. December 18th 1794, Elder Furman and four Brethren with him, came
and examined into their claims and gave them fellowship as a church of Christ.
-- Their number twelve. This church lies west from Springfield church, distant
about seven miles.

SECOND CHURCH OTSEGO.
IN the year 1791 a number of persons set up a religious meeting, The year
following, Elder James Bacon came into the place and began to preach to the
people, baptized some, and continued with them for the space of two years; and
then returned to Connecticut. About this time B'r John Bostwick began to
improve by way of doctrine among the people. On the 20th of May 1795 they met
in conference and deliberated on the propriety of forming a church. On the 4th
Wednesday of June following they again met in conference, and consulted on the
subject of church government, and a covenant was agreed to, and they voted to
call a council to give them fellowship. On the 19th of August 1795 pursuant to
request, a council consisting of the following churches, (viz) Springfield and
Franklin, convened and gave them fellowship as a church in gospel order. Their
number was 12. This church lies southwesterly from Springfield, distant about
20 miles.

OTEGO FORMERLY SECOND UNADILLA.
IN the year 1790 three B^ptist professors moved into the town of Unadilla,
near the mouth of the Otego creek, and soon set up the worship of God on Lord's
day: the country being new rendered it difficult for the people to assemble,
especially on evenings, on which occasions they made use of torches to light
them through the Indian paths to their habitations. At a certain time a number
of rude persons made an agreement to break up their meeting; but before the
time came they were convinced of the impropriety of such conduct, and desisted
from their purpose. About this time they were involved in some trials by reason
of false brethren, who came in among them. In the years 1792 and 1793 some
ministers visited them, a small reformation took place and five persons were
baptized. In 1794 several professors moved into the place and united with them
in the worship of God. In 1795 they met and gave a relation of their christian
experience to each other, and obtained fellowship, agreed upon articles and
covenant, and voted to send for a council. August 20th 1795 A council
consisting of Springfield and Franklin churches convened and gave them
fellowship as a church. Their number was 15. It lies south westerly from
Springfield distant about thirty-five miles.

OTSEGO ASSOCIATION.
IN the year 1789 Elder William Furman removed with his family into the town of
Springfield, in the county of Otsego, state of New York. This town lies at the
north end of Otsego lake, and about 15 miles south of Mohawk river; and about
60 miles west of Albany. At this time there was no B^ptist church in all this
extensive country. Eld'r Furman was at this time about forty years of age, he
is of a middling statute, robust constitution, fitted to endure hardships,
naturally of a mild and gentle disposition, affable in conversation, meek and
winning in his preaching; sound in doctrine, in exhortation excels, his gifts
seem to be mostly of the exhortative kind; yet, he is capable of handling a
text doctrinally to the satisfaction of the lovers of truth. He is of deep
penetration and sound judgment, which renders him eminently useful in councils.
He was the first minister who was settled in this wilderness, who was
particularly useful in planting churches and promoting the rise of this
Association. Having the glory of God in view, and desirous of the increase of
the Redeemer's kingdom, he spared no pains, but exerted himself to the utmost
for the accomplishment of those glorious purposes. He may with propriety be
said to be the father of these churches, God has remarkably blessed his labors
with abundant success. He now rejoices to see the happy effects of his
unwearied pains in the service of his Lord.

In the spring of the year 1794 he proposed to the churches to meet in a
conference, to consult the propriety of forming an Association of these
churches. Accordingly seven churches met by their delegates on the 4th day of
September 1794, at the house of B'r Wm. Goff, in Burlington. Eld'rs Werden,
Cornell and Craw, belonging to the Shaftsbury Association being present, took
seat with them. After an agreeable conference on the subject, they adjourned
until the 2nd Thursday in January, 1795, to meet at the house of Paul Gardner,
in Burlington.

January 8th, 1795, the churches again met pursuant to adjournment, and two
more were added. Sentiments of an Association and the platform thereof were
read, and agreed to refer them to the churches, requesting them to appoint
delegates to meet at the meeting house in Springfield, on the 2d day of
September next, invested with power to decide on the propriety of forming an
Association.

Adjourned.

September 2d, 1795.
The delegates from the churches met.

Introductory Sermon, from Luke XXIV. 26, by Elder Ashbel Hosmer: He was at
this time a member of a church in Connecticut, but having removed his family
into Burlington, and residing with the second church in that place, was sent as
one of their delegates to this conference.
A Moderator and Clerk were chosen. Letters from the churches were read, and
the following list taken:

Churches. Ministers. Numbers. Springfield, William Furman, 56 1st Burlington,
-- -- 22 2d Burlington, Ashbel Hosmer, 101 3d Burlington, -- -- 10 Norwich, --
-- 30 1st Unadilla, -- -- 17 Richfield, -- -- 22 Stuart's Patent, -- -- 21
Schuyler, John Hammond, 63 Charlestown, Ehjah Herrick, 24 Churches. Ministers.
Numbers. Norway Palatine, Joel Butler, 31 2d Unadilla, -- -- 15 Otsego, -- --
12 1^ Churches. 6 Ministers. 424

Note the three last mo^ti^^ed churches had not before attended the conference.

Eld'rs Cornell and Finds by appointment from the Shaftsbury Association being
present, took seat in the conference. Adjourned until 8 o'Clock tomorrow
morning.

Sept. 3, 8 o'Clock.
Sermon by Eld'r Cornell from Timothy 11.3. After a short intermission
proceeded to business. A Platform and plan of union for these churches was read
and unanimously agreed upon.

The delicate circumstances in which the infant churches, in this extensive
territory were placed, rendered them liable to impositions from artful and
designing men; and several such of dangerous principles and corrupt practices
having already obtruded themselves upon these new settlements, it became
indispensibly necessary that some method should be devised to prevent such
impositions in future, and to keep out of our connection all persons sustaining
such characters. Therefore the conference appointed Eld. Cornell to examine
each church respecting their faith and practice, and each minister concerning
his character. After which the aforementioned churches and minister being found
in a circumstance to unite, they UNANIMOUSLY voted to consider themselves at
this and future meetings as an Association, by the name of the Otsego
Association. The Elders and brethren present gave them fellowship as an
Association.

Voted to open a correspondence with the Shaftsbury and D^^bury Associations.

Voted to meet annually on the first Wednesday in September at 10 o'Clock A. M.

This being the first interview of this nature ever enjoyed in this western
country, it was apparently crowned with a divine blessing -- The presence of
Jehovah was really felt, and the souls of God's people expanded with joy, Some
who came to the meeting with a resolution to oppose the forming of an
Association, were constrained to acknowledge that God was with them; and their
souls rejoiced in the union of these infant churches. Indeed it was a pleasing
and interesting scene, to behold the little churches scattered thoughout this
extensive land, coming up out of the wilderness and uniting together in an
Associate capacity, thereby exhibiting what the Lord had done and was still
doing in this once howling desert.

In order to give the reader an idea of the state of the churches in this
connex^on, we shall present him with some extract^ from th^^ yearly letters to
the Association, so far as we are able.

Extracts of letters to the Association for 1795.
Butternts alias 1st Unadilla. "It seems to be a winter season with us, yet at
our last conference we had a very comfortable time. -- Our frozen hearts began
to thaw; and our cold affections began to flame. We felt a little of our first
love, and our desire is that the bleeding cause of God may be built up; that
Zion may travel and Satan's kingdom may fall to the ground."

1st Otsego alias Stuart's Patent. "We have to bless God that when we put our
trust in him he never proves a barren wilderness to our souls, but is as the
shadow of a great rock in a weary land. We have gone through some tria^^ at
times; but the Lord has helped us. We have some encouragement -- many attentive
to hear the word and convicted we trust. We wish that brotherly love may
continue."

Exeter alias First Richfield. "We have reason to bless God that not only peace
and harmony abound, but we have some additions and it appears that the Lord is
at work on the minds of others."

Springfield. "Approves of the platform, and desires the association of the
churches."

Third Burlington. "Peace and harmony among us."

Schuyler and Whitestown. "Wishing that practical Godliness may be zealously
attended by the churches -- we have reason to speak of the goodness of God that
we have additions to the church, while we lament that some have of late left us
and embraced heretical principles."

Second Burlington. "The church in comfortable circumstances, pray for the
upbuilding of the cause of truth."

Second Otsego. "Desirous of union."

Norway and Palatine "We rejoice that God has put it into the heart of any of
his people to seek for the advancement of his glory, and the building up of
Zion in the world."

Otego alias Second Unadilla. "In comfortable circumstances, desirous for the
advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom."

Charlestown. "Small and feeble, recommend themselves to the prayers of God's
people."

First Norwich. "In a comfortable state."

Second session of the Otsego Assoctation, holden at Burlington, September 7th
and 8th, 1796.
ONE is our God who reigns above,
And one our Savlour whom we love;
One is the faith, the spirit one
That brings us round Jehovah's throne;
One hope we have, one race we run,
To our eternal shining home;
One is our guide, and one the way,
That leads to shining fields of day;
And one the song of praise we sing
To our eternal Glorious King.
Wednesday, September 7th, so o'clock A. M. Association met. Introductory
sermon by Eld'r Joel Butler, from St. John xvii, 2^. Letters from the churches
re^d and the following account taken:

Dismissed 3 Added 318 Excluded 6 Diminished 11 Died 2 Diminished 11 Increase
307

Four churches and four ministers were added to the Association this year.

Narrative of the churches received this year, [1796.]
FRANKLIN.
IN the month of August, 1792, a reformation began in this town which continued
until January 1793, when on the 15th of said month they received fellowship as
a church in gospel order. Their number was about 30. They increased greatly in
numbers for about one year after they received fellowship: Several more were
converted in a judgment of charity, who joined the Presbyterian church. This
church lies south westerly from Springfield, distant about fifty mile^.

AURELIUS.
SOME time in the latter end of the summer of 1795, Eld'r David Irish came into
this place, and preached to the people, the Lord added his blessing; so that on
the 18th of November the same year, ten persons entered, into church relation.
About this time the Lord began to pour out his spirit in convicting and
converting sinners in a most glorious manner, the stout hearted were broken
down, while young converts were shouting hosannas to the son of David, the
hearts of God's people were made to rejoice, and join the blessed theme; their
little cottages became praying houses, and the wilderness that not long since
was a waste howling desert, where savages and be^^^ of prey were wont to roam,
became as pools of living water. -- This church lies westerly from Springfield,
distant about one hundred miles.

FIRST LITCHFIELD.
In September 1794, a number of Baptist professors met in conference to consult
on matters relating to Christ's militant kingdom; and feeling it a matter of
importance they agreed to continue their conferences. On the 15th of March 1795
they embodied as a church, the church at Fai^field and Palatine gave them
fellowship. Their number was seven. Soon after the Lord poured out his spirit
in a remarkable manner, sinners were awakened and many we trust were brought to
the knowledge of the truth, so that twenty were added to the church, besides
several who united with the Congregational society in this place. In 1799 this
church was again visited by the spirit of God in a special manner, and twelve
were added to the church in the space of four months. This church lies west
from Springfield, distant about 30 miles.

SCIPIO.
FOR a particular account of the rise of this church, the reader is referred to
their letter to the Association for 1796. This church lies w^^terly from
Springfield, distant about one hundred and six miles.

Extracts of letters from the Churches, for 1796.
Butternuts. "Destitute of a pastor, desire the assistance of our Brethren in
the ministry, our number small, our progress slow, we have lost one of our
members by death the preceding year."

First Otsago. "We remain steadfast in the truth, endeavoring to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bonds of peace. We are not ignorant of the devices of
satan: but yet, though satan desires to fist Christ's followers as whea^ we
believe the Savior prays for us still; so that we can sing of mercy and
judgment."

Aurelius. "In comfortable circumstances the Lord is pouring out his spirit."

First Litchfield. "We have great reason, in this infant fettlement, to bless
the Lord for his goodness unto us. At present it is not with us as in months
past, not many conversions lately among us, but brotherly love abounds and we
enjoy peace among ourselves. We have no pastor."

Exeter. "It appears to be a night season with us, and through much tribulation
we march but slowly; nevertheless we rejoice that there is among us a general
desire to press forward."

Springfield. "We remain steadfast in the doctrine of the Gospel. -- The l^^d
has blessed us with a spirit of love and union ^he year past, and some
additions have been made to the church.

Second Burlington. "It gives as pleasure to see God has planted churches, and
gives the sweet breathing of his holy spirit to revice the heart of his
children."

Otego. "We wish to continue our union with the churches; desiring that they
may be enabled to contend earnestly for the faith. -- We enjoy a comfortable
union, endeavoring to withstand the wiles of the adversary, believing that we
shall reap if we faint not."

Charlestown. "We retain the same sentiments in divine things as when we last
addressed you: We have to lament that coldness too much prevails among us at
present. A small addition has been made to our number the year past. We are
feeble, and have many trials to pass through. Brethren pray for us, that we may
have grace and wisdom given us to walk as becoming those professing godliness."

Scipio. "The great Captain of our Salvation, from motives originating in
himself, has seen fit, not only in the government of providence to cause this
land which not long since was a waste howling desert, inhabited only by
untutored savages and beasts of prey; to be peopled with civilized beings; but
he is now spreading the knowledge of divine truths among us: God has in a
glorious manner within a few months poured out his spirit here; our frolicking
chambers have become praying houses, and our young people in some of these
parts are now running together to bless and praise God's holy name. About
sixteen months ago a few Baptist professors from different churches, residing
in this town met in conference to form an acquaintance and obtain fellowship
with each other. We continued our conferences until the October following when
we sent for a council, and obtained the help of two Elders and some Brethren
who gave them fellowship as a church in gospel order. We have had considerable
additions since."

Second Otsogo. "We rejoice that the Lord reigns and that his gracious
providence is over all his works, and that he takes peculiar care of his people
who are the purchase of the blood of Jesus, and for his own Glory's sake
nourishes, supports comforts and cherishes, all who put their trust in him; and
though he is pleased to lead his people through great tribulation; yet his rod
and his staff shall comfort them, and their robes shall be made white in the
blood of the Lamb. Though we have often to mourn here, we hope to rejoice
hereafter. We trust the Lord is with us, and we believe he will conduct us
through our trials and bring us at last to Glory.

Third session of the Otsego Association, bolden at Fairfield on the first
Wednesday in September 1797.
Wednesday, September 6th, 10 o'clock, A. M. Association met. Introductory
sermon from John xv, 16, by Eld'r James Bacon. Letters from the churches were
read and the following account of the state of the churches was taken:

Dismissed 55 Added 358 Excluded 11 Diminished 71 Died 5 -- 71 Increase 287

For the circular letters the reader is referred to the printed minutes for
each year.

Eight churches and three ministers were added to the association at this
session. It was a very comfortable time. The people of God rejoiced in the
flourishing of the Redeemer's kingdom, in this wilderness.

Accounts of the churches received into fellowship at this time.
SECOND LITCHFIELD.
November 10th 1796, met at the house of Aaron Peabody to converse on religious
subjects, when several told their experience. They had several meetings after
this, until Feb. 7th 1797 when they met, agreed upon articles of faith and
covenant and voted to send for a council to inspect their doings.

Accordingly a council, consisting of the churches in Fairfield Palatine, 2d in
Burlington, and the first in Litchfield, convened March 10th, 1797 at the house
of B'r Cole, in Litchfield: when after inspecting their articles and covenant
they unanimously gave them fellowship as a church in sister relation; their
number was fifteen. This church lies westerly from Springfield distant about
twenty-miles.

KORTRIGHT.
IN May, 1792, Warner Lake and his wife, who were members of Elder Gray's
church, of Great Barrington, moved their family to Kortright patent They soon
set up a religious meeting.

IN the spring of the vear 1793, there appeared a considerable attention among
the few scattered inhabitants. In July, Elder Gray by their request visited
them, and baptized seven. Three more members from Elder Gray's church had
lately come into the place. At this time they entered into covenant and on the
9th of July, 1793 Elder Gray gave them fellowship as a church: their number was
thirteen. About this time B'r Lake began to speak to them in a doctrinal way.
In the summer of 1794 the church called B'r Lake to ordination. October 30,
1794, the church in Great-Barrington and the church in Coeymans met in council,
for the purpose of ordaining B'r Lake. After having enquired into matters which
were necessary they proceeded on the following^ day to set him apart by the
imposition of hands, which was done in the following manner: Eld. Gray
performed the first prayer, and preached from I. Cor. iv. 1.2. Eld. Mudge
prayed the ordination prayer and gave the charge. -- Eld. Gray gave the right
hand of fellowship. The summer past there was something of a revival, and ten
or twelve were baptized. Soon after the ordination a reformation began, which
spread into Harpersfield, and about twenty were added to the church.

In 1797 another small revival took place, and sixteen were added to the
church. This church lies southeasterly from Springfield, distant about (...)

PARIS
ABOUT the 20th of March 1796 Elder Eastman moved his family into Paris, and
immediately set up a religious meeting. About the beginning of May the same
year, he, together with baptist professors met in conference for the purpose of
forming an acquaintance.

About the 18th of December the same year Elder Eastman being gone a journey,
Elder Butler came into the place, and preached a sermon which was accompanied
with a divine blessing; a considerable revival took place and sixteen souls
were hopefully converted.

March the 9th. 1797 they met and covenanted together to watch over one another
as a band of brothers.

May 30th agreed to call a council for inspecting their order.

July 6th, 1797, a council convened at b'r David Wood's house in Paris,
consisting of the churches in Whitestown, 1st Litchfield, Fairfield Palatine,
Petershurg, 2d Burlington and Schuyler. The council, after duly enquiring into
their circumstances and inspecting their articles gave them fellowship. Their
number was twenty-seven. This church lies about west from Springfield, distant
about forty miles.

NORTH CHURCH BURLINGTON.
In June, 1795, Elder Ashbel Hosmer moved into Burlington and began to improve
with the second church in that town. In October following he joined with the
church as a member in full communion. but never was considered as the pastor of
said church. He preached part of the time with a congregational society in the
north part of the town, which society was the first in that part of the town
that set up and maintained religious meetings. About the beginning of February
1797 he requested and received a letter of dismission from the church. The said
society finding that he was dismissed from the church requested him to tarry
and preach with them, and a number of baptist professors having moved into the
vicinity, and attended upon that meeting, he agreed to their request.

Feb. 9th. 1797, Eld. Hosmer, with the above mentioned baptists met in
conference, and the following question was proposed: "Is it expedient for us to
attempt to unite in covenant as a gospel church!" Answered in the affirmative.
Six persons who had been baptized and one who had not related their experience,
then conferred on the general principles of the baptists, and found a happy
agreement.

May 15th, 1797, they again met and agreed to articles of faith and a covenant,
and voted to consider themselves in future as a church of Christ. They likewise
agreed to call a council to look into their order. They also voted to give
Elder Hosmer a call to the pastoral charge of the church, to which he assented.

June 14th, 1797, the church in Springfield, 1st and 2d Otsego, 2d and 3d in
Burlington met in council in Burlington, and after exemining into their order
gave them followship as a church in ^^^^ed order, The council likewise gave
them fellowship in their calling Eld. Hosmer to the pastoral charge. Their
number was fourteen. This church lies southwesterly from Springfield, distant
about 2^ miles.

SECOND RICHFIELD.
In the summer of 1796, Eld, Roots was preaching part of the time in the
northeast part of Richfield, in the suceeding Autumn God was pleased to pour
out his spiri^^on that small settlement, the people began to attend of
conferences frequently, and a number were hopefully converted. Several of the
brethren in the ministry frequently visited and preached among the people, and
baptized a number. In one of their conferences they agreed to consider
themselves in the character of a church, they also voted to call a council.

April 26th, 1797, a council cousisting of Springfield, Stuart's Patent, 1st in
Richfield and 2d in Litchfield churches convened and gave them fellowship as a
church in gospel order. Their number was sixteen. From this time until they
joined with the association their number increased to twenty-seven. This church
lies west from Springfield, distant about twelve miles.

AUGUSTA alias NEWPETERSBURGH.
On the 15th of December, 1795, a number of persons met in conference according
to previous appointment, several persons gave a relation of their experience.
August 16th, 1796, in conference Elders Bacon, Butler, Eastmen and Holmes being
present, a number of doctrinal propositions were discussed and agreed upon.

Oct. 27th, 1796, they agreed to send for a council. Nov. 9th, 1796, a council
consisting of 1st Lirchfield and Fairfield Palatine churches convened and gave
them fellowship as a chuch in regular order. Their numbers were nine. This
church lies westwardly from Springfield, about forty miles distant.

WHITESTOWN.
A number of professors of the congregational denomination, in Whitestown, did,
in the month of Oct. 1795, covenant together to hold up religious meetings. The
February following Eld. Stephen Parsons, from Connecticut visired and baptized
five of them: and in June 1796, having set apart a day for fasting and prayer
entered into covenant to walk togeter as a church. Eld. Parsons being present
on a visit assisted them to articles and covenant, gave them fellowship and
administered the Lord's Sooper to them the next Lord's day. Their number was
seven. The September following Eld. Parsons moved into Whiteston and settled
with them. This church lies nor^^westardly from Springfield, distant about 40
miles.

FIRST HAMILTON.
A. D. 1795 a small number or people pitched on the head waters (...) Chenange,
about 100 miles west of Albany. They soon set up a religious meeting. June
24th, 1796 they met in conference at the house of B'r Samoel Pain, and gave a
relation of their experience to each other: they continued their conference by
adjournments (...) Aug. 19th, 1796, when a council met, and after proper
inquiries advised them to examine their articles which they had previonsly
drawn, and compare them with the articles of other churches, to which result
they agr^ed. On the 29th of September, 1796, they sent for a council which
convened on the 10th of Oct. 1796, consisting of the churches in Fairfield
Palatine, 2d and 3d in Burlington and 1st in Litchfield. The council after a
candid inspection of their doings gave them fellowship as a church in gospel
order. Their number was 12 -- This church is situate from spingfield
southwesterly, distant about forty five miles.

We have not been able to obtain the letters for the year 1797. therefore we
cannot present our readers with any extracts from them.

Fourth Session of the Otsego Association, holden at Franklin on the 5th and
6th of September, 1798.
Wednesday, Sept, 5th, at 10 o'Clock A. M.
The Association opened with public worship. A sermon from Romans x. 13, 14, 15
was delivered by Elder Parsons.

Letters from the churches were read, and the following account of the state of
the churches was taken:

Dismissed 20 Added 308 Excluded 40 Decrease 68 Died 8 Decrease 68 Increase
240, present year

Three churches were added at this time. A very comfortable time. The presence
of Zion's King was conspicuou^. For the particular transactions at this meeting
and the circular letter the reader is referred to the printed minutes for this
year.

An account of the churches received at this Session.
SECOND NORWICH.
A number of Baptist professors who had removed from Nine Partners, did in the
year 1795, set up and continue conferences until the 24th of Feb. 1797, when
they received fellowship as a church in gospel order by the church in Hamilton.
Their number was 14. Th^^ church lies southwesterly from Springfield, distant
about 45 miles.

POMPEY.
In autumn, 1794, a considerable number of baptist professors Pompey and
Manlius covenanted to support the worship of God, his own appointed ways. In
1797 several persons were brought (...) the knowledge of the truth. In October
the same year Eld. Holmes from New York baptized seven persons, who were the
first baptized in this country.

In Feb. 1798, a church consisting of fifteen members received fellowship. This
church lies west from Springfield distant seventy miles

OXFORD.
IN the month of Sept. Eld. Smith, with other baptist professors in the town of
Oxford met in conference and agreed to form a church; October 4th, 1797,
received fellowship by the church in Paris and first in Norwich. This church
lies west from Springfield distant about fifty miles.

Extracts from letters of the Churches, for 1798.
Butternuts. "We mourn that our practice is not more conformable to our
principles. It is a time of coldness, though not of entire insensibility; a
comfortable union among the brethren; some ardent desires with fervent cries
ascending the hill of God for the outpouring of the divine spirit, and the
ingathering of souls into the kingdom of God."

1st Otsego. "Having obtained help of God we continue until now, though we wade
thorough many trials yet a number appear not discouraged: we have had some
addition."

Aurelius, "God is good and deals in judgment and mercy though not in anger.
Come over into Macedonia and help us."

1st. in Litchfield. "We enjoy a comfortable degree of union; in this we have
reason to rejoice and give God thanks always, yet at the same time we have
reason to mourn our unfaithfulness in so precious a cause; for we are not
insensible of the growing evils in the land and in the church, particularly the
neglect of the worship of God, which has a tendency to quench the holy spirit,
is a violation of a divine command, gives the adversary an advantage and causes
the faithful to mourn."

Whitestown. "We are happy to say that in the midst of prevailing in^quity, we
find a small number whose faces appear to be set toward Zion, and are seeking
a city which has foundations: while we have reason to mourn the low state of
vital piety in this place, and want of the powerful quickening and sanctifying
influence of the holy spirit; yet we feel indebted to sovereign grace that a
measure of christian stedfastness possesses this little community, and we have
hither to been preserved from any particular breach of christian fellowship;
and still enjoy a degree of union in the worship of God, and in the ordinances
of the gospel among ourselves."

Burlington North "We enjoy peace. We rejoice in the advancement of the Church.
glorious cause of our Redeemer to this wilderness; the happy prospect before us
seem to promise much: if the blessing be not lost by selfgratulation, or
squandered away by languor or diffidence, nothing can more retard the projects
of real roli^ion, than o^^e^^^tions views, or (...) of God's ordinances or
worship. The souls of our unconverted children and neighbors are at stake! God
has in former days, wrought gloriously for our help: how unreasonable would it
then be, for us to provoke him to take away his presence from us: our warmest
wishes are for the continuance of the divine presence with us and you."

Springfield. "It has pleased the Lord to continue among us the year past, a
degree of love and harmony, for which we desire to be thankful."

Schuyler and Whitestown. "A low time in the church; yet notwithstanding the
prevailing indifference among us, God has been kind, and we have had
considerable additions.

2d. Burlington. "Peace and harmony prevailing among us."

Oxford. "Brethren we think it a privilege, as well as duty, to make ourselves
known to you, and tell what the Lord has done in this place, which but a few
years since was a howling desert. But God has called together a number of his
dear children (as we believe) and they united in the bands of love, according
to divine rule. Since we have embodied, we have passed through scenes of
affl^ct^on on and trials; but our situation at present is pleasant and lovely:
we enjoy something of God's grace, and the smiles of his countenance, and we
can truly say, the Lord is good."

Hamilton. This letter takes notice of the conduct of divine providence, in
changing the howling desert into a fruitful field; and that they enjoy peace
and amity among themselves, and trust that the Lord has seen fit often to give
them his comforting presence and that it continues a comfortable time among
them.

Otego. "God we trust has begun to return the captivity of Zion in our land, by
sending forth his holy spirit among us, causing stout hearted sinners to bow
before his word, and fall victims to sovereignty; being in some measure
sensible that they were lost in sin and justly condemned by God's righteous
law, and that he has by his matchless grace enabled some of our youth to speak
of his goodness for his deliverance of their souls; while under the protection
of heaven we do feel to acknowlge our imperfection. We have a comfortable union
among ourselves at this time."

Charlestown "Continue steadfast in sentiments, no difficulty, a small addition."

Scipio. "The Lord has seen fit to preserve us in union and made some addition,
so that we have reason to bless his holy name; notwithstanding we live in the
midst of Deists, infidels and opposers of christianity; yet we feel (with the
assistance of God) to maintain the ground against all the assaults of earth and
hell. The Lord reigns let the earth rejoice."

Paris. "The Lord has been pleased to make some additions to our number the
year past, and at present we are not destitute of tokens for good, and blessed
^estimonies of the power and grace of Christ, so that we feel comfortable and
steadfast."

1st Norwich. "General union and some additions."

2d. Norwich. "Blessed be God where he has begun a good work he will carry it
on unto the day of the Lord Jesus. We rejoice that this country which was but a
little while since a pathless wild, inhabited only by savages and (...) of ^^ey
has now become a mountain of praise to the most high God and that there are so
many baptist churches erected and erecting into an associated body."

2d. Burlington. It is a matter of grief to see religion opposed and ridiculed
by the world in general, but how much more ought our sorrow to increase when we
daily see those who are the professed followers of Jesus lightly esteem the
gospel institutions, and can easily pass by religious duties. But we have some
consolation from God's word, bel^eving the Lord knows who are his; and that
when Zion is purged her sons will come forth as gold that is tried. We have
passed under many trials since our last interview, but God has preserved us,
We enjoy a comfortable union at present, our great complaint is general
coldness, which is productive of a great neglect of rel^gious duties."

Augusta Prays for the union, peace, harmony, and prosperity of Zion.

Kortright. "Brethren having spoken union with you, we wish to maintain our
correspondence with you, from which we conceive so many advantages arise,
especially in this day in which earth and hell are uniting their forces, and
are directing their attacks against revealed religion. It is a time that calls
for every soldier of Jesus, to make use of those weapons described by the
Apostle, in defense of the truth: and as the tokens of God's displeasure hang
over our land, it becomes every christian to lie near the throne of Grace,
crying to God that he may avert those judgments if consistent with his will;
that truth may spread; that antichristian delusions may fall; the powers of
darkness tremble, and the children of God gain the victory through faith in
Jesus' name. Our present circumstances are not very flattering, nor yet
particularly discouraging. Some trials have attended us the year past, but in
the midst of affliction God has remembered mercy, and we have some refreshings;
upon the whole we can say we have joy in the midst of mourning."

2d. Litchfield. "We maintain the form of religion, and continue in union and
brotherly love among ourselves."

Franklin. "We have a comfortable agreement among ourselves, but much wanting
in those lively exercises that we enjoyed in years past."

Fairfield, Palatine. "With reluctance we inform you that it is a low time
among us as to religion, and some trials; notwithstanding we hope to come off
conquerers through Christ."

Fifth session of the Otsego Association, holden at Exeter on the 4th and 5th
of September 1799.
Wednesday, September 4, 1799. 10 o'clock A. M.
Association convened. Sermon from II. Cor. v. 20. by Eld'r Furman. Letters
from the churches were read.

State of the churches since last Association.

Dismissed 127 Added 452 Excluded 22 Decrease 164 Died 15 Decrease 164 Increase
288, this year.

The following churches were cordially received at this session, (viz)
Brothertown, 2d Hamilton, 3d Norwich, Sangerfield, Schuyler-Short-Lots, and
Wor^ester.

A sketch of the history of those six churches:
BROTHERTOWN.
IN the year 1776, David Fowler and five others moved to the westward of
Albany, having previously obtained accession of lands from the Oneida Indians:
upon which they so^^ formed a settlement, and set up a religious meeting, which
was carried on by singing, praying, and exhortation. In the time of the
revolutionary war, they were greatly distressed by the enemy, being deprived of
their cattle and most of their other effects; so that they were forced to break
up their settlement and retire to the older towns. At the conclusion of the war
they returned to their former habitations; soon after a dispute arose between
them and the Oneidas concerning their lands; which was productive of much
trouble: many other difficulties they met with from the English on account of
their land, which were discouraging; but the providence of God protected them.

Through all their trials they kept up their religious meetings; and on the
24th of May, 1798 four persons were baptized by Eld. Parsons, and they agreed
to send for a council. August 23d 1798, a council consisting of the churches in
Fairfield-Palatine, Paris, Whitestown, Scuyler and Whitestown, and Hamilton,
convened, who after inquiring into their circumstances, gave them fellowship as
a church of Christ^ their number was twelve. This church lies west from
Springfield, distant about forty miles.

SANGERFIELD.
IN the year 1797, a number of persons in the town of Sangerfield, set up a
religious meeting on the Lord's day. At this time there were some who appeared
under awakenings; they continued their meetings through the winter; in the
course of which there arose such opposition against the baptists having any
share in the lead of the meeting, that on the 14th of April, 1798, eight
persons met in conference at the house of B'r White, and agreed to hold up a
meeting in the baptist order; the May following four persons were baptized: at
this time there appeared an engagedness in the minds of many, and the
congregation increased, and some more were baptized in the summer and autumn.
Nov. 27th, 1798, they agreed to call a council to give them fellowship; and
likewise agreed to give Eld. Butler a call to settle with them. Dec. 19th, 1798
the churches in Fairfield Palatine, Whitestown, Paris, Hamilton and Augusta,
convened in council, and gave them fellowship as a church in sister relation;
their number was seventeen. This church lies westerly from Springfield about 35
miles. A small settlement in this vicinity, of about a dozen families, who were
educated in the paedo baptist sentiments, were visited by the Lord, which
induced them to turn their attention to things of a divine nature: the
consequence was that several of them were converted to God, and all of them
(except one or two) to the Baptist sentiment; seven of whom have joined with
this church.

SCHUYLER SHORT LOTS.
A NUMBER of baptist professors living on Schuyler Short Lots, did on the 25th
of Feb. 1797, embody into a church, agreeable to the advice and in fellowship
of a council; their number was seventeen.

In 1799, the spirit of the Lord moved upon the minds of several, and numbers
come up to the help of the Lord against the mighty. In about five months their
number increased to fifty one. This church lies northwesterly from Springfield
distant about 25 miles.

THIRD NORWICH.
Feb. 9th, 1799, the first church in Norwich voted to call a council to advise
with them on dividing the church: accordingly on the 23d of March, 1799, the
north church in Burlington, ^^d the church in Oxford, met in ^^uncil, and after
enquiring into their circumstances gave them fellowship in their division;
accordingly thirteen members were set off and embodied into a new church, and
received the fellowship of the council as the 3d baptist church in Norwich.
This church lies southwestward from Springfield distant about 46 miles.

WORCESTER.
IN the latter end of the year 1798, Elders Hosmer and Lawton visited a number
of Baptist professors living on the Susquehannah river, in the towns of
Suffrage and Worcester: they were advised to get into a circumstance of
embodying into a church. Eld. Hosmer baptized one person, and there appeared a
pleasing attention among the people. They continued their meetings and Eld.
Lawton frequently visited them, and baptized three persons. After struggling
through many difficulties, they did on the twenty-first day of August 1799
receive the fellowship of a council consisting of the North and Third Churches
in Burlington, the churches in Butternuts and Kortright. Their number was
eight: since which time eight have been added. This church lies southerly from
Springfield, distant about 26 miles.

SECOND HAMILTON.
FROM this church we have received no particular information.

Extracts of letters. 1799.
Butternuts. "It is with great satisfaction that we inform you of the goodness
of God unto us. In September last the Lord began his work among us, his power
was great and the effects thereof conspicuous; sinners were alarmed, souls
converted, and the people of God rejoiced. Children forsook their toys, the
youth their gaudy baubles, the middle aged their undue world* pursuit^ and the
old their long confirmed traditionary habits; and all with united hearts bowed
to the scepter of prince Emanuel; willingly submitted to his government and
came into obedience to his laws, and with joyful hea^ts consented (...) walk in
his sta^utes. The work was in no one instance attended with scarcely the least
symptoms of enthusiasm, but remarkably regular; and passions at no time
exceeded the bounds of decency and good order: we feel ourselves under the
greatest obligations to praise the name of God, for his goodness to us in this
and many other respects; but alas we feel ourselves deficient in making
suitable return^ to our God for all his goodness exhibited. There is not that
apparent engagedness in the cause of religion that we could wish, a lethargic
drowsiness seems to pervade the minds of professors, yet not to that degree as
to exclude all sensation, for we at times feel some of the vivifying rays of
the sun of righteousness, which causes our souls to spring up anew, and reach
away to the eternal source of all ^ood. No difficulties among us at present but
union and love continues."

First Otsego. "Having obtained help we continue, but wading through
afflictions and trusting in him who never changes."

Aurelius. "God is good and deals with us in judgment and mercy, but not in
anger, 'Come over into Macedonia and help us.'"

Rangerfield. "That man in his original state was formed for society, and under
divine providence is greatly dependent on its aid, manifestly appears from an
innate desire to extend his intercourse with his own species; so in the kingdom
of grace, the christian, having the object of divine love in view, and holding
it fast in his embrace, brings it into the chamber of her that conceived him,
and into the house of that body whose faith and practice agrees with his own
sentiments. And as sma^l bodies though weak and feeble of themselves, by
associating together in the bonds of love with more bodies, while ea^h builds
over against his own house the whole forms a cord that cannot easily be broken.
Taking these reasons into consideration, agreed to make known our earnest
desire to be admitted into the O^sego Association. Our cries we trust shall
ascend to the father of spirits, for the outpouring of his holy spirit, that
the kingdom of grace may be enlarged, and the souls of all people brought to
the knowledge of Jesus, and thereby made to comply with his holy ordinances as
revealed in his holy word.

1st Litchfield. "Since our last we think we can say we have had some
comfortable hours, to see God's children animated, back ^^ider^ reclaimed,
sinners trembling, and some we hope converted. Yet no^ withstanding we enjoy so
many favors, there is a great inattention to duty, for which we have abundant
reason to be ashamed, we desire your prayers for us and your watch care was
over us, "let the righteous smite me it shall be a kindness, and let him
reprove me it shall be ^n excellent oil; which ^^^ll not break my head," so may
we strive to walk in wisdom's ways, which are pleasant, and all her paths are
peace.

Exeter. "We have to mourn because of sin which has made a breach in the
family: but we more abundantly rejoice by reason of grace which has more than
made up the loss. It appears that God is at work by his Holy Spirit on the
minds of his creatures here, and has brought a number to the knowledge of the
truth."

Whitestown. "Although we have reason to mourn the want of a gene^al attention
to religion in this place, and the prevalency of vice a^^ error: yet we have
great cause of thankfulness, that God has re^iv^d his work in some instances
among us: we have attended (...) meeting for prayer the year past, and have
been blessed with (...) ^okens for good therein: some backsliders have returned
to Z^^n, and the Lord has made us joyful in the house of prayer. From ou^
experience of the benefit of prayer meetings, we recommend the p^^ct^ce (...)
all the churches in our connection; and while the voice o^ ^^fi^i^^ Goodness to
sinful worms still cries "seek ye my face." -- May all ^ur hearts answer, thy
face, oh Lord! we will seek. And may we continue in prayer till sovereign mercy
rain righteousness upon us.

North Church Barlington. "Our situation at times, through grace, is
comfortable. The Lord is pleased to bring some to confess Christ by submiting
to the ordinances of the gospel. But when we consider the general stupidity
which seems to prevail among us, we ^^oure that many run in ways of vanity
which if not repented of w^ll l^nd them in misery; but the power of God is
sufficient to give them new hearts, and cause them to sing redeeming love. We
desire your united prayers to God, that the vine which is planted here may be
watered with the dues of heavenly grace; that the streams which make glad the
city of our God, may continually slow unto us, to the refreshing, strengthening
and establishing of our souls; and that the glory of God may reside among us to
the latest generations."

Springfield. "We remain steadfast and unmoved in our sentiments respecting
doctrine, which principles as a foundation of our union we are bound in duty
with you to support, as being united in the same cause* We are happy to inform
you that the Lord has continued a degree of love and union among us, for which
we desire to praise his holy name."

2d Hamilton. "We esteem it not only the duty but privilege of God's children
to labor for and maintain union and fellowship, so far (...) an acquaintance
may be gained, that they may with one heart and mouth glorify God."

3d Burlington. "We have been blessed with a good degree of harmony the year
past; our state at present comfortable: we hold the same principles as at
first, the cause of Christ is a good cause: the Lord give us grace that we may
maintain it. May God's glor^ be our ultimate aim, till we shall meet in one
associated body in the eternal world."

Schuyler and Whitestown. "We feel ourselves under obligations to acknowledge
the goodness of God, that he has called a number of souls out of darkness into
his marvelous light* not only round about us but some symptoms of grace and
penitence appears in our meetings, several have of late given a satisfactory
relation of a work of grace on their hearts, and some have been baptized. We
have an encouraging prospect at present. We have dismissed thirty-eight, who
are formed into a church of the same faith."

Pompey. "Since our last we have enjoyed a happy degree of internal hamony and
outward prosperity. The goodness of God is manifest among us, and has given us
some enlargement. We have had nineteen added the year past."

Worcester. "A feeble band, standing in need of help, and desiring assistance."

First Hamilton. Since our last we have enjoyed good days; the Lord has we
trust been here by his Holy Spirit, and converted souls into his kingdom; there
has been a great awakening among the young people, and a number have made a
public profession of their faith in the Lord and united with this church. At
present it is rather a low time among us, but we still enjoy peace, union and
comfort."

Otego. "We have a comfortable union among ourselves, though we are passing
through a heavy scene of trial; but we hope that God will enable us to
withstand all our adversaries: and while they are rejoicing over the sons of
Zion, let us with one heart lift a cry to the throne of grace for protection."

Charlestown. "No difficulties -- not so much life and power as is desirable."

Scipto. "We have had and still enjoy a comfortable union among ourselves; so
that we feel ourselves under renewed obligations to praise the name of God. The
year past the Lord has distilled some mercy drops on various parts of this
town, which we trust has brought some sinners to the knowledge of the truth,
and caused the hearts of God's people to rejoice. On that we may praise his
holy name, and live more to his honor and glory!"

Paris. "Informing you of our christian welfare which calls for grateful
acknowledgements, while we make mention of the goodness o^ that being who has
hitherto helped us: from whom we have obtained help to continue until now, in
the enjoyment of a happy and precious union, with that harmony and peace which
is truly comforting in its infl^ence and blessed in its effect: yet we have
reason to mo^th, and in the deepest humiliation before God, acknowledge our
ingratitude and unfruitfulness under these special favors; but we humbly trust
and believe that the Lord has and does own and bless us; he is adding to our
number such as we trust shall be saved, and our drooping spirits are sometimes
comforted with hopes of a gracious v^sit from on high; there are numbers among
us who appear to be attentive, and enquiring what they shall do to be saved."

2d Norwich. "It is a matter of joy to us when we hear that in many parts of
this and a jacent states, God is by his spirit moving on the hearts and
conferences of the children of men: yet we mourn that we feel no more of the
heavenly influence among us. May God in mercy visit us with a sh^wer of his
grace. We are in a destitute condition as to preaching."

3d Norwich. Inform of their stability and union, but mourn their want of
engagedness in the cause of religion, and request the prayers of God's people,
that they may be kept from dishonoring God, and wounding the cause of religion.

Schuyler Short Lets. Takes notice of the late remarkable outpouring of God's
spirit in our land, adores God for his grace in bringing them out of ^arkness
into light: For his goodness to them in visiting their settlement by his grace:
in consequence of which a number were added to the church. Prays for more
engagedness in the cause of truth.

2d Burlington. "A very low time among us, great inattention to religious
duties, and the love of many waxes cold; a dark trying day among us, which
calls for the fervent prayer of all the friends of Zion: But we still are
encouraged to trust in God, believing that when Zion is thoroughly purged, her
sons will come forth as gold that is tried. We wish to pass under the rod with
patience, believing that all things shall work together for good to those that
love God.

2d Otsego. "We acknowledge the goodness of God unto us in protecting our lives
and preserving us from a discordant spirit: he has been pleased to make some
addition to our small body, which we hope is but a prelude to a more copious
display of divine grace -- there appears a greater attention in the minds of
people in general, and of the brethren in particular, than for some time
before. We find it necessary to be on our guard against imposters, who swarm in
this day of error and delusion, and are nuisances to society, ravening wolves
in the church of God. From suc^, dear brethren turn away.

It it necessary for us to be on our guard, as our country is new, our
settlements young, and men of all principles and characters are flocking into
them: there is therefore the greatest danger of the poison of false principles
being d^sseminated among the churches. Not only so but we are liable to be
imposed upon by vile characters in the ministerial order, who will bend and
twist themselves into any shape to get a footing among the churches, These
considerations have given us much concern, and excited in us a wish that such
measures may be ad^pted by us, as may have a tendency to prevent the evil
apprehended."

Augusta. "We feel to rejoice and mourn; to rejoice that God by energetic
influence of his holy spirit, has brought stout hearted sinners to bow to the
feet of Jesus in this part of the land, that he has not wholly let^ us as a
people, but is visiting one place and another, and gathering in his elect: We
feel to mourn that we are no more engaged in this glorious cause, yet we humbly
trust, that by the assistance of God's grace, we shall travel Zion ward, though
our number is few and our strength small, and passing under trials; yet we take
encouragement in the promises of God, and pray that these trials may be
sanctified to us for our spiritual good."

Kortright. "We remain steadfast on the same ground of faith and practice where
we met you. We enjoy a comfortable union among ourselves, and a degree of
engagedness to persevere in christian duties is manifested. God has had us in
remembrance, and brought many out of darkness into his marvelous light; a
number of youths have been partakers of this precious grace: we have had
thirty-one added the year past."

2d Richfield. "A comfortable agreement among ourselves; our numbers small, but
a degree of confidence, that we shall persevere, and in due time receive
increase."

2d Litchfield. "God who is rich in mercy, is from time to time letting down
some mercy drops among us, and we have reason to be thankful for the least
favor."

Fairfield Palatine. "It is a low time with us, and we are passing through some
trials; but are yo^ happily united."

A brief account of some churches that have not yet united with the association.
BROOKFIELD.
A NUMBER of baptist professors living in the town of Brookfield met in
conference, June 28th, 1798, and continued their conferences until January
26th, 1799, when they voted to consider themselves a church. On the ninth of
November the same year, a council consisting of the 2d, 3d and north churches
in Burlington, and 2d church in Litc^field, convened and gave them fellowship
as a regular gospel church: their number was twenty. This church lies westerly
from Springfield distant about 30 miles.

WARREN.
March 26th, 1799, a number of baptist professors met in conference, to
consider the propriety of forming a church: their meetings were continued until
the 25th of September, when they agreed to call a council. October 16th, 1799,
Springfield, Stewart's Patent, and Richfield churches met in council, and gave
them fellowship as a gospel church.

On the 9th of July, 1800, a council, consisting of Springfield, Stuart's
patent, Butternut, Otsego, Burlington 3d, Burlington north, and Richfield
churches, convened for the purpose of attending to the ordination of B'r
Phinehas Holcomb: the solemnity was attended to in the following manner: Elder
Hofmer preached a sermon. Elder Irons prayed the ordining prayer, and laid on
hands with Elders Barus and Lawton: Eld. Bostwick gave the charge, Eld. Furman
the right hand of fellowship: Eld. Tailor prayed the concluding prayer: The
whole was conducted in good order. This church, when constituted consisted of
16 members; and lies northwest from Springfield distant about 12 miles.

DE RUYTER.
On the 26th of Dec. 1799, twenty three persons received the fellowship of
council, as a church in regular order, in the town of De Ruyter. This church
lies west from Springfield distant about 60 miles.

Some account of the revival of religion in different places.
LITCHFIED.
IN the summer of 1796 God was pleased to pour out his spirit on a small
settlement in the town of Litchfield. A few of the inhabitants were professors
of the congregational order: some were methodists. Elders Butler, Hosmer and
Roots occasionally visited them, preached and baptized a number of persons, the
work continued through the summer and winter ensuing, during which time those
congregational brethren embraced the baptist sentiments, and uniting with those
newly converted, formed the 2d Baptist Church in Litchfield; several of the
converts joined the methodist society: since which time they have had several
refreshing visits from on high, which caused them to rejoice in the Lord, and
some addittions were made to their number.

NORWICH.
IN the year 1796, a small revival took place in the south of the church in
Norwich, the settlement was small; Elder Hosmer visited them, preached, and
baptized a number.

RICHFIELD, NOW EXETER.
IN the month of May 1797, the Lord began to pour out his spirit in this ^ace,
and a considerable revival took place: The arm of the Lord was revealed,
backsliders reclaimed, sinners awaked, and the children of God rejoiced: It
continued through the summer in which time twenty-six were added to the church;
from which time the church gradually increased in number until the latter end
of June 1799, when a most remarkable thunder storm took place in this part of
the country, which, through the goodness of God, was made a mean of awa^ening
some to a serious concern for their souls: since which time ten have been added
to the church. In the aforementioned reformation of 1797, (...) John Lesure
preached with them a part of the time; the other part ^e preached with the
church at Stuart's patent, to which considerable additions were made.

OTEGO.
In the month of August 1798, at a meeting on the Lord's day, two young persons
appeared to be in great distress of mind, which was a matter of consolation to
the Brethren, in so much that they continued together in the evening spending
the time in singing, praying and exhorting; during which another young person
was deeply affected. These persons went to their parents and with great
humility confessed their faults to them, and earnestly implored their
forgiveness. On the Thursday following they met for conference and prayer, when
God was pleased to draw near by the powerful influence of his holy Spirit, and
ma^e it a comfortable season to his people, whose hearts were made glad:
sinners began to be alarmed, and many appeared under serious impressions* the
work was carried on with a divine power, and the happy effects were soon
visible. Several of the brethren in the ministry visited them, and were
instrumented in promoting the good work; the reformation continued through the
Autumn and winter ensuing, and intended itself into the adjacent settlements
toward the welt, and ^e inhabitants on the Butternut creek participated in the
blessing. During (...) ^sitation forty-six were added to the church.

BUTTERNUTS.
ON the 17th of January 1798, B'r John Lawton moved into the town of
Butternuts, in consequence of a request of the baptist church there: the church
at that time was few in number: a good degree of harmony prevailing among them
at this time: but not so great an engagedness in religion as could be wished;
and a great neglect of the duties of religion was prevalent among them; but
still there were some desires for more engagedness in the cause of truth. Early
in the spring there was some seriousness apparent on the minds some of the
youth, but it was soon gone: However the truth made some impressions, the minds
of professors seemed to be more and more impressed with the necessity of
attending to religious duties: and desires were increased for the out-pouring
of the holy spirit. Thus it continued until Lords day August 26th 1798, when
one was excluded the church privileges, for immoral conduct. This was a solemn
scene, it being the first case of that nature in the church. The members were
deeply affected, and the audience in general appeared solemn and attentive:
about this time information was received of the reformation on the Otego creek.
Lords day, September 26th 1798, was a solemn day; in the meeting, the power of
the Lord seemed to be present; and a number of youth and other persons seemed
to be greatly alarmed, while the people of God much encouraged. About this time
a young woman gave a relation of the work of God on her soul, and was received
for Baptism. Several persons were now under deep exercises of mind. October
10th, Elder Hosmer preached a sermon from I. Peter 111, 12. and baptized four
persons. This was a solemn time, the arm of the Lord was revealed, and the
glory of God displayed: the tongues of God's children were loosed, and their
souls were filled with joy and gladness: while sinners were expressing their
concern with many tears and signs, fobs and groans were heard on every side:
but notwithstanding the powerful operators many were passing under, yet there
was no appearance of any wild enthusiastic zeal: But a national concern
agitated the minds of sinners, while the children of God seemed to rejoice from
having r^ght apprehensions of the truth; order and regu^arity appeared through
all the m^eting.

On the 25th of October, B'r Lawton was ordained, and the Lord's day following
baptized eleven persons. The work continued through the winter, during which,
and in the spring and summer following* sixty persons were added to the church
by bap^^sm: one of them a wom^n in her eighty fourth year, and had been a
professor sixty years several of them vou^h. Thus God has made a glorious
display of h^s divine power and grave, for the salvation of his people. The
work was truly glorious. When we behold a little village just emerging as it
were from a ^^^^e of uncultivation, where we see but now and then a little
cottage, among the huge forests that overspread the country, yet in such a
place sixty souls brought to bow to the scepter of King Jesus, must give us
high and exalted thoughts of God's grace. The work was regular as well as
powerful. It was almost entirely free of any enthusiastic ^aint, a deep
solemnity appeared on the minds of the subjects of the work, their
understandings were enlightened, their judgments ^formed and their affections
regulated.

HAMILTON.
In the latter end of the year 1798 a B'r Price visited the church in Hamilton.
His preaching was blessed of God and a glorious work took place in different
parts of the town. A young man in the vicinity who was a princ^pal leader in
their merry meetings was struck under great concern of mind, w^^ch induced him
to converse freely on religious subjects. His conversation together with the
former preaching (B'r Pr^ce being now absent) had such an effect that a number
of youth under deep impressions left their school and went to see the aforesaid
young man who was still laboring under great distress of mind. The night
following a conference was held, and says our correspondent "it was a time
never to be forgotten. Sa^nt's ^ongues were loosed ^n prayer and exhortat^on,
and sinners crying out what they should do to be saved. One man present, an
open deist, who delighted much in Paine's book, despised the Bible, and spoke
evil of religion, was awakened to a sense of his danger, and through the
goodness of God, was brought into liberty and united to the church with a
number of others, who had been brought to bow to the righteous scepter of
Zion's victorious and ever glorious King.

SECOND CHURCH NORWICH.
About the last of October, 1799, there began to be some attention to religious
subjects, on the Chenango river, in the town of Norw^ch. This was occasioned by
the sudden death of two eminent persons in the Second Church. -- About this
time Elder Tailor, v^sited, preached and baptized four persons: his preaching
was blessed to the awakening of several from their security, and of consolating
the people of God. About the middle of November, Elder Hosmer, being on a
journey, met with one of the brethren, who solicited hi^^ (...) (...) them and
preach, he complied, turned aside and preached a lecture in the afternoon, and
in the evening attended a conference which was continued till almost day br^^k.
^he ^^e was taken up in the relation of experiences which was not finished when
the me^ting broke up. This was a means of a further spread of the work. About
the first of Dec. there appeared a general concern on the m^^ds of the people.
The impressions were powerful. The first su^day in De^. Elder Roots visited
them and baptized twenty-two persons. He ^^^nu^d with them the ensuing week,
when time he spent in visiting and ^^tending conferences. On the second sunday
he baptized fourteen, on the third he baptized twelve more.

On the monday after he last sunday ^n Jan. 1800, Eld. Hosmer by request
visited them, and preached on monday, tuesday and wednesday evenings. On
thursday be went to Sherburne and bap^^zed sour, some of these were aw^kened by
his preaching here in Nov. Some thing singular took place here, five persons
were sitting together in one of then meetings, when their souls were delivered,
four of them, within the space of ten minutes of each other. On friday he
returned and on the sabbath following he preached, Eld. Roots being present
baptized two persons.

ORDINATIONS.
June 23d, 1796, B'r John Bostwick was set apart to the work of the ministry,
in the second chh. Orsego. Business conducted in following manner. (viz.)

Eld. Henry Green of the Vermont Assn. preached a sermon. Eld. Butler prayed
the ordaining prayer, Elders Bacon, Roots and Lake laid on hands. -- Eld.
Cornell of the Shaf^sbury Assn. gave the charge. Eld. Hosmer the right hand of
fellowship. Eld. Furman prayed the concluding prayer. This was the fist
ordination wihin this Assn. The collection of people was so great that the
solemnity was attended to in the woods. The whole was attended with decency and
good order.

October 25th, 1797, B'r Stephen Tailor of the 3d chh. Burlington was separated
to the work of the gospel ministry, by the imposition of hands, in the
following manner, (viz.)

Eld. Butler preached from (...) Elder Bacon prayed the ordaining prayer and
laid on hands with Elders Furman and Hammond. Eld Hosmer gave the charge. Eld.
Bostwick the right hand of fellowship. Eld. Hammond concluded with prayer. The
exercises were attended to in a barn. Decency and good order crowned the
business of the day.

Oct. 25^h, 1798, B'r John Lawton of the Butternut church, was publicly
inducted in o^th^^ min^^erial labor in the following manner, (viz.)

Eld. B^^ler preached a sermon from 1st Timothy iii chap. 1 verse. Elder Les^re
prayed the ordaining prayer and laid on hands with Elders Bostwick and Smith.
Eld. Bacon gave the charge. Eld. Hosmer the right hand of fellowship. Eld.
Tayloy closed the solemnity with a pertinent address to the th^o^^^ of grace.
The business was performed on a stage in the open air, in the presence of a
large concourse of people, who behaved with decency and candor.

A List of the Churches composing the Otsego Association.
Churches. Ministers. 1795 1796 1797 1798 1799 1795 Aurelius 10 83 96 93 9^
1796 Aug^sia 9 9 15 14 1^9^ 1st Burling. 20 22 21 21 21 22 1794 2d Burling. 9
101 99 96 91 94 1794 3d Burling. Steph'n Tailor 11 10 15 15 22 (...) 1797
Burling. N. Ashbel Hosmer 14 19 20 (...) 1793 Butternuts John Lawton 10 17 24
30 32 (...) 1798 B^othe town 12 13 Charleston Elijah Herri^k 25 26 29 32 (...)
1794 Exeter 9 22 27 43 60 ^^ 1793 Franklin 30 90 101 93 ^3 1794 Fuir. and Pal.
14 31 37 53 3^ ^1 1796 1st Hamilton Peter P. Roots 12 3^ ^^ 179^ 2d Hamilton ^^
1793 Kort^^ht Warner Lake 13 60 ^^ ^^ 1795 1s Li^chfield 7 27 37 ^^ 4^ 1797 2d
Litchsield 15 15 ^7 33 1794 1st Norw^ch 11 30 35 41 43 ^^ 1797 2st Norwich 14
^3 ^4 179^ 3d Norwich 13 19 1794 1st Otsego 12 21 24 46 53 50 179^ 2d Otsego
John Bostwick ^^ ^2 26 33 41 50 1794 O^ego ^^ ^^ ^^ ^^ 24 ^^ 1797 Oxford S^^^^
Smith ^^ 30 1797 Pa^io (...) 27 28 40 52 1798 Po^^pey 15 19 3^ 1797 Ri^^field
Jas. (...) 16 27 19 19 1795 Scipio David Frish 47 7^ 89 103 17^^ Spring field
W^^. Furman 30 56 61 78 84 87 179^ Sange^ field Joel Butler 17 37 Schuyler and
Whitestown Schuyler Joo. Hammond 63 77 81 96 4^ 17^^ Short Lots 17 ^5 1796
Whitestown Steph. Parsons 7 12 24 36 1799 Worcester 8 8 34 15 424 653 1054 1292
1659 1709 Brookfield 20 20 1799 War^en Phin. Holcomb 16 16 1799 De Ruyter 23 23

Brookfield, Warren and De Ruyter churches were formed since the last session
of the Ass'n.

EXPLANATION. The first column shows what year the churches were constituted --
the second chhs. names -- third ministers' names -- fourth the ^^ther when
constituted -- the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth the number ^ach year
as they are marked.

SOME GENERAL REMARKS.
WE have been particular in noting the day when the churches were formed, and
by whom they were received into fellowship, that we may give the reader some
idea of their circumstances in the infant state of the country, and when there
were but sew in habitants to what there is now. The settlements were very small
and scattered over a great extent of country: many of the first settlers were
the professed children of God, but in general they became backsliders: the
difficulties of settling a new and uncultivated country, the hardships they
endured, and the want of opportunities to attend on religious meetings, may be
assigned as part of the reasons for this declension. God permitted them in some
measure to overcome the stubbornness of the country, and then was pleased to
recall the wandering of their minds. The reformations began with those
backsliders, and was attended with power on the hearts of those that knew not
God; and yet the village perhaps so small that all might meet in a small log
house, and if the shower extended further, a log barn or an adjacent wood
formed their place of worship.

Our brethren in the old towns and cities have sept abroad accounts of the
wonderful work of God among them, but if we take a comparative view of the
numbers, if ten in our small villages are brought to the knowledge of the
truth, it is more in proportion than an hundred in some of those places: but in
some places, where the settlements have been of earlier date, it has been
surprising to see the numbers collected, instances have been known of two or
three hundred people convening at a weekly lecture. None of these churches are
of longer standing than about seven years (excepting Springfield church,) which
time is short for the extraordinary increase, which is about four times the
number since the association formed, which is about five years. There are yet a
number of churches in Onondaga and Ontario counties which have formed a
conference among themselves, concerning which we have been able to obtain
little or no information; a number of reformations have taken place there under
the preaching of our fellow laborer Elder David Irish an account of which we
cannot obtain before this goes to the press.

We have given an account by whom these churches were received into fellowship,
that we might inform the ^eader of the union that ha^ taken place, and the care
there has been both in ministers and churches, to guard against errors in
doctrine and practice: it is worthy (...) observation that the loose manner in
which the laws of the sta^^ (...) New York concerning the first day of the week
were execused, ^^gether with the mixture of inhabitants of different
sentiments, almost overthrew the observation of the day; (...) therefore
h^^^m^, ^^cessary that the religious observation of the first day, should be
eni^^ned on the churches at their formation, and made an article in their
covenant, and that every head of a family should set up the worship of God, die
vocal prayer in their houses.

There were but five ordained ministers when the association (...) formed, and
no two of them nigher together than twenty five (...), one of them, living at
the distance of sixty or seventy miles from the body of the association, did
little but minister to the church to which he ^^^orged; another but se^dom
appe^red abroad, so that the weight of the work ^ay on three, together with the
assistance of some young men whom the Lord was raising up, and some traveling
Elder^ from other Associations. Eld'r J^mes B^con ministered to the church
(...) Franklin, which belonged to the Shaftsbury Association, but his kind
assistance ought to be remembered.

In the year 1793, Eld'r Joel Butler came to the Royal Grant, and began to
preach to a few scattered i^^^b^tants; a considerable opposition was made
against him by an a^^birious I^^^guer, whose character has since came up to
public view; this ^^^ed his progress for some time, but the hand of the Lord
was with him, a church was formed under the name of Fairfield and Pala^^^. In
the spring of the year 1795, a considerable reformation began in Litchfield,
Eld'r Butler princ^pally attended, preached and bapt^zed; when this reformation
subsi^ed others took place; Eld'r Butler's calls were numerous, and as a
zealous act^ve laborer in the cause, was greatly instrumental of the grow^h of
the north western part of this Association, and is to be respected for his
caution, piety and abilities.

In June 1795, Eld'r Ashoal Hosmer removed his family to Borlington and began
to labor, in connection with Eld'rs Butler and Forman, whose friendship to him
as a stranger and unused to the woods, he is ever ready to acknowledge. An
expensive circuit became the lot of each of these, the frequent calls from the
little numbers in one place and another, "to come over and help us,"
necessitated them to encounter the hardships of rains and snow, by day and
night, through uncultivated wilds and unoccupied roads, without much hopes of
^urthly reward, the country being new and the churches small; the people, poor,
were hardly able to support themselves without expending much on the preacher^
Joined to these discouragements was another of greater magnitude; that was, the
frequent intrusion of men of corrupt principles and characters, who, imagining
that the country was favorable to their sinister views, not only journeyed, but
some actually removed and got into the vicinity of some of the small churches,
and through their means divisions and contentions arose, which caused councils,
the preachers must be called for, and when they discharged their duty, and bore
testimony against their evil conduct, heavy reflections from them and their
partisans were the consequence, yet amid all these discourag^ments they
continued their exertions, and God crowned their labors with su^cess, and
comforted their souls by pouring out his holy spirit; the old professors were
stimulated to unite in church relation, and sinners were converted to the
knowledge of the truth; the wilderness that once sit solitary and was the
lurking place (...) savage men and beasts, now became the place where God was
^^^^^ipped in truth and sincerity. These observations will in (...) ^r^ account
for those rules which appears in our minutes, which (...) ^xcited the wonder of
our friends and the malice of our ^^^mies.

After the formation of the Association, Eld'r Roots came into th^^ country,
whose industry is best icon by an extract from his journal, which we here
subjoin: -- "In December 1795, I came to Litchfield, in the state of New York.
in consequence of an invitation which I received Elder Hosmer of Burlington,
who had been desired by the baptift at Litchfield to engage some preacher to
come among them. About the first of January 1796, I agreed to preach at
Litchfield one half of the time for one year. During this year I rode and
preached in many places; and in the month^ of October, I rode as far as the
Genes^e River and preached thirty two times;" since which time Eld'r Roots has
married in this country, has removed his residence to Hamilton, obtained a
letter of dismission from the church in Boston, joined with the first church in
Hamilton and continues his labors in that and adjacent places.

In the year 1796, the church in Franklin, having obtained a dismission from
the Shaftsbury Association, united with us, which added Eld'r James Bacon to
our number, whose unwearied labors, notwithstanding his advanced age, has been
a source of great comfort to churches and ministers. At the sitting of the
Association in September t^is year, Eld'r John Bostwick, who had lately been
ordained in the second church in Otsego, Eld'r David Irish of Scipio church,
were received in fellowship, and Eld'r Hezekiah East^^an, who had removed to
Paris and was laboring with a people where a church has since been formed,
came and formed an acquaintance with (...). The same autumn Eld'r Stephen
Parsons, a man of super^or abilities, settled in Whit^ftown and commenced labor
in union with us. At the next Association, he, with Eld'r Lake of Kertright,
joined and increased our strength. Shortly after this, Stephen Tailor was
ordained in the third church in Burlington, and continues his labors with that
church and oceasionally with others to good acceptance. The next year, John
Lawton was ordained in the Butlernut church, and continues with them at
present, and of a truth we may say the Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad. The extent of this association from east to west is about
one hundred and forty miles, and from north to south about 60. The first
association was holden in a meetinghouse, built by the baptists and
congregationalists in Springfield, the second mostly in the woods, the third in
a barn, the fourth and fifth in dwelling houses; and in all these the presence
of the Lord has more than made up the want of convenience. The rapid increase
of these new settlements has now made many of our congregations respectable,
though it is to be lamented that many of the settlers do not attention the
worship of God.

Let the reader pause a moment and reflect on the mavelous ^ork of God, and he
will be astonished to think that such a va^^ exte^^ of ^^ritory should suddenly
emerge from a state of uncultivation, and pre^^^ to view its golden fields and
spacious meads which promise a rich ^^^d to the industrious husbandman: the
mind must expand with ^^^erior joy, while it views the increasing glory of the
Redeemer's ^^ngdom, exhibited on this spacious theater.

The following letter was received by one of the compilers of this work.
"DEAR SIR,
"IN compliance with your request, I send you an account respecting religion in
this new settlement in the summer of 1796, being destitute of preaching a
number of serious persons agreed to meet together on the sabbath, to read and
pray together, which was ever after attended to. In the winter of 1797
religious conferences were set up and attended to weekly, although the number
very small, part of the not more than one male exclusive of the family where
the meeting was held would attend. Although very discouraging, yet they were
continued. A most remarkable stupidity appeared among the people. About the
beginning of Autumn 1797, there was one woman under strong impressions of mind;
and I trust she was born again as she gives evidence of the new birth. The 9th
of June, 1798, a church was gathered here by the Rev. Mr. S -- which consisted
of 13 members, which had belonged to other churches; there has been additions
made until its number was 24, since which two have moved away.

The latter part of the summer, 1799, several persons appeared to be under some
impressions of mind; the work gradually increased till about the last of
October, when there appeared an uncommon solemnity on the countenances of
people, and a number were struck under strong impressions: Nearly at the same
time in No^ember, three persons were propounded to the church, and last sabbath
17 more; and more I expect will shortly come forward and confess Christ before
the world. At present the awakening appears to be at a stand: This work has
been remarkable on account of the steadiness of the people: nothing of the
enthusiastic nature has appeared; God is a sovereign, he has taken some of the
most unlikely persons to human appearance; gray headed and middle-aged, and
mostly passed by the youth. Oh, my friend I most earnestly entreat your prayers
to Almighty God for us, that he would continue to pour out his spirit more and
more among us, and not pass by the youth, and that it may spread from house to
house, from heart to heart, from state to state, and from nation to nation;
till the glory of the Lord covers the earth as the water does the sea: which is
the sincere prayer of your friend.

J. C.
Bridg^water, January 16th, 1800.
Rev. A. H.

